u


iHiiUMUUHtM


UllJMflUUMHUlUiiHUI.    li

thUtHHlHlliMHHM4>fM  t
1  lUMmjJlHUMtiiuIiU

tUtltilUllHIUtHilU-lUU
mMUlli''l(UtlM-ljtU([((I
iaNKilllJlltlilUlU     u

HiijIOII+lHlHiUiMiulu
UintttHUHIlkUIHIUKi     .

JfHiWH»KllHHUliuil!l
lf»Mf)HHU(l4'tlUHl!|lll'

ttrilt-HlfilHHiimUliUI       '

4ll(UimUH-t*HlkHllH*'
'M4HHlllHliH(ltlH-(llui

.luiinuimmiiUiiiMH*

'HlUllllUUI|HMti-lli(M
'(iU^lHIUliHI  nil  I  i
III '


a


iiuu«-UnUMMU*tH44++i4t.a4«tHMt*nuifiitt+;-i
nuH4;t.nuit>fiii*.naH+viuu-un(nH;UH(+'M^nu-uiU(Wt(

(i  |iilUHU4'U.{umi)(t<lMlUl-t-UU-(«ltH(U-ltUHlWlHWW    ■
'■  ■^UlUltl44J4JIMUH-lial.UUJ+(IUl-Ullt-tt4U«llJJWiH-"

tHU(4«iniiiii(aiHU44l(Ui;-umiiH4UUimm"Ht(-

4(14444.(14  UUUl(UHU4+Ulii-iHUU<HHUilllUtum4'


'"4t.lltUH
.   *4-i*  lUPU


U'lll(tUl.i44U(U.414U-U(l4l
i.ll-il(UiUIUu<tUUUIH(
UUHU(UaUUIU-l4t4>4Jl4I


iteiiiitiiiiii!,;!;!;:-

■If  HH4HUIIHH1  iilH

.444t-HUt(iiUi)t  MtHlMf  I.
4HMHft(llHH(|iHI  HH*'  ^^
l4»UimH^tMHlMm  ItfH  ■
illltlhHH«*HHH4t  iiiH
tHtftHttlUm  f(l  HI  Htl'.
IfH  til  flHlHrn  IH  HI  i

|iflfl!ijinilf|ltiil«l!ltn

lt|i(Mtllilll|Ii[[  4H  iHU

iittHii'HfilHHnm  urn

f4-IIMiliH  h.KUIIH  4111
'■-'•UlitluiVlHllHiil  4(-Mr
MliflHHi+lMiltiHI  HMi
iiHitH1UHIIH.-Hin  L  It'
Hl(*'H  IMHHHlUIHHil'
HltUWhflHlKtlHMllUif

IttHlliHUll+iiUlutliHt   ^


H  It    ifKM(-<J|


ItiiHIi-H-i


iimmiHtK-HMi'

HUHMtHMH-flMl

iMtMtHiii'miifi


HiHiHHimi\H'

IHffl  HtHUltiHlHHiiH'

jtftHJHHI  HiHUtlHllH


(  «f    Khuili


Hi -till  IMlh(H)HU  M  HM  HHH-tlH-fiUifH'
i   Ml  *  Hi     U   HU'UIU!  11     U  'HUH'MiMHi'


I  M  us     n  in  I      II         iifmi-ilUUU  Hi

I  inyii    4iU(    n-i  a

-i  <.Hil  nuim*«i  I

■i    uumttut  HI

I  1  mttt  ti  -ti  ^tt

II  I      Uii   <-       I      I

I  I-
niHii   4  i  at  H       I  41

HtHIIMIii     IK     I  UUI

{m-iHi44i(iu  HI  i    ^^   n

IHl   |UliH4<'   ('I  ■(     t   1        4

UMW'lit  HUHlll
(fUi  IH'HIWJH
m  i       IHIHHHI

i  W      Uun'iu  ■(

.4.     I  \U\il  \U

ttll     1  Ulli  1tl  i  I  H  1   Mil     U       <

.H<I((HI1  T  U  J    lil  1     HHiimHIl
(IHI  I  IHIlUtmi     I  1  I  tim'MHIlt  I         I
UU    \i    4-HH«tHU-*HlllHiH  tHitltUiU  I  I
I-H-IH  (llHIMdIII   1  )  1  tl-iH   (Hi    ^


iiUiMUilHM

l4m(H<MU«4i

mununi  —
imfHi«H

HWIHH'    ......

H  H414      4       Kll  UUI   i-)(4(  iu«  ^H

I  IHU)  iUlil  t(   lU'(l*-(i  (++ilU14«m(   (
1(       t+    tUil   OHII  + 4U  i   1|<U4  ■iU4U-li-U

II  IHUmtt  1HH4HW*II^H   CUtUH   i       ^  4

ii4  -iiHKti  Utuu  UH  uuMi  u^H^^*MHiiitHW*^^

4Ht     iWUilUtltl'-MJiWdUHiUiHHf'"''"*"""'

1  4U.H  4-.i|imf4t.-ii.imM*(Hi«i4-i«-w....
1  iimiM-MnmUHmuHH+d-WHwwwH-— ...-„,— -^.-  .
I    III  !munnm  MUHfnutwmn(-m-KW-tfrmwtwwtwHW4M<iiww
i4(  -411  i4-(imi  (uiHU'"  ' ^■"■' ^

HU  tl  lllitlHW  liKHM- _„ „

mi  llUluili-tit    UIHII  iv|  W«LlrK44UmiUilUi*HUil«U«f(«W«*t(!Ct<    t

tiluiinl  i  imniinu  iH(i44«w+H^4  ^un(^l|U^«^i«i■^t■(««■tw.■ -■

[(1411  4iin  <r  lUiimtKfH  iJiHi  Km  muHumufiumiHiu  "

IH   lUIUHilU   (Ull   I,   HI  4   IWUUH  U  441(441    4-4-i  U4UU(l(^4  <
II   I  -illllH  llUl  141   MIH  IIH-I   HtlHH  I  tllU  tmii  l.i-141  U    4(  [
ttilllU    I  hlH  {  IHI  illUH  I  1    UHUil  I  I  fv((lliHMl  {1  I      i
HUUii        IH    i  4(  HiHlHtHI     mm  I'HidHK  iUlU    I
kHHIi-    H-Un.+Iiu    Ui  1  tl  (      H'Ht  4t(«^4HH^^f^iH(
HtfHMi  Ht  41   I   ''


4  HUiH**W«i{J  «Mt,«t«i


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105041


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY


EDITED    BY   THE

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;
AND    BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY   THE,


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E.

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A.

REV.  A.  PLUMMER,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto,


v^^     */v.


O/


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED   BY  THE


REY.  CANON  11.  1).  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

VICAR  AND   RUPAL  DKAN  OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO   THE   LORD
BISHOP  OF   GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL  ;


AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,

EDITOR  OF  "THE  HOMILETIC  QUARTERLY."


EZRA.


(Ejcposition :
Bt  EEV.  GEOEGE  RAWLINSON,  M.A.,

OAMDEH  PROFESSOR  OF  ANCIENT  HISTORY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD;  AND  CANON   01

CANTERBURY.

IgomileticB :
By  REV.   W.   S.  LEWIS,   M.A.,

VICAR  OF  ST.  GEORGE'S,  WORTHING.

i|omilics  bg  tJariotts  ^Autljors :

REV.  J.  A.  MACDONALD;         REV.  A.  MACKENNAL,  B.A.5
REV.  W.  CLARKSON,  B.A. ;        REV.  J.  S.  EXELL.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  akd  Toronto.


E  Z  E  A.


INTRODUCTION.


§  1.  Subject  of  the  Book.

The  Book  of  Ezra  ia  a  work  of  so  simple  a  character  as  acarcely  to  require  an
"Introduction."  It  is  a  plain  and  straightforward  account  of  one  of  the  most
important  events  in  Jewish  history — the  return  of  the  people  of  God  from  the
Bahylonian  captivity.  This  return  had  two  stages.  It  commenced  under
Zeruhbahel,  the  lineal  descendant  of  the  kings  of  Judah,  in  the  first  year  of
Cyrus  the  Great  in  Babylon,  which  was  b.o.  538  ;  and  it  was  continued,  and
in  a  certain  sense  completed,  under  Ezra,  in  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes
Longimanus,  which  was  B.o.  458.  The  Book  contains  an  account  of  both
these  periods,  and  is  thus,  primarily,  divisible  into  two  portions — the  history  of
the  first,  and  the  history  of  the  second  return.  The  former  occupies  the  first
six,  the  latter  the  last  four  chapters.  A  close  harmony  may  be  observed  between
the  two  narratives.  The  origin  of  the  movement  in  either  case  is  traced  up  to
a  sentiment  of  goodwill  in  the  mind  of  the  reigning  Persian  monarch;  the
sentiment  gives  birth  to  a  decree,  which  is  recited  at  length.;  then  a  commission
to  conduct  the  captives  back  to  their  own  land  issues ;  the  number  of  those
who  returned,  and  the  names  of  the  leading  men,  are  given  ;  the  exact  weight  of
the  sacred  vessels  which  the  exiles  brought  back  on  each  occasion  is  put  on
record,  and  the  exact  number  and  character  of  the  offerings  which  they  severally
made  to  the  God  of  Israel  The  history  is  also  carried  on  in  either  case  to  the
main  result  which  followed  the  return.  And  here  again  there  is  a  parallelism.
On  the  first  occasion  the  zeal  of  the  exiles  raised  up  with  difficulty,  and  after
much  opposition,  the  material  church  of  God — the  temple — which  the  Chaldaeans
had  destroyed;  on  the  second,  they  raised  up  and  restored  to  its  pristine  glory
the  spiritual  Church,  or  congregation  of  the  people  of  Israel,  which  had  sunk
into  a  low  and  miserable  condition  through  the  influence  of  the  neighbouring
heathen.  As  history  does  not  ever  exactly  repeat  itself,  there  is  of  course  much
diversity  combined  with  this  resemblance.  The  rebuilding  of  the  temple
occupied  a  long  term  of  years ;  the  religious  reformation  was  accomplished  in  a
few  months.  The  one  was  the  work  of  the  established  civil  ruler ;  the  other  of
a  mure  scribe  and  priest,  holding  a  temporary  commission.     To  effect  the  one  it


INTBODUCTION  TO


was  necessary  to  struggle  with  adversaries,  and  make  appeals  to  the  Persian
king ;  prayer  was  the  means  by  which  the  other  was  brought  about,  and  a  single
appeal  to  the  King  of  heaven  su£Sced.

§  2.  Authorship.

It  ia  maintained  by  many  that  the  Book  of  Ezra  is  the  work  of  several
di£ferent  hands,  and  that  such  unity  as  it  possesses  has  been  given  to  it  by  a
compiler.  The  compiler  is  by  some  believed  to  have  been  Ezra,  by  others  an
unknown  Jew  contemporary  with  him.  This  latter  theory  rests  upon  the  fact
of  the  curious  transitions  from  the  third  to  the  first  person,  and  back,  which
occur  in  the  later  chapters  (Ezra  vii.  28  j  x.  1).  Ezra,  it  is  thought,  would
have  kept  to  one  person  or  the  other ;  and,  as  the  parts  where  the  first  person  is
used  are  manifestly  his,  those  where  he  is  spoken  of  in  the  third  person  (ch.  viL
1 — 26  J  and  x.)  are  ascribed  to  a  difierent  hand.  In  the  earlier  portion  of  the
Book  it  is  supposed  that  different  styles  may  be  traced ;  and  here  some  have  even
ventured  to  name  the  authors  of  certain  chapters.*  But  it  may  be  questioned
whether  these  views  do  not  spring  from  over-refinement,  and  assume  a  keenness
of  critical  discernment  which  cannot  be  claimed  without  arrogance.  The  simple
view,  that  Ezra,  who  is  admitted  to  have  written  at  least  one  section,  really
composed  the  whole,  using  for  the  most  part  his  own  words,  but  in  places
inserting  documents,  is  to  the  full  as  tenable  as  any  other  hypothesis.  Tho
general  harmony  of  the  whole  Book  alreaily  noticed,  and  the  real  uniformity  of
its  style,  are  in  favour  of  this  view.  The  oljjection  from  the  changes  of  person  is
of  no  great  importance,  changes  of  this  kind  often  occurring  in  works  admitted
to  be  the  production  of  a  single  writer,  as  in  Thucydides  and  in  Daniel.
Moreover,  tradition  ascribes  the  whole  Book  to  Ezra ;  and  if  Ezra  wrote
Chronicles,  which  is  the  view  of  many  critics,  then  the  connection  of  the  Book
with  Chronicles  will  be  an  additional  argument  in  favour  of  Ezra's  authorship.

§  3.  Date.

The  last  event  recorded  in  the  Book  of  Ezra  is  the  reformation  of  religion
effected  through  Ezra's  influence  in  the  spring  of  b.o.  457,  the  year  after  his
arrival  at  Jerusalem.  The  date  of  b.o.  457  is  therefore  the  earliest  that  can  be
assigned  to  it.  It  may  have  been  written  a  year  or  a  few  years  subsequently,
but  can  scarcely  be  given  a  later  date  than  b.o.  444,  the  year  of  Nehemiah's
arrival ;  since,  if  that  event  had  taken  place  when  the  author  wrote,  he  would
almost  certainly  have  mentioned  it.

§  4.  General  Charaoter  op  the  Work.
"  Ezra,"  as  already  observed,  is  a  history,  and  a  very  simple  history.     No
book  of  Scripture  has  fewer  difficulties  or  fewer  obscurities.     There  is  no  miracle

»  Bishop  A.  Hervey  assigns  the  first  chapter  to  Daniel,  the  second  to  Zechariah,  and  ch*
iii. — vi.  to  Haggai  ('Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  voL  i.  p.  607).


THE  BOOK  OF  EZKA.  iS


recorded  in  it,  and  hence  its  historical  truth  is  admitted  almost  universally.
The  language  closely  resembles  that  of  other  Books  of  Scripture  written  about  the
same  time,  as  Chronicles,  Daniel,  and  HaggaL  Like  Daniel,  it  is  written  partly
in  Hebrew,  partly  in  Chaldee,  the  latter  being  the  form  which  Hebrew  had
assumed  during  the  captivity.  Like  the  same  Book,  Chronicles,  and  Esther,  it
contains  a  number  of  Persian  words,  as  was  natural  at  a  time  when  Judaea  was
a  province  of  Persia.  The  tone  of  the  writing  is  level  and  uniform,  never
sinking  into  the  familiar,  and  only  in  one  place  (ch.  ix.  6 — 15)  rising  to
eloquence.  Very  little  that  is  directly  didactic  occurs  in  it :  the  writer  tells  his
story  as  plainly  as  he  can,  and  leaves  his  story  to  teach  its  own  lessons.  Once
only  (ch.  vii.  27,  28)  does  he  interrupt  his  narrative  with  a  burst  of  gratitude
and  devotion,  as  he  thinks  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  putting  good  resolves  into
the  heart  of  a  Persian  king,  and  ia  making  him  (Ezra)  the  instrument  of
carrying  these  out.  Apart  from  this,  he  simply  narrates  facts,  placing  before  us,
briefly  but  clearly,  the  circumstances  of  the  two  returns,  and  the  events
immediately  following  them.  It  is  remarkable  that,  instead  of  making  his
history  continuous,  he  passes  over,  absolutely  without  notice,  an  interval  of
dearly  sixty  years,  which  is  the  space  of  time  intervening  between  Ms  sixth  and
his  seventh  chapters.  We  may  perhaps  conclude  from  this  that  from  the  time
of  the  dedication  of  Zerubbabel's  temple  (B.a  516)  to  the  mission  of  Ezra  (B.a
458),  the  history  of  the  Palestinian  Jews  was  a  blank ;  which  may  well  be,
since  during  the  whole  of  the  period  they  were  submissive  and  attached  subjects
of  the  Persian  empire.

§  5.  Position  and  Chabactbb  of  thb  Author,

The  only  facts  which  are  certainly  known  to  us  of  Ezra  are  those  recorded
in  his  own  Book  and  in  the  Book  of  Nehemiah.    From  these  works  it  appears —

1.  That  he  was  a  priest,  a  descendant  of  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  (ch.  vii.  5).

2.  That  he  belonged  to  that  branch  of  Eleazar's  family  which  had  recently
furnished  the  high  priests,  being  descended  from  Hilkiah,  high  priest  in  the
reign  of  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  4),  and  from  Seraiah,  high  priest  at  the  time  of
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  {iMd.  xxv.  18).  3.  That  he  was  a  "scribe,"'  or
teacher,  interpreter,  and  copier  of  the  law,  one  who  made  the  law  of  Moses  his
main  study,  and  the  teaching  and  expounding  of  it  his  chief  practical  work.  4.
That,  being  resident  at  Babylon,  one  of  the  Persian  capitals,  and  well  known  to
the  king,  Artaxerxes  (Longimanus),  he  requested  .(ch.  vii.  6)  and  obtained
permission  from  the  king  to  visit  Jerusalem,  and  was  allowed  to  carry  with  hira
all  those  of  Israelite  extraction  who  liked  to  take  the  opportunity  of  returning  to
their  own  land  {ibid.  ver.  13) ;  various  privileges  were  granted  to  him  {ibid.  vers.
16 — 26),  and  a  commission  issued  giving  him  supreme  authority  over  Judaea
for  a  time.  He  accordingly  quitted  Babylon  in  b.o.  458,  the  seventh  year  of
Artaxerxes  {ibid.  ver.  8),  accompanied  by  a  band  of  about  1800  raen  (ch.  viii.  3 —
14)  with  their  families  {ibid.  ver.  21),  and  reached  Jerusalem  after  a  journey  of


INTRODUCTION  TO


four  months  (ch.  vii.  9).  Hia  authority  was  recognized ;  and  after  depositing  Lu
the  temple  a  number  of  sacred  vessels  which  Artaxerxes  had  intrusted  to  his
care,  and  making  numerous  offerings  (ch.  viii.  35),  he  effected  a  reformation  of
religion,  inducing  aU  those  Israelites  who  had  married  heathen  wives,  and  become
entangled  in  the  abominations  of  heathen  idolatry,  to  put  their  wives  away  (ch.
X.  16 — 44),  and  return  to  the  pure  worship  of  Jehovah.  He  then,  it  is  probable,
returned  to  Babylon.  Afterwards,  in  B.C.  444,  he  is  again  found  at  Jerusalem
(Neh.  viii.  1),  occupying  a  position  secondary  to  that  of  Nehemiah  the  governor
(ibid.  ver.  9) — a  position  purely  ecclesiastical,  in  which,  as  scribe  and  priest,  he
teaches,  blesses,  and  directs  the  devotions  of  the  people.  Here  he  continues  till
the  dedication  of  the  wall  (b.o.  431),  when  he  takes  a  leading  part  in  the
solemn  procession,  or  perambulation  of  the  wall  (ibid.  xii.  36),  which  was  a
principal  feature  of  the  ceremony.  At  this  point  the  Scriptural  notices  terminate,
Ezra  is  not  said  to  hav^e  been  concerned  in  the  religious  reformation  of  Nehemiak
— one  in  some  respects  so  like  his  own  —  whereof  we  have  an  account  in
Nehemiah's  last  chapter ;  and  the  probability  would  seem  to  be  that  he  had  died,
or  quitted  Jerusalem,  previously  to  it.  Jewish  tradition  adds  to  this  account
various  particulars,  which  would  be  of  the  utmost  interest  if  we  could  rely  on
them.  1.  Ezra  is  said  to  have  instituted  the  "  Great  Synagogue,"  and  to  hare
been  its  first  president.  2.  He  is  declared  to  have  settled  the  Canon  of  the
Jewish  Scriptures,  and  to  have  re-edited  the  whole  of  them,  making  additions
and  alterations  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  at  the  same  time
forming  the  arra;ngement  into  the  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Hagiographa,  which
obtaius  among  the  Jews  to  the  present  day.  3.  He  is  said  to  have  begun  the
practice  of  building  synagogues  in  the  Jewish  provincial  towns,  and  to  have
instituted  the  synagogue  service,  which  seems  certainly  to  have  been  unknown  to
the  Jews  before  the  captivity.  Finally,  he  is  reported  to  have  lived  to  a  good
old  age,  and  to  have  died — on  his  way  from  Jerusalem  to  the  court  of  Artaxerxes
— at  Samarah,  on  the  Lower  Tigris,  where  his  tomb  was  shown  in  the  time  of
Benjamin  of  Tudela.  What  historical  basis  these  traditions  rest  upon  it  is
impossible  to  say.  As  we  find  no  trace  of  the  "  Great  Synagogue  "  either  in  Ezra
or  in  Nehemiah,  its  institution  by  Ezra  is  scarcely  probable.  Even  less  weight
belongs  to  the  statement  that  he  finally  settled  the  Canon,  since  Nehemiah
probably,  and  Malachi  certainly,  wrote  their  works  after  his  decease.  On  the  other
hand,  it  is  anteriorly  probable  that  some  priest  learned  in  the  law  collected  and
re-edited  the  sacred  Books  on  the  return  from  the  captivity,  and  the  tradition
that  Ezra  did  so  is  remarkably  in  accordance  with  what  is  said  of  him,  both  in
his  own  Book  and  in  that  of  ifehemiah,  as,  that  he  was  "  a  ready  scribe  in  the
law  of  Moses  "  (Ezra  viL  6),  "  a  scribe  of  the  words  of  the  commandments  of  the
Lord,  and  of  his  statutes  to  Israel "  {ibid.  ver.  11),  and  that  he  "  had  prepared  his
heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  it,  and  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes
and  judgments"  {ibid.  ver.  10).  With  regard  to  the  institution  of  synagogues,
there  is  no  evidence ;  but  perhaps  it  is  most  probable  that  they  arose  in  the  earl/


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


Maccabee  period,  when  tlie  temple  had  been  defiled,  and  Jerusalem  was  in  the
hands  of  the  Syrians.  Ezra's  death  and  burial  at  Samarah  has  nothing  about  it
that  is  improbable ;  but  it  is  curious,  that  while  the  tombs  of  Jonah,  Ezekiel,  and
Daniel  are  still  shown  in  Mesopotamia,  that  of  Ezra  has  passed  into  oblivion.

The  personal  character  of  Ezra  stands  out  in  the  narrative,  both  of  "  Ezra  "
and  "  Nehemiah,"  as  that  of  a  thoroughly  earnest,  God-fearing,  and  man-loving
man,  and  is  without  speck  or  flaw.  Not,  of  course,  that  he  was  really  perfect ;
but  his  defects  are  unnoticed.  In  his  indefatigable  activity  as  a  teacher,  in  his
deep  sense  of  dependence  upon  God,  in  his  combination  of  horror  at  sin  with  pity
for  the  sinner,  he  reminds  us  of  St.  Paul,  while  in  the  depth  of  his  self-humili-
ation on  account  of  the  transgressions  of  others  he  recalls  the  utterances  of
Daniel.  As  a  servant  of  the  Persian  king,  he  so  approves  himself  to  his  master
as  to  be  singled  out  for  the  high  trust  of  an  important  commission.  In  executing
that  commission  he  exhibits  devotion,  trust  in  Grod,  honourable  anxiety  to
discharge  his  duties  with  exactitude,  and  a  spirit  of  prayer  and  self-mortification
that  cannot  be  too  highly  commended.  As  supreme  governor  of  Judsea,  he  is
prompt  and  decided  in  taking  the  measures  necessary  to  purify  the  Jewish
community,  while  he  abstains  from  all  arbitrary  acts,  persuades  rather  than
commands,  and  effects  his  purpose  with  the  good  will  and  hearty  acquiescence  of
aU.  classes.  Placed  in  a  subordinate  position  under  Nehemiah  after  having  held
the  entire  direction  of  affairs,  he  shows  no  jealousy  or  discontent,  but  carries  out
with  zeal  the  designs  of  his  civil  superior,  is  active  within  his  own  sphere,  and
does  good  service  to  the  nation.  Simple,  candid,  devout,  sympathetic,  full  of
energy,  unselfish,  patriotic,  never  weary  in  well  doing,  he  occupied  a  most
important  position  at  a  most  important  time,  and  was  a  second  founder  of  the
Jewish  state.  Eminent  alike  as  a  civil  governor,  as  an  ecclesiastical  adminis-
trator, and  as  a  historian,  he  left  behind  him  a  reputation  among  the  Jews  inferior
only  to  that  of  Moses ;  and  the  traditions  which  cluster  about  his  name,  even  if
they  had  no  other  value,  would  at  any  rate  mark  the  high  esteem  in  which  his
abilities  and  character  were  held  by  his  countrymen.


LiTBRATDRB    OF    EZRA.


Ezra,  80  far  as  the  present  writer  is  aware,  has  not  been  made  the  subject  of  any
special  work.  Bertheau  has,  however,  written  a  comment,  which  is  valuable,  on  the
three  Books  of  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther.  General  '  Commentaries  on  the  Old
Testament,'  and  '  Introductions  to  the  Old  Testament,'  have  necessarily  treated  of
it.  The  best  of  these,  so  far  as  Ezra  is  concerned,  are  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary '
and  the  '  Introductions '  of  Havernick  and  Dr.  Davidson.  There  is  an  important
article  on  the  Book  of  Ezra  in  Winer's  '  Kealworterbuoh ; '  and  others  containing  much
that  is  interesting  will  be  found  in  Dr.  W.  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  and  in
Kitto's  'CycIopiBdia.'  Of  the  earlier  commentators,  Patrick  may  be  consulted  with
most  advantage.

Abranqement  ov  the  Book  in  Sbotions.

The  best  arrangement  of  Ezra  seems  to  be  the  following: —

Part  I.  (chs.  i. — ^vi.).     First  return  of  the  Israelites  from  captivity,  under  ZerubbabeL


THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  [ch.  i.  1—4


Section  1  (ohs.  i.,  ii.)-  Decree  of  Cyrus,  and  return  under  Zerubbabel,  with  the
numbers  of  those  who  returned,  and  the  names  of  the  chief  men.

Section  2  (ch.  iii.  1 — 7).  Restoration  of  the.  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice,  and  celebra-
tion of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

Section  3  (ch.  iii.  8 — vi.  15).     Rebuilding  of  the  temple,  and  opposition  made  to  it.

Section  4  (ch.  vi.  16 — 22).  Dedication  of  the  temple  and  celebration  of  the  Feast
of  the  Passover.

Part  II.  (ohs.  vii. — t.).  Second  return  of  the  Israelites  from  captivity,  under
Ezra.

Section  1  (chs.  vii.,  viii.).  Decree  of  Artaxerxes,  and  return  under  Ezra,  wi*l)
the  numbers  of  those  who  returned,  and  the  names  of  the  chief  men.

Section  2  (chg.  iz.,  x.).     Reformation  of  religion  sccomplished  by  Ezrtv


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


PART    L


L    Thb  Fibst  Eetttkn  from  thb  Capttvitt.
EXPOSITION.


Thb  aECREB  o»  Ctbus  (ch.  i.  1 — *).
The  origin  of  the  return  is  found  in  an  ex-
ertion of  Divine  influence  on  the  mind  of  s
heathen  king,  who  was  moved  thereby  to
put  forth  a  proclamation  or  decree,  addressed
to  ftll  the  people  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel
dn-uUing  in  any  part  of  his  dominions,  grant-
ing them  &ee  permission  to  return  to  their
own  land,  and  at  the  same  time  recommend-
iiv^  his  other  subjects  to  expedite  their
departure  by  giving  them  out  of  their  abund-
ance gold,  silver,  goods,  and  cattle,  so  that
none  should  be  hindered  by  poverty  from
taking  advantage  of  the  king's  kindness.
Many  things  are  remarkable  in  this  decree  : —
1  Its  promulgation  by  a  heathen  king,
spontaneously  as  it  would  seem ;  2.  Its
recognition  of  a  single  supreme  God,  "the
Lord  God  of  hearen;"  3.  Its  declaration
that  the  supreme  God  had  "charged"  the
king  to  rebuild  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  ;
and  4.  Its  actual  origination  in  a  "stir"  of
the  king's  spirit  by  God  himself.  The  secret
government  of  the  world  by  Jehovah  is,  in
part,  opened  to  us,  and  we  see  how  great
political  events,  anteriorly  improbable,  are
brought  about  by  his  action  on  men's  hearts  ;
we  see  that  he  does  not  leave,  has  never  left,
the  heathen  wholly  to  themselves,  but  con-
descends to  put  thoughts  into  their  minds,
and  bend  their  wills,  and  so  bring  about  his
purposes.   We  see,  moreover,  that  the  heathen


were  not  universally  without  some  knowledge
of  the  true  God  ;  and  especially  we  perceive
that  in  Persia  at  tliis  date  (B.C.  638)  there
was  a  distinct  recognition  of  a  single  supreme
Deity,  and  an  identification  of  this  Deity
with  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  Jews.  This
fact  throws  light  on  the  whole  history  of  the
Jews  under  the  Persians — on  the  friendly
tone  of  the  decrees  of  Darius  (ch.  vi  6 — 12)
and  Artaierxes  (ch.  vii.  12 — 26),  on  the
amicable  relations  between  the  latter  king
and  Nehemiah  (Neli.  it  2 — 8),  on  the  posi-
tion occupied  by  Mordecai  under  Ahasuerus
(Esther  x.  2,  3),  on  the  quiet  submission  of
the  entire  people  to  the  Persian  yoke  for
above  two  centuries,  and  on  their  faithful
adherence  to  the  cause  of  the  last  Persian
king  when  he  was  attacked  by  Alexander
(Joseph.  'Ant.  Jud.,'  xi.  8,  §  3).  A  religious
sympathy,  it  is  clear,  united  the  two  nations.
We  must  not,  however,  carry  this  notion  too
far,  or  regard  the  Persian  religion  with  too
favourable  an  eye.  The  native  literature
shows  that  the  Persians  worshipped  more
gods  than  one,  although  one  was  supreme,
and  that  their  religion  was  moreover  dualistic,
involving  a  belief  in  a  principle  of  evil,  co-
eternal  and  almost  co-equal  with  the  prin-
ciple of  good.

Ver.  1. — In  the  first  year  of  Cyrns.  The
context  shows  that  it  is  the  first  year  of
Cyms  at  Babylon  which  is  intended.    Cynu

B


2


THE  BOOK  OP  EZBA.


[CH.  I.  1 — 4.


the  Great  became  King  of  Peisia  bj  his  final
defeat  and  capture  of  Astyages,  in  B.O.  669
probably.  Hia  con(juest  of  Babylon  was,
comparatively  speakmg,  late  in  his  reign
(Herod.,  Xenoph.),  and  is  fixed  by  the  Canon
of  Ptolemy  to  B.O.  538.  He  took  the  city
on  the  night  of  Belshazzar's  feast  (Dan.  T.
30),  when  Daniel  had  just  been  appointed
to  the  third  place  in  the  kingdom  {ibid.  ver.
29),  and  was  practically  at  the  head  of  affairs.
Thus  the  great  king  and  the  great  prophet  of
the  time  were  brought  into  contact,  and  natur-
ally conferred  together,  as  may  be  gathered
from  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,' zi  1).  That  the
word  of  the  Lord  by  the  month  of  Jeremiah
might  be  fulfilled.  The  reference  is  to  Jer.
XXV.  11,  12,  and  xiii.  10.  Jeremiah  had
prophesied  not  only  the  fact,  but  the  date
of  the  return,  by  assigning  to  the  captivity  a
duration  of  "seventy  years."  There  might
be  some  doubt  when  exactly  this  term  would
run  out,  since  the  year  of  360  was  in  pro-
phetic use  no  less  than  the  year  of  365  days
('Diet  of  the  Bible,'*,  v.  tear),  and,  more-
over, the  exact  date  of  the  commencement
of  the  captivity  admitted  of  question ;  but
Daniel  appears  to  have  calculated  in  B.o.
538  that  the  term  was  approaching  its  term-
ination (seeDan.  ix.  2 — 19).  If  the  captivity
were  regarded  as  commencing  in  the  third
year  of  Jehoiakim  (Dan.  L  1,  2),  which  was
B.  0.  606 — 605,  and  if  years  of  360  days  were
regarded  as  intended,  this  would  clearly  be
80,  since  360  x  70  =  25,200,  and  365  x  68  =
24,820,  so  that  in  B.o.  5S8  only  another
year  was  wanting.  For  the  prophecy  to  be
fulfilled,  it  was  requisite  that  the  first  steps
towards  bringing  about  the  return  and  the
cessation  of  desolation  should  not  be  delayed
beyond  the  close  of  B.o.  538.  The  Lord,
accordingly,  in  this  year  stirred  up  the  spirit
of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia.  As  God  in  earlier
times  had  worked  on  the  minds  of  Abimelech
(Gen.  XX.  3)  and  Balaam  (Num.  xxiii.  5,  16),
and  more  recently  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.
ii  28),  BO  now,  it  would  seem,  he  directly
influenced  the  heart  and  will  of  Cyrus.  This
is  the  less  surprising,  as  Cyrus  was,  in  the
Divine  counsels,  fore-ordained  to  do  this
work,  and  had  been  raised  to  his  high  station
for  the  purpose  (Isa.  xliv.  28 ;  xlv.  1 — 4).
Cyrus  was  thus  induced  to  make  a  proclama-
tion (literally,  "to  make  to  pass  a  voice")
throughout  the  whole  kingdom,  which  reached
from  the  iEgean  Sea  to  Me  borders  of  India,
and  from  the  Caucasus  to  the  Persian  Gulf,
and  even  to  put  it  in  -writing,  b'  mikiab,
that  so  it  might  be  sure  to  become  generally
known.  Writing  was  probably  of  recent
introduction  into  Persia;  but  there  is  posi-
tive evidence  in  the  native  remains  of  its  use
by  C^rnu.  His  proclamation  was  probably
iggaed  in  at  least  two  languages,  Persian  and
OUIdee.


Ver.  2. — Thus  saith  Cyrus.     Persian  in-
scriptions do  not  ordinarily  commence  in
this  way  j  but  the  formula  "  says  Darius  the
king,"  "says  Xerxes  the  king"  is  frequent
in  them.     King  of  Persia.    So  the  Behistun
inscription:  "I  am  Darius,  the  great  king,
the  king  of  kings,  ihs  king  of  Persia."
The  Lord  God  of  heaven,  Yghovah  Elohey
hashshomiayiTn.     "God  of  heaven"  seems
to  have  been  a  usual  title  of  the  Snpreme
Being  among  the  Persians  (see  below,  ch.
vi  9,  10 ;  vii   12,  23),  and  perhaps  desig-
nated Ormuzd  in  contradistinction  to  Ahri-
man,  who  was  lord  of  the  infernal  regions.
The  use  of  the  term  "Jehovah,"  instead  of
Ormuzd,  is  remarkable,  and  was  probably
limited  to  the  Hebrew  transcript  of   the
proclamation.    Hath  given  me  all  the  king-
doms of  the  earth.    An  acknowledgment
that  they  have  received  and  hold  their  loyal
power  from  Ormuzd  is  nniveisal  on  the  part
of  all  the  Persian  kings  who  have  left  in-
scriptions of  any  length ;  but  they  do  not
often  indulge  in  such  a  hyperbole  as  this  of
Cyrus.      Artaxerxes  Ochus,   however,   caDs
himself  "king  of  this  world"  (Bawlinson,
'Cuneiform  Inscr.,'  voL   i   p.  341).      The
mention  of  the  "kingdoms  of  the  earth"  is
appropriate,  since  Cyrus  had  not  inherited
his  empire,  but  built  it  up  by  the  conquest
of  a  vast  number   of   independent    states
('  Herod.'  i  passim).     His  own  feeling  that
God  had  in  all  cases  given  him  the  victory
harmonizes  with  the  statement  of  Isaiah  in
ch.  xlv.  1.     He  hath  charged  me  to  bnild
him  a  house  at  Jerusalem.    The  he  is  em-
phatic, and  is  expressed  by  air&e  in  the
Septuagint  and  ipse  in  the  Vulgate.     He
himself,  Jehovah-Elohim,  has  given  it  me  in
charge  to  buUd  him  a  house.     Most  critics
rightly  explain  by  referring  to  Isa.  riiv.  28,
and  accepting  the  statement  of  Josephus
('  Ant.  Jud.,'xi.  1)  that  the  passage  was  shown
to  Cyrus  shortly  after  his  capture  of  Babylon.
He  understood  the  prophecy  as  a  command,
and  proceeded  to  obey  it.  Which  is  in  Judah.
The  addition  of  this  clause  marks  strongly
the  oblivion  into  which  the  ruined  city  had
fallen.  Apparently,  it  was  necessary  to  recall
its  situation  to  men's  minds  by  an  express
mention  of  the  province  whereof  it  had  been
the  capital.  Note  the  repetition  of  the  clause
in  the  next  verse.

Ver.  3. — Who  (is  there)  among  you  of  all
his  people  I  Cyrus  does  not  limit  his  address
to  the  Jews,  or  even  to  Judah  and  Benjamin,
but  extends  it  to  the  whole  people  of  Jehovah,
t. «.  to  all  the  tribes  equally.  Gozan  and
Media,  to  which  the  ten  tribes  had  been
transported  by  the  Assyrian  monarchs,  were
wiliin  his  dominions  no  less  than  Baby-
lonia, That  many  non-Jewish  Israelites  did
return  appears  from  1  Chron.  ix.  3.  His
God  be  with  him.     A  pious  wish,  almost  •


OH.  L  1-^.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA


indicative  of  the  deep  leligions
feeling  and  great  goodness  of  heart  which
chaTacterized  Cyrus  alone  of  Persian  monarchs.
Ajnong  the  Greeks,  ^sohylus,  who  first
speaks  pf  him,  calls  him  "kindly"  or  "gra-
cious "  (tv^pwv) ;  Herodotus  says  he  ruled
his  suhjeots  like  a  father  ;  Xenophon  makes
him  a  model  prince  ;  Plutarch  observes  that
"in  wisdom  and  virtue  and  greatness  of
soul  he  excelled  all  other  kings  ;"  Dibdorus
ascribes  to  him  a  remarkable  power  of  self-
cOmmaud,  tog;ether  with  ^ood  feeling  and
gentleness.  The  Latin  writers,  Cicero  and
others,  add  their'  meed  of  praise ;  and  alto-
gether it  may  be  said  that,  so  far  as  the
evidence  reaches,  no  nobler  character  appears
in  ancient  history.  The  Scriptural  notices,
whether  in  this  book  or  in  Isaiah,  are  in
remarkable  accord,  let  him  go  up.  Jeru-
lem  was  on  a  much  higher  level  than  Baby-
lon, and  the  travellers  would  consequently
have  to  ascend  considerably.  And  build  the
house.  The  "charge"  to  Cyrus  did  not
require  him  to  take  a  personal  share  in  the
building.  He  was  simply  to  "say  to  Jera-
salem,  Thou  shalt  be  built ;  and  to  the  temple.
Thy  foundation  shall  be  laid"  (Isa.  xliv.
28).  He  is  therefore  content  to  assign  the
actual  work  to  others.  He  is  the  God.  The
Septuagint  and,  the  Vulgate  attach  the  last
clause  of  the  verse  to  these  words,  and  render
"  He  is  the  God  who  is  in  Jerusalem,"  which
greatly  weakens  the  force  of  the  expression.
According  to  this  punctuation,  Cyrus  makes
Jehovah  a  mere  local  Deity;  according  to


the  far  preferable  arrangement  of  the  A.  V.,
he  declares  eniphaticafly  that  Jehovah  is
the  one  true  God,  beside  whom  there  is  no
other.  Compare  the  very  similar  confession
of  Nebuchadnezzar  (Dan.  vi  26).

Ver.  i. — Whosoever  remaineth  in  any
place  where  he  sojourneth.  Literally  cor-
rect ;  but  the  meaning  is,  "And  with  regard
to  all  those  who  remain  (of  the  captive
people)  in  tmy  part  of  the  country  where
they  have  their  temporary  abode,  let  the
men  of  his  district  help  him  with  silver,"
&c.  Cyrus  finishes  his  decree  by  calling
upon  his  heathen  subjects  to  come  to  the  aid
of  the  poorer  Israelites,  and  assist  them  with
money,  cattle,  and  other  commodities,  in
order  that  none  may  be  hindered  by  poverty,
or  by  the  want  of  beasts  of  burthen,  from
joining  the  band  of  emigrants,  and  setting
out  on  their  return  to  Jerusalem.  Again,
the  kindliness  of  his  disposition  is  apparent.
Beside  the  freewill  offering.  So  the  Septu-
agint;  but  the  Vulgate  has,  "Except  the
freewill  offering,"  &c.  The  Septuagint  and
the  A.  V.  are  right.  Cyrus  means  that
money,  cattle,  and  goods  are  to  be  made
over  to  the  poorer  Israelites,  in  (tddttion  to
any  offering  that  might  be  intrusted  to  them
for  conveyance  to  Jerusalem,  either  by  him-
self or  by  his  subjects.  Individually,  he
was  about  to  send  "a  freewill  offering,"
consisting  of  a  number  of  gold  and  silver
vessels  for  the  service  of  the  temple.  His
words  suggest  that  his  subjects  might  follow
this  good  exauif  le.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  1. — The  crisis.  The  very  first  word  of  this  book  (literally  "  and,"  Keil,
Wordsworth,  &c.)  has  its  importance.  It  shows  the  book  to  be  an  additional  and  con-
tinuous portion  of  that  most  important  of  all  histories,  the  history  of  the  Jews.  How
large  is  the  place  of  that  history  in  the  Bible,  beginning  at  Gen.  xii.  and  hardly
passing  again  to  that  of  the  Gentiles  at  Acts  x.  How  interesting  a  story  in  itself  I
No  people  so  favoured  (Amos  lii.  2 ;  Eom.  iii.  1  ;  xi.  28).  No  people  so  exalted
(Exod.  iv.  22;  Jer.  xxxi.  9  ;  John  i.  47).  How  important  a  story  to  us  I  So  instruc-
tive (1  Cor.  X.  11,  &o.,  &o.).  So  vital  (Gen.  xii.  1 — 3  ;  Num.  xxiv.  9,  &c.).  We  are
all  the  better  or  tlie  worse  for  the  lessons  of  the  story  of  the  Jewish  people.  This
opening  verse  of  Ezra  introduces  us  to  tl  is  singular  people  at  a  very  important
juncture,  and  relates,  in  connection  with  their  history,  a  very  momentous  event.

I.  The  importance  op  the  juncjubb.  We  find  the  people,  e.  g.,  in  very  great
tribulation.  They  are  under  the  rule  of  a  stranger,  counting  the  years  of  their  history
by  the  years  of  a  "  king  of  Persia."  This  not  so  in  former  days  (see  2  Chron.
zxxiv.  8  ;  xxzv.  19  ;  and,  as  perhaps  an  instance  of  transition  in  this  respect,  Jer.
lii.  12).  We  are  thus  pointed  backward  to  the  invasions  of  Judah  by  Nebuchadnezzar,
and  to  those  three  successive  waves  of  desolation  which  came  over  the  land  under  him.
See  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6,  7 ;  Dan.  i.  1,2,  for  the  first  invasion,  in  the  days  of  Jehoiakim
or  Eliakim,  about  607  b.o.  For  the  second,  in  the  days  of  Jeconiah  or  Jehoiachin,
about  599  b.o.,  see  2  Kings  xxiv.  13  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  9,  10.  For  the  third,  in  the
reign  of  Zedekiah,  B.o.  588,  see  2  Kings  xxv.  14;  Jer.  lii.  8.  Some  idea  of  the
desolation  thus  caused  in  the  land  itself  may  be  inferred  from  what  is  said  in  2  Kings
sxiv.  14,  of  only  "the  poorest  sort  of  the  people"  remaining  after  the  second  incur-
sion !  and  from  what  is  said  in  Jer.  xlii.  2,  after  the  third :  as  also  from  what  w«

b2


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,  [oh.  l  1—4.


»re  told  respecting  the  "  few  "  mentioned  there  in  Jer.  xliii.  5 — 7  No  wonder  we
read  the  prophet  lamenting,  as  in  Lam.  i.  1 ;  v.  18.  Awful  indeed  was  that  gray  and
iilent  Sabbath  which  had  fallen  on  Judah's  cities  and  fieldsl  As  to  the  people  thence
carried  away,  equally  desolate  were  their  hearts.  How  grievous  their  reproach  and
"  confusion  of  face  "  (Dan.  ix.  7,  8).  How  bitter  their  recollections  (Lam.  i.  10 ;
iv.  10,  20,  &c.).  How  inconsolable  their  anguish  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  4).  Could  any  sorrow
be  worse  (Lam.  i.  12 ;  Dan.  ix.  12)  ?  At  the  precise  moment,  however,  when  our  story
begins  there  was  a  little  light  in  this  darkness.  Some  of  the  people  evidently  were
in  expectation  of  some  change  for  the  better.  The  name  of  the  king  mentioned  seems
to  show  this  to  begin.  Also  the  fact  of  its  being  the  "  first  year  "  of  his  reign.  Now
that  he  had  come  to  the  throne,  what  would  he  do  ?  See,  for  evidence  of  the  great
interest  elsewhere  attached  to  this  date,  Dan.  i.  21,  as  compared  with  vi.  28  and  x.  1.
How  exceedingly  natural  is  this  interest  if  we  believe  Isa.  xli.  25 ;  xliv.  28,  &o.,  accord-
ing to  the  best  commentators,  to  be  prophecies  of  this  Cyrus  by  name  I  What  a  great
turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  exile,  his  capture  of  Babylon,  and  subsequent  coming
to  the  throne.  Another  ground  of  great  expectation  at  this  jimcture  is  also  hinted  at
in  the  text.  The  prophecies  of  Jeremiah,  a  prophet  whom  many  of  the  exiles  may  have
heard  for  themselves,  had  foretold  seventy  years  of  sorrowful  "  rest"  to  the  land  (see
Jer.  XXV.  12 ;  xxix.  10,  compared  with  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21,  and  Lev.  xxvi.  34,  35, 43).
The  end  of  those  seventy  years  coincided  with  this  first  year  of  King  Cyrus.  There
was  one  at  least  amongst  the  exiles  who  knew  this  "  by  books  "  (Dan.  ix.  2).  This  same
man  had  been  the  tried  friend  and  chief  adviser  of  the  immediate  predecessor  of
Cyrus  (Dan.  vi.  3,  14,  26),  and  had  a  deep  thought  and  constant  love  for  his  people
and  land  (Dan.  vi.  10).  From  a  man  of  such  a  character,  and  with  such  influence
and  knowledge,  what  might  not  be  hoped  for  at  such  a  time  ?  And  how  exceedingly
welcome,  in  such  a  condition  of  misery,  would  be  any  such  hope  I

II.  The  EVENT  BELATED  was  quite  in  accordance  with  these  natural  expectations.
While  the  people  were  thus  anxiously  listening,  there  came  a  sound  on  their  ears.
This  new  ruler  had  spoken ;  he  had  issued  a  proclamation — no  unimportant  thing  in
itself.  We  do  not  expect  kings  to  speak  unless  they  have  something  to  say.  It  was
also,  as  they  would  soon  learn  (a  more  important  point  still),  a  proclamation  about
themselves.  Further  yet,  it  was  made  in  two  ways,  each  worthy  of  note.  On  the  one
hand,  to  make  it  public,  it  was  made  orally,  by  word  of  mouth  (see  margin, "  caused  a
voice  to  pass  "),  throughout  all  his  kingdom,  for  the  information  of  all  who  could  hear
(comp.  Dan.  iii.  4).  On  the  other,  to  make  it  sure,  it  was  "  put  in  writing,"  as  a  thing
meant  to  abide  (comp.  Dan.  vi.  8,  10).  How  momentous,  therefore,  even  thus  far,
the  thing  which  had  happened.  It  was  a  loud  knocking  at  the  door  of  their  prison-
house,  whatever  it  meant.  Observe,  in  conclusion — 1.  The  fulness  of  God's  word.
How  much  here  (apparently)  beneath  the  surface  ;  viz.,  the  prophecies  of  Isaiah  j
the  influence  of  Daniel ;  also  in  the  reference  to  the  Sabbatical  years,  the  legislation
of  Moses ;  and,  finally,  in  the  appearance  of  Cyrus  as  a  predicted  restorer  and  deliverer,
the  promise  of  Christ  himself.  2.  The  consistency  of  God's  word.  How  many,  how
various,  and  from  what  widely-distant  parts  of  it  are  the  stones,  as  it  were,  thus  brought
together.  Yet  how  admirably  they  fit  together,  and  what  a  whole  they  compose.
3.  The  promptness  of  God's  mercy.  Many  centuries  passed  before  God  visited  his
people  for  their  neglect  of  the  Sabbatical  years ;  but  as  soon  as  the  seventy  years
of  enforced  compensatory  rest  are  concluded,  that  moment  his  mercy  shines  forth.
See  this  characteristic  illustrated  in  the  case  of  Israel  (Gen.  xv.  16  •  Exod.  xii  41)
In  the  case  of  the  world  (Gal.  iv.  4).  '

Vers.  2 — I.— The  edict.  When  the  proclamation,  which  captive  Israel  had  heard
of  with  such  interest  and  expectation,  came  to  be  examined,  what  was  it  found  to
contain?  Besides  a  proper  preamble,  showing  in  whose  name  and  by  whose  authority
It  was  issued,  three  principal  things ;  viz.,  1.  a  remarkable  confession ;  2.  a  satisfactory
permission ;  'and  3.  a  considerate  command.

1.  A  REMABKABLB  CONFESSION.    A  Confession  or  acknowledgment—!.  Of  Jehovah's

existence.    Cyrus,  brought  up  as  a  worshipper  of  Ormuzd,  begins  his  proclamation

i^^  ty  mentioning  Jehovah  by  name.     2.  Of  Jehovah's  greatness.     Jehovah  the

God  of  heaven  —so  he  goes  on  to  describe  him— i.  e.  according  to  Persian  usag«


en.  1  1—4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


(see  Keil  in  loe.),  the  supreme  God,  the  Most  High.  This  the  more  remarkable
because  neither  Nebuchadnezzar  nor  Darius  before,  nor  Artaxerxes  afterwards,  when
much  impressed  with  the  power  of  Jehovah  the  God  of  the  Jews,  spealt  of  him  in
this  way  (comp.  Dan.  ii.  47 ;  iii.  29 ;  vi.  26 ;  Ezra  vii.  15 ;  also  Ezra  vi  12).  3.
Of  Jehovah's  goodness.  "He  has  given  me  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth."  How
great  a  possession  1  how  true  a  gift  1  This  language  very  significant  from  the  lips  of
a  Persian  king  (comp.  "By  the  grace  of  Orrauzd  I  am  king,"  as  quoted  in  Lange
on  this  passage).  4.  Of  Jehovah's  authority.  "  He  hath  charged  me."  With  all
this  authority  laid  upon  me,  I  am  under  his  authority  still  (comp.  Matt.  viii.  9).
Cyrus  speaks  here  of  himself  just  as  God  had  spoken  before  of  Nebuchadnezzar  (see
Jer.  XXV.  9 ;  xxvii.  6).  And  5.  Of  Jehovah's  will.  "  He  hath  charged  me  to  build
him  an  house."  This  is  the  special  thing  which  he  desires  me  to  accomplish.  Also
a  significant  acknowledgment,  if  we  suppose  (and  there  is  really  no  other  supposition
before  us)  that  Cyrus  understood  the  declarations  of  Isaiah  respecting  him  (see
above)  to  imply  a  charge  of  this  kind.  At  the  same  time,  with  all  that  we  know
from  other  sources  of  the  singular  integrity  of  his  character,  and  with  all  that  we  can
infer  from  the  Bible  of  his  probable  intimacy  with  and  respect  for  Daniel,  only  a  natural
thing  in  his  case.  Who  so  likely  as  his  prime  minister  Daniel  to  draw  up  this
"  king's  speech ; "  and  if  he  drew  it  up,  to  commence  it  in  this  way  ?  Certain  it  is
that  no  beginning,  taking  it  for  all  in  all,  could  have  been  more  full  of  hope  and
promise  to  the  Jews.

II.  A  SATISFACTOBT  PEEMissioN  (ver.  3).  1.  Satisfactory  as  to  its  object.  The
great  thing  that  Israel  needed  for  their  true  restoration  and  deliverance  from
captivity  was  the  restoration  of  Jehovah's  House.  On  the  one  hand,  there  could  be
no  restoration  of  Israel  without  that  of  Jerusalem  (see  Ps.  cxxxvii.  1,  6,  6  ;  Dan.  vi.
10 ;  ix.  16),  and  no  true  restoration  of  Jerusalem  without  that  of  the  Temple  (see  Ps.  cxxii
4,  9,  &o.).  On  the  other  hand,  with  Jerusalem  and  its  Temple  restored,  and  all
Israel  going  up  to  its  feasts,  the  whole  people,  even  if  in  part  dispersed,  would  still
be  one  nation,  one  Church  (comp.  Acts  xxvi.  1).  This  seems  to  have  been  the  exact
ideal  of  the  post-captivity  Church.  Israel  before  the  captivity  was  national,  local,
and  centralized  ;  identified  with  one  race,  one  land,  one  house.  The  true  Israel  since
Christ  has  been  none  of  the  three  (Matt,  xxviii.  19,  20 ;  John  iv.  21 ;  1  Cor.  i.  2 ;
Gal.  iv.  26).  Israel  in  the  intermediate  centuries  was  in  a  kind  of  intermediate  con-
dition, still  national  and  still  centralized,  but  only  local  in  part — in  part,  on  the  con-
trary, becoming  almost  as  much  dispersed  as  the  "  Catholic  "  Church  is  itself  (Acts
ii.  6—11).  In  these  intermediate  centuries,  therefore,  the  importance  of  the  "  house,"
as  a  central  bond  by  which  to  prevent  the  dispersion  from  ending  in  total  obliteration,
was  almost  greater  than  ever.  Accordingly  this  whole  book  of  Ezra  has  to  do  in  the
main  with  this  question,  and  may  be  called,  not  inaptly,  the  Book  of  the  Restoration
of  the  House.  Also  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah  are  greatly  concerned  with  the  same
subject,  and  the  prophecy  of  Haggai  in  particular  does  not  speak  of  much  else.  This
also  is  the  great  object  of  this  permission  of  Cyrus :  "  Let  him  go  up  and  build  the
house ;  "  the  great  topic,  in  fact,  of  the  whole  proclamation — being  mentioned  in  some
way  in  each  verse.  See,  finally,  how  it  is  all  summed  up  on  a  subsequent  page :  "  Let
the  house  be  builded  "  (Ezra  vi.  3).  In  other  words,  "  Let  that  be  done  which  is
needed  the  most."  So  Cyrus  speaks  in  this  place.  2.  The  manner  of  the  permission
was  equally  satisfactory.  It  was  \&cy  definite,  being  addressed,  it  seems,  to  all  Israel,
and  yet  to  Israel  alone,  as  was  right  (see  beginning  of  ver.  3).  Contrast  the
Samaritans  afterwards,  who  offered  to  help  in  building  God's  house,  though  none  of
his  people.  It  was  very  cordial.  "  Jehovah  "  (see  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  23)  "  his  God  be
with  him,  and  let  him  go  up."  Cyrus  would  not  only  have  them  go  up,  but  go  up
with  a  blessing,  such  a  blessing  as  he  himself  had  already  received.  Compare  the
words  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xlviii.  16).  It  was  very  complete.  Cyrus  would  have  them
"  go,"  or  leave  where  they  were  (Isa.  Ii.  14)  ;  he  would  have  them  "  go  up,"  or  reach
the  place  they  desired  (Ps.  cxxii.  2)  ;  he  would  have  them  "go  up  and  build,"  i.  e.  do
the  very  thing  that  was  needed.     What  could  he  do  more  to  show  his  goodwill  ?

III.  The  CONSIDBBATB  COMMAND  which  we  have  in  ver.  4  seems  to  answer  this
question.  Besides  saying  "  Be  ye  wanned  and  filled  "  (James  ii.  16),  he  "  gave  "  to  the
Israelites  in  various  ways  what  was  "  needed  "  in  their  case.    He  did  so,  partly,  so  wa


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  i.  1— i


understpjid  the  words,  by  a  tax.  There  were  various  places  in  his  dominions  where
some  of  the  "remnant"  of  Israel  ("whosoever  remaineth":  comp.  Neh.  i.  2,  &c.  ;
Haggai  ii.  3,  &o.)  were  "  sojourning "  as  strangers.  In  any  such  "  place,"  if  any
Israelites  wished  to  go  up,  the  men  of  that  place  were  hereby  commanded  (the  request
of  such  a  sovereign  would  be  a  special  command)  to  assist  them  by  their  gifts.  But
this  was  not  all.  The  king  helped  the  Israelites  also  in  their  great  undertaking  by
his  personal  gifts.  So  we  understand  those  gifts  distinguished  aa  "  freewill  offer-
ings,'.' and  mentioned  at  the  end  of  ver.  4  (and  again  at  end  of  ver.  6)  as  being
"  beside."  Not  improbably  we  find  these  afterwards  partly  specified  in  ch.  vi.  3,  4.
At  any  rate,  we  learn  from  that  passage  that  the  king  did  give  of  "  his  own."  Both
by  his  people,  therefore,  and  by  himself  he  did  what  he  could.  So  far  as  a  mere  pro-
clamation could  do  such  a  thing,  he  not  only  permitted,  he  enabled  them  to  go  up.
In  this  proclamation,  as  thus  understood,  may  we  not  see  a  picture  of  that  great
declaration  of  liberty  to  the  captives  (Luke  iv.  18),  the  gospel  of  Christ  Jesus?  How
many  the  points  of  resemblance.  How  "  definite "  its  language.  "  Whosoever
will,  let  him  come  "  (Eev.  xxii.  17).  How  "  cordial  "  its  invitations.  "  I  will  in  no
wise  cast  out "  (John  vi.  37).  How  ''  complete  "  its  provisions  (John  iv.  14 ;  Col.  ii.
10,  &c.,  &o.).  How  ample  and  "  considerate  "  its  gifts,  God  Almighty  both,  as  it  were,
taxing  the  whole  world  for  the  benefit  of  his  true  servants  (Bom.  viii.  28  ;  1  Cor.  iii.
21,  22),  and  also  being  pleased  to  give  them  indeed  of  "  his  own  "  (John  iii.  16 ;  Bom.
viii.  32).

Note. — ^It  is  interesting  to  observe  how  the  intermediate  condition  of  Israel  or  the
Church  in  the  "  fourteen  generations  "  between  Salathiel  and  Christ  (Matt.  i.  17),  as
above  noted,  by  leading  to  the  establishment  of  synagogues  throughout  the  Eoman
world,  prepared  for  the  subsequent  founding  of  the  New  Testament  Church  or  IsraeL
See,  inter  alia,  how  the  synagogues  are  mentioned  in  Acts  is.  2,  20  ;  xiii.  6,  14,  &c. ;
xiv.  1 ;  xvi.  13  (the  Proseucha)  ;  xvii.  1,  2  (as  his  manner  was),  10, 17 ;  xviii.  4  ;  xix.
8,  &c.,  &c.  The  effect  also  of  so  many  thousand  Jews  coming  up  to  Jerusalem  at  the
time  of  Christ's  death  (the  Passover)  and  at  the  descent  of  the  Spirit  (the  Pentecost)
should  be  considered  in  this  connection.

HOMILIES   BY    VARIOUS  AUTH0E3.

Ver.  1. — The  sovereignty  of  God.  Dualities  are  everywhere  seen.  Amongst
these  are  things  passive  and  active;  things  ruled  over  and  things  ruling.  The
mechanical  heavens  are  active  and  rule  the  passive  earth.  In  animated  nature
rulers  and  subjects  are  individualized ;  most  remarkably  so  in  the  kingdom  of  men.
Passing  into  the  spiritual  world,  we  still  find  order  and  rule ;  "  principalities  and
powers  in  the  heavenlies" — amongst  angels  of  light,  also  amongst  angels  of  dark-
ness. But  behind  all  these  sovereignties  and  over  them  is  the  glorious  sovereignty
of  God.

I._  The  providence  op  God  is  ALL-coNTROLLiNa.  1.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the
spirit  of  Cyrus."  (1)  This  he  did  by  means.  Josephus  says  that  Cyrus  was  shown
the  places  in  Isaiah  where  he  was  mentioned  by  name  and  his  exploits  indicated
about  a  century  before  he  was  bom  (see  Isa.  xliv.  28 ;  xlv.  1 — 5).  Possibly  Daniel,
who  was  in  Babylon  when  Cyrus  entered  it,  and  the  fame  of  whose  wisdom  was  far-
reaching,  may  have  pointed  them  out  to  him.  (2)  By  his  Spirit  God  made  the
means  he  employed  effective.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus."  "  He  can
turn  the  hearts  of  princes  as  the  rivers  of  the  south."  Means  are  ineffectual  without
his  blessing.  That  blessing  should  be  sought  upon  all  our  nndertakings.  2.  By
means  of  Cyrus  God  moved  the  Persian  empire.  (1)  The  royal  edict  was  issued.
(2)  It  was  vocally  proclaimed.  Heb.,  caused  a  voice  to  pass,  &o.  This  form  of
proclamation  is  for  the  multitude.  For  the  multitude  God  causes  his  gospel  to
be  preached.  (3)  It  was  also  written.  This  was  for  the  magistrates.  A1b»  for
reference.  The  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel  is  also  written.  This  fixes  its  cer»
tainty.  3.  The  sequel  shows  how  cordial  was  the  response.  As  the  exodus  from
Egypt  was  a  figure  of  the  emancipation  of  the  believer  in  Christ  from  the  bondage
of  sin,  so  was  the  return  from  the  captivity  of  Babylon.

II.  Thb  P30VIDBN0B  OF  GoD  IS  ALL-PBBVADiNO.    1.  He  rules  the  world  according


OB.  1. 1—4.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,


to  a  grand  plan.  (1)  This  fact  is  seen  in  the  Scriptures  of  prophecy.  Broad  out-
lines of  future  history  of  the  world  drawn  (see  for  example  Gen.  ix.  25 — 27).  Here
consider  "  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  "  (see  Jer.  xxv.  12  j  xxix.
10).  (2)  Further  seen  in  the  conversion  of  prophecy  into  history.  Examples
abound.  Example  before  us  in  the  restoration  of  Judah  from  the  captivity  of
Babylon.  The  time  was  "  in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus."  This  was  B.C.  636.  Add  to
this  the  seventy  years  of  Jeremiah's  prophecy,  and  we  have  the  year  B.C.  606,  the
very  year  in  which  "  Nebuchadnezzar  carried  Jehoiakim  and  the  vessels  of  the  house
of  the  Lord  to  Babylon  (see  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  6,  7).  2.  The  plan  of  Providence  in-
clvdes  the  means  to  be  employed  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes.  (1)  Stirs
up  the  spirits  of  men  to  study  his  word  (see  Dan.  ix.  2).  Stirred  up  the  spirit  of
Cyrus  also.  -Daniel  was  stirred  up  to  pray ;  Cyrus,  to  act.  It  is  God's  order  that
his  people  should  pray  for  their  blessings  (see  Bzek.  xxxvi.  37).  There  is  often  a
connection  between  the  prayers  of  the  good  and  the  better  actions  of  the  wicked.

1.  Learn  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  chance.  (1)  Afflictions  do  not  spring  out
of  the  dust.  (2)  See  the  hand  of  God  in  our  deliverances.  2.  Learn  that  provi-
dences are  often  retributive.  (1)  The  seventy  years  of  captivity  were  in  retribution
for  seventy  sabbatic  years  in  which  selfishness  refused  the  land  her  rest,  and  con-
sequently the  poor  their  privileges  (corap.  Lev.  xxv.  1 — 6,  and  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21)
(2)  If  we  open  our  eyes  we  may  see  the  operation  of  retributive  providences  every
'  day.     "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 4,  7 — 11. — The  wide  reach  of  the  ride  of  God.  We  are  accustomed  to
pray  that  the  kingdom  of  God  may  come ;  we  desire,  and  therefore  ask,  that  men  may
offer  themselves  in  willing  subjection  to  the  service  of  their  Divine  Sovereign.  For
this  we  must  labour  and  pray,  and  always  shall  do  so  the  more  earnestly  as  we  our-
telves  are  the  more  unreservedly  subject  to  his  benign  and  gracious  rule.  Meantime
there  is  a  sense  in  which  God's  rule  is  a  present  thing.  The  kingdom  of  God  is
among  us  ;  the  arms  of  his  power  are  around  us  ;  the  hand  of  his  skill  is  directing
our  affairs.  Arfd  this  rule  of  the  Supreme  is  wider  than  some  suppose  ;  its  reach  is
far  beyond  the  thought  of  many,  perhaps  of  most  of  us.  These  verses  will  suggest  to
us  how  far  it  goes.

I.  FuETHEK  THAN  THE  Chukch  18  APT  TO  THINK.  "  The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit
of  Cyrus,"  &c.  "  The  Lord  God  of  heaven  hath  charged  me  "  (Cyrus)  (vers.  1—4).
The  Jewish  Church  was  slow  to  believe  that  God  had  much  to  do  with  any  nation
beside  Israel.  Jehovah  was,  in  their  thought,  the  God  of  Abraham  and  of  his  seed
in  a  very  distinctive  if  not  positively  exclusive  sense.  His  action  on  those  outside
the  sacred  pale  was,  they  popularly  imagfined,  to  punish  or  subdue  rather  than  to
control  or  rule  them.  They  did  not  expect  him  to  manifest  himself  to  "  the  uncir-
cumcised,"  or  to  use  them  in  his  service.  But  he  was  governing  those  outside
nations,  and  he  did  act  upon  others  than  the  children  of  the  faithful.  He  who
inspired  Balaam  to  utter  those  exquisite  words  of  poetic  prophecy  (Num.  xxiii.,xxiv. )
now  "  stirs  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus,  king  of  Persia ; "  makes  ms  heathen  monarch  "  his
shepherd,  performing  his  pleasure  "  (Isa.  xliv.  28) ;  calls  him  his  "  anointed  one  whose
right  hand  he  has  holden"  (strengthened)  (Isa.  xlv.  1),  and  constrains  him  to  render
signal  service  to  his  people  which  had  great  and  enduring  issues.  The  Christian
Church  is  slow  to  believe  that  the  hand  of  God  is  at  the  helm  of  all  national  and
international  affairs,  and  that  he  lays  that  hand  of  Divine  power  and  wisdom  upon
men  and  things  whether  these  be  counted  among  his  own  servants  or  not.  "  Upon
whom  doth  not  this  light  arise?"  It  was  by  his  all-wise  direction  that  Greece
prepared  her  thought  and  her  language,  and  Rome  her  highways  for  the  gospel  in
the  "fulness  of  times."  We  know  not  to  whom  God  is  speaking,  or  whose  hand  he
is  guiding,  in  civilized  or  savage  lands,  but  we  may  be  sure  that  he  is  where  we  do
not  suspect  his  Presence,  and  is  acting  through  men  we  should  not  have  ranked
among  his  servants,  as  the  end  will  one  day  show.     "  His  kingdom  ruleth  over  all."

II.  Further  than  the  world  supposes  (ver.  2).     We  smile  now  as  we  read  that
Cyrus  imagined  that  God  had  given  him  "all  the  kingdoms  of  the  earth"  (ver.  2)
The  heathen  monarch  little  dreamt  what  God  was  doing  elsewhere,  and  what  strong
workmen  he  had  in  other  spheres  that  were  outworking  his  holy  will,  his  gracious  and


8


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[oh.  l  6 — 11


redeeming  purposes.  Little  does  the  world  know,  greatly  does  it  under-estimate,  th«
work  which  God  is  doing  in  the  midst  of  it.

III.  FdETHEB  in   individual    men    than  they   ABE   THEMSELVES  AWABE'.        CymB

did  not  know  what  use  the  Lord  was  making  of  him.  "  I  girded  thee,  though  thou
hast  not  known  me  "  (Isa.  xlv.  6).  The  Persian  king  could  not  foresee  that  God  was
inducing  him  to  take  a  step  which  should  have  not  only  wide  and  lasting,  hut  world-
wide and  everlasting,  issues  and  influences.  God  may  be  prompting  us  to  take  steps
— as  he  has  with  many  since  the  days  of  Cyrus — which,  when  taken,  will  lead  on  to
the  most  happy  and  fruitful  consequences,  stretching  on  far  into  the  future,  reaching
wide  over  land  and  sea.

IV.  Thbouqh  the  heart  and  mind  to  the  hand  of  men  (vers.  3,  4,  7  — 11).
God  so  acted  on  Cyrus  that  that  king  was  (a)  inclined  in  his  heart  to  take  the
generous  course  of  liberating  the  Israelites  and  causing  the  temple  to  be  rebuilt.  It
was  generous  on  his  part,  for  he  was  thus  denuding  his  country  of  many  of  his  most
industrious  and  skilful  subjects,  and  he  was  acting  on  behalf  of  a  religion  somewhat
difEerent  from  his  own.  And,  thus  disposed,  he  (6)  took  every  necessary  and  desir^
able  step  for  its  thorough  execution.  He  (1)  issued  a  proclamation,  which  he  put
into  writing,  authorising  all  Jews  in  his  kingdom. to  return  to  Jerusalem  and  rebuild
the  house  of  the  Lord  (vers.  2,  3) ;  (2)  invited  his  subjects  to  aid  the  Israelites  with
money,  cattle,  and  other  valuable  gifts  (ver.  4)  ;  and  (3)  restored  the  sacred  vessels
which  Nebuchadnezzar  had  taken  from  Jerusalem  (vers.  7 — 11).

God  may  use  us  whether  we  know  it  cr  not,  whether  we  will  or  not.  He  may
employ  us  in  his  service  even  if,  like  Cyrus,  we  have  a  very  partial  knowledge  of
his  will,  and  some  inclination  to  do  it,  though  we  are  not  fully  and  wholly  on  his
side.  We  may  be,  as  many  among  the  heathen  have  been,  instrwments  in  his  hand.
But  how  much  better  to  be,  as  Ezra  and  Kehemiah  were,  agents  of  his,  deliberately
opening  our  minds  to  his  truth,  fixedly  and  finally  yielding  our  hearts  and  lives  to
his  service,  consciously  and  rejoicingly  working  with  him  in  his  beneficent  design.
It  is  only  such  co-workers  that  will  win  his  final  acceptance  and,  hearing  his  "  weU
done,"  enter  into  his  glory. — C.


EXPOSITION.


Thx  bsspoksx  to  teb  sscbee  (vers.  6 —
11).  The  response  made  to  the  decree  fell
short  of  what  might  have  been  expected.
The  "patriarchal  chiefs"  who  responded
belonged  solely,  or  mainly,  to  the  two  tribes
of  Judah  and  Benjamin;  the  "ten  tribes"
were  for  the  most  part  deaf  to  the  invitation
addressed  to  them.  Some,  however,  of
Ephraim  and  Manasseh  (1  Chron.  ix.  8),  and
perhaps  some  of  other  tribes,  were  more
zealous,  and  took  part  in  the  migration.
Many,  on  the  other  hand,  even  of  Judah  and
Benjamin,  preferred  remaining  in  Babylonia
to  undertaking  the  long  and  perilous  (Ezra
vii.  22)  journey  to  Palestine,  and  taking  the
chance  of  what  might  happen  to  them  there.
They  were,  as  Josephus  says,  "disinclined
to  relinquish  .their  property."  In  the  course
of  nearly  seventy  years  great  numbeis  of
Jews  had  acquired  wealth ;  some  had  invested
their  money  in  lands  and  houses ;  others  had
extensive  business  connections ;  others,  again,
though  poor,  may  have  been  unenterprising  ;
and  the  result  was  that  only  some  42,000


persons  took  advantage  of  the  opportnnity,
and  proceeded  from  Babylonia  to  Jerusalem
(ch.  iL  64).  The  response  to  the  latter  part
of  the  decree,  addressed  by  Cyrus  to  his
heathen  subjects,  was  more  satisfactory.  The
Jews  were  helped  by  their  neighbours  freely,
with  gold,  and  with  silver,  and  with  goods,
and  with  beasts,  and  with  precious  things
(ver.  6) ;  and  besides  all  this,  a  certain  num-
ber of  freewill  ofiFerings  were  contributed.
As  in  Egypt  at  the  time  of  the  Exodus  (Exod.
xi  3),  so  now,  the  Jews  found  favour  in  the
eyes  of  the  heathen  on  their  departure  from
among  them,  and  were  made  partakers  of
their  worldly  substance.  We  may  well  sup-
pose tliat  once  more  God  gave  his  people
favour  in  the  sight  of  those  with  whom  they
had  been  living,  and  disposed  their  hearts  to
liberality.

Ver.  5. — ^Then  rose  up  the  chief  of  the

fathers.     The  "  chief  of  the  fathers  "  are  the
hereditary  heads  of  the  families  recognized
as  distinct  and  separate  (see  ch.  it  8 — 19).
Ver.  6.  —All  they  that  were  about  them.


CH.  I.  6—11.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


/.  e.  all  their  neighbours.  Strengthened
their  hands.  This  is  the  literal  rendering.
The  margin  gives  the  right  meaning —
"helped  them."  With  precions  things.
Migdan6th,  a  rare  word,  only  iised  here,  in
Gen.  xxiv.  53,  and  in  2  Chron.  xxL  3  ;
always  connected  with  silver  and  gold  ;  de-
rived from  meged,  which  means  "precious."
Besides  all  that  was  willingly  offered
(comp.  ver.  4).  The  gold,  silver,  precious
things,  &c  previously  mentioned  were  free
gifts  to  individual  Jews,  and  were  additional
to  certain  offerings  which  were  intrusted  to
them  for  conveyance  to  Jerusalem.  On  the
value  attached  by  the  Persians  to  offerings
made  in  Jerusalem  to  Jehovah,  see  below,
ch.  vi.  10,  and  vii.  17.

The  restoration  of  the  sacred  ves-
sels BY  Cyrus  (vers.  7 — 11).  Following
the  ordinaiy  custom  of  the  early  Oriental
conquerors,  Nebuchadnezzar,  long  before  he
destroyed  the  Jewish  temple,  had  carried  off
from  it,  partly  as  trophies  of  victory,  partly
as  articles  of  value,  many  of  the  sacred  j
vessels  used  in  the  temple  service  (see  2
Chron.  xxxvi.  10 ;  Jer.  xxvii.  19,  20  ;  Dan.
i.  2).  At  his  final  capture  and  destruction  of
Jerusalem  he  bore  off  the  remainder  (2  Kings
XXV.  14,  15).  These  he  deposited  at  Baby-
lon in  the  temple  of  Merodach  (or  Bel),  the
god  whom  he  chiefly  worshipped  (Dan.  i.  2),
where  they  probably  remained  until  Belshaz-
zar  had  them  brought  out  and  desecrated  at
his  great  banquet  (ibid.  v.  2).  A  religious
instinct  now  prompted  the  Persian  king  to
give  the  vessels  back,  in  order  that  they
might  revert  to  their  original  use.  The
careful  enumeration  of  them  (vers.  9 — 11)  is
characteristic  of  Ezra,  who  is  very  Siinute
and  exact  in  his  details,  and  fond  of  making
lists  or  catalogues.

Ver.  7.— The  vessels.  Probably  all  that
he  could  find,  yet  scarcely  all  that  had  been
taken  away,  since  many  of  these  were  of
bronze  (2  Kings  xxv.  14),  and  the  restored
vessels  seem  to  have  been,  all  of  them,  either
of  gold  or  silver  (see  ver.  11).  Which
Nebuchadnezzar  had  brought  forth.  The
carrying  off  of  sacred  vessels,  as  well  as
images,  from  temples  is  often  represented  in
the  Assyrian  sculptures.  It  was  a  practice
even  of  the  Romans,  and  is  commemorated
on  the  Pillar  of  Titus,  where  the  seven-
branched  candlestick  of  the  Jewish  temple  is
represented  as  borne  in  triumph  by  Roman
soldiers.  And  had  put  them  in  the  house
of  his  gods.  Elohayv,  which  is  the  form
used  iu  the  text,  can  only  mean  "his  riod,"
nat  "  his  god*"   Nebuchadnezzar  represents


himself,  in  his  inscriptions  generallj,  as  •
special  devotee  of  a  single  Babylonian  god,
Merodach,  whose  temple,  called  by  the
Greeks  that  of  Bel,  is  no  doubt  here  intended
(comp.  Dan.  L  2).

Ver.  8.— Mithredath  the  treasurer.  Not
"  Mithridates,  the  son  of  Gazabar,"  as  the
Vulgate  renders.  The  Hebrew  gizbdr  repre-
sents a  Persian  word,  gazabara  or  gomza-
bara,  which  had  no  doubt  the  meaning  of
"treasurer,"  literally  "treasure -bearer."
We  have  here  the  first  occurrence  of  the
famous  name,  borne  by  so  many  great  kings,
of  Mithridates.  The  name  is  thoroughly
Persian,  and  is  excellently  rendered  by  the
Hebrew  Pi^ria.  It  means  either  "given  by
Mithra"  or  "dedicated  to  Mithra,"  and  is
distinct  evidence  of  the  worship  of  Mithra
by  the  Persians  as  early  as  the  time  of  Cyrus.
Mithra  was  the  sun,  and  was  venerated  as
Mitra  by  the  early  Vedic  Indians.  His
worship  in  later  Persia  is  clearly  established  ;
but,  except  for  the  name  of  Mithredath  in
this  place,  it  would  have  been  doubtful
whether  he  was  as  yet  an  object  of  religious
veneration  to  the  Iranians.  Sheshbazzar.  It
is  generally  allowed  thatthis  was  the  Chaldffian
or  court  name  of  ZerubbabeL  (The  chief
evidence  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  ch.  v.  16
compared  with  ch.  iii.  8.)  What  the  name
signified  is  uncertain.  The  prince  of  Jndah.
Zerubbabel  was  the  son  of  Pedaiah,  brother
of  Salathiel,  who  was  the  legal  heir  of  Jehoi-
achin,  king  of  Judah.  He  appears  to  have
been  adopted  by  Salathiel  as  his  son,  and  to
have  been  recoOTized  as  the  legitimate  heir  to
the  throne  of  David.  Thus  he  did  not  owe
his  appointment  to  the  mere  favour  of  Cyrus,
but  was  the  natural  leader  of  the  people.

Ver.  9. — Chargers.  Agarteley,  a  rare
word,  perhaps  Persian.  The  LXX.  translate
^vKTTiQti,  "  wine-coolers  ; "  the  Vulgate  has
phialce,  "vases;"  the  apocryphal  Esdras,
anovStia,  "vessels  for  drink-offerings."
Probably  basons  or  bowls  are  intended.
Knives.  Machal&phim,  another  rare  word
of  doubtful  sense.  The  LXX.  render  5ropi;\-
\ay)i'iva,  "  changes,"  regarding  the  word  as
derived  from  nVn,  "to  exchange."  The
apocryphal  Esdras  has  9vtaKai,  "censers."
But  the  most  usual  translation  is  that  of  the
A.  v.,  "knives."

Ver.  10.— Of  a  second  sort.  Not  "  double,"
as  the  LXX.  render;  but  "secondary,"  or
"of  inferior  quality"  (comp;  1  Sam.  xv.  9
where  mish/nim  has  the  same  meaning).

Ver.  11. — All  the  vessels  were  five  thou-
sand and  four  hundred.  The  numbers  pre-
viously given  produce  a  total  of  only  2499,
or  less  than  half  of  this  amount.  There
must  be  some  corruption,  but  whether  in
the  total  or  the  items  is  uncertain.  The
apocryphal  Esdras  raises  the  total  number  of
the  vessels  to  5469.


10  TUE  BOOK  OF  BZKA.  [ch.  i.  6—11.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  5— 11.— The  muster.  We  have  noted  already  that  the  great  and  pri  narj
feature  in  the  restoration  o£  Israel  from  captivity  was  the  restoration  of  the  house.
With  a  view  to  this  restoration,  as  we  have  seen,  the  whole  edict  of  Cyrus  vas
framed.  In  the  passage  now  before  us  we  shall  see,  in  the  next  place,  tha'.  the
results  of  that  edict  were  in  accordance  with  this  design.  They  secured,  i.  e.,  the  two
first  requisites  for  carrying  out  this  design,  providing,  as  they  did,  on  the  one  hand,
the  requisite  men ;  and,  on  the  other,  the  requisite  means.

I.  The   requisite   men.     1.    The   requisite  laymen.      "Then   rose    up

Judah"  (Heb.  vii.  14)  "  and  Benjamin."  The  Church  is  before  its  ministers  (comp.
Phil.  i.  1).  Perhaps,  also,  the,  laymen  in  this  case  were  the  first  to  be  stirred.  Ntxt,
the  requisite  lay-leaders,  the  "  chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah  and  Benjamin."  Wliur-
ever  any  body  of  men  moves  towards  an  enterprise,  there  must  be  some  to  go  first.
In  this  case  it  pleased  God  so  to  arrange  by  his  providence,  and  so  to  work  by  the
edict  of  Cyrus,  that  some  of  those  were  ready  to  go  first  who  naturally  stood  first  as
it  were.  This  was  particularly  the  case,  as  we  afterwards  find,  with  him  who  stood
first  of  all  amongst  these  "chief  of  the  fathers  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,"  viz.,
"  Sheshbazzar  the  prince  of  Judah,"  mentioned  in  ver.  8.  This  Sheshbazzar,  better
known  as  Zerubbabel  (comp.  ch.  v.  16  and  Zech.  iv.  9 ;  see  also  Dan.  i.  6,  7),  about
whose  exact  descent  and  Uneage  it  is  difficult  to  make  sure,  seems,  at  any  rate,  to
hav^  been  regarded  both  by  Israelites  and  Gentiles  as  the  representative  of  the  house
of  David.  As  siich,  he  was  the  natural  leader  of  the  movement  for  restoration ;  and
as  such  a  leader,  in  God's  providence,  he  was  found  willing  to  act.  In  addition,  next,
to  this  sufficient  lay  element,  we  find  also,  2.  The  requisite  ecclesiastics.  And  that,
as  before,  of  all  ranks.  Both  "  the  priests  and  the  Levites,"  e.  g.,  both  the  appointed
ministers  and  their  appointed  assistants,  are  specified  in  ver.  5.  Mention  is  also  made
afterwards  of  Jeshua,  the  legitimate  high  priest,  or  supremo  ecclesiastical  head  ^cn.
ii.  2 ;  iii.  2,  &c.) ;  and  of  the  Nethinims  and  children  of  Solomon's  servants  (ch.  ii.
43^68),  the  lowest  grades  of  all  those  occupied  in  purely  ecclesiastical  work.  This,
therefore,  completes  the  list.  If  the  Church  is  before  its  ministers,  it  is  not,  therefore,
without  them.  Neither  Judah  and  Benjamin  without  Levi,  nor  Levi  without  Jndah
and  Benjamin,  could  have  restored  the  kind  of  house  that  God  wished.  It  is  to  be
admired,  accordingly,  that  in  this  instance  God  caused  the  edict  of  Cyrus  so  to
operate  as  to  call  forth  sufficient  of  both.  And  something  more  than  merely  suflSoient,
so  some  have  supposed.  Besides  men  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  and  men  belonging
to  or  connected  with  the  ecclesiastical  tribe  of  Levi,  some  also  belonging  to  other
tribes  of  Israel  are  thought  to  be  pointed  to  in  the  words  "  with  all  them  whose
spirits  God  had  raised."  The  return  of  some  such  appears  clearly  implied  in  1  Chrou.
ix.  3,  and  was  only  natural,  when  we  bear  in  mind  how  many  men  of  other  tribes  at
various  times  before  the  captivity  had  joined  themselves  to  that  of  Judah  (see  2  Chron.
xi.  14 — 16;  XV.  9;  xxx.  1,  10,  11,  18;  also  Blunt's  'Undesigned  Coincidences,'  p.
189).  It  is  further  evident  that  such  a  separate  ten-tribes  element  amongst  those
returning  from  Babylon  would  be  a  fact  of  much  weight,  since  it  would  serve  so
greatly  to  make  the  restored  house,  as  originally  intended  (Ps.  cxxii,  4),  a  house  for
the  whole  race,  a  centre  of  unity  for  all  "the  twelve  tribes  scattered  abroad"  (James
i.  1).  And  it  would  also  aid  us  in  understanding  St.  Paul's  long-subsequent  description
of  those  "twelve  tribes"  as  "instantly  serving  God  day  and  night"  throughout  the
world  (Acts  xxvi.  7).  They  did  so  in  that  common  temple  which  they  had  all  thus
helped  to  restore.  •

II.  The  requisite  means.  The  men  thus  duly  called  were  also  duly  equipped
Almighty  God,  by  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  both  "raised"  their  "spirit"  and  filled  their
hands  (see  Ps.  ex.  3  ;  Phil.  ii.  13).  For  example,  we  find  them  provided  with  the
requisite  means  of  support.  These  men  would  have  to  live  whilst  on  their  journey,
and  whilst  building  the  house.  The  "  gold  "  and  "  goods "  mentioned  in  ver.  6,
added  to  what  we  may  suppose  them  to  have  made  by  selling  their  possessions  (Jer.
xxix.  4,  6),  may  have  been  meant  for  this  end.  Ro  also  the  "  beasts  "  in  the  same
verse  (comp.  ch.  ii.  66,  67,  where  none  but  beasts  of  burden  are  mentioned)  may
have  supplied  them  with  another  requisite,  viz.,  means  of  transport.    Next,  if  we  are


OH.  1. 5—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  BZRA.  11

right  in  referring  the  last  words  of  ver.  6  to  the  grant  made  by  Cyrus  himself,  oa
afterwards  defined  in  ch.  vi.  3,  4,  we  see  that  they  had,  further,  at  their  disposal  the
requisite  materials  for  huildiiig.  This  point  will  perhaps  appear  more  plainly  if  we
compare  the  last-quoted  passage  with  what  is  said  in  1  Kings  vi.  36.  Not  only,  t. «.,
were  the  necessary  materials  for  building  the  temple  granted,  but  they  were  granted,
it  would  appear,  of  the  precise  shape  and  size  required  for  erecting  one  most  import-
ant part  of  the  new  temple,  viz.,  its  inner  court.  Further  yet,  another  most  important
point,  we  find  that  the  requisite  temple  vessels  were  supplied  in  this  case  (vers.  7 —
10).  God's  providence  had  so  ordered  it  that  a  sufiScient  number  of  these — sufficient,
at  any  rate,  to  make  a  beginning ;  sufBcient  also,  it  may  be,  to  serve  as  a  pattern  for
others  (a  point  of  great  importance  according  to  Exod.  xxv.  9,  40 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.
11)  ;  and  sufficient,  in  this  way,  to  keep  up  the  identity  of  the  old  worship  and  the
new,  and  make  it  a  true  restoration — were  placed  at  their  service.  This  ia  a  point  to
be  marked.  Taken  away  by  Nebuchadnezzar  principally  at  his  first  capture  ol
Jerusalem  (2  Chron.  zxxvi.  7,  as  contrasted  with  2  Kings  xsiv.  13 ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi,
19),  placed  by  him  in  the  house  of  his  "  god  "  (Dan.  i.  2),  brought  out  thence  at  tho
great  feast  of  Belshazzar  on  the  same  night  that  Babylon  was  captured  (Dan.  v.  3,
23,  30),  they  were  preserved  by  God  through  all  these  vicissitudes  as  something
destined  for  further  use.  Exactly  corresponding  with  this  is  the  careful  way  in
which  we  find  them  handled  by  the  Persian  treasurer  Mithredath,  taking  them  in  his
"  hand,"  according  to  Lange,  so  as  to  inspect  and  recognize  them  as  Jerusalem  temple
vessels;  and  afterwards  "numbered"  or  catalogued  by  him  in  the  way  that  follows
(vers.  9, 10)  before  giving  them  to  Zerubbabel.  What  these  vessels  exactly  were  it  ia
impossible  for  us  now  to  make  out ;  but  it  is  evident  that  they  were  considered  most
important  by  all  concerned  at  the  time,  and  also  evident  that  they  leave  little  else  in
the  way  of  "  requisites  "  to  be  named.  We  may,  perhaps,  conjecture,  however,  that
under  the  "  precious  things  "  of  ver.  6  may  be  included  those  priestly  "  garments  "  of
which  we  read  in  ch.  ii.  69,  and  those  musical  instruments,  no  longer  now  to  be  hung
on  the  willows,  of  which  Josephus  informs  us.  Also  (one  other  point  yet),  that  other
vessels  besides  these  preserved  ones  were  now.  ofEered  for  temple  use,  in  such  num-
bers as  almost  to  double  the  whole  number  at  the  disposal  of  the  priests  (comp.  the
total  of  the  numbers  in  vers.  9  and  10  with  the  total  given  in  ver.  11).  In  fact,  certain
other  "  vessels  of  silver,"  for  which  no  other  use  is  specified,  are  mentioned  by  name
in  ver.  6.  But,  whether  with  or  without  these  conjectures,  we  have  much  here  to
admire.  (1)  How  willing  are  God's  people  in  the  day  of  his  power  I  When  he  has
special  work  to  be  performed  in  his  Church,  how  easily,  how  surely  he  provides  the
right  men.  (2)  How  carefully,  also,  and  how  completely  he  enables  them  for  their
work,  either  by  providing  them  with  fresh  instruments,  or  by  using  those  which  they
have.  Compare  Ehud's  "  left  hand,"  David's  "  sling,"  the  "  eloquence  "  of  Apollos,
&c.  If  called,  therefore,  to  any  work  (and  we  are  all  called  to  the  great  work  of
glorifying  Christ  and  fighting  sin),  in  that  call  itself  is  our  strength.  "  Go  in
this  thy  might"  (Judges  vi.  14;  see  also  Josh.  i.  9;  Judges  iv.  6).  (3)  At  the  same
.  time,  we  must  not  mistake.  Preparation  is  not  accomplishment  (1  Kings  xx.  11).
Collecting  soldiers  is  one  thing;  arming  and  supplying  them  another;  actual
campaigning  another  yet.  "  Speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel  that  they  go  forward."
"  Go  in  this  thy  might."  The  first  word  in  that  sentence  as  important  aa  the
last.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  6,  6. — God's  action  on  i/ie  minds  of  his  people.  When  Cyrus,  moved  of
(iod,  proclaimed  liberty  to  the  captives  in  Persia  and  invited  the  children  of  Israel  to
return  to  their  own  land,  there  was  a  very  large  proportion  that  preferred  to  stay,
some  from  excusable  and  others  from  insufficient  motives,  but  a  large  company  of
the  people  of  God  made  an  immediate  and  honourable  response.  These,  to  the
number  of  42,000  persons,  forthwith  made  ready  to  leave  their  adopted  country  and
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  to  build  again  the  house  of  the  Lotd,  rebuilding,  at  the  aame
time,  the  shattered  fortunes  of  the  land  of  their  fathers.  The  reaponae  to  the  king'a
overture  illuatrates  God's  action  on  the  minds  of  his  own  people.     We  haTe —


12  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [cH.  i.  6—11

I.  His  two  metuods  of  appboach.  "  Then  rose  up,"  &o.  (ver.  5).  1.  Instrumental.
God  worked  on  the  minds  of  the  chiefs  of  the  people  by  means  of  the  proclamations
and  edicts  of  Cyrus,  and  on  the  minds  of  the  generality  of  the  people  by  means  of
their  leaders.  Then — when  the  king's  offer  was  circulated — "  rose  up  the  chief  of
the  fathers  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,"  &c.  And  when  Sheshbazzar  (Zerubbabel)  and
the  other  natural  leaders  came  forward,  then  the  multitude  volunteered :  there  is
human  agency  here.  2.  Direct.  God's  spirit  acted  directly  and  immediately  on
their  minds.  They  were  men  ''  whose  spirit  God  had  raised ; "  they  were  like
the  "band  of  men  whose  hearts  God  had  touched  "  (1  Sam.  x.  26).  God  "laid  his
hand  upon  them,"  and  lifted  them  up,  spiritually,  and  they  became  strong  and  brave,
ready  to  do  a  good  work  for  him  and  for  the  world.

II.  Its  spiritual  result.  Elevation  of  soul.  Their  spirit  was  raised — as  ours
will  be  whenever  God  works  within  us  as  he  did  in  them — (a)  above  its  common  level
of  thought  and  feeling.  Tliey  saw,  as  otherwise  they  would  not  have  seen,  the  excel-
lency of  the  service  of  God  and  of  their  native  land ;  they  felt,  as  they  did  not
usually  feel,  how  glorious  a  thing  it  was  to  lay  everything  on  the  altar  of  God  and
strike  a  brave  and  faithful  blow  for  their  country's  freedom  and  independence.
Their  views  were  cleared,  their  ambition  heightened,  their  mind  enlarged,  their  soul
exalted.  God  "  raised  their  spirit,"  and  they  were  lifted  up  (6)  above  the  induce-
ments of  a  comfortable  present ;  so  that  the  pleasant  homes  and  prosperous  employ-
ments and  agreeable  friendships  and  enjoyable  amusements  in  which  they  had  been
spending  their  days,  these. they  were  willing  to  leave  behind  them.  And  they  were
raised  (c)  above  the  fear  of  misfortune  in  the  ftUure;  so  that  the  difficulties  of  the
journey,  the  "  lion  in  the  way,"  the  arrangements  between  one  another,  the  desolate
ruins  of  the  once-favoured  city,  the  enemies  that  might  dispute  their  right,  aU  these
dangers  and  difficulties  they  were  prepared  to  encounter  and  overcome.  Under  the
touch  of  the  hand  of  God  they  became,  as  we  may  now  become,  men  whose  "heart
was  enlarged  "  to  dare  and  do  great  things,  to  attempt  and  accomplish  what,  in  an
unenlightened  and  uninspired  state,  they  would  never  have  dreamed  of  doing,  God
was  with  them,  his  spirit  was  in  them,  and  these  children  of  men  became  the  serv-
ants and  the  soldiers  of  God.  Dare  to  attempt  nothing  if  God's  Spirit  be  not  in  the
soul,  inciting  and  sustaining  it.  Dare  to  undertake  anything  if  he  opens  the  eyes  of
the  understanding  and  if  he  dwells  within  the  heart.

III.  Its  material  issues  (ver.  6).  Such  was  the  spirit  of  these  men,  that  (a)
those  of  their  kindred  who  did  not  accompany  them  and  their  Persian  neighbours
"  strengthened  their  hands  with  vessels  of  silver  and  gold,  with  goods  and  beasts
and  precious  things ;  "and  (6)  thus  equipped  they  marched  out  of  their  captivity,  and
went  forth  free  men  to  espouse  the  cause  of  Jehovah  and  to  make  their  mark  on
their  age  and,  indeed,  upon  future  ages.

Our  great  wisdom  is  to  know  when  God  comes  to  us  ;  to  listen  when  he  speaks  ;
to  respond  when  he  calls.  Many  Jews  in  Persia  heard  but  heeded  not  that  voice  ;
they  felt  the  touch  of  that  Divine  finger  but  obeyed  it  not.  They  lived  on  in  such
comfort  and  enjoyment  as  their  adopted  country  yielded  ;  but  they  entered  not  the
open  gate  of  opportunity  ;  they  rendered  no  great  service  t«  their  land,  their  church,
their  race.  Not  theirs  the  victory  and  the  crown ;  these  were  for  the  men  who  re-
sponded when  God  called,  and  whose  spirits  rose  to  the  height  of  that  great
occasion. — C.

Vers.  6,  6.— TAe  return.  The  books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  are  the  historical
mtroduction  to  this  third  period  of  Jewish  history.  The  first  or  formative  period  is
that  of  the  exodus  and  the  conquest  of  Canaan.  The  second,  that  of  the  kings  is
the  period  of  national  development,  when  all  that  was  possible  to  them  as  a  nation
was  accomplished.  The  third  period  was  that  of  national  dependence,  and  it  lasted
600  years.  From  the  return  from  captivity  to  the  fall  of  Jerusalem,  the  history  of
the  Jews  IS  bound  up  with  the  policy  of  the  great  empires,  Persia,  Macedonia,  Greece,
and  Rome,  on  whose  favour  they  depended,  or  to  whom  they  offered  a  fruitless
resistance.

Just  as  the  exodus  and  the  conquest  trained  the  people  for  the  second  stase  in
their  development  and  prepared  its  way,  so  the  third  period  prepared  for  the  f oimb—


CH,  1. 6—11,]  THE  BOOK  OF  BZfiA.  13

Judaism  in  its  relation  to  modern  history.  The  true  destiny  of  Israel  is  now  revealed,
to  exist  as  a  "  leaven  "  among  the  nations.  The  Divine  purpose  in  the  Israelitish
-leople  is  accomplished  in  Chnstendom  ;  religious  susceptibility,  fitness  for  inspiration,
las  been  the  signal  endowment  of  the  Jews ;  theirs  is  a  spiritual,  not  a  national,
gloiy.  And  the  modem  history  of  the  unconverted  remnant  is  not  without  signifi-
cance ;  we  see  in  them  the  natural  stock  out  of  which  Christendom  has  grown.  The
tenacity  and  steadfastness  which  still  characterise  the  race,  their  patience,  gentleness,
and  readiness  to  serve  or  to  rule,  are  some  of  the  elements  of  their  fitness  to  afEect  most
intimately  the  history  of  the  world,  some  of  their  qualifications  to  be  the  depositary
of  the  promises  of  Ood.

The  period  of  the  return  is  sometimes  contrasted  with  that  of  the  exodus  as  an
unheroic  with  an  heroic  time.  It  is  easy  to  exaggerate  the  force  of  this  contrast.
That  is  not  an  unheroic  or  uneventful  history  which  contains,  as  its  heart,  the  story
of  the  Maccabees.  Even  in  these  two  books — Ezra  and  Kehemiah — ^the  narratives  of
the  rebuilding  of  the  altar,  the  foundation  and  dedication  of  the  temple,  the  building
of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  reorganisation  of  a  corrupt  society,  are  not
inglorious.  The  tact,  the  courage,  the  patience,  the  fidelity  displayed  awaken
admiration  ;  and  some  of  the  incidents  strike  the  imagination  and  stir  the  soul.

The  true  contrast  is  rather  that  between  ancient  and  modem  life,  the  conceptions
and  conditions  of  the  old  and  the  new  world.  Instead  of  miracle,  we  read  the  story
of  providential  guidance  and  of  homely  virtues  winning  the  hearts  of  the  captors.
We  are  involved  in  the  details  of  foreign  policy,  brought  face  to  face  with  the
intrigues  of  Oriental  rulers.  The  successive  fortunes  of  the  great  heathen  states
profoundly  affect  the  fortunes  of  the  Jews.  Their  history  is  becoming  international,
cosmopolitan.  A  new  source  of  interest  appears  in  these  books,  commonly  reputed
dnii,  as  we  perceive  this.  The  history  affects  us  not  by  its  contrasts  with  our  more
commonplace  life,  but  by  its  revelations  of  the  Divine  and  noble  in  the  common-
place ;  it  appeals  not  to  our  wonder,  but  to  our  sympathy.

The  period  of  the  exodus  was  marked  by  a  splendid  cycle  of  miracles  inaugurated
by  Moses,  and  fitfully  appearing  down  to  far  later  days.  In  the  period  of  the
monarchy  God  revealed  himself  in  a  succession  of  prophets ;  men  whose  glory  and
whose  main  ofiBce  it  was  to  declare  the  great  moral  principles  of  the  Divine  rule  into
which  they  had  the  insight  of  spiritual  genius ;  but  who  yet  had  often  conferred  upon
them  a  predictive  gift,  a  power  to  foresee  and  to  foretell  events,  which  fixed  attention
on  their  utterances  and  confirmed  their  mission  as  from  God.  The  period  of  which
we  are  now  speaking  was  marked  by  regard  for  law ;  the  reverence  for  God  as  the
God  of  order  which  characterises  modem  thought  and  modem  piety  had  here  its
birth.  Ezra  was  "  a  priest,"  but  he  was  also,  and  even  more,  "  a  scribe  ; "  and  the
scribe,  as  Dean  Stanley  points  out,  was  the  forerunner  of  the  Christian  minister.  We
have  wise  men  still,  men  of  marvellous  spiritual  insight,  ability  to  read  the  secrets  of
the  human  heart  and  to  forecast  human  story ;  not  these,  however,  but  "  pastors  and
teachers"  are  the  officers  of  the  Church.  With  the  study  of  the  law  began  the
recognition  of  the  sphere  of  the  intellect  in  religion,  the  interpretation  of  God's  will.
The  synagogue — in  which,  and  not  in  the  temple,  the  Christian  congregation  finds
fts  historic  origin — dates  from  this  time ;  and  so  does  the  common  school  of  the  Jews.
All  this  is  of  profound  significance ;  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  religious  revolution.
God  will  henceforth  be  increasingly  conceived  of,  not  as  interfering  with,  but  direct-
ing, the  course  of  events.  Study  is  to  take  the  place  of  signs  ;  the  knowledge  of  his
will  is  to  be  gained,  not  through  rare  and  fitful  glimpses  and  glances,  but  by  constant
thought  and  careful  reasoning.

Two  lessons  may  be  noted  here —

First,  AB  TO  THE  PEOVIDENCB  OF  GoD.  "  The  fall  of  Sardis  and  Babylon  was  the
starting-point  of  European  life ;  and  it  is  a  singular  coincidence  that  the  beginmng
of  Grecian  art  and  philosophy,  and  the  foundation  of  the  Soman  constitution,
synchronize  with  the  triumph  of  the  Arian  race  in  the  East"  '  Similarly,  Christ  came
"■in  the  fulness  of  the  times,"  when  Gentile  history,  as  well  as  Jewish  expectation,
had  "  prepared  the  way  of  the  Lord."    These  coincidences  have  on  evidential  value ;

»  Smith's  'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  art  'Oynw.'


14  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  i.  5—11.

they  mark  design  in  history.  Time,  which  removes  us  so  far  from  events  that  they
lose  impressiveness,  compensates  for  the  loss  by  revealing  more  fully  correspondences
that  speak  of  purpose.  The  majestic  march  of  Providence  makes  also  a  direct  appeal
to  the  emotions  of  piety.

Next,  AS  TO  THE  PURPOSE  OF  GoD.  The  object  of  tlie  separation  of  Israel  to  a
peculiar  destiny  and  discipline  was  that  they  might  contribute  moral  and  spiritual
force  to  humanity.  The  "  election  "  was  for  the  sake  of  the  human  race.  They  were
chosen  not  to  judge  mankind,  but  to  influence  it.  The  Jewish  people,  like  him  who
was  its  archetype  and  greatest  representative,  came  not  to  condemn  the  world,  but
to  save  the  world.  And  this  is  the  common  order  of  spiritual  eflBciency.  First
separation,  then  influence.  The  first  precept  is,  "  Come  ye  out  from  among  them,
nd  be  ye  separate,  and  touch  not  the  unclean  thing ; "  then  we  can  "  be  all  things  to
all  men,"  can  "  eat  and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners."  Some  of  these  thoughts
receive  emphatic  illustration  in  these  verses.

I.  It  was  a  peaceful  rbtukn.  God  had  ''raised  their  spirit"  "to  go  up  to
build  the  house  of  the  Lord."  They  went  with  the  good  wishes  of  Cyrus  and  the
people.  "AU  they  that  were  about  them  strengthened  their  hands."  Jeremiah
(ch.  xxix.)  had  told  them  what  spirit  they  were  to  cherish  during  their  years  of
bondage.  "  Seek  the  peace  of  the  city  whither  I  have  caused  you  to  be  carried  away
captives,  and  pray  unto  the  Lord  for  it:  for  in  the  peace  thereof  shall  ye  have  peace.'
It  is  still  a  characteristic  of  the  Jews  that  they  are  good  citizens.  Many  of  them
signally  won  the  confidence  of  their  masters  ;  as  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  Daniel,  Mordecai,
and  the  three  Hebrew  youths.  The  reward  of  their  meekness  and  service  came.
Contrast  this  return  with  the  fiight  out  of  Egypt.  "  They  were  thrust  out  of  Egypt. "
"  The  Egyptians  were  urgent  upon  the  people,  that  they  might  send  them  out  of  the
land  in  haste  ;  for  they  said,  We  be  all  dead  men."  •

II.  The  character  or  Ctrus.  It  is  a  large  assumption  which  appears  in  his
decree — "  Jehovah  the  God  of  heaven  hath  charged  me  to  build  him  an  house  at
Jerusalem,  which  is  in  Judah  ;  "  but  it  is  not  out  of  harmony  with  what  we  know  of
his  character.  The  noblest  epithets  are  heaped  upon  him  in  the  prophecy  of  Isaiah.
He  is  "  the  anointed,  the  Messiah,  of  Jehovah."  God  "  saith  of  Cyrus,  He  is-my
shepherd,  and  shall  perform  all  my  pleasure."  He  is  "the  righteous  man"  whom
God  "  raised  up  from  the  East."  Contrast  this  with  the  scorn  of  Egypt  as  an  ally
(Isa.  XXX.,  XXXI.),  and  the  denunciation  of  the  pride  of  Assyria,  and  the  prophecy  of
its  doom  (Isa.  x. ).  And  heathen  writings  illustrate  the  Scripture  representation  of
him.  They  speak  of  his  virtues ;  they  record  romantic  circumstances  in  his  early
career  which  justify  the  belief  that  he  was  providentially  preserved  for  some  great
purpose.

III.  The  points  of  besemblanck  between  the  Jewish  and  the  Persian  faith.
The  unity  of  God  ;  that  he  should  not  be  worshipped  under  the  form  of  idols  ;  that
God  was  good,  and  that  evil  was  not  from  him.  Each  faith  was  able  to  contribute
something  to  the  other ;  but  fundamentally  they  were  in  harmony.  Contrast  this
with  the  idolatries  of  Babylon,  the  scornful  picture  of  Isa.  xlvi.  1, 2  ;  and  picture  the
meeting  in  Babylon  of  the  Persian  victors  and  the  Jewish  exiles.  An  interest  might
well  be  excited  in  one  another  such  as  is  indicated  in  our  text.

The  narrative  illustrates  "  Ood'a  making  use  of  -men's  goodness "  to  advance  his
purpose.  He  can  make"  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  ; "  but  he  loves  rather  the
frank  service  of  those  in  sympathy  with  him.  We  too  love  to  contemplate  good
acts  done  graciously ;  favours  unmarred  by  any  bitter  memories.  The  feeling  of
the  return  finds  lyrical  expression  in  the  joyousness  and  trust  of  Ps.  cxxvi. — M.

Vers.  6,  6. — The  response.  "  Then  rose  up,''  &c.  The  edict  of  Cyrus  had  been
issued  (see  vers.  2 — i).  The  voice  of  God  was  in  the  voice  of  the  king  (see  ver.  1).
But  who  responded  ?

I.  The  chiefs  of  the  fathers  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  responded.  1.  Happy
the  people  whose  magistrates  lead  them  nobly.  (1)  In  politics.  The  voice  of  uie
king.  The  purpose  of  that  voice.  (2)  In  religion.  The  voice  of  God.  The  pur-
pose of  that  voiie :  immediate  ;  ulterior  with  respect  to  fulfilment  of  prophecy,  Ac.
2.  Politics  cannot  be  divorced  from  religion.     (1)  God  has  joined  them  in  the  con-


CB.  u  6— ll.j  THE  BOOK  OP  EZSA.  16

stitution  of  our  nature.  (2)  He  holds  citizens,  as  sucli,  responsible  to  himself.  (3)
Experience  proves  that  godly  men  are  the  best  citizens.  3.  Uvil  rulers  are  scourget
of  God  to  wicked  peoples.  (1)  Not  appointed  without  his  providence  (see  Isa.
iii.  4).  (2)  Rulers  are  no  worse  than  their  people.  Representative  governments^
responsibility  of  the  franchise.  In  hereditary  magistracies  (see  Isa.  i.  10).  "  Rulers
of  Sodom"  associated  with  "people  of  Gomorrah"  (see  Isa.  i.  25,  26).  When
the  vices  of  a  people  are  purged  away,  then  worthy  magistrates  are  raised  np  to
them.

IL  The  priests  and  Levites  responded.  1.  Priests,  leaders  in  religion.  (1)
Sons  of  Aaron — type  of  Christ,  also  of  Christians.  (2)  OfBces  at  the  altar.  (3)
OfSces  in  the  sanctuary.  2.  Levites,  leaders  in  teeraiwrc.  (1)  Scattered  in  Israel —
schoolmasters,  scribes  of  the  law  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  13).  (2)  Services  about  the
temple.  Literature  should  be  the  handmaid  of  religion.  When  otherwise,  inversion
of  God's  order — ^fearfully  mischievous.

III.  Skilful  artificers  responded.  Those  whose  spirit  God  hath  raised  to  ^o
up  and  build  the  house  of  the  Lord.  1.  All  vseful  labour  is  from  God.  (1)  He  ic
the  Author  of  our  faculties.  (2)  His  providence  furnishes  opportunities  for  their
culture.  2.  All  talent  should  be  devoted  to  God.  (1)  In  building  up  his  material
temple.  (2)  In  furthering  the  building  of  hiB  livmg  temple.  (3)  In  our  secular
calling  (see  1  Cor.  x.  31).

IV.  A  willing  people  responded.  1.  All  iheg  that  were  about  them,.  (1)  Not
all  the  nation.  Some  elected  to  remain  in  Babylon.  Gain  of  merchandise,  &c.,  &c.
So  it  is  still  when  God  calls  us  to  forsake  the  world.  (2)  Those  responded  whose
sympathies  were  true — "  about  them."  Frequently  the  children  of  godly  persons
elect  the  service  of  Christ.  2.  These  strengthened  thdr  hands.  (1)  True  sympathy
is  hflp.  Moral  influence  of  virtuous  citizens  strengthens  the  hands  of  magistrates.
(2)  Where  sympathy  is  true  it  will  furnish  active  help.  Gifts  from  the  wealthy — viz.,
things  of  "  gold  and  silver,"  "  goods,"  "  beasts,"  viz.,  for  transport  (see  ch.  ji.  66,  67)  ;
"  precious  things."  Gifts  from  the  multitude — "  freewill  oiferings."  All  is  precious
that  comes  from  a  loyal  heart.  1.  Learn  that  religion  and  politics  may  be  harmon-
ised without  resorting  to  compulsion.  The  response  was  voluntary.  Uniformity  is
not  unity  Endless  variety  in  living  things.  2.  Harm^my  in  religion  and  politics
is  truest  when  free.  With  compulsion  comes  resistance  and  contention.  Admit  the
principle  of  coercion,  then  the  question  is  not  between  religion  and  politics,  as
abstract  principles,  but  becomes  often  an  ambitious  and  unholy  strife. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 11. — The  beginning  of  a  great  religious  mov&tient.  Israel  had  ex-
perienced long  bondage  in  a  foreign  land  under  a  heathen  king ;  this  would  have  a
beneficial  influence.  1.  It  would  tend  to  cultivate  within  them  a  right  view  of  the
sorrow  consequent  upon  sin.  Their  captivity  was  a  punishment  for  idolatry.  Sin
sends  men  into  slavery.  2.  It  would  tend  to  cultivate  within  them  a  right  view  of
the  external  in  religion.  Solomon's  temple  was  the  pride  of  Israel.  They  prided
themselves  in  the  magnificent  masonry,  in  the  richly- coloured  garments,  in  the  lofty
altar ;  but  now  all  is  in  ruins,  and  they  in  bondage,  will  they  not  learn  to  worship  God
in  simplicity,  in  spirit  and  in  truth  ?  The  sensuous  in  religion  leads  to  slavery.  It
is  well  sometimes  that  our  temple  should  be  destroyed ;  God  lays  the  outward,  in
ruins  that  we  may  see  the  inward.  The  Church  has  often  to  go  into  captivity  to
learn  the  meaning  of  the  spiritual.  3.  It  would  tend  to  cultivate  within  them  a
right  view  of  the  Divine  in  worship.  Israel  thought  that  the  temple  was  the  one
place  of  worship  ;  but  in  captivity  the  scattered  people  learn  that  God  will  hear  their
cry  from  heathen  cities  and  in  desert  places.  4.  It  would  cultivate  within  them  a
right  view  of  the  sympathetic  feeling  which  should  prevail  in  their  midst.  Israel
had  been  sore  rent  by  faction  ;  in  captivity  they  are  one.  The  Church  is  united  by
its  sorrows.     We  observe  respecting  great  religious  movements —

I.  That  they  often  take  their  rise  in  the  stirrings  of  an  individual
BOUL.  "The  Lord  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Cyrus  king  of  Persia."  1.  A  Divine  com-
mencement. Here  we  see  the  beginning  of  the  great  movement  of  Israel's  restora-
tion to  fatherland.  History  is  unveiled  and  God  is  seen.  Thn  voice  of  God  is  heard
ill  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus.     The  human  historian  can  only  write  the  pr'rilamatiof


16  THE  BOOK  OF  E2EA.  [oh.  l  6—11.


of  the  king ;  the  inspired  historian  makes  known  the  secret  working  of  God.  We  know
nothing  of  the  Divine  heart-stirrings  which  precede  the  great  movements  of  our  age.
God  is  behind  the  king  and  we  see  him  not.  The  political  serves  the  apiiitnal.  _  Let
us  rightly  interpret  our  heart-stirrings ;  God  is  in  them,  they  have  great  meanings.
They  are  more  than  the  beatings  of  a  pulse,  they  are  the  beginnings  of  spiritual
liberty.  Heaven  has  various  ways  of  stirring  our  souls.  2.  A  secret  commence-
ment. The  restoration  of  Israel  began  in  the  secret  stirrings  of  one  heart.  It  did
not  begin  with  the  crowd,  but  with  the  individual.  And  so  great  religious  move-
ments generally  commence  in  the  secret  awakening  of  the  one  man.  See  the  power
of  a  God-moved  heart.  The  kingdom  of  God  cometh  not  with  observation.  Restora-
tions are  in  the  heart  before  they  are  in  the  world.  3.  An  unlikely  commencement.
The  Jews  were  looking  for  a  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  to  restore  them ;  God  sent
an  alien  deliverer.  A  man  of  war  becomes  a  man  of  peace ;  a  man  of  conquest
becomes  an  emancipator  of  the  people.  God  employs  unexpected  agencies.  Great
religious  movements  often  have  unlikely  beginnings.  '4.  An  effectual  commence-
ment. The  stirring  of  the  heart  of  Cyrus  had  great  possibilities  in  it — ^it  expanded
into  a  temple  of  worship  ;  its  pulsations  are  felt  in  our  own  age.

II.  That  they  abb  timed  by  the  faithful  providence  op  God.  "  That  the
word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah  might  be  fulfilled."  Thus  the  captivity
of  Israel  terminated  in  the  set  time  of  God.  1.  The  mercy  of  God.  In  the  pro-
clamation of  Cyrus  to  the  wretched  slaves  see  the  Divine  mercy  to  those  most  unde-
serving of  it ;  the  word  of  God  is  a  merciful  message  to  man,  it  is  a  word  of  liberty,
that  the  ruined  temple  of  life  may  be  rebuilt.  2.  The  fidelity  of  God.  Israel  had
the  promise  of  liberty  fulfilled  ;  so  all  the  promises  of  God  respecting  the  future  glory
of  the  Church  will  be  accomplished.  3.  The  purpose  of  God. '  The  captives  were
not  to  go  out  of  bondage  merely  for  their  own  freedom  and  enjoyment ;  but  to  build
the  temple  of  the  Lord.  Men  are  freed  from  the  tyranny  of  sin  that  they  may
establish  the  kingdom  of  heaven ;  they  must  be  liberated  before  they  can  build.
This  is  the  Divine  purpose  in  the  salvation  of  men,  that  they  may  engage  in  pro-
moting spiritual  good.

III.  That  they  often  eeveal  in  men  unexpected  excellences  of  mosal
character.  1.  The  hidden  excellences  of  men.  The  Jews  probably  did  not  ex-
pect much  aid  from  Cyrus  ;  but  he  had  excellences  of  knowledge,  of  grace,  they  little
suspected.  God  saw  this  and  used  him.  Men  are  often  better  than  we  know,  and
are  more  prepared  to  aid  the  work  of  God  than  we  suppose.  2.  The  revealed  excel-
lences of  men.  Cyrus  incidentally  shows  by  his  proclamation  the  good  that  is  in
him.  Times  of  religious  revival  reveal  unexpected  abilities  in  men  ;  then  the  dull
man  becomes  brilliant;  the  man  of  little  opportunity  becomes  rich  in  knowledge;
the  cold  man  becomes  generous  in  gift.  3.  The  utilised  excellences  of  men.  All
that  is  good  in  men  God  uses  for  the  welfare  of  his  Church.

IV.  That  they  are  often  furnished  with  needful  material  aid  in  the  most
unexpected  manner  (ver.  6).  The  departure  of  such  a  people  would  require  great
preparation,  and  would  necessitate  great  expense.  How  are  the  captives  to  meet
it?  The  proclamation  of  Cyrus  provides  for  it.  A  wondrous  providence  often
causes  the  world  in  unexpected  ways  to  minister  to  the  temporal  needs  of  the
Church  ;  men  of  the  world  often  help  to  erect  a  temple  in  which  liiey  are  little  in-
terested, and  into  which  they  will  never  enter.

V.  That  at  such  times  spiritual  things  are  restored  to  their  rightful
SERVICE  (ver.  7).  The  vessels  of  God  were  brought  from  the  heathen  temple  and
given  to  the  returning  Jews.  In  times  of  religious  revival  money,  talents,  children,
all  are  brought  from  the  possession  of  sin  and  placed  in  the  service  of  God.  Heaven
now  proclaims  liberty  to  the  captive  I — £.


OK.  n.  1—67.]


THE  BOOJK  OP  EZfiA,


1?


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  II.

The  number  of  those  who  kbtuened

FROM  OAPTIVITr  WITH  ZBBUBBABEL,  AND
rHB  NAMES  OF  THE  CHIEFS  (ch.    ii    1 — 64).

It  has  been  argued  that  the  whole  of  this
chapter  is  out  of  place  here,  and  has  been
ti'ansferred  hither  from  Nehemiah  (ch.  viL
6 — 73),  where  it  occupies  its  rightful  position
(Bishop  A.  Heryey).  According  to  this  view,
the  list  is  one  embodying  the  results  of  the
census  made  by  ITehemiah,  not  a  list  of
those  who  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  Zerub-
babel.  But  it  seems  strange  that  such  a
theory  should  ever  have  been  seriously
maintained,  since  not  only  does  Ezra  declare
the  list  to  be  a  catalogue  of  those  "  which
came  toith  Zenibhahel"  (ver.  2),  but  Nehe-
miah  himself  warns  us  that  it  is  "a  register
of  the  genealogy  of  them  which  came  up  at
the  first"  (Neh.  vii.  5).  The  Jews,  like
other  Semitic  races,  especially  the  Arabs,
get  great  store  by  their  genealogies  ;  and,  to
secure  a  sound  basis  for  these  in  the  restored
community,  it  was  essential  that  a  correct
record  shotild  be  kept  of  the  families  by
which  the  state  was  re-established.  Already
there  was  a  large  number  of  Jews  among
the  captives  "  which  could  not  show  their
father's  house,  or  their  pedigree,  whether
they  were  of  Israel"  (ver.  59).  It  was
essential,  according  to  Jewish  ideas,  that
such  ignorance  should,  at  the  least,  be
arrested,  and  not  spread  through  the  nation.
Hence  the  elaborate  genealogies  with  which
the  first  Book  of  Chronicles  opens  (chs.  L —
viii. ),  and  hence  also  the  present  list.

The  list  may  be  divided  into  ten  parts : —

1.  Enumeration  of  the  leaders  (ver.  2).

2.  Numbers  of  those  who  returned,  ar-
ranged according  to  families  (vers.  3 — 19),

8.  Numbers  of  those  who  returned,  ar-
ranged according  to  localities  (vers.  20 — 35).

4.  Numbers  of  the  priests,  arranged  ac-
cording to  families  (vers.  36 — 39).

6.  Numbers  of  the  Levites,  arranged
•imilarly  (vers.  40—42).

6.  Families  of  the  Nethinim  (vers.  43-r-54).

7.  Families  of  "Solomon'a  servants"
(vers.  66—57)


8.  Number  of  these  last  two  classes  to-
gether (ver.  58).

9.  Account  of  those  who  could  not  show
their  genealogy  (vers.  59 — 63).

10.  General  summation  (ver.  64).

Ver.  1. — These  are  the  children  of  the
province.  /.  e.  of  Judaea,  which  was  Sl  pro-
vince of  Persia,  distinguished  here  from
Babylon,  which  was  one  of  the  capitals — a
mode  of  speech  indicating  the  foreign  stand-
point of  Ezra.  ITnto  Jerusalem  and  Jadah,
every  one  unto  his  city.  Jerusalem  was
not  the  only  site  occupied  by  the  people  on
their  return.  Many  took  up  their  abodes  in
the  neighbouring  tovms  and  villages,  such
as  Jericho,  Tekoah,  Gibeon,  Mizpah,  Zanoah,
&c  (see  Neh.  iiL  2 — 19,  and  vii  20—35).
These  were  chiefly  persons  whose  families
had  belonged  to  those  places.

Yer.  2. — Zerubbabel,  Jeshua,  &c.  In  the
corresponding  verse  of  Nehemiah  (vii  7)
there  are  twelve  names,  one  of  which  (it  is
probable)  has  accidentally  fallen  out  here.
The  twelve  are  reasonably  regarded  as  either
the  actual  heads  of  the  twelve  tribes,  or  at
any  rate  as  representing  them.  Notwith-
standing the  small  number  among  the  re-
turned exiles  who  belonged  to  other  tribes
than  those  of  Judah,  Benjamin,  and  Levi,
there  was  a  manifest  wish  on  the  part  of  the
chiefs  to  regard  the  return  as  in  some  sort
that  of  all  the  tribes  (see  ch.  ii  70 ;  vi.
17  ;  viii  35,  &c.).  The  number  of  the  men.
The  lists  in  Nehemiah  and  the  apocryphal
Esdras  differ  in  many  details,  and  furnish
strong  evidence  of  the  corruption  to  which
numbers  are  liable  from  the  mistakes  of
copyists,  and  the  facility  of  error  when
there  is  no  check  from  the  context.  Of
the  forty-two  numbers  here  given  by  Ezra
(vers.  3 — 60),  as  many  as  eighteen  differ  from
the  corresponding  numbers  in  Nehemiah.
The  difference,  however,  is  mostly  small ;
and  even  the  sum  of  the  differences  is  trivial
(see  comment  on  ver.  64j.

Ver.  20.— The  children  of  Gibtar.  For
"  Gibbar "  we  should  probably  read
"Gibeon,"  which  occurs  in  the  correspond-
ing passage  of  Nehemiah  (vii  25).  The
writer  at  this  point  passes  from  persons  to
places,  making  the  latter  portion  of  his  list
topographicai  Gibeon  was  a  well-known
town  in  Benjamin  (Josh,  iviii  25).  Other
Benjamite  towns  in  the  list  are  Anathoth,
Bamah,  Gaba,  Michmas,  Bethel,  and  Jericho.
It  would  seem  that  the  descendants  of  the
captives  carried  off  from  these  places  re-
tained a  traditional  knowledge  of  the  locality
to  which  they  belonged.


n


THE  BOOK  OF  E2BA.


[cH.  II.  1—67.


Ver.  36.  —  The  priests.  Four  priestly
families  went  up  with  Zerubbabel  Of
these,  three  traced  their  descent  to  persons
who  had  been  heads  of  the  priestly  courses
in  the  reign  of  David,  viz.,  Jedaiah,  Immer,
and  Harim  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  7,  8,  14).  The
other  family  had  for  founder  a  priest  named
Pashur,  who  was  not  otherwise  distinguished.
The  numbers  assigned  to  the  priests  by  Ezra
are  identical  with  those  in  Nehemiah  (vii
89 — 42).  Jedaiah,  of  the  house  of  Jeshua.
To  whose  house,  that  is,  Jeshua,  the  existing
high  priest,  belonged.  Hence,  no  doubt,  the
precedency  given  to  the  house  of  Jedaiah,
which  numerically  was  the  least  important.

Ver.  40. — The  levites.  The  non-priestly
Levites  are  divided  into  three  classes : —
1.  Ordinary  Levites  (ver.  40) ;  2.  Choral
Levites  (ver.  41) ;  and  Levites  descended
from  those  who  had  had  the  charge  of  the
temple  gates  (ver.  42).  Compare  1  Chron.
xxiv.  20 — 31 ;  xxv. ,  and  xxvi.  1 — 19.  Of  the
first  class,  only  two  families  seem  to  have
returned  —  those  of  Jeshua  and  Kadmiel,
both  of  which  traced  their  descent  to  a
certain  Hodaviah,  or  Judah  (ch.  iii.  9).

Ver.  41. — The  singers,  the  children  of
Asaph.  See  2  Chron.  xxv.  1.  It  is  remark-
able that  no  descendants  of  either  Heman  or
Jeduthun  {ibid. )  took  part  in  the  return.

Ver.  42. — The  porters.  Six  families  of
doorkeepers  returned ;  three  of  which  bear
old  names,  those  of  Shallum,  Talmon,  and
Akkub  (1  Chron.  ix.  17),  while  the  other  three
have  names  that  are  new  to  us.  One  hundred
and  thirty-nine.  The  smallness  of  this  and
the  two  preceding  numbers  is  remarkable.
While  the  returning  priests  numbered  4289,
the  returning  Levites  of  all  classes  were  no
more  than  341  (350,  Nehemiah).  It  would
seem  as  if  some  jealousy  of  the  priests,  like
that  which  animated  Korah  and  his  followers
(Num.  xvi  1 — 10),  must  have  grown  up  dur-
ing the  captivity  (oomp.  below,  ch.viii.  15).

ver.  43. — The  Nethinims.  See  note  on
1  Chron.  ix.  2.

Ver.  55. — Solomon's  servants.  Solomon
formed  the  remnant  of  the  Canaanitish
population  which  survived  at  his  day  into
a  separate  servile  class,  which  he  employed
in  forced  labours  (1  Kings  ix.  20,  21).  It
would  seem  that  the  descendants  of  these
persons,  having  been  carried  into  captivity  by
the  Chaldaeans,  continued  to  form  a  distinct
class,  and  had  become  attached  to  the  sacer-
dotal order,  as  a  body  of  hieroduli  inferior
even  to  the  Nethinims.  We  may  account
for  their  special  mention  at  this  time  by  the
importance  of  their  services,  when  such  a
work  as  that  of  rebuilding  the  temple  was
about  to  be  taken  in  hand.

Ver.  59.  — Tel-melah  is  probably  the
ThelmS  of  Ptolemy  ('Geograph.,'  v.  20),  a
fitjr  of  Lower  Babylonia,  situated  in  the


.salt  tract  near  the  Persian  Gulf.  Hence  tin
name,  which  means  "  Hill  of  Salt."  Chernh
is  no  doubt  Ptolemy's  Ohiripha,  which  was
in  the  same  region.  The  other  places  here
mentioned  are  unknown  to  us,  but  probably
belonged  to  the  same  tract  of  country.
Tel-Harsa  means  "Hill  of  the  Wood."
They  could  not  show  their  father's  house.
It  is  more  surprising  that  so  many  of  the
returning  exOes  had  preserved  their  genealo-
gies than  that  a  certain  number  had  omitted
to  do  so.  Considering  the  duration  of  the
exile,  its  hardships,  and  the  apparent  im-
probability of  a  restoration,  there  could  have
been  no  cause  for  wonder  if  the  great  majority
had  forgotten  their  descent

Ver.  61. — Of  the  children  of  the  priests.
Some  of  those  who  claimed  to  be  descendants
of  Aaron,  and  therefore  priests,  had  also  lost
the  evidence  of  their  descent.  This  loss  was
held  to  disqualify  them  from  the  exercise  of
the  priestly  office  (ver.  62).

Ver.  63.— The  Tirshatha.  As  "Shesh-
bazzar  "  was  the  Babylonian  name  of  Zerub-
babel (ch.  i.  8),  so  "the  Tirshatha"  seems
to  have  been  his  Persian  title.  The  word  is
probably  a  participial  form  from  tars  or
tarsa,  "to  fear,"  and  means  literally  "the
Feared."  It  is  used  only  by  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  (vii  65 ;  viiL  9).  Haggai  calls
Zerubbabel  mxTiomAj  pechdh,  "governor"
(Haggai  L  1,  14  ;  iL  2,  21).  They  should
not  eat  of  the  most  holy  things.  The
priests'  portion  of  the  offerings,  called  "most
holy"  in  Lev.  ii.  2,  10,  is  intended.  Of
this  no  "stranger"  might  eat  (tJicJ.  xxii  10).
Till  there  stood  up  a  priest  with  ITrim  and
Thummlin.  Zerubbabel  evidently  expected
that  the  power  of  obtaining  direct  answers
from  God  by  means  of  the  Urim  and
Thummim,  whatever  they  were  (see  note  on
Exod.  xxviii.  30),  which  had  existed  in  the
pre-captivity  Church,  would  be  restored  when
the  Church  was  re-established  in  its  ancient
home.  The  doubt  whether  the  families  of
Habaiah  and  Coz  (or  Haccoz)  belonged  to
the  priestly  class  or  no  might  then  he
resolved.  But  Zerubbabel's  expectation  was
disappointed.  The  gift  of  Urim  and  Thum-
mim, forfeited  by  disobedience,  was  never
recovered.

Ver.  64.  —  The  whole  congregation  to-
gether was  forty  and  two  thousand  three
hundred  and  threescore.  Ezra's  numbers,
as  given  in  detail  (vers.  3 — 60),  produce
when  added  together  a  total  of  only  29,818  ;
Nehemiah's  items  (viL  8 — 62)  give  a  total  of
31,089  ;  those  of  the  apocryphal  Esdras  a
total  of  33,950.  The  three  authorities  agree,
however,  in  their  summation,  all  alike
declaring  that  the  actual  number  of  thosa
who  returned  with  Zerubbabel  was  42,360.
Esdras  adds  that  children  under  twelv»
years  of  age  are  not  included.     If  this  we<


CH.  II.  1—67. J


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


19


so,  the  entire  number  must  have  exceeded
50,000 — an  enormous  body  of  persons  to
transport  a  distance  of  above  a  thousand
mUes,  according  to  Western  experience,  but
one  which  will  not  surprise  those  acquainted
with  the  East.  In  the  East  caravans  of
from  ten  to  twenty  thousand  souls  often
traverse  huge  distances  without  serious  mis-
hap, and  migrations  frequently  take  place
on  a  much  grander  scale.  In  the  year  1771,
50,000  families  of  Torgouths,  reckoned  to
number  300,000  souls,  arrived  on  the  frontiers
of  China,  after  a  journey  of  10,000  leagues
through  a  most  difficult  country,  and  were
given  lands  in  the  Chinese  empire.  They
were  followed  in  the  next  year  by  180,000
Eleuths  and  others,  who  had  accomplished
a  similar  distance  (see  De  Hell,  '  Travels,'  pp.
228,  229).  Jenghis  Khan  is  said  to  have  forced
100,000  artisans  and  craftsmen  to  emigrate
in  a  body  from  Khiva  into  Mongolia  (How-
arth's  '  History  of  the  Mongols,"  p.  85).  The
transplantation  of  entire  nations  was  an
established  practice  among  the  Assyiians,
Babylonians,  and  Persians.

The  number  of  the  slaves,  hoeses,
mules,  camels,  and  asses  of  those
WHO  RETURNED  (vers.  65 — 67).  It  may
seem  strange  that  matters  of  this  trivial
character  should  be  recorded  with  such
exactness  in  Holy  Writ ;  but  enumerations
similar  in  character  are  not  unfrequent  (see


Gen.  xxiii.  14,  16 ;  2  Chron.  xvii  11 ;  Job
xlii.  12).  They  may  perhaps  be  viewed  as
teaching  the  lesson  that  with  God  nothing
is  too  trivial  for  exact  knowledge,  even  "all
the  hairs  of  our  head  "  being  "  numbered"
(Matt.  X.  30).  In  the  present  passage  the
enumeration  is  not  altogether  without  a
further  historical  value,  since  it  is  indicative
of  the  general  poverty  and  low  estate  of  the
returning  exiles,  who  had  but  one  slave  and
one  ass  to  every  six  of  their  number,  one
horse  to  every  sixty,  one  camel  to  every
hundred,  and  one  mule  to  every  one  hundred
and  seventy-five.

Ver.  65. — Two  hundred  singing  men  and
singing  women.  Neheraiah  says  two  hun-
dred and  forty-five,  and  so  the  apocryphal
Esdras.  Perhaps,  in  the  great  default  of
Levites,  the  services  of  these  persons  may
have  been  used  to  swell  the  sacred  choruses
of  the  time  (ch.  iii.  10).  Hence,  it  may  bo,
the  mention  of  this  otherwise  unimportant
fact.

Ver.  67. — Their  asseg-  The  ass  (we  see)
is  still,  as  in  the  earlier  times,  the  chief
beast  of  burden  employed  by  the  Israelites.
Horses  are  rare,  camels  and  mules  still  rarer  ;
but  most  emigi'ant  families  had,  it  would
seem,  one  ass  (comp.  1  Sam.  viiL  16 ;  1
Chron.  xxviL  30 ;  Isa.  xxi.  6).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 67. — The  muster  -  roll.  The  last  chapter  gave  n»  a  catalogue  of  the
sacred  vessels  returned.  In  that  portion  of  the  present  chapter  which  concludes
with  the  above  verses  we  have  a  similar  catalogue  of  the  sacred  people  returned  (see
Lam.  iv.  2).  The  first  verse  seen.j  to  show  us  where  this  catalogue  was  made  out,
viz.,  in  the  land  of  their  exile,  where  Judaea  was  constantly  spoken  of  as  "  the  pro-
vince "  (comp.  Ezra  v.  8 ;  Neh.  i.  3 ;  xi.  3).  If  the  nearly  identical  catalogue  which
Nehemiah  (ch.  vii.  6)  describes  himself  as  having  found  at  Jerusalem,  about  103
years  afterwards,  were  the  same  catalogue  as  corrected  and  laid  up  after  the  arrival
of  the  exiles  at  Jerusalem,  this  might  account  for  the  various  minor  difEerences  which
are  discoverable  between  lliem.  Many  enrolled  to  start  might  never  start,  or  never
arrive  ;  some  not  enrolled  to  start  might  join  afterwards  and  be  enrolled  then.  At
any  rate  it  is  easier  to  suppose  something  of  this  kind  than  to  suppose,  in  coimection
with  such  careful  and  formal  documents  of  state,  so  many  glaring  "  mistakes."  See
also  the  very  curious  coincidences  with  regard  to  numbers  in  this  case  adduced  by
Wordsworth  in,  loc. ;  coincidences  hardly  to  be  accounted  for  except  on  the  supposition
of  some  secret  but  perfect  method  of  numerical  reconciliation.  We  may  take  the
catalogue  before  us,  therefore,  very  much  as  it  stands.  Not  improbably,  according
to  its  own  methods  of  interpretation,  it  is  quite  correct  as  it  stands.  Can  we  regard
it  as  being  also  instructive  from  a  moral  point  of  view  ?  Perhaps  if  we  mereiy
regard  it  in  a  general  way,  and  as  setting  before  our  notice,  first,  the  kind  of  men,
and  second,  the  number-of  lAen,  that  came  up,  we  shall  find  oven  this  apparently
barren  Scripture  not  without  some  sacred  use  to  us.  Suino  lessons  can  also  be
gathered  from  the  very  names  we  find  here.


20  THE  BOOK  OF  EZKA.  Loh.  n.  1—67.


L  Thb  kind  of  kbit  that  oamb  ijp.  They  appear  to  have  been  men,  in  th«
main,  loving  the  old  state  of  things.  They  were  conservatives,  e.  g.,  in  politics,  keeping
still,  in  the  person  of  Zerubbabel  as  their  chief  civil  ruler,  to  the  ancient  dynasty,
that  of  David.  They  are  also  thought  by  some,  comparing  the  names  in  ver._2  with
the  probably  correcter  account  in  Neh.  vii.  7,  and  with  Ezra  vi.  17 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  31,  to
have  shown  the  same  spirit  touching  the  ancient  twelve-fold  _"  constitution  "  of  Israel.
In  Church  matters,  again,  so  to  call  them,  the  returning  exiles  showed  their  strong
respect  for  precedents  and  the  past  by  submitting  to  Jeshua  as  chief  priest  (see
2  Kings  XXV.  18—21 ;  1  Chron.  vi.  15  ;  Haggai  i.  1, 14).  Also  we  see  another  branch
of  this  Church  conservatism  of  theirs  in  the  especial  importance  attached  by  them  to
the  question  of  genealogy.  While,  further  yet,  on  this  last-mentioned  matter,  the  only
proposal  made  for  settling  thp  doubts  that  beset  it  was  by  an  ancient  method  again
(ver.  63).  Nor  is  it  altogether  unworthy  of  remark  in  this  connection  that  they  also
appear  to  have  been  men  showing  great  attachment  to  race  and  place,  and  assembling
together  for  their  proposed  return.to  Jerusalem  in  family  groups.  In  most  cases  these
groups  are  described  as  "  the  children"  of  some  one  man.  This  is  the  case  of  vers.  1 — 17,
and  again  of  vers.  33—55.  In  other  cases  (vers.  18 — 33)  the  groups  are  described  as
being  connected  with  particular  towns,  which,  considering  how  necessarily  near  of  kin
all  Israelitish  fellow-townsmen  had  formerly  been,  comes  to  much  the  same  thing  (see
Num.  xxxvi.  7 ;  1  Kings  xxi.  3).  All  the  priests  also  who  returned  amongst  them
are  in  similar  groups,  being  all  described  as  belonging  to  four  "  courses  "  or  family
lines  (vers.  36 — 39).  The  same  kind  of  thing,  again,  is  true  of  the  Levites  (vers.  40 —
42),  and  even  of  those  Nethinims  and  children  of  Solomon's  servants  who  appear  to
have  been  the  "hewers  of  wood"  and  "drawers  of  water"  for  the  congregation
at  large.  A  strong  "  clannish  "  spirit,  a  great  desire  to  be  and  do  as  in  "  the  old  times
before  them,"  seems  to  have  prevailed  among  all ;  the  same  spirit  which  afterwards
degenerated  into  that  false  conservatism,  the  conservatism  of  mere  human  traditions
(comp.  Jer.  vi.  16  and  xviiL  15),  found  in  Pharisaism  and  Babbinism.  Meanwhile,
however,  and  while  still  uncorrupted,  it  made  them  just  the  men  for  their  work :
returned  refugees,  not. colonists ;  men  called  upon  merely  to  rebuild  and  restore,  and
not,  like  Moses  before  and  the  apostles  of  Christ  after  them,  to  devise  and  create.

II.  The  NUMBBB  of  those  who  returned  is  also  worthy  of  note.  They  were  only  a
Eew,  all  told  ;  some  50,000,  of  all  sorts,  including,  so  it  would  seem  from  comparing
the  items,  about  10,000  souls  of  some  kind  not  mentioned  in  the  detailed  catalogue.
How  different  from  the  600,000  "  that  were  men,"  beside  women  and  children  and
many  others,  that  had  come  up  out  of  Sgypt  so  many  generations  previously  I
How  many  others  must  have  been  left  behind  (as  some  indication  of  the  state  of
things  on  this  point,  see  Esther  ix.  16)  1  Counting  also  by  the  number  of  families  or
groups  that  returned,  what  are  thirty-five,  the  whole  number  mentioned  here,  out  of
the  many  thousands  of  Israel  1  Moreover,  a  comparison  of  this  chapter  with  what  we
read  in  oh.  viii.  of  such  names  as  Pharosh,  Pahath-Moab,  Adin,  Shephatiah,  and  others,
shows  that  all  the  members  even  of  these  thirty-five  families  did  not  come  back  at  the
first.  So  also,  although  the  proportion  of  priests  returning  was  very  considerable
(about  one  tenth  of  the  whole),  only  four  courses  out  of  the  twenty-four  (vers.  36 —
39  ;  1  Chron.  xxiv.)  were  represented  among  them ;  whilst  some  341  Levites  of  all
three  descriptions,  as  against  38,000  in  David's  time,  and  some  392  Nethinims  and
others,  coiflpris6«d  in  forty-five  groups,  complete  the  catalogue  given,  except  of  cases
jf.  doubt.  Yet  even  these  few  appear  to  be  many,  viewed  from  a  different  point.
Of  beasts  of  burden  of  all  kinds  they  had  rather  more  than  9000  amongst  them
(about  one  to  every  six  travellers)  ;  but  of  these  only  736  were  horses  ;  and  of  camels,
ihe  animals  so  especially  required  by  them  in  the  desert  journey  before  them,  there
were  only  435— a  very  different  proportion  indeed  to  that  which  we  read  of  in  Gen.
xxiv.  10,  where  ten  camels  appear  to  have  been  provided  for  one  traveller's  use.
Altogether  it  may  well  be  questioned  whether  ca—vans  of  greater  apparent  import-
ance in  every  way  do  not  annually  cross  the  deserta  of  the  East  without  leaving
any  visible  trace  behind  them  on  the  history  of  the  day.  The  secret  of  the  difference
was  in  the  "blessing  "that  went  with  them.  In  those  holy  vessels,  in  the  dnty  before
them,  and  in  the  presence  among  them  of  the  prophets  and  priests  of  Jehovah,  and  o£
the  ancestor  of  the  coming  Saviour,  they  were  indeed  "  bearing  precious  seed  "  (Pa.


OH.  U.  1—67.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  21

cxKvi.  6).  That  being  so,  their  small  number  was  just  the  proper  one  for  God's  nse  ;
sufficient  to  form  a  nucleus  and  make  a  beginning,  but  not  sulficient  to  give  them  the
appearance  of  being  more  than  instruments  in  his  hands  (comp.  Judges  vii.  2,  4 ;  and
in  connection  with  the  very  people  and  time  we  are  speaking  of,  Zech.  iv.  6).

III.  A  word  or  two  may  be  added,  finally,  as  to  the  special  names  we  find  here.  It
cannot  surely  be  a  mere  coincidence  that  we  find  this  second  entrance  into  Canaan,
this  return  from  Babylonian  captivity,  headed  (ecclesiastically)  by  one  bearing  the
greatest  of  Jewish  names.  Are  not  such  truths  as  we  find  in  Ps.  Ixviii.  18 ;  Acts  vii.
45 ;  Col.  ii.  15,  &c.  pointed  to  here  by  this  name  of  Jeshua  ?  See  further,  as  to  the
typical  relation  between  this  "  Jeshua  "  and  the  man  Christ  "  Jesus,"  Isa.  xi.  1 ;  Jer.
xxiii.  5  ;  Zech.  iii.  8 ;  vi.  11 — 13,  &o.  Also  let  the  name  of  Bethlehem  in  ver.  21  of
this  chapter  be  noted.  Was  not  the  fact  there  recorded,  the  return,  viz.,  of  certain
Bethlehemites  to  their  ancestral  home  in  Judah,  one  step  in  the  many  steps  taken  to
fulfil  the  prophecy  of  Mieah  v.  2,  and  to  make  this  town  of  Bethlehem  in  after  ages
the  exact  spot  where  heaven  came  nearest  to  earth?  When  we  remember,  indeed,
yet  further,  as  before  noted,  that  we  have  in  the  name  of  Zerubbabel  the  name
of  a  direct  ancestor  of  Messiah  himself  (Matt.  i.  13 — 16),  as  also  what  we  read  in
Heb.  vii.  9,  10,  can  we  not,  in  these  three  names  of  Jeshua,  Zerubbabel,  and  Bethle-
hem, prophetically  see  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  leading  his  people  back  to  their  land  ?
And  can  we  not  also,  in  the  march  of  that  little  company,  as  it  were,  hear  the  very
sound  of  his  feet  ?  How  true,  therefore,  and  how  much  to  be  remembered  by  us,
what  we  read  of  as  declared  on  this  subject  by  apostles,  by  angels,  by  himself  (John
7.  39,  46  i  Acts  X.  43 ;  Rev.  xix.  10).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vera.  1,  2. — The  restoration  of  Israd.  This  is  an  important  subject.  Great  por-
tion of  Scripture  occupied  with  it.     Events  of  the  utmost  moment  connected  with  it.

I.  As  THE   SCATTEBINO  OF    ISRAEL    WAS    GRADUAL,  SO  MAY    HIS    GATHEKINQ  BB.       1.

Sis  tribes  became  distributed  into  two  Mngdoms.  (1)  United  until  the  evil  days  of
Behoboam  (see  1  Kings  xii.  20).  (2)  Thence  distinguished  as  Judah  and  Israel.
Under  the  name  of  Judah  is  comprehended  also  the  small  tribe  of  Benjamin,  with
priests  and  others  of  the  tribe  of  Levi.  2.  The  ten  tribes  were  first  carried  captive
by  the  Assyrians.  This  was  in  two  detachments.  (1)  By  Tiglath-pileser,  B.C.  739
(see  2  Kings  xv.  29).  (2)  By  Shalmaneser  eighteen  years  later,  when  the  deportation
was  complete  (see  2  Kings  xvii.  6,  18).  3.  The  Jews  were  afterwards  carried  away
to  Babylon.  This  was  130  years  later,  and  was  also  accomplished  in  two  detach-
ments, viz. — (1)  That,  B.o.  599,  when  Nebuchadnezzar  removed  the  principal  people
(see  2  Kings  xxiv.  14).  (2)  That  eleven  years  later,  when  the  remnant  was  removed
(see  2  Kings  xxv.  11).  (3)  Then,  six  centuries  later,  came  the  dispersion  by  the
Romans.  Prophecy  views  the  scattering  as  a  whole,  without  breaking  it  up  into
its  details,  and  so  it  views  the  restoration ;  and  as  the  scattering  was  accomplished
at  long  intervals  by  instalments,  so  may  the  gathering  be.

II.  This  restobation  by  Ezra  was  not  the  full  accomplishment  of  the  peo-
PHEOIES.  1.  The  ten  tribes  were  not  induded  in  it.  (1)  They  were  the  "  children  of
the  province."  Not  of  Babylon,  as  some  think,  for  Babylon  is  contrasted  with  it
here.  But  of  Judaea,  now  a  province  of  the  Persian  empire  (see  ch.  v.  8).  Behold
the  goodness  and  severity  of  God  1  (2)  Further  specified  as  "  those  whom  Nebu-
chadnezzar carried  away."     No  mention  made  of  those  before  carried  into  Assyria.

(3)  Further,  as  "  the  number  of  the  men  of  the  people  of  Israel."  Given  in  detail
in  this  chapter.  Here  we  find  children  of  Judah,  of  Benjamin,  of  Levi  and  the
priests,  and  even  of  the  Gibeonites,  but  no  mention  of  Ephraim  and  his  associates.

(4)  But  the  restoration  of  the  ten  tribes  is  promised  (see  Ezek.  xi.  16 — 17).  (What
a  rebuke  to  those  who  repeat  this  conduct  of  Judah  in  exclusively  claiming  for
themselves  as  Christians  the  promises  made  to  Israel  1)  Therefore  there  is  yet  a
grand  restoration  for  Israel.  2.  This  restoration  did  not  reunite  the  divided  nation.
'1)  This  fact  already   shown.      (2)  But  prophecy  requirs.s  this  (see  Ezek.  xxxvii.

11,22).    "  Therefore,"  &o.     %  This  restoration  was  not  permanent.    (l)Eventh9


22  THE  BOOK  OP  BZEA.  [oh.  u.  1—67.

Jews  were  Bubsequently  scattered  by  the  Romans.  Have  since  been  kept  scattered
by  Romanists  and  Mahomedans.  (2)  But  prophecy  requires  this  (see  Jer.  zxxi.  10 ;
Bzek.  xxxiv.  27,  28  ;  Amos  ix.  14,  15).     "  Therefore,"  &o.

III.  This  restoration  was  a  pledge  of  the  greater  event.  1.  If  answered  great
purposes  of  prophecy.  (1)  Those  connected  with  the  incarnation.  To  take  place
while  the  tribe-rod  wag  yet  with  Judah  (see  Gen.  xlix.  10).  (See  Julius  Bate  on
'The  Blessing  of  Judah  by  Jacob.')  While  the  family  of  David  yet  had  their
genealogies ;  while  yet  they  dwelt  near  Bethlehem  (see  Micah  v.  2).  (2)  Those
connected  with  the  atonement.  Jerusalem  the  place  of  sacrifices.  Zion  the  place
from  whence  the  gospel  law  should  issue  (see  Isa.  ii.  3  ;  Joel  ii.  32).  2.  There  is  a
prophecy  in  accomplished  predictions.  ( 1 )  The  preservation  of  the  Jews  amongst  the
nations.  Without  a  parallel  in  history.  What  for  (see  Jer.  xxx.  11)  ?  "  Full  end"
of  Assyria,  Babylon,  Rome.  Anti-christian  nations  doomed.  (2)  History  of  the
Ijind  as  remarkable  as  that  of  the  people.  No  permanent  settlers.  Romans,  Greeks,
Saracens,  Papists,  Turks  I  3.  The  Jews  expect  tlieir  restoration.  (1)  Good  reason,
for  the  word  is  sure.  (2)  Their  faith  is  patient.  Centuries  of  disappointment.  I§
our  faith  so  patient  under  trials  i — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 67. — Spiritual  significances.  What  signifies  to  us,  it  may  be  asked,  the
exact  number  of  the  children  of  Parosh  and  Shephatiah  (vers.  3,  4)  ?  What  does  it
signify  to  us  that  the  heads  of  the  returning  families  bore  such  and  such  a  name  ?
Why  record  this  ?    What  is —

I.  The  significance  of  this  record  of  names  and  numbers  ?  The  paina  which
the  children  of  Israel  took  to  keep  a  strict  record  of  their  families  in  Persia  may
have  been  (a)  an  act  of  faith:  it  may  have  been  the  expression  of  their  belief  that
God's  word  of  promise  spoken  by  Jeremiah  (i.  1)  would  be  fulfilled,  and  that  the
hour  would  come  when  they  or  their  children  would  lay  claim  to  their  ancestral
inheritance.  Or  it  may  have  been  (6)  a  habit  of  obedience,  which  itself  is  suggestive
enough.  It  was  the  will  of  their  Divine  Sovereign  that  everything,  however  minute,
which  pertained  to  his  people  should  be  scrupulously  cared  for.  Nothing  was  unim-
portant that  pertained  to  the  people  of  God.  It  was  worth  while  to  chronicle  every
birth  in  every  household  of  every  family  of  every  tribe  of  the  holy  nation.  It  was
important  to  count  every  head  of  every  division  and  rank  of  those  who  came  out  of
Babylon,  the  "ransomed  of  the  Lord."  This  striking  particularity  has  no  little
interest  to  us.  Things  which  the  great  and  good  among  men  would  overlook  as
unimportant,  are  accounted  not  unworthy  of  regard  by  the  Highest  and  the  Best  One.
He  who  redeems  us  from  a  worse  captivity  than  that  of  Babylon,  and  leads  us  to  a
better  heritage  than  the  earthly  Jerusalem,  counts  everything  of  consequence  that
relates  to  his  redeemed  ones.  He  writes  their  names  in  the  palms  of  his  hand ;  he
counts  their  tears ;  he  hears  their  sighs ;  he  orders  their  steps.  Not  one  is  over-
looked ;  every  name  is  entered  in  the  book  of  life ;  every  liberated  soul  has  a  place
in  the  heart  of  the  Redeemer.

II.  The  significance  of  the  loss  of  the  record  (vers.  59,  62,  63).  "These
could  not  show  their  father's  house,  and  their  seed,  whether  they  were  of  Israel "
(ver.  59).  "  These  sought  their  register  ....  but  they  were  not  found :  therefore
were  they,  as  polluted,  put  from  the  priesthood,"  &c.  (vers.  62,  63).  (a)  Some  of
the  Jews  had  not  taken  sufficient  pains  to  prove  that  they  were  of  the  people  of  God,
(6)  Others,  who  believed  themselves  (rightly,  no  doubt)  to  be  descendants  of  Aaron
had  lost  their  register ;  perhaps  some  of  these  may  have  more  cared  to  claim  and
prove  descent  from  the  "honourable"  house  of  Barzillai  (ver.  61),  esteeming  such
secular  rank  of  greater  value  than  the  more  sacred  lineage.  The  descendants  of  both
of  these  classes  sufiEered  through  their  neglect;  the  latter  more  particularly,  for
they  were  separated  from  the  priesthood  for  an  uncertain  and,  as  it  turned  out,  an
indefinitely  long  period.  The  retention  of  our  claim  to  be  of  the  "  Israel  of  God,"
or  to  be  of  those  who  "  minister  in  holy  things  "  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  does
not  depend^  on  any  documentary  evidence ;  no  revolutions  here  can  affect  the  roll
that  is  "  written  in  heaven;"  but  carelessness  about  our  own  spiritual  life, negligence
in  the  worship  of  God,  inattention  to  the  claims  of  our  spirit,  indifference  to  the  work
and  the  want  of  other  souls — this  may  lead  to  our  name  being  "blotted  out  from  the


CH.  II.  1—67.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  23

book  of  life,"  or  to  our  being  counted  all  unworthy  to  "  speak  in  the  temple  the  words
of  this  life  "  to  others.

III.  The  bignificancb  of  the  pauoitt  op  theib  number  (ver.  64).  "  The  whole
congregation  together  was  forty  and  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  three  score."
Counting  children  they  may  have  amounted  to  50,000.  This  was  but  a  small  number
compared  with  that  of  the  exodus  from  Egypt,  a  feeble  nucleus  of  a  renewed  nation  I
But  the  slenderness  of  their  number  was  fitted  (a)  to  bind  them  the  more  to  the
service  of  God,  and  (6)  to  knit  them  together  in  closer  bonds  of  union.  A  small
number,  devoted  to  Christ  and  united  to  one  another,  is  far  more  powerful  than  an
undevout  and  inharmonious  multitude.

IV.  The  significance  of  the  scantiness  of  theib  resources  (vers.  65 — 67).
Their  "  servants  and  maids,"  and  their  "  singing  men  and  singing  women  "  (ver.  65),
their  "  horses  and  mules  "  (ver.  66),  their  "  camels  and  asses  "  (ver.  67),  made  but  a
small  show  of  property  for  the  ransomed  people.  Doubtless  there  were  amongst
them  men  "  well  to  do,"  if  not  wealthy.  But  the  greater  part  of  the  rich  members
of  the  community  remained  behind.  They  who  had  the  most  to  lose  were  least  likely
to  accept  the  invitation  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  They  who  had  least  to  leave  behind
them  were  most  easily  convinced  of  the  wisdom  of  returning.  "  How  hardly  shall
they  that  have  riches  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  "  Blessed  be  ye  poor,  for
yours  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." — 0.

Vers.  61 — 63. — The  privileges  of  the  priesthood.     We  are  here  forcibly  reminded

I.  That  the  priesthood  had  its  privileges.  These  were — 1.  Theu  were  sancti-
fied to  the  service  of  God.  (1)  Distinguished  from  the  tribes  whose  inheritance  wag
in  the  soil  (see  Num.  zviii.  20).  (2)  Distinguished  among  the  Levites.  They  were
sons  of  Aaron.  Were  served  by  the  Levites.  While  they  served  in  the  holy  places,
at  the  altar,  within  the  veil  (see  Num.  xviii.  7).     2.  They  ate  of  the  most  holy  things.

(1)  As  Levites,  they  had  tithes  from  the  nation.  (2)  As  priests,  they  had  tithes  from
the  Levites  (Num.  xviii.  20,  21,  26—28).  (3)  They  partook  of  the  altar  (see  Lev.
vi.  16,  26  ;  vii.  6,  &c.).  (4)  They  ate  the  shew-bread  of  the  Presence,  viz.,  of  the
Shekinah,  the  visible  glory  of  God.  All  this  symbolically  expressed  near  fellowship
with  God.

II.  The  law  priests  were  types  of  true  Christians.  1.  In  their  birth,  as  sons
of  Aaron.  (1)  Aaron  was  a  type  of  Christ.  See  arguments  in  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews.  (2)  Christians  are  of  the  family  of  Christ  (see  Eph.  iii.  14,  15 ;  Gal.  iv.
4 — 7).  Have  we  the  spiritual  birth?  2.  In  their  ojice,  as  priests  of  God.  (1)
Christians  are  a  spiritual  priesthood  (see  Isa.  Ixi.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5,  9 ;  Rev.  i.  6).

(2)  They  have  a  spiritual  consecration  (see  2  Cor.  i.  21 ;  1  John  ii.  20,  27).  (3)
They  ofEer  spiritual  sacrifices.  Themselves  (Rom.  xii.  1).  Sacrifices  of  prayer,  of
praise,  of  service  (see  Hosea  xiv.  2 ;  Heb.  xiii.  15).  3.  In  the  privileges  of  their  office.
(1)  They  draw  nigh  to  God.  The  law  priest  entered  the  holy  place.  We  enter  the
most  holy  (see  Heb.  x.  19 — 22).  (2)  They  feast  with  God.  This  glorious  fellowship
is  now  expressed  in  the  Lord's  Supper.

III.  Those  who  aspire  to  these  privileges  must  be  able  to  show  a  valid  title.
1.  As  to  the  priesthood  under  the  law.  (1)  Case  of  the  children  of  Habai  and  Koz.
These  not  elsewhere  otherwise  mentioned.  Here  acknowledged  as  sons  of  Aaron.
Their  reputed  descendants  could  not  show  their  genealogy  from  them.  (2)  Case  of
the  children  of  Barzillai's  daughter.  Honourable  mention  made  of  Barzillai  (see
2  Sam.  xvii.  27 — 29 ;  xix.  31 — 39).  This  accounts  for  descendants  of  his  daughter
assuming  his  name  rather  than  that  of  their  father.  (3)  They  were  therefore  excluded
(Keh.,  pollttted)  from  the  priesthood.  Lost  the  sanctity;  also  the  privileges.  2.  As
to  the  priesthood  under  the  gospd.  (1)  As  with  the  aspirants  through  Habai  and
Koz,  the  reputation  of  being  of  the  family  of  Jesus  will  not  avail.  Have  you
evidence  of  spiritual  birth  ?  (2)  As  with  the  aspirants  bearing  the  honourable  name
of  Barzillai,  respectability  will  not  avail  in  place  of  a  spiritual  title.  We  must  do
real.  (3)  The  Tirshatha  will  scrutinize  our  claims.  We  must  all  pass  the  scmtiny
of  the  judgment.  3.  But  is  it  possible  for  ws  to  make  up  a  valid  title?  (1)  What
does  the  Tirshatha  say  (see  ver.  68)?'  (2)  The  Drim  and  Thummim  were  wanting
then.    These  were  nsed  u  the  breastplate  of  the  high  priest  for  obtaining  response!


24


TUE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  II.  68—70.


from  the  Shekinah  of  Qod  in  the  temple.  Neither  these  "  lights  and  perfection«  "  noi
the  Shekinah  to  illuminate  them  were  found  in  the  second  temple.  (3)  We  have
&n  High  Priest  who  stands  up  with  these,  even  Jesus,  who  ministers  in  the  grander
temple.  Through  his  glorious  Spirit,  the  true  Shekinah,  we  have  in  our  breasts
llie  most  perfect  illuminations.  By  these  we  ascertain  our  spiritual  birth  with  its
litlea.    Have  we  this  most  sacred,  this  most  indubitable  assurance  ? — J.  A.  M.


EXPOSITION.


Thb  offbrinos  made  by  thk  kettjbnbd
exiiks  on  their  arrival  at  jerusalem
(vers.  68 — 70).  It  has  been  customary  among
the  picas  of  all  ages  and  countries  to  make
thauk-offerings  to  the  Almighty  on  the
accomplishment  of  any  important  oralanger-
ous  work.  The  long  journey  of  the  exiles  from
Babylonia  to  Jerusalem  involved  considerable
risk  (see  ch.  viiL  22,  31),  and  its  successful
termination  naturally  called  forth  their
gratitude.  The  character  of  the  offerings
made  is  indicative  of  the  fact,  otherwise
probable,  that  the  exiles  had  turned  all  that
they  possessed  into  money,  and  had  brought
to  Jerusalem  a  considerable  amount  of  coin.

Ver.  68. — Some 'of  the  chief  of  the
fathers.  That  is,  "  Some  of  the  heads  of
families."  Each  family  went  up  under  a
recognized  head  or  chief,  the  number  of  such
heads  being,  as  it  would  seem,  nearly  a
hundred  (vers.  3 — 61).  When  they  came  to
the  house  of  the  Lord.  No  doubt  consider-
able ruins  of  Solomon's  temple  existed
when  the  exiles  returned,  and  were  easily  to
be  recognized,  both  by  their  situation  and
by  the  size  of  the  stones  employed  (1  Kings
V.  17).  The  place  occupied  by  these  ruins
was  that  whereto  the  emigrants  flocked,
and  about  which  they,  in  the  first  instance,
located  themselves.  Offered  freely  for  the
house  of  Ood,  to  set  it  up  in  its  place.  The
first  object  of  the  returned  exiles  was  the
rebuilding  of  the  temple,  and  their  offer-
ings were  consequently  given  expressly
towards  the  expenses  of  this  costly  work.

Ver.  69. — After  their  ability.  As  each
was  able  ;  the  richer  more,  the  poorer  less.
Threeieore  and  one  thoniaud  draau  of  gold.


The  word  translated  "dram "  is  darkimSn,
which  appears  to  be  the  Hebrew  represent-
ative of  the  Persian  word  which  the  Greeks
rendered  by  dareikos,  or  "  daria"  This  was
a  gold  coin,  stamped  with  the  figure  of  a
Persian  king,  wearing  his  crown,  and  armed
with  a  bow  and  arrow.  According  to  the
most  exact  computation,  each  such  coin
contained  somewhat  more  pure  gold  than  an
EUglish  guinea,  and  was  worth  £l  \s.  W^d.
of  our  money.  The  61,000  darics  would
therefore  have  been  equal  to  £66,718  15».
Five  thousand  pounds  of  silver.  The  word
translated  "  pound"  is  maneh,  an  equivalent
of  the  Greek  Tnma  and  the  Latin  miina.  In
Greece  the  silver  mina  was  worth  a  little
more  than  £i  of  our  money.  The  value  of
the  Hebrew  silver  maneh  is  uncertain,  but
probably  was  not  very  different  from  the
Greek.  Thus  the  sum  contributed  in  silver
may  be  estimated  at  above  £20,000,  and
the  entire  contribution  at  nearly  £90,000.
It  must  be  noted,  however,  that  Nehemiah's
estimate  (viL  71,  72)  is  less.  One  hundred
priests'  garments.  Nebemiah  says  ninety-
seven  {ibid.  vers.  70,  72),  whence  we  may
conclude  that  Ezra  uses  a  round  number.

Ver.  70. — In  their  cities.  Not  in  Jerusa-
lem only,  but  in  the  neighbouring  towns
also,  e.  g.  Bethlehem,  Anathoth,  Ramah,
Gaba,  Michmash,  Bethel,  Ai,  Nebo,  and
Jericho  (see  above,  comment  on  ver.  1).  All
Israel.  Ezra  very  determinately  puts  for-
ward this  aspect  of  the  return — that  it  was
participated  in  by  all  the  tribes  (see  ii.  2 ;
iii.  1 ;  vi  16,  17  ;  vii.  13  ;  viii.  29,  35,  &c.).
Ho  does  not,  however,  exclude  the  other
aspect,  that  it  was  especially  a  return  ol
Judah,  or  "  Judah  and  Benjamin"  (see  ch.
V.  1 ;  X.  9).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  68 — 70. — The  arrival.  After  the  muster-roll,  as  described  to  us  in  vers.
1 — 67  of  this  chapter,  the  next  thing,  naturally,  is  the  expedition  itself.  In  the
present  instance,  however,  this  is  disposed  of  in  a  couple  of  syllables.  "They
came."  In  these  modem  days — so  some  one  has  noticed — in  consequence  of  the
great  comparatiTe  ease  and  rapidity  of  the  means  of  locomotion,  we  speak  rather  of
arriving  at  than  of  travelling  to  our  destinations.  There  is  something  parallel  here.
Nothing  is  related  of  this  journey  except  that  it  was  duly  brought  to  an  end.  It
does  not  follow  from  this,  however,  that  it  is  unworthy  of  note.  Often,  where  little
is  said,  all  the  more  is  implied.    How  far  this  is  the  ease  in  the  present  instan'.-e  will


en.  n.  6»— 70.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  25


be  our  first  branch  of  inquiry.     What  we  are  afterwards  told  of  the  doings  of  these
pilgrims  immediately  on  their  arrival  at  Zion  will  be  our  second  and  last.

I.  Before  the  arrival.  These  travellers  "  came."  That  is  all.  What  does  this
show  as  to  their  method  of  coming?  The  route  traversed,  it  must  be  remembered,
was  by  no  means  a  short  one.  Babylon  was  always  considered  a  long  way  froni
Jerusalem  (Isa.  xxxiz.  3).  Ezra,  afterwards  (ch.  vii.  9),  was  four  months  on  the
road,  a  time,  in  these  days,  more  than  sufficient  to  travel  round  the  whole  globe.
The  road  also  at  that  time,  viz.,  during  the  subsequent  reign  of  Artaxerxes,  was  b^
no  means  a  safe  one  (ch.  viii.  22 ;  see  also  Neh.  ii.  9).  On  the  other  hand,  such
travellers  as  these  Were,  returning  with  spoils  which  had  evidently  seemed  precious
even  to  Nebuchadnezzar  in  all  his  pride  (Dan  i.  2),  would  be  especially  liable  to  attack  ;
to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  their  very  errand  would  rouse  the  hatred  of  not  a  few.
At  the  same  time,  the  character  of  their  company,  as  being  a  collection  of  families
intending  to  "  settle"  again  in  Palestine,  would  itself  put  very  great  difficulties,  in
their  case,  in  the  *ray  of  di-fence ;  as  also  in  regard  to  progress,  and  commissarial
too.  It  is  not  every  man  who  could  have  conducted  even  an  army  in  safety  so  far ;
much  less  so  large  a  household,  so  mixed  a  multitude,  a  caravan  at  once  so  vulnerable,
so  feeble,  and  yet  so  rich.  It  is  something  to  be  able  to  say  of  such  that  they  did
arrive  at  Jerusalem.  Ptrhaps  we  shall  see  the  significance  of  this  brevity  more
plainly  still  in  the  way  of  contrast.  "  When  Israel  came  out  of  Egypt"  and  travelled
to  Canaan  before,  they  had  a  very  much  shorter  journey  before  them,  and  their
numbers  were  so  vastly  larger  that  they  were  able  in  some  measure,  even  at  first,  to
defend  themselves  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 13).  Yet  how  much  we  are  told,  and  how  copiously,
nf  their  difficulties,  their  dangers,  their  deliverances,  their  many  murmurings.
rebellions,  and  judgments,  and  all  the  long  succession  of  marvellous  vicissitudes  thai
befel  them  by  the  way  (Num.  xx.  14).  That  first  journey  of  theirs  to  Cunaan  is  the
most  adventurous  journey  on  record.  Never  were  any  travellers  so  guided,  so  fed,  sn
protected,  so  often  so  near  to  destruction  and  so  triumphantly  rescued  from  it.
Nowhere,  at  any  rate,  are  we  told  so  much  of  any  other  journey  on  earth.  The  absolute
silence  of  Scripture,  therefore,  respecting  all  the  incidents  of  this  second  journey  of  the
same  people  to  the  same  land  seems  well  worthy  of  note.  We  can  only  account  fen
it  by  supposing  that  there  was  nothing  notable  to  be  told.  But  how  much  thit
implies,  as  we  said.  How  much,  1.  As  to  the  character  of  the  pUgrwis.  How  unlit e
the  Israelites  in  the  desert,  how  quietly  persevering,  how  free  from  "murmuring;-
and  disputings"  these  Israelites  must  have  been.  Considering  how  many  occasions
for  disputing  fellow  travellers  are  known  to  find  (Gen.  xlv.  24;  Mark  ix.  33),  th'
Eact  that  in  this  four  months'  journey  on  the  part  of  50,000  people  there  was
nothing  of  the  kind  worth  mentioning  is  not  without  weight.  Do  we  see  in  it  one
wholesome  result  of  the  heavy  discipline  of  their  long  captivity  ?  Like  the  singular
post-captivity  freedom  of  Israel  from  idolatry,  that  constant  pre-captivity  sin  (sec
Ps.  cxix.  67)  ?  How  much,  2.  As  to  GocPs  rule  in  this  world.  It  was  certainly  by
God's  "good  hand  upon  them"  (Ezra  viii.  31,  32  ;  Ps.  cvii.  7  ;  James  iv.  13 — 16)
that  they  had  come  where  they  were,  just  as  much  so  as  in  the  case  of  those  addressed
in  Josh,  xxiii.  14.  How  complete,  therefore,  in  both  cases,  his  faithfulness  to  his
promise  I  How  constant  and  effectual  his  providence  I  How  all-ruling  his  power.
Yet  how  exceedingly  opposite  his  modes  of  operation  1  In  the  one  case  by  a
succession  of  miracles  which  Israel  never  forgot.  In  the  other  case  without  a  single
incident  that  left  any  trace  of  its  path  ;  unless,  indeed,  we  consider  such  consummate
finish  and  ease  of  operation  to  be  a  kind  of  miracle  in  itself — the  standing  miracle  of
his  rule  (see  Col.  i.  17 ;  Heb.  i.  3  :  "  upholding,"  &c.).

II.  After  the  arrival.  The  journey  thus  happily  accomplished,  what  was  first
taken  in  hand  ?  As  far  as  possible,  their  first  duty.  They  had  come  up  specially  to
build  the  Lord's  house.  It  was  necessary,  of  course,  in  order  to  do  this,  that  they
should  have  homes  of  their  own.  Before,  however,  they  see  to  this  second  point  in
any  way,  they  do  all  they  can  for  the  first.  They  cannot  yet,  whilst  themselves
homeless  and  unsettled,  actually  begin  the  Lord's  house.  But  they  can  lay  aside  of
their  substance  for  that  purpose,  and  so  show  their  desire ;  they  can  make  their
"  offerings  "  (ver.  68)  and  put  them  into  the  "  treasury  "  (ver.  69),  adding  thus  to  that
which  they  had  already  collected  in  various  ways  (see  ch.  i.  4,  &c.)  for  that  end


26  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  n.  68—70.

And  this  they  do,  it  Beems,  first.  Such  is  the  Scriptural,  such  the  politic,  plan  (see
Deut.  xxvi.  1 — li  ;  1  Kings  xvii.  13 ;  Matt.  vi.  33;  Luke  xi.  41).  It  is  also  to  bo
observed  that  they  do  so  "freely" — the  Scriptural  spirit  (see  Exod.  xxv.  2;  xxxv.
5 ;  Deut.  xv.  10  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  7).  And  that  they  do  so,  once  more,  sufficiently — the
Scriptural  proportion.  "They  gave  after  their  ability"  (see  Mark  xii.  43,  44;
xiv.  8  ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  It  would  almost  seem,  indeed,  as  though  2  Cor.  viii.  2  had
been  fulfilled  in  this  case;  so  large,  considering  their  numbers  and  probable  condition,
is  the  computed  value  of  their  contributions.  For  example,  if  the  61,000  drams  oi
dareicB  of  gold  =  £e6,718  15s.,  and  the  5000  pounds  or  minse  of  silver =£20,000,
we  have  a  total  contribution  of  about  £90,000,  which,  for  a  congregation  of  not
ijuite  50,000  (children  and  poor  and  servants  included,  as  it  would  seem),  is  nearly
two  pounds  per  head.  Well  would  it  be  if  no  other  "  congregations  "  ever  did
any  legs.  This  additional  provision  thus  made  for  God's  house,  they  next  see
to  their  own ;  the  result  being  as  briefly  summed  up  to  us  in  ver.  70.  Comparing
tiiis  verse  with  Neh.  vii.  73,  which  seems  to  relate  to  the  same  transaction,  we
5nd  that  in  both  cases,  with  some  diversity  on  other  points,  God's  ministers  are
named  first.  If  this  means  that  they  were  attended  to  first,  it  harmonises  well
ivith  what  went  before.  God's  house  before  their  own  houses ;  God's  ministers
before  themselves.  In  any  case  we  seem  invited  to  notice  that  all  his  ministers
of  all  ranks  were  attended  to ;  not  the  "  priests "  only,  but  all  the  divisions  of
the  "  Levites  "  (Levites  proper,  singers  and  porters),  and  even  their  assistants,  the
"  Nethinims,"  too.  Indeed,  however  we  are  to  understand  the  peculiar  expression,
found  both  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,  "  [some]  of  the  people,"  it  would  seem,  from  the
ipecial  subsequent  mention  in  both  cases  of  "all  Israel"  as  "dwelling"  "in  theii
cities,"  that  the  laity  also  of  all  tribes,  and  probably  also  of  all  classes,  including  Ihose
mentioned  in  ch.  ii.  69 — 63,  were  duly  provided  for  in  like  manner.  And  if  so,  the
picture  is  one  of  a  very  beautiful  kind.  All  these  pilgrims,  down  to  the  humblest,
were  pilgrims  no  more.  All  these  once  banished  ones  both  arrived  now  and  settled.
In  their  true  country  ;  in  their  proper  "  cities  ;  "  in  their  respective  homes  I  In  all
which  we  may  see  an  ilIusl;ration  of  the  wonderful  variety,  order,  and  completeness  of
God's  ways.  In  creation  (Ps.  civ.  27  ;  cxxxvi.  25  ;  cxlv.  15,  &c.).  In  providence
(Acts  xxvii.  43,44).  In  grace  (John  x.  28;  xvii.  12).  In  the  "dispensation  of
the  fulness  of  times"  (Dan.  xii.  13,  as  contrasted  with  Ps.  i.  5;  Luke  xxi.  36,  &o.).
Happy,  indeed,  who  can  say,  "  We  are  journeying  home  to  God  "  (Num.  z.  29).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — ^70. — Men,  forsaking  the  worldly  life.  We  regard  the  people  return-
ing from  Babylon  as  typical  of  men  going  out  of  the  worldly  life  into  the  life  and
work  of  the  kingdom  of  God.     Observe —

I.  That  men  forsake  the  worldly  life  from  choice.  Cyrus  compelled  no
man  to  leave  the  land  of  captivity.  The  Jews  left  Babylon  in  the  exercise  of  tlieir
own  free  will.  Israel  as  a  nation  went  out  of  Egypt ;  but  as  individuals  they  come
out  of  Babylon.  Heaven  compels  no  man  to  forsake  sin.  1.  It  was  a  good  choice.
It  was  better  to  build  the  temple  than  to  work  in  Babylon  ;  the  spiritual  is  better
than  the  servile ;  it- is  good  to  serve  God.  2.  It  was  a  wise  choice.  They  would  be
honoured  as  the  heroic  builders  of  the  second  temple  ;  and  how  would  they  be
blessed  in  their  holy  toil.  It  is  wise  to  choose  the  unworldly  life.  3.  It  was  a  $df-
denying  choice.  ^  They  had  to  leave  friends  and  companions  behind;  they  had  to
forsake  vested  interests,  and  enter  an  unknown  future.  The  unworldly  life  neces-
sitates self-denial,  but  the  reward  is  a  hundredfold.  4.  It  was  a  believing  choice.
They  believed  that  God  would  be  with  them,  and  that  his  angel  would  go  before
them.  There  are  great  duties  in  the  pursuit  of  an  unworldly  life  ;  there  are  many
temples  to  erect,  but  God  is  an  infinite  resource.

II.  That  there  are  numerous  encouragements  to  men  forsaking  the  wobldly
LIFE.  1.  They  have  encouragements  of  a  spiritual  nature.  "The  priests"  are
with  them  (ver.  36).  All  that  belongs  to  heaven's  priesthood  goes  along  with  the
unworldly  life  in  its  march  from  Babylon.     2.  They  have  encouragements  of  a  social


CH.  II.  68—70.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZKA.  21

nature  (ver.  64)..  The  companionships  of  the  unworldly  life  are  helpful.  3.  They
have  encouragements  of  a  Jojj/aZ  nature.  "The  singers  "are  with  them  (ver.  41).
And  men  who  seek  to  live  an  unworldly  life  are  accompanied  by  many  celestial  joys.
4,  They  have  encouragements  of  a  varied  nature.  There  were  many  to  aid  in  un-
numbered ways  the  people  in  their  new  work.

III.  That  in  forsaking  the  worldly  life  men  must  be  solicitous  as  to  the
EVIDENCES  OF  THEIR  MORAL  REALITY.  "  But  they  could  not  show  their  father's  house  "
(vers.  69 — ;63).  These  were  with  the  returning  people,  and  to  all  appearance  as  loyal
as  any  of  them,  but  they  could  not  prove  their  oneness  with  them.  1.  There  is
a  register  mthin.  Are  the  dispositions  of  a  renewed  life  within  us  ?  have  we  the
testimony  of  a  good  conscience?  2.  There  is  a  register  around  us.  Whom  do  men
say  that  we  are  ?  Are  our  lives  such  as  become  the  builders  of  God's  temple  ?
3.  There  is  a  register  above  us.  God's  witness  is  true.  The  register  is  soon  lost
by  sin.  Lpt  us  not  sacrifice  it  to  temporal  gain ;  let  us  not  sacrifice  it  by  mar-
riage (ver.  61).  If  we  lose  it  we  shall  be  morally  unclean,  spiritually  depraved,
and  eternally  cast  out  (vers.  62,  63).  We  must  prove  our  religion  as  well  as  pos-
sess it.

IV.  That  in  forsaking  the  worldly  life  men  must  give  themselves  entirely
TO  THE  new  toils  THAT  DEVOLVE  UPON  THEM  (vers.  68 — 70).  1.  They  came  to  the
work.  "They  came  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  is  at  Jerusalem."  Sight
quickens  activity.  The  ruined  temple  would  awaken  a  sense  of  duty.  2.  They  gave
to  the  work.  "They  gave  after  their  ability."  Ability  is  the  universal  law  of
service.  Men  who  enter  upon  the  unworldly  life  must  be  ready  for  all  the  work  of
the  Lord. — E.

Vers.  68 — 70. — Social  and  ipiritual  gradations.  The  company  that  came  out
of  Babylonian  captivity  was  by  no  means  a  disorderly  or  unorganized  multitude.  It
was  well  ofiicered,  and  was  divided  and  subdivided  into  ranks.  It  probably  marched
in  regular  order.  Under  the  "  Tirshatha  "  Zerubbabel,  Jeshua  the  high  priest,  and
Mordecai  (probably  the  honoured  deliverer),  with  ether  natural  leaders,  came  (ver.  70),
priests,  Levites  (a  singularly  and  disproportionately  small  number  of  these),  the
people  (typical  Israelites — laymen,  citizens),  the  singers,  the  porters,  the  Nethinims.
There  were —

I.  Various  ranks  in  the  host  of  the  Lord  (ver.  70).-  "  The  priests,  and  Levites,
and  some  of  the  people,  and  the  singers,  and  the  porters,  and  the  Nethinims,"  &c.
Each  man  of  the  42,000  had  a  part  to  play  in  this  exodus  as  well  as  in  the
settlement  and  the  building  which  should  follow ;  but  some  had  more  difficult  and
responsible  posts  than  others.  No  service  was  without  value  of  its  kind.  They
could  not  have  carried  their  treasures  without  help  from  the  porters,  nor  conveyed
the  sacred  vessels  without  the  Nethinims ;  nor  could  they  well  have  spared  the  sing-
ing men  and  women,  whose  sweet  songs  of  Zion  must  have  beguiled  the  way  and
helped  them  on  over  rough  places  and  up  steep  heights  towards  the  site  of  the  city
of  their  hopes.  Much  less  could  they  have  spared  the  priests  and  the  leaders,  who
by  their  clear  head  and  commanding  will  were  to  do  more  than  the  others  with  their
hand  and  tongue.  One  is  our  Master,  even  Christ :  we  all  take  the  truth  which  we
hold  and  teach  from  the  words  of  the  great  Teacher  himself.  But  many  are  the  parts
we  take,  and  varied  the  services  we  render,  as  we  journey  toward  the  heavenly
Jerusalem,  as  we  build  the  house  and  kingdom  of  the  Lord.  In  our  Christian  ranks
are  great  leaders,  like  Luther,  and  Calvin,  and  Knox,  and  Chalmers,  and  Wesley ;
great  writers  and  apologists,  like  Augustine,  and  Butler,  and  Baxter ;  great  preachers
and  missionaries  whose  name  is  legion ;  and  below  these  in  spiritual  rank  and  influence
are  ministers,  teachers,  officers,  "sweet  singers,"  and  all  the  company  of  those
that  help  in  the  service  of  the  sanctuary,  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  down  to  the
"doorkeeper  of  the  house."  Each  man  in  his  place  renders  valued  service:  service
which,  if  not  marked  "  valuable ' '  by  the  handwriting  of  man,  is  yet  truly  and  really
valued  by  the  observant  and  discerning  Master.  He  who  does  well,  working  con-
scientiously and  devoutly,  the  work  for  which  he  is  fitted,  is  rendering  a  service  to
his  race  and  to  his  God  which  is  not  overlooked,  and  will  never  be  forgotten.  Its
noord  is  on  high,  and  he  who  wrought  it  will  hear  of  it  again,  when  every  man


28


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.


[CH.  III.  1 — 7.


(wlio  is  anywise  praisewortliy)  shall  have  praise  of  God,  and  the  blessed,  heart-
satisfying  "  Well  done  "  shall  be  spoken  by  the  Son  of  man.

U.  Excellency  op  work  in  his  service  (vers.  68,  69).  _  The  narrative  (vers.
68,  69)  anticipates  the  arrival  in  Judsea  and  the  work  to  which  they  there  addressed
themselves.  It  states  that  some  of  the  chief  of  the  fathers  "  ofiEered  freely  for  thn
house  of  God,"  and  that  they  "  gave  after  their  ability  unto  the  treasure  of  the
work."  Here  were  two  acceptable  elements  in  all  sacred  service — (1)  cheerfulness,
which  the  Lord  loveth  (2  Cor.  ix.  7)  ;  and  {2)  fulness,  according  to  ability,  every  one
doing  the  best  he  can :  not  the  least  that  can  be  ofEered  with  decency,  but  the  most
that  present  resources  will  allow.  In  building  up  the  spiritual  house  of  our  Lord's
kingdom — a  work  in  which  every  Christian  disciple  is  to  be  engaged — we  may  bring
silver  and  gold  to  the  treasury,  or  we  may  bring  manual  labour,  or  mental  work,  or
spiritual  exercises,  or  we  may  contribute  the  services  of  the  teacher  or  the  organizer.
We  may  help  in  one  of  a  hundred  ways,  more  or  less  important.  And  not  only  is
each  one  honourable  and  valuable  in  its  way,  but  each  work  admits  of  being
done  in  varying  degrees  of  excellency  —  more  or  less  cheerfully,  more  or  less
efficiently.  We  must  aim  at  perfection  in  every  department.  When  we  realize
that  we  are  giving  to  him  (a)  who  "  gave  himself  for  us,"  (6)  who  is  giving  his
Spirit  to  us,  and  (c)  who  will  give  his  glory  to  us,  we  shall  give,  not  of  our  weakness,
but  our  strength  ;  not  sluggishly  and  inefficiently,  but  "  after  our  ability."  The
Lamb  that  was  slain  is  worthy  to  receive  "  riches." — '

§  S.    Bbstobatiom  or  the  Altah  of  Burnt  Sacbificb,  and  Cbledbation  or  thi

Feast  of  Tabernacles.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  III.


Restoration  of  the  altar  (ch.  lii
1 — 3).  On  their  arrival  in  their  own  land,
the  exiles,  it  would  seem,  proceeded  first  of
all  to  their  several  cities,  reconnoitring  the
ground,  as  it  were,  and  at  first  taking  no
step  that  could  arouse  the  hostility  or
jealousy  of  the  previous  inhabitants.  After
a  while,  however,  "  when  the  seventh  month
was  come,"  they  ventured  with  some  mis-
givings to  restore  and  rebuild  the  great
altar  of  burnt  sacrifice,  which  Solomon  had
formerly  erected  in  the  principal  court  of
the  temple,  directly  opposite  to  the  porch
(2  Kings  xvi.  14  ;  2  Chron.  iv.  1),  and  on
which,  until  the  destruction  of  the  temple,
the  morning  and  evening  sacrifice  had  been
offered.  We  gather  from  Ezra's  narrative,
that  when  the  ruins  were  carefully  examined,
the  site  of  the  old  altar  was  ascertained,  and
care  was  taken  to  put  the  new  one  in  the
old  place.  The  restoration  of  the  altar  thus
considerably  preceded  even  the  commeuce-
meut  of  the  temple  ;  the  one  being  essential
to  the  Jewish  service,  which  could  not  exist
without  sacrifice,  while  the  other  was  only
■  convenient  and  desirable  adjunct.      The


altar  must  have  been  completed  by  the  last
day  of  the  sixth  month  (see  ver.  6).

Ver.  1. — ^When  the  seveath  month  was
come.  The  seventh  month  was  Tisri,  and
corresponded  nearly  to  our  October.  It
was  the  most  sacred  month  of  the  Jewish
year,  commencing  with  a  blowing  of  trum-
pets and  a  holy  convocation  on  the  firtt
day  (Lev.  xxiii  24),  which  was  followed
on  the  tenth  day  by  the  solemn  day  of
atonement  (ibid,  ver.  27 ;  comp.  ch.  xvi
29 — 34),  and  on  the  fifteenth  day  by  the
feast  of  tabernacles  or  "ingathering,  "  one
of  the  three  great  annual  festivals,  which
lasted  to  the  twenty-second  day.  Zembba-
bel  and  Jeshua  determined  to  risk  a  disturb-
ance rather  than  defer  the  restoration  of  the
altar  beyond  the  commencement  of  this
sacred  month.  The  people  gathered  them-
selves together.  The  people  were  bound  to
attend  the  feast  of  tabernacles  (Exod.  xxiii.
14 — 16) ;  but  something  more  than  this
seems  to  be  intended.  The  restoration'  of
the  altar  and  the  re-establishment  of  the
daily  sacrifice  having  been  announced,  there
was  a  general  influx  of  the  country  Israelites
into  Jerusalem  to  witness  the  proceedings.
As  one  man.  Very  emphatic  (comp.  Judges
XX.  1,  8  ;  2  Sam.  xix.  14).

Ver.  2. — Jeshua  the  sou  of  Jozadak.
The  position  of  Jeshua,  both  here  and  in
vers.  8,  9,  sufiicieutly  marks  him  M  tba


Ob.  III.  1—7.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


29


high  priest,  though  Ezra  does  not  give  him
the  title.  Haggai,  however  (ch.  L  1,  14  ;
it  2),  and  Zechariah  (ch.  iii.  1,  8  ;  vi.  11)
distinctly  assign  him  the  office.  His  father,
Jozadak,  or  Josedech,  was  the  son  of  Seraiah,
high  priest  at  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem
(1  Chron.  vi.  14).  The  name  Jeshua  is  a
mere  variant  of  Joshua,  and  so  corresponds
to  Jesus,  of  whom  Jeshua  may  he  regarded
as  a  type.  His  hrethren  the  priests.  As
being  all  of  them  equally  descended  from
Aaron,  the  priests  were  "  brethren."
Zernbbabel  the  son  of  Shealtiel.  See  note
on  ch.  ii.  2,  where  Zerubbabel's  actual
descent  is  given.  And  his  brethren.  Such
other  members  of  the  royal  house  as  had
returned  with  him.  As  it  is  written  in  the
law.  See  Lev.  xvii  2 — 6  ;  Deut.  xii.  6 —
11.  It  was  an  express  command  of  God  to
the  Israelites  that  sacrifice  should  be  offered
only  at  Jerusalem  in  the  place  which  he
should  appoint.  Hoses  the  man  of  God.
That  is,  "  the  Prophet ; "  but  the  phrase  is
emphatic,  and  characteristic  of  Ezra  (comp.
1  Chron.  xxiii.  14  and  2  Chron.  xxx.  16).

Ver.  3. — They  set  the  altar  upon  his
basei.  They  built  the  new  altar  upon  the
foundations  of  the  old  one,  making  it  exactly
conform  to  them.  This  was  done,  no  doubt,
to  indicate  that  the  religion  which  the  exiles
Drought  back  from  Babylon  was  in  every
respect  identical  with  that  which  they  had
possessed  before  they  were  carried  thither.
Many  modems  hold  the  contrary ;  but  it
has  not  yet  been  proved  that  the  sojourn  at
Babylon  modified  the  religious  ideas  of  the
Jews  in  any  important  particular.  For  fear
was  upon  them.  Or,  "  though  fear  was
upon  them."  Notwithstanding  their  fear
of  the  surrounding  nations,  they  set  up  the
altar.  We  must  remember  that  their  neigh-
bours were  not  Persians,  but  descendants  of
various  idolatrous  nations  —  Hamathites,
Babylonians.  Susianians,£lamites,  Cuthseans,
&C. — bitterly  opposed  to  anything  like  a  pure
spiritual  religion  (see  2  Kings  xvii.  24  ;  Ezra
iv.  9, 10).  Though  the  exiles  had  permission
from  Cyrus  to  raise  up  not  only  their  altar,
but  their  temple,  it  was  not  at  all  certain
that  his  nominal  subjects  would  passively
submit.  It  was  as  if  a  modern  Turkish
Sultan  should  decree  the  erection  of  a
Christian  altar  and  a  grand  Christian  cathe-
dral at  Kerbela  or  Bussorah,  towards  the
verge  of  his  empire.  There  would  be  great
danger  in  acting  on  such  a  d:cree.  Burnt
ofiferings  morning  and  evening.  So  the  law
required  (see  Exod.  xxix.  88,  39 ;  Num.
zxviiL  3,  4).

Celbbkation  of  the  feast  of  tabek-
HACLES  fver.  4).  Emboldened  by  their
successful  restoration  of  the  altar  of  burnt
Mcrifice,  Zerubbabel  and  Jesnua  allowed  the


people  to  gather  themselves  together  and
celebrate  the  autumnal  festival,  though  they
can  scarcely  have  made  it  on  this  occasion  ■
"  feast  of  ingathering."

Ver.  4. — ^As  it  is  written.  According  to
the  mode  of  celebration  prescribed  in  the
law ;  i.  e.  for  seven  consecutive  days,  from
the  fifteenth  to  the  twenty-second  of  Tisri,
with  burnt  offerings  every  day,  and  a  holy
convocation  on  the  first  day  and  the  last,
and  a  "dwelling  in  tents"  during  the  whole
period  (see  Lev.  xxiii.  31—42).  The  daily
burnt  offerings  by  number,  according  to  the
custom.  The  offerings  for  each  day  of  the
festival  are  carefully  laid  down  in  Num.
xxix.  13 — 38.  We  must  understand  that  all
the  particulars  there  enjoined  were  carefully
observed.

Permanent  establishment  o»  the
daily  sackifiob,  the  set  feasts,  and
the  offerino  of  free-will  offerings
(vers.  5,  6).  Having  set  up  the  altar,  and
celebrated  the  particular  festival  which  the
revolving  year  happened  to  have  brought
round,  and  which  it  would  have  been  wrong
to  neglect,  the  exiles  re-established  perma-
nently three  things : — 1.  The  daily  sacrifice  ;
2.  The  celebration  of  the  new  moons  and
other  regular  feasts  ;  and  3.  The  practice  of
allowing  the  people  to  bring  offerings  when-
ever they  pleased,  to  be  offered  on  the  great
altar  by  the  priest  or  priests  in  attendance.
The  first  of  these  was  for  atonement ;  the
second  for  public  thanksgiving  and  acknow-
ledgment of  God's  mercies ;  the  third  for
private  devotion,  the  payment  of  vows,  and
the  like.

Ver.  5. — The  continual  bnrnt  offering.
This  is  beyond  a  doubt  the  daily  morning
and  evening  sacrifice,  called  "  the  continual
burnt  offering "  in  Exod.  xxix.  42  and
Num.  xxviii.  3  —  6.  The  clause  is  not
modified  by  the  succeeding  words,  which  are
additional,  not  exegetical,  and  which  should
not  be  translated,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  both  of
the  new  moons,  but,  "and  those  of  the  new
moons."  The  returned  exiles  kept  hence-
forth regularly  both  the  daily  morning  and
evening  sacrifice,  and  also  that  appointeil
for  the  new  moons  (Num.  xxviii.  11 —
15),  and  those  appointed  for  the  other  "set
feasts,"  such  as  the  passover  and  tlie  feast
of  Pentecost.  And  of  every  one  that  will-
ingly offered.  Nor  was  this  all.  The  prac-
tice was  resumed  of  sacrificing  on  the  great
altar  at  any  time  any  free-will  offerings  that
individual  Israelites  might  bring  (see  Lev.
L,  ii,  iii,  &c).     Thus  provision  was  nud*


30


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  III.  1—7.


for  all  that  was  most  essential  in  the  ritual
of  religion,  while  the  temple  itself  still
remained  unbuilt  (see  ver.  Q).

Prepaeation  of   materials   foe  the

EEBUILDINO     OF     THE      TEMPLE      (ver.     7).

When  the  restoration  of  religion  had  pro-
gressed thus  far,  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical
rulers  turned  their  attention  to  that  object
which  had  been  specially  mentioned  in  the
"decree  of  Cyrus"  (ch.  L  2,  3),  the  rebuild-
ing of  the  temple.  And,  first  of  all,  it  was
necessary  to  collect  building  materials,  wood
and  stone,  which  were  the  chief  materials  of
the  first  temple,  and  which  Cyrus  had  par-
ticularized in  a  supplementary  decree  (ch.
vi  4)  as  those  to  be  employed  in  the  con-
Btruction  of  the  second.

Ver.  7. — ^They  gave  money  also  unto  the
masons.  The  exiles  had  no  doubt  been
employed  by  the  Babylonian  monarchs  to  a
large  extent  in  building,  as  their  ancestors
had  been  during  their  sojourn  in  Egypt
(Exod.  L  2).  Consequently,  among  those
who  returned  there  were  many  masons  and
carpenters.  These  were  now  set  to  work  by
Zerubbabel,  and  received  their  wages  in
money.  And  meat,  and  drink,  and  oil,  unto
them  of  Zidon,  and  to  them  of  Tyre.  The
Phcenicians,   on  the  other  hand,   received


their  wages  in  kind.  As  Phoenicia  was  i
narrow  strip  of  country,  and  grew  but  little
corn,  it  had  always  to  depend  mainly  for  it»
supplies  of  food  on  its  neighbours,  and
generally  drew  the  greater  part  &om  Palestine
(see  Acts  xii  20).  Hiram  had  furnished
materials  to  Solomon  for  the  first  temple
on  condition  of  receiving  wheat,  barley,  wine,
and  oil  (2  Chron.  iL  16).  Zerubbabel  made
a  similar  aiTangement  at  the  present  time
with  the  Tyrians  and  Sidonians.  To  bring
cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  to  the  sea  of  Joppa.
Having  cut  the  timber  in  the  mountains,  the
Phoenicians  conveyed  it  to  the  coast,  perhaps
sometimes  letting  it  pass  down  the  rivers,
and,  collecting  it  on  the  coast  into  large
rafts  or  "flotcs"  (2  Chron.  ii  16),  took
these  by  sea  to  the  roadstead  of  Joppa  (Jaffa).
Hence  it  was  conveyed  by  land  a  distance
of  thirty-five  miles  to  Jerusalem.  Lebanon
cedar  was  in  great  request  in  the  East,  and
appears  to  have  been  cut  and  carried  off  both
by  the  Egyptians  and  the  Assyrians.  The
forests  must  in  the  ancient  times  have  been
far  more  extensive  than  at  present.  Accord-
ing to  the  grant  that  they  had  of  Cyrus.
A  special  grant  of  Phoenician  timber,  made
by  Cyrus,  seems  to  be  intended.  Though
Cyrus  had  not  conquered  Phoenicia  ( '  Herod. ,'
ill  Si),  he  might  regard  his  conquest  of
Babylon  as  involving  the  submission  of  what
had  for  some  time  been  ■  Babylonian  de-
pendency.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 3. — The  first  sacrifice.  The  third  chapter  begins  much  as  the  second
chapter  concluded,  with  a  picture  of  the  restored  Israelites  in  their  respective
"cities"  or  homes.  But  they  do  not  stay  there  very  long.  The  temple  and  the
temple  worship,  for  which  they  had  laid  by  (ch.  ii.  68,  69)  before  dispersing,  is  still
much  on  their  minds.  These  verses  tell  us  of  the  consequent  action  next  taken  in
that  direction — 1.  on  the  part  of  the  people  specially ;  2.  on  the  part  of  their  leaders
specially ;  and  3.  on  the  part  of  them  all  collectively.

I.  The  people  specially.  They  left  their  "  cities  "  for  the  city  of  God ;  of  their
own  consent  (they  "gathered  themselves  together"),  with  one  consent  ("as  one  man").
ofioSvitalov,  1  Esd.  V.  46.  What  stirred  them  all  in  this  manner  ?  The  fact,  apparently,
that  the  "  seventh  month  "  was  "come,"  or  was  "approaching"  (Keil).  Certainly,
connected  with  that  month  there  were  many  things  which  might  well  have  this  efEect.
How  important  this  month  ecclesiastically,  and  &om  the  point  of  view  of  the  temple
worship.  On  the  first  day,  besides  the  new  moon,  came  the  festival  known  as  the  feast
of  trumpets  (Num.  xxix.  1).  On  the  tenth  the  great  day  of  atonement,  the  griiat  fast
of  the  Jewish  year  (Num.  xxix  7).  From  the  fifteenth  to  the  twenty-second  was
celebrated  the  third  of  the  three  great  annual  feasts,  viz.,  that  of  tabernacles  or
ingathering.  No  other  month  was  equally  distinguished.  No  subsequent  month  of
the  twelve  was  distinguished  by  any  universal  call  to  the  temple  precincts.  The  next
such  caU  would  be  five  months  afterwards,  in  the  passover  month.  How  important,
agam,  thisseventh  month,  as  the  first  month  of  the  civil  year,  the  month  from  which
the  Sabbatical  and  Jubilee  years  were  computed  (Lev.  xxv.  9)  Its  first  day  would
answer  exactly  to  our  "  New  Year's  Day,"  a  most  natural'  time  for  instituting  or
recommencing  a  new  order  of  things.  Historically,  also,  as  being  a  month  in  which
one  of  the  special  captivity  fasts  (see  Zech.  vii.  5 ;  viii.  19)  had  been  observed  tbk


JH.  III.  1— 7.J  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  31

was  a  marked  moTith  in  these  exiles'  minds.  How  fit  a  month,  therefore,  in  every
iway,  for  making  a  beginning  of  some  kind.  "  Now,  if  ever ;  "  almost  "  Now,  pi
iiever,"  the  occasion  seemed  to  exclaim.  It  is  by  such  conjunctions,  perhaps,  that
God  most  frequently  signifies  his  guiding  will  to  his  willing  people  (comp.  Acts  xvi.
6—10).

II.  The  leadebs  specially.  If  the  time  for  action  was  now  so  near,  who  should
take  the  lead  in  regard  to  it?  Who,  of  course,  but  the  natural  leaders.  The  leaders
in  the  Church  first  ("  Jeshua,"  &c.),  the  matter  in  hand  being  one  so  specially  con-
cerning them.  IJut  not  the  leaders  in  Church  only  ;  "  Zerubbabel  and  his  brethren,"
as  laymen,  also  having  their  interest  in  it.  Together  they  resolved  to  begin  by  rebuild-
ing the  sacrificial  altar,  that  which  had  stood  in  the  old  temple  before  the  holy  place
and  in  the  court  of  the  priests.  Why  did  they  begin  in  this  way  ?  Partly  owing  to
the  tenor  of  the  "  law  of  Moses,"  that  being  a  law  of  sacrifices  from  beginning  to
end  (see  Heb.  ix.  21,  22),  according  to  which  there  was  no  approach  to  the  most
noly  place  itself  without  the  previous  use  of  the  altar.  This  consideration  would
probably  tell  especially  on  Jeshua  and  the  priests  ;  as  the  example  of  David,  next,
who  desired  to  build  the  house,  but  was  only  permitted  to  "find  out"  its  "place,"
and  so  far  to  begin  it  as  to  consecrate  as  it  were  its  altar  (1  Chron.  xvii. ;  xxi-  26 ;
xxii.  1 ;  Ps.  cxxxii.  5),  would  tell  especially  on  Zerubbabel,  David's  representative
and  descendant,  and  lead  him  also  to  wish  to  begin  by  erecting  the  altar  upon
the  old  "  base  "  (ver.  3).  There  would  also  be  a  third  reason  to  influence  both  sets
of  leaders  alike.  By  this  time  the  returned  remnant  would  find  the  hostility  |  of
their  new  neighbours  awakened.  Only  surprised  at  first  to  hear  of  their  return
(comp.  Ps.  cxxvi.  2),  afterwards  inclined  to  ridicule  and  despise  them  (cbmp.  Neh.
iv.  2 — 4),  when  they  saw  them  settling  down  in  their  old  habitations  as'  a  distinct
and  separate  people  (Num.  xxiii.  9),  these  strangers  would  begin  in  various  ways  to
show  their  dislike,  and  perhaps  to  murmur  their  threats.  In  this  condition,  of  danger
how  natural  to  follow  the  example  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  vii.  10;  comp.  xiiL  11,  12),
and  sacrifice  to  Jehovah.  A  very  instructive  lesson,  by  the  way,  for  these  gospel
times.  Just  so  our  need  of  an  atonement  is  the  very  first  of  our  needs.  The  nature
of  (xod's  law,  the  example  of  God's  servants,  the  enmity  of  the  world  and  Satan
(Bev.  xii.  11)  combine  to  teach  us  this  truth.

III.  The  congeegation  en  masse.  Representatives  of  all  Israel  having  come  to
Jerusalem,  and  the  leaders  having  erected  the  altar,  what  were  they  all  to  do  next  ?
The  place  of  sacrifice  was  restored.  Out  of  the  many  kinds  of  sacrifices  connected
with  it  in  former  days,  which  shonld  they  place  on  it  first  ?  That  which  God  had
appointed  for  sanctifying  the  beginning  and  end  of  each  day  (ver.  3).  This  quite  in
accordance  with  the  very  first  use  of  the  original  altar  itself  (Exod.  xxix.  38),  and
with  the  happy  consequences  thereby  secured  (ibid.  43 — 45).  Also  with  the  many
remarkable  successive  injunctions  of  Num.  xxviii.,  xxix.,  where  we  find  it  expressly
commanded  that  whatever  special  sacrifices  might  be  ordered  on  any  day — whether
for  the  Sabbath  (ver.  10),  or  new  moon  (ver.  15),  or  passover  (ver.' 23),  or  any  day
of  it  (ver.  24),  or  Pentecost  (ver.  31),  or  feast  of  trumpets  (xxix.  6),  or  day  of  atone-
ment (ver.  11),  or  feast  of  tabernacles,  or  any  day  of  it  (vers.  16,  19,  22,  25,  28,  31,
34^  3g) — these  regular  daily  sacrifices  were  always  to  be  offered  "beside."  Also
with  the  prominence  given  to  them  in  1  Chron.  xvi.  39,  40 ;  2  Chron.  ii.  4  ;  xiii.  11 ;
xxxi.  3.  Also  with  the  peculiarly  grave  character  attached  in  Dan.  viii.  11 ;  ii.  27 ;
and  xii.  11  to  their  cessation  and  interruption.  Indeed,  from  a  spiritual  point  of
view,  and  regarding  this  people  of  Israel  as  a  "congregation"  or  living  Church,
these  daily  sacrifices  seem  always  presented  to  us  as  the  very  pulse  of  its  life  How
fitting,  therefore,  in  the  endeavour  to  restore  that  Church's  suspended  animation,
to  attend  to  them  first.  How  important,  also,  under  the  new  economy,.the  perpetual
intercession  of  Christ.  "He  needeth  not  daily,  as  those  high  priests"  (Heb.  vii.
27),  to  offer  for  sin;  "for  this  he  did  once  [JEor  all]  when  he  offered  himself."
But  there  is  a  need  that  he  himself  should  continually  be  pleading  this  one  sacrifice
on  our  behalf.  On  this  depends  our  justification  (Rom.  viii.  34).  On  this  in  every
way  our  salvation  (Heb.  vii.  25).  Herein  is  the  pulse  of  owr  life.  So  we  seem  to
be  taught  by  such  passages  as  Col.  iii.  3 ;  Gal.  ii.  20.  And  so,  with  regard  esjje-
oially  to  the  restoration  o£  that  life  when  impaired  or  susnended  (just  as  with


S2  I'ttE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  Hi.  1—?.

Israel  in  the  case  before  us),  in  what  is  said  in  1  John  ii.  1,  2  respecting  this  great
Intercessor  or  "Advocate,"  and  the  efiectual  plea  of  his  death.  "If  any  man  sin,"
as  every  man  does  (1  John  L  8 — 10),  and  so  begins  to  die,  as  every  sinner  tbendoeB,
here  is  his  way  of  escape.

Vers.  4— 7.— 7%«  fira  feast.  "  Also,"  vor.  4 ;  "  afterward,"  ver.  5  ;  "  but,"  ver.  6  ;
these  are  the  three  stepping-stones  of  this  passage.  After  making  a  good  beginning
in  restoring  the  daily  sacrifices,  the  people  "  also  "  kept  their  firs*  feast.  "  After-
ward "  they  did  what  they  could  in  restoring  the  observance  of  all  the  other  ordinances
and  feasts  of  Jehovah.  "  But,"  it  being  impossible  to  do  this  satisfactorily  as  they
were  then  situated  with  regard  to  the  temple,  they  further  proceeded  to  make  the
necessary  arrangements  for  commencing  its  erection,  which  was,  after  all,  their  great
work.     Such  seems  to  be  the  order  here  of  thoughts  and  events.

I.  The  "ALSO,"  the  special  feast.  In  the  natural  order  of  things,  the  seyenth
incnth  having  now  come,  the  feast  of  tabernacles  would  be  that  nearest  at  hand.  We
cannot,  therefore,  exactly  consider  them  to  have  chosen  this  as  their  first  restored
festival ;  but  we  can  see  indications  that  they  specially  welcomed  it,  and  observed  it
with  much  joy.  The  seventh  month  also  brought  round  the  feast  of  trumpets  and
the  day  of  atonement  ;  yet  the  observance  of  these,  if  now  observed  at  all  by  them,
was  not  of  such  a  kind  as  to  be  considered  worthy  of  special  mention.  Thefirstthing
mentioned  is  the  daily  sacrifice  ;  the  next,  this  feast  of  tabernacles.  If  not  the  next
thing  that  occurred,  therefore,  it  was  certainly,  to  their  thoughts,  the  next  thing  in
importance.  Observe,  also,  what  is  expressly  recorded  as  to  the  spirit  in  which  they
observed  it.  The  regulations  for  the  observance  of  this  feast  were  amongst  the  most
intricate  in  the  whole  book  of  the  Law.  Many  victims  of  many  kinds  were  required
for  its  due  observance  ;  some  the  same,  some  different,  for  all  its  seven  days  in  succes-
sion ;  those  required  for  the  eighth  day  being  different,  again,  from  them  all  (see
oarefuUy  Num.  xxix.  12 — 38).  All  this,  as  there  found  "written,"  if  not  as  also  added
'0  by  long -established  "custom"  (see  John  vii  2,  37,  38  for  a  supposed  reference
to  a  "  custom  "  of  this  kind),  as  "  every  day  required,"  they  fulfilled.  How  great,
aow  manifest  their  pleasure  in  learning,  in  doing  all.  This  not  to  be  wondered
it  when  we  bear  in  mind  the  peculiar  joyfulness  of  this  annual  feast.  As  the  feast
of  ingathering  or  harvest  (Deut.  xvi.  13 — 15  ;  Exod.  xxiii.  16),  and  as  the  feast  which
celebrated  the  close  of  their  wanderings  (Lev.  xxiii.  40,  42,  43),  it  was,  even  more
than  the  passover  or  the  Pentecost,  a  special  season  of  joy.  Accordingly,  while  we
read  in  the  passover  of  the  bread  of  affliction  (Deut  xvi.  3),  and  read  once  of  rejoic-
ing at  Pentecost  {ibid.  11),  we  read  of  it  twice  (ibid.  14, 16)  in  this  case.  Also,  in  the
history  of  Israel  we  find  mention  of  certain  special  cases  of  peculiar  joy,  all  connected
with  ideas  of  permanent  habitation  and  finished  toil,  when  this  feast  was  celebrated
with  peculiar  glory  (see" reference  to  Joshua  in  1  Kings  viii.  65 ;  1  Chron.  xvii.  1,  5  ;
2  Chron.  vii.  8 — 10 ;  Neh.  viii.  9 — 18).  No  feast,  therefore,  in  every  way,  could
have  been  more  appropriate  to  their  case.

II.  The  "afieeward,"  the  other  cedinances.  However  peculiarly  suitable  to
them  this  timely  festival,  it  was  not  the  only  thing  they  observed.  On  the  contrary,
besides  that  which  they  had  previously  reinstituted  (as  again  referred  to  in  ver.  6)
they  attended  henceforward  now  to  all  things  enjoined  in  God's  law.  They  kept
up  still  the  continual  burnt  offerings  (mentioned  specially  again  perhaps  because  of
their  special  importance^,  and  began  from  this  time  to  order  regularly  all  monthly,
or  annual,  or  even  occasional  rites — "the  new  moons,"  "the  set  feasts,"  "the  free-
will offerings"  of  individuals.  All  that  the  Lord  had  "consecrated"  or  directly
enjoined,  all  that  he  had  also  declared  his  willingness  to  accept,  they  gladly
observed.  In  short,  they  restored  in  spirit  the  religious  year,  and  as  far  as  they
could,  in  their  circumstances,  brought  back  in  this  respect  the  old  days.

III.  "  BCT  " — for,  as  we  have  remarked  already,  there  was  a  serious  "  but "  in  thi*
case — THEY  COULD  NOT  AS  YET  DO  ALL.  Thoy  had  the  proper  altar  and  priests ;  to
some  extent  the  proper  vessels ;  also  the  requisite  knowledge  and  inclination ;  and
in  a  certain  way,  the  requisite  means.  For  all  this,  however,  to  be  done  as  they  shouM
be,  with  proper  state  and  significance,  and  as  Israel's  future-  functions  requiiad


CH.  III.  1—?.]  'f  liE  BOOK  OP  E2tlA.  3S

perhaps  more  than  ever,  there  was  needed  a  proper  house.  To  this  matter,  accord-
ingly, they  next  turn.  Its  very  "  foundation  "  at  that  time  was  not  laid,  and  could
not  be  as  things  were.  But  the  necessary  preparation^  could  now  be  seen  to,  and
must  be,  indeed,  without  delay.  For  example,  they  could  arrange  as  to  wages,  &c.
with  those  workmen  who  were  to  work  on  the  spot,  as  we  read  in  the  beginning  of
ver.  7.  Also  with  those  to  work  at  a  distance  ("them  of  Zidon  and  Tyre,"  ver.  7),
who  were  to  cut  the  requisite  cedar  trees  in  Lebanon  and  convey  them  for  use  both
by  land  and  sea.  In  which  last  particular  it  is  to  be  noted  that  they  followed  the
example  of  the  wise  king  himself  when  building  the  first  temple,  as  well  in  choosing
the  right  persons  as  in  adopting  the  right  route,  and  in  offering  the  right  remuner-
ation, viz.,  not  "money,"  but  "  meat"  and  so  on  (see  1  Kings  v.  6,  9,  11 ;  2  Chron.
ii.  8,  16 ;  also  Acts  xii.  20).  Further,  we  find  that  they  asked  for  no  more  than  they
were  already  aulliorised  to  ask  by  King  Cyrus  (end  of  ver.  7).  It  would  be  well
if  all  business  transactions  were  equally  prudent  and  fair,  especially  those  which
have  to  do  in  any  way  with  God's  service.  Seek  out  the  hands  that  are  truly
skilful,  offer  them  what  it  is  worth  their  while  to  accept,  ask  of  them  only  what
is  lawful,  this  makes  the  man  of  business  and  the  man  of  honour  as  well.  And  in
doing  business  on  God's  account  the  man  of  God  should  be  both.  May  not  this  whole
passnge  teach  us  yet  another  lesson  in  regard  to  doing  God's  work  ?  There  is  always
something,  whatever  our  circumstances,  that  we  can  all  do  in  that  line.  We  can  begin
if  we  cannot  complete.  We  can  prepare  if  we  cannot  begin.  Even  where  we  can
do  nothing  ourselves,  we  may  engage  others  to  do  it.  Moreover,  if  we  really  seek
to  use  such  opportunities  as  we  have,  our  endeavours  are  quite  sure  to  be  accepted
and  blessed  (Mark  xiv.  8;  2  Cor.  viii.  12).  This  applies  to  learning  as  well  as
doing  God's  will  (John  vii.  17),

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3.— The  altar  rebuilt.  The  return  from  Bubylon  is  supposed  to  have
been  in  the  spring.  The  first  employment  of  the  people  would  be  to  construct  for
themselves  huts,  or  so  to  repair  dilapidated  buildings  as  to  make  them  fit  for  habit-
ation. This  accomplished,  no  time  was  lost  in  setting  about  the  great  work  of
re-establishing  their  ancient  worship.  So  "  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,"  the
month  Tisri,  corresponding  to  portions  of  our  September  and  October,  they  repaired
to  Jerusalem  to  encourage  and  witness, —

I.  The  rebuilding  of  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings.  1.  They  saw  it  placed
upon  its  old  bases.  (1)  They  regarded  it  as  the  same  altar.  No  ceremonies  of  con-
secration needed — wanted  no  novelties  in  religion.  Here  is  a  useful  lesson  to
Christians.  The  religion  of  their  fathers  was  Divine,  and  was  associated  with  a
wonderful  history.  (2)  Antiquity  should  be  tested  by  appeal  to  Scripture.  2.  They
saw  it  rise  to  its  completion.  (1)  They  had  hostile  neighbours  (see  ch.  iv.  1,  9, 10).
Idolaters  of  all  sorts  will  ever  oppose  true  worship.  (2)  These  were  overawed  by
the  multitude.  The  wicked  are  cowards  at  heart.  (3)  The  hands  of  the  elders  were
encouraged.  This  is  the  force  of  the  particle,  "  T/ten,  stood  up,"  &c.  Learn  the
great  value  of  witnessing  for  Christ.

II.  The  offering  of  the  daily  sacrifices.  These  are  described  Num.  xxviii.
1 — 8.  1.  The  offerings.  These  were — (1)  The  burnt  offering — a  lamb  of  the  first
year,  type  of  Christ,  consumed  in  fire,  and  so  called  the  "food  of  God."  (2)  The
meat  offering — fine  flower  mingled  with  oil,  consumed  by  the  worshipper  or  his
representatives.  (3)  The  drink  offering — ■*ine— like  the  meat,  partaken  of  by  God
and  man  (see  Judges  ix.  13).  This'  feasting  the  symbol  of  friendship.  2.  These
were  continual.  (1)  Morning,  evening,  day  by  day  the  year  round,  so  forward
"year  by  year  continually"  (see  Heb.  x.  1).  (2)  Kept  up  a  continual  remembrance
of  sin.  (3)  Continually  procured  the  "  forbearance  of  God  "  until  his  justice  should
be  satisfied  in  the  perfect  sacrifice  and  offering  of  Calvary.  3.  But  there  was  no
tacredflre.  (1)  The  Jews  confess  the  absence  of  this  after  the  captivity.  No  account
of  any  in  the  more  recent  Scriptures.  (2)  Strange  fire  would  scarcely  be  used.  No
account  of  its  authorisation.  Without  this  would  it  be  accepted  (see  Lev.  x.  1,  2)?
(3)  Burnt  offerings  without  fire  I    Significant  of  the  waning  of  the  diipensation.

EZBA.  D


34  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  iii.  1—7


Designed  to  wean  the  Jews  from  Moses  in  favour  of  Jesus.  Strength  of  prejudice  1
Strong  tendencies  even  in  Christians  to  ritual  rather  than  to  the  spiritual  in  worship
(see  Gal.  iii.  1 — 3).    We  witness  here —

III.  A  UNITED  NATION  OF  WOBSHIPPERS.  1.  There  was  concert  among  the  priests.
(1)  The  high  priest  was  there.  Jeshua  is  not  here  expressly  so  styled ;  implied  in
the  words,  "  Then  stood  up  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak  and  his  brethren,"  Thus
distinguished  elsewhere  (see  Haggai  i.  1 ;  ii.  2 ;  Zech.  iii.  1).  He  was  the  grandson  of
Seraiahjthe  high  priest  who  was  slain  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (see  2  Kings  xxv.  18—21).
He.  was  a  type  of  Christ  not  only  in  virtue  of  his  office,  but  also  in  his  name,  which
is  the  same  as  Jesus,  and  in  his  leading  the  captivity  out  of  Babylon.  (2)  Tlie
"  brethren"  of  Jeshua  were  with  him.  The  sons  of  Aaron  in  general.  2.  There  was  ,
concert  among  the  nobles.  (1)  Zerubbabel  was  there.  He  heads  the  roll  of  names
(ch.  ii.  2)  as  a  principal  leader  of  the  restoration.  He  was  the  representative  of  the
royal  family,  and  now  a  worthy  successor  of  his  ancestors,  David  and  Solomon,  who
were  so  gloriously  concerned  with  the  first  tepiple.  (2)  His  "  brethren  "  were  with
liim.  3.  The  people  were  there  "  as  one  man."  (1)  Eesponsive  to  the  summons  of
the  chiefs.  They  assembled  fifteen  days  earlier  than  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  when
all  the  males  should  appear  (see  ver.  6).  (2)  They  came  with  exemplary  unanimity  ;
their  heart  was  in  it ;  they  were  the  noblest  of  the  nation,  under  60,000,  leaving  the
indifferent  ones  in  Babylon.  Such  unanimity  could  never  have  been  secured  by
coercion.     Value  of  the  voluntary  principle. — J.  A.  M.

Ver«.  1 — 7. — Acceptable  service.  When  the  42,000  Israelites  arrived  in  the  land
whither  they  went  forth,  they  took  peaceable  and  glad  possession  of  their  old  homes ;
many,  if  not  most,  of  them  returning  to  the  very  fields  and  homesteads  from  which
their  fathers  had  been  led  away.  They  then  showed  a  piety  which  was  partly  the
fruit  of  the  long  discipline  they  had  passed  through  in  Persia.  Their  tervice  of
Jehovah,  on  this  their  return,  was  characterised  by —

I.  Spontaneity  (vers.  1,  5).  They  must  have  had  much  to  do  to  bring  into  good
condition  the  long-forsaken  fields  ;  agriculture  must  have  been  neglected,  and  there
must  have  been  a  strong  demand  for  the  most  active  and  unremitting  labour.  Never-
theless, without  any  edict  or  decree  from  any  spiritual  or  secular  authority,  "the
people  gathered  themselves  together  as  one  man  at  Jerusalem"  (ver.  1).  A  common
impulse  urged  them  all  to  leave  business  employments  and  household  duties  and
repair  to  the  sacred  city  for  the  worship  of  God.  And  when  there,  they  "  willingly
offered  a  freewill  offering  unto  the  Lord"  (ver.  6).  Their  service  was,  as  ours  will  be,
the  more  acceptable  because  unconstrained,  spontaneous,  the  prompting  of  individual
piety.  Not  the  mandate  of  an  earthly  master,  but  the  will  of  our  Divine  Lord,  the
love  of  Christ,  should  constrain  us  to  activity  and  liberality.

II.  BiGHTNESS  OF  PLACE  (vers.  1,  3).  They  gathered  at  Jerusalem  (ver.  1),  and
built  an  altar  on  the  very  same  basis  as  that  on  which  the  old  altar  had  stood  (ver.  3).
They  were  right  in  this.  For  it  had  been  very  specially  enjoined  that  only  on  that
one  site  should  sacrifices  be  offered  unto  God.  They  had  regard  to  a  precise  injunc-
tion in  thus  confining  their  offerings  to  one  place.  No  such  restrictions  limit  oui
worship.  The  hour  has  come  when  neither  on  one  mountain  nor  another  shall  men
worship  the  Father  (John  iv.  21).  Wherever  the  people  of  God  meet  in  sincerity
and  earnestness,  there  they  "behold  his  mercy-seat."  "Every  place  is  hallowed
ground  "  to  the  devout  heart.  Yet  there  is  such  a  thing  as  propriety  of  place.  Still
"  the  Lord  loveth  the  gates  of  Zion,"  and  to  worship  him  regularly  at  his  house,  to
unite  regularly  with  his  people  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  is  a  useful  and  acceptable
service.

III.  Unity  (ver.  2).  Jeshua  and  Zerubbabel  stood  together  to  build  the  altar  of
the  Lord.  It  is  a  most  excellent  thing  for  any  society  when  those  who  are  influen-
tial in  the  Cliiirch  and  those  highly  placed  in  the  State  unite  and  do  not  divide  their
influence,  strengthen  and  do  not  weaken  one  another's  hands,  in  the  promotion  of
morality  and  religion.

IV.  Readiness  through  eagerness  (vers.  3,  6).  After  using  Solomon's  temple
as  their  sacred  edifice  wherein  to  worship,  it  was  natural  that  the  people  should  desire
something  more  than  a  rude  altar  reared  under  the  skies.    But  so  eager  wen  they  to


CH.  III.  1-7.1  'i'HE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  36

return  to  the  old  sacrifices,  which  had  so  long  ceased  to  be  offered,  that  they  could
not  wait  for  the  erection  of  a  building ;  before  the  foundation  of  the  temple  wa»
laid  (ver.  6)  they  began  to  present  burnt  ofEerings  unto  the  Lord.  The  apathetic
Bcul  will  be  ready  enough  to  find  an  excuse  for  irreligion,  for  leaving  unoffered  the
sacrifice  that  is  due ;  but  the  eager-hearted  will  be  prompt  to  substitute  one  instru-
ment for  another,  that  the  service  may  not  be  unrendered.  A  feeble  piety  will  yield
to  the' first  check.  Spiritual  earnestness  will  be  ingenious  to  devise  means,  and  will
anticipate  the  hour  when  all  outside  circumstances  compel  to  devotion.  Do  not  lei
God's  praise  remain  unsung  because  a  full-toned  organ'  is  not  at  hand  for  aosompani-
ment,  nor  let  his  truth  be  unspoken  because  there  are  no  fine  walls  to  echo  ilR
proclamation.     Godly  zeal  will  find  utterance  whether  art  be  present  or  absent.

V.  Regularity  (ver.  4).  "  They  offered  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  number,
according  to  the  custom,  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required"  (ver.  4).  There  must
be  room  left  for  some  play  of  spontaneity,  or  our  spiritual  Hfe  will  become  mechanical
and  lose  its  animation  and  elasticity  and  beauty.  But  there  must  be  also  regularity :
constant  services,  daily  devotion,  morning  and  evening  prayer.  Liberty  and  law  must
be  reconciled  and  dwell  harmoniously  together,  not  only  in  every  home,  but  in  every
heart.

VL  CoMPEEHENSivBNKSS  (ver».  8,  4).  Opposite  feelings  led  them  to  the  mercy-
seat  ;  their  fear  led  them  to  seek  God — ^they  set  up  the  altar  for  fear  of  the  people
by  whom  they  were  surrounded  (ver.  3) ;  and  their  joy  also  led  to  devotion — they
kept  the  joyous  feast  of  tabernacles,  and  united  in  the  service  in  which  gladness  of
heart  prevailed  (ver.  4).  The  truly  devout  man  is  he  with  whom  all  paths  lead  to
the  throne  of  grace ;  to  whom  all  things,  however  varied  and  unlike  one  another,
suggest  the  thought  of  God ;  who  brings  his  burden  of  grief  and  fear,  as  well  u  his
treasure  of  joy  and  hope,  to  the  feet  of  his  Master. — C.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Aspects  of  worship.  I.  The  human  in  worship.  "Then  stsod
up  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak,"  &c.  (ver.  2).  These  men  were  the  leaders  in  this
movement  of  worship  ;  they  gathered  the  people  thereto.  There  is  a  human  side  to
Divine  worship ;  the  altar  looks  toward  earth  as  well  as  toward  heaven  ;  man  builds,
if  God  consecrates  it ;  man  appoints  the  tiihe  of  worship,  arranges  its  method,  gathers
the  people,  stimulates  the  conscience  by  faithful  words,  and  enforces  the  law.  A
few  good  men  can  awaken  the  devotional  in  the  multitude,  can  give  the  impulse  of
altar  building.

II.  The  ESSENTIAL  in  worship.  "  And  builded  the  altar  "  (ver.  2).  The  altar  was
built  first  because  it  was  of  primary  importance ;  because  it  was  essential  to  their
sacrificial  offerings.  The  altar  first.  1.  Then  it  is  important  to  begin  early — ^the  altar
before  the  city  ;  early  in  life  ;  in  the  day ;  in  the  enterprise.  2.  Then  it  is  important
to  begin  aright — to  commence  with  the  essential  rather  than  with  the  incidental.
There  are  devotional,  doctrinal,  social,  domestic  altars ;  begin  with  them  in  any  work
of  restoration  ;  well  begun  is  half  done.  Love  before  worship,  pardon  before  works,
Christ  before  civilization ;  commence  with  the  altar.  3.  Then  it  is  important
to  begin  under  good  leadership.  4.  There  is  acceptance  in  a  rude  moral  begin-
ning. It  was  only  an  altar,  but  its  offerings  were  accepted  by  God.  When  we  have
not  all  that  is  needful  to  ornate  worship,  heaven  will  accept  a  sacrifice  from  a  rude
iiltar  ;  the  heart  is  more  than  the  structure.  God  will  accept  worship  from  the  rude
iltar  in  the  forest  as  well  as  from  the  stately  altar  in  the  temple.  6.  Then  there  is
I  great  power  in  a  feeble  but  devout  beginning.  The  flower  is  in  the  seed ;  the
temple  is  in  the  altar.

III.  The  ADDITIONAL  in  worship.  "And  they  offered  burnt  offerings  thereon
unto  the  Lord,"  &c.  (ver.  3).  A  true  worship  will  not  rest  content  when  the  altar  is
ouilt ;  the  altar  is  only  a  commencement ;  we  must  go  on  to  perfection.  There  is  a
binding  influence  in  the  erected  altar ;  we  cannot  cast  down  what  we  have  built.  It
is  an  inspiration ;  to  what  service  will  it  lead.  Faith  and  worship  have  numerous
addenda.  A  man  who  begins  with  the  altar  to  God  can  only  end  by  working  it  out
in  all  loving  possibility  ;  in  fact,  by  placing  himself  upon  it.  We  must  put  large
ofEerings  on  our  altars ;  Christ  gave  himself  for  us.

IV   The  TIMOBOUS  in  WOBSHIP.    They  built  the  alta- ,  all  the  while  in  fear  of  the

D  2


t6  THE  BOOK  OP  EZilA.  [ch.  hi.  1—1

people  who  perhaps  had  little  sympathy  with  the  edict  of  Cyrus  (ver.  3).  The  peoplg
erected  the  altar  at  once  because  they  feared  interruption  ;  an  altar  erected  is  a  power
against  the  adversaries.  In  these  days  of  quietude  we  can  build  our  altar  without
fear  of  the  persecuting  enemy.  What  fears  often  animate  the  soul  of  the  devout
worshipper  I

V.  The  SECUIAB  in  worship.  "  They  gave  money  also  unto  the  masons,"  Ac.  (ver.  7).
Worship  combines  the  sentiment  of  the  soul  and  temporal  aid  ;  the  bread  of  life
which  God  gives  us  and  the  bread  we  give  him.  It  combines — 1.  Prayer.  2.  Gifts.
3.  Work.  The  temple  of  God  is  built  by  a  variety  of  gifts  and  by  a  variety  of
men  ;  it  provides  a  service  for  all.  Many  have  to  do  with  it  mechanically  who  have
nothing  to  do  with  it  morally ;  a  man  may  be  a  "  mason  "  without  being  a  minister.
— E.

Vers.  4 — 6. — The  worship  qfihefinst  year.  In  connection  with  the  worship  of  the
first  year  after  the  return  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Babylon,  we  notice —

I.  That  it  was  such  as  codld  be  conducted  in  the  open  air.  1.  They  had  their
altar  rebuilt.  (1)  This  was  the  first  thing  done,  because  it  was  essential.  Sacrifice
is  interwoven  with  all  the  ceremonies  of  worship  according  to  the  law.  The  prin-
ciple of  sacrifice  is  no  less  essential  under  the  gospel.  Ponder  the  thought  that  there
can  be  no  true  worship  without  sacrifice.  (2)  They  lost  no  time  in  this.  They
came  forth  from  Babylon  in  the  spring.  The  journey  probably  occupied  four
montlis  (comp.  vii.  9).  They  had  therefore  barely  time  to  get  housed  before  the
seventh  month  came,  upon  the  first  day  of  which  they  were  "  as  one  man  "  at  Jeru-
salem. Learn  that  things  essential  to  worship  should  have  prompt  and  early  attention.
Forsaking  Babylon — seeking  Zion.  2.  But  the  foundation  of  the  temple  was  not  yet
laid.  This  recalls  the  worship  of-the  patriarchs.  (1)  That  of  the  first  family  eastward
of  P'den  (Gen  iii.  24,  and  iv.  3,  &c.).  (2)  That  of  Noah  emerging  from  the  ark  (Gen.
viii.  20).  (3)  Tl^at  of  the  Hebrew  patriarchs  in  Canaan  (Gen.  xii.  6 — 8  ;  xiii.  18  ;  xv.
9 — 11 ;  xxii.  13 ;  xxvi.  25  ;  xxxiii.  18 — 20).  Learn,  worship  may  be  genuine  without
being  elaborate  (see  John  iv.  23,  24).  3.  There  appears  to  have  been  no  celebration  oj
t/te  ceremonies  (^  ih,e  great  ddy  of  atonement.  (1)  The  daily  sacrifice  commenced  on
the  first  day  of  Tisri  (ver.  6).  The  great  day  of  atonement  was  due  on  the  tenth  of  the
same  month,  of  which  there  is  no  mention.  The  narrative  carries  us  at  once  to  the  feast
of  tabernacles,  wliich  followed  on  the  fifteenth  day.  (2)  The  reason  of  the  omissioii
is  found  in  the  want  of  the  temple.  The  sprinkling  of  the  tabernacle  and  all  the
vessels  of  the  ministry  would  be  impossible  (see  Lev.  xvi.).  There  was  no  most
holy  place  for  the  higli  priest  to  enter  (see  Heb.  ix.  7,  25).  There  was  no  altar  of
incense  (see  Exod.  xxx.  10).  Lesson :  If  we  cannot  worship  God  as  we  would,  we
should  worship  him  as  we  can.

II.  That  it  comprehended  all  the  festivals  of  their  religion.  1.  Foremost
amongst  these  was  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  This  was  one  of  the  great  annual
festivals  (Exod.  xxiii.  1—6).  (1)  The  passover.  This  was  held  on  the  first  day  of
Abib — instituted  to  commemorate  the  events  connected  with  the  exodus  from  Egypt
(Exod.  xiii.  3,  4 ;  Deut.  xvi.  1—8).  (2)  The  feast  of  first-fruits.  This  commenced
with  the  putting  in  of  the  sickle  for  the  harvest.  Also  called  the  feast  of  weeks,  for
it  lasted  seven  weeks,  while  tlie  fruits  of  the  earth  were  being  gathered.  Lesson :
We  should  recognise  God  in  all  our  blessings.  In  all  this  rejoicing  the  Israelites
still  kept  up  the  memory  of  their  emancipation  from  Egypt  (see  Deut.  xvi.  7 — 12).
(3)  The  last  was  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  In  the  present  case  this  came  first.  This
arose  from  the  accident  of  its-occurring  first  after  the  return  from  Babylon.  Yet  in
this  accident  there  was  a  providence,  for  the  feast  of  tabernacles  has  a  peculiar
relation  to  gospel  times  (see  Zech.  xiv.  18).  This  feast  also  called  the  feast  of  in-
gathering, for  it  was  a  rejoicing  over  the  garnering  of  the  harvest  and  vintage
^Deut.  xvi.  13—16).  Not  so  called  here,  for  there  would  be  no  extensive  ingathering
in  this  first  year.  There  was  !i  remembrance  of  the  deliverance  from  Egypt  in  this
festival  also  ;  it  called  to  mind  the  dwelling  in  tents  in  the  wilderness.  In  this
celebration  the  people  could  not  but  associate  with  this  their  own  recent  deliverance
from  Babylon.  Lesson :  Ir  all  our  festivities  let  the  grateful  remembrance  be  pre-
sent with  us  of  our  spiritual  emancipation  from  the  Egypt  and  Babylon  of  sin  and


CH.  in.  8—13.1


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


37


error.  (4)  Particularly  note  that  they  "  offered  the  daily  burnt  offerings  by  number
according  to  the  custom  as  the  duty  of  every  day  required,"  On  each  of  the  days
during  which  this  feast  lasted  there  was  a  difference  in  the  custom  (see  Num.  xxix.).
"As  the  duty,"  &c.  Heb., "'  the  matter  of  the  day  in  the  day."  Learn:  (a)  Every
day  brings  its  own  religious  duties.  (5)  We  must  do  the  work  of  the  day  in  the  day.
2.  They  offered  also  the  eontinudl  burnt  offerings.  (1)  The  daily  offerings.  These
were  never  interrupted.  They  continued  morning  and  evening  throughout  the  year.
(2)  Those  of.  the  Sabbaths  (see  Num.  xxviii.  9,  10).  The  word  Sabbath  is  applied
not  only  to  the  seventh  day  of  the  week,  but  indifferently  to  all  the  Jewish  festivals
(Lev.  xix.  3,  30).  (3)  Those  of  the  new  moons  (see  Num.  xxvii.  11 — 16).  (4)
Additional  to  all  these  were  the  free-will  offerings  of  the  people.  Lesson :  The  ser-
vices of  religion  are  not  to  be  taken  up  fitfully,  but  must  be  steadily  observed.  They
are  not  irksome,  but  delightful  to  those  whose  hearts  are  brought  into  sympatliy
with  them  by  the  grace  of  God.    This  grace  should  be  diligently  sought. — J.  A.  M.


I  8.    Rebuildino  of  the  Temple  and  Offosition  hadk  to  it.
EXPOSITION.


IiATINO    OF    THE    TOUKDATION    OF    THE
iBMPLB  AND  CEREMONIAL  ON  THE  OCCASION

(vera.  8 — 13).  Seven  months  were  occu-
pied with  preparations.  The  winter  was
past,  and  the  spring  had  anived.  It  was
the  second  month,  Zif,  the  month  of  "blos-
som "  corresponding  to  our  May — the  same
month  in  which  Solomon  had  laid  the
foundation  of  the  first  temple  (1  Kings  vi
I) — when  Zembbabel  judged  that  the  time
bad  come  for  commencing  the  foundation  of
the  second.  The  correspondence  of  the
month  was  no  doubt  intentional,  like  the
correspondence  of  the  foundations  of  the
altar  (ver.  3),  and  was  to  mark  that  all  was
to  be  as  before,  that  nothing  was  to  be
vrantonly  changed.  Zei-ubbabel  and  Jcshua
presided  ;  but  to  Zerubbabel  is  assigned  the
chief  part  in  the  work.  "The  hands  of
Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation  of  this
house"  are  the  words  of  God  himself  to
Zechariah  (Zech.  iv.  9).  It  was  arranged
thit  the  work  should  commence  with  a
religious  ceremonial,  natural  piety  here  sug-
gesting what  was  not  recorded  of  the  "first
house,"  though  it  may  have  occurred  and
not  have  been  put  on  record.  The  cere-
monial consisted  chiefly  of  praise,  and  was
accompanied  with  sacred  music,  according
to  the  pattern  set  by  David  and  Solomon  in
their  sacred  processions  and  ceremonies
(1  Chron.  xv.  19,  24 ;  xvi.  5  ;  2  Chron.  v.
12,  &C.).  Their  special  parts  in  it  were
usigned  beforehand  to  the  priests,  the
Levites  and  the  people.


Ver.  8. — In  the  second  year.  In  b.c.
537,  the  second  year  of  Cyrus  in  Babylon,
which  was  also  the  second  year  of  their
coming  (i.  e.  after  their  coming)  to  the
(ruined)  house  of  God  (ch.  ii.  68),  began
Zerubbabel,  and  the  others,  and  appointed
the  Levites.  Small  as  the  number  of  tho
Levites  who  returned  vvith  Zerubbabel  was,
to  them  especially  was  intrusted  the  work
of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  i.  e.  the  super-
intendence of  the  workmen  employed  tc
rebuild  it  (see  ver.  9).

Ver.  9. — Jeshua  here  is  the  head  of  the
Levitical  family  mentioned  in  ch.  ii.  40  as
"  the  children  of  Jeshua,"  and  Kadmiel  is
the  head  of  the  other  family.  Jndah  repre-
sents the  "Hodaviah"  of  that  place,  and  is
probably  a  corrupt  reading,  as  Nehemiah
(vii.  43)  has  "Hodevah."  The  sons  of
Henadad,  who  are  hero  united  with  the
Jeshuites  and  Kadmielites,  constitute  a  third
Levitical  family,  which  (as  the  text  stands)
was  also  engaged  in  superintending  the  work..
But  there  is  some  reason  to  suspect  that  the
passage  is  an  unauthorized  addition  to  the
true  text.

Ver.  10. — When  the  builders  (Zerubbabel
and  Jeshua)  laid  the  fonndationof  the  temple,
they  set  the  priests  in  their  apparel— the
rich  apparel,  designed  "for  glory  and  for
beauty,"  which  tlie  law  required  (Exod.
xxviii.  40 ;  xl.  27 — 29),  and  which  the
people  had  recently  provided  (Ezra  ii.  69).
With  trumpets.  To  blow  with  trumpets
was  always  the  duty  of  the  priests  (Num.  x.
8  ;  xxxi.  6  ;  Josh.  vi.  4  ;  1  Chron.  xv.  24 ;
xvi.  6 ;  2  Chron.  v.  12),  to  praise  God  with
cymbals  the  task  of  the  Levites  (1  Chron.
XV.  16,  19  ;  xvL  5 ;  2  Chron.  v.  12,  13 ;
xxix.  25,  &c.),  perhaps  because  the  trumpet
was  regarded  as  the  instrument  of  greater


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA


[oh.  III.  8—13.


dignity.


uigui...  After  the  ordinance  of  Bapd.
David  s  ordinance  on  the  subject  is  first
expressed  briefly  in  1  Chron.  xv.  16  ;  after-
wards, more  fully,  in  vers.  17—21  of  the
■ame  chapter.  The  musical  service  of  Zerub-
babel  fell  short  of  the  "  ordinance  of  David,"
since  it  comprised  neither  psalteries  nor
harps,  which  were  an  essential  part_  of
David's  system.  Apparently,  the  musical
sldll  of  the  Levites  had  declined  under  the
depressing  circumstanooa  of  the  captivity
(see  Fs.  cxzxvii  2).

Yer.  11.— They  lang:  together  by  course.
Literally,  "They  replied  (to  each  other),"
or  sang  antiphonically ;  the  burthen  of  their
song  being,  that  God  was  good,  and  his
mercy  towards  Israel  everlasting  (comp.  2
Chron.  v.  13  ;  vii  3,  where  the  Levites  of
Solomon's  time  are  reported  to  have  praised
God  similarly).  All  the  people  shouted  with
a  great  shout.  Shouting  on  occasions  of
secular  joy  and  triumph  has  been  practised
by  most  nations,  both  in  ancient  and  modem
tunes.  But  religious  shouting  is  less  com-
mon. StUl  we  hear  of  such  shouting  when
the  ark  of  the  covenant  was  taken  into  the
Israelite  camp  near  Aphek  (1  Sam.  iv.  6),
and  again  when  David  solemnly  brought  it
up  from  Kirjath-jearim  to  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.
vi.  16).  Shouting  appears  also  in  the  Psalms
(xlvii  6)  and  in  Zechariah  (iv.  7)  in  connec-


tion with  religion.  It  is  always  indicative
of  religious  joy.

Ver.  12. — Many  .  .  .  who  were  ancient
men,  that  had  seen  the  first  house.  The
old  temple  had  not  been  destroyed  so  much
as  fifty  years.  Consequently,  there  would
be  many  who  could  remember  its  grandeur
and  glory.  These  persons,  when  the  founda-
tion of  the  (new)  house  was  laid  before  theii
eyes,  wept  with  a  loud  voice.  It  was  "  the
day  of  small  things"  (Zech.  iv.  10).  fhe
new  house,  in  comparison  with  the  old  one,
was  "  as  nothing  "  (Haggai  ii.  3).  The  differ-
ence was  perhaps  not  so  much  in  the  dimen-
sions (see  note  on  ch.  vL  3)  as  in  the  size
and  quality  of  the  foundation-stones  (1  Kings
V.  17),  the  excellence  of  the  masonry,  and
the  like.  Solomon  had  employed  the  best
workmen  of  one  of  the  greatest  of  the  Tyrian
kings  ;  Zerubbabel  had  only  the  arms  of  his
own  subjects  to  depend  upon.

Ver.  13. — ^Ihe  people  could  not  discern
the  noise  of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  noise
of  the  weeping.  One,  it  would  seem,  was
as  loud  as  the  other ;  neither  predominated.
This,  which  would  scarcely  be  possible  among
surselves,  was  not  unnatural  in  the  East,
where  those  who  lament  utter  shrill  cries,
instead  of  weepins;  silont'.y.  Herodotus
describes  the  lament  of  the  Persians  for  a
lost  general  as  "resounding  throughout  all
Boeotia"  (ix.  21).


HOMILETICS.

Ven.  8 — 13. — The  firtl  ttone.  We  now  come  in  this,  story  to  a  very  critical  time.
The  great  work  of  the  restoration  of  the  house,  for  the  sake  of  which  the  partial
restoration  of  Israel  to  Canaan  had  been  brought  about  and  was  to  continue  (see
ngain  ch.  i.  2,  3,  4,  5 ;  also  vi.  3,  noting  further  how,  in  fact,  all  recorded  in  Ezra,
and  even  in  Nehemiah,  may  be  regarded  as  introductory,  subsidiary,  or  supplementary
to  this  point),  at  last  is  before  us.  We  read,  on  the  one  hand,  of  the  very  last  step
in  the  way  of  prelude  and  preparation.  We  read,  on  the  other,  of  the  very  first  step
in  the  way  of  actual  construction.  In  both  we  shall  find  how  much  importance  is
attached  to  the  juncture.

L  The  last  preliminabt.  The  site  being  fixed,  the  workmen  engaged,  as  also,
we  may  suppose  (the  "  second  month  of  the  second  year  "  having  arrived),  the  proper
materials  being  now  on  the  spot,  it  only  remains  to  arrange,  before  finally  starting,
for  proper  superintendence.  Who  so  likely  for  this  as  those  who  had  a  kind  of
family  fitness  or  hereditary  call  to  that  Work,  viz.,  the  Levites  of  sufficient  age  ?
And  what  so  proper  an  age  (t.  e.  if  second  thoughts  are  best)  as  the  age  fixed  by  the
"  last  words  of  David  "  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  27,  compared  with  vers.  3,  24—26 ;  and  see
2  Chron.  xxix.  25  as  further  evidence  of  the  authority  attaching  to  all  David's
arrangements  concerning  the  house)  ?  Such,  accordingly,  was  the  precedent  followed
by  allconcemed  in  this  case.  All  who  helped  to  make  up  the  whole  "remnant"
that  had  returned  to  Jerusalem  (including  by  name  both  leaders,  and  by  express
mention  the  priests  and  Levites,  and  by  inlplication  all  other  Israelites)  approved
of  this  plan.  And  all  thus  called  and  "  appointed,"  t.  &  all  those  Levites  belonging
to  those  families  which  had  Ihkt  hereditary  acquaintance  before  referred  to,  equally
approved  of  it  too.  Two  families  of  such  have  been  already  mentioned  among
those  that  came  up  (ch.  ii.  40).  We  find  mention  now  for  the  first  time,  though
not  for  the  only  time  (Neh.  ui.  18.  24 ;  x.  9),  of  a  third,  viz.,   the  family  or


CH.  III.  8—13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  S9

"  sons  of  Henadad."  Possibly  these  may  have  come  up  at  some  subsequent  date,
or  it  may  be  that  they  only  form  some  minor  division,  which,  as  being  specially
qualified  for  the  work  now  to  be  entered  on,  come  specially  now  to  the  front.  In
any  case  it  is  a  significant  indication  of  the  universal  readiness  on  the  part  of
all  qualified  Levites  "  to  set  forward  the  work."  Indeed,  in  this  "  last  preliminary  "
this  seems  the  principal  feature  presented  to  us,  this  marked  unanimity  of  will
and  judgment.  As  tney  appear  to  have  travelled  from  Babylon,  as  they  had  har-
moniously arranged  in  distributing  the  people  (ii.  70),  as  they  had  all  agreed  about
erecting  the  altar  (iii.  2),  so  are  they  all  of  one  mind  also  in  this  finishing  touch.
We  may  well  believe  that  it  was  one  secret  of  their  happy  progjess  so  far.  Tliere  is
nothing  so  fatal  as  the  absence  of  unanimity  in  building  a  house  (Gen.  xi.  6 — 8).
Nothing  so  effectual  as  its  presence,  especially  where  God's  house  is  concerned  (see
Zeph.  iii.  9  10 ;  John  xiii.  34,  35 ;  xvii.  20,  21 ;  also  Acts  iv.  32,  33 ;  Ephes.  ii.
19—21 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6).

II.  The  fiest  movb.  This  was  the  action,  of  course,  of  placing  the  first  stone.
(Contrast,  as  a  description  of  utter  destruction.  Matt.  xxiv.  2.)  How  important  a
step  this  was  considered' may  be  seen  by  noting  the  formalities  observed  on  the
occasion,  being  almost  identical  with  those  observed  at  that  more  than  royal  progress
described  in  2  Chron.  v.  4 — 14  (comp.  also  1  Chron.  xv.  27,  28).  How  significant
too  these  formalities  were  in  themselves.'  "Trumpets"  are  used  commonly  on
occasions  of  state,  to  notify  the  approach  of  the  sovereign,  to  draw  attention  to
proclamations  made  in  his  name.  In  the  Old  Testament  we  find  them  employed  to
"  sound  an  alarm,"  or  assemble  the  people,  or  proclaim  the  Jubilee  year  (Lev.  xxv.
8 — 10;  Num.  x.  9,  10;  Joel  ii.  1,  15  ;  Amos  iii.  6);  and  that  generally,  though
not  always,  in  the  hands  of  the  priests  (Josh.  vi.  6,  8,  13  ;  Judges  vii. ;  1  Chron.  xv.
24  ;  xvi.  4—^6 ;  2  Chron.  v.  12).  The  priests,  therefore,  as  here,  sounding  these,  and
ckd  in  official  garments,  made  the  occasion  one  of  state  in  God's  name,  as  though
himself  present  and  speaking  peace.  On  the  other  hand,  the  cymbals  and  songs  of.
the  Levites,  praising  God  again  in  the  ancient,  national,  and  highly-esteemed  manner
(1  Chron.  XVI.  41 ;  Ps.  cxxxvi. ;  and  the  prophecy  of  Jer.  xxxiii.  10,  11),  was  a  kind
of  response  to  that  voice.  One  is  almost  reminded  of  the  "  goodwill  towards  man  "
and  "  glory  to  God  in  the  highest,"  when  the  foundation-stone  of  redemption  was
laid  in  Christ's  birth  (Luke  ii.  14).  How  important  also  the  occasion  was  found  to
be  in  practice.  "  Well  begun  is  half  done."  A  foundation-stone  is  both  a  proof  and
a  promise — a  proof  of  much,  a  promise  of  more.  How  much  had  now  been
accomplished  1  How  great  a  step  at  last  taken  1  How  much  more  might  be  hoped  I
When  the  heart  is  full  of  such  feelings,  what  can  it  do  but  shout  out  (see  Zeph.
iii.  14 ;  Zech.  ix.  9).  Compare  also  the  shout  of  Xenophon's  returning  ten  thousand
when  they  found  out  how  far  they  had  travelled  towards  the  goal  they  desired  on  first
catching  sight  of  the  sea.  Just  so  the  men  here.  "  The  foundation  is  laid.  We
shall  soon  have  the  house.  Praise  God."  So  they  felt,  so  they  shouted  in  the
exuberance  of  their  joy.  So  may  a  Christian  also,  when  laying,  as  it  were,  by  simple
faith  in  Christ,  the  "  foundation-stone "  of  his  hope.  With  these  "  pleasures  of
hope,"  however,  there  were  also  sorrows  of  memory.  Some  fifty  years  or  thereabouts
before  then  there  had  been  another  house  on  that  spot.  There  were  "  ancient  men  "
present  there  who  had  seen  it  in  all  its  glory.  They  could  see  it  still  in  their  minds.
To  them,  therefore,  this  present  "  foundation-stone  "  recalled  years  of  shame,  and
terror,  and  agony.  Oh,  that  such  a  thing  as  this  should  ever  have  been  required  I
That  there  should  ever  have  been  this  pitiable  necessity  for  thus  beginning  ag.iin  !
That  there  should  be  such  a  scene  around  them  as  they  saw  at  that  time  (see,  even
long  afterwards,  Neh.  vii.  4  ;  also  Haggai  ii.  3  ;  Zech.  iv.  10)  1  Bursting  into  uncon-
trollable tears  at  these  thoughts,  they  filled  the  air  with  their  cries.  It  was  impossible
indeed  for  any  to  distinguish  which  kind  of  cry  prevailed  most,  the  cries  of  sorrow
r  those  of  joy.  No  wonder  the  story  adds  that  "  the  noise  was  heard  afar  off."
itegarded,  indeed,  from  a  typical  and  prophetical  point  of  view,  has  it  ceased  echoing
yet  (see,  into-  alia,  Ps.  czviii.  22 — 24  ;  Isa.  xxviii.  16 ;  1  Pet  ii.  4—8)?


40  THB  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  ni.  8—13


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  7 — 13. — Thought,  work,  and  feeling.    We  have  in  this  passage —

I.  A  TRUE  THOUGHT  (ver.  8).  "  Now  in  the  second  year  of  their  coming,"  &c.  We
can  easily  imagine  any  orator  among  the  company  of  the  returned  Jews  making  out
a  strong  case  for  leaving  the  building  of  the  temple  till  better  days  should,  dawn.
The  sufficiency  of  the  altar  already  reared  for  the  practical  purposes  of  devotion ;
the  readiness  of  God  to  accept  any  offering  that  came  from  the  heart,  however  mean
the  outward  circumstances  might  be  ;  the  insecurity  of  their  present  state ;  their
incompetence  to  build  a  temple  which  would  compare  with  that  of  Solomon ;  the
imperative  necessity  that  existed  to  spend  all  their  strength  in  consolidating  their
new-gained  liberty ;  the  wisdom  of  waiting  till  they  could  do  something  worthy  of
the  God  they  worshipped,  &c. — all  this  might  have  been  made  plausible  enough,
perhaps  was  so  made.  But  if  so,  it  was  overruled  by  the  true  thought  that  to  the
God  who  had  redeemed  them  from  bondage,  and  given  back  to  them  their  old  liberties
and  their  beloved  land,  they  owed  the  very  best  they  could  offer,  and  that  at  the
earliest  moment.  The  first-fruits,  they  had  long  learnt,  belonged  to  him  who  gave
them  everjrthing.  It  was  meet  and  fitting  that  as  soon  as  ever  they  were  established
in  their  own  old  land  they  should  build  to  him,  the  Source  of  all  their  blessings,  the
best  house  they  could  rear.  This  was  a  true  thought  of  theirs,  and  should  find  a
home  in  our  minds  now.  Not  anything  that  will  do,  but  the  very  best  that  can
possibly  be  done,  for  God.  We  should  not  be  content  that  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant
of  the  Lord  should  remain  under  curtains  "  while  we  dwell  in  a  "  house  of  cedars  "
(1  Chron.  xvii.  1).  Whatever,  in  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  is  improvable  should  be
improved.  The  slain  lamb  is  to  be  "  without  blemish."  The  building  should  be
without  disproportion ;  the  singing  without  discord ;  the  service  without  mistakes.
Let  worthiness,  excellency,  beauty,  grace  be  offered  to  him  who  has  given  us  not

•only  the  necessary  and  indispensable,  but  the  exquisite,  the  delightf  d,  the  glorioua
Let  npthing  detain  us  from  the  immediate  service  of  Christ.

II.  Ststematio  woek  (vers.  8,  9).  They  set  about  accomplishing  their  design
with  great  carefulness  and  method.  They  committed  it  to  the  Levites,  who  were
most  interested  and  best  instructed — to  those  of  them  who  were  of  a  suitable  age
(ver.  8)  ;  they  sent  to  Tyre  and  Sidon  and  to  Lebanon  for  the  best  workmen  and  the
best  materials  that  could  be  had  for  money  (ver.  7) ;  while,  for  love,  the  high  priest
and  the  priests  overlooked  and  directed  the  work,  and  saw  that  all  was  according  to
the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord.  The  work  was  quickly  begun,  but  it  was,  not
hurriedly  and  slovenly  dispatched.  Bach  part  was  wrought  by  those  who  were
specially  adapted  for  it.  No  amount  of  zeal  in  the  cause  of  God  will  make  up  for
lack  of  intelligence  and  adaptation.  We  must  build  up  the  spiritual  house  of  the
Lord — ^the  Church  of  Christ — not  only  inspired  by  consecration  of  spirit,  but  guided
by  a  wise  and  intelligent  adoption  of  the  best  means  and  appliances.  Generous
impulses  must  be  sustained  by  sound  methods,  or  the  cause  we  have  at  heart  will
suffer,  and  instead  of  joy  and  exultation  will  come  sorrow  and  shame.

III.  Mingled  feeling  (vers.  10—13).  No  more  touching  and  pathetic  picture
can  be  found  even  in  the  Bible  itself— that  book  of  tenderest  pathos  and  truest
Joetry — ^than  the  scene  recorded  in  the  closing  verses  of  this  chapter.  The  Jews,
pure  in  heart  and  godly  in  spirit,  have  ever  been  capable  of  the  most  profound
emotion.  Here  was  an  occasion  to  call  forth  the  fullest  joy  and  at  the  same  time  the
tenderest  grief.  Once  more,  on  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  sanctuary,  the  new  temple  was
about  to  rise.  It  was  the  hour  from  which  a  new  era  in  their  nation's  history  should
date.  It  was  an  act  from  which  the  devotion  of  a  reverent  people  for  many  a  long
century  should  spring.  Patriotism  and  piety  lent  their  strong  and  hallowed  influences
to  eiinoble  and  consecrate  the  scene.  Feeling  touched  its  deepest  and  rose  to  its
highest  note.  And  when  the  aged  fathers,  the  ancient  men,  remembering  the  perished
glories  of  the  temple  on  which  the  eyes  of  their  youth  once  rested  with  such  pride
and  joy,  wept  as  they  looked  on  its  ,ruins ;  and  when  their  tears  and  lamentations
mingled  with  the  shouts  of  gladness,  resounding  far  and  wide,  that  came  from  all  the
younger  men,  who  rejoiced  with  great  joy  at  the  sound  of  the  sacred  songs  celebrating
the  goodness  and  mercy  of  Jehovah,  there  was  such  a  scene  aa  can  never  have  been


CH.  ui.  8—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  41

forgotten  by  any  of  that  goodly  throng  while  life  and  memory  remained.  Thus  hand
in  hand  go  joy  and  Borrow,  inseparable  companions,  along  the  path  of  life.  Thus  do
they  stand  together  round  the  same  altar,  under  the  same  roof.  Thus  do  they
mingle  their  smiles  and  tears  at  the  same  hour  and  scene.  "  Shadow  and  shine  ia
life,  little  Annie,  flower  and  thorn,"  says  the  aged  grandmother  in  one  of  our  poems ;
and  in  another  we  read  most  truly  that

"There's  not  a  string  attuned  to  mirth
But  has  its  chord  in  melancholy."

"  We  thank  thee  more  that  all  our  joy  is  touched  with  pain,"  sighs  another  tender
spirit.  That  which  forms  so  constantly  recurring  a  strain  in  our  poetry  must  be,  and
IB,  a  prevalent  and  abiding  feature  of  our  life.  Ill  is  it  for  those  who  have  no  other
portion  than  the  pleasures  of  the  present,  no  other  heritage  than  the  satisfactions  of .
earth  and  time.  Well  is  it  for  those  who  thankfully  accept  earthly  joy  and  the
shaded  brightness  of  the  present  time  as  flowers  that  spring  at  the  touch  of  God's
finger  along  the  path  of  duty  and  devotion,  intended  to  help  us  onward  in  that
goodly  way,  speaking  to  us  of  the  fuller  blessedness  which  the  future  holds  in  its
folded  hand  for  them  that  are  faithful  unto  death. — 0.

VerB.  7 — 13. — The  founding  of  the  temple.  The  worship  of  Israel  during  the
first  year  of  the  restoration  from  Babylon  was  such  as  could  be  conducted  around  an
altar  in  the  open.  The  people  naturally  felt  how  imperfectly  they  could  fulfil  the
law  of  Moses  without  a  temple,  with  its  courts,  its  veil,  and  its  sacred  furniture.
They  -did  not  let  discouragement  paralyse  them,  but  taxed  their  energies  and
resources.    These  words  bring  under  our  notioe= —

I.  The  pkeparatoey  work.  1.  What  was  required  {see 'ver.  1)1  (1)  Here  we
read  of  "  masons."  These  suggest  the  quarrying  and  cutting  of  stones,  and  theii
transportation  to  the  site  (comp.  1  Kings  vi.  16 — 18).  (2)  "  Cedars  of  Lebanon  "
are  mentioned.  These  suggest  also  other  kinds  of  timber.  The  trees  had  to  be
felled,  transferred  to  Tyre  or  Zidon,  thence  floated  to  Joppa,  and  conveyed  across  the
country  to  Jerusalem  (comp.  1  Kings  vi.  5 — 10).  Other  preparations  suggested  by
these  hints.  2.  How  did  they  meet  the  demand?  (1)  Indirectly,  by  the  gifts  and
sacrifices  ofEered  in  connection  with  their  worship  at  the  altar.  These  were  required  -
for  the  support  of  that  worship.  But  the  spirit  of  the  worship  thus  encouraged
animated  them  to  further  efforts.  So  it  operates  still  under  the  gospel.  (2)
Directly,  in  their  additional  subscriptions  of  cash  and  kind  (ver.  7).  These  gifts
rewarded  the  workmen  of  Tyre  and  Zidon  (comp.  1  Kings  vi.  11 ;  2  Chron.  ix.  10).
Also  workmen  of  their  own  nation  (comp.  1  Kings  vi.  13 — 16).  How  anticipative  of
the  wide  spirit  of  the  gospel  that  Jews  and  Gentiles  should  be  jointly  concerned  in
this  typical  work  t  (3)  Do  not  these  efforts  shame  those  of  Christian  congregations  ?
Here  were  under  50,000  persons,  all  told  (see  ii.  64,  65),  equal  to  about  fifty  out  of
the  many  thousands  of  our  Christian  congregations,  undertaking  this  great  work  I
What  are  we,  each  individual,  doing  towards  the  building  of  the  spiritual  temple  ?

II.  The  stone-lating.  The  arrangements  were — 1.  The  appointment  of  officers
for  the  building  (vers.  8,  9).  (1)  Zerubbabel  had  supreme  command  (see  Zech.  iv.).
This  lie  had  as  of  the  seed  royal,  and  representing  David  and  Solomon.  (2)  Jeahua
the  son  of  Josadak,  as  high  priest,  was  associated  with  Zerubbabel.  (3)  'The  priests
of  the  courses  were  his  seconds  in  command — captains  of  the  hosts  of  workmen.
(4)  The  Levites  were  made  foremen  over  the  workmen.  "And  appointed  the
Levites,"  &c.  (vers.  8,  9).  There  should  be  order  in  everything  connected  with  the
work  of  God.  2.  The  presence  of  all  things  essential  to  the  ceremony.  (1)  The  stone
itself  was  there.  This  was  a  type  of  Christ,  the  Foundation  of  the  living  temple
(see  Ps.  cxviii.  22,  23  ;  comp.  with  Matt.  xxi.  42 — 44  ;  Eph.  ii.  20—22  ;  Isa.  xxviii.
16  ;  viii.  14 ;  comp.  with  1  Pet.  ii.  6 — 8).  (2)  Zerubbabel  was  there  to  lay  the
stone.  In  this  he,  too,  typified  Clirist  (see  Zeoh.  iv.  6—10).  This  language  has  un-
mistakable reference  to  the  triumphs  of  the  Messiah.  (3)  Jeshua  the  son  of  Jozadak
was  there  to  witness  it  (see  Zech.  iii.  9).  In  this  he,  too,  was  a  type  of  Christ,  our
great  High  Priest  (see  Zech.  iii.,  and  vi.  9 — 15).  Essentials  in  religion  are  those
things  which  concern  Christ,    These  should  be  held  as  fundamentals.    3.  The  pro-


41  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [oh.  iil  8—13.

vition  /<yr  the  cddrrativn  of  praise.  (1)  There  were  the  trumpeters.  These  were
the  pnests,  distinguished  by  their  apparel  (see  Num.  x.  8,  10).  (2)  The  Levites,
sons  of  Asaph,  struck  the  cymbals.  This  was  "  after  the  ordinance  of  David  "  (see
1  Chron.  xn.  4—6).  The  Levites  also  led  the  singing.  This  was  responsive.  The
burden  was  "  Praise  and  thanksgiving  be  unto  the  Lord ; "  the  response,  "  Because
he  is  good,  and  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  towards  Israel."  The  leaders  of  praise
in  Christian  congregations  should  be  godly  persons.

IIL  The  effect  of  the  phoceedings.  This  was  various.  1.  There  was  the
emotion  of  tlie  people.  (1)  Excitement  was  so  strong  that  it  vented  itself  in  shout-
ing. (2)  Ours  should  be  intense  as  we  realise  the  glorious  things  foreshadowed.
2.  There  was  the  emotion  of  the  ancients.  (1)  While  "all"  shouted  "because  the
foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  was  laid,"  yet  on  the  part  of  many  the  shouting
was  mingled  with  wailing.  These  were  the  ancients  who  looked  on  the  ruins  of  the
temple  of  Solomon,  which  they  remembered  in  its  splendour.  They  saw  a  mere
handful  of  people,  the  relics  of  a  great  nation  as  they  remembered  it.  They  looked
upon  their  chief  magistrate,  a  dependent  uponihe  Persian  king,  in  contrast  with  what
they  remembered  of  the  earlier  representatives  of  David  and  Solomon.  (2)  The  passion
of  the  weepers  was  such  that  it  rivalled  that  of  the  exulters.  No  interests  are  so
vital  as  those  of  religion.  None  should  move  us  so  deeply.  3.  The  outsiders  heard
the  smind.  (1)  Those  "afar  ofE  "  were  the  Gentiles  (see  2  Kings  xxvii.  6).  (2)
The  nations  of  the  world  should  be  made  to  hear  the  sounds  of  Christian  exultation. —
J.  A.  M.

Veri.  8 — 13. — The  joyful  and  sorrowftd  in  religious  worship.  Here  we  have
illustrated  the  power  of  a  right  leadership,  the  wisdom  of  devout  co-operation,  and
the  progress  of  a  great  enterprise  (vers.  8 — 10).

I.  The  JOYFUL  in  religious  worship.  "They,  sang  together"  (ver.  11).  1.  That
God  will  deign  to  consecrate  by  his  Presence  the  temple  erected.  God  will  dwell  in
the  temple  made  with  hands ;  what  a  condescension  and  benediction  is  this  toward
man ;  hence  the  joy.  2.  What  God  is  in  himself  to  those  who  worship  him.  "  Be-
cause he  is  good,  for  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever  toward  Israel  "  (ver.  11).  3.  In
the  strength  which  worship  imparts  during  the  trying  circumstances  of  life.  Who
can  tell  the  gladness  put  into  tiie  heart  of  Israel  during  their  arduous  task  by  their
worship.  Worship  inspires  joy  in  time  of  difficulty.  4.  In  the  progress  of  religious
enterprise.  Another  house  to  be  erected  for  moral  uses.  5.  In  religious  youth  the
joy  of  worship  is  eminently  strong.  Natural  feeling  combines  with  spiritual
delight.

II.  The  SOBBOWFUL  in  religious  worship.  "  Wept  with  a  loud  voice ''  (ver.  12).
1.  That  sin  has  thrown  life  into  such  a  condition  that  a  temple  should  be  necessary.
Eden  had  no  temple  ;  heaven  has  none.  Sin  has  rendered  necessary  the  material
aids  to  worship.  2.  That  disobedience  should  ever  violate  the  holy  sanctuary  of
God.  The  first  temple  had  been  destroyed ;  its  glory  had  departed.  3.  That  the
best  temple  man  could  build  should  be  so  poor  and  imperfect.  The  poverty  of  their
work  awakened  tears.  4.  That  the  temple  should  be  so  little  cared  for  by  man,  and
that  80  little  good  should  be  gained  by  its  frequenters ;  so  many  of  their  comrades
were  left  in  Babylon.

III.  The  blending  of  jot  and  sobrow  in  religious  wobship.  "So  that  the
people  could  not  discern  the  noise  of  the  shout  of  joy  from  the  noise  of  the  weeping
of  the  people  "(ver.  13).  1.  A  scene  in  the  soul.  In  the  soul  joy  blends  with
Borrow.  2.  A  scene  in  the  sanctuary.  In  the  same  Church  joy  and  sorrow  blend
in  the  experience  of  the  worshippers.  3.  A  scene  in  the  world.  Sorrow  and  joy
blend  on  earth.     4.  Not  a  scene  in  heaven ;  there  no  more  tears. — E.

Vers.  11 — 13. — The  foundation  laid.  The  weeping  of  these  old  men  was  the  first
check  on  the  enthusiasm  of  the  builders  of  the  temple.  The  books  of  Ezra  and
Nehemiah,  and  the  prophecies  of  Zechariah  and  Haggai,  which  illustrate  them,  are  a
very  troubled  history:  sorrow,  disappointment,  and  indignation  again  and  again
break  out;  but  until  now  there  had  been  no  consciousness  of  hindrances,  or  the
consciousness  had  been  suppressed.    The  time  of  preparation,  which  is  pre-eminentl>'


OH.  ut  8—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  48


the  time  of  hope,  was  over ;  the  people  stood  face  to  face  with  the  work  they  had
undertaken;  its  difBculties  were  before  them;  they  felt  the  poverty  of  their  resources.
But  though  the  enthusiasm  of  the  multitude  was  checked,  it  was  not  daunted ;  the
hope  of  the  younger  men  overbore  the  depression  of  the  elders ;  the  influence  of
their  sacred  festival  sustained  them ;  the  popular  feeling  was  wiser  and  more  healthy
than  the  despondency  of  the  leaders.  The  work  of  preparation  had  been  carried
forward  with  spirit.  Not  more  than  a  year,  probably  a  good  deal  less  (ver.  8),  had
elapsed  since  "  the  chief  of  the  fathers  "  had  come  "  to  the  house  of  the  Lord  which
is  at  Jerusalem  "  (ch.  ii.  68),  and  much  work  had  been  accomplished  in  the  organising
of  labour  and  the  collection  of  materials  for  the  building  (ver.  7).  Patriotism,
wisdom,  and  piety  had  been  manifested  in  their  plans.  The  whole  remnant  of  Israel
was  enlisted  in  the  cause ;  this  was  the  work,  not  only  of  those  who  had  returned,
but  also  of  those  whom  the  military  leaders  of  Assyria  and  Chaldsea  had  not  deemed
of  sufficient  importance  to  carry  away  (cl  ver.  1  with  2  Kings  xxiv.  14;  xxv.  12).
The  daily  sacrifices  had  been  early  re-established,  that  the  courage  of  the  people
might  be  sustained  by  their  faith  in  the  God  of  Israel  (vers.  3—6).  Great  careful-
ness was  manifested  that  all  things  should  be  done  according  to  the  law  ;  they  were
scrupulous  in  their  obedience  of  God  (vers.  2,  4,  and  ch.  ii.  69,  61,  62).  A  beautiful
simplicity  and  hope  appear  in  the  counsel  of  "the  Tirshatha"  (ch.  ii.  63),  the  expect-
ation that  the  Lord  would  again  reveal  his  will  for  their  practical  guidance.  The
responsibility  of  all  this  action  must  have  been  felt  by  the  "  ancient  men  "  "  of  the
priests  and  Levites;"  overstrained  feeling  may  have  been  one  reason  of  their
weeping.     Among  the  causes  of  their  grief,  notice  these —

I.  The  despondency  which  is  natural  to  the  aged.  There  was  a  great  contrast
between  Solomon's  temple  and  the  ruins  which  were  around  them ;  between  the
glorious  past  of  Israel  and  the  scattered,  demoralised  condition  of  the  nation  now.
But  the  greatest  contrast  was  between  the  energies  of  their  own  youth  and  their
present  inability  to  rise  to  the  demands  of  a  great  occasion.  "  We  receive  but  what
we  give."  Difficulties  are  a  spur  to  a  young  man's  courage  ;  the  consciousness  of
power  shows  itself  in  the  desire  to  struggle  and  to  overcome.

II.  The  partial  and  insufficient  response  that  had  been  made  to  the
decree  of  Cyrus.  "  Forty  and  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  threescore "  was
the  number  of  "  the  whole  congregation "  that  offered  themselves  for  the  return ;
and  of  these  a  large  proportion  were  persons  professionally  engaged  about  the
temple.  "  The  priests  and  Levites  "  mourned  that  their  readiness  met  with  so  small
a  response  from  the  people.  Some  of  the  leaders  of  the  nation,  noble  men  bearing
noble  names,  were  there ;  but  many  also  of  small  account,  "  a  mixed  multitude,"
like  a  great  proportion  of  our  modern  emigrants,  unable  to  succeed  anywhere  and
eager  for  any  change  (oh.  ii.  58 — 63).  The  "  great  middle  class  "  of  Israel  never
returned.  They  continued  "  dispersed  among  the  Gentiles."  The  feelings  of  the
ancient  men  would  probably  exaggerate  these  facts.

III.  Unreadiness  to  dent  themselves  fob  the  sakb  of  thb  work  for  which

THEY  HAD  returned  MAT  HAVE  ALREADY  APPEARED  IN  MANY.      Only  "  SOme  of  the

chief  of  the  f atliers  offered  freely "'  (ch.  ii.  68 ;  cf .  with  the  phrase  "  chief  of  the
fathers"  in  our  text).  Zechariah  (ch.  vii.)  speaks  of  the  greed  which  characterised
the  nation  during  the  captivity;  Haggai  first,  and  Malachi  long  afterwards,  indig-
nantly rebuked  it  in  the  men  of  the  restoration  (Haggai  i.  3,  4,  9 ;  Mai.  i.  6 — 10).
The  great  grief  of  the  old  men,  however  natural,  would  have  seriously  hindered  the
work.  The  want  of  hope,  and  the  selfishness  which  made  many  plead  hopelessness
as  an  excuse  for  abandoning  their  efforts,  were  the  sins  against  which  Zechariah  and
Haggai  had  to  testify.  The  frank  impulse  which  led  the  multitude  to  shout  for  joy
was  wiser  than  the  weeping.  It  anticipated  the  subsequent  teaching  of  Nehemiah
under  similar  circumstances  (Neh.  viii.  10),  "The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."
Lessons ; — 1.  Tlie  mingled  character  of  all  human  work.  We  begin  in  enthusiasm
and  continue  in  depression.  There  is  the  contrast  of  the  actual  with  the  ideal ;  the
sense  of  accumulating  difficulties ;  the  consciousness  of  failing  powers ;  the  perception
of  imperfection  in  all  human  instrumentality.  The  work  remains,  though  the  feeling
changes ;  remains  to  be  done,  remains  when  it  is  done.  "  Duty  remains,  and  God
abideth  ever."    "They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy."    2.  The  advantage  qf


44


TflK  BOOK  OF  EZfiA.


[cH.  IV.  1—24


felloiosliip  in  labour.  Many  weep  and  many  shout  aloud  for  joy ;  and  this  is  well,
for  each  can  temper  the  emotion  of,  and  furnish  help  to,  the  other.  "  'Tis  held  that
sorrow  makes  us  wise ;  "  but  happy  ignorance  is  also  blessed.  Care  is  good,  and  so
is  the  occasional  outburst  of  joy  that  sweeps  care  away.  Blend  old  and  young
together ;  the  old  with  memory  which  is  the  nurse  of  great  purposes ;  the  young
with  the  passion  to  make  a  future  for  themselves.  3.  The  cause  that  can  bind  true
men  in  a  fellmoship  of  labour.  It  is  the  cause  of  God  ;  the  cause  in  which  we  can
worship  together  as  well  as  work  together.  "  They  sang  together  by  course  in
praising  and  giving  thanks  unto  the  Lord ; "  -  all  the  people  shouted  with  a  great
shout,  when  they  praised  the  Lord,  because  the  foundation  of  the  house  of  the  Lord
was  laid."  A  common  faith  in  God  and  God's  call  harmonises  all  diversities  of
feeling. — M.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV,


Opposition  made  to  the  kebuildino  of

THE  TEMPLE  BY   THE  SAMARITANS  (ch.    iv.

1 — 24).  In  this  world,  whenever  a  good
work  is  begun,  some  kind  of  opposition  is
sure  to  show  itself,  since  Satan  will  never
BufTer  any  attack  upon  his  kingdom  without
resenting  it  The  opposition  may,  however,
be  of  two  kinds.  It  may  be  open  and  pro-
claimed, or  it  may  take  the  subtler  and
more  dangerous  shape  of  seeming  approval
and  patronage.  In  the  case  before  us,  the
opposition  to  Zerubbabel's  mission  was,  at
the  first,  of  this  latter  kind.  The  mixed
race,  partly  Israelite  but  mainly  heathen,
which  had  been  settled  by  the  Assyrian
monarchs  in  central  Palestine  (2  Kings  xviL
24  ;  Ezra  iv.  9,  10),  made  a  specious  proposi-
tion to  the  Jewish  prince,  acceptance  of
which  would  have  been  fatal  to  the  entire
movement.  The  movement  was  one  for  the
re-establishment  of  God's  peculiar  people  in
their  own  land,  under  their  own  system,  as
a  witness  to  the  nations  against  polytheism,
■gainst  idolatry,  against  materialism  and
sensualism  in  religion.  As  the  Samaritans
had  adopted  a  mixed  or  mongrel  worship,
uniting  idolatrous  rites  with  the  acknow-
ledgment of  Jehovah  (2  Kings  xviL  29 — 41),
their  admission  by  Zerubbabel  to  a  partner-
ship in  his  work  would  have  been  equivalent
to  the  abandonment  of  pure  religion,  and
the  acceptance  of  a  syncretism  inherently
vicious,  and  sure  to  develop  into  pronounced
forms  of  impurity  ano  corruption.  Zerub-
babel therefore  declined  the  offer  made  him
— most  properly,  since  there  is  no  "com-
munion between  light  and  darkness  "  (2  Cor.


vi  14),  no  "agreement  between  the  temple
of  God  and  idols"  {ibid.  ver.  16).  His
determination  was  bitterly  resented.  Unable
to  seduce  him  into  alliance  with  them,  the
Samaritans  became  bis  open  and  avowed
enemies  ;  during  three  reigns — the  remainder
of  the  reign  of  Cyrus,  the  reign  of  Cambyses
(Ahasuerus),  and  that  of  the  Pseudo-Smerdis
(Artaxerxes)  —  they  so  worked  upon  the
Persian  court  that  the  rebuilding  of  the
temple  was  almost  wholly  stopped  ;  no  pro-
gress was  made  until  the  second  year  of
Darius,  when  a  new  opposition  showed  itself,
as  appears  by  the  next  section.

Ver.  1. — The  adversaries.  Notwithstand-
ing the  friendly  guise  in  which  they  came,
the  historian  sees  from  the  first  that  the
Samaritans  are  in  reality  "  adversaries,"  or
' '  persecutors  "  {tsazey),  identical  in  spirit  with
Sanballat  and  his  followers,  whom  Nehemiah
designates  by  the  same  word  (iv.  11).

Ver.  2.— We  seek  your  God,  as  ys  do.
"  We  seek  your  God  "  was  true  ;  "  as  ye  do  "
was  not  true.  The  Samaritans  worshipped
Jehovah,  but  not,  as  the  Jews  did,  exclus-
ively. "They  feared  the  Lord,  a)id  wor-
shipped their  own  gods  "  (2  Kings  xvii.  33).
Such  worship  dishonours  Jehovah  almost
more  than  total  neglect  of  him.  Since  the
days  of  Esar-haddon.  There  was  more  than
one  colonisation  of  Central  Palestine  by  the
Assyrians.  Sargon  relates  that  he  placed
Arabians  in  the  country  ;  the  writer  of  Kings
tells  us  that  it  was  occupied  by  Babylonians,
Cuthseans,  Avites,  Hamathites,  and  Sephar-
vites  (2  Kings  xvii.  24) ;  the  Samaritant
themselves  said  that  they  were  "Dinaites,
Apharsathchites,  Tarpelites,  Apharsites,
Archevites,  Babylonians,  Susanchites,  De-
havites,  and  Elamites"  {infra,  ver.  9).  They
attributed  this  last  colonization  to  Esar-
haddon.  We  may  suspect  that  the  second
colonisation  was  by  Sennacherib,  who  appean
to  have  taken  Babylon,  Hamath,  Sephai*


ck  tv.  i— «.]


THE  BOOK  OP  EZEA.


49


vaim,  and  Ivah  or  Avah  (2  Kings  xviiL  34).
The  result  was  that  the  Samantans  were  a
very  mixed  race.

Ver.  3. — ^Ve  have  nothing  to  do  with  na
to  bnild  a  honse  unto  our  God.  You  have
no  ground  on  which  to  rest  your  claim  of
uniting  with  us  in  this  matter.  You  do  not
really  wish  to  build  to  our  God  sirajjly  and
singly ;  nor  were  you  mentioned  iu  the
decree  of  Cyrus,  which  is  our  warrant  for
what  we  are  doing.

Ver.  4. — Then  the  people  of  the  land  (i. «.
the  Samaritans)  vreakened  the  hands  of  the
peopIe^  of  Judah.  As  aiding  is  called
"strengthening  the  hands"  {irsfra,  ch.  vi
22 ;  Isa.  xxxr.  3  ;  Jer.  xsciiL  14 ;  Ezek.  xvi
49,  &C.),  so  hindering  is  expressed  by
"weakening  the  hands"  (Jer.  xxxviii.  4),
though  this  latter  phrase  is,  comparatively
speaking,  unusual.  And  troubled  them  in
building.  Probably  as  Sanballat  and  his
followers  troubled  the  builders  of  the  wall  in
Nehemiah's  time  (Neh.  iv.  1 — 12).

Ver.  6. — ^And  hired  counsellors  against
them.  It  is  always  possible  at  an  Oriental
court  to  bribe  some  of  the  royal  favourites,
and  induce  them  to  use  their  influence  with
the  monarch  for  the  furtherance,  or  hin-
drance, of  any  work  that  is  being  proceeded
with  in  any  part  of  the  country.  The
Samaritans  now  had  recourse  to  this  system,
and  employed  it  with  great  success  for  a
considerable  period.  All  the  days  of  Cyrni,
/.  e.  "all  the  remaining  days,"  from  B.O.
537  to  B.O.  529,  when  Cyrus  died,  and  was
succeeded  by  his  son  Cambyses.  Even  until
the  reign  of  Darius.  It  is  implied  that  the
reign  of  Darius  did  not  immediately  follow
on  that  of  Cyrus.  Profane  history  tells  us
of  two  intermediate  kings,  viz.,  Cambyses,


son  of  Cyrus,  who  reigned  from  b.o.  52f
to  B.O.  522,  and  Smerdis,  or  Bardes,  a
usurper,  who  occupied  the  throne  for  about
ton  months  in  the  years  &o,  622,  521
Darius  became  king  in  this  last-named  year,
but  seems  to  have  counted  his  reign  from
the  date  of  the  decease  of  Cambyses.

Ver.  6. — And  in  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus
Some  critics  regard  this  Ahasuerus  as  iden-
tical with  the  Ahasuerus  of  Esther,  who  is
generally  allowed  to  be  Xerxes,  the  son  and
successor  of  Darius  Hystaspis,  and  the
invader  of  Greece.  In  this  ca«e  the  Arta-
xerxes  of  the  next  verse  is  taken  to  bo  Arta-
xerxes  Longimanus,  and  the  entire  passage
from  ver.  6  to  ver.  23  inclusively,  is  re-
garded as  parenthetic,  having  reference  to
events  which  happened  later  than  any  oi
those  recorded  in  ch.  vi  But  the  evident
nexu^  of  vers.  23,  24  is  fatal  to  this  view,
which  has  nothingin  its  favour  beyond  the
sequence  of  the  royal  names,  an  nncertain
argument  ih  this  instance,  since  we  know
that  Persian  kings  had  often  moi«  than
one  name.  If  on  these  grounds  we  reject
the  proposed  identification,  and  regard
the  chapter  as  chronologically  consecutive,
Ahasuerus  here  must  be  explained  as
Cambyses,  and  the  Artaxerxes  of  ver.  7  as
Smerdis.  This  is  the  view  most  usually
taken,  and  it  seems  to  the  present  writer  to
present  fewer  difficulties  than  any  other.
In  the  beginning  of  his  reign.  As  soon  as
ever  a  new  king  mounted  the  throne,  fresli
representations  were  made  to  him  by  the
"adversaries,"  lest  the  work  should  be
recommenced.  Wrote  they  an  accusation.
Comp.  vers.  12-  ■  16,  by  which  we  see  the
sort  of  "  accusation  "  that  could  be  plausibly
brought.


HOMILETICa

Veni.  1 — S. — The  work  endangered,.  Mosee  was  exposed  to  danger  whilst  still  in
his  cradle.  The  same  was  true  about  Cluist.  There  is  yet  another  parallel  in  this
passage.  No  sooner  is  the  foundation-stone  of  the  restored  temple  laid,  than  we
hear  of  that  branch  of  the  great  work  of  Restoration  being  in  imminent  peril.  To
profit  riglitly  by  this  story  of  danger,  two  things  must  be  pondered,  viz.,  the
nature  of  the  danger,  in  the  first  place ;  and  the  manner  of  the  deliverance,  in  the
second.

I.  Thb  natueb  of  the  danger.  This  was  —  1.  Serious  in  itself.  It  was  a
serious  thing  for  the  Jews,  in  their  circumstances,  that  their  work  should  have  so
strongly  attracted  the  notice  of  tlie'r  "  adversaries."  "  The  adversaries  "  (see  ch.  iv.
3)  "  heard  "  of  their  doings.  This  was  bad,  to  begin.  Such  hearing  was  only  too
likely  to  lead  to  "  doing ;  "  and  to  unfriendly  doing,  of  course.  So,  in  fact,  it  turned
out.  After  unfriendly  notice  came  unfriendly  interference.  The  people  referred  to
"  came."  How  unwelcome  a  sight  to  the  Jewish  builders  and  rulers.  How  far  from
"beautiful"  the  "  feet "  of  these  strangers  on  the  ''mountains  round  about  Jerusalem"
(Ps.  cxxv.  2).  "  What  have  they  come  for  ?  "  Not  merely  to  inquire  and  observe ;
but  to  interrere,  and  that  not  for  good  (comp.  1  Sam.  xvi.  4;  2  Kings  ix.  17- — 23).
Still  more  serious,  when  these  adversaries  did  come,  was  the  course  which  they  took.
We  must  bear  in  mind  who  they  were.    A  "  mixed  multitude"  in  every  sense.    Of


46  THE  BOOK  OF  iSZRA.  [oh.  iv.  1—6.

various  stocks ;  of  various  creeds.  The  descendants  of  men  brought  to  the  citiea
and  hills  of  Samaria  from  widely-distant  provinces  of  the  great  Assyrian  empire ;
bringing  with  them,  in  all  cases,  their  old  idols  and  creeds ;  but  grafting  on  to  these
afterwards,  through  the  mere  motive  of  fear,  something  of  that  already  grievously-
corrupted  worship  of  Jehovah  which  had  prevailed  in  the  kingdom  of  the  ten  tribes
previously  to  its  final  overthrow  and  dispersion  (see  2  Kings  xvii.  7 — 18,  24 — 33).
Such  mingled  worship,  being  in  violation  of  the  very  first  of  the  ten  commandments,
was  especially  displeasing  to  the  one  true  God ;  and  had,  indeed,  in  this  instance,
been  already  condemned  by  him  as  no  true  worship  of  his  name  (see  ibid.  vers.  34 —
39).  It  was  the  children  then  of  these  men,  walking  in  the  steps  of  their  fathers,  who
now  came  to  Mount  Zion.  To  whom  had  they  come  ?  To  those  "  children  of  the
captivity "  who  had  been  so  careful  to  prove  themselves  of  the  stock  of  Israel  only
(see  ch.  ii.  59),  and  who  had  been  brought  back  to  that  holy  mountain  to  restore
there,  in  a  for  ever  purified  form,  the  worship  of  Jehovah  alone.  To  Buch  men
came  this  mixed  multitude,  as  though  brothers  in  blood  and-  religion.  "  We  seek
your  God ;  we  would  help  in  your  work ;  let  us  build  by  your  side."_  A  serious
proposal,  indeed ;  being  a  proposal  virtually  to  break  down  the  very  division  which
they  were  engaged  in  constructing,  and  for  neglecting  and  despising  which  that  long,
just-completed  Babylonian  exile  had  come  upon  their  race.  To  consent  to  such  a
proposal  would  be  to  consent  to  their  ruin.  They  could  never  so  build  the  house  of
Jehovah.  What  could  they  so  build,  in  fact,  but  a  Babel,  a  monument  of  displeasure
and  disaster  to  themselves,  and  of  no  benefit  even  to  their  adversaries  ?  Better  not
build  at  all  than  build  thus.  At  the  same  time  this  danger  was — 2.  Most  insidious  as
to  its  form.  After  all,  the  proposal  made  came  in  the  shape  of  an  offer  of  help.
Better  to  have  that  help  than  be  without  it.  So  many  would  think.  Better  to  have
such  neighbours  for  us  than  against  us  (see  2  Chron.  xxv.  9)  ;  especially  they  being
so  many  and  we  so  few.  Besides  which,  to  all  appearance,  it  was  an  offer  of  help
made  in  perfect  good  faith ;  and  by  men  even  of  tried  sincerity,  it  also  appeared,
"  We  seek  your  God,  as  ye  do ;  we  have  done  so  ever  since  coming  to  these  regions,
some  150  years  from  this  date."  *  How  harsh  it  would  seem  to  reject  such  assist-
ance! How  bigoted  I  How  "narrow  I"  How  opposed  indeed  to  true  religion!
Even  supposing  these  men  to  be  seeking  Jehovah  in  a  somewhat  ignorant  and
unacceptable  way,  might  they  not  be  won  over  to  the  truth  by  a  little  brotherly  kind-
ness ?  Might  not  the  influence  of  the  Jews  tell  for  good  on  them,  if  they  two  were
associated  in  so  good  a  work?  Whereas,  if  rejected  and  driven  away  from  the
work,  would  they  not  also  be  driven  away  even  more  from  the  truth  ?  In  a  word,
be  servants  to  them  so  far ;  afterwards  they  will  be  your  servants — and,  what  is
more,  the  servants  of  Jehovah — for  ever.  So  plausible,  and,  therefore,  ao  doubly
dangerous,  was  this  offer  of  help.

II.  The  deliverance  vouchsafed  from  this  danger  has,  next,  to  be  marked.  God,
who  allowed  this  great  and  subtle  temptation  to  come  on  his  servants,  made  them
also  a  way  of  escape  (1  Cor.  x.  13).  This  he  did  by  granting  to  them — 1.  A  spirit  of
discrimination.  "  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build."  In  other  words,  This  is
not  a  task  "  for  you  and  us  in  common  "  (see  Lange,  who  compares  Josh.  xx.  24  [sic]  ;
Judges  xi.  12 ;  2  Kings  iii  13).  The  root  or  foundation  of  the  proposal  made  lay
in  the  assumption  that  there  was  much  in  common  between  the  Samaritans  and  the
Jews.  In  reality,  so  far  as  this  matter  was  concerned,  there  was  nothing  in  common
except  a  name.  The  Samaritans  worshipped  other  gods  first,  and  Jehovah  only
second.  The  Jews  worshipped  Jehovah  first,  and  no  one  else  second.  This  was
not  holding  common  ground,  but  being  at  opposite  poles.  How  could  forces
thus  intrinsically  antagonistic  work  efficiently  together?  2.  A  spirit  of  decision.
Besides  seeing  the  truth  thus  clearly,  the  Jewish  leaders  were  also  enabled  to  act  on
it  boldly.  Was  it  indeed  for  "them  alone"  to  undertake  this  enterprise?  They
alone,  as  one  body,  would  do  so.    They  would  say  so  openly,  and  in  so  many  words.

•  Tbia  may  be  the  purport  of  the  end  of  ver.  2,  even  if  we  read  it,  as  lome  do,  "  "We  do  nol
sacrifice,'  &o.,  &o. ; "  the  meaning  probably  being,  in  that  case,  "  We  have  Bought  or  wished  to
sacrifice  to  him  all  these  years,  but  have  not  been  able  to  do  so  for  want  of  such  a  temple  Si
you  have  now  commenced.     Hence  this  proposal  of  ours  to  assist  in  that  effort.*


on.  IV.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  «

Let  their  Samaritan  neighbours  at  once  understand  that  so  their  minds  were  made  up.
"  We  ouraelves  together  "  will  be  responsible  for  this  task.  3.  A  spirit  of  discretion.
God  gave  them  this  in  conclusion,  so  that  they  put  the  matter,  in  concluding,  on  a
very  wise  ground.  The  decision  arrived  at  might  not  be  pleasing  to  the  Samaritans ;
but  at  any  rate  it  ought  not  to  be  regarded  by  them  as  an  injury  or  a  g^evance ;
for  it  was  only  in  strict  accordance  with  the  will  of  one  whom  they  were  all  bound
to  obey.  "  King  Cyrus,  the  king  of  Persia" — King  Cyrus,  our  common  ruler — ^has
g^ven  express  commands  on  this  poiqt,  as  you  know.  He  lias  commanded  ub  to  erect
this  building.  He  has  commanded  us  alon?  to  do  so  (see  ch.  i.  beginning  of  ver.
3).  That  being  so,  let  us  all  obey  him ;  some  by  la;foWing,  some  by  abstaining.
Possibly,  also,  this  further  thought  can  be  traced  in  their  words :—'_'  If  Cyrus  himself
as  a  Gentile  did  not  engage  personally  in  this  work,  but  only  commissioned  us  Israelites
to  perform  it,  why  should  any  others  who  are  not  Israelites  put  their  hands  to
the  task  ?  "  At  any  rate  the  reply  answered  the  immediate  purpose  in  hand.  It
delivered  the  Jews  completely  from  that  great  danger  to  which  they  were  at  thai
moment  exposed.  The  Samaritans  were  compelled  thereby  to  retire,  and,  like  another
adversary  in  another  case  on  a  subsequent  occasion,  to  leave  them  alone  "for  a  season  "
(Luke  iv.  13).  Amongst  other  general  lessons  the  following  may  be  noted : — 1.  TUe
need  of  patience  in  God?s  work.  True  progress,  from  its  very  nature,  creates  resist-
ance and  opposition.  This  applies  to  our  work  for  others  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  Also  to
much  of  the  scepticism  of  the  day.  That  scepticism  is  not  a  wholly  desperate  sign
(see  Rev.  xii.  12).  Also  to  our  own  spiritual  progress  (Luke  ix.  42 ;  Acts  ziii.  7,  8).
Per  aspera  ad  ardua  tendo  is  a  very  wide  rule.  2.  The  need^  o/jfirmness  in  God's
work.  True  toleration  will  not  go  out  of  its  way  to  interfere  vritn  others ;  but  it  will
not  allow  others  to  interfere  wim  it.  Neither  will  it  prevent  us  from  telling  others
the  truth.  Compare,  in  connection  with  certain  later  Samaritans, "  They  went  to  another
village  "  (Luke  ix.  56),  and,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Jews  "  (John  iv.  22).  8.  The  need
of  tarutiny  in  God's  viork.  Scrutiny,  first,  as  to  faith.  There  are  some  errors  of
doctrine  which  affect  the  root  of  the  tree.  There  are  some  which  only  tend  to  hinder
its  full  development  and  fniitfulness.  These  must  be  dealt  with  in  different  ways.
Scrutiny,  next,  as  to  persons.  Those  who  are  altogether  "without"  we  leave  in
God's  hands.  Not  so  those  who,  though  really  aliens,  claim  to  be  considered  as
brethren  (comp.  1  Cor.  v.  9 — 13).  None  are  so  truly  the  enemies  of  the  Church  as
those  "  who  call  themselves  Jews  but  are  not '  (see  Bev.  iii.  9).

Vers.  4,  5. — The  work  checked.  The  incidents  related  in  the  previous  verses
would  happen  some  time  after  the  second  month  of  the  second  year  of  King  Cyrus,
that  being  about  the  date  of  laying  the  foundation-stone  of  the  restored  temple
(see  ch.  iii.  8,  10).  Tidings  of  these  incidents,  and  of  the  discouragement  and  in-
trigues which  they  led  to,  as  described  in  the  present  passage,  would  probably  reach
the  Persian  court  towards  the  end  of  that  year.  In  the  beginning  of  the  next  year —
so  we  find  from  Dan.  x.  1,  &c. — the  aged  prophet  Daniel  was  still  alive,  but  in  a
state  of  much  sorrow  and  perplexity,  near  the  river  Hiddekel  or  Tigris.  Also  we
find  that  his  last  recorded  vision  was  given  to  him  at  that  time.  The  two  passages,
therefore,  seem  sufficiently  contemporaneous  in  character  to  be  considered  together ;
and  may  serve  to  give  us  thus  a  more  complete  conception  of  what  was  then  coming
to  pass.  We  will  first  consider  the  himian  view,  and  then  the  superhuman  view,  of
the  scene.

I.  The  HUMAN  VIEW  of  the  story.  What  was  being  done,  1.  In  the  province.
What  were  men  doing  now  at  Jerusalem,  or,  on  that  side  the  Euphrates,  in  conr
iiection  with  it  ?  Were  the  Samaritans  quiet  after  their  recent  rebuff  ?  Were  they
likely  to  be,  if  like  other  men  ?  The  Jews  did  right,  and  did  wisely,  as  we  have
seen,  in  rejecting  their  help  ;  but  who  could  expect  things  to  end  in  that  manner  ?  Such
a  repulse,  however  justifiable,  would  be  felt  as  an  insult,  a  moral  souflet.  The  more
instilled,  in  fact,  by  the  circumstances,  the  more  galling  it  would  seem,  and  the  more
insulting.  The  greater  the  truth,  in  this  sense,  the  greater  the  libel  (comp.  Gen.  xix.
9).  We  cannot  wonder,  therefore,  that  Samaritan  feeling  now  took  a  different  turn.
If  they  cannot  help  on  the  terms  they  had  offered, — the  virtually  destructive  terms
they  had  offered, — they  will  do  the  next  best  (in  their  view)— they  will  thwart  Th»


4d  tMe  Book  OJ  MZRA.  [cH.  iv,  1—6.

Jews  are  anxious  to  do  all  by  themselves.  Let  us  take  care  they  do  Tione.  Such
was  their  inward  resolve.  Their  outward  actions  accorded.  They  contrived,  e.  g.,
to  "  weaken  the  bands  of  the  people  of  Judah."  The  "  hands  "  of  the  people,  figur-
atively speaking,  may  mean  those  persons  on  whose  manual  labour  the  work  of
building  depended.  Just  so  we  often  speak  now  of  "  factory  hands."  By  weakening
their  hands,  therefore,  is  not  improbably  meant  causing  those  who  laboured  for  them
to  retire  from  the  work :  whether  those  hired  carpenters  and  masons,  of  whom  we
have  read,  on  the  spot  (ch.  iii.  7)  ;  or  those  Tynan  labourers,  of  whom  we  have  also
read,  on  Mount  Lebanon  (ibid.) ;  or  those  seafaring  men  who  would  be  necessary  to
convey  to  Jerusalem  what  was  cut  down  at  Lebanon,  It  would  not  be  difficult  for
the  Samaritans,  as  long-established  Gentiles  of  superior  wealth  and  influence,  either
by  bribes  or  threats  to  draw  or  drive  many  of  such  men  away  from  their  work ;  and
it  would  not  be  easy  for  the  Jews  to  go  on  with  it  in  that  case.  But,  besides  this,
the  Samaritans  are  said  to  have  "troubled  them  in  building."  Besides  depriving
them  of  labourers,  they  deprived  them,  that  is,  of  peace.  Besides  weakenmg  the
"  hands,"  they  distracted  the  heads ;  most  probably  by  such  measures  as  those  we
read  of,  many  years  afterwards,  in  the  story  of  Npljemiah  (see  Neh.  iv.  2,  3,  7^9,
16 — 23 ;  vi.).  But,  above  all,  2.  They  seem  to  have  directed  their  chief  endeavours,
with  true  military  instinct,  against  the  key  of  the  position  before  them.  To  human
eyes  the  chief  Jewish  reliance  was  on  the  assured  favour  of  C3TUS.  Hence  the  edict,
and  all  its  consequences.  Hence  this  whole  attempt  of  thuus  to  rebuild  the  temple,
and  their  very  presence  there,  on  its  ancient  site.  Deprive  them  of  that  imperial
favour,  and  you  deprive  them  of  all.  Moved,  apparently,  by  such  considerations,
the  Samaritans,  as  we  said,  delivered  their  chief  assault  at  the  great  (human)  centre
of  Jewish  hope.  They  secured  those  (for  they  were  able  to  do  so)  who  could  speak
"against"  the  Jews  at  the  court  of  the  king ;  they  sought  out  the  most  fitting  men
(counsellors)  to  do  this ;  they  secured  them  by  proper  fees ;  they  instructed  them
as  to  the  object  wished  for ;  and  they  urged  their  point  with  a  spirit  of  pertinacity
which  nothing  seemed  to  wear  out.  What  must  have  been  the  original  vigour  of
that  impetus  which  survived  "  all  the  days  "  described  in  ver.  4  ?  And  what,  on  the
whole,  therefore,  the  Jewish  prospects,  humanly  speaking,  when  first  it  took  place  ?
How  weak,  how  distracted  the  builders !  How  powerful,  how  united,  how  embittered,
how  skilful,  how  unsparing,  how  determined  their  opponents  I  The  deadly  Samaritan
friendship  had,  no  doubt,  been  escaped.  But  was  not  this  furious  Samaritan  enmity
almost  as  great  a  ground  for  despair  ?  And  was  not  the  whole  work,  in  shortj  if  not
dead  already,  at  least  ready  to  die  ?

II.  The  SDPEBHUMAN  VIEW  of  the  juncture.  Just  at  this  time,  as  we  have  seen,
the  prophet  Daniel,  who,  of  all  the  Israelites  tjien  alive,  would  be  most  concerned  and
confounded  at  this  condition  of  things  (comp.  Dan.  ix.  16 — 19),  was  in  great  sorrow
and  deep  perplexity  (ibid.  x.  2, 3, 12).  Just  at  this  time,  also,  a  vision  was  sent  him,
having  for  its  object  to  give  him  instruction  respecting  the  destiny  of  his  people  (ibid.
14).  We  believe,  therefore,  that  we  have  in  that  vision  a  superhuman  view  of  that
time  of  trouble— a  light  from  heaven  itself  on  that  day  of  disappointment  and  fear.
Here  was  the  work  for  which  he  had  prayed  and  laboured  all  his  lifetime,  and  for
which  God  had  done  so  much,  and  which  he  had  treated  as  so  important,  almost
brought  to  a  stand.  What  did  it  all  mean  ?  This  the  vision  seems  to  explain.  It
meant,  1. — so  much  we  can  see  without  going  into  any  of  the  disputed  features  of
this  remarkable  vision— that  the  matter  now  perplexing  him  was  one  exceedingly  deep-
It  had  to  do,  e.  g.,  with  that  glorious  Person  before  whom  he  fell  as  one  dead  (vers.
5—9),  and  so  with  that  great  and  all-restoring  kingdom  which  that  Holy  One  was  to
set  up  upon  earth  (Dan.  vii.  13,  14;  Acts  iii.  21).  Being  so,  it  was  a  matter  of
great  interest  to  angelic  intelligences  of  all  kinds  (Matt.  viii.  29 ;  1  Pet.  i.  12) ;  even
leading  in  consequence  (so  we  understand  the  passage)  to  long-continued  contentions
and  struggles  among  them  (see  Dan.  x.  13,  20,  21 ;  and  comp.  Eph.  v.  11,  12 ;  2
Pet.  ii.  11 ;  Jude  9  ;  Rev.  xii.  7).  2.  A  purpose  thus  deep  would  naturally  appear
sometimes  exceedingly  deliberate  in  its  rate  of  progress.  Such  great  contending
forces,  such  wide-embracing  operations,  such  evidently  intricate  and  far-seeing
methods,  could  not  do  otherwise  than  take  time.  Hence  the  language  of  Dan.  x.  1,
14,  and  the  repeated  reference  to  the  future,  and  the  "  end  "  and  the  "  time  of  the


oa.  jv,  1-4.]  f  fifi  BOOK  of  E^fiA.  4§

end,"  and  the  blessing  pronounced  on  "  waiting  "  in  ch.  xii.  1, 4,  6,  8, 12,  13  (comp.
also  2  Pet.  iii.  9).  3.  Bit  if  deliberate,  it  was  also  sure — all  the  surer,  in  fact,  on
that  ground.  See  again  ch.  z.  21  about  the  "Scripture  of  truth"  (a  purpose,  it
would  seem,  "  written  "  down  in  order  that  the  exact  terms  of  the  purpose  and  the
exact  nature  of  its  fulfilment  might  afterwards  be  compared)  ;  also  xi.  2  ;  also  the
solemn  oath  in  xii.  7 ;  also,  as  showing  the  efEect  left  on  Daniel's  mind  when  he
began  recording  the  vision,  the  opening  declaration,  "  the  thing  was  true,"  in  Dan.
X.  1.  Thus  we  see  how  the  prophet  was  lifted  up  in  order  that  he  might  see  things
from  above.  And  thus,  as  it  were,  in  his  company,  we  are  enabled  to  take  a  like
•  view.  We  learn  from  it— 1.  How  great  is  our  natural  ignorance.  "  There  are  more
things"  indeed  "in  heaven  and  earth  than  are  dreamt  of  in  our  philosophy" — yes,
in  our  philosophy,  with  all  its  talk.  More  things,  by  far,  are  concealed  than  are
revealed,  both  by  our  sight  and  by  our  search.  2.  How  false  the  estimate  of  our
senses.  The  assaults  of  earthly  enemies,  disputes  of  Jews  and  Samaritans,  the  doings
of  kings  and  counsellors,  the  delays  of  years  and  centuries,  only  eeem  great  to  us
because  we  see  them  so  close.  Viewed  from  a  proper  distance,  as  the  mount  of
prophecy  enables  us  to  view  them,  they  almost  shrink  out  of  sight — only  important
because  of  those  larger  issues  of  which  they  form  part.  At  the  same  time,  we  also
see — 3.  Ho^o  great  is  God's  care  for  his  people.  Even  in  these  smaller  matters  hia  eye
is  on  them  for  good.  Even  in  the  darkest  days  he  is  shaping  their  path  towards  the
light.  The  things  of  earth  are  not  too  petty,  the  things  above  earth  are  not  too
lofty,  all  together  are  not  too  intricate  for  his  omnipotent  care  (see  Ps.  zcvii.  11 ;
Rom.  viii.  28).  What  was  said  of  Gad  is  true  of  all  Israel  (Gen.  xlix.  19) — ^They
"  shall  overcome  at  the  last."  4.  How  great  is  God^s  concern  even  for  the  comfort  of
thc«e  who  fear  him.  How  afEecting,  on  this  view,  at  this  crisis,  is  this  seasonable
vision  to  the  afflicted  prophet.  How  significant,  also,  that  it  should  have  been
recorded  and  preserved  to  us  aa  a  kind  of  standing  illustration  to  us  of  God's  ways
on  this  matter.  He  is  not  only  always  caring  for  his  people ;  he  is  always  wishing
them  to  know  that  he  is.  Never  more  so  than  when  it  seems  to  them,  as  it  probably
seemed  to  Daniel  and  the  Jerusalem  Jews  in  this  day  of  rebuke  and  blasphemy,  that
he  had  "  forsaken  his  people  "  (see  Judges  vi.  13).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — S. — PeoM  and  purity.  No  sooner  had  the  "children  of  the  cap-
tivity "  begun  their  good  work  of  rebuilding  the  house  of  the  Lord  than  difficulties
began  to  arise.  They  found,  as  we  find,  that  the  work  of  God  does  not  proceed
smoothly  from  beginning  to  end,  as,  at  the  outset,  we  are  apt  to  think  it  will ;  that
from  without  and  from  within  obstacles  and  discouragements  spring  up  and  beset  us.
They  soon  found  that  they  had  to  do  with —

I.  A  PROFFERED  ALLIANCE  (vers.  1,  2).  Their  neighbours,  the  Samaritans,  a
mixed  people,  composed  in  part  of  the  remnant  of  the  ten  tribes  and  in  part  of  the
Assyrians  deported  by  Esar-haddon  from  their  own  country  and  planted  there,  made
offers  of  alliance.  Moved  by  jealousy,  thinking  that  the  name  and  fame  of  a
temple  at  Jerusalem  would  eclipse  anything  of  the. kind  they  had,  perhaps  fearing
lest  it  should  win  the  hearts  of  the  people  away  from  the  "  mongrel  religion  "  which
they  had  adopted — a  miserable  compromise  between  pure  religion  and  gross  super-
stition— they  came  proposing  to  make  common  cause  with  the  returned  Israelites.
"  Let  us  unite  our  forces,"  they  said.  "  We  will  build  together ;  this  temple,  erected
by  our  joint  labours,  shall  be  common  property :  we  worship  the  same  God  whom
you  worship,  and  there  need  not  be  any  separation  between  us."  Thus  impurity
approaches  purity ;  thus  error  seeks  alliance  with  truth;  thus  worldliness  i  addresses
piety.  "  Let  us  walk  together,"  it  says.  "  We  will  sink  our  differences ;  we  will
keep  unpleasant  divergencies  of  conviction  in  abeyance,  and  stroll  together  in  sweet
communion  along  the  path  of  life."     Here  was —

II.  A  POWEBFni,  TEMPTATION.  Jeshua— and  still  more  Zerubbabel,  who  was
answerable  for  the  peace  and  order  of  the  community— may  well  have  thought  tiat
it  was  a  time  for  conciliation.  The  little  state  was  not  yet  fairly  established.  It
was  still  in  its  very  infancy,  and  might  well  shrink  from  the  field  of  contention.    It

EZBA.  I


50  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  iv.  1— G.

was  a  time  when  they  might  excusably  go  far  in  the  direction  of  peace.  Would  it
not  be  wrong,  by  any  churlishness  or  obstinacy  on  small  points  or  narrowness  of
ciew,  to  plunge  the  infant  Church  into  strife,  perhaps  mortal  strife,  with  those  who
had  80  much  in  common  with  them,  and  whom  charity  might  consider  brethren  ?
What  a  pity  to  endanger  the  work  in  hand  and,  it  might  be,  bring  everything  to
failure  when  the  prospeets  of  success  were  so  bright,  if,  by  entering  on  an  alliance
with  these  men,  fliey  could  insure  the  consummation  of  their  hopes  I  Perchance,
too,  they  might  win  these  men  to  a  purer  faith  ;  the  sight  of  the  temple  on  its  old
site,  the  performance  of  the  old  rites,  the  singing  of  the  old  psalms,  &c.  might
purge  their  hearts  of  the  evil  leaven  that  had  crept  in,  &c.  Thus  their  minds  may
have  been  agitated  by  doubt  and  distraction,  questioning  whether  they  should  have
a  perilous  alliance  or  a  defiant  and  'dangerous  isolation.  So  purity,  truth,  piety  find
themselves  courted  by  those  who  are  their  adversaries,  but  who  speak  with  the  voice
and  use  the  language  of  friendship.  And  often  do  they  find  themselves  greatly
tempted  to  make  peace  and  enter  into  alliance.  Sometimes  they  do,  and  disastrous
is  the'  result.  Like  the  Rhone  and  the  Arve  outside  Geneva,  the  pure  blue  waters  of
the  one  flow  for  some  time  side  by  side,  without  mingling,  with  the  muddy  and
earth-discoloured  waters  of  the  other ;  but  farther  down  they  intermix,  and  the
blueness  and  the  purity  are  gone!     But  here  we  have —

III.  A  BTOUT-HEARTED  REFUSAL  (ver.  3).  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  peremptorily
declined  the  offered  alliance.  "  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us."  "  We  ourselves  will
build,"  &c.  (ver.  3).  Whatever  inward  conflict  there  might  have  been,  there  was  no
vagueness  or  hesitancy  in  their  answer.  It  was  explicit  and  downright,  as  an  answer
should  be  to  a  deceitful  offer.  It  was  seen  to  be  their  duty  to  keep  apart  from  men
whose  association  would  too  probably  have  ended  in  corruption,  and  they  dared  all
consequences.  First  purity,  then,  peace  (James  iii.  17).  Let  there  be  no  compromise
when  the  maintenance  of  principle  is  at  stake.  There  is  far  more  to  lose  than  to
gain  in  having  the  help  of  those  who  are  not  really  and  heartily  at  one  with  us.
Mere  matters  of  detail  are  things  for  arrangement,  and  it  is  often  wise  and
Christian  to  forego  our  preferences  for  the  sake  of  brotherly  accord.  But  when
great  and  vital  truths  are  at  stake,  truths  on  which  human  hearts  live,  truths  which
heal  and  save  and  sanctify  the  soul,  truths  for  the  purity  and  integrity  of  which
we  exist  to  testify,  then  let  us  put  our  foot  firmly  down,  and,  risking  misrepre-
sentation and  attack,  say,  "Ye  have  nothing  to  do  witli  us."  We  must  walk
apart— <3.

Vers.  1 — 6. — A  timful  alliance  smigkt  and  rejected.  I.  A  sinful  alliance  sough'i  .
"Let  us  build  with  you"  (ver.  2).  1.  The  people.  "The  adversaries  of  JudaL
and  Benjamin'"  (ver.  1).  These  were  a  mixed  race,  partly  Israelitish  but  chief!)
foreign.  The  more  dangerous  because  the  more  nearly  related  to  Israel ;  erro
is  more  dangerous  when  allied  with  truth.  2.  The  pretext.  (1)  Utility.  "Let  us
build."  They  would  help  in  the  enterprise  of  Israel.  Sinful  alliances  alway
seem  advantageous.  (2)  Religion.  "  For  we  seek  your  God  "  (ver.  2).  Those  whd
seek  sinful  alliances  often  assume  the  garb  of  piety  ;  they  come  as  angels  of  light.
(3)  Community  of  interest.  The  Samaritans  wanted  to  make  a  common  cause
with  Israel;  what  fellowship  hath  light  with  darkness?  3.  Thejo/aji.  (1)  Secret,
and  not  open.  They  concealed  their  real  intentions.  Suspect  the  world.  (2)
Friendly,  and  not  hostile.  They  came  not  as  warriors,  but  as  helpers.  Be  not
deluded  by  the  smiles  of  sin.  (3)  Dangerous,  and  not  safe.  The  kisB  of  sin  is
perilous ;   the  dagger  is  behind.

II.  A  sinful  alliance  rejected.  "Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us"  (ver.  3).  1.
Wisdom.  The  hypocrisy  was  detected  by  the  leaders  of  Israel.  We  need  spiritual
discernment  in  dealing  with  the  world  ;  we  must  try  the  spirits.  Be  wise  as  serpents.
2.'  Indqjendence.  "  But  we  ourselves  together  will  build  "  (ver.  3).  The  Church  can
do  its  own  work ;  it  needs  not  the  aid  of  the  unholy.  God  requires  the  good  man
to  be  independent  of  carnal  helpers  and  of  worldly  compacts ;  dare  to  reject  apparent
advantage.  3.  Determination.  A  most  decided  reply  was  given  to  the  proposed
allies,  and  Israel  was  prepared  to  brave  the  result.  Hesitation  would  have  been
fatal-     4.  Disaster.    The  professed  friends  soon  reveal  their  enmity:  reject  tli*


CH.  IV.  1— 6.J  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,  61

world,  and  it  will  soon  "  trouble  yon  in  building."  The  enmity  of  sin  is  better  than
its  friendship ;   sin  triumphs  for  a  time. — E.

Vers.  1 — 6. — The  friendship  of  the  world.  Two  classes,  strongly  contrasted,
divide  the  human  race  (see  Bph.  v.  8 ;  1  Thess.  v.  4 — S ;  1  John  iii.  10).  There  is
no  intermediate  class  (see  Matt.  zii.  30).  Between  these  clasBes  genuine  sympathy
is  impossible.  The  syren  voice  of  "charity"  must  not  be  heeded  here;  it  is
treachery  to  Christ.  "  The  friendship  of  the  world,"  however  this  may  be  taken,
"is'  enmity  against  God."  Selfishness  and  hypocrisy  often  guide  the  policy  of
malignity.    Hence—

I.  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  peoffered  to  the  godly  in  their  prosperity.

1.  The  world  is  cold  to  them  in  their  adversity.  (1)  No  sympathy  came  to  Israel
from  the  Samaritans  when  nothing  apparently  was  to  be  gained.  They  were  only
"  children  of  the  captivity  " — bom  in  captivity,  scarcely  emerging  from  bondage,
impoverished  by  a  four  months'  march ;  comparatively  few,  60,000  persons,  scattered
over  the  south,  and  likely  to  be  absorbed  into  the  mass  of  "  the  people  of  the  land."
(2)  There  were  even  signs  of  hostility.  For  the  elders  of  Israel  did  not  venture  to
build  the  altar  of  the  Lord  until  encouraged  by  the  demonstration  of  strength  in  the
universal  response  to  their  summons  to  the  convocation  (see  iii.  1—3).  Lesson — It
is  folly  to  look  to  the  wicked  for  help.  Even  Eabshakeh  spoke  truly  (2  Kings  xviii.
21 ;  comp.  Ezek.  zxix.  6,  7).  2.  But  when  prosperity  comes  this  policy  is  changed.
(1)  The  "  children  of  the  captivity  "  had  made  rapid  progress  towards  national  con-
solidation. Not  content  to  become  gradually  absorbed  in  other  nationalities,  they
have  raised  a  national  altar,  and  laid  the  foundations  of  their  national  temple.  Note
— Religion  is  the  strongest  bond  of  national  union.  It  touches  the  deepest  sympathies
of  our  nature  (see  Prov.  xiv.  31).  (2)  This  made  its  impression  upon  "  the  people  of
the  land."  They  discerned  in  Israel  the  elements  of  future  greatness.  By  the  laws
of  association  the  value  of  the  patronage  of  Cyrus  would  gain  in  importance,  and
the  traditions  of  the  ancient  greatness  of  Israel  would  revive.  (3)  Therefore  they
now  volunteered  their  friendship.  They  said,  "Let  us  build  with  you."  Let  U6
share  your  labours  and  the  charges,  and  we  will  reap  with  you  also.  "  We  seek
your  God  as  you  do."  "  Do  not  hesitate  to  trust  us."  "  We  do  sacrifice  to  him  since
the  days  of  _  Esar-haddon  king  of  Assur,  which  brought  us  hither.".  "  We  will  not
cause  you  embarrassment  by  any  disagreement  with  your  worship."  Lesson — First,
be  aware  of  worldly  plausibility.  Why  was  not  all  this  pleaded  earlier  ?  Secondly,
discern  the  selfishness  which  guides  the  policy  of  worldly  friendship.  Thirdly,  never
lose  sight  of  the  nature  of  the  carnal  mind  (Bom.  viii.  7).

II.  When  the  policy  of  the  world's  friendship  is  frustrated,  malice  will
discover  its  hypocrisy.  1.  The  reply  discovered  to  the  Samaritans  that  they  were
comprehended  (ver,  3).  (1)  "  Ye  have  nothing  to  do  with  us  to  build  an  house  unto
our  God."  You  say,  "  We  seek  your  God  as  ye  do."  This  we  do  not  accept.  You
say,  '*  We  do  sacrifice  to  him,"  &c.  This  also  we  dispute.  We  have  too  good  reason
to  do  so  (see  2  Kings  xvii.  34—38).  Note,  (a)  The  true  God  is  not  worshipped  at  all
if  other  gods  are  worshipped  along  with  him  (see  also  John  iv.  22).  Note,  (6)
No  sacrifice  to  God  is  true  that  is  associated  with  spurious  sacrifices.  Qtiery — Is  not
the  sacrifice  of  Christ  "  made  of  none  effect"  to  those  who  associate  with  it  the
sacrifice  of  the  mass  and  works  of  supererogation  ?  (2)  Therefore  "  we  ourselves
together,"  in  a  unity  of  faith  and  love  which  we  would  not  have  interrupted  by  you;
heresy  and  malignity,  "  will  build  unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  our  own  covenant
God,  "  as  king  Cyrus  the  king  of  Persia  hath  commanded  us."  So,  take  notice  that
in  thus  serving  God  we  are  countenanced  by  the  pleasure  of  the  king.  Note,  here,
the  lawful  mingling  of  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent  with  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove.

2.  They  now  appear  as  the  "adversaries  of  Judah  and  Benjamin."  They  have
now  no  policy  of  selfishness  to  restrain  their  malignity.  So  (1)  "  the  people  of  the
land  weakened  the  hands  of  the  people  of  Judah."  They  stirred  up  dissension.
Their  proposition  would  be  variously  viewed  by  the  people ;  worldly  men  would
no  doubt  think  that  the  Samaritans'  offer  should  have  been  accepted  by  the
chiefs,  who  with  advancing  years  were  grown  too  conservative  and  narrow.  Note —
Dissension  in  sentiment  is  a  weakening  of  the  hands.    (2)  "  They  troubled  them  in

b2


62  THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  [ch.  iv.  1—6

the  building."  This  would  be  the  efEect  of  dissension.  They  would  aggravate  th«
embarrassment  by  ridicule,  &c.  (3)  "They  hired  counsellors  against  them  to
frustrate  their  purpose."  Some  of  these  would  operate  upon  the  workmen ;  others  in
the  Tersian  court.  (4)  This  was  continued  "  all  the  days  of  Cyrus."  To  what
extremities  will  the  malignity  of  the  wicked  cany_  them  1  Beflect — The  worst
enemies  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  were  those  "  who  said  they  were  Jews  and  were
not "  (Rev.  iii.  9).  Let  those  who  discourage  a  good  work  consider  whose  example
they  follow. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  4,  5. — Human  hatred.  Whatever  drops  of  neighbourly  kindness  there  may
have  been  in  the  cUp  of  friendship  ofiEered  by  the  Samaritans  to  "  the  children  of  the
captivity,"  these,  on  the  refusal  of  Zerubbabel  to  enter  into  alliance  with  them,
turned  into  bitterest  animosity.  Thenceforward  they  "  breathed  threatening  "  and
made  opposition  to  those  whom  they  had  courted.  We  have  illustration  or  sugges-
tion here  of  the  character  and  outworkings  of  human  hatred.

I.  Its  blindness.  Like  all  cruelty,  and  indeed  like  all  sin, "  it  knew  not  what  it  did."
It  thought  it  was  only  indulging  in  a  natural  and  proper  resentment ;  in  truth  it  was
lifting  up  its  hand  against  the  people  of  God,  and  was  doing  its  best  (which  was
indeed  its  worst)  to  undermine  and  bring  to  nought  the  good  work  of  God.  Anger
is  always  blind.  It  does  not  see  its  own  hideousness ;  nor  does  it  perceive  the  end
of  its  doing.  Its  eye  is  darkened  or  discoloured,  and  its  hand  n  a  suicidal,  a  self-
injuring  hand.

II.  Its  deliberateness.  These  men  deliberately  set  themselves  to  undo  what  their
neighbours  had  begun.  No  mere  outflash  of  indignation  theirs,  but  deep,  steady,
well-cherished  purpose  to  be  avenged.  Nothing  was  left  undone,  no  stone  unturned,
that  these  new-comers  might  feel  the  full  weight  of  their  wrath.  They  found  means
to  hinder  them  in  their  work,  and  they  got  up  all  the  evidence  they  could  collect  of
past  excitements  and  di8turba;nces  in  Jerusalem,  and  "  hired  counsellors "  to  repre-
sent them  at  the  court  of  Babylon  (ver.  6),  that  they  might  frustrate  and  overthrow
the  purpose  of  Israel.  There  is  no  more  painful  sight  in  this  world,  and  no  more
saddening  evidence  and  consequence  of  sin,  than  the  fact  of  men  cherishing  and
nursing  a  rancorous  hatred  in  their  hearts  against  their  fellows,  and  plotting  and
scheming,  montb  after  month,  to  do  them  injury,  to  break  their  schemes,  to  dis-
appoint their  hopes.

III.  The  mischief  which  it  works  (ver.  4).  These  angry  interferers  had  all  too
much  success.  They  did  weaken  the  hands  of  those  whom  they  sought  to  hinder  ;
"  they  tWubled  them  in  building  ; "  they  succeeded  in  gaining  the  ear  and  winning
the  support  of  Cyrus,  and  ultimately  they  caused  the  work  of  building  the  temple  to
cease.  There  is  a  prevalent,  belief  that  persecution  defeats  its  own  ends — and  this
is  true.  We  say  that  "  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the  Church  " — and
often  it  is.  The  fires  it  lights  are  often,  if  not  always,  purifying,  cleansing  the  gold
of  its  dross,  and  making  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  more  "  meet  for  the  Master's  uie."
Yet,  on  the  other  hand,  it  often  works  most  serious  mischief  to  the  Church  and  the
world,  from  which  they  painfully  and  only  gradually  recover.  History  shows  that
human  rage  against  the  truth  and  cause  of  God  has  done  injury  on  a  large  scale,  and
doubtless  it  is  continually  making  its  evil  power  felt  on  a  small  one :  it  is  "  weaken-
ing the  hands  "  (ver.  4)  of  the  people  of  God ;  it  is  troubling  them  in  building  up
his  kingdom;  it  is  causing  "the  work  to  cease;"  it  is  "hindering  the  gospel."
This  instance  of  unrighteous  anger,  like  all  other  illustrations  of  it,  reminds  us  of —

IV.  Its  essential  unnaturalness.  No  doubt  it  seemed  natural  enough  to  these
Samaritans  to  indulge  in  this  bitter  wrath  and  to  take  these  vindictive  measures.
One  of  the  greatest  of  the  Romans,  writing  only  a  few  years  before  Christ,  declared
that  "  war  was  the  natural  relation  between  neighbouring  nations."  But  how  really
and  essentially  unnatural  it  is  for  one  human  heart,  made  to  be  the  home  of  love  and
kindness  and  compassion,  made  to  he  the  spring  and  source  of  beneficence  and  gen-
erosity, to_  be  harbouring  hatreds,  to  be  finding  pleasure  in  another's  pain,  to  be
rejoicing  in  the^ humiliation  and  disappointment  of  another  human  heart!  What
blank  contradiction  to  the  will  of  our  Creator  1  What  a  wretched  departure  from  hi?
design  I    How  utterly  unbeautiful,  how  infinitely  repugnant  to  his  eye  t — 0.


OH.  nr.  7—16.1


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


tt


EXPOSITION.


y«r.  7. — ^And  in  the  days  of  Artazerzes.
See  the  comment  on  yer.  6.  If  Artaxerxes
be  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  we  can  readily
mderstand  why  an  application  was  not
made  to  him  at  once,  and  how  it  came  about
that  the  Jews  recommenced  their  building,
aa  they  appear  from  vera.  12,  13  to  have
done.  The  Pseudo-Smerdia  waa  a  usurper ;
his  reign  was  a  time  of  partial  anarchy  ;  in
a  distant  part  of  the  empire  it  would  not  be
known  for  a  while  who  was  king.  Men
would  be  thrown  on  themselves,  and  would
do  as  it  seemed  good  in  their  own  eyes.
Later,  there  may  have  been  some  doubt
whether  a  king,  who  was  known  to  be  a
religious  reformer,  would  follow  the  policy
of  his  predecesaor  with  respect  to  thb  Jews,
or  reverse  it.  Hence  a  delay,  and  then  a
more  formal  application  than  before  for  a
positive  decree  to  stop  the  building  (see  ver.
21).  The  rest  of  their  companions.  Literally,
of  their  companies — the  abstract  for  the
concrete.  The  writing  of  the  letter  was
written  in  the  Syrian  tongue.  Bather,  "  in
the  Syrian  fashion,"  i,  e.m  Syriac  characters.
And  interpreted  in  the  Syrian  tongne.  Or
' '  translated  into  the  Syiiac  language. "  The
character  and  the  worda  were  alike  Syriac
(comp.  2  Kings  zviii.  26).  Ezra  gives  the
letter  in  Chaldee.

Yer.  8. — Behnm  the  chancellor.  Literally,
"  the  lord  of  judgment."  It  may  be  con-
jectured that  Eehum  was  the  sub-satrap
(i'TTOffarpairijf,  Xen.),  of  the  province  of
Samaria.  And  Shimshai  the  scribe.  Or
"secretary."  Herodotus  tells  us  that  in
every  Persian  province  the  governor  had
a  secretary  attached  to  him,  who  waa
appointed  by  the  crown,  and  acted  as  a
check  upon  his  nominal  maater  (Herod.,
iii  128).  The  position  assigned  to  Shim-
shai in  this  chapter  (see  especially  vers.  9,
17,  23)  is  such  as  might  be  expected  under
these  circumstances.

Yer.  9. — The  Dinaites,  &c.  It  is  curious
that  the  Samaritans,  instead  ,of  using  a
general  appellation,  describe  themselves
under  the  names  of  the  various  nations  and
cities  which  had  furnished  the  colonists  of
whom  they  were  the  descendants.  It  would
seem  that  they  were  not  yet,  in  the  time  of
the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  amalgamated  into  a
single  people.  Prom  the  list  of  names  we
may  gatiier  that  the  colonists  of  Esar-haddon's
time  had  been  derived  chiefly  from  Southern
Babylonia  and  the  adjacent  regions  of
Susiana,  Persia,  and  Elymais.  The  Baby-
lonians, Susanchites,  and  Elamites  speak  for
themselves,  and  require  no  explanation.
The  Archevites  are  the  people  of  Ereeh  or
Orohoe  (now  Warka),  a  city  to  the  south-


east of  Babylon.  The  Apharsites  are  no
doubt  Persians  ;  the  Dehavites,  Dai  or  Dahse,
a  tribe  located  in  Persia  Proper  (' Herod.,'  L
125).  If  uncertainty  attaches  to  any  of  the
names,  it  is  to  two  only — the  Dinaites  and
the  Tarpelites.  Of  these,  the  Dinaites  are
probably  the  people  of  Dayman,  a  country
bordering  on  Cilicia,  whose  inhabitants  are
often  mentioned  by  the  Assyrian  monarchs.
The  Tarpelites  have  been  regarded  as  the
people  of  Tripolis  ;  but  it  is  improbable  that
that  city  had  as  yet  received  its  Greek  name.
Perhaps  they  are  the  Tuplai,  or  people  of
Tubal,  mentioned  in  Scripture  and  the
Assjrian  inscriptions,  the  letter  r  being  a
euphonic  addition,  as  in  Darmesek  for
Dammesek  skarbith  for  ihebeth,  and  the
like.

Yer.  10. — The  rest  of  the  nations  whom
the  great  and  noble  Asnapper  brought  over.
Nothing  more  is  known  of  "  the  great  and
noble  Asnapper,"  who  is  here  mentioned  as
bringing  the  colonists  and  setting  them
in  the  cities  of  Samaria.  We  must  suppose
him  to  have  been  an  officer  employed  by
Esar-haddon  on  this  service.  The  name  is
Assyrian  in  form,  and  may  have  meant
"Asslmr  pursues."  The  rest  that  are  on
this  side  the  river.  Rather,  "across  the
river."  As  Bomans  in  North  Italy,  writing
to  Eome,  would  have  spoken  of  themselves
as  "  IVarwpadani,"  so  Persian  subjects,
writing  to  Susa  from  the  west  of  the  Jordan,
speak  of  their  country  as  "across  the
Jordan."  And  at  such  a  time.  Bather,
"and  so  forth."  This  and  the  preceding
verse  set  forth  the  address  of  Rehum's  letter.
The  whole  address  not  being  given,  the
writer  ends  with  the  phrase  vMeneth,  which
means  "  and  so  forth,  or  "  et  cetera  "  (comp.
ch.  vii  12).

Yer.  11.— This  is  the  copy  of  the  letter.
The  address  having  been  given,  the  writer
now  proceeds  to  the  contents  of  the  letter.
Thy  servants  the  men  on  this  side  the  river,
&a  This  was  a  sort  of  heading  inside  the
letter — a  repetition  in  brief  of  the  address.

Yer.  12. — The  Jews  which  came  up  from
thee.  /. «.  from  the  central  provinces — from
that  part  of  the  empire  where  thou  dwellest.
To  us.  To  our  part  of  the  world — to  Pales-
tine. Are  . . .  building  the  rehellioua  and
the  bad  city.  The  ground  of  this  accusa-
tion must  be  sought  in  the  various  revolts  of
the  Jews  from  the  Babylonians  recorded
in  2  Kings  zxiv.,  zzv.  There  had  been
one,  or  perhaps  two,  previous  revolts  from
Assyria  (2  Kings  xviii  7  ;  2  Chron.  zxxiii.
11) ;  but  of  these  the  Samaritans  probably
knew  nothing.  They  would,  however,  be
likely  to  know  that  before  Nebuchadnezzar


64


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  IV.  7—16.


took  tb»  extreme  measiiTe  of  lemoTing  the
Jews  from  their  own  land  to  Babyloa,  they
had  rebelled  against  him  three  several  times —
once  under  Jehoiakim  (2  Kin^  xxiv.  1),  once
nnder  his  son  Jehoiachin  {ibid.  vers.  9,  10),
and  once  nnder  Zedekiah,  the  last  king  {ibid.
ver.  20).  Thus  they  had  a  basis  of  truth  on
which  to  ground  their  charge  that  Jerusalem
was  "  the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city."  And
have  set  up  the  walls  thereof  It  appears
very  clearly  from  the  book  of  Nehemiah
that  the  walla  of  Jerusalem  were  not  restored
till  his  time,  seventy-five  years  after  this.
The  Samaritans,  however,  would  naturally
exaggerate,  and  call  the  rebuilding  of  the
ten^e,  and  of  a  certain  number  of  dwelling-
houses,  a  fortifying  of  the  place.  The  ex-
aggeration, however,  is  not  so  great  in  the
Ohaldee  text  as  in  the  Authorized  Version.
What  is  said  seems  to  be,  that  "they  are
setting  up  the  walls  and  joining  the  found-
ations." That  the  work  was  far  from  com-
plete is  admitted  in  the  next  verse.  We
may  doubt  whether  it  was  really  begun.

Ver.  13. — ^Then  will  they  not  pay  toll,
tribute,  and  custom.  This  was  plausible
reasoning.  In  Greece,  if  a  subject  city  set
to  work  to  fortify  itself,  rebellion  was  imme-
diately anticipated,  not  unfairly.  But  the
circumstances  of  the  Persian  empire  were
different.  In  the  remoter  parts  of  that
empire  the  central  government  was  weak,
and  disorders  frequently  occurred.  A  city
might  need  fortifications  to  protect  it  against
its  immediate  neighbours,  when  it  had  not
the  slightest  intention  of  asserting  independ-
ence. Judging  from  the  later  history,  which
shows  no  revolt  of  the  Jews  against  Persia,
we  may  say  that  the  accusation  now  alleged
was  unfounded,  though  perhaps  it  was  not
made  in  bad  faith.  Toll,  tribute,  and
custom  represent  the  chief  heads  of  Persian
taxation,  which,  however,  did  not  include
"custom"  in  our  sense  of  the  word.  The
three  terms  used  by  the  Samaritans  really
represent,  respectively,  "tribute,"  or  the
money  payment  required  from  each  province,
"  provision,"  or  the  payment  in  kind  equally
required  (Herod.,  i  192 ;  iii  91),  and
"toll,"  or  contributions  from  those  who
made  use  of  the  Persian  highways.  Ac-
cording to  the  Samaritans,  none  of  these
would  lie  paid  by  the  Jews  if  Jerusalem  was


once  fortified.  And  so  thon  shalt  endamsf  i
the  revenue.  The  general  meaning  is  given
correctly  enough  by  this  rendering,  bat
"revenue"  is  not  expressly  mentioned.
Aphthom,  the  word  so  translated,  ineam.
really  "at  length,"  "at  last,"  Translab,
"And  so  at  last  thou  shalt  endamage  tl  i
kings."

Ver.  14. — We  have  maintenance  fromt  le
king's  palace.  The  marginal  rendering,  is
better,  and  shows  the  true  sen%3.  "Ealing
a  man's  salt "  in  the  East  is  deriving  one's
subsistence  from  him.  The  man  who  eats
another's  salt  is  bound  to  look  after  his
interests.  It  was  not  meet  for  us  to  see  the
king's  dishonour.  Rather,  "the  king's
detriment  or  loss  " — it  was  not  meet  for  us
to  stand  by  tamely  and  see  the  king  stript
of  his  due.

Ver.  15. — That  search  may  be  made  in
the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  fathers.  It
was  the  practice  at  the  Persian  court  to
register  all  important  i  events  in  a  book,
which  from  time  to  time  was  read  to  the
kings  (Esther  ii  23  ;  vi  1).  The  Samaritans
suggest  a  consultation  of  this  book,  which
would  at  any  rate  contain  their  own  previous
accusations  against  Jerusalem  (supra,  vera
6,  6),  and  might  make  some  mention  of  the
revolts  from  Babylon  (see  the  comment  on
ver.  12).  For  which  cause  was  thii  city
destroyed.  This  was  the  great  fact  on  which
the  Samaritans  relied.  Kebuchadnezzar  had
only  destroyed  Jerusalem  in  consequence  of
repeated  rebellions.  True  ;  but  no  sufficient
indication  that  there  would  be  revolt  from
Persia,  which  was  anti-idolatrous,  and  had
proved  herself  so  true  a  friend  to  the  Jews.

Yer.  16. — ^Thon  shalt  have  nc  portion  on
this  side  the  river.  It  is  not  quite  clear
whether  the  river  intended  here  and  in  ver.
10  is  the  Euphrates  or  the  Jordan.  Generally
in  the  Old  'Testament  hannaliar  means  the
Euphrates,  but  the  exaggeration  is  gross  if
that  river  was  intended  here.  Only  twice
in  their  history  had  the  Israelites  advanced
their  frontier  as  far  as  that  stream — under
Solomon  (1  Kings  iv.  21)  and  under  Mena-
hem  (2  Kings  xv.  16) ;  in  their  present
depressed  condition  it  was  absurd  to  imagine
that  they  could  rival  those  early  glories.
But  jealousy  does  not  stop  to  weigh  the
reasonableness  of  its  accusations.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  6 — 16. — The  work  maligned.    Besides  "hiring  counsellors,"  as  mentioned
in  ver.  6 ;  or,  it  may  be,  in  order  to  provide  these  counsellors  with  documents  to

fiiesent  and  act  on ;  we  are  here  told  that  the  Samaritan  "  adversaries  "  sent  various
etters  to  the  Persian  kings  against  the  temple  builders  at  Jerusalem.  One  of
these,  sent  to  a  king  here  styled  Abasuerus,  is  merely  referred  to'  as  an  "accusation."
Another  and  more  successful  one,  sent  "in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes,''  is  described
at  full  length.    With  many  commentators  of  note  and  of  various  schools  (see  Words-


OH.  IT.  7—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  61


worth,  in  loe.),  we  shall  assume  these  two  kings,  notwithstanding  the  apparent
diversity  of  their  names,  to  be  Cambyses  and  the  Pseudo-Smerdis,  the  son  and  pre-
tended son,  and  two  next  successors,  of  Cyrus.  In  any  case  the  latter-named  letter
(ver.  33),  if  not  an  exact  copy,  may  be  regarded  as  a  fair  sample,  of  what  was  sent.
Looked  at  thus  from  the  Jewish  side  of  the  question,  it  was  a  most  formidable  pro-
duction : — equally  so  whether  we  now  consider,  on  the  one  hand,  its  writers ;  or,  on
the  other  hand,  its  contents.

I.  Thb  writers.  Much  of  the  importance  of  a  letter  turns,  of  course,  on  this
point.  Were  they  (1)  persons  of  note  f  It  is  evident  that  they  were  in  this  case.
"  Bishlam,  Mithredath,  Tabeel "  (ver.  7)  were  clearly  well-known  names  at  that  time.
No  one  then  required  to  be  told  who  they  were.  It  is  also  evident  that  they  were  (2)
persons  of  much  acuteness.  They  had  their  letter  written  in  the  .Syrian  or  Aramaic
language  and  characters,  as  being  those  used  (Lange)  in  Western  Persia  in  all
official  documents.  Such  a  plan,  of  course,  would  give  their  letter  all  the  better
chance  of  perusal.  Further,  it  was  so  contrived  that  some  of  those  signing  the  letter
should  be  (3)  men  of  rank.  Every  Persian  governor  (so  Herodotus,  quoted  by  Eaw-
linson)  was  accompanied  to  his  province  by  a  royal  secretary,  having  an  independent
authority  of  his  own.  These  correspond  in  this  instance  to  the  "  chancellor  "  and  the
"  scribe  "  who  are  described  in  ver.  8  as  writing  the  "  letter  against  Jerusalem."  Bish-
lam, &o.,  in  all  probability,  were  its  concocters  and  framers ;  Behum  and  Shimshai  its
official  senders.  Both  sets  appear  also  to  have  been  (4)  men  of  much  influence.  Mention
is  made  both  of  them*and  their  "  companions."  They  acted  for  others  besides  them-
selves ;  for  others  who  could  be  named,  but  are  not.  At  the  same  time,  there  were
others  named  by  them,  as  persons  joining  with  them  in  sending  this  letter,  whose
names  were  such  as  to  give  it  much  additional  weight.  These  were  men,  for  example,
who,  in  the  matter  of  origin,  represented  very  various  cities,  provinces,  and  races  in
the  wide  empire  of  Persia ;  such  as  ancient  Erech  (Gen.  x.  10),  mighty  Babylon,  royal
Susa,  and  others.  Yet  they  were  men,  again,  who,  as  to  recent  history  and  present
position,  represented  only  the  province  from  which  the  letter  came,  having  been
brought  long  ago  to  where  they  were  by  the  same  kind  of  imperial  authority  as  that
to  which  they  appealed  (ver.  10).  All  these  tliirgs  made  them  the  right  persons  to
address  the  ruler  of  the  whole  empire  respecting  a  matter  afiecting  the  welfare  of  the
whole  empire,  yet  arising  exclusively  in  that  province  of  it  in  which  they  all  dwelt.
Not  only  so,  these  same  individuals,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  represented  the  whole  of
that  province.  With  the  exception  of  those  they  wrote  about,  they  were  able  to
speak  of  themselves  as  all  "the  men  on  that  side  the  river."  In  a  word,  numbers,
rank,  influence,  authority,  character,  origin,  situation — the  writers  of  the  present
letter  had  all  these  things  on  their  side.  It  was,  indeed,  a  great  league ;  reminding
us  of  what  we  read  of  in  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  3 — 8,  and  Acts  iv.  27,  and  (as  something
to  happen  hereafter)  in  Rev.  xx.  7 — 9.  In  the  presence  of  such  a  league  the
temple  builders  were  like  the  two  flocks  described  in  1  Kings  xx.  27 ;  or  like  the
disciples  when  the  Saviour  said  to  them  as  in  Mutt.  x.  16.

II.  The  contents  of  the  letter.  These  also  were  very  formidable,  because  both
weighty  and  well  put.  They  comprised — 1.  A  severe  acnisation.  The  returned  Jews
were  described  as  rebuilding  a  city  always  notorious  for  its  evil  name — Jerusalem
"  the  rebellious  "  (ver.  12).  Such  a  charge  no  cliief  governor  could  afford  to  pass  by.
Such  a  charge,  also,  in  this  instance,  had  a  very  plausible  look.  Situated  as  the
temple  was,  at  the  eastern  edge  of  the  city  heights,  the  building  of  its  foundation
and  enclosures  (the  real  work  of  the  men  of  Jerusalem)  might  easily  be  misrepresented
as  a  " making  ready  "  of  the  "walls"  of  the  "city"  itself.  2.  A  plain  warning ■
"In  the  judgment  of  us  who  live  on  the  spot,  this  thing  is  even  worse  than  it
seems.  The  building  of  this  city  means,  in  reality,  the  building  of  a  fortress  against
the  king ;  and  that  means,  in  turn,  serious  loss  of  revenue ;  for  no  taxes  of  any
sort  will  that  city  pay,  whether  in  money,  or  kind,  or  for  using  the  highways."
3.  A  skilful  apology.  Why  do  we  refer  at  all  to  so  unpleasant  a  contingency?
Simply  as  a  matter  of  duty,  and  because  of  our  loyalty.  Having  eaten  of  the
king's  salt  (margin),  being  his  dependents  and  subjects  (possibly  also  his  cove-
nanted servants,  2  Chron.  xiii.  6),  we  could  not  see  even  such  possibility  of  hurt
without  speaking.      4.    An  appeal  to  history.     Besides,   the   king  can  judge  foi


M  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,  [ch.  iv.  7— 1«

himself  on  this  subject.  He  has  only  to  inquire  for  himself  in  the  goTemmnnt
records,  and  see  what  has  always  been  said  there  about  this  city.  Why,  in  fact,  if
not  thus  "  rebellious,"  was  it  ever  destroyed  ?  6.  An  appeal  to  reason.  If  things
be  thus,  what  must  be  the  consequence — the  inevitable  consequence  of  such  a  city
being  again  established  ?  Has  our  warning  gone /or  enough,  in  reality  ?  There  will
not  only  be  rebellion  here,  but  a  rival  sovereignty ;  not  only  some  revenue,  but  s
whole  province,  lost.     Such,  at  any  rate  (so  we  assure  the  king),  is  our  fear.

This  subject  illustrates — 1.  The  perilous  nature  of  Christian  warfare.  All  the
neighbours  of  the  Jews  were  against  them ;  all  that  could  be  urged  was  urged
against  them,  and  in  the  very  best  way.  It  would  be  difficult  to  improve  the  letter
before  us,  considering  the  purpose  in  view.  So  many,  so  powerful,  so  subtle  always
are  the  enemies  of  the  Church.  (Comp.  Matt  xxiv.  9 ;  Luke  xxi.  16, 17 ;  Actsxxviii.
22.)  Consider  also,  in  a  different  sphere,  Job  i.  9 — 11 ;  ii.  4 — 6 ;  Eev.  xii.  10 ;  and  the
very  meaning  of  the  name  Diabolus.  2.  The  secret  of  Christian  vitality.  How  has
the  Church  survived  all  this  except  by  help  from  above  ?  Could  Jerusalem  have
survived  this  present  league  and  letter  if  left  to  itself  ?  Comp.  "  I  have  reserved  to
myself,"  in  Rom.  xi.  4 ;  1  Kings  xix.  18.  3.  The  proper  direction  of  Christian
trust.  With  such  enemies,  with  such  accusers,  to  whom  must  we  look  for  defence  ?
Not  to  other  men,  not  to  ourselves,  but  only  to  the  appointed  "Advocate,  Jesus
Christ  the  righteous  "  (1  John  ii.  1).  He  is  more  than  all  that  are  against  us  (Num.
xiv.  9;  Ps.  zxvii.  1 — ^3;  cxviii.  6).  Also,  being  our  "propitiation"  (1  John  iL  2), be
can  say  more /or  us  than  they  against  us.  (Comp.  "  I  have  prayed  for  thee,"  in  Luke
xziL  31,  32 ;  and  see  Bom.  viii.  33,  34  ;  Heb.  vii.  25.)

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  4 — 16. — The  worlds  opposition  to  the  Church.  We  observe,  in  reference
to  the  world's  opposition  to  the  (5hurch —

I.  That  it  often  seeks  to  hinder  useful  enterpbise.  These  Samaritans  sought
to  "trouble  them  in  building"  (ver.  4).  As  Israel  was  employed  in  rebuilding
the  ruined  temple,  so  the  Church  is  engaged  in  erecting  a  great  spiritual  temple ;  this
noble  enterprise  is  hindered  by  the  varied  enmity  of  the  world.  The  moral  building
is  hindered  as  well  by  tJie  pleasures  as  by  the  enmity  of  men :  how  sinful  to  hinder
the  work  of  God.

II.  That  it  COMBINES  A  VARIED  AGENCY.  1.  Costly.  "  And  hired  counsellors  against
them  "  (ver.  6).  The  world  often  expends  much  time  and  money  in  its  opposition
to  the  work  of  Qod  ;  it  always  has  "counsellors"  ready  to  take  its  unprofitable  pay.
The  Church  opposes  with  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  2.  Numerous.  The
enemies  of  the  Church  are  legion ;  but  more  are  for  it  than  all  that  can  be  against
it.  3.  Competent.  The  men  here  named  were  capable  of  the  most  effective  method
of  obtaining  their  end ;  the  enemies  of  the  Church  are  often  socially  great  and
mentally  gifted.  Learning  is  sometimes  arrayed  against  the  Church.  But  God  hath
chosen  the  weak  things  of  the  earth  to  confound  the  mighty.  4.  '  Influemtial.
These  men  have  influence  with  the  king,  and  stay  the  work  of  Israel.  But  a  faithful
Israel  has  power  with  God,  and  shall  prevail.  Strange  are  the  intellectual  and  social
elements  allied  against  the  Church.

III.  That  it  takes  advantage  op  political  changes.  "And  in  the  reign  of
Ahasuerus  "  (ver.  6).  During  the  former  reign  the  Samaritan  enmity  did  not  obtain
much  favour ;  but  it  is  more  successful  with  the  new  king.  This  opposition  is — 1.
Persistent.  Kings  may  die,  but  it  continues.  2.  Vigilant.  It  is  ever  on  the  outlook
for  new  opportunity.  3.  Flattering.  Thus  it  seeks  to  win  its  way  with  the  new
monarch.  The  Church  must  remember  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,
to-day,  and  ever ;  his  purpose  standeth  sure.  4.  An  appeal  to  self-interest.  "  En-
damage the  revenue  of  the  kings  "  (ver.  13).

IV.  That  it  makes  a  cunning  use  op  misrepresentation.  "  They  will  not
pay  toll"  (ver.  13).  The  worldly  opposition  represents  the  Church  of  God
as  injurious  to  the  state.  1.  Bebellious.  "Building  the  rebellious"  fver.  12).
That  the  Church  will  obey  God  rather  than  the  king ;  true  if  their  laws
come    into   collision;    but   are   not    Christians    the    most    law-abiding    subjects?


CH.  vr.  7—16. 1  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  6'

2  Defrauding.  "  They  will  not  pay  toll."  But  does  not  the  Church  render  untc
God  the  things  that  are  his,  and  to  C«sar  the  things  that  are  Cajsar's  ?  3.  Hypo-
critical.  They  build  not  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  for  God,  but  to  shut  out  the  king.
4.  Dicked.  They  designate  Jerusalem  a  "  bad  city."  Thus  the  world  maligns  the
Church ;  it  spoke  evil  of  Christ ;  it  will  undervalue  his  followers.

V.  That  it  makes  the  pretence  of  a  disinterested  mot  ive.  "  It  was  not  meet
for  us  to  see  the  king's  dishonour"  (ver.  14).  The  world  will  not  allow  that
its  opposition  is  angry  or  jealous.  The  most  wicked  plans  seek  the  aid  of  righteous
pleas.  This  opposition  appears — 1.  Disinterested.  It  does  not  seek  its  own,  but  the
king's  welfare.  2.  Loyal.  They  had  "  the  king's  maintenance,"  and  therefore  inform
the  king, of  his  peril.  3.  Open.  They  will  tell  the  king  plainly  of  the  matter,  and
he  can  decide.     Thus  would  the  world  conceal  its  hatred  to  the  Church.

VI.  That  it  puts  a  false  interpretation  upon  national  history.  "  That  search
may  be  made  in  the  book  of  the  records  of  thy  fathers  "  (ver.  15).  1.  The  his-
torical record.  The  history  of  the  Church  is  blended  with  the  history  of  the  world  ;
the  Divine  and  human  records  move  together.  2.  The  historical  argument.  3.  The
historical  perversion.  History,  riglitly  interpreted,  is  on  the  side  of  the  Church.
4.  The  historical  vindication.  We  justify  Israel  now  and  condemn  the  Samaritans ;
time  will  surely  vindicate  the  Church. — E.

Vers.  6 — 24. — Three  thoughts  from  old  documents.  The  determined  attempts
made  by  the  Samaritans  to  prevent  the  Jews  from  building  the  temple  and  the  walls
of  Jerusalem  are  well  illustrated  in  the  correspondence  between  them  and  the  king  of
Persia.  Documents  passed  between  the  two  of  which  we  have  the  superscription  and
contents  in  these  verses.     They  remind  us —

I.  That  men  may  take  an  immensity  of  trouble  to  do  other  people  harm  and
MAKE  THEMSELVES  iNFAMons.  These  men,  "  in  the  days  of  Artaxerxes"  (ver.  7),
secured  the  sympathy  and  co-operation  of  the  Persian  "  chancellor  "  and  "  scribe  "
(ver.  8) ;  also  of  their  "  companions,"  various  Persian  colonists  then  living  in  Samaria
(ver.  9),  with  "the  rest  of  the  nations  "  whom  "  Asnapper  brought  over  and  set  in
their  cities  "  (ver.  10) :  with  their  aid  and  through  their  medium  they  gained  access
to  King  Artaxerxes,  and  induced  him  to  listen  to  a  long  statement  of  complaint.  They
riad  a  momentary  success,  ,as  the  king  granted  their  prayer  and  arrested  the  work  ;
but  in  the  end  their  evil  designs  were  defeated,  and  those  against  whom  they  plotted
gained  their  end.  All  that  these  malignant  Samaritans  did  was  to  annoy  and  delay
without  defeating  their  neighbours,  while  they  have  earned  for  themselves  a  most
unenviable  immortality.  This  document  is  only  read  now  by  those  who  will  con-
demn their  conduct.  How  often  do  we  see  men  putting  forth  patient  energ}-,
expending  great  ingenuity  and  labour,  to  compass  that  in  which  it  is  best  for  them
to  fail,  of  which  they  will  live  to  be  ashamed.  If  there  be  a  sense  in  which  "  all
labour  is  profit"  (Prov.  xiv.  23),  it  is  also  painfully  true  that  thousands  of  men  are
laboriously  engaged  in  doing  work  which  will  perish,  and  had  better  perish  ;  in
making  a  name  and  repute  which  they  would  be  glad  afterwards  to  hide.  Well
for  those  who  are  doing  that  which  really  serves,  that  which  will  stand,  that  for
which  other  generations  will  not  rebuke  but  bless  them.

II.  That  a  time  of  special  activity  will  probably  prove  a  time  of  unusual
SNUURANCE  (verft  12 — 16).  The  Jews  at  this  time  were  actively  engnged  in  building —
not  merely  in  erecting  stone  walls,  but  in  rebuilding  a  nation,  in  relaying  the  found-
ations of  the  kingdom-  and  cause  of  God.  Thus  employed,  they  found  themselves
exposed  to  bitter  hostility  and  deadly  machination.  Their  nearest  neighbours  were
plotting  against  them  ;  and  now  they  were  doing  that  which  is  always  found  very
difficult  to  endure — they  were  misrepresenting  and  maligning  them;  they  were
reporting  them  to  the  king  as  a  "rebellious  and  bad  city"  (ver.  12),  bent  on  refusing
to  "pay  toll,  tribute,  and  custom  "  (ver.  13),  "hurtful  unto  kings  and  provinces,"
intending  to  break  off  their  allegiance,  so  that  the  king  "  would  have  no  portion  on
this  side  the  river."  Though  not  incapable  of  turbulence,  and  not  indisposed  tc
throw  off  a  foreign  yoke  when  that  should  be  possible,  the  Jews  were  not  cherishing
any  purpose  of  this  kind  ;  they  had  been  faithful  subjects  when  in  Persia,  and  they
bad  honourable  and  loyal  intentions  now.    This  "  accusation  "  (ver.  6)  was  essentially


58


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  IV.  17—2-1


false ;  it  was  a  malignant  misrepresentation.  When  men  are  actively  engaged  in
building  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  they  may  expect  Samaritan  misrepresentations.
Things  will  be  said  by  the  ill-disposed  which,  as  here,  may  have  a  colouring  of  truth,
but  which  are  essontially  false.  We  must  not  mind  misrepresentation  when  we  are
doing  earnest  and  faithful  work.  The  very  excellency  of  our  efEort  will  bring  down
the  hatred  and  opposition  of  those  who  are  enemies  of  the  truth,  and  our  work  and
ourselves  will  be  slandered ;  we  may  find  ourselves  members  of  a  "  sect  everywhere
spoken  against."  We  shall  not,  then,  forget  who  it  was  that  was  charged  with
sedition,  and  so  far  from  being  surprised  that  "  the  disciple  is  not  above  his  master,"
we  shall  rejoice  that  we  are  counted  worthy  to  "  partake  of  the  sufferings  of  Christ."
No  truly  great  work  has  ever  been  wrought  which  has  not  been  covered  at  times
with  black  clouds  of  misrepresentation.

III.  That  selplshness  and  justice  are  seldom  associated  together.  The  king
listened  to  those  who  seemed  so  desirous  of  serving  him  ;  he  was  inclined  to  believe
those  that  were  anxious  his  "revenue  should  not  be  endamaged"  (ver.  13),  who  did
not  wish  to  "  see  the  king's  dishonour "  (ver.  14),  and  who  took  measures  that  he
should  not  lose  his  "portion  on  one  side  the  river"  (ver.  16).  And  search  being
made,  it  was  easy  to  find  some  incidents  which  might  be  construed  in  the  sense  of
these  complainants  :  the  city  "  of  old  time  had  made  insurrection,"  &c.  (ver.  19)  ;  there
had  been  "  mighty  kings  "  to  whom  "  toll,  tribute,  and  custom  "  had  been  paid,  &c.^ —
there  might  be  some  possible  danger  too  in  the  future ;  let  the  work  cease  for  the
present  (ver.  21),  for  "  why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of  the  kings  ?  "  (ver.  22).
Rather  send  bitter  disappointment  to  the  holiest  hopes  of  a  province  than  endanger
the  prosperity  of  kings.  Thus  does  self-interest  pervert  justice.  To  save  them-
selves from  slight,  remote,  and  contingent  barm,  men  will  cause  much  present  and
certain  injury  to  their  fellows.  Selfishness  is  unfair  and  often  cruel.  To  be  true
and  juit  one  must  be  disinterested. — C.


EXPOSITION.


Ver.  17. — Then  sent  the  king  an  answer.
The  complaint  made  was  of  such  importance
that  an  answer  was  returned  without  delay,
[t  was  addressed  both  to  Rehum  and  Shim-
bhai,  since  they  were  independent  authorities.
Peace,  and  at  such  a  time.  "  Peace "
isheldm)  is  the  ordinary  Oriental  saluta-
tion. The  other  word,  uk'eth,  is  taken  by
our  translators  to  refer  to  the  date ;  but  it
really  means,  like  uK'eneth  (ver.  10),  "  and
BO  forth,"  or  "  et  cetera."

Ver.  18. — The  letter  hath  been  plainly
read  before  me.  Despatches  are  read  to,
not  by,  Oriental  sovereigns,  who  have  often
no  literary  education.  (Compare  Esther
vi.  1.)

Ver.  19. — I  commanded,  and  search  has
been  made.  The  Pseudo-Smerdis,  who  was  a
fanatical  adherent  of  Magism,  which  disal-
lowed temples  altogether  (Herod.,  i.  130),
and  who  had  already  destroyed  the  temples
of  Ormuzd  in  Persia  ('  Behistun  Ins.,'  col.  i.
par.  14,  §  5),  was  naturally  willing  enough
to  do  as  the  Samaritans  desired,  and  stop
the  restoration  of  the  Jewish  temple.  Ac-
cordingly, he  had  a  search  made  among  the
state  records,  and  found,  as  they  had  expected
he  would,  evidence  of  insurrections  on  the
part  of  the  Jews  against  the  foreign  countries
to  which  they  had  been  subject,  as  Assyria


(2  Kings  xviii.  7)  and  Babylon  (ihid.  xxiv.
1  ;  Jer.  lii.  3),  and  also  proof  of  the  formid-
able power  possessed  by  certain  Jewish  oi
Israelite  kings ;  upon  which  he  thought
himself  justified  in  complying  with  the
Samaritan  request,  and  ordering  the  work
that  was  going  \>ti  at  Jerusalem  to  cease
(see  ver.  21).

Ver.  20.  —  Mighty  kings.  David  and
Solomon  best  answer  to  this  description,
possessing  as  they  did  a  kingdom  which
extended  from  the  Euphrates  to  the  holders
of  Egypt  (1  Kings  iv.  21,  24),  and  drawing
tribute  from  the  various  petty  princes  or
chiefs  of  the  nations  dwelling  within  those
limits  (2  Sam.  viii.  6—12  ;  1  Kings  x.  14,
25).  Josiah  had  perhaps,  more  recently,
possessed  an  almost  equally  extensive  sway.

Ver.  21. — Until  another  commandment
shall  he  given.  It  can  scarcely  be  supposed
that  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  had  any  intention
of  issuing  "  another  commandment ;"  but,
since  "  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,"
as  a  general  rule,  "altered  not"  (Esther  L
19  ;  Dan.  vi.  1.5),  it  may  well  be  that  the
clause  before  us  was  one  inserted  as  a  matter
of  form  in  most  decrees,  to  prevent  them
from  being  uTevocable.

Ver.  23.— They  went  up  in  haste.  The
"adversaries"  lost  no  time.     Having  ob-


CH.  IV.  17— 24.J


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


(9


tained  the  decree  wliich  forbad  further
building,  they  proceeded  with  it  to  Jeru-
aalem,  and  by  a  display  of  forco  compelled
the  Jews  to  submission.  No  doubt  resist-
B,nce  might  have  been  made,  but  resistance
would  have  been  rebellion.

Ver.  24.  —  Then  ceased  the  work  .  . .
until  the  second  year  of  the  reign  of  Sarins.
The  interval  of  compelled  inaction  was  not
long.  The  Paeudo-Smerdis  reigned,  at  the
utmost,  ten  months  ;  after  which  a  revolution
occurred,  and  the  throne  was  occupied  by
Darius,  the  son  of  Hystaspes.  If  the  work
was  resumed  early  in  this  monarch's  second
vear,  the  entire  period  of  suspension  cannot


have  much  exceeded  a  year  and  a  half
King  of  Persia.  There  is  probably  no  in-
tention of  distinguishing  the  Darius  of  this
book  from  "Darius  the  Mede"  (Dan.  v.
31 ;  vi  1).  " King  of  Persia"  is  appended
to  his  name  merely  out  of  respect  and
honour,  as  it  is  to  the  names  of  Cyrus  (i.  1,
2,  8),  Artaxerxes  I.  (iv.  7),  and  Artaxerxes  II.
(vi  14).  Such  a  superfluous  attachment  to
his  name  of  the  style  and  title  of  a  monarch
is  common  throughout  the  Old  Testament,
and  generally  marks  a  distinct  intention  to
do  the  individual  honour  (see  Gen.  xlL  46  ,
1  Kings  iii.  1 ;  ix.  11,  16  5  id.  18 ;  2  Chron
xxxvi.  22,  &C.),


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  17 — 24. — The  work  stopped.  The  ostensible  object  of  the  letter  to  Artii
xerxea  (vers.  11 — 16)  was  to  stop  the  building  of  the  walls  of  Jerusalem.  Its  real
object  was  to  put  a  stop  to  the  building  of  God's  house.  In  this  for  a  time  it  suc-
ceeded, as  our  present  passage  records.  Two  things  are  to  be  especially  noticed  in
the  story  of  this  grievous  success.  The  weapon  obtained  was  most  efficient ;  the  use
made  of  it  was  most  efEectual.

L  An  efficient  aid  in  an  evil  plan.  This  the  Samaritans  found  provided  for
them  in  the  reply  of  King  Artaxerxes.  Besides  the  bare  fact  of  having  a  reply  at
all,  which  was  satisfactory  so  far  as  showing  that  their  accusation  had  reached  head-
quarters (as  they  had  planned),  the  reply  itself,  when  examined,  turned  out  all  they
could  wish.  For  example,  its  language  showed  that  their  representations  had  met
(1)  with  most  favourable  attention.  The  number  and  character  of  those  making
them  (as  noted  in  our  last)  had  been  duly  observed  (ver.  17).  Their  friendly  object
in  doing  b<>  was  acknowledged  by  the  usual  friendly  salutation  ("Peace,"  &c.)  in
return.  Also,  the  contents  of  the  letter  had  been  submitted  carefully  to  the  notice
of  the  king  (ver.  18;  comp.  Esther  vi.  1).  As  a  beginning,  therefore,  what  could
be  better  ?  Next,  we  find  that  the  recommendations  of  the  letter  had  met  (2)  with
most  ready  compliance.  The  suggested  "  search  "  had  been  formally  ordered  (obs.
word  "decree"  in  margin),  and  properly  instituted  and  carried  out.  Further,  the
result  of  that  search  had  proved  such  as  to  give  their  words  of  warning  (3)  most
ample  support  All  that  they  had  said  was  found  true.  Jerusalem  was  found
described  in  the  government  archives  as  "  seditious,"  and  that  "  of  old  "  (ver.  19).
Also  their  fears  as  to  the  loss  of  revenue,  and  even  of  the  province,  had  been  fully
justified  by  the  search.  Jerusalem,  so  it  was  found,  had  formerly  both  ruled  and
taxed  all  "beyond  the  river;"  and  might  do  so  again,  of  course,  if  rebuilt  (ver.  20).
Not  only  so,  but  it  may  perhaps  be  noticed  that,  so  far  as  the  search  went,  nothing
of  an  adverse  nature  had  been  found  ;  or,  at  any  rate,  if  found,  had  not  been  referred
to.  Esther  vi.  2, 4  are  at  least  sufficient  to  show  how  different  a  complexion  the  results
of  this  search  might  have  had,  if  thorough  and  earnest.  Also,  that,  had  it  been  so,
the  designs  of  the  Samaritans  would  probably  not  have  met,  as  we  find  them  doing,
(4)  with  such  signal  success.  For  example,  the  builders  at  Jerusalem  were  to  be
made  to  "  cease,"  the  very  upshot  wished  for.  Not  only  so,  they  were  not  to  begin
again,  except  by  express  permission  for  it  from  the  king  himself.  This  "  command-
ment "  was  to  continue  binding  until  there  should  be  "  another  commandment "  in
its  place.  Added  to  which,  the  Samaritans  themselves  were  not  only  at  liberty,  as
though  by  a  kind  of  "permissive  legislation,"  to  see  to  the  execution  of  this  decree
of  the  king,  but  they  were  strongly  urged,  and  almost  entreated  in  fact,  to  prevent
its  infraction.  One  can  see,  in  that  concluding  remonstrance,  how  well  their  (mis)-
representations  had  told ;  and  how  fully  they  had  succeeded  in  alarming  and  arousing
the  jealous  eovetousness  of  the  king.  "  Take  heed  now  that  ye  fail  not  to  do  this  :
why  should  damage  grow  to  the  hurt  of  the  king  ?  "  Must  they  not  have  read  this
language  with  a  smile  of  triumph  as  well  as  joy?    Here  was  the  king,  in  urging  his


60  THB  BOOS  Of  EZSA.  [ob.  IV.  1?— 24

-  -  ■

own  desires,  forwarding  theirs  even  more.  Here  was  that  which  could  be  usej
against  the  Jewish  elders  at  their  only  strong  point — as  it  seemed.  The  one  thing,
as  noted  before,  which  appeared  to  give  any  strength  to  the  builders  of  the  temple,
was  the  edict  of  Cyrus.  Here  was  a  similar  edict,  still  more  urgent  and  quite  as
explicit,  on  the  exactly  opposite  side.  Surely  the  means  of  success,  if  not  success
itself,  was  now  placed  in  their  power.

II.  An  efficient  aid  in  an  evil  plan  effectuallt  employed.  Were  the
Samaritans  able  to  use  the  aid  thus  placed  in  their  hands?  Were  they  satisfied  with
merely  obtaining  so  welcome  a  decree  ?  Unless  a  weapon  is  effectually  wielded,  it
might  as  well  remain  barging  up  in  the  armoury.  Unless  a  decree  is  made  known
and  enforced,  it  differs  nothing  from  one  not  yet  passed — so  far,  at  any  rate,  as  its
results  are  concerned  ?  The  Samaritan  leaders  and  council,  to  whom  came,  in  the
first  instance,  the  above-described  decree  of  the  king,  seem  to  have  been  fully  alive
to  these  truths.  They  appear  to  have  met  together  (ver.  23)  in  order  to  hear  its
contents.  It  was  doubtless  "  read  before  "  them  with  all  proper  state.  After  this,
there  was  (1)  no  delay.  They  proceeded  to  take  action  on  it  "in  haste."  They
determined  to  strike,  as  we  say,  while  the  iron  was  hot.  Also,  they  did  this,  we  find,
(2)  in  person;  not  deputing  action,  it  seems,  on  so  pressing  a  matter,  to  any  kind  of
subordinates.  "  They  "  themselves,  who  had  thus  received  the  letter,  and  heard  it
read,  at  once  proceeded  to  act.  May  we  not  notice,  too,  in  what  way  they  did  so  ?
Namely,  on  the  one  hand,  (3)  as  to  place-  They  went  to  Jerusalem,  the  city  in
question,  the  place  which  the  king's  letter  and  their  wishes  had  both  so  plainly  in
view.  Also,  on  the  other  hand,  (4)  as  to  persons.  They  went  "  to  Jerusalem  to  the
Jews,"  it  is  stated;  i.  «.,  as  we  take  it,  to  the  Jewish  rulers  and  elders  (so  the
expression  "  the  Jews  "  is  constantly  used  by  St.  John  in  his  Gospel) ;  in  other  words,
to  those  men  at  Jerusalem  who  were  actually  engaged  in  directing  and  overseeing
the  erection  of  the  temple,  and  so  were  those  really  responsible,  in  fact,  for  the  whole
of  that  work.  Nor  is  this  quite  all  we  are  told.  We  are  told,  further,  of  these
Samaritan  authorities — and  the  point  being  expressly  mentioned  seems  worthy  of  a
special  note,  at  least,  in  passing — that  they  "  made  "  the  Jewish  authorities  "  to
cease  "  from  their  work ;  and  that  they  did  so,  also,  "  by  force  and  power  " — that  is
to  say,  no  doubt,  with  a  very  considerable  exhibition  of  ill-usage  and  threat.  In  a
word,  it  is  as  though,  with  this  decree  from  Shushan  in  their  hands,  they  had  rushed
all  the  way  from  Samaria  and  struck  these  Jerusalem  Jews  as  they  worked  ;  and  that
with  so  much  force  and  such  a  degree  of  skill  as  to  deprive  them  of  all  power  to  go
on.  Nothing,  in  fact,  could  be  better  aimed,  nothing  more  effectual,  than  this  their
stroke.  It  utterly  destroyed  the  thing  struck ;  at  any  rate  for  so  long  a  time,  and  so
completely,  that  there  was  nothing  more  to  be  said.  "  Then  ceased  the  work  of  the
house  of  God  which  is  at  Jerusalem."  Not  till  a  year  and  a  half  have  passed  by,  not
till  a  new  king  and  even  a  new  dynasty  have  appeared  on  the  scene,  shall  we  hear  of
it  again  1

See,  therefore,  in  this  matter — 1.  The  mystery  of  GoeCs  ways.  The  omnipotent
God  himself  allowed  his  own  work  to  be  stopped  1  Not  merely  his  own  workmen.
That  is  another  thing,  and  often  the  case  (see  Matt.  xiv.  3 ;  Mark  ix.  18 ;  Acta
xvi.  6,  7 ;  Eev.  xi.  7 — 10).  Even  such  a  stoppage,  however,  is,  not  uncommonly,  a
sufficiently  mysterious  thing  in  our  eyes.  The  Baptist,  apparently,  felt  this  himself
(Matt.  xi.  2  —  6).  Who,  again,  without  marvel,  can  see  the  glorious  sunrise  of
Stephen's  ministry  (Acts  vi.  8 — 13)  so  suddenly  set  before  men  (Jer.  xv.  9 ;  Acts
vii.  59)?  But  this  phenomenon  of  the  cessation  of  the  work  itself  is  more  marvellous
etill,  because  it  appears  at  first  hardly  consistent  with  God's  own  attributes  and
nature.  Does  it  mean  that  he  has  changed  his  purposes  (1  Sam.  xv.  29;  Bom.  xi.  29 ;
James  i.  17)  ?  Or  that  he  cannot  carry  them  out  (Matt.  xix.  26 ;  Mark  xiv.  36)  ?
Especially  may  we  ask  thus  where  the  work  in  question  is  one  for  which  he  has  done
so  much  and  so  triumphantly,  as  in  this  instance  (see  chaps,  i. — iii.,  almost  through-
out). And  still  more  where  the  cessation  of  the  work  is  brought  about  by  the
enemies  of  himself  and  his  people,  and  that  with  such  a  spring-tide  of  success  as  our
eyes  have  just  seen.  The  greatest  things  and  the  smallest  (so  our  attention  tc  some
of  the  very  minutiae  of  this  case  has  served  to  show  us),  the  "  stars  in  their  coursea  "
and  the  dust  of  the  desert  have  seemed  in  league  here  with  God's  foei.    And  the  end


OH.  IV.  17—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.,  61

has  been — what  ?  The  open  failure,  in  the  eyes  of  his  enemies,  and  in  the  eyes  of
his  friends  as  well,  of  the  undertaking  on  which  he  had  set  his  heart.  That  is  what
that  deserted  temple  enclosure,  with  its  manifestly  interrupted  labours,  and  its  sorry
wealth  of  unused  materials,  seemed  to  say  for  so  long.  It  was  like  the  flag  of  the
enemies  of  Jehovah  waving  triumphantly  over  the  very  citadel  of  his  strength  '(Ps.
IxxiT.  7)  I  2.  The  mercy  of  God's  ways.  After  all,  the  case  was  not  desperate.
There  was  just  a  gleam  of  light  in  the  darkness ;  a  gleam,  it  is  possible,  that  would
never  have  been  noticed  unless  the  surrounding  darkness  had  been  so  extreme ;  a
gleam,  however,  all  the  more  worthy  of  notice  on  that  very'  account.  Why  that
singular  suggestion  of  a  possible  second  "commandment"  in  the  (othei-wise)  unfal-
tering royal  decree  of  this  chapter?  Does  Scripture  tell  us  of  anything  like  it  in
any  other  document  of  this  nature  (comp.  Ezra  i.  2 — 4 ;  vi.  6 — 12  ;  vii.  11 — 26 ;
Dan.  iii.  29 ;  vi.  25 — 27)  ?  Considering,  indeed,  the  almost  excessive  value  attached
by  the  ancient  Persian  government  to  the  idea  of  "finality"  in  its  legislation  (Dan.
vi.  throughout),  is  not  this  curious  hint  in  the  exactly  opposite  direction  a  feature  of
most  singular  note  ?  And  may  we  not  believe,  therefore,  with  all  reverence,  that  we
see  in  it  the  special  handiwork  and  the  special  mercy  of  God  himself  ?  Often  does
he  give  such  dim  bi*  priceless  glimmerings  of  hope  to  those  on  the  very  verge  of
despair  (see  Judgesxiii.  22,  23;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  12—14;  Jer.  iv.  27;  v.  9,  10,  18;
Luke  viii.  49,  50 ;  xxiv.  17,  32 ;  Acts  xx.  9,  10).  This  is  equally  true  of  his  Church
(Ps.  xii.  1),  and  of  souls  (Ps.  xxvii.  13).  So  often  may  it  be  said  of  both  of  them,
■IS  in  2  Cor.  iv.  8,  9.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  17 — 24. — Man  hindering  the  work  of  God.  I.  That  mem  abb  capable  of
iiiNDEBiNa  THE  WORK  OF  GoD.  "Give  ye  now  commandment  to  cause  these  men
to  cease,  and  that  this  city  be  not  builded  "  (ver.  21).  1.  Presumptuous.  "Then
ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God."  How  could  presumption  oe  greater  than
to  stop  the  work  of  God  ;  let  men  pluck  the  stars  from  the  heavens,  but  let  them  not
injure  the  Church  of  Christ.  2.  Perplexing.  Is  it  not  a  mystery  that  the  Eternal
will  allow  frail  and  sinful  men  to  impede  the  work  of  his  people  ?  3.  Pr^vdicial.
The  walls  of  Jerusalem  required  restoration.  The  temple  must  be  built  and  the  old
worsdip  restored.  This  hindrance  is  injurious  to  the  Jewish  commonwealth.  How
do  men  prejudice  great  interests  by  staying  the  beneficent  ministries  of  the  Church.
i-  Permitted.  These  hindrances  were  allowed  for  a  time,  that  new  energy  might  be
stimulated,  that  the  mercy  of  God  might  be  seen  in  the  aid  given  to  the  dejected
workers,  and  his  glory  in  the  final  defeat  of  all  enemies.  6.  Preparatory.  To
greater  success ;  the  pent-up  stream  will  soon  flow  on  more  rapidly.  6.  Patient.
The  work  of  the  Church  is  patient ;  it  will  outlive  all  enmity.

II.  The  methods  which  ake  most  calculated  to  hinder  the  work  of  God.  The
letter  to  the  king  caused  the  work  to  cease.  The  impediments  to  Church  work
are — 1.  External.  The  political  may  hinder  the  moral ;  unjust  law,  civil  persecu-
tion, and  the  force  of  circumstances  may  sometimes  cause  the  work  of  God  to
cease.  (1)_  Haste.  (2)  Force  (ver.  23).  2.  Internal.  The  work  of  God  is  more
often  hindered  by  a  low  spiritual  condition,  by  a  quarrelsome  temper,  by  a  critical
spirit,  by  the  thoughtless  word ;  it  is  indeed  sad  to  cause  moral  work  to  cease
from  within.  See  the  responsibility  of  conduct,  when  a  word  may,  like  this  letter  to
the  king,  stay  the  work  of  God.

III.  The  consequences  which  follow  when  the  work  of  God  is  hindered.  1.
Disappointment.  After  the  generous  edict  of  Cyrus  how  disappointing  this  order  to
cease  work.  How  often  is  the  Church  disappointed  in  her  best  efEorts.  2.  Com-
plaint. No  doubt  many  Israelites  would  indulge  a  complaining  spirit.  The  Cliurch
should  not  grumble  when  its  work  is  hindered,  but  pray.  3.  Sorrow.  That  the
good  work  should  be  unfinished.  4.  Hope.  That  God  will  yet  undertake  their
cause. — E.

Ver.  24 ;  v.  1, — Hindrances.  These  two  verses  suggest  the  two  sorts  of
hindrances  which,  immediately  after  the  foundation  of  the  temple,  interfered  with  the


62  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  iv.  17—24.

progress  of  the  building  of  it  Circumstances  were  adverse  to  the  Jews ;  these  are
recorded  in  Ezra  iv.,  and  are  illustrated  in  the  Persian  history  of  the  time.  There
crept  over  the  people  a  growing  indifference  to  the  work ;  they  became  unready  for
the  self-denial  which  it  demanded ;  their  spiritual  unfitness  for  it  was  increased  by
the  presence  of  the  external  obstacles :  to  understand  this  we  must  turn  to  the
prophecies  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah.  This  is  the  right  way  to  study  all  history.
The  issue  of  events  cannot  be  understood  apart  from  the  moral  condition  of  the
men  who  are  affected  by  them ;  men's  moral  condition,  again,  and  their  actions  are
profoundly  affected  by  circumstances.  The  Divine  Providence  ordains  and  permits
events  ;  in  the  use  we  make  of  them  our  character  reveals  itself,  here  our  responsi-
bility lies.

The  letter  of  Artaxerxes  effectually  prevented  the  progress  of  the  building :  "  then
ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God  which  is  at  Jerusalem."  No  prophet  rebuked
the  people  during  this  period  ;  rebukes  of  inaction,  when  activity  is  impossible,  only
fret  and  wear  out  the  soul.  There  is  "  a  time  to  keep  silence,"  as  well  as  "  a  time  to
speak."  With  the  accession  of  Darius,  work,  though  it  might  be  arduous,  became
possible  ;  and  then  Haggai  and  Zechariah  did  not  spare  their  words.  God  gives  vs
men  as  well  as  times  and  seasons.  He  gives  also  men  of  different  qualifications
according  to  different  needs :  the  preacher  as  well  as  the  workman ;  him  who  has
insight  into  the  springs  of  human  conduct  as  well  as  him  who  can  lend  activity.
Haggai  and  Zechariah  are  henceforth  joined  with  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  as  builders
of  the  temple  (ch.  v.  2 ;  vi.  14).

I.  The  outwaed  hindrances,  (a)  The  jealousy  of  the  surrounding  heathen
(ch.  iv.  1 — 3).  These  were  the  people  mentioned  in  2  Kings  xvii.  24 — 41,  sent  to
occupy  the  northern  kingdom  when  the  Israelites  were  carried  away  into  Assyria.
They  were  superstitious  (2  Kings  xvii.  26),  followers  of  the  lustful  and  cruel
worship,  to  contend  against  which  the  Hebrew  nation  was  raised  up  (vers.  29 —
31).  They  had  no  conception  of  Deity  but  that  of  polytheism  (vers.  26,  32,  33,
41).  It  was  impossible  for  the  Jews  to  admit  their  partnership  in  building  the
temple.  It  would  have  been  treason  to  the  object  for  which  Cyrus  had  sent
them  back ;  it  would  have  been  a  denial  of  their  own  faith  ;  it  would  have  been
a  new  provocation  of  Ood.  Our  age,  which  understands  that  truth  is  one  and  indi-
visible, ought  to  be  able  to  see  that  not  intolerance,  but  fidelity,  prompted  their
refusal.  These  people,  from  whom  the  leaders  of  the  Jews  expected  trouble  at  the
first  (ch.  iii.  3),  and  whom  they  counted  "  adversaries  "  (ch.  iv.  1),  directly  opposed
them  (ver.  4),  and  intrigued  against  them  at  the  court  of  Persia  (ver.  5).  (6)  No
direct  appeal  was  made  to  Cyrus  to  countermand  the  proclamation  which  was  the
charter  of  the  Jews'  return.  "The  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians  altereth  not."
But  no  protection  uas  afforded  them.  The  history  of  the  later  years  of  Cyrus  is
obscure.  "  The  warlike  prince,"  says  Eawlinson,  "  who  conquered  the  Persian
empire  did  little  to  organise  it"  He  was  pursuing  schemes  of  conquest  to  the  last.
The  Jews  were  left  in  their  feebleness  to  execute  his  original  decree  in  their  favour
as  best  they  could,  (c)  The  troubled  history  of  Canibyses,  the  Ahasuerus  of  Ezra,
enables  us  to  understand  why  he  too  was  indifferent  to  a  local  qriarrd  in  a  distant
prownce.  His  jealousy  of  his  brother  was  his  first  engrossing  care.  Then  came  hie
schemes  of  conquest,  necessitating  his  absence  from  his  capital ;  and,  finally,  the
revolution  which  placed  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  (Artaxerxes)  on  the  throne.  We  can
understand  the  indecisive  character  of  Ezra  iv.  6.  (d)  The  whole  character  of  the
Persian  rule  was  changed  on  the  accession  of  Artaxerxes.  A  usurper,  he  had  no
loyalty  to  the  purpose  of  Cyrus.  A  "  Magian,"  he  was  out  of  sympathy  with  the
Zoroastrianism  of  his  great  predecessor.  Appeal  was  made  to  political  jealousy
alone ;  the  history  of  the  Jews  had  shown  they  were  too  strong  to  be  tolerated  (vers.
12 — 16).  The  appeal  was  successful:  "then  ceased  the  work  of  the  house  of  God
which  18  at  Jerusalem."

II.  The  mobal  hindrances.  The  people  were  reluctant  to  resume  work  when  the
accession  of  Darius  made  it  possible.  Darius  was  a  second  Cyrus  ;  "  the  greatest  of
the  Persian  monarchs."  He  was  a  strong  man,  a  conqueror.  He  knew  the  need  of
good  government,  and  organised  his  empire.  He  abolished  tributary  kingships,  and
placed  in  every  district  an  officer  directly  responsible  to  the  supreme  authority.


OH.  IV.  17—24.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  SS

Such  a  man  would  not  tolerate  petty  local  jealousies ;  he  was  worthy  of  tmst.
Hence  Haggai  and  Zechariah  began  to  urge  on  the  work  of  building ;  and  Zerub-
babel  and  Jeshua  began  to  build.  Then  appeared  the  old  vices  of  the  people,
testified  against  by  many  a  prophet ;  they  were  also  demoralised  by  their  enforced  in-
action, (a)  They  were  dispirited.  Haggai  urges  them  "  be  strong."  God  is  with
them:  "  my  spirit  remaineth  among  you, fear  ye  not."  All  resources  are  his,  "  the  silver
and  the  gold."  He  can  make  all  nations  serve  them.  "  The  glory  of  this  latter  house
shall  be  greater  than  of  the  former  "  (Haggai  ii.  1  —9).  Zechariah's  prophecy  glows
with  encouragement  and  hope.  God  loves  his  people  (Zeeh.  i.  14 — 17;  ii.  8,  10 — 12).
Jeshua  and  Zerubbabel  are  his  chosen  servants  (chs.  ii.',  iii.).  The  prosperity  of
Jerusalem  is  assured  (ch.  viii.  1 — 8).  (6)  They  were  worldly.  The  force  of  char-
acter native  to  the  Jews,  diverted  from  the  work  of  building,  had  found  a  channel
in  agriculture  and  trade.  Some  were  rich,  dwelling  in  "  ceiled  houses  "  (Haggai  i.  4)  ;
they  were  very  active  (ch.  i,  6).  And  they  were  hypocriticri,  making  professed
regard  for  God's  word  an  excuse  for  their  unreadiness.  They  had  begun  too  soon  ;
the  "  seventy  years  "  of  Jeremiah  were  not  completed :  "  the  time  is  not  come,  the
time  that  the  Lord's  house  should  be  built."  (c)  They  were  selfish.  The  old  sins  of
oppression  were  rife  (Zech.  vii.  8 — 10),  side  by  side  with  sanctimoniousness  (vers.
1 — 7).  They  were  careless  of  justice  and  truth  (ch.  viii.  16,  17).  They  were  dis-
honest and  perjured  (v.  4).  These  are  the  very  vices  that  a  time  of  advefeity  is
likely  to  foster.  One  of  the  perils  against  which  we  ought  to  be  on  our  g^ard  when
a  check  is  imposed  on  our  prosperity,  and  we  find  ourselves  unable,  for  a  time,  to
execute  a  noble  purpose,  is  that  we  drop  into  an  altogether  lower  mood.  A  few
men  can  mould  circumstances  ;  there  are  more,  but  still  few,  who  are  indifferent  to
them ;  most  men  are  profoundly  afEected  by  them.  Practical  lessons : — 1.  Since
circumstanceg  so  intimately  affect  our  moral  and  spiritual  life,  the  sphere  of  cir-
cumstance it  a  sphere  for  prayer.  "  Give  me  neither  poverty  nor  riches. '  To
limit  the  use  of  prayer  to  personal  character  is  impossible  ;  for  among  the  influences
n.ifecting  personal  character  are  the  order  of  nature,  and  the  course  of  events.
"2.  Let  all  circumstances  be  rightly  used  by  us.  There  are  virtues,  as  well  as  vices
fostered  by  special  seasons.  Prosperity  may  nourish  the  generous  virtues ;  n
liberal  habit  acquired  in  prosperity  may  help  to  preserve  us  from  a  craven,  niggardly
spirit  in  times  of  care.  Adversity  may  give  us  an  opportunity  for  patience,  meek-
ness, and  faith  ;  and,  by  teaching  us  to  be  indifferent  to  personal  ease,  may  fit  us  to
consecrate  returning  prosperity  to  God  and  our  fellows.  3.  Our  responsibility  for
the  use  we  make  of  varying  circumstances.  These  may  master  us  or  we  may  master
them.  Our  ability  to  read  the  "  signs  of  the  times  "  is  an  indication  of  our  moral
character.  Contrast  the  Jews'  perversion  of  the  "  seventy  years' "  prophecy  (Haggai
i.  2)  with  the  prophets'  quick- perception,  so  soon  as  the  second  year  of  Darius,
that  here  was  a  man  on  whom  they  could  rely,  and  that  the  time  was  come  to  resum?
work.  Compare  also  our  Lord's  solemn  denunciations  of  the  Pharisees  (Matt.  xvi.
1—4).  It  is  thus,  by  events  working  upon  and  revealing  character,  that  time  is
preparing  our  eternity. — M.

Ver.  24 ;  v.  1,  2. — Spiritual  amendment.  It  is  quite  true  that  the  building  of  thp
house  of  the  Lord  ceased  in  consequence  of  the  opposition  of  the  Samaritans ;  it  is
also  true  that  this  cessation  continued  because  of  their  animosity  and  opposition.
Yet  this  does  not  express  the  whole  truth.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  if  not  everywhere,
different  causes  combined  to  produce  the  one  result.  The  long  inactivity  on  the  part
of  the  returned  Jews  was  partly  due  to  their  own  moral  deficiency ;  there  was  witlj
them  some —

I.  Slackness.  "  Then  ceased  the  work,"  &c.  (ver.  24).  We  have  here  the  great
advantage  of  being  able  to  compare  one  book  of  Scripture  with  another,  and  (what
is  more)  a  historical  with  a  prophetical  book.  Comparing  Haggai  i.  with  Ezra  v.,
we  conclude  that,  under  the  pressure  from  without,  the  first  zeal  of  the  liberated
captives  cooled,  and  that  they  allowed  themselves  to  be  too  much  affected  by  the
unfriendliness  of  their  neighbours.  If  it  was  really  necessary — as  perhaps  it  was — to
lay  down  their  weapons  at  the  first,  they  might  have  resumed  them  much  sooner  tlian
they  did.  They  permitted  nearly  two  years  to  pass  without  venturing  to  take  up  that


64


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  V.  1,  2.


which  they  laid  down.  Meantime  the  first  ardour  abated,  and  priests  and  people,
taking  their  tone  from  the  governor  and  the  high  priest,  settled  down  into  satisfaction
when  they  should  have  been  filled  with  eagerness  and  anxiety.  A  noble  aspiration
was  rapidly  giving  way  to  an  ignoble  contentment.  This  is  but  too  frequently  recur-
ring a  page  in  the  history  of  human  goodness.  First  an  all-consuming  ardour,  an
intensity  of  heat  which  promises  to  shine  with  utmost  brilliance  and  burn  up  every-
thing which  is  impure ;  then,  after  a  while,  the  light  dies  down,  the  spirit  cools,  and
only  a  few  sparks,  with  a  little  smoke,  are  left.  First  devotion,  which  thinks  tke
hours  of  worship  all  too  short ;  zeal  which  longs  to  multiply  its  labours ;  consecration
which  prefers  the  post  of  danger  and  the  field  of  difficulty.  Then  languor,  laziness,
love  of  ease ;  the  hours  of  worship  are  too  long ;  the  duties  too  heavy ;  the  perils  too
great.     The  sanctuary  is  passed  by,  the  vineyard  deserted,  the  enterprise  abandoned.

II.  Reproof  (ver.  1).  "  Then  the  prophets  ...  prophesied,"  &c.  How  vigorously,
after  the  manner  of  a  Hebrew  prophet,  Haggai  reproved  and  incited  Zerubbabel
and  Jeshua,  we  may  read  in  both  chapters  of  that  book  of  prophecy.  "  Is  it  time
for  you  to  dwell  in  your  cieled  houses,  and  this  house  lie  waste?"  is  the  burden  of
the  Lord  which  Haggai  delivered.  These  men  of  God — for  he  was  joined  by
Zechariah — must  have  sought  the  praise  of  God  rather  than  that  of  man  ;  their  one
care  was  to  be  faithful  to  him  in  whose  name  they  spoke,  and  so  to  "  deliver  their
soul."  They  did  not  "prophesy  smooth  things,"  but  rough,  hard,  trying  things.
Not  only  those  whose  chief  vocation  and  profession  it  is  to  speak  for  God,  but  all
who  fear  his  name  and  call  themselves  his  disciples,  must  be  ready,  on  occasion,  to
declare  the  "  burden  of  the  Lord,"  to  speak  the  word  which  is  unpalatable,  which
wounds  and  troubles  the  soul.  Sometimes  it  is  our  duty,  like  the  Master,  to  send
men  away  "  sorrowful "  (Matt.  xix.  22).  Sometimes  we  must  receive  in  grief  rather
than  anger  the  reproaches  of  our  friends.     "  Faithful  are  the  wounds  of  a  friend."

III.  Eecovert.  "  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua,  and  began  to  build  "  (ver.  2).
The  Jewish  leaders  hearkened  to  the  voice  of  God  speaking  to  them  through  the  prophets,
and  they  regained  their  lost  devotednesB.  "  Then  they  rose  up,  and  began  to  build."
They  heeded  the  admonitions  given,  and  cheerfully  co-operated  with  those  who  gave
them.  They  had  the  wisdom  to  perceive  that  they  were  wrong ;  they  frankly  owned
it,  and  they  promptly  and  energetically  set  themselves  to  rectify  their  ways.  Here
is  true  manliness  as  well  as  wisdom.  It  is  a  weak  and  foolish  thing  for  a  man  to  go
on  in  a  false  course  when  he  sees  that  he  is  in  the  wrong.  There  is  nothing  which
more  (1)  honours  our  manhood  than  to  submit  at  once  to  the  known  will  of  God,
whether  by  pursuing  our  path,  or  by  returning  in  our  way,  or  by  holding  our
hand.  There  is  nothing  which  more  (2)  conduces  to  our  own  spiritual  elevation  and
dignity.  Before  honour  is  humility ;  if  we  humble  ourselves,  when  wrong,  we  begin
at  once  to  enter  the  path  which  leads  to  true  exaltation.  There  is  nothing  which
more  (3)  conducts  to  lasting  usefulness  and  joy.  If  Zerubbabel  had  rejected  the
counsel  of  the  Lord,  he  would  certainly  have  suffered.  As  it  was,  he  was  honoured
and  enriched  of  heaven. — 0.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  V.


Recommencement  of  the  btjildinq  in
lUE  SECOND  TEAK  OF  Darius.  Preaching
op  HAoaAi  AND  Zechariah  (ch.  v.  1,  2).
It  appears  from  the  extant  prophecies  of
these  two  prophets  that  the  long  frustration
of  their  hopes  had  had  its  natural  effect  on
the  spirits  of  the  people.  They  had  begun
to  weary  of  endeavours  which  produced  no
practical  result,  and  to  despair  of  accom-
plishing an  object  which  all  their  eSorts  did
not  perceptibly  advance.    A  reaction  had  set


in.  The  burning  enthusiasm  which  had
shown  itself  on  the  first  arrival  of  the  exiles
with  Zerubbabel  (ch.  ii  68,  69  ;  iii.  11)  had
faded  away ;  indolence  had  succeeded  to
activity,  and  a  selfish  desire  of  comfort  to
zeal  for  the  honour  of  God.  Instead  of
watching  eagerly  for  an  opportunity  of  re-
commencing the  great  work,  and  seizing  the
first  occasion  that  offered  itself,  the  people
had  come  to  acquiesce  in  its  indefinite  post-
ponement, and  to  say  among  themselves,
"  The  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  th*
Lord's  house  should  be  built "  (Haggai  L  IX


OB.  ▼.  1,  2.]


THE  BOOK  OP  EZKA.


66


Laying  aside  all  idea  of  moving  further  in
'  the  matter  of  the  temple,  they  had  turned
their  energies  to  the  practical  object  of  estab-
lishing themselves  in  good  and  comfortable
houses  {ibid.  I  i,  9).  The  great  revolution
in  Persia,  by  which  the  Pseudo-Smerdia  was
dethroned  and  slain,  Magism  put  down,  and
the  (comparatively)  pure  religion  of  Zoroaster
re-established  as  the  religion  of  the  Persian
state,  failed  to  stir  their  minds  or  raise
their  hopes.  A  whole  year  was  allowed  to
elapse,  and  nothing  was  done,  no  fresh  effort
made.  It  was  the  second  year  of  King
Darius  (Ezra  iv.  24) — nay,  it  was  the  sixth
mordh  at  that  year,  the  month  Elul,  corre-
sponding to  our  September,  as  we  learn  from
Haggai  (i.  1) — and  still  no  step  was  taken.
The  nation  was  "eating,"  and  "drinking,"
and  "  clothing  itself"  (ibid.  i.  6),  and  making
for  itself  "cieled  houses"  (ibid.  ver.  i),  while
the  house  of  God  lay  "  waste  "  (ibid.  ver.  9)
— ^in  that  unsightly  condition  always  pre-
sented by  works  commenced  and  then  sus-
pended for  years.  Even  Zerubbabel  and
Jeshua — the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  rulers —
acquiesced  apparently  in  this  miserable  state
of  things — this  tameness,  sloth,  indifference
to  God's  honour,  and  general  pursuit  of  mere
carnal  delights.  Such  was  the  situation,
when  suddenly,  unexpectedly,  to  the  people's
consternation  rather  than  their  joy,  a  Pro-
phet appeared  upon  the  scene.  "In  the
second  year  of  Darius  the  king,  in  the  sixth
month,  on  the  first  day  of  the  month,  came
■  the  word  of  the  Lord  by  Haggai  the  prophet
unto  Zerubbabel."  Prophecy  had  been  in
abeyance  for  sixteen  years,  since  the  "third
of  Cyrus,"  when  Daniel  uttered  his  last
warning  (Dan.  x.  1).  It  was  now  revived.
Haggai  came  forward,  self-proclaimed  a  pro-
phet of  Jehovah  (Haggai  i.  13),  and  rebuked
the  people  in  the  old  prophetic  tone,  ^nd
■'  stirred  up  the  spirit  of  Zerubbabel  and  the
spirit  of  Jeshua"  (ibid.  ver.  14),  and  by
exhortations,  and  warnings,  and  threats
brought  about  in  little  more  than  three
weeks  (ibid.  ver.  15)  the  resumption  of  the
work,  which  was  henceforth  pressed  forward


with  zeaL  Haggai's  mission  continued  only
for  a  very  short  space — from  September,  B.O.
520,  to  December  of  the  same  year ;  but
before  his  work  came  to  an  end  God  raised
np  a  second  prophet — "  Zechariah  the  son  of
Iddo" — who  carried  on  his  task,  sustained
the  spirit  of  the  people  and  the  rulers,  and
saw  the  happy  accomplishment  of  the  great
undertaking,  which  he  had  previously  an-
nounced as  near  (Zech.  iv.  9),  in  the  sixth
year  of  Darius,  B.O.  516.

Ver.  1.  —  Zechariah  the  son  of  Iddo.
Really  the  grandson  (Zech.  t  1).  But  Bere-
chiah,  his  father,  probably  died  while  he
was  a  child,  and,  being  brought  up  by  Iddo,
he  was  called  "the  son  of  Iddo."  Pro-
phesied unto  the  Jews.  The  addresses  of
Haggai  and  Zechariah  were  only  occasion-
ally "  prophetic,"  as  we  now  commonly  un-
derstand the  word.  But  in  the  language  of
the  Biblical  writers  aU  religious  teaching  is
"  prophesying,"  and  Ezra  here  refers  mainly
to  the  exhortations  addressed  to  the  Jews  by
Zechariah  and  Haggai.

Ver.  2. — Then  rose  np  Zerubbabel  .  .
and  Jeshua.  Haggai's  preaching  was  espe-
cially addressed  to  these  two  leaders  (Haggai
L  1),  and  their  spirit  was  especially  "stiiTed
up"  (ibid.  ver.  14)  by  his  preaching.  The
prcphets  of  God — Haggai  and  Zechariah —
were  with  them,  throughout  their  work,
helping  them ;  and  that  in  various  ways.
1.  By  direct  command  to  the  people — "  Go
up  to  the  mountain,  and  bring  wood,  and
build  the  house  "  (Haggai  L  8) ;  2.  By  warn-
ings— "  Because  of  mine  house  that  is  waste
.  .  .  therefore  the  heaven  over  you  is  stayed
from  dew,  and  the  earth  is  stayed  from  her
fruit"  (tJid.  vers.  9, 10) ;  3.  By  exhortations
—"Be  strong,  0  Zerubbabel,  saith  the  Lord;
and  be  strong,  0  Joshua,  son  of  Josedech,
the  high  priest;  and  be  ye  strong,  all  ye
people  of  the  land,  saith  the  Lord,  and
work  "  (Haggai  ii.  4) ;  and  4.  By  encouraging
prophecy — ' '  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have
laid  the  foundation  of  this  house ;  his  hands
shall  also  finish  it"  (ZecK  iv.  9);  and  "the
glory  of  this  latter  house  shall  be  greater
than  that  of  the  former,  saith  the  Lord  of
Hosts:  and  in  this  place  will  I  give  peace,
saith  the  Lord  of  Hosts  "  (Haggai  ii.  9).  By
these  and  similar  means  the  two  prophet
aroused  a  spirit  of  enthusiasm,  which  caused
the  work  to  make  rapid  progress,  and  was  an
invaluable  assistance.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  work  revived.     How  completely  the  work  described  in  thes-
reraes  was  a  revival  of  the  previouB  work  of  building  the  temple,  as  desc  ih  d
in  chaps,  i. — iii,  may  be  Been  oj  the  use  of  the  word  "  began "  in  ver.  2.    Even
czBA.  y


66  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  v.  1,  2.

"  Zerubbabel "  and  "  Jeshua,"  the  leaders,  had  been  remiss  and,  as  it  were,  dfad
to  the  enterprise  ;  consequently,  in  again  going  on  with  it,  had  again,  as  it  were,
to  "  begin."  Tliis  seems  also  the  best  explanation  of  the  singular  way  in  which
Haggai  (ii.  18)  and  Zechariah  (viii.  9)  speak  o£  the  "foundation"  of  the  I,ord's
house  as  having  been  "  laid  "  at  this  time.  This  second  "  f  ouhdation,"  in  the  reign
of  Darius,  led  to  sc  much  more  than  the  first  did  in  that  of  Cyrus,  and  pioved  so
much  more  worthy,  therefore,  of  such  a  name  in  the  issue,  that,  not  unnaturally,  it
got  almost  to  monopolise  that  name  even  on  prophetic  lips.  It  is  thus,  in  another
spheie,  that  historians  speak  of  the  Roman  empire  as  being  founded  by  Augustus
Caesar,  though  in  reality  he  only  re-established  in  a  more  abiding  form  (as  it  turned
out)  what  his  predecessor,  Julius  Caesar,  had  previously  founded  and  lost.  Strict!}'
speaking,  indeed,  would  either  of  these  first  foundations  have  been  a  foundation
practically  if  it  had  not  been  afterwards  followed  up  and,  as  it  were,  superseded  by  a
second  ?  How  this  happy  resurrection  of  a  buried  cause  was  brought  about  in  this
instance  is  the  special  point  now  to  consider.  It  was  by  the  indications  of  Providence,
we  shall  find,  in  the  first  place  ;  and  by  the  voice  of  prophecy,  in  the  next.

I.  The  INDICATIONS  of  Providence.  Piovidence  had  spoken  to  the  people,  in  the
interim  between  the  visit  of  Rehum  (ch.  iv.  23)  and  the  time  at  which  our  chapter
opens,  in  various' ways.  1.  In  the  language  of  hope.  A  change  of  rulers  had  taken
place — both  of  chief  rulers  and  also  of  subordinates.-  Darius  instead  o*.  Artaxerxes ;
Tatnai,  Ac.  (ch.  v.  3)  instead  of  Rehum,  &c.  This  was  something  of  itself.  When
things  are  as  bad  as  they  can  be,  no  change,  to  say  the  least,  can  be  for  the  worse.
In  such  a  case,  moreover,  a  violent  change,  such  as  this  which  brought  Darius
Hystaspis  to  the  throne  in  place  of  the  usurper  Pseudo-Smerdis,  and  which  probably,
therefore,  affected  the  empire  in  all  its  provinces,  was  of  a  stUl  more  hopeful  de-
scription. How  likely  that  the  hand  which  took  the  previous  monarch's  crown  should
also  reverse  his  policy  !  Especially  as,  in  this  instance  (and  it  is  almost  certain
that  some  nimours  of  this  would  reach  the  ears  of  the  Jews),  the  new  king  was
showing  almost  ostentatious  respect  to  the  name  and  memory  of  that  Cyrus 'who
had  been  so  favourable  to  the  Jews.  To  men  anxious  to  be  at  work  again,  this  would
have  been  great  encouragement  to  begin.  2.  In  the  language  of  blessing.  Judging
from  the  apparently  royal  luxury  which  some  of  the  returned  Jews  were  enabled  to
indulge  in  (Jer.  xxii.  14 ;  Haggai  i.  4),  the  means  of  recommencing  the  work  must
have  been  somehow  placed  in  their  power.  This,  also,  a  call  to  do  so  (comp.  Deut.
viii.  12, 17, 18 ;  G-al.  vi.  10 ;  James  iv.  17).  3.  In  the  language  of  affliction.  These
other  calls  not  being  attended  to,  there  came  one  of  a  different  kind.  God  met  the
people  in  their  path  of  disobedience,  as  the  angel  met  Balaam  (Num.  xxii.  32),  with
signs  of  displeasure.  The  blessings  he  had  given  being  misused,  he  began  to
withdraw  them.  Instead  of  plenty  there  was  "  dearth  "  (Haggai  i.  11),  to  the  great
impoverishment  (ver.  6)  and  sore  disappointment  (begin,  ver.  9)  of  them  all.  See
further  Zech.  viii.  9, 10  as  to  the  wide  extent  and  deep  severity  of  this  visitation ;  and
also  as  to  the  precise  time  of  its  occurrence,  viz. ,  just  "  before  "  the  people  for  a  second
time  ^aid  the  "foundations"  of  God's  house.  Putting  these  things  together,  were
they  not  a  loud  constructive  call  to  begin?  So  fair  an  opening,  such  ample  means,
such  a  clear-timed  judgment,  what  does  it  all  mean  ?  To  this  effect,  at  least,  the
Jewish  elders  ought,  in  such  circumstances,  to  inquire  (see  end  of  Job  x.  2).

II.  The  VOICE  of  PBOPHECY.  It  was  the  special  privilege,  however,  of  Israel  to
have  more  than  "  constructive ''  calls  from  God's  throne.  He  was  graciously  pleased
to  make  known  his  will  to  them  by  articulate  speech  (Deut.  iv.  33 ;  Rom.  iii.  1,  2).
So,  accordi'gly,  it  was  here.  Besides  these  silent  gestures  on  the  part  of  Providence,
so  to  call  them,  there  were  direct  verbal  utterances  also  from  the  lips  of  those  who
were  authorised  to  speak  to  Israel  in  his  name.  Two  such  men,  two  of  these
prophets,  Huggai  and  Zechariah,  raised  up  especially,  as  it  appears,  for  this  special
emergency,  prophesied  at  that  time  to  these  returned  Jews  (ch.  v.  1).  Much
importance  seems  attached  here  to  this  fact.  These  prophets  prophesied  to  these
Jews,  it  is  said,  "  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel  which  was  upon  them."  Being
God's  people — being,  in  fact,  the  very  heart  and  hope  of  God's  people  at  that

■  By  marrying,  «.  g.,  two  of  the  daughters  of  Cyras.    See  Wordtworth  on  tL  10.


M.  ▼.  1, 1]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  67

particular  moment — God's  prophets  were  commissioned  to  recognise  and  address
them  as  such.  Well  might  the  people  listen,  that  being  the  case.  The  purport,  also,
of  the  message  thus  sent  to  them  was  just  as  much  to  the  point.  A  mere  glance
at  the  extant  prophecies  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah  will  suffice  to  show  this.  The
prophecies  sent,  e.  g.,  were  just  what  was  needed  — 1.  In  the  way  of  appeal.  "Thus
saith  the  Lord  of  hosts,  Consider  "  (Haggai  i.  5) ;  so  again  i.  7, "  Consider ; "  so,  twice
over,  and  with  a  special  note  of  urgency, in  ii.  18:  "Consider  now  from  this  day  and
upward  . . .  consider. "  Consider  what  you  are  doing,  and  what  you  ought  to  be  doing,
in  your  present  circumstances.  Consider  their  meaning  and  message,  and  what  they
are  now  saying  to  you,  in  effect.  2.  In  the  way  of  interpretation  and  explanation.
7%{3  is  what  these  circumstances  are  saying  to  you,  viz.,  that  it  is  "  time  "  to  build  the
Lord's  house  (Haggai  i.  1 — 3).  There  is  no  further  change  to  be  waited  for.  Now,
under  your  present  ruler,  is  the  "time"  to  begin.  Your  recent  blessings  mean  this
(ch.  i.  4).  Your  present  trials  mean  it  too  {ibid.  vers.  6 — 11).  Thus  did  prophecy,  in
this  case,-interpret  Providence, and  explain  the  "signs,"  as  it  were, cf  those  "times."
3.  In  the  way  of  promise.  Our  present  history  seems  to  speak  of  this  particularly
in  the  end  of  ver.  2 — "the  prophets  of  God  helping  them."  The  first  result  of  th
appeal  and  remonstrance  above  spoken  of  seems  to  have  been  a  feeling  of  "fear"
(Haggai  i.  end  of  ver.  12).  As  soon  as  this  began  to  manifest  itself  (see  middle  of
same  verse)  in  a  spirit  of  obedience,  the  voice  of  promise  was  heard.  "  Then  spake
Haggai  the  Lobd's  messenger  in  the  Lobd'.s  message  unto  the  people,  saying,  I  am
with  you,  saith  the  Lord  "  (ch.  i.  13).  Within  a  short  month  after  (comp.  ch.  i.  15,
and  ii.  1)  came  another  and  larger  promise  (ch.  ii.  2 — 9)  ;  and  two  others  again  from
the  same  prophet  in  about  two  months  from  that  time.  Besides  that  notable  series
of  eight  prophetic  visions,  mainly  of  hope  and  enoouragementj  from  the  prophet
Zechariah,  before  the  close  of  the  same  year  (Zech.  i.  7 — vi.  16).  So  plentifully  was
this  precious  dew  vouchsafed  at  this  special  season  of  growth  ;  and  so  harmoniouslj
did  all  these  various  changes,  dispensations,  and  voices  work  together  for  this  revival
of  God's  work.

From  these  considerations  we  see — 1.  The  duty  of  studying  God^s  works :  hii-
works  in  providence,  and  in  nature  too,  so  far  as  we  have  opportunities  for  so  doing,
because  in  all  of  them  he  has  something  to  say  to  us,  if  we  are  only  able  to  under-
stand it.  This  applies  especially  to  those  works  or  doings  of  God  which  concern  oui
own  persons  and  times,  because  we  may  almost  say  of  such  doings  that  they  are
presented  to  us  for  study.  Note  the  comparison  on  this  subject  between  nature  and
providence  in  Matt.  xvi.  2,  3 ;  and  see  1  Chron.  xii.  32.  2.  The  duty  of  listening
to  God's  word.  Partly  on  account  of  the  clearer  significance  which  it  gives  to
God's  works ;  partly  because  of  the  additional  message  which  it  brings  of  its  own.
For  the  language  of  some  of  God's  works  see  Ps.  xix.  1 — 6,  and  comp.  Rom.  i.
19,  20.  For  the  further  language  of  God's  Word  see  same  Ps.  7 — 9.  Compare
also,  as  showing  the  specially  exalted  and  complementary  character  of  prophecy  or
revelation,  the  remarkable  declaration  of  Ps.  cxxxviii.  2,  and  2  Pet.  i.  19 — 21.
The  dark  page  of  God's  doings  (for  so  it  is  to  us,  see  Ps.  xovii.  2)  should  never  be
neglected  ;  but  it  never  can  be  safely  interpreted  apart  from  the  plainer  page  of  his
word.  We  may  also  see  from  these  considerations  wha'  j's— 3.  The  central  topic  oj
all  prophecy.  The  building  of  God's  house  by  God's  Israel  pointed  forward  in
manifold  ways  to  the  coming  and  work  of  God's  Son.  That  house  was  a  well-known
tvpe  of  his  body  (John  ii.  19—21).  In  that  restored  house  he  himself  was  to  appear
fHaggaiii.  7;  Mai.  iii.l ;  Luke  ii.  25— 30).  And  out  of  that  figurative  "house"  or
P'lmily  of  Israel,  as  their  peculiar  crown  and  salvation,  and  as  a  blessing  to  all  other
"iinilies  on  earth,  he  was  to  arise.  When,  therefore,  the  work  of  building  that
'louse,  under  apparently  hopeless  circumstances,  has  to  be  revived,  how  fittingly  does
the  spirit  of  prophecy  suddenly  reappear  on  the  scene,  to  stimulate,  direct,  and
encourage  these  men,  who  were,  virtually,  building  for  all  mankind  in  building  for
rheir  own  Messiah.  It  may  remind  us  of  those  well-known  passages,  John  v.  39 ;
\ct8  X.  43 ;  Rev.  xix.  10.  May  it  teach  us  also  to  give  that  adorable  Saviour  a
umilarly  pre-eminent  place  in  our  thoughts  I

V  t


M  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  v.  1,  %


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vera.  1, 2. — The  inspiration  of  prophecy/.  Through  the  hostility  of  the  Samaritans,
who  obtained  authonty  from  Artaxerxes,  the  work  of  building  the  temple  was
interrupted.  This  interruption  seems  to  have  conf  nienced  under  Cyrus  (ch.  iv.  6).
It  was  continued  under  the  brief  reign  of  an  upstart  who  feigned  himself  to  be  the
brother  of  Ahasuerus ;  and  it  was  carried  on  "  unto  the  second  year  of  Darius  king
of  Persia."  Thus  the  work  was  stopped  for  about  sixteen  years.  "  Then  the
prophets,"  &c.     Here  notice  that —

I.  The  inspiration  of  prophecy  is  rousing.  1.  The  people  now  needed  rousing.
(1)  During  the  stoppage  of  the  building  they  had  cooled  in  their  zeal  for  the  house
of  the  Lord.  Had  they  examined  their  hearts  they  might  have  seen  this,  and  they
might  have  inferred  from  it  that  God  must  be  displeased.  But  they  had  not  the
courage  to  do  this.  Query — Are  we  not  slow  to  examine  our  own  hearts,  and  to
draw  faithful  inferences  from  their  state  ?  (2)  If  they  looked  around  they  might
have  seen  the  tokens  of  Divine  displeasure.  For,  year  after  year,  the  heavens
refused  their  dew,  and  the  scanty  harvests  were  smitten  with  "  blasting,  and  with
mildew,  and  with  hail."  Query — Are  we  not  slow  to  see  the  hand  of  God  in  our
afflictions  ?  Reflect — What  greater  calamity  could  befall  us  than  that  God  should
leave  us  to  ourselves  I  2.  Haggai  brought  home  the  truth  to  them.  (1)  His  first
commission  was  to  awaken  them  to  a  sense  of  their  growing  selfishness  and  apathy
(see  Haggai  i.  1 — 6).  Query — How  far  are  we  ever  justified  in  quietly  "  dwelling  in
cieled  houses  "  while  the  work  of  God  is  neglected  ?  (2)  Then  he  reminded  them
that  the  blast  upon  their  harvests  was  from  God,  and  incited  them  to  arise  and
build  (see  Haggai  i.  6 — 11).  (3)  This  message  from  God  had  the  desired  efEect  (see
Haggai  i.  1 — 12  ;  comp.  text).  What  part  Zechariah  took  at  this  early  date  we  are
not  particularly  informed.    3.  They  were  satis^ed  with  the  credentials  of  the  prophet.

(1)  What  these  were  we  are  not  told.  Miracles  might  have  authenticated  him.  This
was  notably  the  case  with  Moses.  Or  he  may  have  foretold  the  drought  through
which  they  had  passed.  In  this  way  Samuel  "  was  established  to  be  a  prophet  of
the  Loid"  (1  Sam.  iii.  19,  20).  (2)  In  whatever  way  it  may  have  been,  Haggai  so
prophesied,  "  in  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel,"  that  there  was  no  doubt  about  him.
Look  at  this  expression  (see  Exod.  iii.  13 — 20 ;  xxxiii.  19  ;  comp.  also  Num.  xiv.  17),
where  "  power  "  is  put  for  "  name,"  as  in  Exod.  xxxiv.  5,  6).  Reflect,  gratefully,
that  we  have  the  truth  of  God  upon  the  clearest  testimony.  The  Scriptures  are
authenticated  to  us  not  only  by  miracles,  but  by  the  ever-accumulating  evidence  of
prophecy,  and  by  the  deep  experiences  of  the  heart.

II.  The  inspiration  of  prophecy  is  sustaining.  "And  with  them  were  the
prophets  of  God  helping  them."  1.  It  sustains  wncZer  the  burdens  of  the  work  oj
God.  (1)  The  work  is  stupendous.  Many  interests  are  involved  In  it.  Many
workmen  are  engaged  in  it.     If  all  these  were  loyal,  still  the  work  would  be  heavy.

(2)  Haggai  therefore,  four  and  twenty  days  after  his  first  commission,  again  appeared
with  needed  words.  "Then  spake  Haggai  the  Lord's  messenger  in  the  Lord's
message,  saying,  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord."  What  a  blessed  assurance  I  How
spirit  stirring  !  (Haggai  i.  13,  14 ;  see  also  Exod.  xxxiii.  14, 15.)  2  It  sustains  agrfflMwi
the  murmuring  of  God's  people.  (1)  Sons  of  Belial  will  for  vcrj-  perversity  cause
trouble.  There  are  also  crotchety  persons  among  the  godly  who  embarrass  their
leaders.  And  there  are  croakers  who  have  a  morbid  pleasure  in  disparaging  the
good  tilings  of  the  present  by  comparing  them  vrith  the  things  of  the  past  (see  ch.
iii.  12).  (2)  Haggai,  seven  and  twenty  days  after  his  former  message,  again
appeared  to  strengthen  the  hands  of  the  faithful  against  these.  In  doing  this  he
uttered  a  very  glorious  prophecy,  showing  how  by  the  presence  of  Jesus  in  this  dis-
paraged building  it  should  come  to  exceed  the  glory  of  the  temple  of  Solomon  (see
Hagyiii  ii.  1 — 9).  Note — This  prophecy  should  convince  the  Jews.  They  admit  that
the  Sliekinah  never  came  to  the  second  temple  ;  that  temple  is  now  no  more.  If  the
presence  of  Jesus  did  not  constitute  the  greater  glory  of  the  second  house,  what
did?  3.  It  sustains  against  the  assaults  of  enemies.  (1)  Opposition  reappears,
now  led  by  Tatnai  and  Shethar-boznai,  who  question  the  right  of  the  Jews  to  resume


CH.  T.  1, 2.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA  69

the  building  which  had  been  stopped  by  command  of  Artaxerxes  (vers.  3,  4).
^2)  Zechariah  now  appeared.  He  opened  his  commission  by  exhorting  to  repentance
(Zech.  i.  1 — 6).  Note— When  trials  come  we  should  search  our  hearts,  and,  if  we  see
cause,  amend  our  ways.  (3)  Haggai  also  followed  with  words  of  encouragement,
and  assurances  that,  despite  the  opposition,  the  work  would  be  prospered.  Zechariah
subsequently  gave  them  like  assurances.  These  messages  came  at  seasonable
intervals  to  help  the  leaders  and  the  workers.  Reflection — AH  these  encouragements
beloi^  to  those  building  the  spiritual  temple,  for  the  prophecies  have  an  ulterior
reference  to  gospel  times.    Let  us  use  the  inspirations  of  prophecy. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 5.— A  faithful  ministry  in  the  Chitrch.  I.  That  it  is  associated  with
THB  Divine  name.  "In  the  name  of  the  God  of  Israel"  ^ver.  1).  1.  It  advances
in  the  Divine  Mame.  These  two  prophets  came  to  Israel  in  the  name  of  God ;  a
faithful  ministry  is  commissioned  by  God,  has  his  authority,  and  is  qualified  by
him  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  2.  It  partakes  of  the  Divine  Character.  These  prophets
must  bear  in  their  conduct  the  purity  of  God,  and  in  their  words  the  mercy  of  God  ;
a  faithful  ministry  must  exhibit  the  Divine  Character.  3.  It  recognises  the  Divine
Covenant.  These  two  prophets  came  to  Israel  as  the  covenant  people  engaged  in  a
great  work ;  a  faithful  ministry  is  for  the  Church  in  its  redemptive  relationships.

II.  That  it  is  required  in  times  of  moral  degeneracy.  The  building  operation!
of  Israel  had  ceased ;  Israel  had  settled  down  to  an  easy  life,  and  was  reluctant
to  enter  again  upon  the  arduous  task  of  civil  and  religious  restoration.  1.  This
faithful  ministry  was  necessary.  The  Israelites  were  dwelling  in  ceiled  houses,
and  God's  house  was  waste  (Haggai  i.  4).  They  required  to  see  the  wrong  of  this ;
and  who  will  show  it  them  if  the  prophets  of  God  do  not  ?  2.  It  was  timely.  It
was  a  word  in  season  to  the  people ;  they  needed  to  be  called  from  indiiference  to
their  great  work.  A  faithful  prophet  will  adapt  his  words  to  the  condition  of  his
hearers,  and  seek  to  engage  the  Church  in  the  duty  of  the  hour.  3. -It  was  effective.
The  people  no  longer  "  earned  wages  to  put  into  a  bag  with  holes,"  but  they  feared
the  Lord,  and  entered  upon  his  work  (Haggai  i.  6).  Duty  is  really  more  remunerative
than  luxury.  See  then  the  reviving  efEect  which  two  earnest  men  may  exert  within
a  lukewarm  Church ;  they  quicken  its  fading  life  and  inspire  its  languid  work.  A
faithful  ministry  is  most  influential  for  good.

III.  That  the  spiritoal  is  the  medium  of  its  influence.  "  Prophesied  unto
the  Jews."  1.  Not  carnal.  No  sensational  appeals  were  made  to  set  the  luxurious
Israelites  to  build  again  the  ruined  temple ;  but  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  they  were
urged  to  duty.  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  spiritual ;  the  word  of  God  is  the
preacher's  power.  Christ's  ministry  was  spiritual.  2.  Not  coercive.  The  sword
did  not  drive  the  Israelites  out  of  their  ceiled  houses ;  but  the  word  of  God  spoken
by  his  servants,  working  in  the  conscience.  The  truth  is  attractive,  not  coercive.
Christ  drew  sinners  to  hear  him.  3.  Not  cimning.  These  two  prophets  did  not
seek  by  cunning  arts  to  win  the  Israelites  from  luxury  to  work  for  God  ;  but  by
faitiif ul  words  of  remonstrance.  Christ  sought  not  to  win  men  by  artifice,  but  by
a  solemn  statement  of  fact  and  duty.  The  world  will  not  he  subdued  to  virtue  by
the  statesman,  by  the  warrior,  by  the  educationalist,  but  by  the  prophet.

IV.  That  its  welfare  will  be  enhanced  bt  the  co-operation  of  good  men.
"  Then  rose  up  Zerubbabel "  (ver.  2).  The  prophets  alone  are  morally  powerful  ;  but
much  more  so  when  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  are  allied  with  them.  1.  The  allii'n;e
augments  numbers.  The  work  of  restoration  gathers  strength  by  numerical  addition,
especially  by  the  addition  of  influential  men  like  Zerubbabel.  The  ministry  neeh
numerical  support ;  numbers  increase  the  force  of  the  testimony :  exhibit  the  power  of
the  gospel ;  aid  the  argument  of  the  truth;  are  prophetic  of  future  increase.  2.  Tlis
alliance  ensures  efficiency.-  Zerubbabel  will  aid,  advise,  support  the  two  propl  eLs,
and  they  in  turn  will  aid  him ;  this  combined  agency  will  inspire  Israel  with  duty
and  courage.  Four  men  can  do  what  two  cannot  (Mark  ii.  3).  In  the  multitude  of
counsellors  there  is  wisdom.

V.  That  it  leads  the  Church  to  the  holy  enterprise  for  which  it  is  called.
1.  Prochietive  work.  "  To  build  the  house  of  God  "  (ver.  2).  But  for  iLese  two  pro-
phets it  is  likely  that  Israel  would  have  contirmed  to  dwell  in  their  ceiled  houses,


TO


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  V.  3—17


and  have  neglected  the  templB.  The  Church  would  be  much  more  unmindful  oj
Christian  work  than  it  is  were  it  not  for  its  faithful  ministers.  They  awaken  its
memory.  They  quicken  its  conscience.  They  arouse  its  affections.  They  give  it  a
good  personal  example  by  coming  themselves  to  build  the  house  of  God ;  well  nigh  all
houses  of  God  in  the  earth  would  be  unbuilt  but  for  the  ministers  of  the  gospel.
2.  Permanent  work.    The  house  endures  when  those  who  built  it  are  gone.

VI.  That  it  is  subk  to  meet  with  impediments  in  the  enterprise  it  contkm-
FLATEB.  "Then  the  prophets,  Haggai  the  prophet"  (ver.  1).  "At  the  same  time
came  to  them  Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the  river  "  (ver.  3).  When  the  prophet
comes  to  a  Church  to  aid  its  work,  Satan  generally  sends  agencies  to  hinder  it.
The  Satanic : — 1.  Simultaneous.  The  prophets  and  the  hostile  governors  come  to-
gether; the  spiritual  and  the  satanic  move  side  by  side.  2.  Inquisitive.  "Who
hath  commanded  you  to  build  this  house?"  How  the  satanic  interrogates  the
spiritual.  3.  Overruled.  "But  the  eye  of  the  Lord  was  upon  the  elders  of  the
Jews."  Providence  is  co-operative  with  a  faithful  ministry,  and  helps  to  overcome
nil  hindrances. — E.


EXPOSITION.


Renewal  of  opposition  on  the  part
of  the  neiohbourino  heathen.  letter
written  by  them  and  sent  to  Darius
(vers.  8 — 17).  Once  more  opposition  showed
itsel£  Tatnai,  a  high  officer,  called  "go-
vernor on  this  side  the  river"  (ver.  3),  per-
haps satrap  of  Syria,  and  Shethar-boznai,  or
Sitrabarzanes,  a  Persian  noble  probably,  at
this  tim*  took  the  lead,  and  learning  that
the  builaing  was  making  progress,  came  in
person  to  Jerusalem,  and  demanded  to  know
by  what  authority  the  temple  and  city  were
being  restored.  Zerubbabel  seems  to  have
answered,  "  By  the  authority  of  a  decree  of
Cyrus,  issued  in  the  year  that  he  became
king  of  Babylon"  (ver.  13);  whereupon  a
second  question  was  asked,  "  What  are  the
names  of  the  men  responsible  for  carrying
on  the  work ! "  Zerubbabel  answered  that
he  was  alone  responsible,  giving  his  name  as
Sheshbazzar,  and  declaring  himself  to  be
acting  under  a  commission  received  from
Cyrus  (ver.  15),  and  never  revoked.  There-
upon Tatnai  and  Shethar-boznai  seem  to
have  proposed  a  cessation  of  the  building
until  reference  could  be  made  to  Darius  and
his  pleasure  learnt  (ver.  6) ;  but  Zerubbabel
declined  to  agree  to  this,  and  the  work  pro-
ceeded without  intermission  {ibid. ).  Mean-
while, a  letter  was  written  to  Darius,  not
unfairly  stating  the  case,  and  suggesting
that  the  state  archives  should  be  searched
for  the  decree  ascribed  to  Cyrus,  that  it
might  be  seen  what  exactly  it  was  that  the
decree  sanctioned,  and  further  that  the  king
should  expressly  dedare  what  his  own  plea-


sure was  in  the  matter  (ver.  17).  This  letter
Tatnai,  in  his  capacity  of  satrap,  despatched
to  the  court  by  special  messenger,  and  so
left  the  business  to  the  decision  of  Darius
and  his  counsellors,  without  further  seeking
to  influence  him.  Remark  the  strong  con-
trast between  this  despatch  and  that  of  the
Samaritans.  In  the  Samaritan  letter  private
pique  and  enmity  show  themselves — Jerusa-
lem is  "the  rebellious  and  the  bad  city"
(ch.  iv.  12),  "hurtful  unto  kings  and  pro-
vinces" (ibid.  ver.  15);  its  intention  to
revolt  is  assumed  (ver.  13);  the  king  is
warned  that  his  dominion  and  revenue  are
in  danger  (ver.  16);  no  hint  is  given  of
there  having  ever  been  any  such  document
as  the  decree  of  Cyrus ;  no  reference  is  made
to  Sheshbazzar  or  the  royal  commission  that
he  had  received;  altogether,  the  case  is
stated  as  strongly  as  possible  against  the
Jews,  with  great  and  manifest  unfairness.
Here,  on  the  contrary,  where  the  person  who
takes  up  the  matter  is  the  Persian  governor,
a  dispassionate  tone  prevails ;  no  charges  are
made ;  no  abuse  uttered ;  the  letter  is  con-
fined to  a  statement  of  facts  and  an  inquiry ;
the  Jews  are  allowed  to  give  their  own
account  of  their  proceedings,  nearly  half
the  letter  being  their  statement  of  their
own  case  (vers.  11 — 16);  the  decree  of  Cyrus
is  brought  into  prominence,  asserted  on  the
one  hand,  not  denied  on  the  other;  that
it  should  be  searched  for  is  suggested ;  and
finally  there  is  a  simple  request  l^at  the
king  will  declare  his  will  in  respect  of  the
building.


«!H.  V.  3—17.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,


71


Ver.  3. — Tatnai,  governor  on  this  side  the
river.  The  title  given  to  Tatnai  is  the  same
which  is  assigned  to  Zerubhabel,  both  in  ch.
vL  7  and  in  Haggai  (i.  1,  14,  &c.),  viz.,
pechah,  which  ia  a  somewhat  vague  term  of
authority,  translated  sometimes  "  captain  "
(1  Kings  IX.  24  ;  Dan.  iii.  2,  3,  &c),  some-
times "  deputy  "  (Esther  viii  9 ;  ix.  3),  but
generally,  as  here,  "governor."  The  ety-
mology is  uncertain,  but  seems  not  to  be
Semitic  (see  Pusey's  'Daniel,' pp.  570 — 572).
The  respective  rank  of  Tatnai  and  Zerub-
babtl  is  indicated,  not  by  this  term,  but  by
what  follows  it.  Tatnai  was  pechah  "be-
yond the  river,"  i.  e.  governor  of  the  whole
tract  west  of  the  Euphrates;  Zerubbabel
was  pechah  of  Judah  only.  A  Greek  writer
would  have  called  the  one  "  satrap  of  Syria,"
the  other  "  sub-satrap  of  Judsea.  It  was  the
duty  of  Tatnai  to  watch  the  proceedings  of
his  sub-satraps.

Ver.  4. — Then  said  we  unto  them.  It  is
impossible  that  the  existing  text  can  be
sound  here.  Ezra  must  have  written,  "  Then
said  they  to  them."  Tatnai  and  Shethar-
boznai  followed  up  their  first  question  by  a
second,  "What  are  the  names  of  the  men
that  make  this  building?"  (comp.  below,
vers,  i,  10).

Ver.  5. — The  eye  of  their  God  was  upon
the  elders.  "  The  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  upon
the  righteous"  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15)  with  a  jealous
watchfulness,  which  never  for  a  moment
slackens.  "He  withdraweth  not  his  eyes
from  them  "  (Job  xxxvi.  7).  Nothing  hap-
pens to  them  that  he  does  not  know  and
allow.  At  this  time  the  elders,  who  pre-
sided over  the  workmen  employed  in  the
restoration,  were  a  special  subject  of  God's
watchful  care,  so  that  those  who  would  fain
have  hindered  them  could  not.  The  work  of
rebuilding  went  on  uninterruptedly  during
the  whole  time  that  the  messengers  were
away.

Ver.  6.  —  The  Apharsachites  recall  the
'Apharsites"  and  the  "  Apharsathchites  "
of  ch.  iv.  9.  Possibly  all  the  three  forms
are  provincial  variants  of  the  more  correct
Parsaya,  which  appears  in  Daniel  (vi.  28)
as  the  Chaldaean  equivalent  of  "Persian."
Here  the  Apharsachite  "companions"  of
Tatnai  and  Shethar-boznai  are  perhaps  tlie
actual  Persians  who  formed  their  body-guard
and  their  train.

Ver.  8. — We  went  into  the  province  of
Jndaea.  It  has  been  supposed  (Pusey's '  Daniel,'
p.  571),  on  the  strength  of  a  doubtful  passage
in  Nehemiai  (iii.  7),  that  Tatnai  ordinarily
resided  at  Jerusalem.  But  this  expression
indicates  the  contrary.  Most  probably  the
satrap  of  Syria  held  his  court  at  Damascus.
The  house  of  the  great  God  is  a  remarkable
expression  in  the  mouth  of  a  heathen.  It
has  some  parallels,  e.  g.  the  expressions  of


•Cyrus  in  ch.  L  2,  3,  and  of  Nebuchadnezzai
in  Dan.  ii.  47  and  iii.  29  ;  but  they  were
persons  who  had  been  brought  to  the  know-
ledge that  Jehovah  was  the  one  true  God,
under  very  peculiar  and  miraculous  aircum-
stances.  Tatnai,  on  the  other  hand,  repre-
sents the  mere  ordinary  Persian  official ;  and
his  acknowledgment  of  the  God  of  the  Jews
as  "the  great  God  "must  be  held  to  indicate
the  general  belief  of  the  Persians  on  the
subject  (see  the  comment  on  Ezra  i.  2).
Which  is  builded.  Kather,  "being  builded."
With  great  stones.  Literally,  "stones  ol
rolling,"  which  is  commonly  explained  as
stones  so  large  that  they  had  to  be  rolled
along  the  ground.  But  the  squared  stones
used  in  building  neither  were,  nor  could  be,
rolled ;  they  are  always  represented  as
dragged,  generally  on  a  rough  sledge.  And
it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  in  the  "  day  of
small  things"  (Zech.  iv.  10)  the  Jews  were
building  with  very  large  stones.  The  LXX.
translate  "  choice  stones ;"  the  Vulgate  "un-
polished" or  "rough  stone."  Some  of  the
Jewish  expositors  suggest  "marble."  And
timber  is  laid.  A  good  deal  of  timber  had
been  employed  in  the  old  temple,  but  chiefly
for  the  floors  of  chambers  (1  Kings  vi.  10),
for  the  internal  lining  of  the  walls  (ihid.
vers.  9,  15),  and  probably  for  the  roofing.
In  the  new  temple,  timber  seems  to  have
been  employed  also  as  the  main  material  of
the  party-walls.  Here  again  we  have  a  trace
of  the  economy  necessary  in  the  "day  of
small  things."

Ver.  11. — We  are  the  servants  of  the
God  of  heaven  and  earth.  Instead  of  doing
as  they  were  requested,  and  giving  in  a  long
list  of  names  and  titles  of  office,  the  elders
merge  their  individuality  in  this  general
phrase;  as  though  they  would  saj',  "As
individuals,  we  are  nothing ;  as  men  of
mark  in  our  nation,  we  are  nothing;  what
we  do,  we  do  simply  as  servants  of  God,
directed  by  him  (Haggai  i.  8),  bound  to  obey
him,  answerable  only  to  him  for  our  con-
duct." They  speak  of  God  as  "the  God  of
heaven  and  earth  " — a  very  rare  title — partly
in  humble  acknowledgment  of  his  universal
and  absolute  dominion,  as  Christians  speak
when  they  call  God  "the  Maker  of  heaven
and  earth;"  partly  to  impress  favourably
those  to  whom  they  speak,  persons  accus-
tomed to  regard  God  primarily  as  the  Being
who  "gave  mankind  earth  and  heaven"
(Rawlinson's  '  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of
Persia,'  vol  L  pp.  285,  291,  319,  324,  &c.).
And  bnild.  That  is  "rebuUd."  The  house
that  was  builded  these  many  years  ago.
The  old  house,  begun  more  than  400,  finished
nearly  400  years  previously,  and  only  just
beginning  to  rise  again  from  its  ruins,  after
lying  waste  for  nearly  seventy  years.  Which
.  a  great  king  of  Israel  builded  and  set  np


72


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[OH.  V.  3—17


Solomon,  the  greatest  of  the  Jewish  mon-
archs,  if  we  consider  the  extent  and  pros-
perity of  his  kingdom,  and  the  position  that
it  occupied  among  the  other  kingdoms  of
the  eartii  —  a  "great  king"  under  whatever
aspect  we  view  him,  though  one  who  sowed
the  seeds  of  that  corruption  which  ultimately
sapped  the  national  me,  and  provoked  God
to  hring  the  monarchy  to  an  end.

Ver.  12. — Our  fathers  provoked  the  God
of  heaven  nnto  wrath.  Mainly  hy  their
long  series  of  idolatries,  with  the  moral
ahominations  that  those  idolatries  involved —
the  sacrifice  of  children  by  their  own  parents,
the  licentious  rites  belonging  to  the  worship
of  Baal,  and  the  unmentionable  horrors
practised  by  the  devotees  of  the  Dea  Syra.
For  centuries,  with  only  short  and  rare
intervals,  "  the  chief  of  the  priests,  and  the
people,  had  transgressed  very  much  after  all
the  abominations  of  the  heathen,"  and  had
even  "  polluted  the  house  of  the  Lord  which
he  had  hallowed  in  Jerjisalem"  (2  Chron.
zzzri  14).  Therefore,  he  gave  them  into
the  hand  of  Ifebuchadnezzar  the  king^  of
Babylon.  He  punished,  as  he  always  does,
national  apostasy  with  national  destruction.
Making  an  idolatrous  people,  but  a  less  guilty
one,  his  sword,  he  cut  off  Judah,  as  he  had
previously  cut  oif  Israel,  causing  the  national
life  to  cease,  and  even  removing  the  bulk  of
the  people  into  a  distant  country.  Not  by
his  own  power  or  might  did  Nebuchadnezzar
prevaiL  God  could  have  delivered  the  Jews
from  him  as  easily  as  he  had  delivered  them
in  former  days  from  Jabin  (Judges  iv.  2 — 24),
and  from  Zerah  (2  Chron.  xiv.  11 — 15),  and
from  Sennacherib  (2  Kings  xix.  20 — 36).
But  he  was  otherwise  minded ;  he  "gave  them
into  the  hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar  "  (comp.  2
Chron.  xxivL  17).  He  divided  their  counsels,
paralysed  their  resistance,  caused  Pharaoh
Hophra  to  desert  their  cause  (2  Kings  xxiv.
7),  and  left  them  helpless  and  unprotected.
Nebuchadnezzar  was  his  instrument  to  chas-
tise his  guilty  people,  and  in  pursuing  his
own  ends  merely  worked  out  the  purposes  of
the  Almighty.

fer.  13. — In  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  the
king  of  Babylon.  Eecent  discoveries  of  con-
tiact  tablets  have  shown  that  at  Babylon
Cyrus  bore  the  title  of  "king  of  Babylon"
from  the  date  of  his  conquest  of  the  city.
The  same  title  was  passed  on  to  his  success-
ors, Cambyses,  Darius,  fee  Hence  we  find
Artaxerxes  Longimanus  caUed  "king  of
Babylon  "  by  Nehemiah  (xiii  6).


Ver.  14. — The  vessels  also  of  gold  and
silver.  See  ch.  L  7 — 11.  On  the  great  im-
portance attached  to  these  vessels,  see  the
comment  on  ch.  i  7.  So  long  as  they  re-
mained at  Babylon  they  were  a  tangible
evidence  of  the  conquest,  a  glory  to  the
Babylonians,  and  a  disgrace  to  the  Jews.
Their  retention  was  a  perpetual  desecration.
Their  restoration  by  Cyrus  was  an  act  at
once  of  piety  and  of  kindliness.  On  the
temple  of  Babylon,  out  of  which  Cyrus  took
them,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  L  7.

Ver.  15. — let  the  house  of  God  be  builded
in  his  place.  /.  e.  upon  the  old  holy  site —
the  place  where  Abraham  offered  his  son
Isaac,  in  a  €gure  (Heb.  xL  17 — 19),  where
the  an^l  stood  and  stayed  the  pestilence
in  David's  time  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  16 — 18),  and
where  "  the  glory  of  the  Lord  descended  and
filled  the  house  under  Solomon  (2  Chron.
vu.  1).

Yer.  16.  — Since  that  time  even  until  now
hath  it  been  in  building.  It  is  not  quite
clear  whether  these  words  are  part  of  the
answer  given  by  the  Jews  to  Tatnai,  which
he  reports  to  Darius  (see  ver.  11),  orTatnai's
own  statement  of  what  he  believes  to  have
been  the  fact.  Perhaps  the  latter  view  is  the
more  probable  ;  and  we  may  suppose  Tatnai
not  to  have  been  aware  that  from  the  second
year  of  Cyrus  to  the  commencement  of  the
reign  of  Smerdis,  and  again  during  the  latter
part  of  this  reign  and  the  first  eighteen
months  of  the  reign  of  Darins,  the  work  had
been  suspended.

Ver.  17. — Let  there  be  search  made  in
the  king's  treasure  house.  The  Vulgate  has
"in  the  king's  library;"  and  this,  though
not  the  literal  rendering,  is  probably  what
was  intended  by  TatnaL  Libraries  or  record
chambers  were  attached  to  the  royal  resid-
ences under  the  old  Assyrian  and  Babylonian
kings ;  and  the  practice  was  no  doubt  con-
tinued by  the  Persians.  Some  of  these  record
offices  have  been  recently  found,  and  their
stores  recovered.  In  the  year  1850  Mr.
Layard  came  upon  the  royal  library  of  Asshur-
bani-pal  at  Koyunjik,  and  obtained  from  it
several  hundreds  of  documents.  More  re-
cently, in  1875-6,  some  Arab  explorers
happened  upon  a  similar  collection  near
Babylon,  which  yielded  from  3000  to  4000
tablets  ('Transactions  of  the  Society  of
Biblical  Archseology,'  voL  vi  pp.  4,  682).
It  is  quite  possible  that  the  "decree  of
Cyrus  may  still  exist,  and  be  one  day
recovered.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  3 — 17. — Opposition  revived-  We  have  in  these  verses  a  twofold  account
of  two  difEerent  tnings.  In  vers.  3,  4,  in  the  first  place,  we  have  the  historian's
account  o£  tho  Mvived  opposition  called  out  by  the  revival  of  the  work  of  temple-


2H.  V.  S— 17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  73

building  on  the  part  of  the  Jews.  In  vera.  6 — 10  we  have  an  almost  identical  but
slightly  fuller  account  of  the  same  matter  in  the  letter  sent  by  the  opponents  them-
selves to  Darius.  In  ver.  6,  in  the  next  place,  we  have  the  historian's  account  of  the
amount  of  success  to  which  that  revived  opposition  attained,  viz.,  to  obtaining  the
consent  of  the  builders,  whilst  still  justifying  and  continuing  their  operations,  to  refer
the  whole  subject  to  King  Darius.  In  vers.  11 — 17  that  same  letter  of  the  same
•opponents  to  Darius  gives  us  a  fuller  account  of  this  point  also.  Altogether,  we
cannot  help  seeing  how  very  marked  is  the  difference,  so  far  as  the  question  of  result
is  concerned,  between  this  attempt  and  that  made  before.  In  that  other  case,  while
the  appeal  was  pending,  the  work  on  the  spot  almost  expired  of  itself  (ch.  iv.  4).
In  this  case,  although  the  appeal  is  consented  to,  the  work  on  the  spot,  meanwhile,
thrives  to  perfection  (vers.  6,  8).  What  are  the  reasons  of  this  striking  difEerence  ?
So  far  as  second  causes  go,  they  will  be  found,  we  believe,  in  two  things,  viz.,  I.  In
comparatively  greater  moderation  on  the  part  of  the  attack ;  and,  II.  In  compara-
tivefy  greater  vigour  on  the  part  of  the  defence.  Let  ub  proceed  to  see  how  the
whole  story  illustrates  these  two  points.

L  A  WEAKER  ATTACK.  For  example,  it  was  (1)  apparently  not  so  general.  Names
we  read  of  before  (iv.  7,  9),  such  as  Bishlam,  &c.,  the  Dinaites,  &c.,  are  now
mentioned  no  more.  Tatnai  and  Shethar-boznai  are  acting,  if  not  in  ignorance,
yet  in  independence,  of  native  ideas.  So  much  so,  that  the  only  "  companions  "
mentioned  in  this  case,  the  Apharsachites,  are  supposed  by  some  to  be  them-
selves "  Persians  "  of  some  sort.  At  any  rate,  all  the  other  previous  "  companions  "
are  only  conspicuous  now  by  their  absence.  The  present  movement  is  less  for-
midable than  the  previous  one  both  in  numbers  and  names.  Also  the  attack  is  (2)
less  vital.  There  is  no  such  plausible  yet  utterly  fatal  proposal  for  co-operation  in
this  instance  as  that  we  read  of  before ;  only  certain  not  unnatural  and,  all  things
considered,  not  disrespectful  inquiries  are  addressed  to  those  engaged  in  so  evidently
important  a  work.  "  Where  is  your  authority  for  operations  such  as  these  ?  Who
are  the  persons  who  hold  themselves  really  responsible  for  them  ?  "  (See  vers.  3, 4, 9,
10,  reading  "  they  "  for  "  we  "  in  ver.  4  with  Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Arabic  versions,
nnd  even  in  the  Chaldee  with  very  slight  change.)  These  deputy  rulers  would  have
failed  in  their  duty  if  they  had  asked  any  less ;  even  if  we  infer,  as  we  must,  from
ver.  5,  that  their  object  in  so  doing,  at  any  rate  in  the  first  instance,  was  to  "  cause  "
the  Jewish  elders  to  "  cease  "  for  the  time.  Such  opposition,  even  so,  is  very  different
from  that  settled  intention  to  "  frustrate  "  the  Jewish  "  purpose  "  entirely  of  which
we  find  traces  before  (iv.  5).  Oiice  more,  the  attack  is  (8)  less  unreasonable  and
malignant.  The  answer  of  the  elders  to  the  ofBcial  inquiries  put  to  them  is  heard
with  candour,  and  reported  with  truth.  Nor  are  any  charges  made,  as  before,  of
■treachery  or  sedition.  Nor  is  anything  more  proposed  to  the  king  than  a  due  hearing
and  examination  of  the  appeal  which  the  Jews  have  made  to  a  previous  edict  of
Cyrus  in  justification  of  their  conduct  (ver.  17).  Meanwhile,  moreover,  though  ap-
parently with  some  reluctance,  the  chief  authorities  of  the  province  in  which  Judsea  was
situated  have  consented  to  treat  that  justification  as  being,  till  proved  otherwise,
sufficient  and  valid,  by  allowing  that  work  to  go  on  without  endeavouring  to  stop
it  by  menace  or  force.  In  all  this,  if  there  is  something  of  opposition,  as  there
undoubtedly  is,  it  is  not  like  that  of  the  previous  occasion — not  a  wide  conspiracy,
not  a  deadly  aim,  not  a  malignant  effort,  like  that  before.

II.  A  8TE0NGEB  DEFENCE.  The  answer  of  the  Jewish  elders  was  a  good  one — 1.
On  ike  score  of  ^principle.  "  We  are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  "
(ver.  11).  In  other  words,  "  Do  you  ask  our  names  ?  We  are  named  after  the  great
God  (see  ver.  8),  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth.  Do  you  ask  why  we  are  thus  labouring  ?
Because  in  doing  so  we  serve  him  "  (comp.  Acts  xxvii.  23).  It  was  well  for  them
to  put  this  first,  like  soldiers  displaying  the  flag  they  fight  under  on  entering  into  the
battle.  "  Before  all  things  we  wish  you  to  understand  that  this  is  a  question  with  us
of  religion."  2.  On  the  score  of  precedent.  This  was  no  novel  idea  that  they  were
engaged  in  promoting.  They  were  not  beginning,  but  restoring,  the  temple.  Many
successive  centuries  (though  these  officials  were  perhaps  not  aware  of  it)  a  glorious
temple  to  the  great  God  had  stood  on  that  place.  Not  only  so,  the  man  who  had
triginally  "  built "  and  "  set  it  up  "  had  been  one  of  the  greatest  of  their  kings.    Thi»


74  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [CH.  v.  3—17.

was  also  a  wise  line  to  adopt.  If  they  were  permitted  to  be  Jews  at  all  (at  they
certainly  were),  they  might  not  only  be  allowed  to  worship  their  own  God  (as  already
touched  on),  but  also  to  worship  him  according  to  so  long-established  and  truly
national  a  manner.  3.  On  the  score  of  necessity.  -Their  national  welfare  and  even
existence  depended  on  the  work  they  were  engaged  on.  Long  experience  and  heavy
affliction  had  brought  home  this  truth  to  their  hearts.  Why  had  their  fathers  gone
into  captivity?  Why  had  the  original  house  been  destroyed?  Because  theii
"  fathers "  had  "  provoked  the  God  of  heaven "  for  years  in  connection  with  the
worship  of  that  house  (ver.  12 ;  also  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  14—20 ;  Jer.  vii.  1 — 15, 30).  On
the  restoration,  therefore,  of  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah,  and,  as  a  first  step  towards
that,  on  the  restoration  of  this  his  house,  depended,  nationally,  their  very  life.  The
very  permission,  in  fact,  to  rebuild  it  at  all  was  a  kind  of  token  of  restored  animation
which  it  would  be  double  death  to  neglect.  4.  On  the  score  of  authority.  In  all
this  they  were  acting,  furthermore,  as  good  subjects  of  Persia.  One  of  the  first
decrees  of  that  king  of  Persia  who  conquered  "  Babylon  "  and  became  its  "  king "
(see  ver.  13)  was  a  decree  to  rebuild  this  house.  Also,  one  of  his  first  appointments
the  appointment  by  name  (ver.  14)  of  a  Jewish  "  governor  "  to  see  to  this  work.  Also,
one  of  his  first  actions  the  very  significant  action  of  restoring  the  temple  vessels.
■5.  In  the  way  of  conclusion.  AH  these  things  being  so,  was  it  to  be  wondered  at
that  "  the  same  Sheshbazzar,"  thus  empowered  and  equipped,  had  come  to  Jerusalem
and  begun  the  work  ?  Was  it  not  rather  to  be  wondered  at  that  a  work  of  such
amazing  importance  should  have  remained  on  hand  for  so  long  (ver.  16)  ?  Even  "  yet
it  is  not  finished  1 "  What  a  master-stroke  was  that  to  end  with.  "  You  ask  why  we
have  done  so  much.  As  Persian  officials,  speaking  to  us  as  Jews,  rather  ask  why  we
have  done  so  little."  Observe,  in  all  this — 1.  The  secret  of  spiritual  deliverance.
God  delivers  his  people  sometimes  by  restraining  their  adversaries  (Ps.  lixvi.  10 ;
Prov.  xvi.  7)  ;  sometimes  by  giving  themselves  special  wisdom  and  courage  (Luke
xxi.  15 ;  Acts  vi.  10) ;  sometimes,  as  here,  by  doing  both.  How  comparatively
tame  these  adversaries.  How  bold  and  wise  these  defenders.  How  complete,
therefore,  even  so  far,  the  deliverance  granted  (comp.  Acts  iv.  8 — 14,  21).  2.  The
secret  of  spiritual  courage.  Why  is  it  we  fear  man  so  much  ?  Because,  as  a  rule,
we  fear  God  too  little  (Luke  xii.  4,  5).  How  different  the  case  when,  as  here,
we  feel  the  "  eye  of  our  God  "  to  be  "  upon "  us  (ver.  5).  See  also,  in  case  pre-
viously referred  to,  Acts  iv.  19,  and  v.  29 ;  also  Isa.  li.  12,  13.  Many  feel  a  diffi-
culty in  speaking  for  Christ.  If  they  were  more  often  in  the  habit  of  speaking
with  him  the  difficulty  would  greatly  diminish.  Possibly  it  might  even  be  found
on  the  opposite  side  (see  once  more  Acts  iv.  20).  3.  The  secret  of  dealing  with
honest  doubt;  viz.,  (a)  listen  to  it,  do  not  repel  it;  (6)  confront  it,  do  not  avoid
it ;  (c)  enlighten  it,  do  not  despise  it.  The  reason  why  many  are  "  sceptics  " —
i.  e.  (if  they  are  so  honestly)  merely  "  inquirers " — is  because  they  do  not  know
the  strength  of  the  believer's  position.  If  yov,  know  it,  as  the  true  strength  of
their  position  was  known  by  the  Jews  before  us,  and  can  make  it  known  in  turn  to
such  "  inquirers  "  with  like  courage  and  wisdom,  you  will  at  least  obtain  their  respect.
It  may  also  please  God  to  cause  your  efEort  to  do  even  more  (see  2  Tim.  ii.  24,  26).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  3 — 6. — The  eye  of  God.  The  "  people  of  the  land "  procured  authority
from  the  Persian  king  to  stop  the  rebuilding  of  the  city  and  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and
used  it  to  stop  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple  as  well.  After  an  interval  of  nine  years,
through  the  incitement  of  the  prophets  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  the  great  work  was
resumed,  and  with  the  resumption  the  old  hostility  was  revived.  So  the  text,  &c.
The  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  them —

I.  To  GIVE  THEM  ASSURANCE  AND  COMFORT.  1.  This  figure  expresses  his  watchfvl
care.  (1)  His  eyes  are  everywhere  (see  Job  xxviii.  24;  Prov.  xv.  3).  He  observes
us  in  the  work  of  the  sanctuary.  When  working  in  the  city.  When  working  on
tiie  wall.  (2)  His  vision  searches  the  heart  (see  1  Sam.  xvi.  7).  He  fully  com-
prehends the  hypocrite.  So  the  sincerity  of  the  innocent.  How  assuring  I  How
nerving  to  moral  courage  1     2.   It  also  expresses  loving  favour.     (1)   As  pity  is


CH.  V.  3—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  7S

expressed  by  the  human  eye,  bo,  &c.  Thus  used  to  express  tlie  compassion  of  God
for  his  BufEering  people  in  Egypt  (Bxod.  iii.  7 — 10).  Also,  for  the  tears  of  Heze-
kiah  (2  Brings  xx.  6).  So  he  pitied  hia  people  in  Babylon,  and  his  eye  of  pity  is
over  them  here.  (2)  As  the  eye  also  expresses  satisfaction,  so  the  complaisancy  of
God,  &o.  Thus  favour  towards  the  holy  land  (Deut.  xi.  12).  Towards  the  holy
temple  (1  Kings  viii.  29).  Towards  the  holy  people  (Ps.  xxxiv.  15 ;  Jer.  xxiv.  4).
What  comfort  to  the  faithful  I

II.  To  GIVE  THEM  WISDOM  AND  DISCRETION.  1.  They  need  this  in  the  presence  of
their  inquisitors.  (1)  They  are  people  of  influence.  There  is  "  Tatnai,  the  governor
on  this  side  the  river."  If  the  "  river  "  here  be  the  Euphrates,  then  he  would  be
over  the  provinces  of  Syria,  Arabia  Deserta,  Phoenicia,  and  Samaria.  If  the  Jordan,
then  still  a  great  personage.  There  was  Shethar-boznai,  probably  the  secretary
appointed  by  the  Persian  crown,  as  was  customary,  to  act  as  a  check  upon  the
governor.  There  were  "  their  companions,"  probably  magistrates.  (2)  They  put
questions  which  imported  mischief.  By  whose  authority  do  you  build  (ver.  3)  ?
Expressed  again,  ver.  9.  Who  are  your  leaders  in  this  questionable  business  ?
Implied,  ver.  4  (see  ver.  10).  2.  Their  answers  were  guided  by  a  watchful  wisdom.
(1)  That  they  acted  as  the  "  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and  earth  "  (see  ver.
11).  No  authority  could  be  higher.  Query — Do  we  always  and  adejiuately  recog-
nise that  authority?  (2)  That  they  claimed  a  prescriptive  right  in  the  temple
which  was  originally  built  by  one  of  their  great  kings  (see  ver.  11).  (3)  That
their  captivity  did  not  forfeit  them  that  right.  For  God  banished  them  into
captivity  for  their  sin :  Nebuchadnezzar  was  but  his  servant ;  and  God  now  favours
their  restoration  (see  vers.  11,  12).  We  should  never  be  ashamed  to  avow  our
connection  with  God  and  his  work.

III.  To  DEFEND  THEM  FROM  THEIR  ENEMIES.  1.  Bv  moderating  the  opposition.
(1)  Their  former  unscrupulous  foes  are  not  mentioned  (see  ch.  iv.  7 — 9).  Changes
in  the  supreme  government  often  involve  changes  of  provincial  rulers.  Possibly
the  judgment  of  God  may  have  overtaken  them.  (2)  The  temper  of  these  men  is
better.  They  state  facts  honestly.  2.  By  sustaining  them  at  their  work.  (1)
Tatnai  proposed  that,  until  the  question  of  their  right  should  be  determined  by
Darius,  the  work  should  cease.  But  they  saw  the  eye  of  their  God,  and  declined
(ver.  5).  (2)  The  prophets  kept  this  vision  vividly  before  them.  They  came  furtli
from  the  presence  of  God,  having  witnessed  his  visions  and  heard  his  words,  whicli
under  the  strongest  sense  of  the  reality,  they  so  communicated  that  the  people  saw
as  it  were  the  very  eye  of  God  upon  them,  and  went  on  with  his  work.  Query —
Should  not  ministers,  as  coming  from  the  very  presence  of  God,  so  deliver  the  gospel
message  that?  &c.  3.  Bff  bringing  good  out  of  the  evil.  (1)  The  attention  of  Darius
was  thus  called  to  the  decree  of  Cyrus  (see  ver.  17).  (2)  The  king  issued  instruc-
tions accordingly  (ch.  vi.  6 — 12).  (8)  These  instructions  were  carried  out,  and  the
good  work  was  carried  on  to  its  completion  (ch.  vi.  13 — 15). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  3 — 17. —  Wisdom  in  trial.  Hardly  had  the  Jews  recommenced  their  work,
when  they  again  found  themselves  subjected  to  a —

I.  Trial  of  faith.  "At  the  same  time,"  &c.  (ver.  3).  Again  their  unfriendly
neighbours  came  to  the  attack.  They  challenged  their  right  to  build  up  the  walls :
"  Who  hath  commanded  you  to  build  ?"  "  By  whose  authority  do  ye  these  things  ?  "
The  names  of  the  leading  men  were  demanded  (ver.  4),  with  a  view  of  sending  them
on  to  the  Persian  court.  Pressure  was  evidently  to  be  brought  to  bear  on  them
to  compel  them  to  desist.  Accusations  would  certainly  be  made  against  them ;  ill
feeling  would  inevitably  be  fostered  ;  prohibition  would  probably  be  issued ;  and,
not  unlikely,  there  would  be  forfeiture  of  privileges  if  not  loss  of  goods,  perchance
of  liberty.  What,  now,  should  they  do  ?  Should  they  again  lay  down  the  saw  and
the  trowel,  leave  the  woodwork  and  the  walls  till  a  more  favoured  time,  and  content
themselves  with  using  the  altar  they  had  reared,  as  hitherto  ?  They  were  enjoying
freedom  in  their  own  land,  with  liberty  to  worship  the  Lord  according  to  their
ancient  law ;  perhaps  they  would  lose  everything  by  striving  after  more  than  they
had.  Should  they  yield  to  these  alarms  presenting  themselves  in  the  form  of  pru-
dence ?  or  should  they  disnuag  them  as  cowardly  fears,  and  go  on  with  their  work,


76  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [oh.  v.  »— 17.

confiding  in  the  help  of  Jehovah  ?  Such  distractions  must  have  (or  may  have)
agitated  and  perplexed  their  minds.  Such  trials  of  faith  we  may  expect  when
we  have  entered  the  path  of  piety  or  the  field  of  Christian  work.  Inexperience
might  imagine  that  in  a  path  so  sacred  and  Divine  the  adversary  would  not  be
allowed  to  enter.  But  experience  knows  that  it  is  not  so  ;  that  "  there  are  many
adversaries  "  we  must  expect  to  encounter.  Not  only  from  "  them  that  are  without,"
but  also  from  those  that  are  within  the  Church  do  obstacles,  hindrances,  discourage-
ments arise.  We  may  look  for  sympathy,  help,  success,  victory ;  and,  behold  1
there  meets  ua  conflict,  disappointment,  defeat.  Shall  we,  we  ask  ourselves,  retire
as  unfitted  for  what  we  have  undertaken  ?  or  shall  we  hold  on  our  way,  still  grasp
our  weapon,  trusting  that  the  insufficiency  which  is  of  man  will  be  more  than  made
up  by  the  sufficiency  which  is  of  God  ?  But  in  this  trial  of  faith  we  have,  as
they  had —

IL  A  TWOFOLD  INOENTIVE.  "  The  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders  of  the
Jews,  that  they  could  hot  cause  them  to  cease"  (ver..5).  Here  was  (1)  a  spiritual
force  working  within  them.  They  felt  that  their  work  was  marked  of  God.  The
active  participation  of  his  prophets  in  the  work  (ver.  2)  would  help  them  to  this.
They  realised  that  they  were  being  Divinely  guided,  and  were  engaged  in  the  most
sacred  cause:  "We  are  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven"  (ver.  11).  They  were
wisely  conscious  that  past  misdoings  had  led  to  penalty  and  suffering  (ver.  12).
They  lived  and  wrought  "  as  ever  in  the  great  Taskmaster's  eye ; "  and  because  they
felt  that  he  who  "  looketh  from  heaven  and  beholdeth  all  the  sons  of  men  "  (Ps.  xxxiii.
13)  was  continually  regarding  them,  accepting  their  service,  recording  their  negli-
gence and  distrust,  prepared  to  reward  or  to  rebuke,  they  were  incited  to  continue,
let  their  ermies  say  or  do  what  they  please.  The  thought  of  God's  all-seeing
eye,  of  his  all-searching  glance,  is  one  of  the  strongest  spiritual  forces  which  can
work  within  us.  Man  sees  and  blames.  Man  sees  and  threatens.  Yes ;  but  God  is
an  on-looker  also,  and  an  iji-looker  too.  What  does  he  see  ?  What  does  he  think  ?
What  judgment  is  he  forming?  What  does  he  purpose?  If  he  is  for  us,  who  can
be  against  ng  ?  But  here  was  also  (2)  a  Divine  power  working  upon  them.  There
is  suggested  here  a  prompting,  controlling  influence  exerted  upon  them  from  on  high.
God  saw  them,  and,  beholding  their  difficulty  and  their  need  of  his  Divine  help,
interposed  to  sustain  their  courage,  ta  strengthen  their  hand,  to  uphold  them  in  theii
work.  This  is  a  power  to  be  earnestly  sought,  and  found,  in  believing  prayer,  when
we  are  passing  through  the  time  of  trial.

III.  A  TIME  OF  SUSPENSE  (vers.  13 — 17).  Their  adversaries  now  laid  their  case
before  the  Persian  authorities.  They  gave  a  fair  representation  of  the  answer  of
the  Jews  to  the  royal  court,  and  begged  that  steps  should  be  taken  to  confirm  or  dis-
prove this  their  reply.  "  Now  therefore,  if  it  seem  good  to  the  king,  let  there  be
search  made  in  the  king's  treasure  house  .  .  .  whether  it  be  so  "  (ver.  17).  We  may
presume  that  the  Jews  knew  the  tenor  of  this  communication.  We  can  picture  to
ourselves  their  anxiety  to  know  the  result  of  the  appeal.  What  if  the  record  should
not  be  found  in  the  Persian  archives  I  What  if  some  ignorant  librarian  failed  to  know
where  it  was  kept  I  What  if  some  venal  officer  should  be  bribed  to  get  at  it  and
destroy  it  I  &c. ,  &c.  Should  they  win  or  lose  their  case  ?  It  might,  after  all,  go  ill  with
them  and  their  work.  It  was  a  time  of  suspense.  A  very  hard  time  to  go  through.
Souls  that  can  endure  all  else  know  not  how  to  be  tranquil  then.  Then  is  the  time
to  trust. in  God,  to  cast  ourselves  on  him.  When  we  can  do  nothing  else,  we  can  look
up  to  heaven  and  wait  the  issue  calmly,  because  all  issues  are  in  the  hands  of  the
holy  and  the  mighty  One.  "  What  time  I  am  afraid  I  will  trust  in  thee  "  (Pb.  IvL
3).— 0.

Ver.  6. — The  providence  of  God  over  the  Church.  I.  That  the  pbovidbncb  of
God  exercises  a  strict  watch  over  the  enemies  of  the  Church  (ver.  6).  As  soon
as  the  Israelites  commenced  to  build  the  temple  their  enemies  began  to  trouble  them ;
but  while  the  eye  of  "  Tatnai,"  "  Shethar-boznai,  and  their  companions  "  was  upon
them,  "the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  the  elders  of  the  Jews."  1.  The  Divine
providence  is  cognisant  of  the  first  motion  of  the  enemies  of  the  Church ;  this  should
cause  them  to  pause  in  their  unholy  task.    2.  The  Divine  providence  watches  the  man


cu.  V.  3— it.  j  THE  BOOK  OF  EZHA.  1i

who  wouW  oppose  themselves  to  the  enterprise  of  the  Church  ;  they  cannot  escape
the  Omniscient  eye.  3.  The  Divine  providence  watches  the  Church  earnestly  in
the  midst  of  its  enemies.  The  look  sends  light,  means  love,  indicates  help,  should
inspire  trast.  Let  the  eye  of  the  Church  be  toward  God.  The  Cliurch  must
remember  that  the  eye  of  God  is  upon  it,  and  not  yield  to  the  enemy.  History  proves
that  God's  eye  is  upon  the  Church ;  the  Bible  asserts  it ;  reason  suggests  that  the
heavenly  Father  will  watch  over  his  troubled  children  and  workers.

II.  That  the  peovidencb  of  God  is  calculated  to  defeat  the  enemies  of  the
^Chtirch.    "That  they  could  not  cause  them  to  cease"  (ver.  6).    The  providence  of

God  sustained  the  Israelites  in  their  work  of  building,  notwithstanding  the  hostility
of  their  enemies.  1.  Providence  awakens  a  persistent  spirit  in  the  Church.  "  They
could  not  cause  them  to  cease."  2.  Providence  inspires  the  Church  with  right  views
of  its  citizenship.  "Till  the  matter  came  to  Darius."  The  people  of  God  have
citizen  rights,  and  are  not  to  ,cease  their  work  at  the  bidding  of  unauthorised  men.
3.  Providence  uses  the  incidental  processes  of  life  for  the  welfare  of  the  Church.
The  letter  in  those  days  was  a  slow  process ;  before  it  could  be  answered  the  building
would  be  well  advanced.  This  delay  was  useful  to  Israel.  God  causes  all  the  little
processes  of  life  to  work  for  the  good  of  his  people.  Thus  God's  aid  renders  the
Church  victorious  over  enemies.

III.  That  the  pbovidenck  of  God  does  not  always  allow  the  Church  to
experience  the  full  severity  of  trial.  The  opposition  of  Bishlara,  Mithredath,
Tabeel,  and  the  rest  of  their  companions  (ch.  iv.  7)  was  much  more  inveterate  than
that  of  Tatnai ;  the  bostility  now  is  feeble.  Heaven  does  not  always  allow  the
furnace  into  which  the  Church  is  cast  to  be  seven  times  hotter  than  is  wont;  in
wondrous  and  kindly  manner  it  restrains  the  wrath  of  man,  that  spiritual  work
may  be  completed.  The  worst  passions  of  men  are  controlled  by  God  ;  the  old
enmity  of  the  serpent  is  limited  and  often  subdued.

IV.  That  the  providence  op  God  often  wins  kindly  helpers  fob  the
Chubch.  "  Let  the  work  of  this  house  of  God  alone  "  (ch.  vi.  7).  God  can  raise  up  a
Cyrus  to  commence  the  work,  and  a  Darius  to  conserve  and  complete  it ;  kings  are
within  the  plan  of  Providence.  Let  the  Church  take  hope,  for  the  eye  of  God  is  upon
it— E.

Vers.  S — 17. — The  letter  to  Baritts.  The  occasion  of  this  letter  was  the  resumption
of  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple  of  the  Lord  at  Jerusiilem  after  an  interval  of
sixteen  years.  The  authors  of  it  are  Tatnai,  the  governor,  probably  of  all  the  pro-
vinces west  of  the  Euphrates,  and  Shethar-boznai,  who  may  have  been  the  scribe
or  secretary  associated  with  him,  as  Shimshai  was  with  Eehum  (see  ch.  iv.  8).  Oi'
possibly  Shethar-boznai  was  the  leading  man  of  the  Apharsaohites ;  for  these  are
mentioned  as  more  particularly  "  his  companions."  The  Apharsaohites  probably
called  the  attention  of  Tatnai  to  the  matter,  who  attended  to  it  in  a  spirit  of  fairness
which  favourably  contrasts  with  the  conduct  of  the  former  leaders  of  these  instigators
(see  ch.  iv.).     Having  authenticated  the  letter,  the  writers  proceed  to  state—

L  What  they  did.  1.  They  surveyed  the  building.  (1)  They  describe  it  as
"  the  house  of  the  great  God."  The  renown  of  his  wonderful  works  in  Egypt,  in
the  wilderness,  in  Canaan  had  filled  the  world.  They  were  judgments  upon  the
little  gods  of  the  nations  (see  Exod.  viii.  10 ;  ix.  14  ;  xii.  12  ;  xviii.  12  ;  Num.  xxxiii.
4).  (2)  They  noted  the  importance  of  the  building.  "  Great  stones  "  (Mark  xiii.
1 ;  Luke  xxi.  6,  6).  "  Timber  laid  in  the  walls."  Beams  of  cedars  from  Lebanon.
All  work  for  God  should  be  nobly  done.  (3)  They  also  noted  the  rapid  progress  of
the  work.  2.  They_  interrogated  the  elders.  (1)  Who  commanded  you  to  build  this
house  ?  This  question  is  radical.  Not,  Who  hath  authorised  you  to  resume  the  build-
ing ?  but.  Who  authorised  the  commencement  of  the  work  ?  (2)  By  whose  authority
do  you  "  make  up  this  wall "  ?  Probably  referring  to  their  repairing  of  breaches  in
it  made  by  the  "  people  of  the  land  "  (see  ch.  iii.  23).  (3)  "  What  are  the  names  "
of  the  chiefs  ?  Those  who  work  for  God  with  his  approval  need  not  fear  the  scrutiny
of  inquisitors.

IL  What  thbt  learned.  1.  That  the  builders  professed  themselves  lervanti  oj
the  Ood  of  heaven  and  earth.     (1)  What  a  glorious  Being  I    (2)  What  a  Boble


78  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  v.  3—17

service  1  Qacry — Are  we  his  servants  ?  This  honour  not  limited  now  to  Israelites-
It  is  common  to  all  true  builders  of  the  spiritual  temple.  2.  That  they  were  engaged
in  no  Tiovel  business.  (1)  "  We  build  the  house  that  was  builded  these  many  years
ago."  About  five  centuries  had  elapsed.  But  even  Solomon's  temple  replaced  the
tabernacle  which  had  been  set  up  about  five  centuries  still  earlier.  Trae  religion  may
nave  external  changes,  but  remains  essentially  the  same.  3.  That  its  ruin  was  occa-
sioned by  the  rebellion  of  their  fathers.  (1)  God  gave  it  up  to  desolation.  The
outward  splendours  of  religion  are  nothing  to  him  when  the  spirit  of  it  is  dead  (see
Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  xxiv.  1,  2).  The  temple  of  Solomon  in  ruins  was  a  fit  emblem  of
humanity  degraded  by  sin.  (2)  Guilt  is  hereditary.  "  Our  fathers  had  provoked,"
&c.  They  suffered  ;  we  suffer.  4.  That  the  building  is  in  process  of  restoration.
(1)  "  In  the  first  year  of  Cyrus."  Memorable  for  the  tennmation  of  the  seventy
years  of  Jeremiah  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21  ;  Jer.  xxv.  11, 12 ;  xsix.  10 ;  Dan.  ix.  2).  In
this  memorable  year  "  the  king  made  a  decree,"  &o.  (2)  Vessels  of  the  house  also
restored.  These  had  been  desecrated  "  in  the  temple  of  Babylon."  This  was  the
temple  of  Belua  or  Bel.  This  desecration  of  the  vessels  a  figure  of  the  condition  of
backsliders  from  God  (see  Acts  ix.  15  ;  Rom.  ix.  22  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  21).  6.  The  promi-
nent place  occupied  by  Sheshbazzfir.  (1)  Gyrus  trusted  him  with  the  custody  of  the
sacred  treasure.  Made  him  governor.  He  was  of  the  seed  royal  of  Judah.  (2)  His
people  honoured  him.  He  laid  the  foundation-stone.  Conducts  the  work.  (3)  Type
of  Clirist.

III.  The  BECOMMENDATioN.  1.  To  test  the  question  as  to  whether  Oyrus  autJiorised
the  work  as  alleged.  Nothing  to  object  to  the  fairness  of  this.  It  could  only
prejudice  the  Jews  if  found  untrue.  2.  To  signify  the  king' s  pleasure  to  his  servants
thai  they  might  carry  it  out.  It  were  well  if  all  who  oppose  God's  people  were  as
reasonable  as  Tatnai.  Opponents  so  honest  and  free  from  prejudice  may  have  the
honour,  like  Tatnai,  of  promoting  the  work  of  God  (see  ah.  vi.  13). — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  11 — 17. — Things  a  Church  should  understand  concerning  itsdf.  L  That
IT  IS  ENGAGED  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  HEAVEN.  "We  are  the  Servants  of  the  God  of
heaven  and  earth  "  (ver.  11).  1.  An  exalted  service.  It  is  the  service  of  God.  2.  An
extensive  service.  It  reaches  in  its  influence  throughout  heaven  and  earth.  3.  An
arduous  service.  It  is  to  rebuild  a  ruined  temple  in  the  midst  of  enemies.  4.  A
humble  service.    At  best  the  Church  is  but  a  servant.

II.  That  it  has  suffered  much  through  the  commission  of  sin.  "  But  after  that
our  fathers  had  provoked  the  God  of  heaven  unto  wrath,  he  gave  them  into  the
hand  of  Nebuchadnezzar  the  king  of  Babylon  "  (ver.  12).  This  is  the  best  confession
a  Church  can  have  ;  the  Church  is  alone  responsible  for  its  weakness.  1.  Its  degrad-
ation. Israel  is  subject  to  a  heathen  power.  2.  Its  suffering.  Israel  is  in  captivity,
3.  Its  destruction.  "  Who  destroyed  this  house."  All  this  was  attributable — (1)
Not  to  the  Divine  inability  to  help.  (2)  Not  to  the  Divine  lack  of  interest.  (3)
But  to  the  Divine  displeasure  on  account  of  sin.  Let  the  Church  understand  and
acknowledge  that  her  sad  condition  before  the  world  is  due  to  her  lack  of  fidelity ;
she  must  take  the  discredit  of  her  broken  temples.

III.  That  it  is  connected  with  the  history  op  a  wondrous  redemption.  !'  But
in  the  first  year  of  Cyrus  "  (ver.  13).  1.  The  fact  of  redemption.  The  Israelites
were  delivered  from  Babylonian  captivity.  The  Church  has  been  set  free  by  Christ.
2.  The  history  of  redemption.  The  history  of  Israel's  deliverance  was  written  in
the  records  of  Babylon.  The  history  of  redemption  by  Christ  is  written  in  the  Bible ;
it  is  an  earthly  record  as  well  as  a  heavenly  history.  It  is  in  the  annals  of  Babylon  as
well  as  in  the  annals  of  God.  3.  The  research  of  redemption.  "  Let  there  be  search
made  "  (ver.  17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  12).  4.  The  pleasure  of  redemption.  "  And  let  the  king
send  his  pleasure  to  us  concerning  this  matter."    God's  pleasure  is  man's  freedom.

IV.  That  it  is  engaged  in  a  yet  unfinished  enterprise.  "  And  since  that  time
even  until  now  hath  it  been  in  building,  and  yet  it  is  not  finished  "  (ver.  16).  It  is
indeed  true  that  the  Church  is  as  yet  engaged  in  an  unfinished  enterprise ;  all  its
temples  are  not  built ;  its  walls  are  not  erected ;  Jesus  does  not  yet  see  all  things
put  under  him.  1.  The  reason.  Why  is  the  work  of  the  Church  unfinished — is  it
from  lack  of  energy  or  fidelity?    2.  The  duration.    How  long  is  it  to  remain


OH.  VL  1—14.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


79


unfinished  ?  only  God  can  telj.  How  long,  0  Lord  ?  3.  The  reproach.  With  so
many  workmen,  and  with  the  aid  received,  the  work  of  the  Church  ought  to  be  more
advanced.  The  half  finished  walls  are  a  rebuke  to  us.  4.  The  requirement.  We
must  go  with  new  determination  and  more  fervent  prayer  to  complete  the  work  of
the  Church.  6.  Caution.  We  cannot  judge  the  temple  till  it  is  finished  ;  the  work
of  God  will  appear  best  at  the  end.  6.  The  anticipation.  When  the  top  stone  of
the  great  temple  shall  be  brought  on  with  joy.    Let  us  build  to  completion. — £»


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VL


Discovert  ov  the  deceee  of  Ctsus  on
the  subject  of  the  temple,  and  kecita-

TION   OF    ITS    EXACT  TERMS   (ch.    vL    1 — 6).

The  application  made  by  the  satrap  of  Syria  to
Darius  received  his  immediate  attention.  A
search  was  instituted — in  the  iirst  instance,  at
Babylon,  but  afterwards  at  the  other  capitals
also ;  and  inEcbatana,  the  Median  metropolis,
where  the  Persian  kings  always  resided  during
a  portion  of  the  year,  a  copy  of  the  original
decree  was  found,  which  is  considerably  fuller
and  more  definite,  though  in  some  respects
covering  less  ground,  than  the  "proclama-
tion" with  which  Ezra  opens  his  history.
The  decree  not  merely  provided  for  the  re-
building of  the  temple,  but  gave  durections
for  its  dimensions  and  for  the  style  of  its  con-
struction, points  on  which  the  proclamation
said  nothing  ;  it  also  provided  that  the  whole
cost  (of  the  materials)  should  be  defrayed
out  of  the  royal  revenue  ;  and  it  concluded
with  an  express  command  that  all  the  gold
and  silver  vessels  carried  off  by  Nebuchad-
nezzar should  be  restored.  We  may  account
for  the  decree  not  being  foimd  at  Babylon,
or  Susa,  by  the  Pseudo-Smerdis  having  de-
stroyed it  when  he  was  accomplishing  his
religious  reforms,  though  accidentally  he
emitted  to  destroy  the  copy  laid  up  at  Ecba-
tana  ;  thus,  as  so  often  happens  with  wicked
men,  by  a  slip  of  memory  frustrating  his
own  intention.

Ter.  1. — Darius  the  king  made  a  decree.
Rather,  "gave  an  order"  (Yvlg.,  prcecepit).
A  "decree"  would  not  be  necessary.  And
search  was  made  in  the  house  of  the  rolls.
Literally,  "in  the  house  of  the  books,"  i.  e.
in  the  royal  library,  or  record  chamber.
Where  the  treasures  were  laid  up.  The  same
repositorywaa,  apparently,  used  for  documents
of  value  and  for  the  precious  metals.  An
■ndergronnd  apartment  ia  perhaps  indicated


by  the  word  translated  "kid  np,"  which

means  "made  to  descend."

Yer.  2. — ^There  was  found  at  Aohmetha.
Not  "  in  a  coffer,"  as  our  translators  suggest
in  the  margin,  and  as  Aben  Ezra  and  Jarchi
interpret ;  but  "at  Ecbatana,"  which  is  ex-
pressed letter  for  letter  by  the  word  used
m  the  original,  except  that  the  final  n  ia
di'opped.  Compare  for  this  omission  the
passage  of  Harran  into  Carrhse,  and  of  Shn-
shan  mto  Susa.  In  the  palace  that  is  in  the
province  of  the  Kedes.  The  palace  of  Ecba-
tana was  very  famous.  Herodotus  says  that
it  was  built  by  Deioces,  the  first  Median
king,  occupied  the  centre  of  the  town,  and
was  defended  by  seven  circles  of  walls,  one
inside  the  other  (i  98).  Polybius  states
that  the  building  covered  an  area  1420  yards
in  circumference,  and  consisted  of  a  number
of  halls  and  cloistered  courts,  supported  by
wooden  pillars,  of  cypress  or  of  cedar,  both
of  which  were  coated  with  a  plating  of  gold
or  silver,  and  supporied  roofs  sloped  at  an
angle,  consisting  of  silver  plates  instead  of
the  customary  tiling  (v.  27,  }  10).  This
grand  building  was  the  residence  of  the  old
Median  monarchs,  and  also  of  Cynis  and
Cambyses.  Darius  built  himself  still  more
magnificent  residences  at  Susa  and  Peisepolis ;
but  both  he  and  the  later  Achaemenian
monarchs  continued  to  use  the  Median  palace
as  a  summer  residence,  and  it  maintained  its
celebrity  till  the  close  of  the  empire  (see
Arrian, 'Exp.  Alex.,'iiL19).  A  roll.  Accord-
ing to  CtesiasCDiod.  Sic.,'ii.  32),  the  Persians
employed  parchment  or  vellum  for  the  ma-
terial of  their  records,  not  baked  clay,  like
the  Assyrians  and  Babylonians,  or  paper,
like  the  Egyptians.  Parchment  would  be  a
suitable  material  for  roUs,  and  no  doubt  was
anciently  used  chiefly  in  that  shape.  Therein
was  a  record  thus  written.  The  decree
would  no  doubt  be  written,  primarily,  in  the
Persian  language  and  the  Persian  cuneiform
character  ;  but  it  may  have  been  accompanied
by  a  Chaldaean  transcript,  of  which  Ezra  may
have  obtained  a  copy.  Public  documents
were  commonly  set  forth  by  the  Persians  in
more  than  one  language  (see  'Herod.,'  iv.
87 ;  and  comp.  the  '  Inscnptions,'  passim.
which  are  almost  universallv  either  bUinguai
or  trilingual).


fid


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA,


tcri.  VI.  1— id.


Ver.  3. — Let  the  house  be  builded,  the
place  where  they  offered  sacrifice.  Or, ' '  the
place  where  they  may  offer  sacrifice."  It  is  the
future,  rather  than  the  past,  which  Cyrus  is
contemplating.  Let  the  foundation  thereof
be  strongly  laid.  Isaiah  had  prophesied
that  Cyrus  should  "  say  to  Jerusalem,  Thou
shalt  be  built ;  and  to  the  temple,  Thy  found-
ation shall  he  laid  "  (xliv.  28).  Cyrus  adds
an  injunction  that  the  foundations  be  laid
" supportingly,"  or  "strongly,"  that  so  the
house  may  the  longer  continue.  The  height
thereof  threescore  cubits.  Half  the  height
of  the  first  temple,  according  to  the  existing
text  of  Chronicles  (2  Chron.  iii  4) ;  but  one-
third  TTWre  than  the  previous  height,  as  esti-
mated by  the  author  of  Kings  (1  Kings  vi
2).  And  the  breadth  thereof  threescore
cubits.  This  breadth  is  thrice  that  of  the
main  buUdiug,  according  to  both  Chronicles
and  Kings.  It  is  even  double  that  of  the
old  temple,  with  the  side  chamhera,  which
occupied  a  space  of  five  cubits,  or  seven  and
a  half  feet,  on  ejther  wing.  That  such  an
enlargement  actually  took  effect  would  seem
to  be  most  improbable  ;  and  we  may  perhaps
conclude  that  Cyrus  designed  a  building  on
a  grander  scale  than  Zerubbabel,  with  the
resources  at  his  disposal,  was  able  to  erect.
It  is  curious  that  Cyrus  did  not  in  his  decree
specify  the  length  of  the  temple.

Ver.  4 — With  three  rows  of  great  stones,
and  a  row  of  new  timber.  The  Septuagint
interpreter  understood  by  this  that  the  new
temple  was  to  be  four  storeys  high,  three'
storeys  being  built  of  stone,  and  one  of  timber.
The  two  wings  of  the  temple  of  Solomon
were  undoubtedly  three  storeys  high  (1  Kings
vi.  6).  But  it  is  perhaps  doubtM  whether
the  word  nidbak  ever  means ' '  storey. "  Most
commentators  suppose  three  courses  of  stone,
and  then  a  course  of  timber,  repeated  from
foundation  to  summit ;  hut  there  is  no  known
example  of  such  a  mode  of  building.  The
expences  were  to  be  given  out  of  the  king's
house,  defrayed,  i.  e. ,  out  of  the  royal  revenue ;
but  either  this  intention  of  Cyrus  was  not
carried  out,  or  it  was  understood  to  apply
only  to  the  materials.  Large  sums  were  sub-
scribed by  the  Jews  themselves  towards  the
building  (ch.  ii.  69),  and  large  payments  were
made  by  them  to  the  persons  employed  upon
the  work  (ch.  iii.  7).

Ver.  6.  —  Also  let  the  gold  and  silver
Tessels  ...  be  restored.  The  decree  termin-
ated with  instructions  for  the  restoration  of
the  vessels.  Undoubtedly  it  was  impressed
upon  Cyrus,  when  he  took  Babylon,  that  the
wanton  desecration  of  the  vessels  by  Bel-
shazzar  at  his  feast  (Dan.  v.  2,  3)  brought  in
■  great  measure  the  terrible  judgment  of
God  upon  him,  causing  his  own  death  and
the  destruction  of  his  kingdom.  He  was
therefore  most  anxious  to  clear  himself  of


any  partiiipfition  in  so  great  a  crime,  and
not  only  instructed  his  treasurer,  llithrcdath,
to  deliver  the  vessels  over  to  Zerubbabel  (eh.
L  8),  but  devoted  to  the  subject  almost  half
of  his  decree.

Decree  issued  bt  Darius  in  further-
ance OF  THE  DECREE  OF  CyRUS.  OBEDI-
ENCE  OF   THE    Persian   officials,   and

RAPID    COMPLETION    OP    THE    TEMPLE    (ch.

vL  6—15).  The  religious  policy  of  Darius
being  directly  opposed  to  that  of  his  immedi-
ate predecessor,  he  would  naturally  reverse
his  decree  with  respect  to  the  Jews  (ch.  iv.
11 — 22).  He  would  also  he  glad  to  show
himself  in  accordance  with  the  great  founder
of  the  empire,  who  was  universally  reverenced,
and  regarded  as  >*  truly  wise  king.  Hence
his  recital  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  which  it
would  have  been  enough  merely  to  have  re-
ferred to.  By  recalling  its  terms  he  showed
how  completely  his  policy  tallied  with  that
of  Cyrus,  and  how  thoroughly  he  inherited
the  spirit  of  the  first  monarch.  We  may
also  give  him  credit  for  a  real  sympathy  with
the  Jewish  religion,  and  a  real  belief  that
the  prayers  of  the  Jews  in  their  recovered
sanctuary  would  bring  God's  blessing  upon
himself  and  his  children  (ver.  10).  Ilia
decree  is  not  a  mere  formal  and  colourless
document,  but  breathes  a  reverential  spirit,
and  .shows  him  at  least  as  true  a  servant  ef
Jehovah  as  Cyrus.

As  the  trumpet  had  given  no  uncertain
note,  the  Persian  officials,  Tatnai  and  Shethar-
boznai,  whatever  their  wishes  may  have  been,
had  no  choice  as  to  their  line  of  action.  The
king's  word  was  law ;  and  his  favour,  when
clearly  manifested,  secured  to  the  objects  of
it  the  warmest  assurances  of  good-will,  and
the  most  active  help,  on  the  part  of  every
official  in  the  empire,  from  the  highest  to  the
lowest.  The  temple,  therefore,  made  rapid
progress,  and  within  four  years  of  the  time
when  Zei'ubbabel  and  Jeshua  resumed  the
building  (ch.  v.  2),  the  ijntire  work  was  com-
pleted— "  the  house  was  finished."  The
whole  time  which  elapsed  between  the  laying
of  the  foundation  (Ezra  iii  10)  and  the  com-
pletion was  twenty-one  years ;  but  scarcely
any  progress  had  been  made  till  Haggai
began  his  preaching.  The  main  part  of  the
work  was  accomplished  between  the  twenty-
fourth  day  of  the  sixth  month  of  the  second
year  of  Darius  (Haggai  L 16)  and  the  third  day


OH.  VI.  1-.12.]


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.


tl


of  the  twelfth  month  of  his  sixth  year.  This
was  a  space  of  four  years  and  a  hal£  The
^^mple  of  Solomon,  after  a  long  term  of  pre-
paration, occupied  in  its  construction  seven
years  and  a  half  (1  Kings  vL  37,  38).

Ver.  6. — Itow  therefore,  TatuaL  It  is
hardly  to  he  supposed  that  Darius  was  as
abrupt  as  this.  Apparently  the  author  has
not  thought  it  necessary  to  put  on  record  the
whole  royal  letter ;  but  only  the  most  essen-
tial parts  of  it — the  recitation  of  the  decree
of  Cyrus,  and  the  further  decree  of  Darius
himself.  The  address  of  the  letterj  the  open-
ing words,  and  the  passage  by  which  the  two
main  portions  were  linked  together,  are  either
omitted  or  greatly  abbreviated.  Be  ye  far
from  thence-  Keep  away  from  the  Jews —
do  not  go  near  them  to  trouble  them.

7er.  8. — Uoreover,  I  make  »  decree.
Literally,  "By  me  too  is  a  decree  made."
The  decree  of  Cyrus  is  not  enough.  I  add  to
it,  and  require  you  (1)  to  pay  the  wages  of
the  workmen  employed  out  of  the  royal
revenue,  and  (2)  to  supply  the  temple  per-
petually with  all  that  is  needed  for  the  regular
sacrifices  (see  ver.  9).  What  ye  shall  do  to
the  elders.  Not,  "  Lest  ye  do  anything  to
theelders"  (LXX.);  much  less,  "What  must
be  done  by  the  elders  "  (Vulg.) ;  but,  as  in  the
A.  V. ,  "  What  ye  shall  do  to  them  " — how  ye
shall  act  towards  them.  Of  the  tribute
beyond  the  river  forthwith  expences  be  given
to  these  men.  The  Persian  satraps  had  to
collect  from  their  provinces  a  certain  fixed
sum  as  the  royal  tribute,  and  had  to  remit
this  sum  annually  to  the  court.  Darius
orders  that  the  expenses  of  the  men  employed
on  the  temple  shall  be  paid  by  the  satrap
of  Syria  out  of  the  royal  tribute  of  his  pro-
vince, and  only  the  balance  remitted.  Thus
no  additional  burthen  was  laid  upon  the  tax-
payers. .

Ver.  9. — Both  young  bullocks,  and  rams,
and  lambs.  These  were  the  chief  sacrificial
animals  of  the  Jews — a  lamb  being  required
every  morning  and  evening,  two  more  on  the
sabbath,  seven  at  each  of  the  great  feasts  and
at  the  beginning  of  each  month,  and  fourteen
on  every  day  during  the  feast  of  tabernacles,
altogether  more  than  a  thousand  in  the  course
of  the  year ;  and  rams  and  bullocks  being
joined  with  the  lambs  on  the  more  sdemn
occasions.  The  only  other  ordinary  sacrificial
animal  was  "a  kid  of  the  goats.  Wheat,
salt,  wine,  and  oil  were  needed  for  the  "meat
offerings  "  by  which  every  burnt  offering  was


accompanied  (Exod.  xxix.  40,  41  ;  Lev.  ii
13,  &C.).  Let  it  be  given  them  day  by  day.
Since  sacrifice  was  offered  every  day.

"Ver.  10.— That  they  may  offer  sacrifices
of  s^seet  savours.  .Either  incense,  as  iu
Dan.  ii.  46,  or  "  sacrifices  that  are  pleasing
and  acceptable"  (see  Gen.  viii.  21 ;  Num.
xxviii.  2).  And  pray  for  the  life  of  the  king.
The  Jews  have  always  maintained  the  practice
of  praying  for  the  civil  ruler  of  any  country  in
which  they  have  had  their  abo  le.  Jeremiah's
exhortation  to  "  seek  the  peace  "  of  Babylon
(xxix.  7)  was  understood  in  this  way,  and
the  tradition  has  been  handed  down  even  to
the  present  day.  Under  monarchs  so  favour-
able to  them  as  the  Achsemenian  Persians
the  duty  would  certainly  not  have  been
neglected.  And  of  his  sons.  In  Persia  "the
royal  house"  was  the  special  object  of  regard.
Individual  kings  must  die,  but  the  house
would  ^0  on  (see  the  speech  of  Artemisia  to
Xerxes  in  'Herod.,'  viii.  102  ;  and  compare
the  references  to  the  "gods  of  the  royal
house "  in  the  Inscriptions).  Kings  took
special  care  of  their  sons.  Thus  Cyrus  sent
Cambyses  back  to  Persia  when  he  was  about
to  attack  the  Massagetae  ('Herod,,'  L  208),
and  Xerxes  gave  several  of  his  sons  into  the
charge  of  Artemisia,  to  convey  thefii  by  ship
to  Asia,  while  he  himself  took  the  long  and
perilous  journey  by  land  {ibid,  viii  103).

Ver.  11. — Whoever  shall  alter  this  word.
Rather,  "  this  edict."  To  alter  the  terms  oi
a  royal  decree  would  in  any  country  be  a
heinous  offence.  In  Persia,  where  the  mon-
arch was  absolute,  and  where  decrees  were
regarded  as  "altering  not"  (Dan.  vi  8,  12),
it  was  a  crime  of  the  deepest  dye.  Hence
the  severity  of  the  punishment  threatened.
The  punishment  has  been  explained  as  cru-
cifixion, impalement,  and  ' '  whipping  at  a
post ; "  but  there  seems  to  be  no  real  doubt
that  crucifixion  is  intended.  Great  crimi-
nals were  almost  always  crucified  by  the
Persians  (see  Brisson,  'De  Begno  Persa-
rum,'  ii  pp.  327 — 329 ;  and  comp.  '  Behist.
Inscr.,'  col.  ii  par.  14;  coL  iii  par.  8).
Let  his  house  be  made  a  dunghilL  Some
render  "  he  confiscated,"  but  wrongly.  The
best  Hebraists  agree  with  onr  transla-
tors.

The  practice  of  concluding  important  docu-
ments with  maledictions  was  common  to  the
Persians,  with  the  Assyrians,  Babylonians,
and  others  (see  '  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.
i  pp.  53,  106,  126  ;  voL  t.  p.  26 ;  vol  vii
pp.  19,  20,  68 ;  ToL  iz.  pp.  36,  86,  96,  100
107,  &0.).


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Opposition  silenced.    The  letter  of  Tatnai  and  his  companions
to  Darius,  the  contents  of  which  are  given  us  in  ch.  v.  7 — 17,  seems  to  hav«
led  to  some  disappointment  at  first  speaking,  i.  e.,  from  fue  point  of  vi^w  of  the
Ezra  a


82  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [oh.  vl  1—12.

Jews.  Tlie  searcli  recommended,  it  is  true,  was  duly  decreed  and  instituted  ;  and
that,  80  far  as  appears,  without  any  delay  or  reluctance.  But  the  important  docu-
ment sought  for  was  not  forthcoming  immediately.  On  the  contrary,  in  that  "house
of  the  rolls,  where  the  treasures  were  laid  up  in  Babylon,"  and  where  "  search  was
made  "  in  the  first  instance,  as  being  apparently  the  most  likely  place  in  which  to  find
a  copy  of  such  an  edict,  no  such  copy  was  found  at  all.  This  would  be  trying  news
for  those  at  Jerusalem ;  till  followed  up,  as  it  afterwards  was,  by  intelligence  of  a
more  cheering  kind ;  viz.,  that  further  search  in  another  place  (Achmetha  or  Ecba-
tana)  had  discovered  the  decree  in  question,  and  had  led  afterwards,  on  the  part  of
Darius,  to  a  further  imperial  decree  on  the  very  same  subject.  What  were  these
two  decrees  found  to  say  ?  The  rest  of  this  passage  tells  us.  We  shall  find  the
contents  of  the  first,  as  rehearsed  here  by  Darius,  exceedingly  encouraging  to  the
Jews.     We  shall  find  those  of' the  second  more  encouraging  still.

I.  The  formee  decree.  This,  when  at  last  found,  was  found  to  be  in  every-
thing as  before  described  by  the  Jews.  King  Darius  expressly  acknowledges  this  in
his  public  reply  to  the  Syrian  governor.  1.  With  reference  to  date.  The  decree
in  question  had  been  issued  by  Cyrus  in  his  "first  year"  (ver.  3),  as  reported.
2.  With  reference  to  the  "house."  Darius  had  found  that  decree  to  be  beyond
question  "a  decree  concerning  the  house  of  God  at  Jerusalem."  Note  also,  on  this
point,  (a)  how  express  its  purport  had  been.  "  Let  the  house  be  builded,  as  a  place
where  they  may  ofEer  sacrifice."  Also,  (6)  how  precise  its  directions.  Let  this
building  have  adequate,  i.  e.  weight-carrying,  foundations  ;  and  together  with  these,
proper  proportions,  viz.,  of  more  than  the  former  width,  all  included,  and  not  less
than  half  the  old  height  (see  Wordsworth,  m  loc.) ;  and,  finally,  suitable  style,
viz.,  four  stories  {lofioi,  Joseph., 'Sept.; '  see  also  1  Kings  vi.  6)  in  height,  three
of  stone,  and  one  of  new  wood  (vers.  3,  4).  Also  (c)  how  complete  its  provisions.
Whatever  the  necessary  "  expenses,"  they  were  to  be  "  given  out  of  the  king's
house"  (ver.  4).  In  a  word,  could  Cyrus  have  shown  greater  zeal  and  anxiety
a'!  to  the  erection  of  this  house  unless  he  had  stepped  out  of  his  proper  province,
and  sought  to  build  it  himself  ?  So,  again,  with  reference  (3)  to  the  sacred  vessels.
The  restoration  of  these  by  Cyrus  had  been  justly  made  a  great  additional  point
in  the  defence  of  the  Jews  (ch.  v.  14,  &c. ).  Darius  next  (ver.  5)  virhially
acknowledges  that  here  also  their  statements  had  been  fully  confirmed  by  this
decree  of  Cyrus.  These  very  vessels  which  they  had  spoken  of  were  found  exactly
described  there  (ver.  5).  Their  material,  their  original  use,  the  place  they  had  left,
the  man  who  had  taken  them,  the  place  they  were  taken  to,  were  all  mentioned  by
name.  Also,  as  to  the  alleged  order  for  their  restoration,  things  were  equally  plain.
Let  them,  first,  be  given  up  or  "restored;"  let  them  "go,"  next  (margin),  to  the
temple  at  Jerusalem  ;  let  them  be  deposited  there  where  they  were  before,  each  in
its  proper  " place "  in  God's  "house."  Could  Cyrus,  here  again,  have  said  more?
Could  he  have  shown  greater  zeal  and  anxiety  as  to  the  restoration  of  these  vessels
unless  he  had  carried  them  himself  to  Mount  Zion  ?  All  this  Darius  here  acknow-
ledges in  briefly  reciting  the  contents  of  that  decree  of  Cyrus  as  a  kind  of  preamble
to  His  own.  "  I  have  found  the  decree  you  have  spoken  of ;  and  I  have  found  it  all
you  have  said."

II.  The  present  decree.  What  did  this  satisfactory  "  preamble  "  lead  to  ?  To
a  direct  enactment  which,  if  possible,  was  still  more  satisfactory.  1.  As  to  its
matter.  This  was  all  that  the  Jews  could  wish  for.  It  was  so  (a)  negatively.
Tatnai  and  his  fellow  officials  were  neither  to  approach  the  place  in  a  hostile  spirit,
or  interfere  with  the  efEort,  or  hinder  the  men  (vers.  6,  7).  "  Whatever  you  do,  do
nothing  hostile.  This,  of  all  things,  is  the  very  first."  It  was  so  (6)  positively.
If  you  want  to  know  what  "  ye  shall  do  "  (begin,  of  ver.  8),  I  will  tell  you.  Ye  shall
help  these  men  with  money  as  to  "  building  this  house,"  at  my  expense  and  out  of
the  "  tribute  "  now  in  your  hands ;  ye  shall  do  so  at  once  ("  forthwith  "),  and  so  long
as  they  need  (so  some  the  last  clause  of  ver.  8).  Also  ye  shall  help  them  in  kind
as  to  using  this  house,  providing  them  cheerfully  with  all  they  require  of  every  de-
Beription  for  offering  their  appointed  sacrifices ;  and  doing  so,  be  it  also  observed,
according  to  their  own  account  of  their  requirements,  and  that  "  day  by  day  without
ful"  (ver.  9).    In  a  word,  let  everything  be  as  they  wish.    The  enactment  waa


OH.  Ti.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  83

equally  satisfactory  (2)  as  to  its  spirit.  For  example,  it  evinced  (o)  much  lespect
for  the  Jewish  religion.  How  signal  a  mark  of  such  respect  such  a  public  request
as  that  we  find  in  ver.  10  so  mighty  a  king  thus  openly  asking  those  humble
believers  for  an  interest  in  their  prayers  1  (6)  Much  sympathy  with  the  Jews  them-
selves. Whatever  we  may  think  of  the  king's  feelings  towards  his  enemies,  as  shown
in  ver.  11  in  his  reference  to  the  barbarous  punishment  of  crucifixion  (so  Ges.  and
Bertheau  ;  see  Wordsworth),  that  verse  at  least  shows  how  thoroughly  he  felt  with
his  Jewish  subjects  at  Jerusalem  on  the  project  so  near  to  their  hearts.  He  counted
any  one  who  should  oppose  that  as  amongst  the  worst  enemies  of  himself.  Also
(c)  much  personal  confidence  in  their  God.  If  any  enemies  to  this  project  should
appear,  or  hereafter  arise,  whom  the  king's  hand  could  not  reach,  he  hereby  openly
invokes  against  them  the  God  of  the  Jews  (ver.  12).  May  the  God  who  has  placed
his  Name  in  that  house  at  Jerusalem  himself  protect  it  from  all  such.  It  is  with
this  prayer  he  concludes.  What  was  left  to  the  Jewish  builders  except  to  add  their
"Amen  "  ?     In  the  letter  thus  analysed  by  us,  we  see —

1.  The  influence  of  good  example.  "  The  evil  that  men  do  lives  after  them."
So,  sometimes,  does  the  good  (Prov.  x.  7).  See  the  effect  here,  on  the  decisions
of  Darius,  of  the  previous  decisions  of  Cyrus.*  Is  not  the  whole  appeal  of  Heb.  xi.
an  appeal,  in  fact,  to  influence  of  this  kind  ?  "  By  faith "  the  many  illustrious
"  elders  "  there  mentioned  "  obtained  a  good  report ; "  i.  e.  were  justified  before  God.
To  this  truth  they  are  "  witnesses  "  (Heb.  xii.  1).  Let  ns  try  the  same  plan.  Every
man  adds  to  that  "  cloud  " — to  its  size,  to  its  splendour,  to  its  influence — who  seeks  and
finds  salvation  in  a  similar  way.  2.  The  importance  of  viritten  records.  What
hope  would  there  have  been  for  the  Jews,  humanly  speaking,  if  there  had  been  no
written  document  in  this  case  to  appeal  to,  but  only  the  recollection  of  certain  scat-
tered survivors  as  to  some  proclamation  of  former  days  ?  or  only  the  report  of  what
some  of  these  survivors  had  said  in  their  time  ?  How,  indeed,  could  the  good  ex-
ample of  Cyrus  have  told  on  Darius  except  by  the  channel  of  communication  pro-
vided in  his  written  decree  ?  We  can  hardly  be  too  thankful  for  the  Scriptures  of
truth  (see  2  Pet.  i.  15;  also  the  constant  "it  is  written"  of  Luke  iv.  4,  8,  &c,).
3.  The  wisdom  of  waiting  upon  God.  Often,  as  in  this  case,  the  "  vision "  may
seem  to  "  tarry  "  at  first.  But  "  at  the  end  it  shall  speak,  and  not  lie  "  (Hab.  ii.  3).
Rather,  as  in  the  present  instance  again,  the  answer  may  only  have  grown  riper
meanwhile.  This  applies  to  difficulties  connected  with  God's  providential  dealings,
whether  with  communities  or  individual  souls.  Also  to  difficulties  connected  with
Scripture  itself.  A  first  search,  as  in  this  instance,  like  the  first  or  second  interposi-
tions of  Moses  on  behalf  of  Israel,  may  only  seem  to  make  matters  worse  (Exod.  ii.
11 — 16 ;  V.  20- — 23).  But  how  more  than  satisfactory,  how  glorious,  how  triumphant
the  end  !  "  God  is  his  own  interpreter,  and  he  will  make  it  plain  I "  4.  The
thoroilghness  of  God's  work.  "  The  time  to  favour  Zion,  yea,  the  set  time,  is  come  "
(see  Ps.  cii.  13,  a  psalm  written  not  improbably  not  far  from  this  date).  See  how  it
pleases  God  to  speak  for  her,  that  being  the  case.  With  what  fulness  of  provision,
with  what  minuteness  of  detail,  with  what  tenderness  of  consideration — by  the  voice
of  the  living,  by  the  influence  of  the  dead.  The  Persian  king  is  made  to  speak  as
though  almost  an  Israelite  himself.  At  any  rate,  if  he  had  been,  he  could  scarcely
have  displayed  greater  knowledge  of  the  Jewish  worship,  greater  familiarity  with
their  creed  (comp.,  further,  ver.  9  with  Exod.  xxix.  40 ;  Lev.  ii.  13 ;  Ezra  iii.  3,  and
•  the  previous  notes  on  that  verse,  and  hagin.  of  ver.  12  with  Deut.  xii.  11 ;  1  Kings
viii.  29,  Ac).  Even  so  is  it  with  all  those  who  put  themselves  into  the  way  of  favour
by  coming  under  the  ample  conditions  of  the  covenant  of  the  gospel.  They  will  find
it,  indeed,  as  David  speaks  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  6),  "ordered  in  all  things  and  sure."
There  is  nothing  really  needed,  nothing  really  desirable,  however  arduous,  howevei
insignificant,  which  it  has  not  already  thought  of,  specified,  and  secured  (Ps.  xxxvii.
23 ;  Matt.  x.  30 ;  Bom.  viii.  28 ;  Phil.  iv.  19 ;  Col.  ii.  10).

•  The  fact,  referred  to  by  Wordsworth,  that  the  eastern  gate  of  the  restored  temple  wat
called  the  Shushan  gate,  and  had  a  sculpture  on  it  of  the  city  of  Susa,  in  grateful  commemor-
stion  of  the  issuing  of  this  decree  of  Darius  from  that  city,  may  also  be  noticed  in  this
oooaeotion.

a  2


84  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  vi.  1—12.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  decree  of  Gyrus.  In  the  letter  of  Tatnai  to  Darius  he  advised
that  search  should  be  made  to  ascertain  whether  there  existed  any  decree  of  Cyrua
authorising  the  building  of  the  temple  at  Jerusalem.  Search  was  accordingly  made,
and  the  roll  recovered.     The  decree  may  be  viewed  as  consisting  of  three  parts : —

I.  ThS  authentication.  1.  The  author's  signature.'  "  Cyrus  the  king."  (1)
This  name  calls  to  mind  the  remarkable  prophecies  of  Isaiah,  in  which,  a  century
before  his  time,  he  was  surnamed  (see  Isa.  xliv.  28  ;  xlv.  1,  13).  (2)  The  same
God  that  inspired  the  prophecy  found  means  to  bring  it  under  the  notice  of  the  king.
Cyrus  accordingly  accepted  the  Divine  commission  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  23 ;  Ezra  i.
2,  3).  Lesson — We  should  trust  that  providence  which  rules  all  rulers.  2.  The
date  of  the  document.  "  In  the  fir^t  year  of  Cyrus."  (1)  This  date,  B.C.  536,  recalls
the  prophecy  of  Jeremiah,  which  assigned  seventy  years  for  the  duration  of  the
captivity.  These  were  now  completed.  (2)  This  prophecy  also  seems  to  have
been  brought  under  the  notice  of  Cyrus  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  22;  Ezra  i.  1).  Lesson —
(a)  Let  us  see  the  hand  of  God  in  everything.  (6)  Nothing  is  too  trivial  to  be
mentioned  in  prayer.  3.  The  place  of  its  custody.  (1)  Tatnai  specified  "  the  king's
treasure  house  at  Babylon  "  (ch.  v.  17).  Probably  because  the  decree  may  have
been  signed  there.  Search  was  made  accordingly  at  that  treasure  house  in  the
royal  library,  but  the  document  was  not  found.  The  malignity  of  the  Apharsacliites
would  now  be  gratified.  (2)  Further  search  was  made  at  Achmetha,  "  in  the  palace
that  is  in  the  province  of  the  Medes."  Here  the  roll  was  recovered.  Note — (o)  God
watches  over  the  true.     (5)  The  triumphing  of  the  wicked  is  transient.

II.  The  matter  "concerning  the  house  of  God  at  Jerhsalem."  1.  "Let  tht
house  be  builded."  (1)  At  Jerusalem.  The  place  which  God  chose  to  put  his  name
there  (see  1  Kings  viii.  29 ;  2  Chron.  vii.  12 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  67, 68  ;  Ixxxvii.  1, 2).  God
favoured  particular  places  for  his  worship.  1.  To  serve  typical  purposes.  2.  To
keep  his  people  from  mingling  with  idolaters  Note — In  this  spiritual  dispensation
these  reasons  no  longer  obtain  (see  John  iv.  20 — 24).  (2)  "  Where  they  ofEered
sacrifices."  Levitical  sacrifices  were  restricted  to  the  temple  because  the  Shechinah
and  sacred  fire  were  there ;  and  this  ordinance  kept  the  people  from  sacrificing
on  high  places  with  idolaters.  For  this  latter  reason,  though  the  Shechinah  and
fire  were  absent  from  the  second  temple,  still  the  ancient  place  of  sacrificing  is
respected.  Lesson — Every  species  of  idolatry  should  be  scrupulously  avoided.  2.
The  manner  in  which  it  was  to  he  done.  (1)  "  Let  the  foundations  be  strongly
laid."  These  typified  Christ,  upon  whom  the  fabric  of  his  Church  is  built  (see  Matt,
xvi.  16—18  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  11 ;  Eph.  ii.  20—22).  Note— We  may  confidently  rest  on
him  the  whole  weight  of  our  eternal  interests.  (2)  "  The  height  thereof  threescore
cubits,  and  the  breadth  thereof  threescore  cubits."  This  difEered  from  Solomon's
temple,  first,  in  that  it  was  larger ;  and  secondly,  in  that  it  was  square.  Solomon's
temple  was  thirty  cubits  high  and  sixty  broad.  The  New  Jerusalem  also  is  four-
square (see  Rev.  xxi.  16).  The  cube  was  by  the  ancients  regarded  as  a  figure  of
perfection  and  universality,  and,  in  the  typical  temple,  may  anticipate  these  qualities
of  the  heavenly  state  of  the  Church.  (3)  "  Three  rows  of  great  stones,  and  a  row
of  new  timber"  (see  ch.  v.  8).  The  timber  seems  to  have  been  laid  upon  every
tliird  course  of  stones.  Note — This  timber  built  in  amongst  the  stones  would  facilitate
tliiit  destruction  of  the  temple  by  fire  described  by  Josephus.  3.  How  the  cost  was
l<i  he  defrayed.  (1)  "Let  the  expenses  be  given  out  of  the  king's  house"  (see  ch.
iii.  7).  Note — The  hearts  of  princes  are  in  God's  hands.  Prayer  should  be  made
tu  liirn  rather  than  recourse  be  had  to  precarious  expedients  for  raising  funds  for  his
wiirk.  (2)  The  royal  bounty  was  not  such  as  to  preclude  the  necessity  for  con-
triliutions  from  the  people  of  God  (see  ch.  i.  3,  4 ;  ii.  68,  69).  Note — There  is
valuable  moral  education  in  liberality.

in.  The  matter  concerninq  the  sacred  vessels.  1.  Vessels  of  the  precimu
metals,  d )  These  were  taken  as  figures  of  the  servants  of  God  (see  Acts  ix.  16 ;
Bom.  IX. "21— 23;  2  Tim.  ii.  20,  21).  (2)  "Of  gold  and  silver."  Shov/ing  th«
preciouHness  of  the  s.ints  (see  Ps.  xlix.  7,  8 ;   Matt.  xvi.  26 ;    1  Pet.  i.   18,  19).


CH.  VI   1— 12.J  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  88

2.  Removed  by  Nebuchadnezzar.    (1)  Taken  from  the  temple.    The  sin  of  the

people  was  the  cause.  The  removal  of  the  vessels  was  therefore  a  sign  to  them  of
their  apostasy.  (2)  Taken  to  Babylon.  Type  of  the  confusion  of  the  world.
Placed  there  in  the  temple  of  his  god  (see  oh.  i.  7,  8 ;  v.  14).  Thence  taken  out
only  to  make  sport  for  the  licentious  (see  Dan.  v.  2 — 4).  What  a  graphic  figure  of
the  condition  of  the  backshder  1  3.  Now  to  be  restored.  (1)  "  Brought  back  again
to  the  temple."  Sign  of  the  hope  a  backslider  may  cherish  in  the  mercy  of  God.
(2)  Restored  ''every  one  to  his  place,"  i.  e.  every  one  that  was  restored.  Many
filings  were  wanting  in  the  second  temple,  and  some  of  the  vessels  may  have  been
lost.  Backsliders  must  not  presume  upon  an  infallible  final  perseverance  of  the
saints. — J.  A.  M..

Vers.  1 — 12.— Some  useful  things.  I.  The  utility  of  histobt.  "And  there
was  found  at  Achmetha,  in  the  palace  that  is  in  the  province  of  the  Medes,  a  roll,
and  therein  was  a  record  thus  written  "  (ver.  2).  1.  Its  permanence.  The  "  roll  "
contained  the  records  of  past  ages.  The  memory  of  man  could  not  retain  these
events.  History  preserves  them.  It  would  be  a  pity  for  the  nation  and  Church  to
let  die  the  events  that  have  made  them  what  they  are  ;  history  gives  permanence  and
solemnity  to  life.  Cyrus  and  his  edict  lived  before  those  who  made  search  into  the
old  records ;  history  causes  dead  men  to  live.  2.  Its  continuity.  The  roll  linked
the  times  of  Cyrus  with  the  times  of  Darius ;  showed  the  continuity  of  human  life.
There  is  no  interruption  in  the  plan  of  the  world's  life ;  it  runs  on  ttova  one  reign  to
another.  There  is  no  interruption  in  the  making  of  history ;  it  is  made  by  great
edicts,  as  also  by  common  deeds.  It  shows  the  succession  of  labour :  one  man  issues
an  edict  to  commence  a  temple,  another  issues  an  edict  to  complete  it.  3.  Its
publicity.  In  the  days  of  Darius  the  historical  records  were  written  and  hidden
away  in  the  royal  treasure-house ;  now  they  are  printed  and  widely'  circulated  ;  hence
history  is  more  influential  than  ever.  4.  Its  interest.  6.  Its  admonition.  Darius
will  soon  he  as  Cyrus,  only  a  figure  in  history ;  men  soon  pass  from  the  actual  to
the  historical.     Life  continues  but  for  a  little  (Ps.  zxxiz.  4).

II.  The  fokcb  of  example  (ver.  8).  Darius  is  inspired  by  the  example  of
Cyrus  to  issue  a  decree  for  the  aid  of  the  Jews  in  their  great  enterprise.  1.  The
force  of  example  surviving  the  flight  of  time.  Cyrus  has  long  been  dead ;  but  his
edict  has  power  to  animate  the  heart  of  Darius.  The  influence  of  example  never
dies.  2.  The  force  of  example  morally  beneficial  in  its  influence.  The  edict  of  the
dead  king  inspires  a  new  edict  of  help  for  Israel.  Let  us  try  to  leave  the  influence
of  good  deeds  behind  us ;  thus  we  may  help  to  build  temples  our  hands  can  never
touch.

III.  The  wobth  of  superior  station  (ver.  6).  Darius  commanded  Tatnai  to
let  the  Jews  build  in  peace.  It  is  the  work  and  worth  of  superior  ofBcial  power  to
restrain  and  to  keep  inferior  men  in  theii:  right  place  and  to  their  right  duty ;  to  see
that  they  hinder  not  the  great  moral  enterprises  of  society.

IV.  The  spiritual  use  of  money  (vers.  8,  9).  The  king  decreed  that  his  tribute
should  be  given  to  Israel  to  aid  in  completing  the  temple.  Money  realises  its
highest  meaning  in  the  service  of  God. — E.

Vers.  6 — 13. — The  decree  of  Darius.  _  The  full  document  containing  the  decree
or  decrees  of  Darius  occupies  the  firot  thirteen  verses  of  this  chapter.  The  former
portion  of  it  is  principally  taken  up  with  a  recital  of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  published
seventeen  years  earlier.  This  has  been  considered  under  a  distinct  heading.  The
remaining  portion  of  the  document  may  be  viewed  as  in  three  parts : —

I.  The  instruction  founded  upon  the  decree  of  Gyrus  (vers.  6,  7).  1.  The
instruction  is  intrindccdly  good.  (1)  Do  not  hinder  the  work  of  God.  (2)  Do  not
molest  those  who  are  engaged  in  it.  Good  men  would  receive  it  gladly.  The  work
of  God  is  their  work.  Those  engaged  in  it  their  fellows.  2.  But  to  the  wicked  it
is  mortifying.  (1)  Not  to  all  equally  so.  The  governor,  Tatnai,  did  not  commit
himself  to  the  opposition  in  the  spirit  of  bitterness.  Therefore  to  him  the  turn
of  events  might  not  he  mortifying.  (2)  But  to  the  Apharsachites  It  would  be  in-
tensely 10.    Their  opposition  was  maUcious  (see  ch.  iy.).    Therefore  the  frastratioB


16


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  VI.  1—12


of  their  purpoaes  would  sting  them  to  the  quick.  Lesson — Never  do  anything
that  may  involve  humiliation.  Reflection — What  an  agony  of  mortification  there
will  be  in  the  vMiquished  insolence  of  the  lost  I

II.  The  REQ0IRITION  MADE  BY  Darius  (vers.  8 — 10).  1.  That  from  the  Mndi
revmiie  from  beyond  the  river  expenses  he  given  to  the  builders  of  God's  Jtouse.  (1)
Kot  &om  the  kingdom  in  general,  but  from  that  portion  whence  the  opposition  came.
What  a  public  defeat  1  Yet  not  so  public  as  that  of  the  enemies  of  Christ  before
an  assembled  universe  in  the  great  day  of  judgment.  (2)  The  leaders  of  the  oppo-
BitioB  are  the  very  persons  required  to  raise  and  make  these  payments.  What  a
retribution  I  Eye  for  eye  ;  tooth  for  tooth.  2.  That  all  they  required  for  sacrifice
and  offering  should  be  supplied.  (1)  For  burnt  offerings  "  young  bullocks  and  rams
and  lambs."  (2)  For  meat  and  drink  offerings  "wheat,  salt,  oil,  and  wine."  In  the
service  of  God  there  is  nourishment  and  refreshment  (see  John  iv.  34 ;  vi.  27,  65j.
0)  These,  "  according  to  the  appointment  of  the  priests,  to  be  given  day  by  day
without  fail."  We  need  the  continual  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary.  We
need  a  daily  supply  of  spiritual  as  well  as  natural  food.  3.  Their  patriotism  and
loyalty  concerned  in  carrying  out  this.  (1)  Patriotism.  To  avert  the  anger  of
the  God  of  heaven.  To  conciliate  his  favour.  The  blessing  of  God  is  essential  to
the  prosperity  of  a  nation  (Job  xii.  16 — 25 ;  Ps.  Ixxv.  6,  7 ;  Dan.  ii.  21).  (2)
Lioy^ty.  To  ensure  his  blessing  upon  the  king  and  his  sons  (see  1  Kings  zi.
11—13  ;  xiii.  33,  34).

III.  The  malediction  denounced  upon  those  who  mat  fail  to  fulfil  the
BEQUISITION  (vers.  11,  12J.  1.  Civil  penalties.  (1)  His  house  to  be  demolished.
Infliction  not  only  upon  his  person,  but  also  on  his  family.  (2)  The  timber  of  it  to
be  made  into  a  cross  or  gibbet  for  his  crucifixion  or  destruction.  Thus  held  up  to
public  execration  (see  Deut.  xxi.  22,  23).  (3)  The  place  of  his  house  to  be  made
a  dunghill.  That  his  very  memory  might  be  abhorrent  to  men.  2.  The  vengeance
of  heaven  imprecated.  (1)  Civil  penalties  are  for  the  breach  of  the  royal  decree ;
the  vengeance  of  heaven  for  "putting  their  hand"  to  injure  the  "house  of  God"
(see  Josh.  vi.  26 ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  24).  (2)  This  vengeance  imprecated  upon  "  kings  ; "
may  refer  to  deputies,  and  particularly  to  Tatnai  and  Sliethar-boznai.  (3)  It  is  also
called  down  upon  the  "people."  Those  "of  the  land"  particularly  intended.
Queiy — Does  not  this  suggest  a  belief  in  a  future  state ;  for  if  the  civil  penalties
are  to  the  death,  what  more  can  there  be  else  ?  Let  us  "  fear  him  who  can  destroy
both  soul  and  body  in  hell." — J.  A.  M.


EXPOSITION.


Ver.  18. — So  they  did  speedily.  Tatnai
and  Shethar-boznai  showed  no  reluctance.
They  had  no  enmity  agaiiist  the  Jews.  Once
clearly  advertised  of  the  king's  wishes,  they
carried  them  out  with  zeal.  The  rapid  com-
pletion of  the  temple  must  be  in  part  attri-
buted to  their  good-wilL

Ver.  14. — iLad  the  elders  of  the  Jews
builded.  See  above,  ch.  v.  5,  9.  Probably
the  same  as  "  the  chief  of  the  fathers  "  of  ch.
iu  68,  and  ch.  iiL  12.  'While  the  younger
men  were  those  who  actually  laboured,  the
ciders  superintended  the  work.  Zerubbabel
and  Jesfiua  are  no  doubt  included  among
them.  And  they  prospered  through  the
propheiyine  of  Haggai  .  .  .  and  Zechariah.
It  can  well  be  understood  that  Haggai's
earnest  exhortations,  his  warnings,  his
threats,  his  sarcastic  reproaches  (ch.  l  4,  9),
his  prophecies  of  a  coming  glory  to  the  house
greater  than  any  known  previously  (ch.  ii.
9),  would  rouse  the  spirit  of  the  peoi)le,  and
make  them  laboar  diligently  and  persever-


insly ;  but  the  visions  of  Zechariah  seem  less
calculated  to  stir  popular  feeling.  Still  the
knowledge  that  the  angels  of  God  were  inter-
esting themselves  in  the  restoration  of  the
temple  (Zech.  i  9—21 ;  ii  3,  &c.),  and  the
many  promises  that  God  would  "comfort
Zion,"  and  "choose  Jerusalem"  (L  17  ;  ii.
12 ;  iii  2),  and  that  the  temple  should  as-
suredly be  brought  to  completion  (i  16  ;  iv.
9),  helped  no  doubt  to  strengthen  the  hands
of  Zerubbabel,  and  to  keep  up  the  zeal  of  the
people.  According  to  the  commandment  oi
Cyras,  and  Darius,  and  Artaxerzes  king  ol
Persia.  The  commandments  of  Cyrus  and
of  Darius  have  been  set  forth  by  the  writer
(see  ch._L  3  ;  vL  3—5,  7) ;  but  nothing  ha,"
been  said  as  yet  of  any  commandment  given
by  any  Artaxerxes  to  "build"  or  "finish"
the  house.  On  the  contrary,  the  only  Arta-
xerxes mentioned  has  been  declared  to  have
expressly  forbidden  the  work  to  proceed  (ch.
iv.  7—22).  _  The  Artaxerxes  of  that  place,
moreover,  reigned  between  Cyrus  and  Duias,


<m.  VI.  13—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


87


whereas  this  Artaxenes  should,  by  the
position  of  his  name,  be  one  of  the  successors
of  Darius.  It  has  been  suggested  that  Xerxes
is  intended,  and  that  he  may  have  been
associated  trith  his  father  during  the  building
of  the  temple.  But  as  Xerxes  was  the  son
of  Atossa,  whom  Darius  did  not  marry  until
he  had  ascended  the  throne  (Herod. ,  iii.  88),
he  cannot  have  been  more  than  five  years  old
when  the  temple  was  finished.  Nor  was  he
ever  associated  on  the  throne  by  his  father.
Xerxes,  therefore,  cannot  be  meant.  The  next
Idng  to  Xerxes,  however,  who  really  bore  the
name  of  Artaxerxes  was  a  favourer  of  the  Jews,
and  did  give  commandment  to  "beautify,"
and  in  that  sense  "  finish,"  the  house  of  the
Lord  (see  ch.  viL  20,  27).  "We  must  suppose,
therefore,  that  he  is  the  person  intended.
The  objection  that  the  name  is  not  spelt  the
game,  but  has  a  samech  in  one  place  instead
of  a  achin,  is  too  minute  to  require  con-
sideration. The  Persians  themselves  spelt
the  name  of  Artaxerxes  in  more  ways  than
one  (Kawlinson,  '  Cuneiform  Inscriptions  of
Persia,'  voL  i.  p.  348).

Ver.  16  — The  honse  was  finished  on  the
third  day  of  the  month  Adar.  Haggai  (L
15)  gives  the  exact  day  of  the  recommence-
ment of  the  work  as  the  twenty-fourth  of  Elul
in  Darius's  second  year.  Ezra  here  gives  the
exact  day  of  the  completion.  From  Zerub-
babel's  laying  of  the  foundation  (Ezra  iii.  10),
the  time  that,  had  elapsed  was  twenty-one
years.  From  the  recommencement  under
the  inspiriting  influence  of  the  two  prophets,
the  time  was  only  four  years,  five  months,
and  ten  days.

Dedication  of  tee  second  temple  (ch.
vi.  16  — 18).  Following  the  example  of
Solomon,  who  had  solemnly  "dedicated"
the  first  temple  (1  Kings  viii.  63),  and  had
offered  on  the  occasion  a  sacrifice  unexampled
for  its  magnitude  in  the  whole  of  Jewish
history  {ibid.),  Zerubbabel  now,  under  the
advice  of  two  prophets,  inaugurated  the  new
building  with  a  similar  ceremony.  In  "the
day  of  small  things  "  it  was  not  possible  for
him  to  emulate  Solomon's  magnificence  in
respect  of  the  number  of  victims.  Solomon
bad  sacrificed  22,000  oxen  and  120,000  sheep.
Zerubbabel's  means  only  enabled  him  to
make  an  ofiering  at  712  animals,  more  than
half  of  them  lambs.  He  did,  however,  ac-
cording to  his  ability ;  and  God,  who  accepts
all  our  endeavours  according  to  that  we
have,  and  not  according  to  that  we  have
not,  was  content  to  receive  graciously  the
humble  offering  made  to  him,  and  to  bless
the  building  thus  inaugurated  with  a  glory


unknown  to  the  first  temple.  The  Lord
himself,  the  Messenger  of  the  covenant,
so  long  sought  by  his  people,  suddenly
came  to  this  temple  (Mai.  iiL  1)— came  to  it,
and  frequented  it,  and  taught  in  it,  and  gave
it  a  dignity  and  a  majesty  far  beyond  the
first  temple,  which  possessed  indeed  the
Shechinah,  but  was  once,  and  once  only,
vouchsafed  a  brief  manifestation  of  the  actual
Divine  presence  (2  Chron.  vii  1).

Ver.  16. — The  children  of  IsraeL  Again
the  writer  is  careful  to  present  the  returned
exiles  to  us  as  "Israel,"  and  not  merely
"  Judah"  (comp.  ii.  70 ;  iii.  1,  10,  11 ;  iv.
3 ;  V.  1).  This  is  especially  fitting  when
he  is  about  to  explain  why  the  number  of
the  he-goats  offered  was  twelve  (see  the  next
verse).  Kept  the  dedication  of  this  house
of  God.  The  primary  dedication  seems  to
be  glanced  at  in  the  words,  "  the  dedication
of  this  house,"  an  expression  repeated  in  the
next  verse.  It  is  one  of  the  great  objects  of
Ezra  to  link  the  present  with  the  past,  the
new  temple  with  the  old,  the  restored
religion  with  that  of  former  times.

Ver.  17. — And  offered  ...  an  hundred
bullocks,  two  hundred  rams,  four  hundred
lambs.  A  poor  offering,  if  it  be  compared,
not  alone  with  Solomon's  (1  Kings  viii.  63),
but  even  with  Hezekiah's  (2  Chron.  xxx.  24),
or  Josiah's  {ibid.  xxxv.  7).  Hundreds  now
take  the  place  of  the  thousands  offered  under
the  old  monarchy.  A  sin  offering  for  all
Israel.  See  comment  on  ver.  16.  We  may
assume  that  some  of  every  tribe  had  returned
with  Zerubbabel,  and  that  consequently  it
was  possible  to  regard  the  re-established
people  as  "Israel"  (comp.  Neh.  xL  20;
Zech.  viiL  13 ;  Mai.  i.  1) ;  though,  since
the  great  majority  were  Jews,  tney  were
more  commonly  spoken  of  as  "  Judah  "
(Ezra  iv.  1,  6,  23  ;  v.  1,  5  ;  vi  7,  14  ;  Zech.
viii.  15,  &c.).  Zerubbabel,  desirous  of
emphasising  the  nobler  and  grander  view,
made  this  solemn  sin  offering  of  twelve  he-
goats,  one  for  each  of  the  tribes.  Ezra  acted
similarly  when  he  brought  the  second  colony
{infra,  ch.'viiL  35).

Ver.  18. — They  set  the  priests  in  their
divisions,  and  the  Levites  in  their  courses.
The  completion  of  the  new  temple  was
naturally  followed  by  an  arrangement  of
the  ministers  corresponding  to  that  which
had  been  originally  m~ade  by  David,  and
afterwards  adopted  by  Solomon,  for  the
service  of  the  old  temple  (see  1  Chron.  xxiii
6—23  ;  xxiv.  1  — 19).  This  arrangement
was  based  upon  the  ordinances  of  the  law
with  respect  to  the  respective  offices  of  the
two  orders,  as  given  in  the  Book  of  Numbers
(iii.   6 — 10  ;  viii.   6 — 26),  and,   so   far,   waa


S9


THE  BOOK  OV  EZRA.


[CH.  VI.  13—22.


according  to  the  writing  of  the  book  of
Moses.     But  the  "courses"  themselves  were
not  established  till  David's  time.
Celebration  of  the  passover  in  the

ENSUING  month,  AND  OBSERVANCE  OP  THE
FEAST  OF   UNLEAVENED  BREAD  (ch.  VL   19 —

22).  Specially  solemn  passovers  were  cele-
brated on  specially  solemn  occasions ;  and
these  received  special  record  at  the  hands
of  the  sacred  writers.  Of  this  kind  are  the
passover  celebrated  by  Hezekiah  in  the  year
B.C.  726,  recorded  in  2  Chron.  xxx.,  and
that  celebrated  by  Josiah  in  B.o.  624,  recorded
in  2  Chron.  xxxv.  Both  of  these  followed
upon  a  cleansing  of  the  temple,  and  restor-
ation of  the  temple  worship  after  a  period  of
suspension.  Ezra  seems  to  place  the  pass-
over  of  B.O.  516  in  the  same  category.  It
marked  the  period  of  the  full  re-establish-
ment of  the  regular  ordinances  of  religion,
more  or  less  interrupted  from  the  time  of
the  destruction  of  the  temple  by  Kebuchad-
nezzar.  It  terminated  the  abnormal  and
commenced  the  normal  condition  of  things.
Perhaps  it  is  to  mark  this,  that  Ezra  at  this
point  disuses  the  Chaldee  dialect,  which  he
had  introduced  in  ch.  iv.  8,  and  returns  to
the  Hebrew,  the  established  language  of  the
Jewish  religion.

Ver.  19.— Upon  the  fonrteenth  day  of  the
first  month.  The  day  fixed  by  the  law  of
Moses  (see  Exod.  xii.  6).

Ver.  20. — The  opening  section  of  this  verse
is  mistranslated.  Ezra  really  makes  a  dis-
tinction between  the  priests  and  the  Levites,
the  former  of  whom,  he  says,  "  purified  them-
selves," while  the  latter  "were  all  pure,  as
one  man;"  wherefore  the  latter  killed  the

{jaschal  lambs,  not  only  for  themselves  and
or  the  people,  but  also  for  their  brethren


the  priests.  It  would  seem  that,  as  in
Hezekiah's  time,  "the  Levites  were  more
upright  in  heart  to  sanctify  themselves  than
the  priests "  (2  Chron.  xxix.  84).

Ver.  21. — Such  as  had  separated  them-
selves nnto  them.  /.  e.  such  proselytes  as
had  been  made  since  the  return  from  the
captivity.  We  have  perhaps  a  mention  of
some  of  these  proselytes  in  the  "Shorezer"
and  "  Eegem-melech  "  sent  by  the  men  of
Bethel  a  short  time  before  this  to  make
inquiries  of  the  priests  at  Jerusalem  in
respect  of  fasting  (Zech.  vii  2).  These
names  are  Assyrian,  and  not  likely  to  have
been  given  to  persons  bom  Jews.  From  the
filthiness  of  the  heathen  means  "  from  their
moral  defilements"  (see  ch.  ix.  11).  It  is
always  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  heathen
idolatry  was  full  of  such  impurities.

Ver.  22. — Kept  the  feast  of  unleavened
bread  seven  days.  As  required  by  the  law
(Exod.  xiL_15  ;  xiiL  7  ;  tev.  xxiii  6,  &c.).
On  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  feast,  see
1  Cor.  V.  8.  The  Lord  had  . .  .  tamed  the
heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria.  It  has  been
generally  supposed  that  Darius  is  personally
meant  here,  and  surprise  has  been  expressed
at  his  being  called  "  king  ol  Assyria."  That
title  is  never  elsewhere  given  in  Scripture  to
a  king  of  Persia.  Perhaps  the  writer's  real
intention  in  this  place  is  to  express  in  a
general  way  the  thankfulness  of  the  Jews
that  God  had  turned  the  hearts  of  their  civil
rulers,  whether  Assyrians,  Babylonians,  or
Persians,  &om  hostility  to  friendship,  having
replaced  the  bitter  enmity  of  Sennacherib  and
Nebuchadnezzar  by  the  hearty  good-will  of
Cyrus  and  Darius.  On  this  view,  Assyria
would  represent  merely  the  great  power  of
Western  Asia,  and  "the  king"  would  not
be  Darius  personally,  but  the  lord  of
Western  Asia  in  a  more  general  way,  who
by  God's  goodness  had  become  the  perma-
nent friend  of  Israel  instead  of  her  oppressor
and  enemy.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  13 — 22. — The  worJc  completed.  These  words  form  the  conclusion  of  the
first  and  longest  portion  of  this  scriptural  Book  of  Ezra.  All  the  remaining  portion
of  the  book  is  divided  off  from  this  in  three  separate  ways.  It  is  so,  partly,  on
the  question  of  time,  a  gap  of  something  like  sixty  years  intervening  between  the
events  mentioned  at  the  close  of  this  sixth  chapter  and  those  referred  to  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  seventh.  It  is  also  divided  o£E  in  regard  to  its  method,  being  not  so
much,  like  the  former  portion,  a  piece  of  history,  strictly  so  called,  as  an  interesting
extract  from  the  life-story  of  one  particular  man.  And  it  is,  finally,  divided  ofE  to
some  extent  on  the  question  of  subject,  inasmuch  as  it  only  touches  in  a  subsidiary
and  altog-ether  supplemental  manner  on  that  which  the  former  portion  related  at
length.  _  The  proper  record  of  the  work  of  restoring  the  temple  finishes  here.  Coiv
responding  to  all  this  is  the  character  of  the  passage  itself.  It  bears  the  impress,  in
eveiy  way,  of  being  a  winding-up  of  that  record.  How  the  material  building  was
finished  j   how  it  was  solemnly  set  apart  for  its  proper  service ;   and   how  it  vrtm


OH.  VI.  13—22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  Sfl

first  employed  in  that  service ;  these  are  the  only  particulars  now  requiring  to  be
described.    These,  we  shall  find,  are  accordingly  described  to  us  here.

I.  The  building  finished.  This  was  done,  as  we  gather — 1.  Witliout  dday.
There  was  no  delay  on  the  part  of  Tatnai,  &c.  in  making  known  the  edict  of  Darius,
or  in  complying  with  its  injunctions.  The  language  was  very  plain ;  its  tone  very
urgent ;  its  results,  therefore,  very  prompt.  As  "  the  king  had  sent,  so  they  did
speedily "  (ver.  13).  On  the  other  hand,  there  was  just  as  little  delay  on  the  part
of  the  Jews.  The  king's  decree  and  the  prophet's  message  (ver.  14)  together  were
like  wings  to  their  work.  They  "  built,"  and  "  prospered,"  and  "  finished  "  (vers.  14,
J  5),  so  we  are  told.  It  would  almost  seem,  indeed,  as  though  from  the  time  of  the
•irrival  of  this  decree  of  Darius  (probably  in  the  fourth  year  of  his  reign ;  see  Words-
worth on  ver.  14,  and  compare  dates  in  iv.  24 ;  Haggai  i.  1  ;  Zech.  i.  1,  &c.,  in  con-
nection with  time  required  for  sending  to  Darius,  for  search,  for  sending  reply,  and
so  on),  the  Jews  looked  upon  the  completion  of  the  temple  as  a  mere  question  of
time,  and  so  at  last  regarded  their  condition  of  captivity  as  being  practically  at  an
end  (see  Zech.  vii.  1 — 3).  The  very  "  headstone  "  (Zech.  iv.  7)  of  the  building  was
now  within  sight.  2.  Without  defect.  As  God  himself  wished  it  to  b6,  "  according
to  the  commandment  of  the  God  of  Israel"  (ver.  14),  so  the  building  wes  "finished.'
That  was  the  main  point,  of  course.  But  it  was  not  the  only  point  to  be  marked.
We  are  also  to  observe  that  it  was  "  finished  "  as  Cyrus  and  Darius  had  given  "  com-
mandment." Artaxerxes,  it  is  true,  long  afterwards,  did  not  a  little,  in  ii
supplementary  manner,  for  the  beauty  of  this  house  ;  and,  therefore,  it  is  proper  tha  i
he  should  be  mentioned  here  in  this  "commemoration  of  benefactors."  But  all  thai
was  essentially  necessary  had  not  only  been  fully  specified  in  the  decrees  of  his  twci
predecessors,  but  had  also  been  fully  carried  out  during  the  reign  of  the  second
Soon  after  the  beginning  of  the  last  month  in  the  sixth  year  of  Darius  "  this  housr
was  finished ; "  finished  as  God  had  intended  ;  finished  as  he  had  caused  his  sei-
vants,  the  kings  of  Persia,  to  decree ;  finished  as  his  own  people  had  been  taught  tu
expect.  The  last  stone  had  been  placed  ;  the  last  test  had  been  applied ;  all  waf
ready  for  use  (see  prophecies  in  Zech.  iv.  7 — 10).

II.  The  bdildinq  set  apart.  All  was  ready  for  use  as  to  construction.  To  maki
it  equally  ready  for  use  as  to  condition,  it  must  be  solemnly  handed  over,  as  it  were,
to  God's  keeping  and  service.  We  are  next  told,  therefore,  how  this  was  done.
Namely — 1.  With  proper  "joy"  This  to  be  noted  first  because  required  first.  God
can  only  accept  and  bless  that  which  is  oSeredwith  joy  (Bxod.  xxv.  2;  2  Cor.  ix.  7).
Comp.  also  the  joy  of  David  and  Israel  in  ofEering  for  the  erection  of  the  first  temple
(1  Chron.  xxix.  9),  and  that  of  Solomon  and  all  Israel  at  its  dedication.  Equally
universal,  and  possibly,  on  the  principle  of  Luke  xv.  6,  9,  24,  32,  even  deeper
was  the  joy  of  these  "children  Of  the  captivity"  at  this  dedication  of  the  second
house.  2.  With  proper  humility.  That  which  they  were  now  ofEering  to  God  had
been  first  given  to  them  by  himself  (1  Chron.  xxix.  14, 15)  ;  and  could  not,  in  reality,
in  any  way  make  any  addition  to  his  glory  (Ps.  xvi.  2 ;  1. 9 — 12 ;  Luke  xvii.  10) ;  and
was  utterly  inadequate,  in  fact,  for  his  use  (1  Kings  viii.  27 ;  Acts  vii.  48,  49).  Not
only  BO,  as  coming  from  such  as  they  were  (see  Isa.  vi.  5),  it  was  altogether  mifit  (as
it  was)  for  his  service,  and  required,  in  consequence,  in  order  to  make  it  so,  like
themselves,  to  be  "  purged."  In  open  acknowledgment  of  these  various  truths,  by
way  of  thank-ofEering  for  his  many  bounties,  by  way  of  adoration  of  his  infinite
majesty,  by  way  of  appointed  propitiation  fortheirownunworthiness,  they  accompany
their  offering  of  this  building  by  the  other  bleeding  offerings  here  enumerated  (ver.  17).
Observe  especially  the  number  of  victims — two  lambs  for  every  ram,  two  rams  for
every  bullock  ;  the  less  the  value,  the  greater  the  number,  as  is  natural  in  true  thank
offerings.  Also,  in  regard  to  the  sin  offering,  one  victim  to  every  tribe ;  partly,  it
would  seem,  in  believing  reference  to  that  covenant  promise  of  God  which  was  given
to  the  twelve  tribes  as  a  whole  (1  Kings  xviii.  31 ;  Acts  xxvi.  6,  7),  and  partly  in
order  that  the  humiliation  for  sin  therein  involved  might  be  of  a  truly  national  kind.
All  Israel  were  understood  to  confess  their  sins  on  the  heads  of  those  goats.  3.  With
proper  care.  It  was  not  much  they  could  offer  (comp.  the  total  of  712  herewith  the
142,000  of  2  Chron.  vii.  6),  but  it  should  be  the  best  in  their  power.  Because  God
was  indulgent,  and  willing  to  accept,  for  his  covenant's  sake,  what  was  in  itself


•0  /HE  BOOK  OF  BZRA.  [oh.  VI.  19—22

imperfect  and  unworthy,  they  would  "ot  therefore  be  negligent.  Bather,  they  would
seek  to  order  everything  exactly  as  he  had  prescribed,  so  far  as  lay  in  their  power.
Not  merely  the  house,  but  the  household  (Matt.  Henry),  the  "priests"  and  the
"  Levites,"  who  should  attend  to  the  building  and  its  services,  were  solemnly  then
set  apart.  And  all  in  the  way  in  which  Ood  himself  had  directed  his  servant  Moses
to  specify  and  record.  All  were  dedicated,  in  short,  to  God's  service  according  to
God's  way.

III.  The  building  in  dsb.  Why  did  it  please  God,  notwithstanding  Acts  vii.
48 — 50,  to  have  such  a  house  among  men  ?  Partly  to  help  in  separating  and  con-
solidating his  Israel  (see  Exod.  xxiii.  17 ;  Ps.  cxxii.  4,  &c.).  In  the  new  circumstances
of  Israel  (see  earlier  outline)  this  more  needful  than  ever.  Would  this  restored  house,
now  at  last  completed  and  consecrated,  answer  this  end  ?  This  first  recorded  use  of
it  answers  this  question ;  and  seems,  in  short,  to  be  recorded  with  this  object  in  view.
What  a  strong  spirit  of  separation  is  found  in  these  verses  (19 — 22)  throughout.
1 .  Separation  from  other  nations — the  very  feast  observed,  that  of  the  passover,  being
a  commemoration  of  the  most  conspicuous  separation  ever  made  between  Israel  and
the  nations  (Exod.  xii.  26,  27,  also  45,  47).  2.  Separation  from  ceremonial
uncleanness: — even  the  priests  being  superseded  on  this  occasion  by  the  Levites,  in
the  matter  of  killing  the  passover  lambs  for  all,  as  not  being  so  universally  "  pure  "
(see  Rawlinson  on  ver.  20,  who  translates,  "And  the  priests  were  purified,  and  the
Levites  as  one  man  were  all  of  them  pure  ").  3.  Separation  froTn  false  brethren — no
other  persons  being  allowed  to  join  with  the  leturned  children  of  the  captivity  in
celebrating  this  feast,  except  those,  whether  "  prosel3ftes  from  the  heathen "  or
"  Israelites  "  never  captive  at  all,  who  "  had  separated  themselves  unto  "  these  others
"from  the  rllthin^sss  of  the  heathen  of  the  land,  to  seek  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."
The  description  is  almost  scientific  in  its  accuracy  and  precision.  Separated  fioni
the  heathen  ;  from  their  "  filthiness  "  too.  Separated  unto  Israel ;  to  seek  Israel's
God.  4.  Separated  with  joy.  To  find  themselves  once  again  with  a  house  of
their  own;  to  think  of  all  that  God  had  done  for  them  in  providing  them  with
such  a  house,  even  bringing  them  help  from  that  very  Assyrian  land  which  had
formerly  been  their  destruction  (Isa.  lii.  2,  &o. );  and  so  now  at  last,  once  again,
to  feel  themselves  openly  and  fully  a  "  peculiar  people  "  to  the  Lord  their  God,  was
a  very  great  joy.  Nor  was  this  joy  at  all  lessened,  but  rather  increased,  by  the  nature
of  tlie  feast  they  were  keeping,  involving,  as  it  did,  not  only  separation  from  the
heatlien  (see  above),  but  also  as  the  "  feast  of  unleavened  bread  "  (ver.  22),  separation
from  inward  sin  (Exod.  xii.  8,  15,  18 — 20 ;  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8).  So  great  a  delight,  as
well  as  clear  a  duty,  did  they  feel  their  present  separation  to  Jehovah.  And  so
thoroughly  did  this  their  first  use  of  their  just-restored  house  suit  the  character  of
that  house  (Ps.  xciii.  5).     How  forcibly  all  this  instructs  us —

1.  As  to  the  real  nature  of  God's  purposes.  Looking  back  on  all  these  six  chapters
of  Ezra,  we  see  one  object  in  view,  viz.,  the  restoration  of  God's  house.  Looking  on
the  house  now  at  length  completed,  we  see,  however,  that  even  its  erection  was  only
a  means  to  an  end,  viz.,  the  sanctification  of  God's  people.  So  even  of  that  spiritual
temple,  the  body  of  Christ  (John  xvii.  19  ;  Heb.  x.  10).  So  of  the  Sabbath  as  "  made
for  man"  (Mark  ii.  27).  So  of  all  trials  and  affliction  (Heb.  xii.  10).  So  of  the
whole  Christian  calling  (1  Pet.  ii.  9),  and  the  whole  work  of  redemption  (Titus  ii.
1 1 — 14).  Does  not  the  very  expression  indeed,  "  the  means  of  grace,"  teach  us  as
much  ?  Unless  these  means  do  really  minister  grace  to  believers,  they  fail  of  their
end.  2.  As  to  the  true  wisdom  of  God's  people,  viz.,  to  seek  for  the  full  realisation  of
these  gracious  purposes  in  themselves.  Even  in  being  definitely  in  the  way  of  their
realisation  there  is  much  joy,  but  some  sorrow  as  well  (see  above,  ch.  iii.  12,  13).
But  we  read  of  no  such  sorrow  mingled  with  joy  now  that  the  completion  and  dedi-
cation of  the  house  has  been  consummated  by  a  similar  dedication  of  the  people
themselves.  Even  "  unleavened  bread  "  and  "  bitter  herbs  "  in  that  case  are  eaten
with  "joy."  What,  indeed,  is  more  natural  if  we  come  to  consider?  "Without
holiness  no  man  shall  see  God  "  (Heb.  xii.  14).  Nor  can  any  man  see  true  happiness
without  seeing  God  (Ps.  xvi.  11 ;  xvii.  16  ;  1  John  iii.  2 ;  Eev.  xxii.  4).  Even  as  our
Lord  himself  has  summed  up  the  argument  in  Matt.  v.  8.  The  nearer  to  God's
image,  through  the  help  of  his  Spirit  and  for  the  sake  of  his  Son,  the  nearer  to  his


OH.  VI.  13—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZKA.  tl

bliss.     We  may  almost  describe  the  whole  Christian  creed  as  practically  summed  op
in  these  words.

HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  12 — 15. — Overthrow  and  upbuilding.  The  end  of  this  mission  brings  to
our  view —

I.  The  ovebthbow  of  evil.  "  Then  Tatnai,  .  .  .  Shethar-boznai,  anfl  tlieir  com-
panions, according  to  that  which  Darius  had  sent,  so  did  they  speedily  '  (ver.  13).
With  deepest  mortification  and  chagrin  must  tliey  have  received  tliese  tidings  from
the  Babylonian  court.  Their  failure  was  complete  and  conspicuous.  Not  only  hud
they  not  done  what  they  wanted  to  do,  but  they  had  been  compelled  to  aid  and
prosper  that  to  which  they  were  implacably  opposed.  "According  to  that  which
Darius  the  king  had  sent,  so  they  did  speedily;"  they  paid  tlie  expenses  (ver.  8)
and  presented  the  offerings  (vers.  9,  10),  and  thus  contributed  to  the  cause  they  set
out  to  demolish.  In  the  eiul  we  shall  see  evil  overthrown  by  the  power  of  God,  by
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  By  faith  we  may  say  what  our  Master  said  by
Divine  prevision,  "  I  saw  Satan  iis  lightning  fall  from  heaven  "  (Luke  x.  18).  And
sometimes  God  gives  us  to  see  evil  overthrown  before  our  eyes,  its  designs  upset,  its
fabric  brought  dovim  to  the  ground.  It  is  a  pleasing  and  cheering  sight  when  we
see  it  simply  defeated,  as  when,  after  long  and  hard  struggle,  a  good  cause  succeeds
in  establisliing  itself  despite  the  utmost  efforts  of  iniquity  to  hinder  it.  Still  more
gratifying  is  it  to  see  it  suffer  such  an  utter  rout  as  on  this  occasion,  when  its  forces
are  not  only  arrested,  but  made  to  serve  the  cause  it  hud  assailed.  Then  God  not
only  restrains  man's  wrath,  but  makes  it  to  praise  him  and  to  serve  us  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).
Let  us  be  encouraged  under  oppression  and  persecution.  Our  Divine  Leader  can  not
only  dehver  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies,  but  he  may  even,  as  here,  and  as  often
since  in  the  history  of  the  Church,  compel  those  who  are  hating  us,  and  maligning
and  misrepresenting  us,  and  seriously  injuring  us,  to  bring  us  their  tribute  and  aid
us  in  offering  our  sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  unto  the  Lord  our  S.iviour.

II.  SriRiTDAL  BUILDING.  "  And  the  elders  of  the  Jews  builded  "  (ver.  14),  "  and
they  builded  and  finished"  (ver.  15).  Then  the  Jews,  under  their  elders  (in  order,
giving  rank  and  direction  to  those  who  were  men  of  experience  and  capacity),  builded
the  house — 1.  For  God:  for  his  worship  and  praise;  that  offerings  might  be  pre-
sented unto  him  which  should  be  acceptable  to  him;  and — 2.  With  God  :  they  gladly
availed  themselves  of  the  help  accorded  them  by  the  prophets  of  the  Lord.  These
men  (ver.  14)  "  prophesied,"  i.  e.  they  spake  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  urging  all  to
do  their  work  diligently  and  faithfully,  and  therefore  speedily  and  soundly ;  also
obediently,  "according  to  commandment"  (ver.  14);  and  thus  they  brought  their
work — 3.  To  its  completion:  "they  finished  it;"  it  stood  strong  and  fair  and  well
furnished,  from  foundation  to  top-stone.  We,  too,  are  building  for  God  ;  not,  perhaps,
a  material  fabric,  but  that  which  is  more  precious  in  his  sight — a  Christian  charaAer
or  a  Christian  cause.  We  are  engaged  in  "  building  up  ourselves  in  our  most  holy
faith "  (Jude  20),  adding  to  our  faith  vittue,  and  to  virtue  knowledge,  &c.  (2  Pet.
i.  6,  6,  7).  And  we  are  (or  ought  to  be)  engaged  in  building  up  the  temple  of  soma
good  cause.  Some  work  of  God  is  occupying  our  time,  is  engaging  our  strength  and
skill.  We  are  laying  the  foundation  in  some  small  beginnings,  or,  on  the  foundation
another  has  laid,  we  are  building  up  the  imperishable  "  gold,  silver,  precious  stones,"
rejecting  (as  far  as  possible)  the  "wood,  hay,  and  stubble,"  which  the  fires  of  God
would  consume  (1  Cor.  iii.  12).  Let  us  see  to  it  that,  in  building  up  both  our  o^vn
character  and  the  cause  of  God,  we  build —

1.  For  God;  doing  all  things  mainly  and  chiefly  unto  him  ;  as  "  unto  the  Lord,"
and  not  as  unto  ourselves.  Let  the  glory  of  Christ  be  the  mainspring  of  our  action.
Whatever  toil,  patience,  forbearance,  charity  may  be  required,  let  us  gladly  yield  all
because  "  Jesus  is  worthy  to  receive,"  &c.  2.  With  God ;  accepting  all  the  help  God
offers  us  through  the  varied  means  of  grace  he  has  supplied — notably  the  preaching
(or  "  prophesying  ")  of  his  servants ;  consulting  his  word  to  know  his  will,  that  all
our  buUdmg  may  be  "  according  to  commandment."  We  must  do  what  we  do  in  the
way,  i.  e.  in  the  spirit  and  after  the  method,  in  which  he  would  have  na  work.    8.


n  x'SE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  vl  13—22.


Unto  completion.    Learning,  growing,  ripening  until  death ;   sympathising,  giving,
stiiving,  co-operating  tUl  the  work  is  done  and  the  fabric  is  finished. — C.

Vers.  13 — 16. — The  succestfid  issue.  The  vicissitudes  through  which  the  building
of  the  temple  was  carried  to  its  completion  figiire  forth  those  of  the  spiritual  temple
of  the  Church.     This  eventful  history  teaches —

I.  That  God's  pueposes  will  be  accompushed.  1.  This  truth  is  exemplified  in
the  creation.  (1)  A  universe  sprang  into  being  in  obedience  to  his  voice  (Ps.
xxxiii.  9).  (2)  It  serves  his  purposes  in  all  its  complicated  movement  (Ps.  cxlvii.
7 — 9,  15 — 18 ;  cxlviii. ;  Col.  i.  17).  2.  This  truth  is  also  exemplified  in  propliecy.
(1)  The  temple  was  finished  in  accordance  with  prophecy  (Isa.  xliv.  27,  28).  Tlie
events  which  prepared  the  way  were  also  pre-indicated  (see  also  Jer.  1.  and  li. ).  These
are  samples.  The  whole  subject  of  prophecy  proves  that  God  governs  the  moral
world  by  a  plan.  (2)  This  plan  must  comprehend  all  possible  contingencies  that
may  arise  from  the  action  of  free  beings.  There  is  a  limit  to  all  freedom  except  that
of  God.  His  absolute  freedom  ultimately  limits  all  that  is  relative.  Lesson — To
attempt  to  resist  the  will  of  God  is  indeed  madness.

II.  That  God  honoubs  his  willing  servants.  1.  He  gives  them  an  intereit
in  his  work.  "They  prospered,"  viz.,  in  the  success  of  God's  work.  (1)  They
obeyed  his  commandment  because  it  was  his.  Love  to  God  animated  their  zeal.  (2)
Thereby  their  own  moral  nature  became  ennobled.  2.  He  encourages  them  by  Aw
approving  voice.  "  They  prospered  through  the  prophesying  of  Haggai,"  &c.  (1)
His  word  supplies  the  noblest  motives.  To  the  true  servant  of  God  nothing  is
trifling ;  he  does  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  This  stamps  the  most  ordinary  things  with
sublimity.  (2)  His  word  gives  wisdom,  viz.,  to  sustain  them  in  his,  work  against
Uie  prudence  of  the  world  (see  ch.  v.  5).  Also  to  answer  prudently  in  the  face  of
the  enemy  (see  ch.  v.  11 — 16).  Prophecy  in  Cliristian  sanctuaries  is  a  grand  thing
for  business  men.  3.  He  crowns  their  labours  with  success.  (1)  There  may  be,
there  will  be,  vicissitudes  in  the  way.-  Even  in  these  there  is  real  success  when  the
signs  of  it  are  not  visible.  (2)  But  the  issue  is  sure.  The  sequel  will  be  glorious.
Lesson — ^Trust  God  when  you  cannot  trace  him.

III.  GoD_  MAKES  unlikely  PERSONS  HIS  WILLING  SERVANTS.  1.  Several  Medo-
Persian  kings  were  such.  (1)  These  were  worshippers  of  the  elements.  Why
sliould  they  favour  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  who  had  humiliated  their  idolatry  by
liefeating  their  gods?  The  miracles  of  the  Old  Testament  in  general  were  levelled
against  Sabianism.  (2)  Political  as  well  as  religious  reasons  would  render  it  un-
likely that  they  should  favour  the  return  of  the  Jews.  They  succeeded  to  the  place
of  the  Babylonish  kings,  and  might  be  presumed  to  follow  up  the  policy  of  Nebu-
chadnezzar. (3)  But  God  found  means  to  move  the  heart  of  Cyrus.  Darius  also
was  moved  by  him  to  follow  his  great  predecessor.  This  he  was  the  more  disposed
to  by  nature  of  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  which  alter  not.  Artaxerxes
Fjongimanus,  in  after  years,  rendered  his  service  to  the  people  of  God.  2.  Perhaps
Tatnai  was  another  example.  (1)  He  was  unlikely  inasmuch  as  he  had  been  moved
by  the  enemies  of  Israel.  But  he  seems,  to  have  had  little  sympathy  with  their
malice.  (2)  The  "speedy"  obedience  which  he  rendered  to  the  decree  of  Darius
may  have  been  cheerful.  Lesson — Let  no  one  despair  of  the  power  of  the  gospel  to
convert  unlikely  sinners.

IV.  That  God  makes  unwilling  persons  serve  his  purposes.  The  '■^people  oj
the  land'\  were  in  this  category.  (1)  Their  opposition  was  undoubted.  Their
conduct  hitherto  proved  this.  Their  enmity  was  transmitted  to  their  posterity  (see
Neh.  ii.  9,  10,  19  ;  iv.  1 — 3 ;  vi.  16 ;  John  iv.  9).  (2)  But  their  opposition  was
overrule"!  for  good.  It  brought  the  necessities  of  Israel,  occasioned  by  the  neglect
of  the  decree  of  Cyrus,  under  the  notice  of  Darius.  The  enemies  now  had  to  pay
and  collect  taxes  to  supply  those  necessities.  They  do  this  too  "  speedily,"  not
because  they  love  God,  but  because  they  fear  the  king  (see  vers.  11,  12).  So  God
"  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him."  Better  we  should  praise  him  with  a  loyal
heart.  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  b«  at
peace  with  him." — J.  A.  M.


CH.  TL  18—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  M

Vere.  14 — 16. — The  temple  finished.  The  building  of  tlie  temple  was  finished
in  about  four  years  after  the  work  was  resumed.  This  was  a  short  time  for  a  work
so  vast,  when  compared  with  the  resources  of  the  Jews.  It  was  carried  through
without  intermission ;  the  zeal  of  the  people  was  not  suffered  to  become  languid
through  delay.  The  fact  illustrates  both  the  propitious  character  of  external
circumstances  and  the  wisdom  of  the  Jewish  leaders.  When  the  building  was
completed  it  was  dedicated,  and  the  worship  of  the  Lord  was  re-established  witli
solemnity  and  with  joy.  Here  are  two  themes,  distinct  and  yet  united — first,  the
rebuilding  of  the  temple  ;  and  secondly,  its  dedication.

I.  The  rebuilding.  The  accession  of  Darius  appeared  to  Haggai  and  Zechariah
the  sign  that  the  Lord  had  again  visited  his  people.  The  last  monarch  had  been  £,
Magian,  "opposed  to  belief  in  a  personal  G-od,"  and  "not  approving  of  temples."
Darius  was  in  sympathy  with  the  work  of  Cyrus,  having  faith  in  the  God  of  heavei/,
and  regarding  the  Jewish  nation  with  special  favour  (vers.  10,  12^.  Darius  was
the  great  organiser  of  the  Persian  kingdom.  He  made  each  province  feel  itself
under  the  protection  of  the  central  authority,  and  by  his  system  of  "posts "brought
fach  province  into  immediate  communication  with  himself.  A  strong  central
iiuthonty  is  the  best  protection  against  the  tyranny  of  provincial  governments,  with
their  petty  jealousies  and  miserable  intrigues.  Modern  as  well  as  ancient  Oriental
history  illustrates  how  heavily  anarchy  may  press  on  a  people  like  the  Jews,  too  stead-
fast in  religious  convictions  to  join  in  prevailing  heathenism  and  iinmorality,  too
feeble  to  enforce  their  claims.  The  change  in  the  method  of  administration  of  which
general  history  informs  us  is  indicated  in  the  sacred  history  (cf.  the  title  "governor"
i;iven  to  Tatnai,  ch.  v.  3,  with  the  titles  "  chancellor "  and  "  scribe "  given  to
Rehum  and  Shimshai,  ch.  iv.  9).  Tatnai's  personal  character,  moreover,  appears  in
favourable  contrast  with  the  characters  of  the  "adversaries  of  Judiili  and  Benjamin"
whose  letter  is  recorded  ch.  iv.  7 — 16.  He  writes  no  "  accusation  againot  the  in-
habitants of  Judah  and  Jerusalem ; "  he  simply  reports  the  case  for  the  decision  of
DariuB  (ch.  v.  6 — 17).  Nor  is  his  a  one-sided  report ;  fairly  enough  he  states  the
pleading  of  the  elders,  referring  definitely  to  the  decree  of  Cyrus  under  which  they
acted,  and  asks  that  search  may  be  made  for  it.  And  when  the  answer  of  Darius
comes  to  him,  he  loyally  endeavours  to  fulfil  it.  Tatnai's  doing,  and  doing  speedily,
"  according  to  that  which  Darius  the  king  had  sent,"  is  mentioned  in  connection  with
the  "prospering"  of  the  elders  of  the  Jews.  The  wisdom  of  the  leaders  of  the  Jews
is  seen  in  their  hurrying  forward  the  work.  The  zeal  of  the  people  might  flag  ;
changes  might  occur  in  the  monarchy ;  they  must  take  advantage  of  the  favouring
circumstances.  The  work  was  a  great  one ;  not  all  was  accomplished  when  the
temple  walls  were  built ;  the  mention  of  Artaxerxes  in  conjunction  with  Cyrus
and  Darius  shows  that  they  were  in  the  middle,  not  at  the  end,  of  their  labours.
But  this  at  least  they  could  do — make  sure  their  steps  as  they  proceedad ;  the
temple  once  erected  was  not  destroyed ;  it  stood  a  point  of  vantage  for  the
carrying  out  of  further  projects.  Their  wisdom  appears  again  in  their  refusal
to  relax  their  efforts  while  the  appeal  to  Darius  was  being  made  (ch.  v.  5).
They  knew  the  character  of  Tatnai ;  they  acted  in  confidence  either  that  he  would
not  desire  or  would  not  venture  on  his  own  authority  to  disallow  their  appeal
to  the  decree  of  Cyrus.  Their  boldness  was  the  truest  prudence  ;  it  would  keep  up
the  hearts  of  their  own  people  ;  it  would  overawe  the  "  adversaries."  The  basis  of
their  wisdom  was  piety;  they  knew  that  "the  eye  of  their  God  was  upon  them."
They  not  only  confided  in  the  general  providence  of  God  ;  the  prophets  Haggai  and
Zechariah  urged  the  Jews  to  remember  his  special  commission  to  them  :  he  had
brought  them  back  from  captivity  to  do  this  work  ;  his  blessing  would  crown  their
fidelity  with  success ;  his  curse  would  fall  on  their  negligence.  Haggai  spoke  to
the  people,  pledging  the  fidelity  of  the  Lord  to  them  (Haggai  ii.  10—19).  Zechariah
appealed  to  the  sense  of  Divine  inspiration  in  Zerubbabel  (Zech.  iv.  6 — 10),  and
strengthened  Jeshua  the  high  priest  by  lofty  assertions  that  he  and  his  purpose  and
his  trials  were  near  the  heart  of  God  (Zech.  iii.).  Special  tokens  of  the  Divine
favour  encouraged  the  people  in  their  labour.  The  closing  Psalms  of  the  Psalter
are  assigned  to  this  period  of  Jewish  history  ;  Ps.  cxlvi. — cxlviii.  are  entitled  in  the
Saptuagint  version  "  of  Haggai  and  Zechariah  ; "  and  they  speak  of  deliverance  out


94  THE  BOOK  OF  BZBA.  [oh.  tl  ld-22

of  trouble,  and  prosperity  after  distress.  Haggai's  pledge  on  behalf  of  God  wai
fulfilled :  for  drought  they  had  flowing  waters  ;  instead  of  fruitless  labour  they  had
"  food  for  the  hungry,"  and  "  the  finest  of  the  wheat"  (cf.  Ps.  cxlvi.  5—^10 ;  cxlvii.
3,  8,  13—20,  with  Haggai,  passirn).  In  almost  all  great  histories  of  deliverance
and  progress  these  two  elements  are  found  united — favouring  circumstance  and
human  •haracter.  One-sidedness  must  be  avoided  in  our  interpretation  of  history.
It  is  not  wise  to  overlook  the  force  of  propitious  events ;  we  break  human  hearts  if
we  teach  that  everything  depends  on  our  own  fidelity,  our  own  skill ;  not  only  so,
we  thus  obscure  men's  faith  in  the  providence  of  God.  Qd  the  other  hand,  no
times  are  propitious  to  those  who  are  not  ready  to  serve  God.  God's  providence
does  not  supersede  our  service,  nor  render  needless  his  choicest  gift  of  men.  In-
ability to  read  "  the  signs  of  the  times  "  is  declared  by  Cihrist  to  be  a  mark  of  in-
sincerity (Luke  xii.  54  —57)  ;  the  highest  service  man  can  render  man  is  to  be  an
"  interpreter  "  of  God's  purpose,  a  prophet  calling  for  the  fulfilment  of  God's  will.

II.  The  dedication.  The  festival  of  the  dedication  contrasts  strikingly  with
Solomon's  festival.  "  The  holy  of  holies  was  empty.  The  ark,  the  cherubim,  the  tables
of  stone,  the  pot  of  manna,  the  rod  of  Aaron  were  gone.  The  golden  shields  had
vanished.  Even  the  high  priest,  thoug! i  he  had  recovered  his  ofiicial  dress,  had  not  been
able  to  resume  the  Sreastplate  with  tiie  oracular  stones."  (Cf.  1  Kings  viii.  and  2
Chron.  vi.  with  Ezra  vi.  17,  and  Ps.  oxxxvi.  with  Pa.  cxlvi. — cl.)  It  is  the  contrast  of
youth,  flushed  with  prosperity  and  of  an  exultant  tone  of  piety,  with  experienced
and  saddened  manhood.  The  barbaric  munificence  of  Solomon's  offering,  22,000
bullocks  and  120,000  sheep,  contrasts  also  with  the  100  bullocks,  200  rams,  and  400
lambs  of  the  second  sacrifice.  But  one  touch  of  pathos  appears  here  wanting  in
the  fimt— the  offering  of  twelve  he-goats,  a  sin  offering  for  each  of  the  tribes.  The
sin  ofEering,  for  sins  of  ignorance  and  negligence,  was  a  confession  that  all  had  been
heedless ;  they  knew  not,  with  all  they  had  learnt,  the  full  extent  of  their  remiss-
ness, they  felt  "  the  sin  that  mingled  with  their  holy  things."  We  are  touched  by
the  record;  the  appeal  went  to  the  heart  of  God.  "Thou  desirest  not  sacrifice."
"  The  sacrifices  of  God  are  a  broken  spirit."  With  the  dedication  was  associated
the  first  passover,  about  a  month  after.  The  true  consecration  of  a  house  of
prayer  is  not  the  august  ceremonial  which  attends  its  opening,  but  the  habitual
service  offered  in  it.  Note  the  carefulness  to  follow  the  law  which  is  characteristic
of  this  period  (vers.  18 — 20).  Negligence  had  been  their  undoing;  the  sin  offering
confessed  that;  but  the  true  repentance  is  amendment  of  the  evil  habit.  There
was  a  forward  look  in  this  arrangement  of  the  priests  and  Levites  ;  it  was  provision
for  a  long  future  of  Divine  service.  And  with  this  was  combined  hope  for  the
ingathering  of  all  the  nation.  All  the  tribes,  the  children  of  the  captivity,  the
children  of  the  dispersion,  and  the  undistinguished  remnant  left  behind  by  the  king
of  Assyria  were  regarded  as  one.  Their  hearts — like  that  of  Paul  (Rom.  ix. — 3d.) —
could  not  endure  the  thought  of  losing  any.  The  family  is  not  complete  until  all
are  gathered ;  humbler  members,  its  very  prodigals,  as  well  as  the  virtuous  and  the
prosperous.  A  nation.a  Church,  includes  the  weakly  and  the  "less  comely  "members
as  well  as  those  which  are  honourable.  Among  those  who  "had  separated  them-
selves unto  them  from  the  fllthiness  of  the  heathen  of  the  land  to  seek  the  Lord
God  of  Israel "  may  have  been  heathen  proselytes.  The  "  court  of  the  Gentiles  "
appears  for  the  first  time  in  the  temple  of  Zerubbabel.  The  true  separation,  it  was
recognised  with  increasing  clearness,  was  separation  from  the  sins  of  heathenism,
not  national  exclusiveness.  The  joyousness  of  the  festival  is  twice  noticed  (vers.  16,
22).  It  is  remarkable  how  much  is  said  of  joy  in  the  Divine  service  in  these  books
of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  Perhaps  we  are  never  fully  conscious  of  joy  till  we  have
been  sobered  by  sorrow.  And  it  is  a  religious  duty  to  encourage  hope  and  gladness
in  the  depressed.  We  must  learn  how  to  treat  the  various  experiences  with  which
we  have  to  deal ;  not  only  weeping  with  them  that  weep,  but  doing  all  we  can  to
win  them  to  smiles.  Elevating  influences  are  most  needed  by  the  depressed.  It
was  to  slaves  Paul  told  Titus  to  speak  of  "adorning,  making  beautiful,  the  doctrine
of  God  our  Saviour."  To  the  prosperous  we  may  speak  of  sobriety ;  we  may  remind
him  who  lives  many  years,  and  rejoices  in  them  all,  of  the  "days  of  darkness,"
Which  shall  be  many      But  those  who  have  seen  affliction,  and  who  have  arduou*


CH  VI.  13—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  KZKA.  9i5

labour  and  adverse  times  before  them,  require  that  their  relij^ious  services  ihould  b«
made  as  joyoua  and  as  bright  as  possible. — M.

Ver.  15.— Church  prosperity.  I.  There  was  a  change  of  mood  ik  thobb  who
HAD  SOUGHT  TO  HINDEB  THE  WORK.  Tatiiai,  who  had  BOUght  to  hinder  the  building  of
the  temple,  now  by  the  royal  command  does  all  he  can  to  promote  it.  The  world
sometimes  changes  its  mood  toward  the  Church ;  often  from  motives  of  policy  or
fear ;  seldom  from  good  will.  Civil  governors  can  greatly  aid  religious  builders.
When  enemies  help  the  Church  prospers.

II.  There  WAS  a  faithful  ministry  exercised  in  the  midst  of  the  people.  "Thej
prospered  through  the  prophesying  of  Haggai"  (ver.  14).  The  ministry  has  much  ti.
do  with  the  prosperity  of  a  Church  ;  men  like  Haggai  and  Zechariah  cannot  fail  tc
inspire  their  comrades  with  their  own  earnest  spirit.  A  faithful  pastor  will  oftei
make  a  Church  prosperous.

III.  There  was  the  completion  of  an  arduous  undertaking.     "And  this  hous
■Tas  finished  "  (ver.  15).     A  great  enterprise,  which  had  passed  through  so  man^
vicissitudes,  was  now  successfully  ended.     By  the  completion  of  its  toils  the  Cliurcl.
indicates  its  energy,  provides  for  its  own  welfare,  and  glorifies  God. — £.

Ver.  16. — Church  building.  I.  That  God  requires  a  HonSiS  esfeciallt
kbected  for  his  worship.  '■  Tliis  house."  1.  As  a  dwelling  on  the  earth.  God't
presence  pervades  the  universe ;  there  is  no  place  where  it  is  not.  The  heaven  cl
heavens  cannot  contain  him,  much  less  tlie  bouse  which  we  have  built ;  yet  in  great
condescension  he  iiianiCests  a  richer  presence  in  his  holy  sanctuary  than  in  all  the
world  outside.  The  Shechinah  dwells  in  the  temple.  God's  dwelling-place  is  in  Zion.
Christ  is  in  the  midst  of  his  gathered  people  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  2.  As  a  testimony  for
the  truth.  The  temple  was  a  testimony  to  the  heathen  nations  and  to  mU  people  of
the  worship  and  Siiciilioedue  from  the  Israelites  to  Jehovah.  Our  Chriatiaii  churches
testify  to  our  belief  in  the  great  God,  and  to  all  those  sacred  truths  which  he  has
revealed  in  his  book.  3.  As  the  evidence  of  a  religious  feeling.  While  others  an
only  building  houses  for  themselves ;  we  build  also  for  God  ;  we  sacrifice  the  comfor;
of  our  ceiled  houses  and  of  our  gains  so  to  do.  Our  churches  are  evidence  of  tht
unselfish  and  devout  sentiments  of  the  human  heart.  4.  As  the  means  of  social
philatUhropy.  We  love  the  nation,  and  seek  its  moral  welfare,  hence  we  build  it  a
sanctuary.

II.  That  there  are  a  great  many  iMrEDiiiENTS  in  the  way  of  building
CHURCHES.  The  Israelites  had  many  hindrances  in  their  work.  1.  The  lack  of  n
good  heart  for  the  work.  2.  The  lack  of  generous  gifts  for  the  work.  3.  The  lack
of  suitable  men  to  lead  the  work.  4.  The  lack  of  sympathy  in  men  for  the  moral
welfare  of  God's  cause.  5.  The  lack  of  mutual  concession  to  opposing  ideas.  6
The  lack  of  right  help  from  the  outside  circles  of  society.  Christian  enthusiasm
generosity,  sympathy,  good  feeling,  are  the  requisites  of  successful  church  building

III.  That  the  completion  of  a  new  church  is  worthy  or  special  gratitude
The  Israelites  would  indeed  be  grateful  to  see  their  finished  temple.  1.  Grateful  for
the  kind  providence  that  had  aided  them.  2.  Grateful  for  the  valiant  leaders  th.'t
had  inspired  them.  3,  Grateful  for  the  persistent  spirit  of  work  which  had  beer
given  them.  4.  Grateful  that  their  arduous  toils  were  at  an  end.  5.  Grateful  that  tl  t
glorious  worship  of  God  could  now  be  fully  celebrat«d.  6.  Grateful  that  they  had  h
new  impulse  given  to  their  national  life. — E.

Vers.  16 — 18. — The  dedication  of  the  temple, — As  the  temple  was  a  type  of  the
Church  of  God,  and  the  stones  of  which  it  was  composed  represented  individuai
believers,  so  the  completing  of  the  building  foreshadowed  that  grand  consummation
in  which  the  number  of  the  elect  shall  be  complete.  The  consequent  dedication  of
the  finished  edifice  will  therefore  represent  the  future  devotion  to  the  service  of  God
of  his  glorified  Church.  By  anticipation  it  also  describes  the  service  which  believera
should  now  render  to  God,  since  each  part  should  be  a  true  sample  of  the  whole.
Ill  this  view  how  fittingly  was  the  dedication  of  the  temple  an  occasion  of  ioy
I  ver.  16)  I


ae  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  Ti.  13—22

I.  The  eejoicinq  was  over  the  finished  work.  1.  It  was  the  etid  of  all  ikeir
loil.  (1)  The  end,  in  being  the  consummation  towards  which  they  wrought.  Bo
will  the  heavenly  state  be  to  all  trne  workers  in  the  Church  of  God.  (2)  Also  the
end,  in  the  sense  of  bringing  their  toil  to  its  period.  The  labour  of  twenty  long
years  was  now  closed.  No  more  straining  of  muscles  in  felling  of  cedars  in  Leba-
non. No  more  sweat  of  the  face  in  lifting  great  stones.  No  more  endurance  of
cruel  mocking^  and  violent  persecutions.  So  when  we  gain  our  reward  "  there  will
be  no  more  curse  "  (Rev.  xxi.  3 — 5).  2.  It  was  the  triumph  of  their  faith  and  hope
(1)  The  word  of  God  sustained  them  against  opposition  from  the  rulers  and  from
the  rabble.  It  nerved  them  under  the  discouragements  of  threats  and  violence.  So
amidst  vicissitudes  for  twenty  years  they  plodded  on.  Now  they  reap  the  rewsril  of
their  constancy.  (2)  So  has  the  Church  of  God  been  carried  up  stone  by  stcne
amidst  opposition  from  princes  and  people.  Amidst  poverty  and  perplexity.  With
interruptions  and  threatenings.  But  it  is  destined  to  witness  a  magnificent  sequel
(see  Rev.  xxi.  1,  2,  S,  &c.).  (3)  The  history  of  the  Church  has  its  epitome  in  the
experience  of  its  members.  Thoir  constant  faith  will  reap  its  reward  too  in  the
heights  of  the  heavenly  Zion.

II.  They  rejoiced  over  immense  saoeifioes.  1.  There  were  peace  qferings  for
the  dedication.  (1)  The  number  of  the  victims  was  100  bullocks  and  600  smaller
mimals,  viz.,  200  rams  and  400  lambs.  At  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple  the
iaorifices  were  22,000  oxen  and  120,000  sheep  (see  1  Kings  viii.  63).  Yet  this  immo-
lation does  not  compare  unfavourably.  Here  were  only  60,000  Jews  as  against  say
10,000,000  Israelites  in  the  days  of  Solomon,  or  1  to  200.  Multiply  these  victims
by  200,  and  they  scarcely  differ  in  number  from  those  offered  at  the  earlier  dedica-
tion (see  also  ch.  viii.  35).  Consider  also  the  difference  in  their  circumstances  (see
2  Cor.  viii.  2,  3).  Well  might  they  rejoice  in  their  religious  zeal.  (2)  Correspond-
ing to  this  enormous  slaughter,  there  will  be  in  connection  with  the  dedication  to  God
of  his  glorified  Church  a  fearful  sacrifice  of  his  enemies.  These  judgments  began  upoi'
the  antichristian  Jews  (see  Jer.  xix.  6,  7).  They  will  culminate  in  the  destruction
of  the  Antichrist  of  Gentiledom  (see  Isa.  xxxiv.  1 — 7 ;  Ezek.  xxxix.  17 — 20).  If
mercy  rejoices,  it  rejoices  upon  judgment  (not  "  against "  it)  ;  as  the  ark  of  mercy
rode  upon  the  flood  of  judgment  (see  Rev.  xxii.  15).  2.  There  were  sin  offerings  foi
all  Israel.  (1)  "Twelve  he-goats  according  to  the  number  of  the  tribes."  TIip
number  of  the  victims  sacrificed  for  the  tribes  at  the  dedication  of  Solomon's  temple
is  not  mentioned  (2  Chron.  vii.  4).  (2)  Why  for  "  all  Israel,"  when  so  large  a
part  of  the  ten  tribes  remained  in  their  dispersion?  Perhaps  an  expression  of  faitli
in  those  promises  which  speak  of  a  full  restoration  of  "  all  the  house  of  Israel
wholly"  (see  Ezek.  xi.  14 — 20).  This  restoration  was  but  an  instalment  of  the
ultimate  restoration  even  of  Judah.  (3)  Atonement  necessary  to  the  acceptableness
of  services.  The  "  children  of  the  captivity "  had  a  lively  remembrance  of  the
miseries  they  had  suffered  through  sin.  The  redeemed  in  heaven  will  sing  of  Calvary
(Rev.  V.  8—13).

III.  They  rejoiced  over  the  ordering  of  the  service  o»  Ood.  1.  The
priests  were  distributed  into  their  divisions.  (1)  These  "  divisions  "  are  also  called
'■■oiirses  (2  Chron.  viii.  14).  They  were  twenty-four  in  number,  and  so  ordered  by
David  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  1—5).  They  served  in  turn,  under  the  direction  of  the  higli
priest,  and  on  entering  this  service  were  ceremonially  sanctified  (2  Chron.  v.  11).
Example  in  the  case  of  Zacharias  (see  Luke  i.  6,  8).  (2)  There  will  be  supreme
order  in  the  service  of  God  in  heaven.  2.  The  Levites  also  were  distributed  into
courses.  (1)  David,  the  type  of  his  infinitely  more  illustrious  Son,  gave  this  ordi-
nance likewise  (1  Chron.  xxiii.  3 — 6).  (2)  Their  services  were  (o)  those  conneoted
with  sacrifice  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  2).  (hi)  Supervising  matters  pertainmg  to  the  temple,
(c)  Keeping  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  (d)  Leading  the  praise  in  the
worship  of  God.  3.  Believers  in  Christ  are  the  priests  and  Levites  of  the  spiritual
sanctuary.  (1)  They  offer  continual  sacrifices  of  prayer,  of  praise,  of  service.  (2)
Everything  which  concerns  the  house  of  God  concerns  them.  The  service  they
render  is  therefore  joyful  service.  We  should  welcome  holy  ordinances  with  joy
(Ps.  0.  2).— J.  A.  M.


oa.  yi.  13—21]  THE  BOOK  OF  E2ftA.  97

Vers.  16 — 22. — Timely  and  wise  enthusiasm.  It  was  natural  and  right  that,  when
the  temple  was  finished,  the  Israelites,  who  had  spent  on  their  work  so  much  anxiety
and  toil,  and  who  looked  on  the  sacred  building  as  the  one  great  possession  and  glory
of  the  land,  should  find  their  hearts  elated  with  a  strong  and  glowing  enthusiasm.  It
was  timely,  and,  moreover,  it  was  wise  ;  let  us  see  its  characteristics.

I.  JoYon.s.  "And  the  children  of  Israel  .  .  .  kept  the  dedication  .  .  .  with  joy"
(ver.  16).  It  was  "the  Lord  had  made  them  joyful "  (ver.  22).  Their  souls  were
all  alight  and  aglow  with  that  best  kind  of  happiness,  the  joy  of  gratitude.  There
is  nothing  so  miserable  as  unthankfulness  ;  nothing  so  happy  as  gratitude.  They
were  mindful  of  his  mercies  who  had  brought  them  out  of  bondage,  away  from  the
"  strange  land  "  where  they  could  not  "  sing  the  songs  pf  Zion  "  (Ps.  cxxxvii.),  to
their  own  home,  the  land  of  their  fathers.  They  remembered  him  who  had  "  turned
the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria  unto  them,"  and  made  him  even  lend  them  his  aid ;
they  .blessed  the  Divine  hand  which  had  arrested  and  diverted  the  blow  of  their
enemies.  "  Not  unto  us,"  they  said,  "  but  to  thy  name,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxvi.),  and  their
souls  thrilled  with  enthusiastic  joy  as  they  took  possession  of  the  new  house  they
had  built  (ver.  16),  and  again  as  they  kept  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  (ver.  22).
Happy  they  who  "  drink  of  the  river  of  his  pleasures, "  whom  God  makes  joyful,
whose  gladness  of  heart  is  not  the  mere  excitement  of  the  flesh,  but  the  pure  and
healthy  satisfaction  of  the  spirit.

II.  SACEBD(ver3.  17,20,21).  Proceeding  from  a  pure  and  sacred  source,  it  flowed  in
a  sacred  channel,  and  took  a  devout  and  holy  form ;  for  (a)  they  purified  themselves,
"separated  themselves  from  the' filthiness  of  the  heathen"  (ver.  21);  they  made
themselves  clean  of  heart  and  hand,  preparatory  to  worship,  and  "  all  of  them  were
pure"  (ver.  20).  And  (6)  they  brought  sacrifices  in  abundance  to  the  altar  of  the  Lord
(ver.  17).  Not  the  "thousands"  of  Solomon's  time  of  wealth,  but  the  "  hundreds"  of
their  own  time  of  poverty  ;  gladly,  spontaneously,  liberally  they  presented  their  offer-
ings unto  God.  Here  are  twoof  the  requisites  of  acceptable  service,  (a)  Purity.  If
we  regard  iniquity  in  our  heart  the  Lord  will  not  hear  us  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  We  must
be  clean  who  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord  (Isa.  lii.  11).  Only  the  pure  in  heart  can
liOpe  to  see  God,  either  here  by  faith,  or  hereafter  by  sight  (Matt.  v.  8).  (6)  Sponr
taneity.  The  willing,  cheerful  surrender  both  of  ourselves  (our  will,  our  affections,
our  intelligence)  and  of  our  possessions  (our  time,  our  strength,  our  money)  imto  our
Lord.  "  In  the  strength  of  grace,  with  a  glad  heart  and  free,"  we  must  dedicate
ourselves  unto  him.

III.  Hdmble-hbaeted.  They  "  offered  for  sin  offering,"  &c.  (ver.  17).  Twelve
he-goats  were  offered  as  a  sin  offering  (ver.  17).  It  was  not  forgotten  that,  beside
God's  mercies  to  be  celebrated,- there  were  their  own  sins  to  be  atoned.  In  the  midst
of  our  overflowing  joy,  joy  before  God  and  in  him,  it  is  well  to  remember  that  there
are  "  sins  of  our  holy  things,"  and  many  shortcomings  in  our  service,  beside  tres-

{ lasses  in  our  daily  life,  which  should  lead  to  the  prayer,  "  Let  thy  mercy,  0  Lord,
ighten  upon  us,"  blending,  not  inharmoniously,  with  the  voice  of  our  supplication,
and  the  song  of  our  thanksgiving.

IV.  Social.  "  And  the  children  of  Israel  .  .  .  did  eat,  and  kept  the  feast,"  Ac.
(vers.  21,  22).  All  the  children  of  Israel,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  from  the
governor  to  the  humblest  menial  of  the  state,  from  the  high  priest  to  the  lowliest
Levite,  all  sat  down  together  to  eat,  to  keep  the  feast.  Their  holy  joy  was  multiplied
and  was  beautified  in  the  sight  of  God  by  being  shared,  and  by  being  made  as  social
as  their  circumstances  and  customs  would  allow.  So  should  ours  be ;  and  though  we
have  no  longer  Christian  institutipns  answering  to  the  early  "  agapce,"  we  should  seek
for  and  discover  some  ways  by  which  our  "  common  joy  in  the  common  salvation  "
should  be  expressed  together,  in  social  as  well  as  sacred  service.

V.  Systematic.  "  They  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions,  and  the  Levites  in  their
courses  "  (ver.  18).  They  kept  the  passover  according  to  law  (ver.  19),  and  instead
of  letting  enthusiasm  simply  blaze  up  and  die  down,  they  made  provision  for  future
devotion  (ver.  18).  Here  is  enthusiasm  in  its  wisdom ;  in  the  hour  of  its  strength
providing  for  the  hour  when  its  excitements  will  be  over,  when  reliance  must  rest
on  calm  conviction,  and  when  piety  must  be  maintained  by  devout  habits  and  wise
methods  of  worship  and  of  work. — 0.


98  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [oh.  vi  13—2,i.

Vers.  16  —  22.  —  Church  dedication.  I.  That  we  should  dedioatb  a  new
OHTIECH  TO  QoD  IN  A  8FIBIT  OP  SOLEMN  REJOICING.  "  With  joy  "  (ver.  16).  1.  The
vxyrh  itself  a  joy.  As  a  material  structure,  embodying  the  skill  and  handiwork  of
man,  it  is  a  joy.  2.  The  purpose  of  the  work  a  joy.  It  is  built  for  the  glory  of
God  and  for  the  good  of  man.  3.  The  spirit  of  the  work  a  joy.  4.  The  completion
of  the  work  a  joy.  6.  The  prospect  of  the  work  a  joy.  6.  The  interest  of  the
work  a  joy.  Heaven  rejoices  in  the  finished  sanctuary,  in  which  its  holy  worship
shall  be  conducted,  and  its  redemptive  purposes  be  promoted.  Religious  worship
is  a  joyful  thing ;  let  us  enter  the  house  of  God  with  thanksgiving.

II.  That  we  should  dedicate  a  new  church  to  God  in  a  spirit  of  deep  belj'-
ABASEMENT.  "  For  a  sin  offering "  (ver.  17).  1.  We  must  not  be  proud  of  our
mechanical  skill.  Israel  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  as  a  band  of  captives  they
had  displayed  great  skill  in  building  the  house ;  they  rather  felt  that  God  had  built
it.  2.  When  we  have  completed  any  great  work  for  God  we  must  not  think  that  we
have  done  anything  worthy  of  praise ;  we  must  not  commend  our  energy,  devotion,
or  self-sacrifice ;  but  we  must  remember  oar  delay,  our  w^eakness,  and  how  we
needed  the  ministers  of  God  to  stir  us  to  duty.  3.  We  must  humble  our  souls
before  God  in  deep  confession  of  sin.  4.  We  must  come  ofEering  by  faith  the  only
sacrifice  that  can  avail  to  make  us  and  our  imperfect  work  acceptable  to  God.  The
best  house  we  can  build  for  God  is  unworthy  his  acceptance ;  he  can  only  accept
it  through  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  5.  We  must  come  united  in  the  sacred  fellowship
of  the  Church.     Israel  united  in  the  feast.

III.  That  we  should  dedicate  a  new  church  to  God  by  inaugubatino  useful
MORAL  agencies.  "They  set  the  priests  in  their  divisions  "  (ver.  18).  The  house
will  be  comparatively  worthless  unless  it  becomes  the  scene  of  busy  Christian  toil
and  enterprise  ;  it  is  to  be  a  house  of  moral  industry.  The  agencies  are — 1.  Authori-
tative. 2.  Varied.  Priests  and  Levites ;  all  kinds  of  workers.  3.  Orderly — "in  their
course."  4.  Useful — "for  the  service."  6.  Continuous.  One  course  will  relieve
another.  It  is  impossible  to  indicate  the  manifold  agencies  which  ought  to  be  set
in  operation  by  a  new  church,  or  to  estimate  the  mighty  impulse  which  should  be
given  to  the  work  of  Christ  on  the  earth.

IV.  That  we  should  dedicate  a  new  church  to  God  regarding  it  ab  the

REPOSITORY  of  CHRISTIAN  TRUTH  AND  THE  SCENE  OP  RELIGIOUS  WORSHIP.       "  As  it  is

written  in  the  book  of  Moses"  (ver.  18).  "And  killed  the  passover"  (ver.  20).
1.  The  repository  of  the  truth.  The  temple  was  the  repository  of  the  law  of  Moses  ;
in  it  the  law  of  Moses  was  recognised  as  of  supreme  authority.  In  the  new  church
God's  book  must  rule  our  thought,  speech,  and  action  ;  a  law  more  complete  than  the
law  of  Moses  ;  for  in  these  last  days  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  by  his  Son.  %  The
scene  of  worship.  The  new  church  is  not  merely  for  literary,  scientific,  philanthropic
purposes  ;  but  for  the  passover,  for  Christian  worship.  See  that  it  is  used  for  it.«
•rightful  purpose.— B.

Vers.  19 — 22. — The  passover.  Six  memorable  passovers  are  mentioned  in  Old
Testament  Scripture.  The  first  was  in  Egypt  (Exod.  xii.).  The  second  in  the  wilder-
ness (Num.  xi.).  The  third  at  Gilgal  (Josh.  v.).  The  fourth  in  the  days  of  Heze-
kiah  ^2  Chron.  xxx.).  The  fifth  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.).
The  sixth  is  that  here  mentioned.     The  subject  is  distributed  into  two  parts: —

I.  The  FEAST.  This  also  is  distributed  into  two  parts.  1.  The  passover  proper-
(1)  This  was  held  "  upon  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month.'*'  This  was  the
anniversary  of  the  night  before  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  Egypt,
when  the  angel  who  destroyed  the  first-bom  of  the  Egyptians  passed  over  the
Israelites,  who  were  protected  by  the  blood  of  a  slaughtered  lumb.  (2)  What  an  ex-
pressive type  of  the  protection  we  derive  through  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of
Christ  (see  1  Cor.  v.  7)  I  The  very  time  of  the  death  of  Jesus  was  indicated  in  this
date.  He  suffered  not  only  in  the  first  month  and  on  the  fuurteenth  day,  but  also
"  between  the  evenings  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  46).  2.  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread.  (1 )
Scrupulous  care  was  taken  that  no  leaven  should  be  found  in  their  dwellings.  Leaven
is  a  salt  and  sour  matter  which  is  put  into  dough  to  ferment  the  mass  for  bread,  and
is  also  of  a  putrefying  nature.     Its  exr^'ision  by  the  ancient  Israelite  expressed  his


CH.  VI.  13—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


99


aversion  to  the  abominations  of  the  Egyptians  from  which  he  was  delivered  (Exod.  xiL
17 ;  xiii.  3).  These  Jews  would  associate  with  the  abominations  of  Egypt  those  ol
Babylon  from  which  they  were  now  delivered.  (2)  The  Eucharist  is  our  feast  of
unleavened  bread.  Those  who  partake  of  this  should  put  away  all  leaven  of  heresy
(Matt.  xvi.  16).  All  notorious  and  scandalous  living  (1  Cor.  v.  6,  7).  All  malice
and  wickedness  of  the  heart  (1  Cor.  i.  8).  3.  The  feast  was  kept  with  joy.  (1)
With  the  joy  ordinarily  fitting  to  such  an  occasion.  They  kept  it  "  seven  days,"  and
therefore  with  its  "holy  convocations"  on  the  first  and  last  days.  Holy  convoca-
tions to  godly  persons  are  essentially  joyous.  They  anticipate  the  convocation  in
the  heavens.  (2)  But  they  had  special  reason  -for  rejoicing.  "  For  the  Lord  had
made  them  jo^^ul  by  turning  the  heart  of  the  king  of  Assyria  unto  them  to  strengthen
their  hands,"  &c.  The  Persian  monarchs  are  here  collectively  called  the  "  king  of
Assyria  "  because  tliey  were  rulers  over  the  ancient  Assyrian  territory.  (Note — May
not  this  suggest  the  key  to  many  prophecies  which  evidently  relate  in  their  fuller
expression  to  the  latter  times,  in  which  names  of  ancient  kingdoms  are  still  used  ?)
The  finishing  of  their  temple  was  an  occasion  of  great  joy.  There  is  no  joy  to  be
compared  with  that  which  the  Lord  makes  for  ns.

II.  The  preparation.  1.  The  priests  were  purified,  and  the  Levites  were  all  oj
them  pure.  The  state  of  things  was  now  as  it  had  been  in  the  days  of  Hezekiah,
when  the  passover  hud  to  be  held  in  the  second  month  because  the  priests  had  not
sufficiently  sanctified  themselves  to  hold  it  at  the  more  proper  time  (2  Chron.  xxx.  3).
Note— When  the  spiritual  temple  is  complete  the  priests  and  Levites — the  saints  of  God
— will  be  all  morally  pure.  2.  All  the  children  of  the  captivity  ^ete  pure.  (1)  This  ia
evident  from  the  fact  that  the  passover  was  killed  forthern  all  (ver.  20).  The  second
passover  was  instituted  to  meet  the  case  of  those  who  through  ceremonial  uncleanness
were  incapable  of  taking  the  first  (see  Num.  ix.  6 — 11).  Here  there  was  no  need  of  a
second,  for  the  whole  nation  was  ceremonially  clean.  This  was  a  very  remarkable
circumstance,  and  shows  wh.^t  a  wonderful  providence  was  over  their  families,  for  a
dead  body  in  a  house  was  sufficient  to  render  its  inmates  unfit  for  this  feast  (see
Num.  xix.  14).  What  a  type  of  the  glorified  Church  I  The  joy  of  the  paschal  feast
when  it  is  renewed  in  the  kingdom  of  God  will  not  be  interrupted  by  death.  All
tliere  will  be  pure  in  the  noblest  sense.  3.  Beliemng  Gentiles  were  joined  with
llipir  Jewish  brethren  (ver.  21).  They  were  qualified  for  this  holy  fellowship — (1)
By  "separating  tlieiiiselves  from  the  filthiness  of  the  heathen  land."  Some  may
liave  come  with  tlieiii  from  Babylon,  as  the  mixed  multitude  came  up  from  Egypt
(see  Exod.  xii.  38  ;  Neh.  xiii.  3).  Some  may  have  been  "people  of  the  land,"  de-
scendants of  Esar-haddon's  importation  (ch.  iv.  2).  But  they  must  have  become
Jewish  proselytes.  ('2)  By  "  seeking  the  Lord  God  of  Israeh"  True  worship  and
salvation  are  nowhere  else  to  be  found  (see  John  iv.  22).  At  whatever  sacrifice,  let
as  ieek  the  fellowship  of  the  saints  (Eph.  ii.  13 — 22).— J.  A.  M.


PART  II.

SECOND  RETURN  OF  THE  ISRAELITES  FROM  OAPTTVITT  UNDER  EZS^
§  1.    Deceeb  of  Artaxerxes,  and  Return  ondeb  Ezra,  with  the  Ndmbbbs  of

THOSE  WHO  returned,   AND  THE  NAMES  OP  THE  ChIEF  MEN.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VII.


Fifty-seven  years  after  the  completion  of
the  temple  and  its  dedicution,  when  the  long
ind  eventful  reign  of  Darius  was  over,  and


his  son  Xerxes,  probably  the  Ahasnema  of
Esther,  had  also  lived  and  reigned  and
passed  away,  and  the  grandson  of  Daniu,
known  generally  as  Artaxerxes  Longimanna,
occupied  the  Persian  throne,  a  farther  retaro
H  2


100


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  VII.  1 — 10.


of  Israelites  from  Babylon,  on  a  tolerably
large  scale,  took  place.  Ezra,  a  member  of
the  high  priest's  family,  a  descendant  of
Seraiah,  the  "chief  priest"  at  the  time  of
the  destruction  of  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xxv.
18),  and  probably  a  third  cousin  of  the
existing  high  priest,  Eliashib,  having  access
to  Artaxerxes,  and,  apparently,  a  certain
influence  with  him,  asked  (ch.  vil.  6)  and
obtained  the  royal  permission  to  reinforce  the
colony  in  Judsea  by  a  fresh  body  of  emigrants,
and  at  the  same  time  to  convey  to  Jerusalem
a  sum  of  money,  which  the  Babylonian  Jews
had  subscribed  towards  the  temple  (ervice
{ibid.  ver.  16).  Artaxerxes  appears  to  have
had  a  high  respect  for  Ezra ;  he  recognised
in  him  one  possessed  of  wisdom  from  on  high
(ver.  25),  and  readily  granted  him,  not  only
the  request  that  he  had  made,  but  an  im-
portant commission,  which  was  mainly  one
of  inquiry  (ver.  14),  but  which  made  him  for
a  time  paramount  civil  ruler  of  the  province,
with  power  of  life  and  death  over  its  inhabit-
ants (ver.  26) ;  and  also  conferred  upon  the
Jewish  people  certain  valuable  gifts  and
privileges.  The  terms  of  the  decree  are  set
forth  in  ch.  viL  12 — 26,  where  the  Chaldee
version  of  the  text,  as  published  by  Artaxerxes,
is  probably  given  verbatim  et  literatim.
After  reciting  it,  Ezra  breaks  out  into  a  brief
but  earnest  burst  of  thanksgiving  and  ac-
knowledgment of  God's  goodness,  which
concludes  ch.  vii.,  occupying  the  last  two
verses.  He  then  proceeds,  in  ch.  viii.,  t>.
give  an  account  of  the  number  of  the  Jews
who  returned  with  him,  with  the  names  of
their  leaders,  whom  he  calls  "chief  of  the
fathers."  Having  completed  his  list  in  ver.
14,  he  goes  on  (vers.  15—31)  to  describe  the
circmnstances  of  the  journey  from  Babylon
to  Jerusalem,  which  occupied  exactly  four
icLonths,  commencing  on  the  first  day  of  the
first  month  and  terminating  on  the  first  day
of  the  fifth  month  (ch.  viL  9).  In  conclu-
sion, he  tells  us  how,  after  a  rest  of  three
days,  he  discharged  himself  of  the  most
pressing  of  the  commissions  intrusted  to  him,
delivering  over  to  the  priests  in  charge  of
the  temple  the  gifts  sent  by  Artaxerxes,  and
making  known  to  the  various  Persian  officials
of  the  district  the  terms  of  the  royal  decree  so
bras  they  were  afiected  by  it  (ch.  viiL  32—36).
This  section  may  be  subdivided  into  seven


parts : — 1.  The  genealogy  of  Ezra  (ch.  vii.
1 — 5) ;  2.  The  fact  of  his  journey,  with  its
dates  (ibid.  vers.  6 — 10) ;  3.  The  decree  o(
Artaxerxes  with  respect  to  Ezra  {ibid.  vers.  11
— 26) ;  4.  The  thanksgiving  of  Ezra  {Md.
vers.  27,  28) ;  6.  The  numbers  of  those  who
accompanied  him  to  Jerusalem,  with  the
names  of  the  chiefs  (ch.  viii  1 — 14) ;  6.  The
circumstances  of  the  journey  from  Babylon  to
Jerusalem  {ibid.  vers.  15 — 31) ;  and  7.  The
three  days'  rest  at  Jerusalem  and  execution
of  the  more  pressing  commissions  {ibid.  vers.
32-36).

The  oenbaloot  of  Ezra  (ch.  vii.  1—
5).  It  is  plain  that  this  genealogy  is  incom-
plete. It  gives  no  more  than  sixteen  gener-
ations between  Ezra  and  Aaron,  whereas  the
number  of  generations  between  Zenibbabul
and  Ifashon,  prince  of  Judah  in  Aaron's  time
(Num.  i  7  ;  ii  3),  was  twenty-six  (1  Chron.
iL  10 — 15 ;  iii.  6 — 19),  and  that  between  Aaron
himself  and  Eliashib  at  least  as  many  (1
Chron.  vi.  3—15 ;  ix.  11 ;  Neh.  xii  10).
Six  names  are  omitted  between  the  Azariab
and  Meraioth  of  ver.  3,  which  will  be  found
in  1  Chron.  vi  7 — 10 ;  and  at  least  three
must  be  wanting  between  Ezra  himself  and
Seraiah,  who  was  the  great-great-grandfather
of  Eliashib,  Ezra's  contemporary  (Neh.  iii.
1 ;  xiii  4).  The  curtailment  of  genealogies
by  the  omission  of  names  was  a  common
practice  of  the  Jews.  A  notable  instance  is
the  omission  of  three  royal  names  in  St
Matthew's  genealogy  of  our  Lord  (i  8).

Ver.  1. — The  writer  makes  a  marked  di-
vision between  his  first  and  second  sections
by  means  of  the  words,  "Now  after  these
things,"  which  he  uses  in  this  place  only.
The  actual  interval  seems  to  have  been  one
of  between  fifty-seven  and  fifty-eight  years,
the  sixth  year  of  Darius  being  B.  c.  516,  and
the  seventh  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  B.C.
458.  Artaxerxes  is  in  the  original  "  Artakh-
shasta,"  which  reproduces  the  Persian
Artakhshatra  with  the  change  of  only  on*
letter.  That  Longimanus,  the  grandson  ol
Darius,  is  meant  seems  to  follow  from  th<
fact  that  Eliashib,  the  grandson  of  Jeshua
is  high  priest  under  him  (Neh.  iii  1).

Darius,        'i  f  Jeshua,


Xerxes,


correspond  to  ■


Joiakim


Artaxerxes,  j  L  Eliashib

But  for  this  it  would  be  possible  to  regartj
the  Artaxerxes  of  Ezra  (ch.  vii)  and  Nehe-


OH.  yn.  1—10.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


101


miah  as  Mnemon.  Ezra  the  son  of  Seraiah.
Probably  the  great-great-grandson.  In  the
langnage  of  the  sacred  writers,  every  de-
icendant  is  a  "son,"  and  every  ancestor  a
"father."  Christ  ia  "the  son  of  David,"
and  David  "  the  son  of  Abraham  "  (Matt,  i
1).  Joram  "begat"  Uzziah(i6id.  8),hisgreat-
great-grandson.  Jochebed was  'the daughter"
of  Levi  (Exod,  ii  1).  Ezra  omits  the  names  of
his  father,  grandfather,  and  great-grandfather,
who  were  undistinguished,  and  claims  descent
from  Seraiah,  the  last  high  priest  who  had
'  ministered  in  Solomon's  temple  (2  Kings
iiv.  18).  Azariah,  the  father  of  Seraiah,
does  not  occur  in  either  Kings  or  Chronieles  ;
but  Hilkiah,  Azariah's  father,  is  no  doubt  the
high  priest  of  Josiah's  time  (2  Kings  xxiL
4—14  ;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.  14—22,  &c.).

Vers.  2  —4. — This  portion  of  the  genealogy
agrees  exactly  with  that  of  Jehozadak  in  1
Chron.  vi.  3 — 15,  excepting  in  the  omission,
which  has  been  already  noticed,  of  six  names
between  Azariah  and  Meraioth.  We  may
gather  froto  1  Chron.  ix.  11  that  a  Meraioth
&  also  omitted  between  the  Zadok  and  Ahitub
of  ver.  2.

Ezra's  journey  prom  Babylon  to  Jeru-
salem, WITH  DATES  (ch.  vii.  6—10).  In
introducing  himself,  Ezra  seems  to  regard  it
aa  oi  primary  importance  to  state  two  things
— (1)  who  he  was,  and  (2)  what  place  he  had  in
a  history  of  which  the  main  object  is  to  give
an  account  of  the  return  of  Israel  from  cap-
tivity. In  connection  with  the  former  point,
he  gives,  first  of  all,  his  genealogy ;  and,
secondly,  the  account  of  himself  contained
in  vers.  6  and  10.  He  describes  himself  as  "  a
ready  scribe  " — one  who  ' '  had  prepared  his
heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do
it,"  and  also  "  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and
judgments."  In  connection  with  the  latter,
he  is  careful  to  put  before  us  at  once  the  fact
that  he  too,  like  Zerubbabel,  "  went  up  from
Babylon"  to  Jerusalem  by  the  permission
of  the  Persian  king,  and,  like  Zembbabel,
was  accompanied  by  priests,  Levites,  both
singers  and  porters,  Nethinim,  and  a  number
of  the  people  (ver.  7).  He  adds  an  exact
statement  as  to  the  date  of  both  his  departure
and  arrival,  very  natural  in  one  who  is  his
own  biographer,  and  very  interesting  to  the
general  historian.  He  also,  without  any
parade  of  religious  sentiment,  acknowledges
the  hand  of  God  as  directing,  helping,  and
sustaining  him  in  all  his  proceedings,  ascrib-
ing to  the  Divine  favour,  especially,  Arta-
zerzes  allowance  of  his  journey,  and  his  safe


accomplish  ment  of  it  within  a  moderate  spac«
of  time  (vera.  6,  9).

Ver.  6. — This  Ezra  went  up.  See  comment
on  ch.  ii.  1,  where  llie  s.ime  exiu-essLoii —
"  went  up  " — is  used.  He  was  n  retdy  scribe
in  the  law  of  Mosea.  On  thu  meaning  of
this  phrase,  and  the  new  position  occupied
by  "  scribes"  after  the  captivity,  see  '  Inti'o-
duction  to  Ezra,'  §  6.  Which  the  Lord  God
of  Israel  had  given.  It  is  characteristic  oi
Ezra's  piety  never  to  forget  that  the  law  was
not  a  mere  human  code  given  by  an  earthly
lawgiver,  not  even  a  national  treasure,  the
accumulation  of  centuries,  but  a  direct
Divine  gift — "the  law  of  the  Lord"  (ver.
10),  "the  words  of  the  commandments  o(
the  Lord,  and  of  his  statutes  to  Israel "
(ver.  11),  "the  law  which  the  Lord  had
commanded  by  Moses"  (Neh.  viii.  14).
According  to  the  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God
upon  him.  /.  e.  "  by  reason  of  God's  favour
to  him. "  God,  by  reason  of  his  favour  to  Ezra,
inclined  the  heart  of  Artaxerxes  towards
him,  so  that  he  granted  all  his  request.
The  nature  of  the  "request"  is  not  directly
stated,  but  may  be  gathered  from  the
"  letter  of  Artaxerxes,"  especially  vers.  13,
14,  16.

Ver.  7. — The  same  six  classes  are  here
mentioned  as  furnishing  colonists  under
Ezra  which,  according  to  the  earlier  narra-
tive (ch.  ii.  70),  had  accompanied  Zerub-
babel. The  order  in  which  the  classes  are
mentioned  is  nearly,  but  not  quite,  the
same.  _  In  the  seventh  year  of  Artaxerxes.
This  is  the  emphatic  clause  of  the  verse ;
Ezra's  main  object  in  the  section  being  to
give  the  exact  date  of  his  journey.  As
Artaxerxes  began  to  reign  in  B.c.  464  (Clin-
ton, F.  H.,  vol  ii.  p.  380,  note  6),  his
seventh  year  would  be  b.o.  458.

Ver.  i. — And  he  came  to  Jerusalem  in
the  fifth  month.  From  the  ninth  verse  it
appears  that  the  first  day  of  the  first  month
— the  opening  day  of  the  year— was  selected
for  the  commencement  of  the  journey.  This
was  no  doubt  viewed  as  an  auspicious  day
for  beginning  an  important  undertaking.
The  time  occupied  on  the  way  was  exactly
four  months,  which  is  longer  than  might
have  been  supposed  to  be  necessary.  Hero-
dotus reckoned  it  a  three  months  journey
from  Sardis  to  Susa  (ver.  53),  and  the
younger  Cyrus  conducted  an  army  from
Ephesus  to  Cunaxa,  near  Babylon,  in  ninety-
three  marching  days  (Xen. ,  '  Anab. ,'  ii  1,  §  6)
— the  distance  in  either  case  being  consider-
ably more  than  that  from  Babylon  to  Jeru-
salem, even  supposing  the  route  followed  to
have  been  by  Balis  and  Aleppo.  But  !i
caravan,  like  an  army,  requires  rests  ;  and  wc
hear  of  one  such  rest  at  Ahava  (ch.  viii  1 5).
Cyrus  gave  his  troops  more  days  of  rest  thai


lOS


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  va.  1—10


of  movement,  and  took  half  the  year  to  reach
Cunaxa  from  Ephesus.  We  need  not  be
surprisL'il,  therefore,  that  Ezra's  journey
ociMipied  four  months.  Some  delay  must
almost  certainly  have  been  caused  by  the
jierils  of  the  route  (see  ch.  viii.  31).

Ver.  9. — According  to  the  good  hand  of
his  God.  For  the  meaning  of  this  phrase,
see  comment  on  ver.  6.  The  special  favour
of  God  hero  intended  would  seem  to  be
delivorance  from  certain  enemies  who  de-
signed to  attack  the  caravan  on  the  way
(see  the  next  chapter,  vers.  21—23,  81).


Ver.  10.— For  Ezra  had  prepared  Mi
heart,  &o.  God's  favour  towards  Ezra,  and
the  prosperous  issue  of  his  journey,  were  the
consequences  of  his  having  set  his  heart  on
learning  God's  will,  and  doing  it,  and  teach-
ing it  to  others.  To  seek  the  law  is  to  aim
at  obtaining  a  complete  knowledge  of  it
To  teach  statutes  and  judgments  is  to
inculcate  both  the  ceremonial  and  the  moral
precepts.  Ezra  appears  as  a  teacher  of  right-
eousness in  ch.  z.  10, 11,  and  again  in  Neh.
viiL  2—18


HOMILETICa

Vers.  I— 10.— The  reformer.  "After  these  things"— nearly  sixty  years  "after,"
as  usually  understood — certain  other  things  came  to  pass.  Things  so  far  similar
that  they  may  be  recorded  in  the  same  connection ;  things  so  far  different  as  to  open
out  to  us  quite  a  new  part  of  this  book.  There  is  this  similarity,  for  example — that
we  have  the  story  here  of  another  and  supplementary  pilgrimage  of  captive  Israelites
from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  these  points  of  difference —
that  the  new  pilgrimage  is  on  a  much  smaller  scale ;  and  that  the  story  itself  is
rather  biographical  than  historical,  as  before — all  of  it,  in  fact,  centring  closely  round
the  doings  of  one  man.  Accordingly,  it  is  with  the  portrait  of  this  one  man,  Ezra,
that  this  new  portion  begins.  We  can  see  at  once,  on  looking  at  the  portrait,  that
he  is  a  zealous  ecclesiastical  reformer ;  and  we  can  easily  understand  there  being  a
great  necessity  at  Jerusalem  for  such  a  man  at  that  time.  Of  this,  however,  and  of
what  he  did  there,  we  shall  read  by  and  by.  At  present  we  see  chiefly  his  fitness
for  this  difficult  role  ;  and  that  in  coiuiection — 1.  with  his  ancestry ;  2.  his  attain-
ments ;  and  3.  his  ambition.

L  EzrVb  ancestby.  This,  given  us  in  yen.  1 — 6,  would  be  such  as  tc  fit  him  for
the  work  of  Church  reformation  in  several  ways.  1.  At  to  office.  By  lineage  we  see
that  he  was  a  priest;  and  therefore  an  authorised  preacher  (Lev.  x.  11 ;  2  Chron.
XV.  3 ;  Mai.  ii.  5 — 7) ;  and  therefore  a  person  who  would  have  special  facilities  in
reforming  or  setting  things  right,  because  such  endeavours  would,  in  his  case,  be
only  expected.  How  can  any  man  teach  truth  and  right  without  correcting  error  and
wrong?  2.  A$  to  tradition.  It  may  at  least  be  noticed  that,  according  to  this
lineage,  very  many  of  the  traditions  of  his  peculiar  priestly  ancestry  would  be
specially  in  favour  of  reforming  work.  He  belonged,  e.  g.,  to  the  better  of  the  two
principal  priestly  lines,  viz.,  that  of  Eleazar  as  compared  with  Ithamar,  to  which  Eli  and
his  sons  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  3,  4 ;  vi.  8)  belonged.  Also,  even  in  this  very  abridged  form
of  his  genealogy,  how  conspicuous  are  the  individual  names  of  Phinehas  (Num.  xxv.;
Josh,  xxii.;  Ps.  cvi.  30)  and  Hilkiah  (2  Kings  xxii.;  2  Chron.  xxxiv.)  in  regard  to  this
point  I  It  could  never,  therefore,  be  said  of  him,  in  attempting  similar  work,  as  in
1  Sam.  X.  12.  3.  As  to  position.  Being  himself  descended  from  Seraiah,  the  grand-
father or  great  (or  great-great)  grandfather  of  the  high  priest  of  that  time  (1  Chron.
vi.  14 ;  Ezra  iii.  2 ;  Neh.  iii.  1  ;  xii.  10),  he  would  be  not  only  a  priest,  but  a  priest
with  peculiar  family  advantages  for  exerting  an  influence  for  good,  something  as  is
the  case  with  a  "  prince  of  the  blood "  among  us.  On  the  whole,  while  all  these
things  by  themselves  would  not  necessarily  dispose  him  to  become  a  reformer,  they
wo^i^d  all  help  him,  if  so  disposed.

II.  Ezra's  special  attainments.  These  would  also  qualify  him  for  such  labours.
For  we  find  that  he  had  learned — 1.  How  to  listen  to  God.  The  man  who  would
reform  others  must  begin  by  reforming  himself ;  and  this  he  can  only  do  effectually
by  means  of  an  accurate  knowledge  of  God's  will,  that  one  standard  at  perfect  right
(see  Ps.  cxi.  10,  and  end  of  Luke  xi.  2).  This  point  secured  in  the  present  instance
(a)  by  Ezra's  discrimination.  He  knew  where  to  look  for  God's  word,  viz.,  in  the
"  Scriptures  "  of  truth,  recognising  clearly  their  double  aspect,  as  at  once  hum»u  (the


OH.  vu.  1— lO-l  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  103

"law  of  Moses"),  and  also  Divine  (which  "God  had  given").  Comp.  1  Thess.
li.  13 — "the  word  of  God  which  ye  heard  of  ui."  He  recognised  also  theii
peculiar  value  (which  the  "  God  of  Israel  had  given  "),  as  God's  special  gift  to  his
own  people  (Rom.  iii.  1, 2).  (6)  By  Ezra's  diligence.  Being  thus  valuable,  he  treated
them  accordingly.  How  much  is  implied  in  that  expression,  a  "  ready  scribe "  I
"  Heading,"  to  know  the  letter.  "  Marking,"  to  know  the  meaning.  "  Inwardly
learning  and  digesting,"  to  know  the  power.  And  all  together,  to  acquire  the  right
use — ^to  be  "  ready  "  with  them  whenever  called  for.  A  man  thus  familiar  with  the
"  sword  of  the  Spirit "  might  naturally  be  expected  to  further  the  Spirit's  work.
2.  Hcno  to  speak  to  men.  Many  book-learned  men  are  too  bookish  for  this ;  and,
therefore,  not  fit  for  reforming  efforts.  They  can  describe  their  weapons,  but  not
employ  them.  Ezra,  we  find,  on  the  contrary,  was  a  man  able  to  persuade  men  of
all  ranks  and  conditions,  whether  superiors,  from  whom  he  asked  permission  to  go
(end  of  vers.  6  and  28),  or  equals  and  inferiors,  both  lay  and  clerical  (ver.  7),  whom
he  persuaded  to  go  with  him.  Note,  however,  that  this  second  qualification  or
attainment  was  the  result  of  the  first,  as  implied  in  end  of  ver.  6,  and  in  what  we
afterwards  read  in  viii.  17,  18.

III.  Ezra's  special  ambition.  Unless  a  man  desires  an  end — unless  he  strongly
desires  it,  if  difficult  of  attainment  —  he  is  never  likely  to  reach  it.  However
favoured  by  circumstances,  however  qualified  in  itself,  the  locomotive  will  never  go
forward  without  the  requisite  moving  power.  This  supplied  here  by  Ezra's  special
ambition.  We  notice — 1.  Its  patience.  What  is  said  here  (in  ver.  9)  of  the  length
of  his  journey  from  Babylon  may  help  to  illustrate  this.  Also  what  we  read  after-
■  wards  in  the  detailed  account  of  that  journey,  his  waiting  for  the  Levites,  in  ch.  viii.
16 — ^20,  and  subsequent  delay  for  fasting  {ibid-  vers.  21 — 23).  What  is  worth  obtain-
ing is  worth  waiting  for.  Perhaps  this  conviction  is,  of  all  necessities,  the  most  neces-
sary for  success  (James  v.  7).  2.  Its  depth.  "Ezra  prepared  his  heart."  He  was
deeply  earnest  as  well  as  patient ;  could  strike  as  well  as  endure  ;  and  not  only  bide
his  time,  but  use  it  too.  This  a  rare  combination,  but  most  important,  in  doing
good  (see  Gal.  vi.  9;  also  examples  of  Jacob,  Moses,  and  Jehoiada,  the  high
priest,  in  2  Chron.  xxii.  12 ;  xxiii.  1 — 16).  3.  Its  direction.  Those  qualifying
attainments  we  have  spoken  of  were  his  because  he  had  souglit  thera — souglit  them
not  only  as  an  end,  but  as  a  means  also  to  other  ends.  How  definite  and  complete
the  description.  "Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart,  to  seek — ^to  do — and  to  teach."
"  To  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments :  "  there  was  the  summit  of  his  ambi-
tion. First  to  know  and  "  do  "  it  himself :  there  was  the  path,  in  his  judgment,  that
led  to  that  summit  (comp.  1  Tim.  iv.  12,  16 ;  Titus  ii.  7).  As  the  poet  has  written :
"Allured  to  brighter  worlds,  and  led  the  way."

Such  is  the  opening  portrait  of  the  man  whom  God  had  called  then  to  this  special
calling.  We  may  gather  from  it  some  general  considerations  as  to  God's  preparatory
work  in  such  cases.  We  see,  e.  g. — 1.  How  far  bach  stick  work  map  begin.  In  this
case  of  Ezra,  e.  g,,  as  far  back  (shall  we  say?)  as  Aaron.  Certainly  Kefore  his  own
birth  (comp.  Jer.  1.  6;  Gal.  i.  15) ;  and  thenceforward,  continually,  in  all  his  early
training  and  studies,  and  in  all  the  various  hereditary  and  circumstantial  influences  that
made  him  finally  the  man  that  he  was.  This  especially  illustrated  in  the  case  of  the
greatest  of  all  these  "  sent  forth  "  (Heb.  iii.  1).  As  far  back,  at  least,  as  the  birth  of
Seth,  God  was  preparing  for  that  of  Christ.  2.  How  far  off^  such  work  may  begin.
Here,  e.  g.,  in  Babylon  for  the  benefit  of  those  in  Jerusalem.  So  afterwards  at
Joppa  for  Cornelius  in  Cesarea.  So  in  Egypt  in  Pharaoh's  bed-chamber  (Gen.  xli.)
for  the  preservation  of  those  then  in  Canaan.  So  in  Troas  for  the  benefit  of  Mace-
donia (Acts  xvi.  8,  9)  ;  and  in  Philippifor  that  of  Thyatira  {ibid.  ver.  14  ;  Rev.  ii.  18)  ;
and  in  Palestine  for  the  salvation  of  Ethiopia  (Acts  viii.  26 — 39) ;  and,  finally,  in
heaven  itself  for  the  good  of  earth  (Luke  xix.  10;  John  iii.  16;  1  Tim.  i.  15).  3.
How  far  in  both  ways  it  extends.  Here  the  good  work  afterwards  done  by  Ezra  at
Jerusalem  helped  to  preserve  by  purifying  the  nucleus  of  the  whole  Jewi^n  disper-
sion then  residing  there ;  and  so,  afterwards  still,  the  whole  dispersion.  0  ne  disper-
gion,  thus  preserved,  prepared  the  way,  as  we  saw  before,  for  the  prear\mg  of  the
gospel  to  all  nations  in  all  parts  of  the  world  ;  which,  again,  is  to  prepare  for  th«
restoration  of  Israel  to  God's  favour,  and  the  consequent  fulness  of  blessing  to  all


104  •  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [CH.  viL  1—10

mankind  (Bom.  xi.  12, 15).  What  an  extraordinary  power  and  depth  and  stretch  o£
influence  for  good  is  implied  in  these  words — "  Beloved  for  the  fathers'  sakes  "  [
And  how  constantly  we  see  similar  influence  telling  on  strange  peoples  -  and  future
generationa  in  the  history  of  the  world  I

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  exodus  under  Egra.  "  After  these  things,"  viz.,  the  events  which
culminated  in  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  and  consequent  ordering  of  the  service
of  God.  "  In  the  reign  of  Artaxerxes  king  of  Persia,"  after  an  interval  of  nearly
sixty  years,  during  which  the  house  of  the  Lord  had  so  fallen  into  disrepair  as  to
need  "  beautifying,"  and  the  civil  state  of  the  children  of  the  restoration  had  be-
come disordered,  and  needed  readjustment.  With  these  purposes,  and  with  a  view
to  leading  back  to  Judaea  another  detachment  of  Israelites,  Ezra  received  a  com-
mission firom  the  king.    In  the  text —

I.  He  authenticates  himself  as  the  leadeb  of  this  exodus.  1.  He  evinces
his  tocial  qualification.  (1)  He  announces  himself  as  "  the  son  of  Seraiah."  This
was  the  high  priest  who  was  killed  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Kings  xxv.  18,  21).  Ezra
was  not  immediately  his  son,  for  even  supposing  him  to  have  been  bom  the  year  of
Seraiah's  death,  that  woidd  make  him  now  122  years  of  age  I  The  immediate  son  of
Seraiah  who  went  into  captivity  was  Jehozadak  (1  Chron.  vi.  14,  16).  Ezra,  there-
fore, was  probably  the  grandson  or  great-grandson  of  Jehozadak,  and  nephew  or
grand-nephew  to  Jeshua,  the  high  priest  who  accompanied  Zerubbabel.  By  calling
himself  "  the  son  of  Seraiah  "  he  seems  to  have  claimed  now  to  be  in  some  sort  his
representative.  Jeshua  was  probably  deceased.  This  stepping  over  intermediate
generations  has  other  examples  in  this  list  (vers.  1 — 6),  for  it  only  reckons  sixteen
from  Seraiah  to  Aaron,  whereas,  according  to  1  Chron.  vi.,  there  are  twenty-two.  (2)
Lineage  is  not  without  religious  as  well  as  civil  advantages.  Sons  of  Aaron  only
could  ofSciate  as  priests.  It  was  of  substantial  advantage  to  have  descent  irom
Abraham  when  temporal  blessings  of  the  covenant  were  limited  to  his  seed,  for  these
were  not  without  their  relation  to  the  spiritual,  though  these  are  limited  to  the
children  of  his  faith.  Cliildren  of  godly  persons  are  generally  those  who  keep  up
the  succession  of  the  Church  both  in  its  membership  and  ministry  (see  Isa.  Ixv.  23).
2.  He  evinces  his  moral  qualijicatiovs.  "  He  was  a  ready  scribe,"  &c.  (1)  This
law  is  distinguished  as  that  "  which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  given."  The
solemnities  of  Sinai  and  the  miracles  of  the  first  exodus  are  here  called  to  mind.
Such  a  glorious  authentication  can  be  pleaded  in  favour  of  no  other  system
of  religion.  Buddhism  ?  Hinduism  ?  Confucianism  ?  Mahommedanism  ?  (2)  This
is  the  law,  therefore,  to  be  studied.  Its  author,  God.  Its  matter,  truth  the
most  sublime.  Its  spirit,  holiness.  Its  end,  heaven.  (3)  A  ready  scribe  (not  a
skilful  penman  only,  but  an  able  expounder  also)  of  such  a  law  has  the  noblest
qualifications  to  be  a.  leader  of  men.  3.  He  evinces  his  political  qiwlifieation.  (1)
He  had  the  commission  of  the  king.  "The  king  granted  him  all  his  request."
There  was  great  advantage  in  this,  viz. ,  to  influence  the  Jews  to  muster,  to  influence
the  heathen  to  aid  them.  (2)  This  he  had  "  according  to  the  good  hand  of  the  Lord
his  God  upon  him."  By  God's  blessing  he  had  wisdom  to  influence  the  king.  That
blessing  also  disposed  the  kirg  to  listen  (ch.  vi.  22).  Note — God  is  in  everything
good  ;  it  is  our  duty  to  discern  this.

II.  He  relates  the  success  of  his  cndeetaking._  1.  In  the  muster.  (1)  He
had  "  some  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Those  who  came  to  his  standard  were
volunteers  (see  ver.  13).  They  numbered  1773  adult  males,  which  with  a  propor-
tionate number  of  women,  and  children  would  make  9000  persons.  (2)  Amongst  these
were  persons  of  influence.  There  were  "  priests  and  Levites."  Of  these  last  some
were  of  the  families  of  the  "singers"  and  of  the  "porters."  (3)  There  were  also
Nethinims,  descendauts  of  those  "  whom  David  and  the  princes  had  appointed  for  the
service  of  the  Levites  "  (ch.  viii.  20).  The  limitation  of  particular  functions  to  families
tends  to  perfect  efiBciency.  The  service  of  God  in  all  its  departments  should  be  th«
most  ef&cient.   2.  In  Hiojovmey.   (1)  Incidents  are  scantily  given.    The  time  occupied


OH.  vn.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  10«

was  four  months  (ver.  9).  It  appears  to  have  been,  at  least  for  the  able-bodied,  a  march ;
for  whence  could  carriages  be  procured  for  the  transport  of  9000  persons  ?  Amongst
the  requisites  they  were  provided  with  they  had  tents  for  theii  encampment  (ch.
viii.  15).  During  their  pilgrimage  their  hearts  would  be  in  Zion.  So  the  Christian
pilgrim  on  this  earth,  &o.  (2)  If  incidents  are  not  particularly  given,  the  success  ol
the  enterprise  is,  most  emphatically.  They  "  went  up  from  Babylon  "  and  "  came
to  Jerusalem"  (vers.  6,  8,  9).  Far  better  go  up  from  the  mystic  Babylon  to  the
mystic  Jsrusalem  than  reverse  the  journey,  as  too  many  do.  Ezra  had  not  only
the  skill  to  plan  an  exodus,  but  also  the  energy  to  carry  it  out.  Many  a  good
thought  perishes  for  lack  of  executive  ability.  Happy  is  the  coincidence  of  noble
thoughts  and  noble  deeds.  3.  In  the  blessing  of  God-  (1)  Ezra  "  sought  the  law
of  the  Lord."  No  study  more  remunerative — more  ennobling — more  pleasing  tl'
God.  (2)  He  sought  it  in  earnest.  "Prepared  his  heart,"  viz.,  by  raising  it
above  impure  prejudices ;  by  seeking  the  light  of  the  great  Inspirer  in  prayer.
(3)  He  reduced  it  to  practice.  He  prepared  his  heart  "to  do  it."  Glorious
example.  His  life  was  therefore  righteous,  and  his  influence  consequently  grsat —
viz.,  (a)  With  God.  (5)  With  the  king,  (c)  With  the  people.  (4)  And  "he
taught  it  to  Israel."  He  taught  Israel  the  "  statutes,"  viz.,  precepts  and  "  judgments,"
viz.,  sanctions  (1  Kings  vi.  12  ;  Ezek.  xi.  12).  What  a  degenerate  succession  from
the  noble  Ezra  were  the  scribes  of  our  Lord's  day  I  Let  us  emulate  his  qualities. —
J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Ezra :  hit  character  and  work.  Tho  study  of  human  character  and
of  human  life  is  not  onlj'  an  essential  part  of  human  knowledge,  but  of  spiritual
culture.  Biography  is  a  means  of  grace.  We  do  well  to  follow  in  thought  the  lines
along  which  the  noblest  of  our  race  have  moved :  we  are  thereby  attracted  toward
them  and  grow  up  toward  their  spiritual  stature.  We  may  learn  from  the  life  and
character  of  Ezra  by  considering —

I.  What  wb  know  he  was  and  did.  He  was — 1.  A  priest,  claiming  descent,
as  we  see,  from  Aaron  (ver.  5) ;  and  we  doubt  not  that  he  discharged,  faithfully  and
conscientiously,  the  duties  of  the  priesthood.  He  was,  moreover,  what  came  to  be
called — 2.  A  scribe  (ver.  6),  i.  e.  (1)  a  student,  (2)  an  interpreter,  and  (3)  a  copyist
of  the  law.  Ezra  "  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  it,  and
to  teach,"  &o.  (ver  10).  These  three  functions  of  the  scribe  include  the  three  most
important  duties  a  man  can  undertake:  viz.,  (1)  his  duty  to  himself,  in  studying  the
will  of  God  as  revealed  in  his  word,  that  he  may  have  it  in  his  own  heart ;  and,  (2)
his  duty  to  his  ovm  generation,  in  teaching  his  fellows  what  he  has  learned  :  in  inter-
preting, in  "giving  the  sense"  (Neh.  viii.  8),  in  "teaching  statutes  and  judgments"
(ver.  10),  t. «.  in  declaring  and  enforcing  the  great  truths  which  God  had  revealed,
especially  those  which  affected  the  duty  and  the  prospects  of  the  Jewish  people ;  and
(3)  his  duty  to  his  race,  in  copying,  and  thus  multiplying  and  preserving  intact  the
word  and  the  very  words  of  God.  Ezra  "  gave  his  heart "  to  this  (ver.  10),  and  the
result  was  that  he  did  it  with  conspicuous  and  commanding  ability  (Neh.  viii.).
He  was  8  "  ready  scribe  "  (ver.  6).  3.  Administrator  and  reformer.  He  conducted
the  party  whom  he  headed  to  Jerusalem  in  peace  and  safety  (ver.  8)  ;  there  he
established  himself  as  leader  of  the  people,  and  set  about  the  work  of  reforming
abuses  with  a  vigorous  hand.  His  ardour  led  to  a  serviceable  organisation  and  reform.
He  seems  also  to  have  been,  as  few  strong-willed  men  are,  a  co-operator  with  others.
He  acted  with  Nehemiah,  the  governor,  and  it  miy  well  have  been  difficult  to  define
strictly  their  respective  ofBoes.  4.  Man  of  influence  with  his  fellows.  There  was
that  about  him,  due  to  the  elevation  and  disinterestedness  of  his  character  as  well  as
to  the  vigour  and  robustness  of  his  mind,  which  gave  him  strange  influence  with  the
king,  so  that  he  gave  him  leave  to  lead  out  a  large  return  party,  and  also  entrusted
l)im  with  large  powers  in  the  commission.  Men  who,  like  Ezra,"  earnestly  seek  the
will  of  God  and  do  what  they  know  to  be  right  (ver.  10),  and  lay  themselves  out  for
"doing  good  and  communicating"  (Heb.  xiii.  16),  are  likely  to  have  power  -with
me£  5.  2Ian  throiigh  whom  God  wrought.  "  The  hand  of  the  Lord  his  God  was
upon  him  "  (vers.  6, 9,  &c.).  His  soul  felt  the  quickening  touch  of  the  Divine  finger,
and  it  kindled  with  a  sacred  glow  of  piety  and  zeal.     He  was  moved  of  God  tp


106  TUE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  vii.  1—10

attempt  great  things,  and  helped  of  God  to  achieve  them.  His  life  flowed  on  like  a
fertilising  river,  and  did  so  because  "  all  his  springs  were  in  God"  (Ps.  Ixxxvii.  7).
Our  character  may  contfiin  much  that  is  excellent,  and  our  lives  inclide  much  that  is
honourable,  but  except  the  "  hand  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us,"  renewing  our
heart  and  blessing  our  life,  we  shall  not  be  or  do  that  which  is  pleasing  to  nim  or
useful  to  our  fellows.

II.  Generally  received  tradition  respecting  Ezra.  It  is  commonly  believed
among  the  Jews  that  he  instituted  the  Great  Synagogue,  that  he  settled  the  canon
of  Scripture,  that  he  himself  wrote  the  books  of  the  Chronicles,  Ezra,  Nehemiah,
and  (perhaps)  Esther,  and  that  he  established  the  system  of  synagogue  worship.
This  last  arose  about  his  time,  and,  if  indeed  due  to  him,  is  a  work  which  laid  his
countrymen,  and  indeed  us  all  (for  had  not  the  forms  of  the  synagogue  something,
if  not  much,  to  do  with  the  forms  of  the  early  Church  ?),  under  a  heavy  debt  of
gratitude.  Ezra  was  a  holy  and  zealous  man,  with  a  strong  mind  and  a  firm  will,
exercising  a  commanding  influence  on  his  contemporaries,  making  the  word  of  God
the  basis  and  mainspring  of  his  action,  seeking  and  striving  for  the  purity  of  the
people  of  God.  Some  things  he  did  we  know.  Others  we  know  not  of.  We  may
not  be  so  great  and  distinguished  as  he  was.  It  may  not  be  in  our  power  to  render
such  signal  services  as  he  did,  or  to  leave  behind  us  such  a  reputation  as  he  has  left.
Yet  in  the  essentials  of  his  character  and  work  we  may  be  like  him.  We  also  may —
(1)  Be  devout  students  of  God's  will  as  revealed  in  his  word — "preparing  our  heart
to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  it."  (2)  Open  our  hearts  to  receive  heavenly
influences ;  gain  by  humility,  docility,  and  prayer  "  the  hand  of  the  Lord  our  God
upon  us,"  so  that  he  will  dwell  in  us  and  work  through  us.  (3)  Make  known  the
will  of  God  to  others,  teaching  in  some  sphere,  higher  or  humbler,  the  word  of  God
and  the  truth  of  Jesus  Christ.  (4)  Co-operate  cheerfully  with  others,  yielding  our
preferences  to  theirs,  being  "  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord  "  with  those  who  are  our
fellow-labourers  in  tjie  field  of  Christian  work.  And  if  we  do  this  as  did  Ezra,  we
shall,  like  him,  (5)  do  that  which  men  will  mark  and  praise,  but  much  more  that  they
will  not  record  ;  much,  however,  that  will  not  be  unwritten  in  some  book  of  God,  and
that  will  "  in  no  wise  lose  its  reward." — C.

Vers.  1 — 10. — Ezra  the  type  ofanideal  minister.  I.  That  he  is  generally  a  mas
OF  GOOD  MORAL  ANCESTRY.  "  The  son  of  Aaron  the  chief  priest "  (ver.  5).  Ezra  was  in
the  line  of  a  renowned  and  religious  ancestry;  the  past  history  of  Israel  would  be  full
of  meaning  to  him;  sacred  traditions  would  inspire  him  in  the  present  national
crisis.  It  is  well  for  a  minister  to  have  in  his  ancestry  men  whose  lives  and  activities
have  been  intimately  associated  with  the  Church ;  their  holy  example  will  animate
him  ;  natural  sympathy  will  stimulate  him ;  the  sacred  enterprise  of  his  family  will
inspire  him  ;  a  blessed  heritage  will  be  his.  It  is  a  privilege  for  a  minister  to  be  in
the  line  of  Aaron,  if  he  continue  faithfully  in  the  work  of  Aaron.  The  inspiration
and  influence  of  a  holy  ancestry  is  a  rich  ministerial  endowment.

II.  That  he  is  a  man  of  self-sacrificino  spirit.  Ezra  left  Babylon  for  Jeru-
salem. He  exchanged  the  comfort  and  influence  which  he  enjoyed  in  the  court  of
Artaxerxes  for  the  hardships  of  a  perilous  journey,  and  for  the  broken  fortunes  of
Israel.  The  true  minister  will  ever  be  ready  to  leave  Babylon  for  Jerusalem ;  he
will  esteem  luxury,  and  even  life  itself,  as  subservient  to  the  welfare  of  the  people
of  God.  Christ  left  a  better  court  than  Babylon,  and  allied  himself  with  sinful  men
that  he  might  restore  their  broken  hopes.  The  early  disciples  left  all  and  followed
Christ ;  the  carnal  must  be  sacrificed  to  the  spiritual.

III.  That  he  is  a  man  intelligently  taught  in  the  word  of  God.  "  And  he
was  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of  Moses ''  (ver.  6).  1.  He  intelligently  understood
the  truth.  (1)  Its  divinity.  (2)  Its  obligation.  2.  He  carefully  prepared  his  moral
nature  for  the  reception  of  the  truth.  "For  Ezra  had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the
law  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  10).  3.  He  constantly  endeavoured  to  make  his  conduct  an
embodiment  of  the  truth.  "  And  to  do  it "  (ver.  10).  4.  He  wisely  recognised  the
deeper  meanings  of  the  truth.  "  To  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord  "  6.  He  earnestly
sought  to  impart  to  others  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  "  And  to  teach  in  Israel."  Thus
the  true  minister  will  understand  the  gospel ;  will  prepare  his  soul  by  repentance


en.  VII.  1  -10.3  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  107

and  pnij-er  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel  in  all  its  entirety ;  will  exhibit  the  gospel
in  his  daily  conduct ;  will  seek  the  hidden  messages  of  the  gospel ;  and  will  strive
to  bring  mankind  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.
_  IV.  That  he  is  a  man  capable  of  attaching  men  to  himself  (ver  7 ;  compare
viii.  16,  18).  Ezra  went  not  alone  to  Jerusalem,  but  succeeded  in  getting  many
to  accompany  him.  1.  He  awakened  sympathy  in  many  of  his  comrades.  2.  He
awakened  conscience  in  some  of  his  comrades.  3.  He  employed  appropriate
agencies  to  induce  others  to  join  him  in  the  journey  (ch.  viii.  18).  The  true  minister
will  employ  all  rightful  means  to  induce  men  to  walk  with  him  in  the  ways  of  a
new  life  to  heaven  ;  he  will  not  isolate  himself  from  men,  but  take  them  with  him
by  the  force  of  sympathy.

V.  That  he  is  a  man  who  endeavours  rightly  to  influence  the  civil  authori-
ties. Ezra  was  evidently  on  the  most  friendly  terms  with  Artaxerxes  ;  magistrates
and  ministers  should  be  in  sympathy  with  each  other.  The  sovereign  and  the  scribe
should  be  mutually  helpful ;  there  should  be  no  antagonism  between  the  Church  and
the  state.  The  true  minister  will  cultivate  a  judicious  co-operation  with  the
"  powers  that  be."  Ezra  taught  the  king,  hence  his  knowledge  of  the  God  of
Israel  (ver.  15).  It  is  the  office  of  the  minister  to  instruct  men  in  lofty  social
station,  when  they  have  the  opportunity,  as  well  as  to  aid  the  poor  Israelite.  The
Church  IS  the  best  teacher  of  the  state. — B.

Vers.  9,  10. — Eura  and  his  mission.  Two  generations  had  elapsed  between  the
close  of  Ezra  vi.  and  the  events  with  which  the  final  chapters  of  the  book  are
conceme^i.  The  prophetic  voice  was  silent;  Haggai  and  Zecliariah  had  long  since
passed  away.  Zerubbabel,  the  last  representative  of  th.e  house  of  David,  in  whose
person  some  had  looked  fur  a  restoration  of  the  Jewish  kingdom,  was  dead.  The
liigh  priesthood,  which  had  been  filled  by  the  saintly  Jeshua,  was  occupied  by
Bliashib,  who  became  connected  by  marriage  with  two  conspicuous  enemies  of  the
faith  of  Israel.  His  grandson  married  a  daughter  of  Sanballat  the  Horonite ;  he
liimself  "  was  allied  unto  Tobiah,"  to  whom  he  gave  a  residence  "  in  the  courts
of  the  house  of  God  "  (Neli.  xiii.  4 — 7,  28).  Darius  had  been  succeeded  by  Xerxes,
the  story  of  whose  pride,  lasciviousness,  passion,  and  feebleness  is  one  of  the  most
ignoble  of  the  records  of  classic  history.  He  was  the  Ahasuenis  of  the  book  of
Esther.  We  may  judge  from  the  book  of  Esther  how  unfavourable  the  times  were  for
carrying  on  the  national  and  spiritual  restoration  of  Israel.  The  full  extent  of  the
debasement  of  the  settlers  in  Palestine  was  not  known  in  Babylon  ;  it  broke  on  both
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  with  painful  surprise  (Ezra  ix. ;  Neh.  xiii.).  But  enough  was
known  to  awaken  concern  ;  he  desired  "  to  teach  in  Israel  statutes  and  judgments.' '
Filled  with  this  pious  desire,  he  obtained  permission  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.

I.  The  character  of  Ezra.  He  wa«  a  priest,  but  he  was  still  more  a  scribe  ;
tradition  assigns  to  him  a  leading  part  in  the  formation  of  the  canon  of  Jewish
Scriptures.  The  beginning  of  the  study  of  Hebrew  literature  belongs  to  this  period ;
the  dignity  of  the  pursuit  invested  the  name  "  scribe  "  with  honour,  changed  the
mere  registrar  of  documents  and  chronicler  of  events  into  the  scholar  and  teacher.
The  change  of  language  consequent  on  the  deportation  of  the  Hebrews  into  Babylon
rendered  it  necessary  that  some  should  draw  the  inspiring  record  of  the  past  from  the
obscurity  of  a  dead  or  dying  language,  and  make  the  people  acquainted  with  their
Divine  mission  and  the  duties  that  mission  imposed  upon  them.  Above  all,  the  law  of
the  lard  was  the  object  of  Ezra's  reverence  ;  he  was  "  a  ready  scribe  in  the  law  of
Moseti,  which  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  had  given  ;"  he  "had  prepared  his  heart  to  seek
the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  to  do  and  teach  it."  'The  character  of  Ezra  was  intimately
associated  with  his  vocation:  his  were  the  habits  of  the  student;  his  virtues  Nrere
not  tiiose  of  the  statesman,  the  warrior,  or  the  priest,  but  the  virtues  of  the  scholar ;
it  was  his  not  to  give,  but  to  interpret,  laws.  1.  'The  profound  piety  of  the  man
first  strikes  us.  The  precepts  of  the  law  were  to  him  "  the  words  of  God ; "  behind
the  writings  ne  aaw  the  august  personal  authority  of  the  ever-living  Rijer  of  his
people.  He  lived  in  awe  of  his  will  ;  he  had  a  deep  conviction  of  the  evil  of  sin
against  him,  so  deep  that  it  impressed  itself  on  others  ;  they  who  sympathised  with
biB  purpose  were  those  who  "  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  God  of  Israel "  (Eizra  ix


108  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [oH.  vn.  1—10.

4 ;  X.  3).  He  had  a  vivid  consciousness  of  his  mission,  and  the  nearness  of  God  to
him  in  its  fulfilment;  again  and  again  he  refers  his  success  to  "the  good  hand  of
his  God  upon  him."  2.  Ezra  had  courage,  but  it  was  the  courage  of  the  student ;
not  impulsive,  but  meditative.  He  knew  and  feared  the  dangers  of  the  way ;  but
he  knew  how  to  conquer  fear  (viii.  21 — 23).  He  needed  to  be  aroused  to  efEort,  and
when  he  was  called  to  action  he  prepared  himself  for  it  by  consecration  (x.  4,  6)
There  is  a  physical,  and  there  is  also  a  moral,  courage  ;  that  is  the  most  enduring
bravery  which,  knowing  of  dangers,  faces  them,  trembles  but  advances,  which  supplies
the  lack  of  impulse  by  resolve.  The  "fear  of  the  Lord"  casts  out  all  other  fear.
3.  The  sensitive  conscience  and  tender  sympathy  of  the  recluse  are  also  his.  Contrast
his  manifestation  of  feeling  with  that  of  Nehemiah  when  confronted  with  glaring
impiety  (ch.  ix. ;  Neh.  xiii.).  Nehemiah  is  indig-nant,  Ezra  is  overwhelmed.  Nehemiah
"  contends,"  Ezra  weeps.  Nehemiah  curses  the  transgressors,  and  smites  them,  and
plucks  off  their  hair,  and  "makes  thera  "  amend;  Ezra  is  prostrate  from  morning
until  evening,  solemnly  intercedes  with  God  on  their  behalf,  and  wins  the  people  to
concern  and  repentance.  This  is  the  sacrificial  spirit,  feeling  and  confessing  the
sins  of  others  as  our  own,  bearing  their  transgressions,  and  recovering  them  by
BufEering ;  it  is  the  lesson  of  the  cross,  the  Christian  spirit.  4.  The  firmness,  even
ruthlessness,  with  which  he  commands  the  separation  of  the  husbands  from  their
wives  and  children  also  bespeak  the  man  of  the  study.  None  have  shewn  them-
selves more  able  to  rise  above  family  tiesj  none  have  more  imperiously  demanded
this  sacrifice  from  others,  than  those  whose  lofty  ideal,  cherished  in  the  cell,  has
known  none  of  the  abatement  which  we  leam  to  make  in  social  intercourse.  There
is  room  for  such  men  in  history,  and  a  work  sometimes  which  none  can  do  so  well
as  they.  Here  are,  unquestionably,  the  elements  of  a  noble  character.  Not  the
only  noble  type,  nor  need  we  inquire  if  the  noblest ;  enough  that  his  was  the
character  required  for  the  reforms  he  inaugurated.  Nehemiah  was  not  called  to  do
over  again  the  work  Ezra  did.  The  style  of  Nehemiah's  record  (Neh.  xiii.  23 — 28)
indicates  a  very  different  state  of  things  fm  m  that  which  Ezra  found.  This  is  the  true
test  of  the  value  of  a  man's  character,  that  he  is  fit  for  the  work  he  has  to  do ;  the
test  of  his  worth  is  that  he  does  it  efEeotually.

II.  The  eefoemation  Ezra  WBonoHT.  He  went  up  on  a  twofold  errand.  His  own
object  was  to  teach  the  people  "  the  words  of  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,
and  of  his  statutes  to  Israel."  Disobedience  of  these  had  always  been  the  crying
sin  of  the  nation,  and  had  entailed  on  it  its  woes  (ix.  7) ;  the  new  favour  God  had
extended  to  them  would  be  forfeited  if  they  disregarded  his  laws  (ix.  14).  And  the
disobedience  that  would  provoke  God  might  be  through  ignorance  as  well  as  through
presumption.  A  nation  perishes  through  ignorance ;  the  violation  of  the  Divine
order  brings  social  disorganisation  and  ruin,  it  needs  not  that  the  violation  be  wilful.
In  the  sacrifice  offered  on  his  arrival,  together  with  the  renewal  of  consecration — the
burnt  offering,  and  the  feast  of  thanksgiving — the  peace-ofEering,  there  occurs  again
the  touching  sin-ofEering,  twelve  he-goats  are  sacrificed  to  acknowledge  and  ask
pardon  for  sins  of  ignorance.  In  the  disordered  state  of  the  times  it  was  certain
there  must  have  been  many  defects  in  the  people's  service,  many  errors,  many
transgressions  of  which  they  were  not  conscious,  and  these  must  be  confessed.  Then
he  was  charged  with  a  double  mission  from  Artaxerxes,  the  gentle  prince  at  that
time  reigning  over  Persia.  The  furnishing  of  the  temple  was  to  be  proceeded  with;
he  was  laden  with  gifts  for  this  purpose  (viii.  25 — 27)  ;  he  was  charged  to  attend  to
its  service,  and  empowered  to  draw  from  the  royal  revenues  what  was  needed  for  a
stately  ritual  (vii.  16,  17,  22).  He  was  also  commissioned  to  set  magistrates  ai'd
judges  over  the  people  charged  with  the  administration  of  Jewish  law,  and  he  was
empowered  to  execute  it  (vii.  26,  26).  Artaxerxes  knew  that  the  law  of  the  Lord
was  more  than  a  mere  ritual,  that  it  prescribed  social  customs  and  regulated  the  life
of  the  people,  and  he  sympathised  with  Nehemiah's  desire  to  re-establish  its  rule.
One  great  reform,  however,  overshadows  all  other  works  of  Ezra  ;  when  this  is
recorded  the  book  abruptly  closes,  as  if  Ezra's  work  was  done.  The  story  of  Ezra's
dismay  at  hearing  of  the  marriages  of  the  Jews  with  the  heathen,  and  his  prompt
dissolution  of  the  marriages,  is  so  far  removed  from  the  tolerant  spirit  of  modem
Christendom  that  it  needs  some  special   observations.     1.  These  were  idolatrous


fifa.  viL  i— io.j


THE  BOOK  Oi*  EZRA.


m


heathen,  not  monotheistic  heathen  like  the  Persians  ;  they  were  the  heathen  of  Syria,
whose  worship  was  fouled  with  lust  and  blood.  The  term  "  abominations,"  as
applied  to  their  customs,  is-  no  mere  outburst  of  Jewish  arrogance ;  the  tolerant
modem  spirit  is  revolted  by  the  record.  Intermarriage  with  them  meant  sharing  in
their  festivals,  and  exposed  the  Jews  to  the  utmost  peril  (cf.  Neb.  xiii.  26).  The
past  sufierings  of  the  people  should  have  warned  them  against  this  new  folly ;  it
Beemed  like  provoking  God,  so  soon  to  forget  the  past  (ix.  6 — 16).  The  inter-
marriage of  the  people,  and  especially  of  the  priests,  with  idolatrous  women  was
unfaithfulness  to  the  purpose  for  which  they  had  been  restored  from  Babylon  ;  a
betrayal  of  the  confidence  reposed  in  them  by  Cyrus  and  his  successors ;  a  denial  of
the  testimony  of  Zerubbabel  and  Jeshua  (iv.  3)  ;  it  argued  indifference  to  their
national  position,  contempt  of  their  Divine  calling.  2.  The  demand  for  divorce
seems  inconsistent  with  Paul's  counsel  (1  Cor.  vii.  14),  and  the  hopeful  charity  on  which
it  is  based  ;  with  many  of  Christ's  words,  and  the  spirit  of  Christ's  life  ;  it  seems  to
argue  the  terror  of  the  separatist  rather  than  the  confidence  of  the  strong  believer.
We  must  not,  however,  argue  the  question  from  a  Christian,  but  from  a  Jewish,  stand-
point; it  is  as  foolish  to  look  into  the  Old  Testament  for  modem  ethics  as  for
modem  science.  The  immense  moral  force  of  the  gospel  renders  possible  a  genial
and  tolerant  spirit  which  was  not  possible  to  an  earnest  Jew.  As  a  matter  of  fact
the  seductions  of  idolatry  had  always  proved  stronger  than  the  attraction  of
Judaism ;  the  heathen  corrupted  the  Hebrew,  the  Hebrew  did  not  convert  the  heathen.
Judaism,  with  all  its  signal  merits,  was  not  a  missionary  faith  ;  its  ofi&ce  was  protest,
not  evangelisation ;  the  spiritual  power  of  the  gospel  was  not  in  it — the  cross,  and
resurrection,  and  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  presence  of  these  forces  in
Christianity  is  the  reason  of  its  tolerant  spirit ;  it  moves  freely  in  a  world  which  it
has  power  to  change  and  sanctify ;  its  work  is  not  to  protest,  but  to  reclaim  ;  the  Son
of  man  came  not  to  judge  the  world,  but  to  save  the  world.

Some  ipractical  lessons : — 1.  A  lesson  of  wisdom  Force  of  character  is  needed
as  well  as  a  pure  religious  faith  to  render  Christian  intercourse  with  the  world  a  safe
thing.  The  stronger  will  draw  the  weaker ;  and  it  is  not  always  the  Christiim  who  ia
the  stronger.  "  All  things  are  lawful  for  me,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient.  All
things  are  lawful,  but  all  things  edify  not.  All  things  are  lawful,  but  I  will  not  be
brought  under  the  power  of  any."  2.  No  sacrifice  is  too  great  which  is  needed  that  we
may  preserve  our  spiritual  integrity.  Natural  tastes  and  faculties — the  eye,  and  hand,
and  foot ;  the  tenderest  ties — father  and  mother,  sister  and  brother,  wife  and  husband.
3.  The  true  object  of  toleration.  It  is  that  the  noblest,  holiest  influence  may  prevaiL
Christian  tolerance  is  not  indifference  to  tmth  and  falsehood,  evil  and  good  ;  it  is  not
a  passive  grace,  a  mere  easy  disposition ;  it  is  an  intensely  active,  a  missionary
grace.  It  is  bent  on  overcoming  evil  with  good.  If  it  were  otherwise,  it  would
neither  be  fidelity  to  Qod  nor  charitv  to  man. — M.


EXPOSITION,


THX     DIOBKa      OF     iiBTAXERXES     WITH

RBSPBOT  TO  EzBA  (vers.  11—26).  The  pre-
sent decree  was  of  the  nature  of  a  firman
granted  to  an  individuaL  It  embodied,  in
the  first  place,  a  certain  number  of  provisions
which  were  temporary.  Of  this  character
were — 1.  the  permission  accorded  to  all
Persian  subjects  of  Israelite  descent  to
accompany  Ezra  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  13) ;  2.
the  commission  to  Ezra  to  convey  to  Jeru-
salem certain  offerings  made  by  the  king
and  his  chief  courtiers  to  the  God  of  Israel
(vers.  IS,  19) ;  3.  the  permission  given  Lim
to  oonvey  to  Jerusalem  the  free-will  ofTerings


of  Jews  and  others  resident  in  Babylonia
(ver.  16) ;  4.  permission  to  Ezra  to  draw  on
the  royal  treasury  to  the  amount  of  •
hundred  talents  of  silver,  a  hundred  measures
of  wheat,  a  himdred  "baths"  of  wine,  a
hundred  "baths"  of  oil,  and  salt  to  any
amount  (ver.  22) ;  and,  6.  an  indefinite  com-
mission to  "inquire"  (ver.  14).  Besides
these  temporary  enactments,  the  decree  con-
tained certain  provisions  of  a  more  permanent
nature.  1.  Ezra  was  invested  with  the  chief
authority  over  the  whole  district  "beyond
the  river,"  and  was  commissioned  to  appoinli
all  the  subordinate  ' '  magistrates  and  judges  *


no


THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.


[oh.  vn.  11—28.


(yer.  25).  2.  He  waa  authorised  to  enforce  his
decisions  by  the  penalties  of  imprisonment,
confiscation  of  goods,  banishment,  and  even
death  itself  (ver.  26).  3.  An  exemption
&om  taxation  of  eveiy  kind  was  granted  to
all  grades  of  the  sacerdotal  order — to  the
priests,  the  Levites,  the  singers,  the  porters,
the  Nethiaim,  and  the  lowest  grade  of
"ministers" — to  all,  in  fact,  who  were
engaged  in  the  performance  of  any  sacred
function  connected  with  the  temple  (ver.
24).  This  last  provis  on  was  absolutely
permanent,  and  probably  continued  in  force
down  to  the  close  of  the  empire.

Ter.  11. — The  copy  of  the  letter  that  the
kin^ .  .  .  gave  to  Ezra.  This  decree,  as
already  observed,  was  a  private  Ji/rman,  one
copy  of  which  only  was  made,  which  was
presented  to  Ezra,  and  was  his  authority  for
doing  certain  things  himself,  and  for  requir-
ing certain  acts  of  others.  The  priest.  This
is  implied  in  the  genealogy  (vers.  1 — 5),  but
not  directly  stated  elsewhere  by  Ezra  him-
self. Nehemiah,  however,  designates  him
similarly  (viii.  2,  9).  His  most  usual  title
is  the  "scribe."  A  scribe  of  the  words  of
the  commandments  of  the  Lord.  Not  so
much  a  writer  as  an  expounder  (see  above,
rer.  10).

Ver.  12. — Artaxerxes,  king  of  kings.
'King  of  kings,  khihayathiya  khshaya-
thiyanam,"  an  equivalent  of  the  modem
shahinsTiah,  was  a  recognised'  title  of  the
Persian  monarchs,  and  ia  found  in  every
Persian  inscription  of  any  considerable
length  (Eawlinson,  '  Cuneiform  Inscrip-
tions of  Persia,"  voL  L  pp.  195,  271,  279,
287,  292,  fee).  It  was  a  title  that  had  been
used  occasionally,  though  not  at  all  fre-
quently, by  the  Assjrrian  monarchs  ('  Records
of  the  Past,'  voL  iiL  p.  41 ;  voL  v.  p.  8),
and  naturally  expressed  the  fact  that  those
monarchs  for  the  most  part  maintained  the
native  princes  on  the  thrones  of  the  coim-
tries  which  they  conquered  (see  Isa.  x.  8).
It  was  less  appropriate  to  the  Persians,  whose
empire  was  in  the  main  satrapial,  but  still
had  a  basis  of  truth  to  rest  upon,  since  the
Persian  monarch  had  always  a  certain  num-
ber of  tributary  kings  under  him  (cf. '  Herod. ,'
v.  104,  118;  viiL  142;  Xen.,  'Anab.,'
L  2,  §  12  ;  '  Hellen.,'  iv.  1,  §§ 3,  4,  &a).  The
Parthian  kings  took  the  title  from  the  time
of  Mithridates  I.  ;  and  from  them  it  passed
to  the  Sassanians,  who  style  themselves
malkan  malka,  from  firs'  to  last,  upon
their  coins.  The  Ood  of  h^i..ren.  On  this
favourite  Persian  expression  see  comment
on  ch.  L  2.  Feifect  peace.  There  is  nothing
in  the  Chaldee  original  in  any  way  cor-
tesponding  to  "peace;"  and  the  participle


rfmir  (from  g'mar,  "  to  complete  ")  shonld
be  taken  with  sdphar,  "scribe,"  the  whole
passage  being  translated  as  in  the  margin  of
the  A.  V. — "to  Ezra  the  priest,  a  perfei;t
scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven."
And  at  snch  a  time.  Bather,  "  and  so  forth, ''
as  in  ch.  iv.  10,  11,  17.

Yer.  13. — All  they  of  the  people  of
IsraeL  The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  is  as  wide
in  its  terms  as  the  proclamation  of  Cyrus
(ch.  L  3),  and  gives  permission  not  to  the
Jews  only,  but  to  all  Israelites  of  whatever
tribe,  to  accompany  Ezra  to  Jerusalem.  That
Israelites  of  all  the  tribes  actually  went  up
to  Jerusalem  on  the  occasion  seems  indics^tcd
by  the  "twelve  bullocks  for  all  Israel,"
which  those  who  returned  with  Ezra  offered
on  their  arrival  to  the  "  God  of  Israel "
(see  ch.  viii.  35).

Ver.  14. — Ezra  received  his  commission
firom  the  king,  and  from  his  seven  coun-
sellors, who  thus  seem  to  occupy  an  impor-
tant position  in  the  Persian  state.  They
are  commonly  identified  with  the  "seven
princes  of  Persia  and  Media,"  mentioned  in
Esther  (L  14),  "  which  saw  the  king's  face,"
and  "sate  first  in  the  kingdom."  A  con-
jecture, which,  though  not  unreasonable,
cannst  be  said  to  be  substantiated,  connects
the  "seven  counsellors"  with  the  seven
great  Persian  septs,  or  families,  which  had
privileges  beyond  the  rest,  and  among  them
the  right  of  unrestricted  access  to  the  royal
presence  ('  Herod. ,'  iii.  84).  The  commission
which  Ezra  received  is  described  in  this
verse  as  one  to  inquire  concerning  Judah
and  Jerusalem;  but  the  subject-matter  of
the  inquiry  is  not  mentioned.  He  can
scarcely  have  been  sent  to  make  inquiry
whether  the  law  of  Moses  was  observed  oi
no,  since  that  was  certainly  not  a  matter
with  which  the  Persian  government  would
concern  itsel£  Probably  he  was  to  inquire
generally  into  the  material  prosperity  of  the
province,  and  to  report  thereon.

Ver.  15. — ^And  to  carry  the  silver  and
gold,  which  the  king  and  his  connsellors
have  freely  offered.  Large  sums  in  specie
had  in  ancient  times  to  be  remitted  from
one  country  to  another  under  escort.  The
roads  were  never  safe  from  robbers ;  and  the
more  considerable  the  remittance,  the  greater
the  danger  of  its  being  intercepted.  We
hear  of  its  being  usual  to  protect  the  treasure
ii^nually  remitted  to  Jerusalem  from  Babylon
iL.  ^oman  times  by  an  escort  of  above  20,000
mei.  (see  Joseph.,  '  Ant  Jud.,'  xviii  9,  §  1).
The  Tod  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  is  in
Jerui  em.  No  more  seems  to  be  meant  by
"habitation"  here  than  by  "house"  in  ct
i  2,  8.  Artaxerxes  does  not  regard  Jehovah
as  a  local  God.

Ver.  16.— All  the  lUver  ana  gold  that
thou  canst  find.     Bather,  "  that  moa  canst


OH.  wi.  11—28.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


Ill


obtain" — "all  that  thou  canst  get  my  other
subjects  to  give  thee."  Compare  the  pro-
clamation of  Cyrus  (ch.  L  4,  6).

Ver.  17. — That  thou  mayest  buy  speedily
with  this  money  bullocks,  &c.  The  primary
application  of  the  money  sent  by  Ezra  was
to  be  the  maintenance  of  the  Jewish  ritual
in  its  full  splendour  (compare  the  decree
of  Darius,  ch.  vi.  9,  10).  The  residue  was,
however,  to  be  employed  in  any  way  that
Ezra,  acting  under  Divine  guidance,  might
direct  (see  below,  ver.  18).  Apparency,
this  residue  was  actually  employed  on  beau-
tifying the  temple  (see  ver.  27).

Ver.  19. — The  vessels  also.  It  does  not
appear  that  these  were  sacred  vessels  belong-
ing to  the  temple,  like  those  which  Cyrus
had  intrusted  to  Zerubbabel  for  restoration
to  the  house  of  God.  Kather,  it  would  seem,
they  were  a  part  of  the  voluntary  "  offering  "
mentioned  in  ver,  15,  in  which  they  are  (us-
tinctly  included  (viii.  25 — 28).  We  may
perhaps  conclude  that  the  vessels  sent  with
Zerubbabel  had  proved  insufficient  in  number
for  the  great  festivals.

Ver.  20.— Whatever  more  shall  be  need-
ful. Here  the  terms  of  Vasfinrwrn,  are  very
wide  indeed,  and  authorise  apparently  an
unlimited  application  of  the  royal  revenue,
or,  at  any  rate,  of  the  revenue  of  the  pro-
vince, to  any  purpose  in  any  way  connected
with  the  temple.  Probably  it  was  expected
that  Ezra's  own  discretion  would  act  as  a
restraint.  If  this  failed,  the  royal  treasurers
would  see  that  the  amounts  specified  in  ver.
22  were  not  exceeded.  The  king's  treasure-
house  is  not  the  royal  treasury  at  Susa,  to
which  the  tribute  went  up  from  the  various
provinces,  but  the  local  treasury  of  Judaea  or
Syria,  to  which  the  Jews  made  their  remit-
tances, and  on  which  Ezra  was  now  author-
ised to  draw.  Such  local  treasuries  existed
of  necessity  under  a  satrapial  system.

Ver.  22. — ITnto  a  hundred  talents  of
silver.  At  the  lowest  estimate  of  the  Jewish
silver  talent,  this  would  be  a  permission  to
draw  on  the  royal  treasury  to  the  amount  of
£24,000  sterling.  If  we  adopt  the  views  of  Mr.
R  S.  Poole  ('  Diet,  of  the  Bible,'  Articles,
Monet  and  Weights  and  Measures),  it
would  authorise  drawing  to  the  amount  of
£40,000.  A  hundred  measures  of  wheat.
Literally,  "a  hundred  con  of  wheat,"  as
given  in  the  margin.  The  cor  is  variously
estimated,  at  44|  gallons  and  at  86g  gallons.
It  contained  ten  haths.  Orders  oh  the  trea-
sury for  so  much  wheat,  wine,  oU,  and  salt
lound  strangely  in  modem  ears ;  but  were
natural  enough  in  the  Persian  system,  where
taxation  was  partly  in  kind,  and  every  pro-
vince had  to  remit  to  the  court  the  choicest
portion  of  its  produce.  Wine,  com,  oil,
and  salt  were  all  of  them  produced  abund-
antly in  Palestine,  which  was  "a  land  of


com  and  wine,  a  land  of  bread  and  vine-
yards, a  land  of  oil  olive,  and  of  honey"
(2  Kings  xviii.  32),  and  which,  in  the  region
about  the  Dead  Sea,  abounded  with  salt.

Ver.  23.— Why  should  there  be  wrath
against  the  realm  1  In  the  seventh  year  of
ijtaxerxes  Longimanus  there  was  "wrath
against  the  realm  "  of  Persia  in  a  very  dan-
gerous quarter,  viz.,  Egypt  Egypt  had
revolted  from  the  Persians  in  b.o.  460,  and
in  the  following  year,  with  the  assistance  of
the  Athenians,  had  driven  the  last  Persian
out  of  the  country.  A  vain  attempt  was
made  by  an  embassy  to  Sparta,  towards  the
close  of  B.O.  459,  to  force  Athens  to  recall
her  troops.  In  B.O.  458,  Artaxerxes'  seventh
year,  it  was  resolved  that  a  Persian  force
should  attempt  the  recovery  of  the  revolted
country.  Artaxerxes  gives  his  firman  to
Ezra  when  this  expedition  is  preparing  to
start,  and  partly  alludes  to  the  past "  wrath,"
shown  in  the  success  of  the  rebels,  partly
deprecates  any  further  visitation.  Without
pretending  to  penetrate  the  Divine  coun-
sels, it  may  be  noticed  that  from  the  year
B.O.  458  things  went  well  for  the  Persians
in  Egypt.  Memphis  was  recovered  in  that
year  or  the  next ;  and  in  B.O.  465  the
Athenians  were  finally  defeated,  and  the
province  recovered.  The  king  and  his  sons.
This  mention  of  the  "sons"  of  Artaxerxes
has  been  regarded  as  a  proof  that  the  Arta-
xerxes of  Esther  was  Mnemon,  and  not  Longi-
manus (Patrick).  But  it  is  quite  a  gratuitous
supposition  that  Longimanus,  who  had
attained  to  manhood  before  he  ascended  the
throne,  had  no  sons  in  the  seventh  year  of
his  reign.  Ultimately  he  left  behind  him
eighteen  sons  (Ctesias,  'Exc.  Pers.,'  §  44).

Ver.  24.— We  certify  yon.  The  use  of
the  plural  is  curious.  Hitherto  the  king
has  made  every  permission  and  command  to
rest  on  his  own  sole  authority  (see  vers.  12,
13,  21).  Now  that  he  reaches  the  most
important  point  in  the  whole  of  his  decree —
the  permanent  exemption  of  a  large  part  of
the  people  from  liability  to  taxation  of  any
kind,  his  style  changes,  and  he  says,  "  Wt
certify  yon."  Perhaps  he  speaks  in  the
name  of  himself  WM  Ms  successors;  or
possibly  he  means  to  say  that  in  this  matter
he  has  asked  and  obtained  the  assent  and
consent  of  his  council  (compare  ver.  28).
Or  ministers.  Bather,  "and  ministers."
It  is  generally  allowed  that  the  word  here
translated  "ministers"  is  not  applied  to
the  Netbinim,  but  to  that  still  lower  grade
of  attendants  in  the  sanctuary  called  "Solo-
mon's servants"  in  ch.  iL  65 — 68,  and
Neh.  viL  67—60.  It  shall  not  be  lawfal
to  impose  toll,  tribute,  or  custom  npon
them.  It  may  be  suspected  from  thia
proviso  that  the  Persians  exempted  &om
taxation  their  own  (Magian)  priests,  though


Hi


tflE  Book  OF  l^iUk.


[ot.  yu.  11— 5i8.


of  this  there  is  no  other  evidence.  But  they
would  scarcely  have  placed  a  foreign  priest-
hood on  a  higher  level  of  favour  man  their
own.

Ver.  25. — ^And  then,  Ezra.  This  con-
clusion would  be  by  itself  sufficient  to
remove  the  document  out  of  the  ordinary
category  of  "decrees"  or  "edicts,"  and  to
rencfcr  it,  what  it  is  called  in  ver.  11,  nish-
tcvan,  "  a  letter."  After  the  wisdom  of  thy
God,  that  is  in  thy  hand.  /.  e.  "that  is
in  thy  possession."  Set  magistrates  and
jndges.  Both  the  words  used  are  derived
from  roots  signifying  "  to  judge,"  and  it  is
difficult  to  draw  any  distinction  between
them.  The  one  translated  "magistrates"
ia  that  which  gives  Its  title  to  the  Book  of
"Judges."  Which  may '  judge  all  the
people  that  are  beyond  the  river,  all  such
as  know  the  laws  of  thy  God.  The  latter
clause  is  probably  intended  to  be  limit-
ative of  the  former,  and  to  consign  to  Ezra's
government  oniy  the  Jewish  portion  of  the
population,  in  which,  however,  are  to  be
■  sokoned  the  proselytes  (see  comment  on  ch.
vL  21).  And  teach  ye  them  that  know
them  not.  As  the  other  inhabitants  of
Syria  were  not  Zoroastrians,  but  idolaters,
Ezra  was  given  free  permission  to  spread  his
religion  among  them.

Ver.  26. — Finally,  to  Ezra  is  intrusted
distinctly  the  civil  government  of  the  Jewish
people,  with  power  to  fine,  imprison,  banish,
or  put  to  death  offenders,  as  he  may  think
right.  These  powers  were  always  intrusted
by  the  Persians  to  the  civil  administrators  of
provinces,  who  were  autocrats  within  their
respective  territories,  and  responsible  to  the
king  alone  for  the  exercise  of  their  authority.

EzBA's  THANKSOrVmO  OS  KEOBIPT  OF
ABTATHRTTM'     I.BTTKB    (ch.    TU.      27,    28).


Witli  an  abruijtiiess  that  may  appear  strange,
but  which  has  many  parallels  in  the  worki
of  Oriental  writers,  Ezra  passes  without  a
word  of  explanation  £rom  Artaxerzes'  letter
to  his  own  thanksgiving  upon  the  receipt  of
it  Compare  the  inteijectional  prayers  of
Kehemiah  (iv.  4  ;  v.  19 ;  tL  9,  H,  &C.X

Ver.  27. — Having  concluded  the  important
document,  which  he  has  transcribed,  and
not  translated,  and  which  is  consequently
in  the  Chaldee  dialect,  Ezra  now  resumes
the  use  of  the  more  sacred  Hebrew,  and
henceforth  employs  it  uninterruptedly  to
the  close  of  his  narrative.  The  form  of  his
thanksgiving  a  little  resembles  that  of
David  in  1  Chron.  xxix.  10.  The  Lord  God
of  our  fathers  is  an  unusual  phrase,  only
elsewhere  employed  by  David  (1  Chron.
zxix.  18)  and  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  ix.  6).
"God  of  our  fathers"  is  more  common,
being  found  in  Deuteronomy  (xxvL  7)  and
Acts  (iii.  13 ;  v.  30),  as  well  as  in  Chronicles
frequently.  Which  hath  put  such  a  thought
as  this  in  the  king's  heart  Compare  i.  1
and  vi  22.  All  thoughts  favourable  to  the
Jews  are  regarded  by  Ezra  as  impressed
upon  the  hearts  of  heathen  kings  by  the
direct  action  of  God.  To  beautify.  Or
"adorn."  Ezra  gathers  from  the  general
tenor  of  the  king's  letter  that  the  adornment
of  the  temple  is  his  main  object  (see  com-
ment on  ver.  17).

Ver.  28. — Hath  extended  mercy  unto  me
before  the  king.  /.  e.  "hath  given  me
favour  in  the  king's  sight" — "hath  made
him  graciously  disposed'  towards  me "  (see
ver.  6).  And  Ms  counsellors  and . . .  princes.
Compare  the  comment  on  ver.  14.  The
"counsellors"  and  "princei"  are  the  aame
persons.


HOMILETICa

Vers.  H — 26. — I%e  r^ormer't  commission.  The  insertion  her«  of  this  decree  of
Artaxerxes  at  length,  and  in  its  original  Chaldee  form,  is  in  more  or  less  close  keeping
with  the  earlier  parts  of  this  book  (i.  2^4;  iv.  11 — 16,  17 — 22;  v.  6 — 17;  vi.
3 — 12) ;  and  furnishes  an  argument,  therefore,  strongly  in  favour  of  the  unity  of
authorship  of  the  whole  book.  It  is  also  in  keeping  with  the  character  of  Ezra  him-
self. As  a  special  student  of  God's  written  law,  he  would  naturally  think  much  and
make  much  of  the  very  letter  of  the  written  decree  of  those  who  ruled  in  God's  name
(John  xix.  22 ;  Eom.  xiii.  1,  2).  Turning  now  to  our  special  subject  here,  viz.,  the
contents  of  this  document  itself,  we  find  them  STich  as  to  present  Ezra  to  us  yet  further
as  the  central  figure  of  this  last  part  of  the  book ;  and  that  under  two  principal  aspects,
viz.,  (1)  before  the  king  Artaxerxes  himself;  and,  (2)  through  tne  king's  orders,
before  the  world.

I.  Befobb  the  KiNa.  It  is  evident,  from  the  nature  of  the  case,  as  also  from  a
comparison  of  the  end  of  ver.  23  with  27,  that  this  decree  was  not  wholly  spon-
taneous on  the  part  of  the  king.  We  also  gather  from  vers.  14  and  28,  that  when
Ezra  preferred  the  "  request "  spoken  of,  it  was  in  a  special  audience  of  state.    There


CH.  TU.  11—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZKA.  113


are  several  things,  therefore,  under  this  aspect  that  we  may  note  of  Ezra  at  this
time.  1.  His  courage.  It  was  never  a  hght  thing,  and  not  always  a  safe  thing,  for
any  man,  and  especially  for  one  of  a  nation  of  captives,  to  stand  and  speak  there
(comp.  Prov.  xvi.  14;  Neh.  ii.  2;  Esther  iv.  11,  end  of  ver.  16,  &c.).  Also,  2.  His
faithfulness.  Whence  that  acknowledgment  on  the  part  of  this  king  and  his  council
(ver.  25)  of  the  "  wisdom "  of  Ezra's  God  ;  that  special  respect  for  the  "  law "  of
the  same  God  (vers.  11,  14,  21,  26,  26)  ;  also,  perhaps,  that  special  acquaintance,  as
in  the  case  of  Darius  in  ch.  vi.  9,  of  what  was  required  for  Jehovah's  sacrifices  (ver.
22) ;  and  that  notahle  fear  of  his  judgments  (ver.  23 ;  comp.  vi.  10) — except  in  part,
at  least,  from  Ezra's  previous  words  on  these  points  (see  also  what  is  said  trfterwarda
in  oh.  viii.  22).  These  many  widely-scattered  points  of  reflected  light  argue  some
common  source  of  light  of  much  size  and  potency.  Not  a  little  light  had  there  been
from  him  to  them,  before  so  much  in  so  public  a  manner  from  them  to  him.  3.  His
patriotism.  Why  was  all  this  said  and  asked  ?  Why  so  much  as  this  so  freely
risked  ?  For  Jerusalem's  and  Israel's  sake.  It  was  in  going  to  Judah  and  Jeru-
salem (ver.  14),  and  in  the  welfare  of  God's  people  (ver.  25),  that  he  was  known  to
be  interested.  AH  that  is  offered  him  turns  upon  this,  because  all  that  he  requested,
and  all  the  arguments  by  which  he  had  supported  his  request,  had  previously  turned
on  it  too.  It  is  thus,  therefore,  that  we  must  think  of  this  Ezra  pleading  at  this
time,  before  those  who  then  ruled  the  world,  on  behalf  of  a  captive  people,  and  in
the  name  (to  his  hearers)  of  a  strange  divinity.  The  history  is  silent  as  to  what
particular  occasion  led  to  his  doing  so  (contrast  case  of  Neh.  i.  2,  3 ;  ii.  2 — 6) ;  but
tlie  characteristics  which  enabled  him  to  do  so  are  patent  enough.  How  bold  a  man,
how  faithful  a  witness,  how  true  an  Israelite  he  appears  !

II.  Before  the  world.  How  great  was  Ezra's  success  in  thus  pleading  before
Artaxerxes,  the  decree  before  us  informs  us  next.  That  decree  was  the  king's  reply
to  his  pleadings.  It  was  the  "commission"  which  he  received  in  consequence.
Observe,  as  such — 1.  How  exclusive  its  application.-  It  is  a  commission  to  Ezra  in
person  (see  "  Artaxerxes  unto  Ezra  "  in  ver.  12 ;  also  beginning  of  ver.  25  ;  also  the
repetition  of  "thee,"  "thou,"  and  "thy"  all  throughout).  It  is  addressed,  in  fact,
almost  to  Ezra  alone ;  certainly  to  no  one  else  beside  nim,  except  as  being  either
appointed  by  him  (ver.  25),  or  commanded  to  assist  him  (ver.  21),  or  associated  with
him  (ver.  18).  It  says  to  him  throughout,  "Thou  art  the  man."  2.  How  weighty
its  character.  Ezra  being,  so  to  speak,  its  terminics  ad  quern,  where,  on  the  other
hand,  was  its  terminus  a  quo.  Not  from  any  subordinate,  but  the  king  (king  of  kings
he  calls  himself,  ver.  12) ;  not  even  from  the  king  alone,  and  therefore,  possibly,
only  as  an  individual  and  in  a  private  manner,  but  from  "  the  king  and  his  seven
counsellors  "  (ver.  14) — the  "  queen  in  council,"  as  we  should  say — and  therefore,  in
iiact,  from  all  the  authority  of  the  Persian  empire  as  represented  by  such.  "  All  the
empire  to  Ezra."  That  is  the  virtual  heading  of  this  decree.  3.  How  ample  its
provisions.  Whoever  Ezra  wished  for  as  a  companion  (ver.  13),  whatever  Ezra
could  find  to  take  before  starting  (ver.  16),  whatever  Ezra  wished  to  do  (ver.  18),
whatever  more  he  might  find  afterwards  to  be  needful  (ver.  20),  whatever  even,
within  certain  most  liberal  limits  (ver.  22),  Tie  might  think  fit  to  require  (vor.  21 ) —
Uiere  was  the  same  injunction  about  all.  Just  so  he  might  have,  or  take,  or  do,  or
ordain  on  his  part ;  and  just  so  others  were  to  do  for  him  upon  theirs.  4.  How
cordial  its  spirit.  How  was  this  shown?  By  the  magnitude,  cheerfulness,  and
thoughtfulness  of  the  presents  made  him  (vers.  15,  20);  by  the  "speediness"  and
"diligence"  enjoined  both  on  Ezra  himself  (ver.  17)  and  on  those  who  help  him
(ver.  21),  and  on  all  concerned  in  doing  anything  for  the  good  of  God's  house
(ver.  23) ;  by  the  special  and,  up  till  then,  unexampled  exemption  from  any
description  of  tax  secured  for  every  minister  of  that  house,  down  to  the  lowest
(ver.  24,  where  observe  the  "also,"  as  though  tlie  king  had  been  thinking  how
else  he  could  shqw  his  good  will);  by  the  intelligent  sympathy  shown  in  ver.
25  with  Ezra's  special  anxiety  to  teach  all  Israel  the  law  of  his  God  ;  and,  finally,
by.  the  thorough  determination  shown  in  ver.  26  to  regard  and  "  speedily '
punish  all  who  opposed  Ezra  in  tliat  matter  as  offenders  against  the  king  him-
felf.  (Note—"  The  law"  of  thy  God,  and  the  law  of  the  king.")  In  all  these
waya  does  this  whole  document  present  Ezra  to  the  world  as  "the  man  whom
BZBA.  r


114  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [oh.  vii.  11—28.

the  king,"  as  the  king,  "delighted  to  honour"  and  help  at  that  time  (see  Esthci
vi.  11).

May  we  not,  therefore,  leam  here — 1.  The  noblest  me  of  worldly  advantage,
viz.,  to  help,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  in  the  great  work  of  acquainting  men  with
God  and  his  will,  under  which  we  include,  of  course,  his  way  of  salvation,  his  way
of  love.  Of  all  the  things  the  various  kings  of  Persia  ever  did  with  their  wealth
and  power,  what  was  really  wiser  and  more  illustrious  than  to  use  them  as  we  read  of
here?  Are  not  those  three  names,  therefore,  in  the  end  of  ch.  vi.  14  the  three
greatest  of  all?  Compared  to  such  uses,  also,  what  were  Ahab's  "ivory  house"
(\  Kings  xxii.  39),  and  Nebuchadnezzar's  "  great  Babylon "  (Dan.  iv.  30),  ci
Dolomon's  "  apes  and  peacocks"  (1  Kings  x.  22),  or  all  his  royal  luxuries  (Eccl.  ii.),
or  even  his  deserved  reputation  for  wisdcrn  (jhid.  end  ver.  9),  if  regarded  as  any-
thing more  than  means  to  a  better  end,  but  vanity  and  vexation  ?  It  is  one
principal  part  of  God's  will  that  his  will  (t.  e.  his  "  way,"  Ps.  Ixvii.  2)  should  be
"  known  upon  earth."  All  else  in  the  world  is  but  transient ;  but  he  that  helps  in
making  this  known  doeth  that  which,  like  God  himself,  "  abideth  for  ever  "  (1  John  ii.
17  ;  also  Dan.  xii.  3).  To  this,  perhaps,  may  be  applied  the  language  of  1  Cor.  iii.
9 — 13.  How  great  a  mercy  that  it  is  possible  for  us  thus  to  build  for  eternity  with
the  things  of  time  I  How  great  an  insanity,  that  being  so,  to  neglect  to  do  it  1  (See
Luke  xii.  21 ;  xvi.  9 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  17 — 19,  &c.)  2.  The  noblest  ideal  of  human  life,
viz.,  like  Ezra  here,  to  devote  oneself  and  all  one's  days  to  this  "  use  "  (coinp.
2  Cor.  xii.  16).  Who  is  the  true  "  king  "  in  this  passage  ?  Not  Artaxerxes,  whatever
he  calls  himself  (ver.  12) ;  not  Artaxerxes,  with  all  his  court,  nor  even  with  all  lie
does  here  for  God's  service  through  the  instrumentality  of  Ezra;  but  Ezra  himself,
as  the  man  whom  Artaxerxes  and  his  seven  counsellors  and  his  mighty  princes  are
proud  to  honour  and  help.  What,  in  fact,  is  this  whole  decree,  thus  regarded,  but
their  homage  to  him  ?  So  true  is  that  ancient  saying,  "  Whose  service  is  perfect
freedom  ; "  or,  still  stronger  and  truer  and  more  to  our  present  purpose,  as  we  read
it  in  the  original  Ltilin — "Cui  servire  regnare  est."

Vers._  27 — 28. — The  reformer's  psalm.  Very  abruptly,  even  in  our  translation,
does  this  short  p.salm  of  praise  come  in.  Still  more  so  in  the  original,  where  I  lie
writer  here  passes  suddenly  from  Chaldee  to  Hebrew;  that  being,  in  his  case,  the
natural  language  of  such  praise  (Ps.  cxxxvii.  3).  This  makes  the  psalm  all  the  more
valuable  to  us  as  an  index  of  inward  feeling.  Carefully  studied  forms  of  expression
may  or  may  not  be  the  language  of  the  heart.  Sudden  and  unpremeditated  expres-
sions, words  that  escape  from  the  lips  before  the  speaker  has  had  time  to  attend  to
their  appearance,  cannot  be  anything  else.  We  may  take  these  words,  therefore,  as
giving  us  a  peculiarly  life-like  picture  of  Ezra's  feelings,  both  when  first  receiving


_    ,  „  I  recording  aiiv

such  sudden  praise  to  God  under  the  circumstances  is  some  distinction  in  this  direc-
tion. Not  e  /^ery  one  would  have  done  so.  "  Were  there  not  ten  cleansed  ?  But
where  are  the  nine  ?"  His  piety  is  shown,  however,  still  more— 1.  £y  tlie  suhjxrt  oj
his  thoughts,  viz.,  Jehovah  himself  ("  Blessed  be  the  Lord  ").  Also,  Jehovah  alone  in
this  sense,  others  being  only  referred  to  either  as  helping  to  describe  him  more
accurately  (the  God  of  our  fathers),  or  else  as  being  influenced  by  him  for  good  (the
king,  &c.),  or  else  as  having  received  blessings  from  him  (Ezra  himself).  This  is
a  great  characteristic  of  true  piety  (Ps.  xvi.  8,  contrasted  with  x.  4;  xiv.  1).  God
has  far  the  first  place  in  a  really  good  man's  thoughts,  both  in  order  of  time  (comp.
two  tables  of  Decalogue,  and  structure  of  the  Lord's  prayer)  and  also  in  that  of  im-
portance (Ps.  Ixxiii.  26 ;  Phil.  iii.  8).  This  also  is  specially  exemplified  on  all  occa-
sions where  the  heart  is  much  stirred,  such  as  here,  e.  g.  in  very  great  joy,  or  in
great  temptation  (Gen.  xxxix.  end  ver.  9),  or  in  deep  sorrow  for  sin  (Ps.  Ii.  4),  or
in  very  extreme  danger  (2  Chron.  xviii.  31).  In  a  heart  fully  under  the  influence  of
God's  grace  (Acts  vi.  5  ;  xi.  24),  the  more  deeply  that  heart  is  penetrated,  the  more
you  discover  this  to  be  true.  2.  By  the  subject  of  his  praise,  viz.,  first  and  fore-
most, that  the  result  of  God's  special  interference  in  this  mstance  should  be  for  the
"  beautifying "  of  God's   own  house  ;   and   next,  that   "  mercies  "  and  help  should


OH.  VII.  11—28.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  llfi

have  been  extended  to  Ezra  himself  as  concerned  in  bringing  about  this  result.  This
again,  this  love  for  God's  house,  this  joy  in  all  that  tends  to  its  prosperity,  a  grea*
mark  of  true  piety.  Observe  on  this  point,  in  Ps.  xxvi.,  the  connection  between  the
declaration  of  ver.  8  and  the  prayer  and  hope  of  ver.  9.  Also  the  connection,  in
Heb.  X.,  between  the  neglect  of  Ood's  worship  or  house  in  ver.  25  and  the  total  for-
saking of  God  himself  in  ver.  26,  &o.  In  the  eyes  of  God's  true  servants,  every
blessing  to  God's  house  and  people  (God's  house  in  the  highest  sense,  1  Pet.  ii.  5)
is  a  blessing  to  themselves.  This  feature,  also,  is  the  more  noticeable  here,  because
in  that  decree  which  led  to  this  praise  nothing  is  said,  except  most  indirectly,  as  to
the  beautifying  of  God's  house.  But  Ezra,  with  his  great  desire  for  the  good  of
that  house,  and  his  zealous  intentions  in  that  direction,  perceived  with  admiration
and  praise  how  all  the  provisions  of  that  decree  could  and  would  be  used  in  that
manner.  To  have  God  worshipped  in  the  proper  way  was  the  great  desire  of  his
heart.  Whatever,  therefore,  promised  to  help  this  on  was  to  him  a  g^eat  joy.  So
with  all  who  truly  love  God  (see  Ps.  cxxii.  almost  throughout,  &c.,  &o.).

II.  Ezra's  sincere  humility.  This  also  shown  here  in  two  ways.  1.  In  what
he  says  here  of  the  king.  What  Artaxerxes  had  done  was  undoubtedly  due,  under
God,  in  great  measure,  to  Ezra  himself.  Not  every  man  in  the  same  position  would
have  shown  the  same  happy  combination  of  courage,  faithfulness,  patriotism,  perse-
verance, patience,  and  tact.  Not  every  man,  having  displayed  such  qualities,  and
done  so  much  by  them,  would  have  passed  them  all  by  so  completely.  Even  as  the
instrument  employed  for  doing  so  much,  Ezra  entirely  passes  himself  by.  "  Blessed
be  the  Lord,  who  by  my  instrumentality,"  &c.  We  cannot  find  even  such  words  in
the  text.  We  cannot  read  them  even  between  the  lines.  It  is  the  characteristic  of
pride  to  search  out  the  highest  seats  (Matt,  xxiii.  6).  In  this  case  the  highest  seaf
stands  empty  and  ready,  and  yet  is  passed  by  without  thought.  Of  all  humility  tlii'<
is,  perhaps,  the  rarest,  not  even  thinking  of  self.  2.  In  what  he  says  of  himself
True  humility,  for  all  we  have  said,  is  never,  however,  unnatural.  It  does  not  make
an  effort  to  forget  self ;  an  efEort  which  necessarily  fails  the  more  it  succeeds
Where  it  is  necessary  for  any  purpose  intrusted  to  us  that  we  should  mention  our-
selves, purposely  to  avoid  doing  so  is  of  all  ostentation  the  worst.  It  is  saying,  in
efEect,  "Please  admire  my  great  humility.  Observe  how  very  lowly  I  am."  flow
different,  in  this  instance,  Ezra's  mention  of  himself  in  ver.  28.  There  is  no  pre-
tence of  having  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  result  he  joys  over.  He  had  been
"  before  the  king,"  &c. ;  and  his  being  there  had  been  overruled  to  procure  help  in
this  matter ;  and  this  was  one  part,  therefore,  of  the  present  call  on  his  gratitude ;
and  BO,  in  offering  his  praise,  it  could  not  be  omitted.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  onlj
mentioi.ied  as  such — as  a  reason  for  praise.  "  He  hath  extended  mercy  to  me  before
the  king.  He  enabled  me  to  do  what  I  did.  Mine  the  advantage  :  be  his  the  praise."
So  in  what  Ezra  says  afterwards  as  to  being  strengthened  by  God's  hand  (comp.  the
parallel  case  of  St.  Paul,  1  Cor.  xv.  10  ;  Eph.  iii.  8  ;  1  Tim.  i.  12 ;  and  perhaps  Jacob,
Gen.  xxxii.  10).  Doubtless  there  is  much  humility  sometimes  in  not  thinking  at  all
about  self.  There  is  equal  humility  sometimes  in  simply  thinking  of  oneself  as  one  is
(Bom.  xii.  3).     Why  should  not  the  mirror  shine  when  it  is  shone  upon  by  the  sun  ?

In  connection  with  these  characteristics  of  Ezra  we  may  also  observe,  in
conclusion — 1.  The  steadiness  of  his  purpose.  With  all  his  spirit  of  praise,  with  all
Ills  constant  reference  to  God's  "  hand,  and  constant  dependence  on  God's  power,  his
was  no  indolent  soul.  Rather,  by  this  "  good  hand  "  of  God  upon  him,  he  was  the
more  stirred  up  in  work  and  encouraged.  This  is  just  the  spirit  of  true  faith.  Does
God  really  "  work  in  me  both  to  will  and  to  do  "  ?  Then  I  will  seek  myself  to  work
all  the  more  (Phil.  ii.  12,  13).  Are  none  of  those  with  me  to  perish  ?  I  will  exerl
myself  all  the  more  to  save  them  (Acts  xxvii.  24,  31 — 44).  Men  reasoning  in  thia
way  are  the  kind  of  men  to  depend  on.  None  so  truly  trusty  as  those  who  truly
trust  Christ.  2.  The  consequent  greatness  of  his  influence.  What  a  natural  issue
to  all  that  we  have  read  before  is  that  which  we  read  in  the  last  words  of  ver.  28  1
How  likely  such  a  man  to  gather  others  about  him.  How  likely  to  gather  "  chief
menj'  men  of  character  and  position  like  himself.  How  likely,  when  gathered,  to
retain  thera,  so  tliat  they  should  join  him  in  going  up.  How  esperially  likely,  how
certain,  all  this,  with  the  "good  hand  "  of  God  still  on  him.

I  2


116  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  vii.  11—28.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  11. — The  royal  and  the  religious.  I.  The  esteem  which  the  botal  had
roB  THE  BELIGlous.  "  Artaxerxes,  king  of  kings,  unto  Ezra  the  priest,  a  Bcribe  of  the
law  of  the  God  of  heaven,  perfect  peace"  (ver.  12).  Ezra  had  so  conducted  himself
as  to  win  the  regard  of  the  king  ;  the  king  admitted  the  moral  character  of  Ezra  in  all
its  grandeur.  The  minister  must  gain  the  esteem  of  his  comrades  before  he  can
influence  them  for  good;  piety  is  attractive,  and  when  rightly  manifested  will  win
the  esteem  even  of  a  heathen  king.  The  enemies  of  Christ  cannot  but  admire  the
devout  scribe.  The  Christian  is  the  light  of  the  world,  and  as  such  will  attract  by
his  moral  loveliness.

II.  The  inqdibt  which  the  botal  made  thbouoh  the  beliqious.  "  To  inquire
concerning  Judah  and  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  14).  The  king  sends  Ezra  on  an  important
commission.  1.  Authoritative.  "  Thou  art  sent  of  the  king  and  of  his  seven  counsel-
lors." The  true  minister  is  sent  of  God  to  his  work.  The  moral  often  requires  the
authority  of  the  civil  and  political.  2.  Interrogative.  "To  inquire."  The  true
minister  has  many  inquiries  to  make  concerning  the  moral  condition  of  men.  3.
Beligious.  The  mission  of  Ezra  had  chiefly  a  moral  purpose ;  he  was  sent  to  Judah
and  Jerusalem.  Ministerial  inquiries  must  be  of  a  religious  character  ;  concerning
the  work  of  God.  4.  Regulative.  "  According  to  the  law  of  thy  God."  Man  must
measure  life  by  God's  law ;  how  Ezra's  teaching  appears  in  this  decree  of  the  king.
It  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  to  watch  over  the  welfare  of  the  state ;  this  is  part  of  its
commission.

III.  The  bssouece  which  the  boyal  intrusted  to  the  beliqious.  "And  to
carry  the  silver  and  gold,  which  the  king  and  his  counsellors  have  freely  offered  unto
the  God  of  Israel,  whose  habitation  is  in  Jerusalem "  (ver.  15).  The  king  intrusts
Ezra  with  great  treasure ;  religion  conduces  to  honesty  and  awakens  confidence.
The  true  minister  will  always  be  feithf  ul  to  the  treasures  and  trusts  of  men — monetary,
experimental,  and  moral.  The  state  may  safely  commit  its  most  sacred  interests  to
the  care  of  the  Church.

IV.  The  discbbtion  which  the  boyal  permitted  to  the  beliqious.  1.  As  to
amplitude  of  resource  (vers.  18 — ^20).  2.  As  to  judicial  arrangements  (ver.  25).  3.
As  to  the  requirements  of  God's  house  (ver.  23).  4.  As  to  exemption  from  civil  duty
(ver.  24).  The  true  minister  requires  and  must  be  allowed  full  discretionary  powers ;
always  subservient  to  the  Divine  law.  God  places  great  resources  at  the  command
of  his  servants,  greater  than  Artaxerxes  had  to  give.

V.  The  peopitiation  which  the  boyal  souoht  from  the  beliqious.  "For
why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm  of  the  king "  (ver.  23)  ?  The  king
sought  the  aid  of  the  sciibe  in  order  that  he  might  propitiate  an  offended  Deity.
Men  seek  the  spiritual  from  varied  motives;  often  animated  by  fear;  they  little
know  that  God's  way  is  merciful  to  them.  The  spiritual  often  remove  national
calamity ;  the  true  minister  will  be  glad  to  do  all  he  can  to  remove  the  wrath  of
God  from  men. — E.

Vers.  11 — 26. — Pagan  piety.  It  is  certainly  a  striking  fact  that  a  second  Persian
monarch  should  have  shown  so  right  a  feeling  toward  the  people  and  the  cause  of
God.     We  have  in  this  Artaxerxes  another  illustration  of  pagan  piety.     We  see —

I.  Its  faith.  "  Whatsoever  is  commanded  by  the  God  of  heaven,  let  it  be  dili-
gently done,"  &c.  (ver.  23).  Evidently  Artaxerxes  thoroughly  believed  in  the  exist-
ence and  the  power  of  Jehovah.  It  is  noteworthy  that  he  speaks  of  him  not  as  the
Unil  of  Judasa  or  of  the  Jews,  but  as  "  the  God  of  heaven "  (vers.  12,  23).  Whence
til  V  Chiefly,  if  not  wholly,  from  what  he  saw  of  the  Jews  about  his  court'  of
their  strength  of  conviction,  refusing,  as  they  did,  to  accommodate  themselves  to
the  evil  ways  of  the  land  they  lived  in — ^to  "  do  at  Rome  as  Rome  did ; "  of  their
purity  of  life ;  of  their  probity ;  of  their  diligence.  Probably  Ezra's  own  character
and  demeanour  exerted  a  powerful  influence  on  his  mind.  "The  captives  lived  the
truth,  and  the  monarch  became  its  subject.

U.  Its  feab.    "  Why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm  of  the  king,"  Aa


CH.  viL  11—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  117

(ver.  23)?  Artaxerzes  had  at  least  so  much  fear  of  the  living  Qod  that  he  desired  to
propitiate  him  and  to  avert  his  wrath.  This  is,  as  it  ever  was,  the  chief  note  of
pagan  piety.  It  is  a  system  of  propitiating  power  and  averting  its  anger  rather  than
reverencing  goodness  and  rejoicing  in  its  love.  "  I  will  let  you  go,"  said  the  Persian
king;  "take  money,  vessels,  &o.;  levy  tributes  at  the  expense  of  my  people,  Ac.  ;
sacrifice,  pray ;  for  '  why  should  there  be  wrath  against  the  realm  of  the  king  and  hit
son*  f"  Our  missionaries  continually  witness  the  prevalence  of  this  feeling  of  dread
of  the  wrath  of  a  higher  power  and  attempts  to  divert  it,  as  the  sum  total  of  pae-an
piety.  Pear  is  not  a  false  or  wrong  principle  in  religion.  "  Noah,  moved  with  tear.
prepared  an  ark,"  &c.  (Heb.  xi.  7).  "Thou,  even  thou,  art  to  be  feared:  and  wlin
may  stand  in  thy  sight  when  once  thou  art  angiy"  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  7)  ?  But,  good  so  far
as  it  goes,  it  does  not  suf&ce ;  it  must  pass  on  into  that  which  is  higher — into  rever-
ence, trust,  love,  obedience.

IIL  Its  occasional  excellency  ov  behaviotjb  (vers.  13 — 18 ;  21, 22,  25).  Hardly
anything  could  have  been  better — indeed,  considering  the  light  and  the  shade  in
which  he  lived,  we  may  say  nothing  could  have  been  better — ^than  the  king's
conduct  toward  the  people  of  Qod.  He  freely  gave  them  up  as  his  subjects
(and  they  were  valuable  ones)  to  return  to  their  own  land  (ver.  13)  ;  gave  freely
himself,  and  invited  his  courtiers  to  g^ve  also  of  their  possessions  towards  the
expenses  of  the  exodus  (vera.  14,  15) ;  gave  full  permission  to  Ezra  to  get  all
he  could  from  his  own  compatriots  (ver.  16) ;  gave  wise  directions  as  to  the
use  of  the  treasure,  with  leave  to  regulate  all  things  according  to  the  "  will  of  their
Qod "  (vers.  17, 18) ;  took  measures  for  the  same  succours  to  be  granted  beyond
the  river  (vers.  21,  22),  and  charged  Ezra  with  the  exercise  of  political  powers,  bid'
ding  him  also  discharge  his  functions  as  a  teacher  of  the  law  of  Qod  (ver.  25).  Thus
the  pagan  king  did  his  best  to  serve  the  cause  he  espoused.  "  What  his  hand  found
10  do  he  did  with  his  might "  (Eccles.  ix.  10).  Much  more  incumbent  is  it  on  us,  who
live  in  such  brighter  light  than  he,  with  whom  so  many  shadows  have  flown  away,
to  work  with  our  whole  strength,  putting  not  only  our  hand,  but  also  our  mind  and
our  heart,  into  any  task  we  undertake  for  Qod  and  for  his  people.  But  of  this  pagan
piety  we  must  see —

IV.  Its  insueficiesct.  Artaxerxes  did  well  so  far  as  he  went ;  but  he  did  not  go
far  enough.  He  had  faith  enough  in  Qod  to  fear  him ;  and  fear  enough  to  take  some
considerable  trouble,  on  one  occasion,  to  avert  his  displeasure.  But  he  did  not  jrield
to  him  the  chief  place  in  his  heart.  He  had  not  such  regard  and  reverence  for  Qod
as  to  put  away  his  superstitions  and  malpractices.  We  dare  not  inquire  further  into
the  particulars  of  his  life.  True  piety  is  in  giving  to  Qod,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
the  supreme  place  in  our  hearts  ;  making  him,  not  ourselves,  the  King  of  kings  and
Lord  of  lords  (ver.  12),  Sovereign  of  our  soul,  Lord  of  our  life.  Not  one  fine  spurt
of  zeal,  like  this  of  the  Persian  monarch,  but  a  continuous  regal  force,  uplifting  our
spirit  day  by  day  to  heaven,  regulating  our  feelings,  controlling  our  will,  shaping  and
guiding  our  words  and  deeds,  in  all  relations  and  in  every  sphere — that  is  the  piety
which  pleases  Qod. — C.

Vers.  11 — 26. — Mzra's  commission  from  Artaxerxes.  After  giving  a  general
account  of  the  exodus  of  Israel  from  Babylon  under  his  leadership,  Ezra  transcribes
the  letter  of  the  king  of  Persia  containing  his  commission.  In  considering  this  very
remarkable  document,  we  notice —

I.  The  gebetinq.  1.  The  monarch  announces  himself.  "Artaxerxes  king  of
kings."  (1)  This,  in  its  perfect  sense,  is  a  title  of  Messiah  (see  Rev.  xvii.  14 ;  xix.
16).  He  IS  destined  to  become  the  universal  monarch  (Dan.  vii.  14;  Rev.  xi.  15).
Happy  will  this  earth  be  under  the  sway  of  his  intelligence  and  grace  (Isa.  xxxv.).
For  any  earthly  potentate  to  affect  this  title,  in  its  full  sense,  would  be  at  once  blas-
phemous and  ridiculous.  (2)  In  a  limited  sense  Artaxerxes  was  "  king  of  kings."
This  title  was  given  to  the  kmg  of  Babylon  by  Qod  himself  (see  Jer.  xxviL  6 — 1 1  ;
Ezek.  xxvi.  7 ;  Dan.  ii.  37).  The  Persians  succeeded  to  the  empire  of  the  Baby-
lonians. (3)  Artaxerxes  used  this  title  religiously.  He  acknowledged  in  it  his  vast
indebtedness  to  the  providence  of  God.  So  its  equivalent  was  used  by  Cyrus  (see
ch.  i.  2).     Tlie  whole  tenor  of  this  letter  sustains  this  view.    Qlorying  is  legitimate


118  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  vii.  H— 28.

when  we  glory  in  the  Lord  (see  Jer.  ix.  23,  24 ;  1  Cor.  i.  31).  2.  He  addresses  hi*
letter:  (1)  "  Unto  Ezra  the  priest."  The  emphatic  article  is  used  because  Ezra  stood
out  prominently  amongst  the  priests  of  his  nation  by  his  many  noble  qualities.
Noble  qualities  evermore  give  Christians  distinction  among  their  brethren.  (2)  "  A
scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven."  The  margin,  with  justice,  makes  the  word
"  perfect"  in  the  next  member  of  this  seTitence  a  part  of  this,  so  reading  it  "  a  perfect
scribe,"  &c.  He  calls  himself  (ver.  11)  "a  scribe  of  the  words  of  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord,  and  of  his  statutes  to  Israel."  Here  is  an  obvious  reference  to
tliat  groat  work  with  which  he  is  credited  by  the  Jews,  viz.,  issuing  under  Divine
inspiration  a  corrected  edition  of  the  more  ancient  books  of  Scripture.  Ezra  rejoiced
more  in  this  title  than  in  that  of  his  governorship.  Spiritual  are  vastly  more  noble
than  earthly  distinctions.  (3)  "  Peace,  and  at  huch  a  time."  This  form  of  expres-
sion is  common  in  Persian  state  documents  (see  ch.  iv.  10).  The  import  seems  to  be
that  the  peace,  tranquillity,  or  happiness  which  the  document  is  intended  to  promote
may  continue  to  be  enjoyed  so  long  as  it  continues  to  be,  as  at  present  it  is,  merited.
No  peace  is  so  blessed  or  so  enduring  as  that  peace  of  Ood  which  passeth  under-
standing.

II.  The  favoues.  Ver.  13,  &c.  The  particulars  are — 1.  Perrrvisswn  to  go  up  to
Jerusalem.  (1)  This,  in  the  document,  is  implied  rather  than  expressed,  but  yet  so
implied  as  not  to  be  mistaken.  (2)  Ezra  was  a  captive,  and  could  not  move  without
permission.  How  can  slaves  of  sin  escape  its  wrath  without  manumission  from  God  ?
2.  Permission  to  the  Jems  to  go  up  with  him.  (1)  The  different  classes  of  them  are
specified,  viz.,  priests,  Levites,  singers,  porters,  and  Nethinims,  together  with  the
people  of  the  tribes  (vers.  13,  24).  (2)  This  permission  was  not  to  be  construed  into
an  expulsion.  They  were  free  to  go  or  stay  (ver.  13).  All  religious  service  should
be  voluntary.  8.  Authority  to  set  things  in  order  in  Judcea.  (1)  This  authority
was  not  to  be  questioned.  It  came  direct  from  the  crown,  and  with  deliberation,  for
it  is  with  the  advice  of  the  seven  counsellors.  The  names  of  seven  such  counsellors
may  be  found  in  Esther  (i.  13,  14).  (2)  It  was  authority  to  inquire,  viz.,  into  the
extent  to  which  disorganisation  and  demoralisation  may  have  been  carried.  Then  to
adjust,  viz.,  by  appointing  faithful  magistrates  and  judges  (ver.  25).  And  L£  necessary
topunisk  the  refractory  (ver.  26).  This  power  of  life  and  death  was  withdrawn  from
Jewish  magistrates  in  after  times  (see  John  xviii.  31).  The  sceptre  was  then  visibly
departing  from  Judah  because  Shiloh  had  come.  4.  Authority  over  the  Persian
deputies  heyond  the  river.  (1)  The  powers  now  described  were  not  limited  to
Judaea.  If  the  "river"  here  be  the  Euphrates  rather  than  the  Jordan,  which  is
agreeable  to  the  use  of  this  phrase  in  Scripture,  then  the  commission  of  Ezra  invested
him  with  very  extensive  powers.  But  whatever  provinces  were  comprehended  under
the  expression,  there  were  Persian  deputies  there  (ch.  iv.  20 ;  vii.  21).  This
authority  would  effectually  check  opposition  from  the  ancient  enemies  of  the  Jews.
(2)  The  treasurers  were  instructed  to  furnish  Ezra  with  whatever  he  might  require
for  the  service  of  God,  in  silver,  wheat,  wine,  oil,  and  salt  (vers.  21 — 24).  5.  Gommis-
lion  to  carry  offerings  to  God.  (1)  "  Silver  and  gold  freely  offered  by  the  king  and
his  counsellors  "  (ver.  15).  Here  was  a  mark  of  confidence  in  the  integrity  of  Ezra  I
(2)  "  All  the  silver  and  gold  "  which  the  people  "  in  the  province  of  Babylon  "  were
willing  to  confide  to  him.  There  never  was  a  time  when  Gentiles  were  necessarily
excluded  from  the  service  of  God.  Now  the  partition  is  broken  down.  (3)  "  With
the  free-will  offerings  of  the  people  and  of  the  priests,"  &c.,  viz.,  for  the  provision
of  sacrifices  and  offerings  daily  required  in  the  temple.  (4)  And  from  the  king's
treasure-house  vessels  to  be  delivered  to  the  house  of  God,  and  whatever  else  might
be  needed  for  his  service  (vers.  19,  20).  Upon  review  of  the  whole  subject  three
things  strike  us,  viz. — 1.  The  wonderful  accuracy  of  the  knowledge  of  this  heathen
king  of  the  religion  of  the  Jews.  2.  The  largeness  of  his  liberality  in  the  service  of
the  God  of  heaven.  3.  The  enlightened  judgment  which  he  formed  of  the  true
principles  of  civil  government.  In  these  things  he  is  not  an  unworthy  pattern  even
to  Christians. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  21 — U.—The  decree  of  Artaxerxes  to  the  treasurers.  Embodied  in  th*
letter  of  the  Persian  king  to  Ezra  we  have  certain  directions  addressnd  through  him


a.  vn.  11—28.]  THE  BOOK  OF  KZBA.  119

to  the  treannrers  beyond  the  river.  These  directions,  thona^h  emanating'  from  a
heathen  source,  suggest  tke  principles  which  should  guide  liberality  in  the  cautt
of  God,  as  to  its  measure,  its  spirit,  and  its  reasons.

I.  Thb  measure.  1.  This  should  be  generous.  "  Whatsoever  Ezra  the  priestj'
&c.  (1 )  Provision  for  the  immediate  wants  of  the  temple  had  already  been  made  in
the  free  gifts — viz.,  from  the  king,  from  his  counsellors,  from  his  people  in  the  pro-
vince of  Babylon,  from  the  Jews  abiding  tliere  (see  vers.  15 — 20).  (2)  This  direc-
tion was  intended  to  sustain  the  service  in  perpetuity.  Fitful  generosity  is  better
than  none ;  but  principle,  rather  than  emotion  or  passion,  should  guide.  The  cause  of
God  should  not  languish  for  support  until  men  make  their  wills  and  die.  (3)  The
ministers  of  the  sanctuary  were  to  be  exempted  from  taxation  (ver.  24).  The  reason
is  that  they  were  dependent  for  support  upon  the  gifts  of  the  people ;  and  it  is  re-
spectful to  their  sacred  office  that  they  should  be  generously  treated.  2.  It  should
not  he  recMess.  H)  Here  is  a  prescribed  limit.  "  Unto,"  &c.  (ver.  22).  A  talent  of
silver  is  estimated  as  equivalent  to  £400,  so  here  the  limit  is  £40,000.  The  measure
(cor)  is  esthnated  at  86  gallons,  so  here  the  limit  is  8600  gallons  of  wheat.  The  bath
is  seven  gallons  and  five  pints,  so  the  limit  of  wine  is  760  gallons.  (2)  Two  things
should  limit  our  liberality — ^viz.,  (a)  The  necessity  of  the  case.  (6)  Our  ability.  If
we  give  what  is  not  ours  we  act  fraudulently.  3.  It  should  be  religiou*.  "  What-
soever is  commanded  by  the  God  of  heaven,"  &c.  (ver.  23).  (1)  The  laws  of  God
are  reasonable,  merciful,  just.  (2)  Therefore  if  "  the  scribe  of  the  God  of  heaven,"
an  inspired  man,  be  he  Ezra,  Moses,  or  Paul,  in  the  sacred  writings,  make  demands,
these  should  be  respected.  (3)  But  this  does  not  say  that  uninspired  men,  because
in  clerical  orders,  have  any  right  dogmatically  to  prescribe  to  the  laity.  If
there  De  no  sphere  for  the  right  of  private  judgment,  there  is  an  end  to  individual
responsibility.

II.  The  spirit.  1.  It  should  be  diligent.  "Let  it  be  diligently  done  for  tlie
house  of  the  God  of  heaven"  (ver.  23).  (1)  Sacred  objects  are  fittingly  called
"  charities,"  or  objects  of  love.  The  cause  of  God  in  all  its  departments  should  be
dear  to  us,  and  the  claims  of  these  will  be  diligently  studied  as  a  labour  of  love.  (2)
Pains  should  be  taken  so  to  minister  liberality  that  the  maximum  of  good  may  be
attained.  Causes  should  be  "sought  out"  (Job  xxix.  16).  Promiscuous  relief  may
encourage  deception,  and  what  is  given  to  the  worthless  is  diverted  from  the
worthy.  (3)  Careless  donors  are  responsible  to  God  for  the  misery  they  might  have
alleviated  by  the  use  of  diligence.  2.  It  should  he  prompt.  "Letitbe  donespeedily"
(ver.  21).  (1)  This  note  was  rendered  necessary  by  the  tardy  manner  in  which
things  are  commonly  done  in  the  East.  Through  this  slowness  incalculable  misery
is  endured.  But  "  the  king's  business  requires  haste."  (2)  Much  more  the  work  of
God.  This  is  of  the  utmost  importance.  Eternal  issues  depend  upon  it.  Time  is
running.     Souls  are  perishing,

III.  The  reasons.  1.  It  should  be  doiie  unto  God.  (1)  Ezra  was  to  receive
from  the  treasurers  what  he  needed — viz.,  in  his  capacity  as  "the  priest"  and  the
"  scribe  of  the  law  of  the  God  of  heaven."  •  What  he  should  need  for  the  temple  and
the  altar.  What  his  learning  in  the  law  of  God  should  instruct  him  was  needful  to
the  service  of  the  God  of  heaven  (ver.  23).  (2)  No  higher  reason  than  this  can  be
eonceived.  2.  The  prosperity  of  the  realm  required  it.  "  For  why  should  wrath  be
against  the  realm?  The  history  of  nations  shows  that  as  they  became  haughty
against  God  they  sufEered  adversity.  Egypt.  Old  Canaan.  Nineveh.  Babylon.
(2)  Why  should  not  a  blessing  be  upon  the  realm  ?  Was  not  the  hand  of  God  con-
spicuous in  the  prosperity  of  Persia  (see  ch.  i.  2)?  At  this  very  time  Longimanus
began  to  be  successful  against  a  formidable  rebellion  in  Egypt.  3.  The  happiness
of  the  rayed  family  is  concerned.  (1)  "  Why  should  wrath  be  against  the  king  ?  "
The  reverses  of  a  nation  are  reverses  to  the  king.  But  the  king,  like  his  subjects,
has  his  individual  responsibilities  to  God.  His  elevation  no  more  exempts  him
than  their  obscurity  conceals  them  from  his  claims  upon  the  personal  homage  ot
intellect  and  heart.  (2)  Why  should  wrath  be  against  the  king's  "sons"''  God
has  set  mankind  in  families,  so  "  the  seed  of  the  righteous  is  blessed."  History
also  shows  how  families  are  ruined  by  irreligion.  The  antediluvians.  The  pos-
terity of  Nebuchadnezzar  (see  Dan.  v.  5).     Money  is  a  prodigious  power  for  evil


lao  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  vn.  11-28.

or  for  good.  Tbose  who  have  it  should  never  cease  to  pray  for  grace  to  use  it
wisely. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  27,  28. — Hie  extension  of  the  mercy  of  the  covenant.  After  recounting  tlie
wonderful  succesa  of  his  enterprise,  Ezra  breaks  out  into  a  rapture  of  gratitude  to
God.     "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God,"  &c.     Here—

I.  Hb  acknowledges  God  in  his  covenant  capacity.  1.  This  is  expressed  in
the  terms  "  God  of. "  (1)  This  is  shown  in  the  record  of  the  Sinai  covenant  (see
Deut.  xxix.  10 — 13).  Thenceforward  Jehovah  speaks  of  himself  as  the  "  God  of
Israel."  (2)  So  in  reference  to  the  gospel  covenant  (see  Jer.  xxxi.  31 — 34 ;  Heb.
viii.  8).  (3)  So  likewise  when  all  blessings  culminate  in  the  bliss  of  heaven,  and
the  mercy  of  the  covenant  is  fulfilled  (see  Rev.  xxi.  7).  2.  Covenant  relationship
subsists  in  Christ.  (1)  There  is  no  covenant  relationship  with  God  apart  from  him.
He  is  the  impersonation  of  promise.  He  is  the  depositary  of  the  promises  (see  Rom.
XV.  8,  9 ;  2  Cor.  i.  20).  (2)  Hence  he  is  distinguished  as  the  covenant  (see  Isa.
xlii.  6 ;  xlix.  8 ;  Zech.  ix.  1 1).  3.  The  promise  of  the  Christ  was  the  estailisliment
of  the  covenant  with  the  "fathers."  (1)  Hence  the  covenant  in  the  family  of  Noah
was  limited  to  Shera,  who  was  elected  to  be  the  progenitor  of  the  promised  seed  (see
Gen.  ix.  26).  (2)  In  the  family  of  Shem  it  was  afterwards  limited  to  Abraham  for
the  same  reason  (see  Gen.  xvii.  7,  8).  (3)  In  the  family  of  Abraham  Ishmael  was
excluded  and  Isaac  chosen  (Gen.  xxvi.  24).  (4)  In  the  family  of  Isaac  the  limitation
was  to  Jacob  (Gen.  xxx.  13—15).  (5)  In  the  family  of  Jacob  the  restriction  was  to
Judah  (Gen.  xlix.  8 — 10).  (6)  In  the  family  of  Judah  the  covenant  was  established
with  David  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  3,  4 ;  Jer.  xxxiii.  19 — 26).  (7)  In  the  line  of  David  the
promise  was  fulfilled  with  the  Virgin  Mary  (see  Luke  i.  67 — 79).

II.  He  ascribes  his  success  to  the  extension  to  him  of  thb  mercy  op  thb
COVENANT.  1.  The  covenant  was  not  established  imth  Ezra.  (1)  He  was  of  the
tribe  of  Levi  (see  ver.  1 — 5).  Levi  was  shut  out  when  Judah  was  chosen.  (2)  Why
then  does  Ezra  speak  of  the  Lord  as  his  God  ?  This  expression  may  have  reference
to  the  temporal  blessings  of  the  covenant  which  were  made  over  to  all  the  tribes,  and
embodied  in  the  Law.     Thus,  as  he  expresses  it — 2.  The  mercy  of  the  God  of  his

athers  was  extended  to  him.  (1)  Temporal  blessings  are  extended  to  all  who  have
connection  with  the  favoured  line.  Thus  Esau  was  blessed  because  he  was  the  seed
of  Isaac,  who  had  the  promise  of  the  holy  seed  (Gen.  xxvii.  39,  40).  In  like  manner
Ishmael  had  temporal  blessings  because  he  was  the  seed  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  20).

g)  But  the  farther  back  the  connection  is,  the  farther  off  is  the  person  concerned,
ence  the  IsraeliteB,  in  general,  are  spoken  of  as  "  nigh ; "  while  the  Gentiles,  some  of
whom  would  have  to  go  back  as  far  as  Noah  before  they  touched  a  patriarch  with
whom  the  covenant  was  established,  are  spoken  of  as  "  afar  off "  (Eph.  ii.  17).  3.
To  this  extension  of  the  mercy  of_  the  God  of  the  covenant  to  him  he  attributes  his
influence.  (1)  The  king  of  Persia,  the  counsellors,  and  the  mighty  princes  all  felt
the  influence  of  his  integrity  and  ingenuity.  The  people  of  Israel  also  felt  these
influences.  So  did  the  "  chief  men  "  who  gathered  around  him  and  acted  as  his  lieu-
tenants. (2)  But  all  this  influence  he  traces  to  God's  mercy  extended  to  him.
What  a  rebuke  is  here  to  those  who  plume  themselves  upon  their  influence  or
abilities  I

III.  He   BBC0GNI8B8  THB   INTERESTS  OV  THE    COVENANT  AS    THB   TBUE    REASON   FOB

the  Persian  favoub.  1.  The  covenant  God  put  it  into  the  heart  of  the  king.  (1)
God  does  put  things  into  men's  hearts.  We  should  see  his  hand  in  all  tlie  good  that
is  done  by  rulers  and  magistrates.  (2)  In  so  doing  he  serves  the  purposes  o£  his
covenant.  The  measures  to  which  Artaxerxes  was  prompted  were  important  links
in  the  chain  of  events  which  issued  in  the  advent  of  Messiah.  The  very  "  temple  "
which  the  king  "  beautified  "  was  to  become  the  scene  of  some  of  the  grandest  pre-
dicted events  (Haggai  ii.  5 — 9 ;  Mai.  iii.  1).  Consider — 2.  How  the  covenant  has
moulded  history.  (I)  Ancient  history  is  preserved  to  ub  only  in  so  far  as  it  stood
related  to  the  people  of  the  covenant.  Persian  history  is  especially  interesting  in
this  view.  (2)  Modern  history  is  no  less  intimately  connected  with  the  people  of
God.  Those  nations  who  have  the  purest  truth  of  the  gospel  are  the  most  influential
in  moulding  the  politics  of  the  world.     No  matter  how  "  far  off  "  he  may  be,  no  man


CB.  TIL  11— S8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  Ml


is  BO  remote  from_  the  covenant  as  not  to  feel  its  influence  in  temporal  blessing.
Whereas  every  limitation  of  the  covenant  down  to  tLe  advent  of  Messiah  tended  to
remove  collateral  lines  further  off,  now  since  his  coming  this  tendency  is  reversed,
and  he  is  "  lifted  up  "  that  he  may  "  draw  all  men  unto  him  "  (see  Eph.  ii.  13 — ^22).
—J.  A.  M.

Vers.  27,  28. — Aspects  of  the  Divine  and  human.  I.  Aspects  of  God.  "  Blessed
be  the  Lord  God  "  (ver.  27).  1 .  He  is  blessed  by  devout  men.  2.  He  is  the  God  of
our  fathers.    3.  He  puts  good  things  into  the  hearts  of  men.

II.  Aspects  of  MANHOOD  (ver.  28).  1.  Mercy  extended.  "And  hath  extended
mercy  unto  me.''  2.  Influence  augmented.  "  Before  the  king  and  his  counsellors."
3.  Encouragement  imparted.  "I  was  strengthened."  4.  Enterprise  undertaken.
"  And  I  gathered  together  out  of  Israel,"  &c. — E.

Vers.  27,  28 ;  viii.  1 — ^20. — Influence.  These  verses  give  us  the  idea  of  Ezra  as
a  man  of  great  influence  over  his  fellows  ;  one  of  those  men  that  lead  others,  that
inspire  them  with  confidence  and  regard  ;  one  of  those  who  can  make  their  thoughts
and  their  desires  tell  powerfully  on  the  mind  and  the  will  of  others.  We  see  his
influence —

I.  Over  thb  kinq  and  his  court  (ver.  27).  He  puts  it  modestly,  as  becomes  a
devout  man  accustomed  to  refer  everything  to  the  Divine  hand  that  governs  every-
where, and  says  that  God  "  extended  mercy  to  him  before  the  king  and  his  counsel-
lors, and  all  his  mighty  princes."  Putting  it  into  everyday  language,  we  should  say
that  he  gained  a  commanding  inflaence  over  the  minds  of  these  courtly  men,  and
over  this  great  sovereign.

II.  Over  the  chiefs  and  the  multitude  of  the  Jewish  people  (ver.  28).
In  the  same  modest  and  unassuming  strain  he  speaks  of  being  "  strengthened  as  the
hand  of  the  Lord  was  upon  him,"  and  he  "  gathered  out  of  Israel  chief  men  "  to
avail  themselves  of  the  royal  decree  and  go  up  with  him  to  their  own  land  In
other  and  more  familiar  words,  he  succeeded  in  winning  the  confidence  and  pre-
vailing on  the  minds  of  the  leading  men  of  his  own  nation  to  suOh  an  extent
that  they  were  willing  to  forsake  their  homes  and  seek  their  fortune  in  Judtea
And  not  only  the  leaders,  but  also  a  large  company  of  the  "  rank  and  file  "  among
his  compatriots  responded  to  his  call ;  there  were  "  the  people "  as  well  as  "  the
priests"  (viii.  15).

III.  OvEE  the  unresponsive  Levites  (viii.  16 — 20).  When  it  was  found  that,  for
some  reason,  no  Levites  had  joined  the  party  of  the  exodus,  Ezra  picked  out  "  men
of  understanding"  (ver.  16),  the  right  men  for  the  task,  and  told  them  what  to  say,
giving  them  the  right  message  for  the  purpose  (ver.  17),  and  he  thus  succeeded  in
attaching  to  their  company  many  who  had  meant  to  stand  aloof,  thus  completing  the
number  that  should  go  up  to  Jerusalem  (vers.  18 — 20).  Only  a  man  of  commanding
influence,  a  man  of  firm  conviction  who  knew  well  his  own  mind,  and  a  man  of
persuasive  force  who  could  impress  his  will  on  others,  could  possibly  have  accom-
plished this.  .  On  the  great  and  important  subject  of  influence  there  are  two  truths
we  shall  do  well  to  learn —

I.  That  those  who  find  themselves  possessed  of  it  bear  a  weighty  responeibility.
In  many  cases  influence  comes  to  a  man  unsought.  (1)  Wealth,  or  (2)  rank,  or  (3)
office,  or  (4)  intellectual  eminence,  or  (5)  beauty  and  grace  of  person,  or  (6)  an
exceptionally  strong  will,  or  (7)  a  fascinating  disposition,  may  confer  influence  on  a
man  or  woman,  without  any  effort  on  their  part  to  acquire  it.  It  is  a  very  great
possession.  A  grave  thing  it  is  to  be  insensibly  drawing  many  souls  either  along  the
path  of  virtue,  holiness,  and  life,  or  along  the  path  of  sin,  and  shame,  and  death.
Unconscious  influence  is  very  far  from  being  irresponsible  for  what  it  does.  We  are
most  solemnly  oound  to  see  to  it  that  such  is  the  spirit  of  our  life,  such  the  colour
and  complexion  of  our  words  and  deeds,  such  the  tendency  of  our  conduct,  that,
without  any  direct  endeavour  to  do  so,  we  shall  be  influencing  our  fellows  towards
truth,  wisdom,  God,  heaven.  Those  whom  God  has  made  markedly  influential
are  specially  bound  to  consider  what  they  are  doing.  "  They  know  not  what  they
do"  may  be  a  palliation,  but  it  is  not  a  justification,  when  they  might  know  by


122


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH.  VUL  1 — 20.


thinking.  2.  T^hat  <Ao«e  who  would  cherish  the  highest  aspiration  should  strive  to
win  it.  To  win  wealth  or  fame  or  ofSce  for  the  sake  of  these  things  themselves  is
B  comparatively  mean  thing ;  it  does  not  rise  higher  than  a  refined  gratification.
But  to  win  influence  with  the  view  of  leading  human  souls  in  the  path  of  heavenly
wisdom,  this  is  a  noble  aspiration,  worthy  of  a  child  of  God,  of  a  follower  of  Jesus
Christ.  It  may  be  acquired  as  well  as  inherited.  It  is  the  outcome  of  excellency  of
character,  of  Btrenuousnesa  of  soul,  of  kindness  of  heart,  of  likenees  to  JesuB
ChriBt-^


EXPOSITION,


The  NT7MBBB  OF  TH08B  WHO  WENT  TJP  TO
JbBITSALBM   WITH   EZRA,    AND   THE   NAMES

OF  THE  CHIEF  MEN  (oh.  viii  1—14).  This
list  is  parallel  with  that  of  ch.  ii.  3—19,  and
repeats  for  the  most  part  the  same  family
names,  though  not  quite  in  the  same  order.
The  numbers  are  in  each  case  very  much
smaller,  never  amounting  to  one-third,  and
sometimes  falling  below  one-twelfth.  At
the  utmost,  three  new  families  are  mentioned
as  furnishing  colonists — those  of  Shechaniah
(ver.  6),  Shelomith  (ver.  10),  and  Joab  (ver.
9) ;  but  in  two  of  these  cases  the  reading  is
doubtfuL  Altogether,  we  may  say  that  Ezra
was  accompanied  to  Jerusalem  by  members
of  the  same  families  as  Zerubbabel,  but  by
fewer  families,  and  by  fewer  members  of  each.
Thus  Ezra's  list  is  much  shorter  than  Zerub-
babel'a  It  contains,  however,  more  names
of  chiefs,  eighteen  such  names  being  given,
whereas  in  Zerubbabel's  list  there  are,  in-
cluding Zerubbabel  himself,  only  eleven.
The  entire  number  of  adult  male  colonists
who  accompanied  Ezra  was,  including  Levites
and  Nethinim,  1773.  Counting  five  to  a
family,  this  would  give  a  total  of  nearly
9000  souls.  Among  the  chief  men,  there  is
no  name  that  is  remarkable,  excepting  that
of  Hattush.  "  Hattush,  of  the  sons  of  She-
chaniah," is,  beyond  all  reasonable  doubt,
the  descendant  of  David  mentioned  in
1  Chron.  iii.  22,  who  was  a  sea  of  Shemaiah,
and  Zerubbabel's  great-great-grandson.

Ver.  1. — On  the  expression  chief  of  the
fathers  see  comment  on  ch.  ii.  68.

Ver.  3.— Of  the  sons  of  Shechaniah.  This
clause  should  be  attached  to  the  preceding
verse,  since  it  refers  to  Hattush,  who  was
Shechaniah's  grandson  ;  and  ver.  3  should
begin  with  the  words,  "  Of  the  sons  of
Pharosh,  Zechariah."

Ver.  6. — A  name  has  fallen  out  either
between  "Shechaniah"  and  "the  son  of
Jahoziel,"  or  between  "of  the  sons"  and
'  vi  Shechaniah."     The    Septuagint    has,


"  Of  the  sons  of  Zattn,  Shechaniah,  the  son  of
JahazieL"     Zattu  is  mentioned  in  ch.  ii.  8.

Ver.  10.— Here  again  there  is  a  similar
omission  of  a  name,  which  the  Septuagint
supplies  by  reading,  "  Of  the  sons  of  Bani,
Shelomith,  the  son  of  Josiphiah."  Bani
appears  as  the  head  of  a  family  in  ch.  ii,  10.

Ver.  13. — The  last  sons  of  Adonikam  are
probably  his  younger  sons,  .whose  descend-
ants returned  with  Ezra,  their  elder  brethren's
families  having  returned  with  Zerubbabel.

Details  of  Ezra's  journey  from  Baby-
lon TO  Jerusalem  (ch.  viii  15 — 31).  Wo
gather  &om  scattered  statements  in  this
passage — 1.  That  Ezra,  with  his  companions,
after  a  journey  of  nine  days'  duration,  reached
Ahava  from  Babylon  on  the  ninth  day  oi
the  first  month;  2.  That  he  rested  tbjee
days  at  Ahava,  and  proclaimed  a  fast;
3.  That  he  was  there  joined  by  a  small
number  of  Levites  and  a  considerable  body
of  Nethinims  from  the  immediate  neigh-
bourhood; 4.  That,  on  the  twelfth  day  of
the  first  month,  he  resumed  his  journey,
and,  though  threatened  by  some  opposition
upon  the  way,  arrived  safely  at  his  destina-
tion fourteen  weeks  after  he  quitted  Ahava,
and  exactly  four  months  after  he  had  started
from  Babylon.  The  only  other  important
fact  mentioned  is,  that  at  Ahava  twelve  of
the  principal  priests  were  selected  by  Ezra,
and  the  royal  offering  of  silver,  gold,  and
vessels  handed  over  to  them  for  safe  custody,
after  having  been  carefuUy  weighed.  The
weights  are  recorded  with  Ezra's  usual  exact-
ness in  vers.  26,  27.

Ver.  15.— I  gathered  them  together  to
the  river  that  runneth  to  Ahava.  The
"river  that  runneth  to  Ahava"  is  now
generally  identified  with  the  Is  of  Herodotus
(L  179),  a  small  stream  flowing  into  the
Euphrates  fr-m  the  east,  at  a  point  where
stood  a  city  of  the  same  name,  distant  (ac-
cording to  Herodotus)  eigM  days'  journey
from  Babylon.  The  city  appears  to  be  men-
tioned under  the  slightly  variant  forms  of


OH.  Till.  1—20.]


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA


m


A.va  (sw)  and  Ivah  (ni»)  in  the  Second  Book
of  Kings  (xvii.  24  ;  xix.  13).  It  is  called  Aia,
or  Aba,  by  the  LXX. ;  Ihi  in  the  Talmud  ;
Aei  by  Isidore  of  Charax.  The  modem
name  is  Hit.  The  town  has  always  been
one  of  some  importance  in  connection  with
the  bitumen  springs  of  the  neighbourhood.
Ezra's  reason  for  selecting  the  place  as  a
halting-point  seems  to  have  been  the  fact
that  many  Jews  were  settled  in  the  district
(see  ver.  17).  We  abode  in  tents.  A  large
caravan,  like  Ezra's,  even  when  it  reached  a
town,  would  pitch  its  tents  outside,  and
remain  in  them  rather  than  scatter  itself
imong  the  khans  and  caravanserais.  The
phrase  is  therefore  to  be  understood  literally.
I  viewed  the  people.  Rather,  "  I  looked
among  the  people  " — I  looked  to  see  whether
there  were  any  Levites  or  no.  ("  Qusesivi
in  populo  et  in  sacerdotibus  defiliis  Levi." —
Vulg.)  And  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of
Levi.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  the  fact ;
but  there  seems  certainly  to  have  been  a
special  disinclination  to  return  to  Jerusalem
on  the  part  of  the  Levites.  Only  seventy-
four  went  up  with  Zerubbabel,  when  the
priests  who  returned  were  4289  (ch.  ii  36 —
40) ;  and  now  there  was  not  a  single  one  m
the  whole  of  Ezra's  band.  Did  the  jealous
spirit  of  Eorah  (Num.  xvi  8 — 10)  still
animate  the  great  body  of  the  tribe  i

Ver.  17. — Iddo,  the  chief  at  the  place
Casiphia.  Not  "  the  Caspian "  certainly  ;
nor  even  "  Casvin,"  which  is  at  least  400
miles  from  Hit  by  the  nearest  route,  but
some  Babylonian  village  in  the  vicinity  of
Ahava,  not  otherwise  known  to  us.     Vnto


Iddo,  and  to  his  brethren  tha  NetUnimi.

The  "  and  "  here  is  rightly  supplied.  It  ha»
fallen  out  in  consequence  of  the  word  Iddo
ending  with  the  same  letter.  Iddo,  though
the  head  man  of  the  village  under  the  Per-
sians, belonged  by  descent  to  the  compara-
tively low  grade  of  the  Nethinims.

Yer.  18. — By  the  good  hand  of  onr  God
npon  us.  This  is  Ezra's  usual  mode  of  ac-
knowledging the  good  providence  and  favour
of  Almighty  God  (see  ch.  viL  6,  9,  27  ;  and
ch.  viiL  31).  Similar  expressions  occur  also
in  Nehemiah  (11  8,  18),  but  not  elsewhere  in
Scripture.  A  man  of  understanding.  In
the!  Hebrew  Ish-sekel,  which  some  take  for
a  proper  name,  but  without  any  necessity.
No  such  name  is  known  to  have  existed ;  and
the  real  name  of  "  the  man  of  undeistand-
ing"  appears  to  have  been  "Sherebiah,"
who  is  mentioned  more  than  once  in  Nehe-
miah (ch.  viii.  7  ;  ix.  4,  6)  as  a  chief  Levite.
And  Sherebiah  should  be  simply  "  Shere-
biah." The  preposition  "and"  (Heb.  1)
has  been  inserted  by  a  careless  copyist.

Yer.  20. — The  Xethinims,  whom  David
and  the  princes  had  appointed.  We  learn
this  fact  from  the  present  passage  only ;
since  neither  in  Kings  nor  Chronicles  ii
there  any  mention  made  of  David's  adding
to  ths  hieroduli,  or  temple  servants.  It  is,
however,  quite  in  accordance  with  his  other
arrangements  that  he  should  have  done  so.
The  original  Nethinims  were  the  Gibeonites
(Josh.  Lx.  23).  All .  .  .  were  expressed  by
name.  Iddo  sent  to  Ezra  a  list  of  the  Ne-
thinims, which,  however,  he  does  not  think
it  necessary  to  insert.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 20. — The  rendezvous,  or  the  second  muster.  We  have  been  told  twice
before  in  this  story  that  Ezra  wrent  up  from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  (vii.  6 — 8,  9),  and
that  he  did  not  go  by  himself.  But  we  only  now  enter  upon  the  actual  details  of  this
second  and  supplementary  expedition.  Who  were  those  that  went  up  with  him  ?
And  what  was  the  nature  of  the  first  step  which  he  and  they  took  in  common  ?  We
may  answer  these  questions  in  the  opposite  order.  The  first  step  was  to  meet  Ezra
at  the  river  or  town  of  Ahava,  situated,  it  is  supposed,  on  the  road  to  Jerusalem  vid
Carohemish,  and  far  enough  off  from  Babylon  to  ensure  comparative  quiet  and
proper  discrimination.  Those  who  came  consisted  of  two  principal  detachments,
one  of  which  came  to  the  spot  not  only  before  the  other,  but  in  a  somewhat  different
way.  We  may  describe  the  first  detachment  as  one  in  which  we  find  theftrst  last ;
the  second  as  being  one  in  which  we  find  the  last  first.

I.  The  first  last.  Who  might  be  expected  to  be  foremost  in  a  case  of  thia
kind  ?  Where  do  we  find  them  in  actual  fact  ?  Let  us  consider  this — 1.  As  to
family.  Judging  by  all  analogy,  the  family  of  David,  the  royal  family  of  Judah,
ought  to  have  been  foremost  in  such  a  matter.  Who  so  likely  to  feel  the  evils  of
captivity  as  the  heirs  to  a  throne  ?  Who  so  eager  to  return  &om  banishment  (one
■would  suppose)  as  those  who  had  been  banished  at  once  from  dignity  and  from
home  ?  The  previous  return,  also,  under  the  edict  of  Cyrus,  seems  to  bear  out  thia
idea.  Though  no  figure  there  is  so  prominent  as  that  of  Ezra  is  here,  yet  the  most
prominent  of  all  those  there  mentioned  is  that  of  Zerubb&bel,  the  lineal  desoendoni


124  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [oh.  viii.  1—20

of  David,  and  representative  of  his  house.  Under  his  Babylonian  name  ol
Sheshbazzar  he  is  the  only  person  mentioned  by  name  as  returning  in  ch.  i.,  and
he  comes  first  of  all  in  the  detailed  catalogue  of  ch.  ii.  Most  probably,  also,
judging  from  what  we  read  long  afterwards  of  the  descendants  of  David  in  Luke
ii.  4,  the  123  returning  "men  of  Bethlehem"  mentioned  in  Ezra  ii.  21  in  a  later  part
of  the  same  catalogue  were  kinsmen  of  his.  In  the  present  instance,  on  the  other
hand,  we  find  apparent  mention  in  vers.  2,  3  of  only  one  of  this  same,  royal  family
as  returning,  viz.,  Hattush,  of  the  sons  of  Shechaniah  (so,  with  many,  we  read  these
verses.  Comp.  1  Chron.  iii.  22  and  preceding  verses).  Also  we  find  even  this  solitary
specimen  of  that  royal  race  only  occupying  the  third  place  on  the  list  of  those  named.
Whatever  the  reasons,  therefore,  this  is  the  fact,  that  the  family  first  in  rank  and
genealogy  appears  anything  but  first  here  either  in  importance  or  position.  Is  it  the
beginning  of  that  descent  which  ends  long  after  with  finding  David's  greatest  de-
scendant as  a  "  carpenter's  son  "  ?  (2)  As  to  class.  Here,  also,  judging  from  analogy,
the  class  to  take  the  lead  in  a  journey  to  the  centre  and  heart  of  Jewish  worship
and  faith  would  be  that  class  to  which  belonged  exclusively,  in  its  various  ramifica-
tions, the  administration  of  worship.  Such,  we  find,  too,  in  the  previous  expedition,
was  the  case  on  the  whole.  The  Levites  then,  it  is  true,  were  not  many  either  in
number  or  in  proportion,-  when  all  told  ;  but  the  priests  then,  though  all  belonging,
apparently,  to  only  four  out  of  the  whole  twenty-four  courses,  were  very  many  in
proportion.  The  exact  numbers  of  both  (Wordsworth)  were  360  Levites  and  4200
priests,  out  of  a  total  of  42,300  Israelites,  the  priests,  therefore,  constituting  about
one-tenth  of  the  whole  (Ezra  ii.  36 — 42,  64).  A  very  large  proportion,  if  we  bear
in  mind  that  the  priests  represented  only  one  family  (that  of  Aaron)  out  of  two
families  (those  of  Aaron  and  Moses),  both  sprung  from  Amram,  one  of  the  eight
grandsons  of  Levi ;  a  state  of  things,  it  will  be  easily  seen,  which  would  probably
make  the  priests  about  one-sixteenth  of  one  tribe,  instead  of  being,  as  in  this  case,
one-tenth  of  the  whole  assemblage.  In  contrast  to  this,  in  the  present  case,  though
something  more  than  twelve  priests,  judging  from  ver.  24,  must  have  been  present,
only  two,  exclusive  of  Ezra  himself,  were  thought  worthy  of  being  named  (see  ver.
2),  those  who  accompanied  them  (if  any  really  did)  being  not  referred  to  or  even
mentioned,  as  was  the  case  before  m  ch.  ii.  36—39,  and  as  is  the  case  also  here  as  to
all  the  other  Israelitish  families  referred  to  in  vers.  3 — 14.  The  case  as  to  the
Levites  is  still  more  surprising.  Not  only  were  none  numbered  in  this  first  detach-
ment ;  none  at  all  after  three  days'  search  were  even  to  be  found  (end  ver.  15).
They  were  "conspicuous  by  their  absence."  Other  families  of  Israelites  that  had
sent  up  members  before  were  doing  the  same  now  (comp.  vers.  3 — 14  with  ch.  ii.  3
seq.)  ;  one  such  family,  apparently,  their  very  last  man  (ver.  13)  ;  but  no  Levitical
family  had  done  anything  of  the  kind.  Many  lay  Israelites,  a  few  priests,  no
Levites  at  all.  Altogether,  this  is  the  most  notable  feature  in  this  detachment  as
here  reviewed  by  Ezra  (ver.  15),  viz.,  that  those  who  should  have  been  in  the  van  of
all  are  either,  as  it  were,  in  the  rear,  or  else  not  present  at  all.

II.  The  last  fiebt.  This  will  be  seen  by  considering  the  steps  taken  by  Ezra  to
remedy  the  state  of  things  just  described.  We  find  that  he  went  (1)  to  the  right
quarter,  viz.,  to  a  place  called  Casiphia  (possibly  the  "White  House,"  from  keseph,
white),  the  geography  of  which  is  unknown,  but  which  may  have  been  (Wordsworth
and  others)  a  kind  of  college  for  Levites,  or  at  any  rate  a  place  where  many  dwelt
in  company  with  their  associates  the  Nethinims,  and  under  the  presidency  of  one
Iddo,  either  himself  perhaps  a  Levite,  or  even  a  Nethinim  (comp.  "  his  brethren,"
ver.  17),  of  high  repute.  Also  he  sent  (2)  by  the  right  sort  of  messengers,  viz.,  by
a  considerable  body  of  them,  even  eleven  well-known  men,  likely  therefore  to  be  of
weight.  Also  by  men  well  qualified,  being  men  accustomed  to  command  ("chief"),
and  yet  prepared  to  obey  ("with  commandment");  some  of  them,  further,  being
accustomed  to  teach  ("  men  of  understanding  "  =  teachers — 1  Chron.  xv.  22 ;  xxv.  8 ;
Neb.  viii.  7,  9,  &c.,  Kiel),  yet  not  unwilling  to  be  taught,  and  to  have  words  put  in
their  mouth  (ver.  17,  margin) ;  thus  showing,  as  noticed  before,  that  Ezra  understood
men  as  well  as  books.  (3)  With  the  right  kind  of  result,  (a)  As  to  number,
bringing  back  258  pilgrims  in  all ;  (6)  as  to  qualifications,  all  brought  back  being
such  "ministers"  (ver.  17)  as  were  sought;  (c)  as  to  variety, being  both  Levites  ana


CH.  VIII.  1—30.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  125

their  assistants ;  (d)'  as  to  character,  being  all  men  of  resolution  and  purpose,  whose
"names"  (end  ver.  20)  would  be  given  as  those  of  men  whose  minds  were  made  up.
Also,  among  these,  two  especially  of  much  note,  viz. ,  Sherebiah  and  Hashabiali
(comp.  ver.  24,  and  Neh.  viii.  7  ;  ix.  4 ;  x.  11,  13 ;  xii.  34),  the  first  named  especially-
being  a  man  of  such  acknowledged  judgment  and  learning  that  his  coming  was
regarded  as  a  special  mark  of  God's  providential  goodness  (so  we  understand,
with  many,  begin,  ver.  18) .  Thus  conspicuously  were  the  "  last  first ; "  thus  happily
were  the  vacant  places  in  Ezra's  company,  as  it  were,  more  than  supplied — Ezra
himself  being  judge.

In  concIjUSion,  we  may  see  here — 1.  How  important  religious  movements  often
begin,  viz. ,  witli  the  comparatively  undistinguished,  the  rank  and  file.  So  with  John
the  Baptist  (Matt.  xxi.  36),  and  our  Lord  himself  (Mark  xii.  37;  Johnvii.  48).  Both
cases  seem  referred  to  in  Matt.  xxi.  31,  33.  3.  How  they  are  often  perfected  after-
wards, viz. ,  by  the  coming  in  then  of  distinguished  persons  assuming  the  lead  of  the
whole.  So  amongst  those  baptized  by  John  came  Jesus  among  the  last  (Lukeiii.  21).
See,  also,  in  regard  to  the  burial  of  Christ,  how  the  two  "  counsellors,  "  Joseph  and
Nicodamus,  then  interfered.  And,  finally,  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  how  Paul
was  "  born  "  last  and  became  the  first  ( 1  Cor.  xv.  8 — 10 ;  3  Cor.  xi.  5,  33,  &c.  ;  Gal.  ii.
5,  8).  3.  How  all  so  assisting  have  their  peculiar  points,  both  good  and  evil.  Some
are  to  be  praised  for  forwardness  (3  Cor.  ix.  3),  some  for  steadiness  when  begun  ;
some  to  be  blamed  for  backwardness,  some  for  fickleness,  astheGalatians.  So  John
is  first  to  reach  the  sepulchre,  Peter  first  to  go  in.  4.  How  perfect  the  impartiality
of  the  Scriptural  record.  All  this,  so  little  to  the  credit  of  the  Levites,  written
by  a  Levitical  hand.  Comp.  siory  of  Gen.  xxxiv.,  also  xlix.  5 — 7,  as  recorded  by
Moses,  himself  a  Levite.  5.  How  devoutly  humble  its  spirit.  Every  advantage  is
attributed  to  the  good  hand  of  our  God  (1  Cor.  xv.  10;  Ps.  cxv.  1 ;  Phil.  ii.  13).


HOMILIES   BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 30. — The  Church  preparing  itself  for  duty.  I.  That  it  is  pkepabbd  by
COMING  OUT  FROM  A  HCMILIATIK&  CAPTIVITY.  "  This  is  the  genealogy  of  them  that
went  up  with  me  from  Babylon"  (ver.  1).  Ezra  and  his  comrades  must  quit  the
scene  of  their  captivity  before  they  can  carry  the  sacred  vessels  to  Jerusalem  ;  the
Church  must  arise  and  leave  its  moral  Babylon  before  it  can  serve  God  in  successful
enterprise.

II.  That  it  is  pbbpakbd  by  pbayerful  solitude.  "  To  the  river  that  runneth  to
Ahava"  (ver.  15).  1.  Sacred  solitude.  Not  the  solitude  of  the  misanthrope.  8.
Prayerful  solitude.  Seeking  guidance  before  setting  out  for  Jerusalem.  3.  Thoughtful
solitude.  Countingthecost  of  the  journey  to  Jerusalem.  4.  Active  solitude.  Ezra
inspected  the  people  and  the  priests,  and  finding  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  success-
fully sent  for  them.  5.  Friendly  solitude.  The  companionships  of  heaven  were
with  Ezra  and  his  company  by  the  river.  Such  solitude  cannot  fail  to  prepare  the
Church  for  duty.

III.  That  IT  IS  PRBPAKED  BY  THE  PROVIDENTIAI,  gift  OP   TALENT   (VCr.    18).       1.

Talent  required.  Ezra  inspected  his  company.  God  requires  ability  in  the  work  of
his  Church.  Ministers  should  see  that  the  Church  has  the  requisite  capability  for  the
work.  3.  Talent  varied.  "The  people,  the  priests,  the  Levites."  The  Church
needs  combined  capabilities  ;  the  lower  as  well  as  the  higher ;  the  Levites  as  well  as
the  priests.  3.  Talent  absent.  "  And  found  there  none  of  the  sons  of  Levi.  "  4.
Talent  sought.  Ministers  should  endeavour  to  bring  talent  into  the  Church.  5.
Talent  obtained  providentially.  "  And  by  the  good  hand  of  our  God  upon  us  they
brought  us  a  man  of  understanding.  "    Thus  God  prepares  the  Church  for  duty.

IV.  That  IT  IS  PREPARED  BY  THE  ENERGY  OP  ONE  DEVOUT  MAN.  "  And  I  gathered
them  together"  (ver.  15).  Who  was  this  man?  He  was  a  " ready  scribe. "  He  had
"  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  law  of  the  Lord"  (ch.  vii.  10) .  Such  men  are  com-
petent to  prepare  the  Church  for  duty  ;  they  have  first  prepared  themselves.  1.  The
power  of  sanctified  individuality  in  the  Church.  3.  The  use  God  makes  of  a  sanc-
tified individuality  in  the  Church.     3.  The  wisdom  of  a  sanctified  individuality  in


126  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ob.  vm.  1—20

the  Church.  It  discovers  the  absent  Levites.  4.  The  authority  of  a  sanctified
individuality  in  the  Church.    It  sends  for  the  Levites  and  they  come. — ^E!.

Vers.  15—20. — Ths  halt  at  the  Ahava.  The  journey  of  the  children  of  Israel
from  Babylon  to  Jerusalem  may  be  viewed,  like  that  of  their  fathers  from  Egypt  to
Canaan,  as  a  type  of  the  pilgrimage  of  Christians  from  the  abominations  and
miseries  of  the  sinful  world  to  the  purity  and  happiness  of  heaven.  In  this  view
the  halt  at  the  "  river  that  runneth  to  Ahavi"  may  suggest —

I.  That  we  should  have  seasons  fob  eeflection.  1.  The  halt  furnished  Ezra
with  such  a  season.  (1)  It  gave  him  an  opportunity  for  "viewing  the  people  and
the  priests."  His  purpose  was  to  see  how  the  company  he  conducted  would  be  useful
in  recruiting  the  colony  at  Jerusalem.  Christians  should  consider  of  what  service
may  they  be  to  the  Church  of  the  firstborn  in  heaven.  (2)  The  value  of  service  is
measured  by  sympathy  with  its  purposes.  Therefore  we  should  cultivate  fellowship
with  God  and  with  the  purest  and  noblest  of  his  people.  2.  The  review  discovered
to  Ezra  a  want  of  Levites  in  the  company.  (1)  There  were  priests  there  who  were
Levites.  But  the  priests  had  functions  of  their  own  distinct  from  those  of  the
Levites  who  were  not  of  the  family  of  Aaron.  (2)  There  were  no  Levites  who
were  not  priests.  These  too  had  their  own  proper  functions.  (3)  As  in  Jerusalem
there  was  work  for  every  order  of  sacred  person,  so  should  there  be  in  the  Church.
So  will  there  be  in  Jerusalem  above.  Query — Do  we,  as  Ezra  did,  reflect  upon  the
needs  of  God's  Church  ?     Is  God's  cause  ours,  as  it  was  his  ?

II.  That  beflection  should  lead  to  action.     1.  Ezra  resolved  upon  a  mistion.

(1)  There  were  Levites  still  in  Babylon.  So  are  there  Christians  mingled  with  the
communities  of  Antichrist.  (2)  The  Levites  were  congregated  at  Casiphia.  This
word  comes  from  a  root  which  denotes  silver.  Some  think  Casiphia  meant  the
Caspian  Mountains,  in  the  silver  mines  of  which  these  Levites  were  working.  Others
construe  it  to  mean  Silver  Street,  possibly  some  bazaar  in  Babylon  in  which  silver-
smiths conducted  trade.  How  characteristic  of  the  sons  of  Levi  to  be  where  precious
metals  are  exchanged  t  2.  The  mission  he  resolved  upon  Ae  orgrawiged.  (1)  He  chose
"  chief  men "  for  his  missionaries.  If  Providence  has  given  men  high  social
position,  its  influence  should  be  devoted  to  the  ministry  of  his  message.  (2)  He  also
summoned  "men  of  understanding."  The  world  should  not  so  monopolise  the  talent
of  our  sons  that  only  the  refuse,  the  imbeciles,  are  given  to  the  Church.  There  is
scope  in  the  message  of  God  for  the  greatest  ability.  (3)  "  Men  of  understanding"
here  are  not  only  those  of  good  natural  parts,  but  those  who  are  skilled  in  the
teaching  of  God's  law  (Neh.  x.  28,  29).  3.  He  then  instructed  his  missioners.  (1)
He  sent  them  "  with  commandment  unto  Iddo,  the  chief  at  the  place  of  Casiphia."
Calls  to  the  service  of  God  come  with  authority.  Ministers  of  the  gospel  are
ambassadors  for  Christ  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  (2)  He  sent  them  with  arguments.  He  "put
words  into  their  mouths."  The  import  of  the  words  is  suggested  in  the  end  to  be
accomplished,  viz.,  "that  they  should  bring  unto  us  ministers  for  the  house  of  God."
Surely  the  service  of  God  in  his  house  is  far  more  important  than  the  trade  in  Silver
Street.

III.  That  well  -  dibectbd  effobt  will  insuke  success.  1.  The  missioners
returned,  having  gained  over  "o  man  of  understanding."  (1)  This  achievement  is
put  in  the  forefront.     This  son  of  Mahli  was  evidently  a  great  acquisition  to  Ezra.

(2)  A  man  of  understanding  is  an  acquisition  to  any  cause.  How  valuable  to  the
cause  of  order  is  the  influence  of  such  an  one  I  2.  Thirty-eight  Levites  are  next
mentioned.  (1)  The  "man  of  understanding"  is  mentioned  before  Sherebiah,
Hashabiah,  and  Jeshaiah,  with  their  sons  and  brethren,  perhaps  because  of  the
influence  he  may  have  exerted  in  bringing  them  over.  A  man  is  not  only  valuable
for  what  he  is,  but  for  what  he  does.  (2)  We  have  Sherebiah  the  Levite  again  men-
tioned amongst  them  that  made  religious  confession  of  God's  goodness  and  theit
own  wickedness  (see  Neh.  ix.  5).  3.  Then  follow  220  Nethinim*.  (1)  Here  is  an
acquisition  for  which  Ezra  had  not  asked.  God  does  for  us  more  than  we  ask  (1  Cor.
iL  9 ;  Eph.  iii.  20).  (2)  All  success  is  from  God.  Ezra  recognised  this  (ver.  18),
Let  OS  follow  his  good  example. — J.  A.  M.


OH.  Via  21— 3<.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


127


EXPOSITION.


Ver.  21, — ^Then  I  proelaimed  a  feat  there.
The  right  of  the  civil  ruler  to  "proclaim  a
fost "  was  unquestioned  among  the  Jews  and
Israelites.  Jezebel  proclaimed  one  in  Ahab's
name  when  she  wished  to  impress  the
Jezreelites  with  the  notion  that  a  great
crime  had  been  committed.  Jehoshaphat
did  the  same  when  he  was  invaded  by  the
Ammonites,  Moabites,  and  Mchnnim  (2
Chron.  xx.  1 — 8).  A  fast  was  proclaimed
in  the  fifth  year  of  Jehoiakim  when  the
kingdom  of  Judah  was  menaced  by  Nebu-
chadnezzar (Jer.  xxxvi.  9).  Ezra  therefore
assumes  that  he  may  command  one  now,  in
connection  with  the  perils  of  the  coming
journey.  That  we  might  afflict  ourselves.
The  Jews  were  commanded  to  "  afflict  them-
selves "  on  the  great  day  of  atonement  (Lev.
xvi  29),  and  understood  that  the  affliction
was  to  he  mainly  by  fasting  and  abstaining
from  the  hath.  To  ask  of  him  a  right  way.
Or  "a  direct  road,"  i.  e.  a,  prosperous  and
unimpeded  journey  to  Jerusalem.  For  us
and  our  little  ones.  The  colonists  went  up
attended  by  their  families.

Yer.  22. — I  was  ashamed  to  require  of
the  king  a  band  of  soldiers.  Before  he
apprehended  danger  Ezra  had  boasted  to
Artaxerxes  of  the  power  and  goodness  of
God,  and  had  spoken  of  himself  and  his
brethren  as  assured  of  the  Divine  protection.
Now  that  peril  threatened  he  found  himself
afraid,  and  would  l»ave  been  glad  of  such  an
escort  as  Nehemiah  obtained  at  a  later  date
(Neh.  iL  9).  But  after  his  boasts  he  was
ashamed  to  confess  his  fear.  Who  the
enemy  in  the  way  was  it  is  impossible  to
decide ;  but  we  may  gather  from  ver.  31
that  it  was  no  imaginary  foe.  Probably
some  of  the  Arab  tribes,  who  owed  no  alle-
giance to  Persia,  had  formed  a  design  to
intercept  the  caravan  and  plunder  it.

Ver.  24. — Then  I  separated  twelve  of
the  chief  of  the  priests,  Sherebiah,  Hasha-
biah,  &c.  Our  translators,  following  the
Vulgate,  have  omitted  to  render  the  pre-
position ^,  which  occurs  in  the  Hebrew  text
before  the  name  of  Sherebiah,  and  have
thus  represented  Sherebiah  and  Hashabiah
as  priests,  whereas  they  were  not  priests,  but
Levites,  as  appears  from  vers.  18,  19.  The
true  sense  is  given  by  the  LXX. — "  Then  I
assigned  twelve  of  the  chief  priests  to  Shere-
biah, Hashabiah,  and  ten  of  their  brethren  ; "
i  A  "  then  I  appointed  twelve  chief  priests
to  act  with  twelve  chief  Levites,  of  whom
Shsrebiah  and  Hashabiah  were  two,  in  the
matter  of  the  royal  offering."  Ezra  seems
to  have  considered,  that  as  the  gift  of
Artaxerxei  was  an  offering  to  the  house  of


God,  It  ought  to  be  handed  over  at  once  to
the  custody  of  the  ministers  of  religion,  and
not  remain  in  secular  hands  (compare  ver.
28).

Yer.  25. — Aai  weighed  unto  them  the
silver,  Ik;  We  may  gather  from  this  tha^
the  silver  and  gold  were  in  bars  or  ingots,
and  not  in  coined  money.  The  Persians  had
coined  money  at  this  time,  but  the  Treasury
kept  the  bulk  of  its  stores  in  bars  (Herod. ,
iii  96).

Yer.  26. — Six  hundred  and  fifty  talents  of
silver,  according  to  Mr.  Poole's  estimate  of
the  talent,  would  be  nearly  a  quarter  of  a
million  of  our  money.  The  annual  revenue
of  Persia  was  about  three  and  a  half  millions
(Herod.,  ilL  96).  Of  gold  an  hundred
talents.  Bather  more  than  a  million  of  our
money.

Yer.  27. — Twenty  basons  of  gold,  of  a
thousand  drams  (see  comment  on  ch.  ii.  69).
The  "basons"  would  be  worth  about  £55
each.  Fine  copper,  precious  as  gold.  The
metal  intended  is  probably  that  known  to
the  Romans  as  oricnalchum,  which  is  gener-
ally believed  to  have  been  brass,  but  which
may  have  been  a  more  complicated  amalgam.
Being  rarely,  and  perhaps  only  accidentally,
produced,  this  metal  was  highly  valued.

Yer.  28. — ^Ye  are  holy.  Consecrated  to
God  by  their  office,  the  priests  and  Levites
were  the  fitting  custodians  of  consecrated
things.

Yer.  29.— The  ehambers  of  the  honse^  of
the  Lord  are  the  rooms  placed  on  either  side
of  the  main  building  (see  1  Kings  vi  6),
partly  as  chambers  for  the  priests,  partly  as
store-rooms  (see  Neh.  xiii  6).

Yer.  31.— The  river  of  Ahava.  Bather,
"  the  river  Ahava,"  as  in  the  Yulgate  ("a
flumiue  Ahava  ").  The  place  had  probably
taken  its  name  from  the  stream.  The
twelfth  day  of  the  first  month.  Compare
ch.  viL  9,  and  viii  15,  from  which  it  appears
that  Ahava  was  reached  by  Ezra  and  his
company  on  the  ninth  day  after  they  left
Babylon,  which  helps  to  identify  Ahava  with
Is,  since  Is  (according  to  Herodotus)  was
eight  days'  journey  from  Babylon  (see  com-
ment on  ver.  16).  God  delivered  us  from
....  such  as  lay  in  wait.  The  boast  of
Ezra  (ver.  22)  was  justified  by  the  event
He  "  trusted  in  God,"  and  was  "  delivered  "
— ^how  delivered  we  are  not  told,  but
evidently  through  no  "arm  of  flesh."  The
hand  of  God  led  him  safely  through  all  the
perils  of  the  way,  and  brought  him  and  his
companions  withoat  lofls  or  damage  to  the
"  cify  of  their  reat"

Ezra's  thbib  bats'  im  at  Jkbvsauii,


128


THE  BOOK  OF  EZkA.


[oh.  vin.  21— M.


AND  SUBSEQUENT  EXECUTION  OP  THE  MORE
PRESSING    OF  THE  COMMISSIONS   INTRUSTED

ro  HIM  (ch.  viiL  32 — 36).  After  the  fatigues
of  a  four  months'  journey,  a  brief  period  of
complete  rest  was  well-nigh  necessary.  Like
Nehemiah  (Neh.  ii  11),  Ezra  was  content
with  a  rest  of  three  days.  On  the  fourth
he  discharged  himself  of  his  commission  to
present  to  the  temple  treasury  the  offerings
of  the  Persian  king,  his  counsellora  and
lords  (ver.  25),  together  with  that  spon-
taneously contributed  by  the  Israelites  who
had  accompanied  him  (ch.  vii  16).  This  he
did  by  appearing  in  person  before  the  priests
and  Levites  who  ^ere  in  charge  of  the  temple,
and  making  over  to  them  the  entire  offering
of  gold,  silver,  and  vessels  which  had  been
brought  to  Jerusalem  from  Babylon.  At
the  same  time  the  exiles  whom  ho  had
induced  to  return,  and  whom  he  had  con-
ducted in  safety  through  so  long  a  journey,
sacrificed  on  the  altar  of  burnt  offerings  a
number  of  bullocks,  rams,  lambs,  and  he-
goats,  as  a  token  of  their  thankfulness  to
God  for  delivering  them,  from  the  perils  of
the  way.  After  this  Ezra  proceeded  to
make  known  to  the  satraps  and  other
governors  of  the  provinces  lying  west  of  the
Euphrates  the  terms  of  the  permanent  com-
mission which  he  had  received  from  the
king.  The  result  was  that  these  officials
thenceforth  helped  the  Jews  instead  of
hindering  them,  and  furnished  the  necessary
supplies  for  the  temple  service.

Ver.  33. — Meremoth  the  son  of  Uriah,  or
Urijah,  was  one  of  the  heads  of  the  priestly
order,  both  under  Ezra  and  under  Nehemiah.
He  is  mentioned  as  repairing  two  pieces  of
the  wall  of  Jerusalem  when  Nehemiah  was
governor  (Neh.  iii.  4,  21),  and  also  as  one  of
those  who  set  tlieir  seal  to  the  covenant  with
God  which  the  whole  people  entered  into,
under  Ezra's  and  Nehemiah's  guidance,
shortly  after  the  completion  of  the  wall,  in
B.C.  444.  Eleazar  the  son  of  Fhinehas  is
perhaps  the  Eleazar  mentioned  as  taking
part  m  the  dedication  of  the  wall  (Neh.
xii.  42).  Like  Meremoth,  he  was  a  priest.
Jozabad  and  Noadiah,  chief  Levites,  occur


^ain  in  ch.  z.  23,  and  Keh.  viil  7 ;  z.  9 ;
and  xii.  3.

Ver.  i'i. — By  number  and  by  weiglit
The  gold  .tnd  the  silver  were  weighed ;  the
vessels  were  both  counted  and  weighed  ;  the
object  being  to  see  that  what  was  del'verej
to  Meremoth  coiTesponded  exactly  with  what
Ezra  had  given  in  charge  to  Sherebiah,
Hashabiah,  and  others  at  Ahava  (see  above,
vers.  24—27).  All  the  weight  was  written
at  that  time.  Not  only  jvere  the  vessels
counted  and  weighed,  but  an  inventory  of
them  was  made  by  the  priests  in  charge  of
the  temple,  and  the  weight  of  every  vessel
noted.  Such  was  the  care  taken  to  prevent
any  embezzlement  of  the  temple  property
by  its  custodians.

Ver.  35. — Also  the  children  of  those  who
had  been  carried  away.  /.  e.  the  newly-
returned  exiles.  Like  their  predecessors
under  Zerubbabel,  who  had  made  an  offering
for  all  Israel  (ch.  vi  17),  so  the  present
colonists  under  Ezra,  assuming  that  thOT-
represented  all  Israel,  offered  for  the  whole
nation.  The  classes  of  animals  offered  are
the  same  on  the  two  occasions,  and  the
number  of  the  he-goats  is  identical ;  but  in
every  other  case  the  victims  are  fer  less
numerous  now  than  on  the  former  occasion.
This  is  fhlly  accounted  for  by  the  compara-
tively small  number  of  those  who  returned
under  Ezra.

Ver.  36.  —And  they  delivered  the  king's
commissions.  Parts  of  Ezra's  Jirman  con-
cerned vitally  the  other  provincial  governors,
and  had  of  necessity  to  be  communicated  to
them.  Such  were  the  provisoes  concerning
Ezra's  power  of  drawing  upon  the  provinciid
treasuries  for  com,  wine,  oU,  salt,  and  money
( jh.  vii  22, 23),  and  concerning  the  exemption
of  all  ranks  of  the  Jewish  sacred  order  &om
taxation  of  any  kind  whatsoever  {ibid.  ver.
24).  Unto  the  king's  lieutenants,  and  to
the  governors.  The  word  translated  "  lieu-
tenants" is  that  which  corresponds  to  the
Persian  term  "  satrap,"  and  designates  the
highest  <;lass  of  the  Persian  provincial
governors.  That  translated  "governor"  is
the  term  which  has  been  already  applied  by
Ezra  to  Tatnai  (ch.  v.  3,  4)  and  Zerubbabel
(ch.  vL  7).  It  denotes  a  lower  grade  of
official.  They  furthered  the  people.  The
satraps  and  lower  officials,  on  being  made
acquainted  with  the  king's  wishes,  readily
complied  with  them,  and  became  suppoitent
and  favourers  of  the  Jewish  Deoda.


HOMILETICa


Vers.  21 — 30. — •Be/ore  ttartirig.  Ezra's  body  of  travellers  now  duly  asiembled  and
organised,  what  else  was  required  ?  On  the  one  hand,  they  were  in  a  condition  of
much  danger.     Without  being  very  numerous,  they  were  numerous  enough  to  b*


OH.  VIII.  21—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  139

worth  attacking  while  prosecuting  their  journey.  On  the  other  hand,  they  were  in  a
position  of  much  responsibility,  being  intrusted  with  the  care  of  many  treasures  for
God's  house.  These  were  the  two  things  Ezra  had  to  see  to  before  they  actually
moved.  The  pJans  he  adopted  in  doing  so  are  very  characteristic  and  instructive,
and  may  be  employed  to  exhibit  to  us,  in  the  first  place,  an  example  of  courage,
and  in  the  second  a  model  of  caution.

I.  Ezra's  Coubagb.  As  we  have  partially  noted  already,  the  danger  was  great.
The  travellers  were  possessed  of  some  "substance"  (ver.  21).  They  were  carrying
trust- treasures  as  well.  They  were  also  bound  on  a  route  where  persons  so  circum-
stanced were  exceedingly  likely  to  be  attacked.  At  the  same  time,  as  a  company,
they  were  by  no  means  organised  for  defence,  being  little  more,  in  fact,  than  a.  large
family  party,  with  many  women  and  "little  ones"  (ver.  21)  among  them.  Almost
like  Luke  x.  3.  How  natural,  in  such  circumstances,  to  think  of  military  protection  1
How  readily  obtainable,  also,  such  protection  in  this  easel  Ezra  seems  to  feel
(naturally  enough  under  the  terms  of  his  commission,  ch.  vii.  12 — 26)  that  he  had
only  to  ask  for  this  to  obtain  it.  Instead,  however,  of  going  out  of  his  way  at  all  to
obtain  it,  he  rather  goes  out  of  his  way  to  avoid  it.  He  turns  from  the  king  to
Jehovah.  Refusing  to  ask  at  all  in  the  one  case,  he  asks  with  all  his  heart  in  the
other,  and  prepares  to  go  forward  armed  with  nothing  whatever  but  promise  and
prayer.  How  conspicuously  great,  therefore,  his  courage ;  more  so  even  than  that  of
David  in  1  Sam.  xvii.  39,  40,  45 ;  still  more  so  than  that  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxii.),  and
almost  a  contrast  to  Nehemiah  (ch,  ii.  9).  The  secret  of  this  was  to  be  found  (1)  in
his  confidence  in  God's  power.     Whatever  the  king  could  do  for  him  in  the  way  of

Protection,  God  could  do  more  (comp.  Kom.  viii.  31 5  Ps.  xx.  7 ;  Ps.  xlvi.  1 — 3,
,  11).  (2)  In  his  confidence  in  God's  faithfulness.  Here  was  just  one  of  those
cases  in  which  God  might  be  expected  to  exert  his  great  power.  His  well-known
promise  (see  2  Chron.  xvi.  9)  to  defend  all  those  who  sought  him  in  truth  had  been
openly  referred  to  before  the  king  (see  end  of  vnr.  22).  If  Ezra,  in  such  circum-
stances, had  now  asked  for  an  escort,  he  would  have  unsaid  what  he  had  said  already,
and  put  an  open  reproach  on  God's  truth.  On  the  other  hand,  if  God,  when
thus  appealed  to,  had  not  granted  his  protection,  may  we  not  almost  say  that  he
would  have  brought  a  reproach  on  himself?  It  was  Ezra's  conviction  of  this  being
an  impossibility  which  gave  him  his  great  courage  at  this  time.  But  chiefly,
perhaps,  that  courage  was  due  (3)  to  his  confidence  in  God's  mercy.  God's  protec-
tion was  ready  for  those  who  sought  it.  Sought  it  on  what  terms  ?  Sought  it  (a)
with  becoming  earnestness,  as  shown  by  their  "fasting"  or  turning  aside  from
ordinary  pleasures  and  occupations  in  order  to  be  wholly  occupied  in  this  seeking
(comp.  Isa.  Iviii.  end  ver.  3 ;  Acts  xiii.  2).  Sought  it  (6)  with  proper  humility,  as
shown  by  their  "  afflicting  "  themselves  on  account  of  their  sins,  and  not  asking  this
great  favour  as  though  they  in  any  way  deserved  it.  Sought  it  (c)  with  a  profound
sense  of  his  goodness,  as  being  One  concerned  much  for  the  "  little  ones  "  (ver.  21 ;  comp.
Gen.  xxxii.  11 ;  Jonah  iv.  11)  of  his  people,  and  far  from  unconcerned  also  even  as
to  their  "  substance  "  or  temporal  welfare  at  large  (comp.  Ps.  xxxv.  27 ;  Matt.  vi.
25,  26,  end  32  ;  Luke  xii.  7).  These  were  the  kind  of  thoughts  which-  made  these
companions  of  Ezra  as  we  find  them  pictured  to  us  here  in  ver.  23,  viz.,  with
Babylon  left  behind  them,  a  perilous  journey  before  them,  yet  all  the  defence  they
sought  for  found  in  fasting  and  prayer  (see  Ps.  xxxvi.  7).

II.  Ezra's  caution.  As  we  have  already  intimated,  he  was  in  a  position  now  of
great  trust.  The  mere  money  value  of  the  trust  was  exceedingly  large,  amounting
in  silver  alone,  if  we  take  the  talents  as  Hebrew  talents,  worth  £375  each,  to
£650  X  375  -\-  £100  X  375.  It  was  also  valuable  as  being  contributed  by  many  of
the  chief  personages  of  Persia  (the  "king,"  &g.,  &c.),  and  by  all  the  Uite  of  Israel  in
those  parts  ("  all  Israel  there  present ").  And  it  was  especially  precious  as  being  in-
tended for  the  most  aacred,  as  then  known,  of  all  purposes,  "  the  house  of  the  Lord."
It  was  truly  requisite,  therefore,  for  such  a  steward  not  only  to  be  "  faithful,"  but  to
be  "  found  "  so  (1  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  20, 21).  Accordingly,  Ezra  took  care,  first,  to
transfer  the  safe-keeping  of  this  precious  trust  to  ether  hands  than  his  own,  thus
avoiding  all  ground  for  mistrust  or  possibility  of  scandal  in  one  important  direction.
Next,  he  selected  for  this  purpose,  out  of  the  two  classes  most  suitable  by  office  for

EZRA.  K


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [ch.  viii.  21—36

such  a  trust,  a  company  of  no  fewer  (apparently)  than  twenty-four  men  (ver  24),
taking  especial  care  to  have  among  them  two  of  those  last-comers  whose  coming  had
been  looked  upon  as  so  great  a  gain  to  them  all.  Fuither,  all  that  was  intrusted  to
them  he  duly  and  carefully  weighed  (we  are  told  of  this  twice)  in  their  presence,
and  then  placed  in  their'hands,  evidently  accompanied  by  a  correct  catalogue  of  the
whole.  And,  finally,  in  handing  it  over,  he  sought  to  impress  upon  them  a  similar
feeling  of  responsibility  to  that  entertained  by  himself.  "  Watch  ye  and  keep "
(ver.  29)  these  treasures.  Do  so  (1)  as  a  matter  of.  principle.  Ye  yourselves  are
"holy,"  persons  separated  by  your  own  ofSce  and  by  my  choice  for  this  work.  The
treasures,  also,  are  "holy;"  the  vessels  made  for  God's  house,  the  money  a  "free-
will offering,"  i.  e.  something  deliberately  separated  for  his  service  whom  we  have
worshipped  so  long.  Nothing,  therefore,  can  be  plainer,  nothing  more  solemn,  than
this  trust.  Do  so  (2)  as  a  matter  of  prudence.  You  will  be  asked  for  an  account  of
this  stewardship ;  a  very  exact  account  ("  by  weight  '),  »  very  public  account
("before  the  chief  of  the  priests,"  &c.,  &o.),  a  very  solemn  account,  viz.,  in  God's
own  city,  in  God's  own  house.  Thus  anxiously  and  scrupulously  do  we  see  him
seeking  to  avoid  any  injury,  or  any  occasion  of  blame,  either  to  others  or  to  himself,
in  connection  with  this  trust.

From  the  whole  vre  learn — 1.  To  avoid  some  common  mistakes.  Courage  is  not
imprudence.  Caution  is  not  cowardice.  It  was  brave  conduct  on  Ezra's  part  to  be
afraid  of  the  reproach  of  unfaithfulness  or  of  bringing  shame  on  God's  cause.  It
was  prudent  conduct  on  Ezra's  part  to  neglect  human  defence  for  Divine.  2.  To
make  an  important  distinction.  Precaution,  in  trusting  God,  is  always  weakness,
generally  folly,  and  sometimes  sin.  Precaution,  in  trusting  men,  even  men  of  God,
is  none  of  the  three.  In  such  a  case  it  is  not  unadvisable  to  associate  men  in  com-
panies so  as  to  be  checks  and  supports  to  one  another  (Luke  x.  1)  ;  and  to  appeal  to
comparatively  low  motives,  such  as  prudence  and  the  fear  of  detection,  and  not  only
to  high  ones  (Luke  xii.  1,2).  3.  To  recognise  the  spiritual  unity  of  the  Bible.  In
Ezra  we  find  a  man  so  identified  with  the  "  Law  "  that  he  has  been  caUed  a  second
Moses.  Yet  the  gospel  itself  could  not  teach  us  more  than  we  have  learnt  here  of
the  freeness  of  God's  mercy.  (So  comp.  Exod.  xx.  6,  in  the  very  heart  of  the  Deca-
logue, with  the  Master's  own  words  in  John  xiv.  15.)

Vers.  SI— Se.— After  arriving.  "  We  departed."  "  We  came."  Thus  it  is  that
Ezra  here  relates  the  rest  of  his  journey,  the  only  thing  worthy  of  note  between
Ahava  and  Jerusalem  being  this,  that,  through  "  the  good  hand  of  God  "  upon  the
travellers,  they  were  kept  in  safety  the  whole  way.  This  being  acknowledged  with
a  suitable  note  of  thanksgiving,  as  something  remarkable  in  such  a  journey  (see  end
of  ver.  31),  the  story  goes  on  to  tell  us  of  the  first  doings  of  the  pilgrims  after
reaching  the  place  which  they  had  sought  and  thought  of  so  long.  Some  of  these
doings,  we  shall  find,  affect  their  position  principally  as  travellers  just  arrived ;  and
some  have  to  do  with  them,  on  the  other  hand,  rather  as  residents  just  admitted.

I.  Travellers  just  arrived.  Under  this  aspect  we  see  them,  very  naturally,
(1)  enjoying  their  rest.  For  the  first  three  days  this  is  all  that  we  are  told  of  them,
that  they  abode  or  "sat"  in  Jerusalem  for  that  time  (comp.  Neh.  ii.  11).  We  can
imagine  easily  whp.t  took  place :  the  stir  occasioned  by  their  arrival  (Ruth  i.  19 ;
Matt.  xxi.  10) ;  the  family  inquiries  and  recognitions  ;  the  consequent  dispersions  and
hospitalities ;  and  the  final  absorption  and  disappearance  of  all  the  newly-arrived
within  walls.  There  they  would  gradually  recover  from  the  effects  of  their  long
journey,  and  realise  the  grateful  fact  that  they  were  no  longer  on  the  march.  Those
who  have  been  long  travelling,  or  otherwise  labouring,  in  connection  with  God's
•ervice  have  a  kind  of  right  at  times  to  such  rest  (Mark  vi.  30,  31  ;  Acts  xxviii.
17),  if  only  with  the  object  of  enabling  them  thereby  to  do  better  service  in  time
to  come.  In  the  present  instance  we  may  well  believe  that  some  part  of  these  days
of  quiet  was  employed  in  this  way,  the  result  being  that  "  on  the  fourth  day  "we  see
these  just-arrived  travellers  (2)  discharging  their  trust.  On  that  day  there  appears
to  have  been  a  solemn  gathering  for  this  special  purpose  vrithin  the  precincts  of  the
temple.  Ezra  and  his  twenty-four  trustees  (ver.  24)  would  doubtless  be  on  the  one
■ide  to  hand  over  the  treasures ;  and  four  representatives  of  the  Jerusalem  hierarchy,


m  viu.  21—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  1»1

two  priests  and  two  Levites,  are  described  ss  being  present  on  the  other  side  to
receive  them.  Very  carefully,  also,  as  became  the  place  and  the  trust,  was  every-
thing done.  All  the  gifts  of  every  description — "  the  silver  and  the  gold  and  the
vessels" — ^were  "weighed;"  they  were  weighed  by  "the  hand"  of  the  chief  man
who  had  to  receive  them ;  they  were  weighed  in  the  presence  of  the  three  others
associated  with  him,  and  probably  also  in  that  of  all  the  chief  personages  both  in
Church  and  state  (see  ver.  29)  at  Jerusalem  ;  they  were  not  only  weighed  in  their  pre-
sence, but  also  "  numbered  " — numbered  "  every  one  " — as  a  still  further  precaution
against  any  error  in  the  past ;  and  then,  finally,  with  a  view  to  their  safety  for  the
future,  they  were  "  written  down,"  or  added  formally  to  the  existing  catalogue  of
temple  treasures  and  gifts.  So  honourably  and  so  completely  were  these  travelling
treasurers  relieved  of  their  trust.  And  so  happily,  therefore,  was  their  journey  now
terminated,  both  as  to  its  labours  and  as  to  its  special  cares.  Now  they  were  able
to  rest  indeed,  both  in  body  and  mind.

II.  As  RESIDENTS  JUST  ADMITTED.  Their  next  cares,  therefore,  were  in  connection
not  with  their  jouiney,  but  their  arrival.  What  were  the  duties  devolving  on  them
in  connection  with  the  place  they  had  come  to?  They  had  some  such  duties,  it  is
clear,  (1)  in  regard  to  God  and  their  brethren.  For  example,  having  been  conducted
safely,  by  God's  providence,  to  take  up  their  abode  in  that  place  which  he  hail
chosen  to  put  his  name  there,  it  was  very  fitting  that  they  should  openly  declare
their  consecration  to  that  name.  This  was  rep^e^ol■t^d  by  those  "  burnt  offerings  "
of  which  we  are  twice  informed  in  this  place  (ver.  35.  See  also  Lev.  i.;  2  Chioii.
xxix.  end  31,  and  Ps.  Ixvi.  13 — 15,  for  the  connection  of  devotion  or  "  vows  "  with
burnt  offerings,  and  the  various  kinds  of  animals  so  offered,  almost  the  same  as
here).  In  so  consecrating  themselves,  however,  they  only  acted  as  a  portion  of  th.at
whole  consecrated  Israel  of  God  to  which  they  belonged.  This  identification  of
tliemselves  with  the  covenant  people  they  appear  to  have  represented  by  their
evidently  studied  reference  in  the  number  of  animals  offered  to  the  appointed  num-
ber of  the  covenant  tribes,  viz.,  by  offering  twelve  bullocks,  twelve  he-goats,
II  nd  8  X  12,  or  ninety-six  rams.  Note,  also,  how  it  is  expressly  said  of  the  twelve
liiillocks  that  they  were  offered  "for  all  Israel,"  and  comp.  vi.  17,  and  Numb,  vii
2,  &o.  For  the  peculiar  number  of  Iambs  (seventy-seven)  it  seems  difficult  to
account,  but  the  mention  of  the  twelve  he-goats  as  being  for  a  "sin  offering"
was  a  silent  confession  on  their  part  of  their  own  need,  and  of  all  Israel's  need,  of
propitiation  and  atonement.  In  the  next  place,  these  three  religious  duties  of
consecration,  communion,  and  confession  being  thus  duly  attended  to,  we  find  them
turning  to  those  civil  duties  which  were  required  by  their  position ;  i.  e.  to  their
duties  (2)  in  regard  to  their  earthly  ruler  and  king.  In  the  discharge  of  these  they
handed  to  the  governors  and  deputjf  governors  (ver.  36)  of  that  part  of  the  PersiaiL
empire  the  orders  of  Artaxerxes  (vii.  21 — 24).  This  was  done  in  the  proper  order.
It  was  certainly  true,  in  their  case,  that  they  were  Israelites  first,  and  Persian  sub-
jects afterwards  (see  also  Matt.  xxii.  21).  It  was  also  done  with  proper  com-
pleteicss.  To  hand  these  orders  of  Arlaxerxes  to  his  deputies  for  the  purpose
of  securing  the  advantages  therein  specilied  was  to  acknowledge,  in  the  fullest
manner,  both  his  aufhority  and  theirs.  It  was  to  confess  clearly  that  the  Persian
power  extended  so  far.  It  was  to  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  Persian  laws
and  officials  over  all  souls  in  that  land  ;  and,  therefore,  to  prove  themselves  not  only
true  Israelites,  but  loyal  subjects  too.

Conclusion.     Let  all  those  who  name  the  n.iine  of  Christ  see  from  all  this 1.  The

importance  of  shovnng  "  all  good  fidelity "  (Titus  ii.  10).  Before  these  returned
children  of  the  captivity  allowed  themselves  to  present  their  offerings  in  that  house
of  God  which  they  had  travelled  so  far  to  visit  and  to  benefit,  they  made  all  clear
on  this  other  point.  We  find  a  somewhat  similar  spirit  in  1  Sam.  xii.  3 — 5;  2  Cor.
viii.  20,  21  i  and  may  be  reminded  in  two  different  yet  equally  instructive  ways  of
Numb.  xvi.  15,  and  Matt.  v.  23,  24.  2.  The  importance  of  believing  in  the  necessity
of  atoneTnent.  Even  the  burnt  offerings  of  God's  own  Israel,  without  the  sin  offering,
would  not  be  acceptable.  That  which  we  desire  to  offer  to  him  must  be  purified  first.
But  how  can  it  be  purified  except  by  the  sacrifice  of  the  cross  (Heb.  ix.  22 ;  x.  10)  ?
8.  The  importance  of  being  good  suljjectt.     We  have  seen  the  significance,  in  this

K  2


1S2  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [oh.  viil  SI— S«.

■  — •

respect,  of  the  beginning  of  yer.  36.  We  may  also  see  the  good  results  thus  secured
in  what  is  recorded  in  the  end  of  that  verse.  It  caused  those  who  had  the  rule  in
that  land  to  "further"  the  welfare  of  God's  "people,"  and  the  work  of  God's
"  house."  This  is  one  advantage  of  honouring  the  "  powers  that  be  "  as  ordained  of
God.  It  causes  them,  in  return,  to  honour  and  favour  the  religion  we  profess.  Just
as  it  is  with  servants  in  a  household,  so  is  it  with  subjects  in  a  kingdom ;  it  is  thus
they  may  especially  "  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God  their  Saviour "  (Titus  ii.  9,  10).
Other  branches  of  "politics"  may  not  be  forbidden;  this  is  positively  enjoined
(Bom.  xiii.  1,  Ac).

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHOBa

Vers.  21 — 23. — The  fast  at  the  Ahava.  The  halt  on  the  banks  of  the  Ahavs
lasted  three  days.  Ezra  lost  no  time.  He  viewed  his  company,  and  finding  no
Levites,  organised  a  mission  to  induce  some  of  them  to  join  him.  To  the  credit  of
the  sons  of  Levi,  strong  as  was  their  attachment  to  the  silver  of  Casiphia,  they
promptly  forsook  it  in  favour  of  Zion.  On  the  third  day  the  caravan  was  made  up ;
but  before  the  journey  was  undertaken  Ezra  proclaimed  a  fast.    Consider —

I.  The  object.  It  was  to  obtain  the  Divine  guidance  and  protection.  1.  The
adults  needed  this  for  themselves.  (1)  The  weight  of  responsibility  rested  with
them.  Duties  are  claimed  &om  adults  which  are  not  required  from  children  :  re-
ligious, civil.  Excuses  may  be  pleaded  for  infants  which  would  not  avail  for
■  adults.  (2)  Where  responsibilities  are  onerous,  the  greater  the  need  of  prayer  and
fasting.  This  is  not  sufficiently  considered.  Hence  the  serious  blunders,  the
disasters.  2.  They  needed  it  on  behalf  of  their  "  little  ones."  (1)  Any  army  en-
cumbered with  women  and  children  would  be  at  an  immense  disadvantage  in  the  face
of  a  foe.  The  claims  of  natural  affection  would  so  distract  as  to  destroy  presence
of  mind,  and  expose  to  a  more  easy  prey  the  very  objects  of  solicitude.  (2)  This
would  be  so  in  the  highest  degree  in  an  army  of  civilians.  How  helpless  are  we  in
the  face  of  our  spiritual  adversaries  I  What  need  have  we  for  the  hand  of  God
upon  us  for  good  I  3.  They  needed  it  for  the  safefv  of  tJie  treasure  in  their  custody-
(1)  It  was  vast  in  its  value  (vers.  24—27).  The  plate  alone  is  estimated  at
£1,038,600,  Then  there  was  the  private  property,  "  all  the  substance,"  of  the  wlxole
caravan.  (2)  It  was  therefore  tempting  to  the  cupidity  and  rapacity  of  marauders.
These  were  known  to  exist.  "The  enemy  in  the  way."  We  have  to  guard  our
Christian  honour,  which  is  of  priceless  value,  against  the  rapacity  of  the  "  enemy  in
the  way."     So  have  we  need  of  fasting  and  prayer.

IL  The  motive.  1.  He  was  jealous  for  the  honour  of  God.  (1)  He  might  have
had  an  escort  from  the  king.  He  had  influence  enough  at  court  to  have  procured
this.  The  safety  of  the  treasure,  to  which  the  king  himself  and  his  counsellors  and
princes  had  so  handsomely  contributed,  would  have  been  a  sufficient  reason  to  influence
him.  (2)  But  then  he  had  proclaimed  to  him  great  principles,  viz. — (o)  That  "the
hand  of  God  is  upon  all  them  for  good  that  seek  him."  The  king  might  say,  "  Why
then  do  you  not  seek  him  and  trust  in  him  ?  "  May  we  not  say  this  to  ourselves
when  we  are  tempted  to  lean  upon  an  arm  of  flesh  ?  (6)  That  "  his  power  and  his
wrath  are  against  all  them  that  forsake  him."  The  king  might  reply,  "  Why  then
do  you  not  confide  your  defence  to  him  from  those  wicked  persons  who  would  molest
you  ?  "  (3)  What  a  testimony  to  Artaxerxes  of  their  faith  in  their  principles,  and  of
the  jealousy  of  God  for  his  honour,  that  Ezra  did  not  ask  for  a  military  escort,  and
yet  was  prospered  in  his  way  I  2.  lis  yr&a  ]ea[o\i9  iov  the  honour  of  his  people.  (1)
The  great  principles  enunciated  might  be  true,  and  yet  the  way  of  the  people  might
be  disastrous.  In  that  case  it  would  argue  that  they  did  not  "  seek  God,"  and  that,
"forsaking"  him,  they  made  him  their  adversary.  (2)  To  prevent  this  tiie  fast  was
proclaimed.  The  "  afflicting  of  the  soul "  was  to  express  repentance  for  departures
from  God,  that  his  wrath  might  be  averted  and  his  favour  conciliated.  Do  we  not
need  this  ?  (3)  Prayer  was  then  added  to  the  fasting  (ver.  23).  Fasting  and  prayer
are  naturally  associated  (see  Neh.  i.  4  ;  Dan.  ix.  3 ;  Matt.  xvii.  21).

III.  Tub  isbub.    1.  "  The  Lwd  was  entreated  of  them."    (I)  Some  favourable


OH.  vin.  21—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZllA.  IM


sign  may  have  been  given  them.  On  another  occasion  God  anthenticated  his  servant
Ezra  by  sending  heavy  rain  to  show  his  anger  (see  ch.  x.  9).  Their  faith  in  God
would  have  carried  its  own  evidence.  True  faith  is  of  Divine  inspiration  (Col.  ii.
12).  Therefore  it  is  the  subsistence  of  things  hoped  for,  i,  e.  things  hoped  for  are
to  genuine  faith  as  certain  as  though  they  subsisted.  2.  The  success  of  their  journey
vrovedU.  (1)  They  were  "delivered  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy."  The  enemy
was  there,  but  he  was  restrained  by  the  hand  of  God  upon  his  people.  The  lurking
ioes  as  well  as  the  avowed  enemies  were  restrained  (see  ver.  31).  (2)  They  "  oaas
to  Jerusalem "  in  safety  (ver.  32).  Our  safe  arrival  in  heaven  will  be  the  most
glorious  proof  of  the  good  hand  of  God  upon  us.  But  it  would  be  folly  to  remain
unassured  of  that  good  hand  upon  us  until  this  proof  may  or  may  not  be  given.
Until  a  present  assurance  be  given  we  should  not  cease  to  pray  j  and  if  prayer  without
fasting  does  not  secure  it,  then  let  fasting  be  added  unto  prayer. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  21 — 23. — The  spiritual  and  secular  aids  of  life.  I.  The  spiritual  nbbdinq
THE  AID  OF  THE  SECULAB.  "  To  require  of  the  king  a  band  of  soldiers  and  horsemen  to
help  us  against  the  enemy  in  the  way  "  (ver.  22).  Ezra  was  about  to  conduct  his  com-
rades on  a  perilous  journey  to  Jerusalem  j  hence  he  felt  the  need  of  a  military  guard
as  well  as  of  the  good  hand  of  God  upon  him.  The  spiritual,  as  a  rule,  requires  the  aid
of  the  secular.  1.  Divine  truth  needs  secular  aid.  As  the  companions  of  Ezra  would
be  in  danger  during  this  march,  so  the  word  of  God  is  often  in  peril  in  the  world ;
infidels  assail  it,  and  secular  aids  are  necessary  to  defend  it.  2.  The  Church  of
God  needs  secular  aid.  It  is  exposed  to  many  enemies  on  its  journey  to  Jerusalem,
and  requires  the  defence  of  secular  agencies — legislative,  intellectual,  and  social.
8.  The  life  interests  of  the  good  need  secular  aid.  The  good  man  needs  the  aid
of  the  physician ;  his  property  must  be  protected,  his  ships  must  be  insured.
True,  God  loves  his  own  book,  his  own  enterprise,  his  own  people,  but  it  is  his
method  to  aid  them  in  the  use  of  means.  As  a  general  rule  Ezra  must  employ
both  horsemen  and  prayer ;  prayer  and  precaution  must  go  together.  4.  The  moral
needs  the  aid  of  the  secular: — (1)  Because  God  has  ordained  that  the  spiritual  shall
move  in  the  sphere  of  the  secular.  The  sacred  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  journey  in
the  desert  under  the  care  of  man  ;  piety  is  subject  to  physical  law.  (2)  Because  the
spiritual  is  in  danger  through  the  natural  antagonism  of  the  sinful  heart.  Ezra  and
his  companions  were  endangered  by  men  who  wished  to  frustrate  their  mission ;  the
carnal  hates  the  spiritual,  hence  the  need  of  horsemen.  (3)  Because  God  has  in-
trusted the  spiritual  to  men  as  a  discipline.  The  truth  of  God  is  put  within  the
power  of  men  that  they  may  be  cultured  into  a  right  attitude  toward  it ;  that  they
may  become  "fellow-helpers  of  the  truth."

II.  The  spibittjal  acting  without  the  aid  op  the  seculab.  "For  I  was  ashamed
to  require  of  the  king  a  band  of  soldiers."  1.  Why  did  Ezra  act  without  the  aid  of
the  secular  ?  (1)  Because  he  feared  lest  he  should  manifest  greater  dependence
upon  the  aid  of  a  heathen  king  than  in  the  God  of  heaven.  Ezra  did  not  wish
Artaxerxes  to  take  the  place  in  his  enterprise  which  belonged  to  God  ;  he  had  more
confidence  in  his  God  than  he  had  in  his  king.  There  are  times  in  religious  life  and
in  moral  service  when  it  would  be  wrong  to  put  any  trust  in  man,  when  Divine  aid
may  alone  be  sought.  Ezra  wanted  to  show  that  God  was  the  object  of  his  supreme
confidence ;  that  he  was  indeed  conducting  the  sacred  vessels  to  Jerusalem.  (2)
Because  he  feared  lest  he  should  deprive  God  of  the  glory  of  his  own  operation.
Had  Ezra  obtained  the  band  of  soldiers,  they  would  have  concealed  the  operation  of
God ;  C3iristian  workers  must  not  give  the  glory  of  the  Divine  activity  and  achieve-
ment to  another,  much  less  to  the  soldiers  of  a  heathen  monarch.  (3)  Because  he
-feared  lest  he  should  seem  to  compromise  Divine  truth  in  the  view  of  the  king.  Ezra
had  said  to  Artaxerxes  that  "  the  hand  of  our  God  was  upon  all  them  for  good  that
seek  him ;  "  he  feared  even  in  appearance  to  compromise  this  statement  (4)  Because
he  feared  lest  he  should  substitute  a  carnal  expedient  for  a  spiritual  preparation.
Secular  aids  do  not  often  avail  in  the  absence  of  moral  fitness.  Soldiers  cannot  give
safety  to  disobedience.  2.  Hme  did  Ezra  act  without  the  aid  of  the  secular  ?  He  wM
not  indifllerent  to  the  danger  to  which  he  might  be  exposed  in  marching  without  tM
band  of  soldiers;  he  did  not  superstiti Jiisly  seek  to  avert  it  j  he  did  not  frantically


1JJ4  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [oh.  tiii.  il—Z6.

rush  into  it ;  he  religionsly  braved  it.  (1)  Humility.  Ho  hufnbled  himself  be£or«
God  in  view  of  his  perilous  journey.  (2)  Supplication.  He  sought  the  Divine  aid.
Thus  must  we  act  when  we  are  called  upon  to  reject  the  secular  aids  of  life.  3.  When
did  Ezra  act  without  the  aid  of  the  secular  ?  Ezra  travelled  without  the  soldiers  n
an  important  crisis  ;  it  is  but  seldom  that  we  are  called  upon  to  divorce  prayer  and
precaution.  4.  What  moral  qualities  did  Ezra  exhibit  in  thus  acting  without  the  aid
of  the  spiritual  ?  It  is  evident  that  he  was  zealous  for  the  honour  of  Ood  ;  courageous
in  sacred  toil ;  devout  in  daily  life ;  and  could  act  alone  when  necessary.  God
answered  his  confidence  by  leading  him  safely  to  Jerusalem. — E.

Ver.  24. — The  sacred  trusts  of  life.  I.  The  tetjst  given.  "And  weighed  unto
them  the  silver,  and  the  gold,  and  the  vessels,  even  the  offering  of  the  house  of  our
God  "  (ver.  26).  1.  Their  nature.  As  the  men  appointed  by  Ezra  had  costly  and
sacred  vessels  committed  to  their  care,  so  men  have  given  to  them  money,  time,
genius,  and  influence  to  carry  through  life.  2.  Their  purpose  (ver.  28).  These
vessels  of  gold  and  silver  were  given  for  the  use  and  adornment  of  the  temple  at
Jerusalem.  Men  must  hold  their  sacred  trusts  for  God.  3.  Their  measure  (ver.
26).  The  gold  and  silver  given  were  carefully  weighed ;  all  the  capabilities  of
men  are  weighed  by  God :  to  some  he  g^ves  two  talents,  to  others  five  talents ;  to
each  man  according  to  his  several  ability.  4.  Their  responsibility.  The  comrades
of  Ezra  had  the  responsible  task  of  safely  conveying  the  vessels  of  the  temple  to
Jerusalem  ;  human  talent  is  a  solemn  gift.  6.  Their  registration  (ver.  34).  The
gifts  of  man  are  written  in  the  book  of  God.

II.  The  fidelity  required.  "  Watch  ye,  and  keep  them  "  (ver.  29).  1.  Their
peril.  The  men  conveying  the  ccstly  vessels  of  the  temple  would  be  exposed  to
many  enemies  by  the  way  (ver.  22) ;  men  of  talent  are  liable  to  many  moral  enemies
— pride,  indolence,  misuse,  and  neglect  of  culture.  2.  Their  safety.  The  prayers  of
these  men  were  their  protection.  Ezra  says,  "  So  we  fasted  and  besought  our  God  for
this :  and  he  was  entreated  of  us  "  (ver.  23).  Devotion  is  the  safeguard  of  talent.  3.
Their  inspection.  "  Weighed  in  the  house  of  our  God  "  (ver.  33).  At  the  last  God
will  judge  men  for  the  use  of  their  talents ;  then  every  man  will  be  morally  weighed
in  the  unerring  balance  of  truth.  4.  Their  fidelity.  The  comrades  of  Ezra  were
faithful  to  their  trust ;  happy  if  at  the  close  of  life  we  are  found  faithful  to  the
trusts  we  have  received. — E.

Vers.  24 — 30. — The  custody  of  the  treasure.  After  fasting  and  prayer,  before
the  caravan  moved  from  the  halt  on  the  banks  of  the  Ahava,  Ezra  made  arrungementa
for  the  custody  of  the  offerings  with  which  he  was  intrusted.  Whatever  is  done
under  Divine  direction  is  intended  to  instruct,  and  in  these  arrangements  we  may
seek  for  matter  of  profitable  meditation.     Let  us  then  consider —

I.  The  treasure.  The  vessels  which  were  for  the  service  of  the  house  of  the  Lord
typified  his  saints  (Acts  is.  15  |  2  Tim.  ii.  20,  21).  1.  The  treasure  was  various.  (1)
Various  in  its  qualities.  Some  vessels  were  of  silver,  some  of  gold,  and  some  of  "  fine
copper  precious  as  gold."  This  last  the  Syriac,  somewhat  oddly,  construes  as  best
Co^-nthian  brass,  referring  to  the  amalgam,  formed  by  the  fusion  together  of  copper,
brass,  silver,  and  gold,  found  by  Lucius  Munimius  after  the  burning  of  Corinth.  More
probably  it  was  some  factitious  metal  (see  A.  Clarke,  in  loc).  Though  all  men  have
the  attributes  of  each,  yet  these  are  variously  developed.  It  should  be  our  endeavour
so  to  cultivate  our  powers  that  our  service  should  be  like  gold,  of  the  most  valuable
kind.  ,  (2)  Various  in  its  sources.  Some  of  the  vessels  were  the  free-will  offerings
of  Jews.  Some  were  from  the  Gentiles.  So  whether  Jew  or  Greek  now  it  matters
not,  for  all  believers  are  one  in  Christ  (Matt.  viiL  11).  2.  The  treasure  was  ^«ctoiM.
(1)  Gold,  from  its  purity  and  costliness,  has  ever  been  taken  as  a  symbol  of  precious-
ness.  Silver  also  has  the  same  signification,  though  in  inferior  degree.  Here  also
were  vessels  of  a  "  fine  copper  precious  as  gold."  (2)  But  what  material  substance
can  compare  in  value  to  the  human  spirit  (Isa.  xiii.  12)  ?  (a)  Immortal.  (6)  Capable
of  God  (Job  xxviii.  19).  Eedeemed  by  the  Son  of  God  (1  Pet.  i.  7).  3.  The
treasure  was  tacred.  (1)  It  was  rendered  so  by  being  freeljr  given  to  God.  Having
freely  given  ourselves,  we  have  no  right  to  resume  the  gift.    What  an  onomaloni


CH.  vni.  21—36.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  186

position  is  that  of  the  backslider  from  God  I  (3)  By  virtue  of  God's  acceptance  of  a
gift  it  becomes  holy.  When  God  receives  a  sinner  he  sanctifies  him  by  his  Spirit,
As  the  Levites  and  Nethinims  kept  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  clean,  so  are  all  the
ordinances  of  religion  designed  to  keep  believers  pure.    Consider —

II.  Thk  Tbbasurerb.  1.  These  v^ere  twehe  in  number.  (1)  This  number  is  sacred
in  Old  Testament  Scripture.  There  were  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  and  so  the
twelve  tribes  of  Israel  (Gen.  xzxv.  22 ;  xlix.  28).  According  to  the  number  of  these
tribes  were  the  twelve  pillars  built  by  Moses  ;  the  twelve  stones  in  the  breast-plate
of  judgment ;  the  twelve  stones  in  the  Jordan,  and  in  the  altar  of  Elijah  (Bxod.
xxiv.  4;  xxviii.  21;  Josh.  iv.  8;  1  Kings  xviii.  31).  So  the  twelve  cakes  on  the  table
of  shewbread,  &c.  (Lev.  xxiv.  8).  (2)  This  number  is  no  less  sacred  in  the  New
Testament.  Corresponding  to  the  twelve  patriarchs  we  have  the  twelve  apostles
(Matt.  X.  2).  Twelve  thrones  are  to  be  assigned  to  the  apostles  for  the  judging  of
the  tribes  of  Israel.  Twelve  and  multiples  of  twelve  are  common  measures  in  the
Apocalypse  in  things  pertaining  to  the  Lamb  (Rev.  xii.  1;  xxi.  13,  14,  31;  xxii.  2).
2.  Thej  yvevs  of  the  chief  of  the  priests.  (1)  They  liad  a  consecration  to  God  in  their
birth  as  sons  of  Aaron.  So  ministers  of  Christ  who  have  the  oversight  of  precious
souls  should  be  regenerate  persons.  (2)  They  had  also  a  consecration  in  their  official
separation.  So  ministers  of  Christ  must  have  a  vocation  from  Christ.  God  assigns
special  work  to  special  men  (see  Acts  xiii.  2).  By  this  special  service  they  become
holy,  though  they  were  officially  holy  already  (ver.  28).  Every  service  we  faithfully
render  to  him  God  makes  to  react  upon  us  with  a  sanctifying  virtue.

III.  Theik  duties.  1.  They  were  duly  to  estimate  the  value  of  their  charge.  (1)
To  impress  this  upon  them,  they  had  all  the  precious  things  weighed.  (2)  The  value
of  the  soul  cannot  thus  be  estimated,  yet  it  may  be  considered  and  pondered  until
the  very  spirit  of  a  minister  is  penetrated  with  a  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  his  re-
sponsibility in  those  over  whom  he  is  placed  in  the  Lord.  2.  They  were  to  watch
over  it.  (1)  To  see  that  it  was  not  lost  through  neglect,  or  by  becoming  mixed  with
other  property.  Ministerial  neglect  lias  resulted  in  the  loss  of  many  a  precious  soul.
(3)  To  defend  it  from  the  cupidity  of  robbers.  These  infested  the  way:  some  openly,
others  stealthily.  So  are  souls  in  danger  of  encountering  those  who  would  r&b  them
of  peace.  3.  They  were  to  present  it  in  its  integrity  in  the  temple.  (1)  Having  kept
it  amidst  the  dangers  of  the  journey  by  the  blessing  of  God,  the  custodians  present
tlie  treasure  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  It  will  be  a  happy  thing  for  ministers  if  they
can  as  completely  fulfil  their  commission  in  leading  their  flock  into  the  better
Jerusalem.  For  parents  with  their  children,  &c.  (Eph.  iv.  11 — 13).  (2)  The  balances
of  the  sanctuary  are  true.  The  actions  of  all  men  will  there  be  weighed  up.  May
we  not  be  found  wanting  in  the  great  day  of  scrutiny. — J.  A.  M.

"Vers.  24 — 86. — 2!ionwards.  Ezra  and  the  company  he  had  gathered  were  now
fairly  on  their  way  homewards,  and  we  may  look  at  them,  looking  also  at  ourselves,
as —

I.  Travbllbrb  to  Jerusalem.  "  Then  we  departed  to  go  unto  Jerusalem  "  (ver.
81),  They  had  come  forth  from  a  land  of  captivity  and  comparative  privation,
and  were  on  their  way  to  the  land  where  they  would  no  longer  be  bondsmen,  and
where  every  possible  privilege  would  be  theirs  to  enjoy:  they  were  "  going  home;"
to  the  land  consecrated  to  their  thouglit  by  innumerable  hallowing  associations;  to
the  city  whose  walls  should,  to  their  fond  imagining,  shut  them  iii  to  liberty,
security,  and  joy.  Onwards  we  move,  we  wlio  have  left  the  land  of  spiritual  bond-
nee  behind  us,  to  the  land  of  our  hope;  oxir  faces  are  steadfastly  set  toward  the
lieavenly  Jerusalem.  We  "§eek  a  city  yet  to  come."  Every  day  we  are  travelling
forward  to  its  open  gates;  every  night  we  pitch  our  tent  "a  day's  march  nearer"
this  home  on  high.

II.  Guided  and  guarded  op  God  upon  the  way,  ' '  The  hand  of  our  God  was
upon  us,  and  he  delivered  us  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,"  &c.  (ver.  31).  In  answer
to  tlieir  earnest  prayer  (ver.  33)  and  to  their  humility  (ver.  23),  God  gave  them  his
guidance  and  guardianship  along  the  road,  and  whatever  enemies  may  have  been  near
either  refrained  from  attaclcing  them  or  were  easily  repelled.  In  answer  to  our
earnest  prayer  and  our  humility,  God  will  be  our  guide  and  guardian  along  the


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  %m.  tm.  21— 8«.


heavenward  way.  He  will  (a)  show  ns  the  path  we  should  take,  saving  us  from  enw,
and  thus  from  evil,  and  (6)  defend  us  from  our  adversaries:  (1)  those  above  us—
principalities  and  powers,  &c. ;  (2)  those  around  us — evil  men,  dangerous  fascinations,
worldly  honours,  pleasures  of  the  flesh;  (8)  those  within  us— unholy  propensities,
wayward  dispositions,  tendencies  towards  pride,  sensuality,  selfishness,  Ac

III.  Thosb  oharqkd  with  backed  TRBA8X7BE  (vers.  34—80).  Eznt  put  into  the
hands  of  some  of  the  priests  and  Levites  very  precious  treasure — the  gold,  silver,
vessels,  &c.,  which  had  been  contributed  for  the  temple;  they,  as  holy  men,  were
to  take  charge  of  the  holy  things  (ver.  38),  to  watch  them  and  keep  them  intact,  to
be  prepared  to  have  them  weighed  when  they  reached  their  journey's  end  (ver.  39).
All  of  us  who  are  spiritual  pilgrims  are  men  charged  with  treasure — some  with  more
than  others.  All  of  us  have  in  charge  that  most  valuable  treasure— more  precious
than  the  precious  gold  they  carried  (ver,  27) — our  ovm  tpirit,  created  in  Clod's  like-
ness to  bear  his  image,  to  dwell  in  his  glorious  presence.  Dach  one  of  us  must
sedulously,  scrupulously,  devoutly  watch  and  keep  this  unharmed,  and  be  ready  to
have  it  "  weighed  in  the  balances"  of  Qod,  not  being  found  wanting  then.  To  some
of  us — parents,  teachers,  pastors — God  has  intrusted  the  precious  treasure  of  others'
souls,  and  he  bids  us  take  earnest  heed  of  them,  "  watching  for  them  as  those  who
mutt  give  aeeount,"  doing  our  best  in  eveiy  way,  publicly  and  privately,  by  direct
solicitation  and  by  prayer  on  their  behalf,  that  they  may  be  found  whole  and  blame
leas  "in  that  day."

TV.  At  the  Bin>  of  thbib  joubiivt.  They  "  came  to  Jerusalem  "  (Ter.  83),  and
their  arrival  was  marked  by  three  things — (1)  judgment  (vers.  88,  84),  (2)  presenta-
tion of  sacrifice  (ver.  86),  and  (8)  kindly  reception  by  those  across  the  river  (ver.  36).
When  we  reach  the  end  of  our  journey  we  shall  find  these  three  things— (1)  Judg-
ment, for  we  must  all  stand  at  the  judgment  seat,  &c.  (2  Cor.  v.  10).  God  will  bring
every  work  into  judgment  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  (2)  The  offering  of  no  more  sacrifices
as  under  the  old  dispensation,  and  no  more  pleading  of  the  one  great  Sacrifice  for
sin;  no  sin  offering  at  all  (ver.  85),  but  the  offering  of  praise  and  of  holy  service — of
our  purified,  renewed,  perfected  selves,  whole  and  without  blemish,  vessels  meet  for
the  Master's  use  even  in  the  heavenly  sanctuary;  and  (3)  welcome  from  those  who  are
there.  Those  who  are  on  that  side  the  river  will  wait,  with  outstretched  bands,  with
eager  hearts,  to  receive  us  to  those  blessed  shores,  to  lead  us  into  that  better  land,  to
introduce  us  to  that  countiy  which  has  no  temple  because  it  A  a  temple,  full  of  the
presence  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord,— C,

Vers.  81 — SQ.—Progreu.  When  the  treasure  was  disposed  in  eiutody  of  priests
sanctified  to  watck  over  it,  and  the  caravan  was  otherwise  ordered,  the  pilgrims
started  from  the  camp  of  the  Ahava  en  route  for  Jerusalem.  As  we  might  expect
from  the  piety  which  influenced  them  in  their  preparations —

L  They  were  frosfbrbd  ik  thbir  joubnet.  1.  The^  enjoyed  the  blesting  of  theii
Ood.  "  The  hand  of  our  Ood  was  ipon  us."  (1)  The  hand  is  the  symbol  of  power
(Judges  i.  85;  2  Sam.  xxiv.  14)'.  Appropriately  so,  since  it  is  the  instrument  oy
which  commoply  we  exert  our  strength.  So  wnen  the  "  hand  of.Goa  '  is  mentioned
his  omnipotence  is  supposed  (Exod  xv.  6;  Ps.  xvii.  7).  (2)  The  hand  of  Qod
"  upon  "  men  sometimes  denotes  liis  almighty  jtidgments  (1  Sam.  v.  11;  1  Pet.  v.  6).
"It  Is  a  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God."  Sometimes  it
denotes  his  all-suiScient  protection  and  defence  (John  x.  28,  29).  In  this  good  sense
it  is  intended  here  (see  also  vers.  18,  22;  vii.  9;  Neh.  ii.  18).  (3)  The  hand  of
Qod  with  his  people  coming  up  from  Babylon  may  be  likened  to  the  glorious  cloud
which  accompanied  their  fathers  in  their  exodus  from  Egypt  (see  Zech.  ii.  9,  where
"  I  will  turn  my  hand  upon  the  little  ones  "  denotes  the  sheltering  of  the  little  ones
when  the  sword  smites  the  Great  One).  2.  17ie  Divine  protection  was  respected  by
the  enemy.  (1)  There  was  the  open  "enemy  "  in  the  way.  There  ever  were,  as  to
this  day  there  are,  bold  marauders  in  the  East.  Temptations  often,  with  impudent
ostentation,  attack  the  Christian  pilgrim.  (2)  There  were  also  "those  that  lie  in
wait."  There  are  stealthy  as  well  as  sturdy  foemen.  The  brood  of  the  old  serpent
is  legion.  Temptations  are  often  most  successful  when  they  attack  by  surprise.
(8)  But  the  people  were  armed  with  "  all  prayer."    The  knowledge  of  this  so  over


CH.  Tm.  21—86.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


137


awed  the  enemies  that  they  did  not  attack.     Or  else  if  they  did  allacli  they  were
overwhelmed  by  the  "hand  of  God."     " If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ' "

II.  They  bntebed  into  Jerusalem  with  jot.  1.  It  was  the  end  of  a  toilsome
march.  (1)  The  journey  occupied  four  months.  They  "  departed  from  the  river  of
Ahava  on  the  twelfth  day  of  the  first  month."  They  "  came  to  Jerusalem  in  the
fifth  month  "  (vii.  8).  It  would  be  a  joy  to  them  to  have  the  discomfort  of  that
tedious  pilgrimage  ended.  (2)  It  will  be  an  inexpressible  joy  to  the  Christian
pilgrim  to  end  life's  toils  in  the  heavenly  city.  2.  It  was  the  satisfaction  of  a
cherished  hope.  (1)  They  were  "children  of  captivity,"  boru  in  Babylon,  never
having  seen  Jerusalem.  Yet  would  they  not  be  without  the  traditions  of  the  glory
of  their  forefathers.  The  spirit  which  breathed  in  Ps.  Ixxix.  and  cxxxvii.  could
not  leave  them  in  ignorance  of  these  things.  (2)  They  had  also  their  Scriptures,
which  associated  Zion  with  the  glories  of  history  and  of  prophecy.  Now  they  were
standing  in  the  very  place  where  their  fathers  had  worshipped.  In  this  also  they
had  a  pledge  of  the  superior  glories  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem.  (3)  They  were
relatives  of  those  who  had  preceded  them  under  the  conduct  of  Zerubbabel.  This  ia
evident  from  a  comparison  of  the  catalogues  of  names  (ch.  ii.  and  ch.  viii.).  There-
fore they  would  have  happy  recognitions,  congratulations,  and  greetings.  If  in
heaven  now  there  is  joy  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner,  what  will  be  the  joy  of  that
entrance  which  shall  be  ministered  abundantly  into  the  kingdom  I

m.  They  abode  in  Jkrusalem  in  peace.  1.  They  had  peace  in  tliemselves.  (1)
This  is  the  happy  fruit  of  fidelity.  Tranquillity  dwells  wilh  integrity.  They
faithfully  delivered  up  their  precious  charge.  "  Now  on  the  fourth  day;"  &c.  (vers.
33,  34).  (2)  The  balances  of  the  sanctuary  are  true,  and  the  weights  are  just.
Sad  is  the  case  of  him  that  shall  be  "  found  wanting"  (see  Dan.  v.  27).  2.  They
had  peace  with  Ood.  (1)  They  went  the  right  way  to  secuie  this  by  offering
sacrifices  (see  ver.  35).  Christ  is  our  peace.  (2)  Note— These  sacrifices  were
offered  not  only  for  themselves, but  also  "  for  all  Israel."  But  "  Judah  and  Benjamin"
alone  were  present,  and  these  only  by  a  representation,  for  the  bulk  of  the  Jews
remained  on  the  Babylonish  side  of  the  river  Euphrates.  Query— Is  there  not  hers
an  expression  of  faith  in  the  ultimate  restoration  of  all  Israel  (Rom.  x.  26)  ?  3.
They  had  peace  from  their  neighbours.  (1)  This  was  secured  to  them,  through  the
good  providence  of  God,  by  the  king's  commissions  to  lieutenants  and  governors.
These  documents  were  probably  sealed  ;  but  the  purport  of  them  is  evident  from  the
letter  of  Artaxerxes  (ch.  vii.  21—23).  (2)  No  wonder,  then ,  that  these  lieutenants
should  "  furtherthe  peopleand  the  house  of  God."  Persecution  would  cease.  "When
a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him."
Let  us  never  move  without  God.    Let  us  ever  move  with  God.— J.  A.  M.

§  2.    Bkfobmation  of  Relioion  accomplished  by  Ezra  at  Jbbubalbh.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.


iNtheinterval  between  Zerubbabel'smle
and  the  coming  of  Ezra  from  Babylon  with  a
special  commission  appointing  him  gover-
nor of  Judaea,  the  Jews  seem  to  have  been
left  without  any  strong  controlling  author-
ity. The  civil  administration  devol vedupon
a  certain  number  of  chiefs  or  "  princes,"
who  maintained  order  in  Jerusalem,  collect-
ed and  remitted  the  tribute  due  to  the  Per-
sian crown,  and  held  courts  to  decide  all
caases,  criminal  and  civil,  in  which  only
Jews  were  concerned.  Tranquillityand|or-
derwereauflttcientlymaintaiDedin  this  way;
but  the  governing  power  was  weak,  and  in


matters  outside  the  range  of  the  civil  and
criminal  law  men  did  pretty  nearly  "as  it
seemedgoodintheirowneyes."  Duringthis
intervalof  governmental  debility,itappears
that  a  fusion  had  begun  between  the  Jews
and  the  neighbouring  nations.  Although
the  law  of  Moses  distinctly  forbade  inter-
marriagebetween  the  people  of  God  and  the
idolatrous  nations  whose  land  they  had  in-
herited, and  by  implication  forbade  such
unions  with  any  neighbouring  idolaters,
the  newly-returned  Israelites,  perhaps  not
fully  provided  with  women  of  their  ownna-
tion  and  religion,  had  taken  to  themselves
wives  freely  from  the  idolatrous  tribes  and
nations  in  their  vicinity.    They  had  inter-


1«3


THE  BOOK   OF  EZRA.


[CH.  IX.  1 — 15.


married  with  the  Ammonites,  theMoabites,
the  Amorites,  theBgyptians,  and  even  with
theremnantoftheCanaanites.  Notonlyhad
this  been  done  hj  the  common  people,  but
"the  hand  of  the  princes  and  rulers  "  had
been  "  chief  in  this  trespass  "  (ch.  ix.  2).
Norhad  even  thesacerdotal  order  keptitself
pure.  Priests  and  Levites,  nay,  the  actual
sons  and  nephewsof  the  high  priest  Jeshua
himself,  were  guilty  in  the  matter  (ch.  x.
18),  had  taken  to  themselves  wives  of  the
accursed  races,  and  "mingled  themselves
with  the  people  of  the  lands  "  (ch.  ix.  2).
The  danger  to  purity  of  religion  was  great.
Those  who  married  idolatrous  wives  were
tempted,  like  Solomon,  to  connive  at  their
introducing  unhallowed  rites  into  the  holy
city;  while  the  issue  of  such  marriages,  in-
fluenced by  their  mothers,  were  apt  to  pre-
ferheathenism  to  Judaism,  andjto  fall  away
from  the  faith  altogether.  A  fusion  of  the
Jews  with  the  Gentiles  in  Palestine  at  this
time  would  have  meant  a  complete  obliter-
ation of  the  Jews ,  who  would  have  been  ab-
sorbed and  swallowed  up  in  the  far  larger
mass  of  the  heathen  without  materially  af-
fecting it.  Thus  God's  purpose  in  singling
out  a  "  peculiar  people  "  would  have  been
f rustrated.aad  the  world  left  without  a  re-
generating element.  Considerations  of  this
kind  help  us  to  understand  the  horror  of
Ezra  when  he  understood  what  had  taken
place  (ch.  ii.  3 — 6;  x.  1),  and  enable  us  to
estimate  at  its  right  value  the  zeal  that  he
displayedinputtingdowntheexistingprac-
ticeandestablishingahetterorderof  things.
His  task  was  lightened  to  him  by  the  fact
that  a  large  religious  and  patriotic  party
ralliedtohim,  and  associated  itself  with  his
reforms  ;  a  party  including  many  of  the
princes  and  elders  (ch.  ix.  1 ;  i.  8),  and  no
doubt  a  certain  number  of  the  priests.  He
effected  his  reform  by  means  of  a  commis-
sion of  laymen  (ch.  x.  16),  which  in  the  space
of  little  more  than  three  months  inquired
into  all  the  suspected  cases,  and  compelled
every  person  whohad  married  an  idolatrous
wifetodivorce  her,  andsend  her  back,  with
any  children  that  she  had  borne  him,  to
herown  people.  Thns,  for  the  <tm«,  thecor-
raption  was  effectually  checked,  the  evil
rooted  ont  and  removed.  We  shall  find,
Uowerer,  In  Kehemiah,  that  It  recurred


(Neh.  xiii.  23),  in  combination  with  various
other  abuses,  and  had  to  be  once  more  re-
sisted and  repressed  by  the  civil  power
(ibid.  ver.  30).

This  section  is  divisible  into  ten  parts: —
1.  The  complaint  made  by  the  princes  to
Ezra  concerning  the  mixed  marriages  (ch.
ix.  1,3);  2.  Ezra's  astonishment  and  horror
(iiid.  vers.  3,  4) ;  3.  His  confession  and
prayer  to  GoA.{ibid.  vers.  5 — 15) ;  4,  Repent-
ance of  the  people,  and  covenant  sworn
to,  on  the  recommendation  of  Shechaniah
(ch,  I.  1 — 5);  5.  Ezra's  fast  (ibid.  ver.  6);
6.  Proclamation  summoning  all  the  Jews
to  Jerusalem  (ibid.  vers.  7 — 9);  7.  Address
of  Ezra,  and  consent  of  the  people  to  put
away  the  strange  wives  (ibid.  vers.  10 —
14);  8.  Opposition  of  Jonathan  and  others
(ibid.  ver.  15);  9.  Accomplishment  of  the
work  (ibid.  vers.  16,  17);  and  10.  Names
of  those  who  had  married  strange  wives
(ibid.  vers.  18 — 44).

Complaint  of  the  princes  to  Ezka
(ch.  ix.  1,  2).  It  is  remarkable  that  com-
plaint on  a  matter  of  religious  transgres-
sion should  have  come  from  the  secular,
and  not  from  the  ecclesiastical,  authorities
of  the  city.  But  there  clearly  appears  about
this  time  some  remissness  and  connivance
at  evil,  if  not  even  participation  in  it,  on
the  part  of  the  chief  ecclesiastics.  On
this  particular  occasion,  actual  sons  and
nephews  of  Jeshua  the  high  priest  were
among  those  who  had  married  idolatrous
wives  (ch.  x.  18),  and  afterwards.in  Ne-
hemiah's  time,  not  only  did  the  high
priest's  family  indulge  in  similar  alliances
(Neh.  xiii.  4,  28),  but  Eliashib  actually
assigned  to  one  of  the  heathen,  and  one
who  was  a  bitter  opponent  of  Neberaiah,  a
chamberinthetempleitself(tWd.vers.  5,9).
When  the  heads  of  the  sacerdotal  order
were  themselves  implicated  in  the  abuses
prevalent,  it  was  perhaps  not  unnatural,
though  highly  reprehensible,  that  the  in-
ferior clergy  should  be  silent  and  stand
aloof.  By  God's  good  providence,  how-
ever, it  often  happens  that  when  things
have  come  to  this  pass,  and  the  priestly
order  is  hopelessly  corrupt,  godly  princes
are  raised  up  to  take  in  hand  religioas  re-
forms and  carry  them  to  a  successful  issue,

Ver.  1. — ^Whon  tbeie  things  were  done.


CH.  DC.  1—15.]


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA,


139


It  must  have  been  some  considerable  time
afterwards.  Ezra  reached  Jerusalem  on
the  first  day  of  the  fifth  month  (oh.  vii.  9),
rested  three  days  (ch.  viii.  32),  and  on  the
fourth  day  of  the  same  month  made  over
the  vessels  to  the  temple  authorities.  It
was  not  till  the  seventeenth  day  of  the
ninth  month  that,  on  Ezra's  motion,  the
matter  of  the  mixed  marriages  was  taken
in  hand  (ch.x.  8,  9).  Yet  we  cannot  suppose
that  action  was  long  delayed  after  the
matter  came  to  Ezra's  knowledge.  The
princes.  Thecivil  heads  of  the  community,
whom  Ezra  found  at  the  head  of  affairs  on
his  arrival,  and  whose  authority  he  did  not
wholly  supersede  (see  ch.  x.  14, 16).  The
people  of  the  lands.  The  idolatrous  nations
inhabiting  the  districts  adjoining  Pales-
tine :  Egyptians  and  Amorites  on  the  south ;
Moabites  and  Ammonites  on  the  east;  Ca-
naanites  probably  towards  the  north  and
the  north-west.  Doing  according  to  their
abominations.  Rather, ' '  in  respect  of  their
abominations."  The  complaint  was  not
so  much  that  the  Jews  had  as  yet  actually
adopted  idolatrous  functions,  as  that  they
did  not  keep  themselves  wholly  aloof  from
them.  The  foreign  wives  would  introduce
idolatrous  rites  into  their  very  houses.

Ver.  2. — The  holy  seed.  Compare  Isa.  vi.
1 3.  '  The  "  seed  of  Israel,"  however  much
it  polluted  itself  by  transgressions,  was
still  "holy"  by  profession, by  call, by  obli-
gation, by  prophetic  announcement.  They
were  "a  kingdom  of  priests,a  holynation"
( Exod.iix.6) ;  bound  to  be  "separated  from
all  the  people  that  were  on  the  face  of  the
earth"  (Exod.  xxxiii.  1 6) ,  and  to  keep  them-
selves a  "peculiar  people."  When  they
mingled  themselves  with  the  people  of  the
lands, they  not  only  broke  a  positive  com-
mand (Deut.  vii.  3),  but  did  their  best  to
frustrate  God's  entire  purpose  in  respect
of  them,  and  to  render  all  that  he  had  done
for  them  of  no  effect.  The  hand  of  the
princes  and  rulers  hath  been  chief  in  the
trespass.  ' '  Princes  and  rulers  "  are  here
opposed  to  people  of  the  middle  and  lower
ranks.  The  upper  classes,  whether  cleri-
cal or  lay,  had  been  the  chief  offenders
(see  ch.  x.  18);  and  compare  the  similar  de-
fection of  Jews  of  the  upper  classes  in  Ne-
hemiah's  time  (Neh.  vi.  17, 18;  xiii.  4,  28).

Ezra's  ASTONISHMENT  and  horbok  (ch.
ix.  3,  4).  In  Babylonia,  whence  Ezra  had
come,  the  inclination  to  intermarry  with
the  heathen  had  not,  it  would  seem,  shown
itself.  Exiles  in  a  foreign  land  naturally
cling  to  each  other  under  their  adverse  cir-
cumstances, and,  moreover,  being  despised
by  those  among  whom  they  sojourn,  are
not  readily  accepted  by  them  into  social
fellowship,  much  less  into  affinity  and  al-


liance. Thus  the  thing  was  to  Ezra  a  new
thing.  His  familiarity  with  the  Law,  and,
perhaps  we  may  add,  his  insight  into  the
grounds  upon  which  the  Law  upon  this
point  was  founded,  caused  him  to  view  the
matter  as  one  of  the  gravest  kind,  and  to
feel  shocked  and  horror-struck  at  what  was
told  him  respecting  it.  He  showed  his  feel-
ings with  the  usual  openness  and  abandon
of  an  Oriental:  first  rending  both  his  outer
and  his  inner  garments,  then  tearing  his
hair  and  his  beard,  and  finally  "  sitting
down  astonied,"  motionless  and  speech-
less, until  the  time  of  the  evening  sacri-
fice. Such  a  manifestation  of  horror  and
amazement  was  well  calculated  to  impress
and  affect  the  sympathetic  and  ardent  peo-
ple over  whom  Providence  had  placed  him.

Ver.  3. — I  rent  my  garment  and  my
mantle.  Bending  the  clothes  was  always,
and  still  is,  one  of  the  commonest  Orien-
tal modes  of  showing  grief.  Reuben  rent
his  clothes  when  his  brothers  sold  Jo-
seph to  the  Midianites,  and  Jacob  did  the
same  when  he  believed  that  Joseph  was
dead  (Gen.  xxxvii.  29,  34).  Job  "  rent  his
mantle"  on  learning  the  death  of  his  sons
and  daughters  (Job  i.  20);  and  his  friends
"  rent  every  one  his  mantle"  when  tliey
"came  to  mourn  with  him  and  comfort
him"  (Job  ii.  1],  12).  Rent  clothes  indi-
cated that  a  messenger  was  a  messenger
of  woe  (1  Sam.  iv.  12;  2  Sara.  i.  2),  or  that
a  man  had  heard  something  that  had  great-
ly shocked  him,  and  of  which  he  wished
to  express  his  horror  (8  Kings  xviii.  37;
Matt.  xxvi.  65).  Ezra's  action  is  of  this
last  kind,  expressive  of  horror  more  than
of  grief,  but  perhaps  in  some  degree  of
grief  also.  And  plucked  off  the  hair  of  my
head  and  of  my  beard.  These  are  somewhat
unusual  signs  of  grief  among  the  Orientals,
who  were  wont  to  shave  the  head  in  great
mourning,  but  seldom  tore  the  hair  out  by
the  roots.  The  practice  is  not  elsewhere
mentioned  in  Scripture,  excepting  in  the
apocryphal  books  (1  Esdr.  viii.  71;  2  Esdr.
i.  8;  Apoc.  Esth.  iv.  2).  And  sat  down  as-
tonied. Compare  Dan. iv.  19;  viii.27, where
the  same  verb  is  used  in  the  same  sense.

Ver.  4. — Then  were  assembled  unto  me.
The  open  manif  estati  on  by  Ezra  of  his  grief
and  horror  produced  an  immediate  efEect.
A  crowd  assembled  around  him,  attracted
by  the  unusual  sight — partly  sympathiz-
ing, partly  no  doubt  curious.  Every  on*
came  that  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  Ood
of  Israel ;  by  which  is  meant  not  so  much
all  God-fearing  persons  (see  Isa.  livi.  3)
as  all  who  were  alarmed  at  the  transgres-
sion of  the  commands  of  God  (ch.  x.  3),  and


140


THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.


[CH.  IX.  1—18.


at  tlie  threats  which  the  Law  contained
against  transgressors  (Deut.  vii.  4).  Be-
cause of  the  transgression  of  those  that  had
been  carried  away.  The  transgression  of
"  the  children  of  the  captivity"  (ch.  iv.  1)
— of  those  who  had  been  removed  to  Baby-
lon and  had  returned  under  Zerubbabel.  I
sat  astonied  nntil  the  evening  sacrifice.  As
morning  is  the  time  for  business  in  the
East,  we  may  assume  that  the  princes  had
waited  upon  Ezra  tolerably  early  in  the  day
— before  noon,  at  any  rate — to  communi-
cate their  intelligence.  The  evening  sac-
rifice took  place  at  three  in  the  afternoon.
Ezramust, therefore, either  from  the  inten-
sity of  his  own  feelings  or  with  the  view
of  impressing  the  people,  have  "  sat  as-
tonied"— speechless  and  motionless — for
several  hours,

Ezra's  confession  and  pbaybr  to  God
(ch.  ix.  5 — 15).  The  most  remarkable  f  eat-
u  re  of  Ezra's  confession  is  the  thoroughness
with  which  he  identifies  himself  with  his
erring  countrymen, blushes  for  their  trans-
gressions, and  is  ashamed  for  their  miscon-
duct. All  theirsins  he  appears  to  consider
as  his  sins,  all  their  disobedience  as  his  dis-
obedience,all  their  perils  as  his  perils.  An-
other striking  feature  is  his  sense  of  the  ex-
ceeding sinfulness  of  the  particular  sin  of
the  time  (see  vers.  6, 7, 10).  He  views  it  as
a  "great  trespass"— one  that  "is  grown  up
into  the  heavens" — which  is  equivalent
to  a  complete  forsaking  of  God's  command-
ments, and  on  account  of  which  he  and  his
people  "cannot  stand  before"  God.  This
feeling  seems  based  partly  on  the  nature
of  the  sin  itself  (ver.l4),but  also,  and  in  an
especial  way,  on  a  strong  sense  of  the  in-
gratitude shown  by  the  people  in  turning
from  Qoii  so  soon  after  he  had  forgiven
their  former  sins  against  him,  and  allowed
them  to  return  from  the  captivity,  rebuild
the  temple,  and  re-establish  themselves  as
a  nation.  If  after  their  deliverance  they
again  fell  away,  the  sin  could  not  but  be
unpardonable;  and  the  punishment  to  be
expected  was  a  final  uprooting  and  de-
struction from  which  there  could  be  no
recovery  (vers.  13, 14).

Ver.  5.  — At  the  evening  sacrifice  I  arose  np
from'my  heaviness.  The  time  of  sacrifice
was  the  fittest timef  or  prayer.especially  f  or
a  prayer  in  which  acknowledgment  of  sin
was  to  form  a  large  part.  Sacrifice  symbol-
ised expiation;  and  Ezra  probably  felt  that
his  sappUcation  would  be  helped  by  the
expiatory  rite  which  was  being  performed
at  the  time.     He  rent  his  garment  and  his


mantle  a  second  time,  as  a  renewed  indi-
cation of  sorrow,  and  with  the  view  of  im-
pressing the  people  who  "  were  assembled
anto  him"  (ver.  4)  the  more,  and  stirring
them  up  to  penitence.  "  Segnius  irritant
animum  demissa  per  sares  Quftm  qns
sunt  ocidis  subjeeia  fidelibus."

Ver.  6. — I  am  ashamed  and  blnsh.  Jere-
miah had  complained  that  in  his  day  those
who ' '  committed  abominations  were  not  at
iillashamed,neithercouldtheyblush"(Jer.
vi.  15;  viii.  13).  Ezra,  with  these  words  in
his  thoughts  possibly,  begins  his  confes-
sion with  a  protestation  that  he  at  any  rate
is  not  open  to  this  reproach — he  blushes
and  burns  with  shame  for  the  sins  of  his
people.  Car  Iniquities  are  increased  over
our  head.  /.  e.  have  kept  on  rising  like  a
flood;  "gone  over  our  head"{Ps.  xxiviii.
4),  and  overwhelmed  us.  And  onr  trespass
is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens.  Has  grown
to  such  a  height  that  it  has  attracted  the  no
tice  of  God,  and  made  him  angry  with  us.

Ver.  7. — Since  the  days  of  our  fathers.
The  historical  sketches  in  Nehemiah  (ix.
6—35)  and  the  Acts  (vii.  2—53)  show  that
this  phrase  might  be  takefu  in  a  very  wide
sense,  and  ^e  regarded  as  including  the
"fathers"  of  the  nation  who  came  out  of
Egypt ;  but  perhaps  Ezra  has  rather  in  his
mind  the  series  of  idolatries  belonging
to  the  kingly  period,  and  extending  from
Solomon  to  Zedekiah.  We,  our  Idngs,  and
onr  priests,  have  been  delivered  into  the
hand  of  the  kings  of  the  lands.  Menahem
into  the  hand  of  Pul,  Pekah  of  Tiglath-
Pileser,  Hoshea  of  Shalmaneser  or  Sar-
gon,  Manasseh  of  Esarhaddon,  Josiah  of
Pharaoh  -  Necho,  Jehoahaz,  Jehoiakim,
Jehoiachin,  and  Zedekiah,  of  Nebuchad-
nezzar. That  the  priests  had  their  full
share  in  the  calamities  of  the  captirity
appears  from  2  Kings  xxv.  18 ;  Jer.  Mi.
24 ;  Ezek.  i.  1 — 3.  And  to  ooafiuiMi  of
face.  1.  e.  to  disgrace  and  shame  (com-
pare Ps.  xliv.  18—15).

Ver.  8. — And  new  for  a  little  space  grace
hath  been  showed.  The  ' '  little  space  "  must
be  understood  relatitiely  to  the  long  enjoy-
ment of  Divine  favour  from  Abraham  to
Zedekiah.  It  was  a  space  of  more  than
eighty  years.  A  remnant  to  escape.  The
Hebrew  has  simply  p'laythah,  "  a  rem-
nant," the  "  remnant"  being  that  which
had  escaped  the  two  dangers  of  destruc-
tion and  absorption,  and  had  returned
from  Babylon  to  Palestine.  To  give  u  a
nail.  "  A  nail "  seems  to  mean  here  "  a
firm  and  sure  abode,"  as  our  translators
note  in  the  margin.

Ver.  0. — For  we  ware  bondsmen.  Bather,
"  we  are."  Th«  Jews  had  not  reeoTeawd
their  independence.  They  continued  to  ba
thesubjectsof  adespoticmonarch  andwo*
therefore '(iM(i(i»,"Blaiv«B."  ABtheftii»B«


ca.  Dt,  1—16.]


TfiE  Boot  OF  E^RA.


141


shown  them  by  the  kings  of  Persia  bad  not
changed  this  fact.  To  give  OS  a  wall.  That
is  to  say,  "a  shelter."  The  city  wall  still
lay  in  rains  (see  Neh.  i,  3;  ii.  IS,  &c.)-

Ver.  11. — The  land,  nnto  which  ye  go  to
poaseas  it,  is  an  nnclean  land,  &c.  These
exact  words  do  not  occur  elsewhere;  bat
the  "unclean"  and  corrupt  character  of
the  Canaanitish  nations  is  constantly  pro-
claimed in  the  Law,  and  was  the  sole
reason  why  their  land  was  taken  from
them  and  given  to  the  Israelites.  On  the
special  character  of  their  ' '  filthiness  "  and
"abominations"  see  Deut.  xii,  2,  3;  Levit.
xviii.  6—37.

Ver.  12. — Give  not  yonr  daughters,  &c.
Here  Deut.  vii.  8  is  plainly  referred  to,
though  not  verbally  quoted.  This  is  the
sole  place  in  the  Law  where  the  double
injunction  is  given,  Exod.  xxxiv.  16  re-
ferring to  the  taking  of  wives  only.  Uor
seek  theirpeaoe  or  their wealthfor  ever.  So
Moses  had  enjoined  with  special  reference
to  the  Moabites  and  Ammonites  (Deut.
xxiii,  6).  With  regard  to  the  other  idol-
atrous nations,  the  exact  command  was
"to  make  no  covenant  with  them"  (Exod.
xxiii.  82;  xxxiv.  12),  i.e.  no  terms  of  peace.
Much  the  same  was  probably  meant  by
both  injunctions.  That  ye  may  be  strong.
See  Deut.  xi.  8.  And  eat  the  good  of  the  land.
These  words  are  taken  from  Isa.  i.  19.
And  leave  it  for  an  inheritance,  &c.  No
single  passage  seems  to  be  referred  to
here,  but  the  clause  embodies  the  idea
found  in  Deut.  xi.  9;  Prov.  x.  27;  Ezek.
xxxvii.  25,  and  elsewhere.

Vers.  13, 14. — After  all  that  is  come  upon
u,  &c    After  the  poniahments  that  we


have  suffered,  the  loss  of  our  independ-
ence, of  our  temple,  and  our  city,  the
long  and  weary  period  of  captivity  and
servitude  in  a  foreign  land,  which  should
have  bent  our  stubborn  spirits  to  obedi-
ence; and  after  the  mercy  shown  us  in  the
fact  that  thou  hast  punished  ns  less  than
our  iniquities  deserved,  and  given  ns  a
deliverance,  or  rather  a  residue,  snch  as
this,  which  should  have  stirred  us  up  to
gratitude  and  love,  should  we  again  break
thy  commandments,  and  fall  away,  what
can  we  expect  but  final  abandonment,
complete  and  entire  destruction?  If
neither  severity  nor  kindness  avail  any-
thing, what  can  God  do  more?  must  he
not  view  our  case  as  hopeless,  and  so
make  an  end  of  us  altogether?  (Compare
Isa.  V.  1 — 7;  Luke  xiii.  6 — 9.)

Ver.  16. — Thou  ait  righteous:  for  we  re-
main yet  escaped.  Righteousness,  in  its
widest  sense,  includes  mercy;  and  so  the
meaning  here  may  be,  "  Thou  art  good
and  gracious;  of  which  thy  havingspared
us  is  a  proof; "  or  tiaddik  may  have  its
more  usual  sense  of  "just, "  and  Ezra  may
mean  to  say,  "Thou  art  just,  and  there-
fore hast  brought  ns  to  the  low  estate  in
which  we  are  to-day,  and  made  us  a  mere
remnant."  We  are  before  thee  in  onr  tres-
passes. We  are  here,  in  thy  presence;
here,  before  thy  holy  place  (oh.  x.  1);
sinners,  with  all  our  sins  upon  us,  con-
fessing our  guilt;  for  we  cannot  stand  be-
fore thee — we  cannot  boldly  stand  up  and
face  thee  ("Who  shall  stand  in  thy  sight
when  thou  art  angry?"  Ps.  Ixxvi.  7),
beoause  of  this  our  heinous  transgression,
for  which  there  is  no  excuse.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1— 4.— .4n  astounding  ditcovery.  The  previous  chapter  ended  with  every
appearance  of  peace.  The  people  already  at  Jerusalem,  the  new  arrivals,  the  Per-
sian authorities,  seemed  all  of  one  mind.  So  far  as  the  house  and  worship  of
Jehovah  were  concerned,  and,  therefore,  so  far  as  the  welfare  and  prosperity  of  the
returned  remnant  were  concerned,  there  did  not  appear  to  be  a  cloud  in  the  sky.
But  we  have  hardly  begun  this  next  chapter  before  we  are  in  the  midst  of  a  storm!
On  the,  one  side  we  hear  the  language  of  agitation  and  distress.  On  the  other  we
see  the  silence  of  consternation  and  awe.  Rightly  to  appreciate  either  we  must
dwell  upon  both.  Let  us  ask— (1)  What  was  the  origin  of  this  cry  of  distress-  (2)
what  its  exact  nature;  (3)  what  its  immediate  results.  '

I.  The  OBiai»  op  the  cby.  This  was  traceable,  we  believe.  In  large  measure,  to
Ezra's  own  arrival  and  influence.  He  had  come  to  Jerusalem  ayowedly  (see  vii.  25)
for  the  purpose  of  giving  instruction,  and,  where  need  was,  of  administering  correc-
tion, in  regard  to  that  Law  of  Moses  which  he  had  studied  so  well.  As  we  read  the
story,  he  had  now  been  something  more  than  three  months  In  the  holy  city  (comp
Til.  9,  and  x.  8,  9).  During  that  time  he  certainly  had  not  been  silent  as  to  the
commands  of  that  Law ;  but  had  doubtless  both  explained  and  enforced  its  directions
and  warnings  with  a  clearness  and  force  that  made  it  in  those  comparatively  book*
leu  days  almost  a  new  thing  in  Jerusalem.    Consider  all  that  is  implied  in  this  con


14a  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  rx.  1—16,

nection  In  Neh.  viii.  8.  In  the  case  of  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  this
would  have  a  twofold  eflect.  It  would  at  once  enlighten  their  understanding  (Rom.
iii.  end  ver.  20,  vli.  7)  and  arouse  their  fears  (3  Chron.  xxxiv.  19 — 21).  In  pro-
portion, also,  as  his  work  in  these  respects  was  made  effectual  by  God's  blessing,  in
the  same  proportion  would  they  be  led  to  think  and  feel  thus,  not  only  about  such
open  sins  as  Ezra  might  denounce  by  name,  but  also  about  any  other  offences  whicli,
from  his  position  as  a  new-comer  or, other  causes,  might  be  known  to  themselves,
but  not  to  him.  Violations  of  God's  law  in  connection  with  the  peculiar  privacy  of
domestic  life  in  the  East  would  be  sins  of  this  kind.  It  would  be  very  difficult  for
Ezra,  merely  by  seeing  the  heads  of  households  in  public,  to  know  who  might  be
found  connected  with  them  in  the  women's  apartments  at  home.  Nor  would  he
even  learn  this  probably,  in  many  cases,  by  seeing  such  men  in  their  homes,  as  ht
would  seldom,  if  ever,  see  the  women  themselves  (see  Gen.  xviii.  9,  and  comp.
"  bring  forth"  in  the  margin  of  oh.  x.  3).  On  the  other  hand,  amongst  those  wlio
listened  to  him  there  would  be  many  who,  as  resident  in  Jerusalem  from  their  bhtli,
and  not  hitherto  separated  from  others  as  Ezra  was  by  position  and  character,
might  be  perfectly  well  aware  of  what  was  thus  unknown  to  himself.  Such  appears
to  have  been  the  case.  Some  of  his  hearers  knew  of  many  marriages  in  Israel  at
large  which  they  now  found  from  his  teaching,  or  else  now  felt  more  strongly  than
previously,  to  be  contrary  to  God's  law.  Such  men  would  naturally  begin  to  speak
of  these  things  to  others  like-minded,  and  afterwards  would  resolve  with  them
unitedly  on  bringing  the  subject  before  their  teacher.  It  is  thus,  apparently,  tbiit
we  find  them  speaking  to  him  as  in  vers.  1,  2  of  this  chapter.  Ezra  bad  influenci  d
them  to  such  an  extent  that  they  could  not  help  informing  him  about  all  (comp.
Acts  xix.  18).  That  was  clearly  the  first  step.  What  steps  should  be  taken  after-
wards they  would  learn  from  himself.

11.  The  charactbb  of  their  obt.  In  their  way  also  of  confessing  the  facts  of  the
case  to  Ezra  there  is  much  to  be  noticed.  We  find,  for  example,  that  in  speaking  of
the  sin  of  these  mixed  marriages  they  acknowledge — 1.  Its  national  bearing.  "The
people — the  priests  and  the  Levites" — the  whole  people,  i.e.,  including  even  those  who
ought  to  have  been  furthest  from  such  a  transgression,  have  been  concerned  in  this  evil.
Either  by  example,  in  short,  or  else  by  connivance,  we  are  all  guilty  in  this  respect.
2.  Its  intrinsic  iMckednesa.  Wherein  and  why  were  they  bound  to  be  separated  from
the  neighbouring  tribes?  In  respect  of  the  "abominations"  practised  by  them,  and
because  of  the  exceeding  danger  to  the  Israelites  themselves  of  pollution  thereby.
This  may  be  the  reason  why  they  make  mention  here  of  three  other  nations  (viz.,
Ammon,  Moab,  and  Egypt)  besides  those  Canaanitish  nations  which  are  expressly
mentioned  in  that  part  of  the  Law  referred  to.  In  their  then  present  critical  and
■truggling  condition  there  was  similar  danger  to  them  from  these  quarters  as  well
(Lange).  Prom  all  those  who  "hated  God"  (see  2  Chron.  xix.  2)  they  rightly  felt
that  they  ought  to  be  separated  in  such  times  as  theirs.  3.  Its  deadly  character.
Instead  of  being  thus  "separated"  from  these  dangerous  neighbours,  they  had
become  united  with  them,  in  many  cases,  in  the  most  intimate  possible  way,  viz. ,  by
admitting  the  daughters  of  these  idolaters  to  be  the  mothers  and  teachers  of  the
Israel  of  the  future,  to  the  utter  corruption  in  two  ways  of  the  "  holy  seed  "  (see  Isa.
▼1.  13)  of  God's  people.  4.  Its  ipedal  aggravations.  The  very  hands  which
"bare  the  sword"  (Bom.  xlii.  4),  and  ought  to  have  "restrained"  and  prevented
this  evil,  were  those  stained  by  it  most.  "  The  princes  and  rulers"  have  been  "  chief
in  this  trespass."

in.  The  iMMJBDiATB  BEBITLTB  of  this  Unsparing  confession.  These  appear  to  hare
been  even  more  serious  than  the  princes  had  expected.  1.  On  Ezra  himself.  What
depth  of  grief  as  evidenced  by  the  violent  rending  of  both  his  outer  and  inner  gar-
ment (vers.  8  and  5),  more  even  than  we  read  of  m  the  case  of  Job  (Job  i.  20)  after
losing  all  his  substance,  and  all  his  children  as  well.  What  depth  of  indignation  as
shown  by  the  sudden  Injury  done  to  himself,  as  it  were,  for  being  identified  with
such  a  nation  (comp,  somewhat  similar  case  in  Neh.  xiii.  25).  What  utter  bewilder-
ment and  terror,  sitting  down  in  silence  as  one  "  stunned  "  and  confounded,  not
knowing,  in  such  circumstances,  what  to  do  or  even  to  say.  Nay,  one  had  almost
said,  what  despair — so  remaining,  as  in  a  kind  of  ecstasy,  till  all  who  truly  sympa-
thised with  him  in  Jerusalem  had  heard  of  his  grief  and  come  to  him.  2.  On  Ezra's
frimdi.    What  a  picture  of  them  is  here  presented  to  us.    All  "  trembling "  like


CH.  DC  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  U8

Ezra  himself.  All  silent,  like  Job's  frieuds,  wlien  first  they  came  to  him  and  beheld
his  grief  (Job  ii.  13).  There  are  occasions  when  silence  says  most.  It  does  so  when
it  proclaims  a  sorrow  to  be  too  overwhelming  to  allow  of  speech.  In  such  silence
that  afternoon  passed,  till  the  hour  for  the  evening  sacrifice  had  arrived,  and  the
usual  preparations  were  being  made  for  its  solemn  observance.  But  not  till  that
sacrifice  spoke  to  them,  as  it  were,  like  a  voice  from  heaven  was  any  other  voice
heard.

See,  in  conclusion,  from  this  passage — 1.  How  wide  the  grasp  of  God's  law.  _  Even
as  given  in  a  written  form,  and  with  a  peculiar  minuteness  of  specification,  in  the
Pentateuch,  we  see  that  it  was  rather  a  thing  of  principle  than  precise  enactment.
Hence,  in  one  way,  its  "exceeding  breadth"  (Ps.  cxix.  96),  and  its  applicabilUy,  as
here,  to  analogous  cases  as  well  as  direct  ones.  Hence,  also,  the  way  in  which  we
read  of  it  as  being  au  object  of  "love"  and  "delight"  (Ps.  i.  2;  cxix.  97,  113,  165,
Ac).  Those  who  love  it  ask  not  how  little,  but  how  much,  it  implies.  2.  How
subtle  the  infection  of  sin.  There  is  danger  even  in  being  witnesses  of  other  men's
sins  (Ps.  cxix.  37).  There  is  almost  certain  contraction  of  guilt  in  anything  like
intimacy  with  evil  men.  Observe  on  .this  point  the  sixfold  warning  of  Prov.  iv.  14 —
16.  No  privileges,  no  office,  no  rank  secure  exemption  from  this  peril.  8.  How
especially  destructive  the  sins  of  God's  people.  What  can  be  said  or  done  for  those
who  "hold  the  truth  in  unrighteousness"  (see  1  Cor.  v.  11)?  If  it  were  not,  in  fact,
for  the  voice  of  the  "sacrifice,"  the  "propitiation"  appointed  even  for  such  (1  Johr
ii.  1,  3),  what  must  there  be  for  them  but  despair?

Vers.  5 — 15. — A  flood  of  tears.  As  we  noticed  before,  and  as  is  here  noticed  again,
the  approach  of  the  evening  sacrifice  seems  to  have  been  the  first  thing  which  opened
Ezra's  lips.  Speaking  to  him  at  last  as  he  sat  like  a  rock  (comp.  Ps.  cv.  41),  it  was
answered  immediately  by  a  mingled  outburst  of  confession  and  tears.  Again  by
outward  gesture  expressing  his  sorrow,  but  not,  as  before,  his  indignation,  he  added
now,  by  falling  on  his  knees  and  spreading  out  his  hands,  the  outward  tokens  of
humiliation  and  prayer.  And  all  that  he  says  we  find  to  be  in  exact  accordance
therewith.  Unqualified  shame;  irresistible  proof;  inexcusable  guilt.  In  these  words
we  have  a  sufficient  key  to  the  nature  and  order  of  his  thoughts.

I.  Unqualipikd  shame.  How  difficult  a  thing  it  is  to  look  on  any  one  to  whom
we  have  done  wrong.  How  especially  difficult  if  that  other  is  one  to  whom  we  are
especially  bound  to  show  honour.  This  was  the  great  trial  of  the  prodigal's  case.
He  had  to  say  to  his  father,  I  have  sinned  before  thee  (see  Isa.  i.  2  ;  Mai.  i.  6).  The
same  kind  of  feeling  is  traceable  here.  "  O  my  God,  I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift
up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God."  As  one  of  thy  chosen  people  Israel,  how  can  I  look
on  thee  as  things  are?  My  own  countenance  proclaims  its  shame,  its  burning  shame,
if  I  do.  For,  indeed,  there  is  cause  for  shame  in  this  case.  There  is  nothing  else,
in  fact,  as  things  are.  Like  a  man  in  the  waters,  when,  being  above  his  head,  they
destroy  his  life,  so  are  we  overwhelmed  now  with  our  shame.  Like  those  who  have
nothing  to  say  to  thee  because  the  proof  of  their  guilt  is  before  thee,  so  are  we
silenced  now  by  our  shame.  "  Our  guiltiness  (margin)  is  grown  up  into  the  heavens  "
(comp.  Ps.  xc.  8).  Altogether  this  opening  confession  is  like  that  of  Job  (ch.  xl.  4;
xlii.  6).  Behold,  I  am  vile,  and  abhor  myself;  or,  like  that  of  the  prodigal,  before
referred  to,  "I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son."  My  very  privileges  having
become  my  disgrace,  what  disgrace  can  be  worse?

II.  Irkbsistible  proof.  There  being  nothing  perhaps  less  pleasing  to  God  than
to  accuse  ourselves  before  him  without  knowing  why,  such  an  extreme  confession  as
the  above  ought  not  to  be  made  without  sufficient  proof.  This  we  have  in  abundance
in  the  words  which  come  next  (vers.  7—12).  The  sin  which  Ezra  had  that  day  heard
of,  and  which  had  led  him  to  make  this  confession,  was  in  everyway  a  reproach.  It
was  so  because  committed— 1.  In  defiance  of  God's  judgments.  For  similar  sin  in
previous  days  on  the  part  of  their  fathers  an  almost  unexampled  visitation  of  judg-
ment had  come  on  them  as  a  nation.  Though  a  people  sacred  to  Jehovah,  he  had
handed  them  over  in  consequence,  together  with  their  "kings  and  priests,"  the  most
sacred  classes  among  them  (3  Sam.  i.  14,  end  31 ;  Ps.  cvi.  16 ;  Lam.  iv.  20),  into  the
hands  of  their  foes.    Loss  of  life,  or  liberty,  or  substance— in  the  best  case  loss  of


144  THE  BOOK  OF  BZBA.  [(A.  ix.  1— 1&

respect— had  been  the  result  (see  end  ver.  7).  Even  to  that  "day,"  In  fact  (AM.),
this  "  confusion  of  face,"  of  which  Daniel  had  spol^en  so  feelingly  some  eighty  yean
ago,  after  some  seventy  years'  trial  of  it,  remained  as  part  of  their  lot.  Yet,  vith
all  this  in  their  memory  and  experience,  what  had  been  their  reply?  To  repeat  again
now  the  very  ofience  for  which  they  had  suffered  so  muchi  2.  In  despite  of  God's
mercy.  Notwithstanding  this  heavy  displeasure,  there  had  been  compassion  as  well.
For  some  little  time  back  (little  in  the  life-history  of  a  nation,  that  is  to  say)  various
signs  of  "grace  "or  favour  had  been  vouchsafed  to  them.  The  destruction  of  the
people,  e.  g.,  had  not  been  total;  a  "remnant "had  "escaped" — a  great  token  of
good  in  itself  (Ezek.  xiv.  33,  33).  Nor  had  their  dispersion  from  their  home  under
God's  wing  been  for  ever.  On  the  contrary,  a  "  nail,"  or  fixed  habitation  (Isa.  xxii.
23 ;  xxxiii.  30),  had  been  given  them  "  in  his  holy  place."  There  was  some  cheer-
fulness also,  or  "  lightening  of  the  eyes,"  with  ail  their  "confusion  of  face," and  some
"  reviving"  in  their  death-like  bondage.  Truly  wonderful  mercy,  indeed,  it  was  I —
that  restored  house  after  such  long  desolation  ;  that  restored  "  wall "  or  fence  round
such  captives ;  how  much  it  proved  ;  how  much  it  promised  ;  what  an  undeserved
mercy  it  was.  How  amazingly  wicked,  therefore,. how  ungrateful,  to  despise  it  as
they  had  done.  8.  In  contempt  of  God's  express  will.  Most  clearly,  most  strongly,
most  earnestly,  and  that  from  the  very  first,  had  God  declared  his  mind  on  this  pomt.
He  had  done  so  by  his  words,  as  here  quoted  He  bad  done  so  by  his  actions,  as
here  referred  to.  Why  had  he  ever  swept  away  from  Canaan  its  original  inhabitants?
Why  had  he  introduced  the  Israelites  in  their  place?  What  had  he  made  their
inheritance  of  it  to  depend  on  ?  The  answers  to  these  various  questions  were  clear
and  emphatic  on  this  subject,  and  made  the  conduct  which  Ezra  was  bewailing
like  that  of  soldiers  ordered  by  their  commander  to  charge  the  enemy,  and  drawing
their  swords  instead  against  himself.  These  were  the  three  reasons  why  Ezra  spoke
as  he  did  of  their  sin  (comp.  2  Chron.  zzviil.  32 ;  Luke  xii.  47  ;  Rom.  ii.  4 ;  Rev.  iz.
20,  21).

III.  Inexcubablb  outot.  In  circumstances  such  as  these,  what  could  they  say  or
expect?  After  such  experience,  after  such  deliverance,  and  in  the  face  of  such
knowledge,  they  had  begun  again  the  old  sin.  Must  not  this  bring  down  again  the
old  anger,  and  this  time  without  bound  (ver.  14)?  Even  as  things  were,  would  not
God  be  "righteous"  (ver.  15)  if  their  whole  remnant  were  destroyed?  So  much  so,
that  It  does  not  seem  to  occur  to  Ezra  even  to  speak  to  God  of  any  other  course  of
proceeding.  It  is  even  a  marvel  to  him,  in  the  circumstances,  that  they  continue
"escaped.  Here  we  are — do  as  thou  wiliest — we  cannot  stand  before  thee  in  our
trespasses  (see  Ps.  cxxx.  8) — we  can  only  place  ourselves  before  thee  in  the  dust —
we  have  nothing  to  urge.  This  total  absence  of  all  plea  or  entreaty  almost  reminds
one  of  Eli's  silence  in  1  Sam.  iii.  18  (comp.  also  ii.  25),  knowing  as  he  did  the
inexcusable  guilt  and  impenitence  of  his  sons.  Even  Daniel,  in  his  deepest  humilia-
tion on  account  of  the  sins  of  his  people,  could  take  a  different  line  (Dan.  ix.  19).

CoNCLTJBioN.  In  this  remarkable  picture  of  true  penitence  we  may  notice — 1.  lit
lingular  accuracy  of  judgment.  Sin  here,  as  with  David  and  Joseph  and  all  truly
"  God  conscious"  men  and  minds,  is  an  offence  against  God  himself  (see  Gen.  xxxiz.
9  ;  1  Sam.  xii.  23 ;  Ps.  Ii.  4  ;  Rom.  iv.  15  ;  1  John  iii.  4).  3.  Its  unswermng  loyalty.
See  the  acknowledgments  here  of  God's  mercy  and  justice  in  vers.  13,  15 ;  and
comp.  Ps.  Ii.  end  ver.  4,  also  1.  4,  6  ;  Luke  vii.  29  ;  Rom.  iii.  4,  19.  This  sin,  at  any
rate,  the  sin  which  renders  amendment  and  forgiveness  impossible,  the  sin  of  charging
God  foolishly,  the  true  penitent  is  free  from.  3.  li»  unsparing  sincerity.  So  far
from  denying,  hiding,  or  palliating  the  evil  it  refers  to,  it  seems  anxious  rather  to
biing  to  light  and  exhibit  its  very  worst  traits.  We  read  of  Blias  in  one  place  (Rom.
xi.  2)  as  making  "  intercession  against  Israel."  Ezra  here,  identifying  his  own  case
with  that  of  Israel,  may  be  almost  said  to  do  it  against  himself.  Could  even  the
great  accuser  (Rev.  xii.  10)  with  truth  have  said  very  much  worse?  Contrast  Gen.
iii.  12,  13 ;  1  Sam.  xv.  18,  20,  21 ;  and  comp.  perhaps  the  ckSCkiio-i*  of  3  Cor.  vii.  11,


CH.  IX  1—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  145


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOKa

Vers.  1—i.— Spiritual  separation.  I.  That  BSFABATioir  frou  the  world  is  a
LAW  OF  THB  BPnuTUAL  LiFB.  The  Israelites  must  separate  themselves  from  the
people  of  the  land  (ver.  1).  This  separation  fa  not  (1)  local.  The  Israelites  and
Canaanites  must  live  in  the  same  world,  in  the  same  town,  and  often  in  the  same
house.  This  separation  is  not  (3)  political.  Both  the  Israelites  and  the  Canaanites
must  act  theif  part  as  citizens  of  the  same  state.  This  separation  is  not  (3)  com-
mercial. The  Israelites  have  to  do  business  with  the  Canaanites.  This  separation
is  ^4)  spiritual.  The  good  man  is  separate  from  the  world  by  the  moral  dis-
positions and  aims  which  are  cherished  by  him;  so  that  while  he  is  in  the  same
place,  state,  and  business,  he  is  of  a  different  mind,  temper,  and  character.  'Why
must  the  good  man  thus  separate  himself  from  the  world?  True,  he  has  sympathy
with  his  comrades;  he  shares  their  manhood;  he  does  not  leave  it  in  pride,  or  in
sullenness;  but — 1.  That  he  may  maintain  the  dignity  of  the  Christian  life.  The
Israelites  were  the  followers  of  Jehovah,  and  could  not  place  themselves  on  the  same
platfonn  with  idolaters.  There  is  a  moral  dignity  about  religion  which  must  not
be  sacrificed  by  undue  familiarity  with  the  common  things  of  the  world.  There  is
a  dignity  in  the  Divine  name,  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  in  spiritual  devotion,  in  the
truth  of  the  gospel,  in  the  hopes  of  the  believer,  which  the  good  man  must  maintain,
which  is  likely  to  be  forfeited  in  worldly  companionships.  The  sacred  things  of
God  must  not  be  profaned  by  worldly  associations.  The  rose  must  not  cast  in  its  lot
with  the  nettle.  2.  That  he  may  exem  plify  the  purity  of  the  Christian  life.  The  land
of  the  people  was  unclean  (ver.  11).  Israel  must  not  be  contaminated  by  its  abomin-
ations. The  worldly  life  is  sinful.  The  Christian  life  must  be  holy.  Its  command-
ments are  holy.  Its  Suprehie  Example  is  sinless.  Its  duty  is  to  manifest  the  beauty  of
holiness,  and  to  iu  culcate  the  pursuit  of  piety.  In  order  to  this  it  must  be  separate  from
sinners.  3.  That  he  may  insure  the  safety  of  the  Christian  life.  The  Israelites  were
exposed  to  great  danger  by  contact  with  the  healhen,  and  separation  was  their
only  safeguard.  Piety  has  no  right  to  endanger  Itself  by  unholy  associations;  separ-
ation is  safety.  4.  That  he  may  conserve  the  purposes  of  the  Christian  life.  Israel
.  had  a  inission  to  the  other  nations,  and  only  by  separation  could  it  be  accomplished;
separation  is  necessary  to  the  moral  design  of  the  Church.

II.  That  the  law  of  spiritual  separation  ib  often  violated  by  Christian
MEN.  It  is  difficult  to  separate  from  those  amongst  whom  we  live.  It  is  not  easy  to
avoid  unholy  contact  with  the  people  of  the  land  who  are  so  near  to  us.  There  are
many  temptations  which  attract  the  spiritual  to  the  carnal.  The  people  of  the  land
have  daughters  to  give  in  marriage,  they  have  oftentimes  prosperity  and  wealth;  and
these  things  are  calculated  to  tempt  the  godly  into  unholy  alliance  (ver.  11).  Great
will  be  the  condemnation  of  those  who  yield  to  this  solicitation.

III.  That  the  law  of  spiritual  separation  is  conducive  to  the  prosperity
OF  the  Church.  "  That  ye  may  be  strong,  and  eat  the  good  of  the  land,  and  leave
it  for  an  inheritance  to  your  children  for  ever"  (ver.  13). — ^E.

Vers.  1—4.— Ezra's  grief.  "Now  when  these  things  were  done,"  viz.,  when  the
free-will  offerings  were  deposited  in  the  temple,  when  the  sacrifices  had  been
offered,  when  the  king's  commissions  had  been  delivered  to  his  lieutenants  and  the
governors  of  the  provinces— when  all  things  promised  well,  a  new  cause  of  trouble
arises.     "  The  princes  came,"  &c.  (vers.  1,  2).     Here  we  have—

I.  The  cause  of  Ezra's  grief.  1.  The  law  of  God  was  violated,  (1)  The
holy  people  had  made  marriages  with  strangeis.  God  had  separated  the. people  of
Israel  to  himself  (Deut.  xiv.  1,  2).  For  them  to  form  snch  affinities  was  against  the
law  (Deut.  vii  8).  The  marriage  union  of  children  of  God  with  children  of  Satan
is  monstrous:  It  is  an  outrage  against  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  (2  Cor._vi._  14).  (3)
They  had  in  consequence  been  drawn  into  their  abominations.  This  is  just  what
might  have  been  expected.  This  issue  is  constantly  foreshown  (Exod.  xxxiT.
15—17).  The  effect  of  these  unequal  yokings  upon  Christians  fa  most  melancholy.
KZHA.  *•  ••**•


U6  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [cH.  ix.  1—16.

2.  The  violation  of  the  law  was  general.  (1)  The  rulers  were  involved  in  It.  The
civil;  the  ecclesinstical.  "The  princes  and  rulers  have  been  chief  in  this  trespass."'
Being  in  it,  this  could  not  be  otherwise.  Position  involves  responsibilities.  Those
who  are  conspicuous  for  station  should  be  conspicuous  for  goodness.  (8)  Thai
people  vfere  in  it.  Crime  is  contagious.  Witness  too  often  the  tyranny  and  slavery  of
fashion.  What  absurdities  are  endured  because  prescribed  by  the  leaders  of  fashioni
How  demoralising  to  a  people  is  corruption  in  the  court.  The  rulers  could  not
reprove  the  people  when  implicated  themselves.  3.  The  fact  was  ineontestdbU.  (1)
It  was  reported  to  Ezra  by  the  princes.  The  representatives  of  David  and  Solomon
were  the  princes  of  Judah.  They  had  the  rule  over  the  people,  and  must  be  pre-
sumed to  be  well  informed.  (-2)  But  in  this  matter  they  cannot  be  mistaken,  for  they
are  themselves  also  in  the  transgression.  They  bear  witness  against  themselves.'
Note  here  the  power  of  conscience.  Crime  cannot  be  hidden  for  ever.  The  great
day  of  judgment  will  bring  all  deeds  of  darkness  to  the  light.     Consider  now —

II.  Thb  dbpth  [of  Ezka's  grief  (vers.  3,  4).  1.  He  rent  his  clotJiea.  (1)  In
early  times  emotion  was  commonly  expressed  in  symbolical  acts.  This  action  was
expressive  of  deep  distress  of  soul  (Gen.  xxxvii.  29,  30;  Lev.  x.  6;  xi.  44;  Judges
xi.  35;  Job  i.  20).  The  rending  of  the  heart  is  the  idea  (Joel  ii.  13).  (2)  Ezra  rent
his  garment.    The  word  here  rendered  "  garment "  pas  iehged\  is  the  common  terra

for  clothes.  His  rending  the  vestments  personal  to  him  would  express  his  per-
sonal grief.  The  honour  of  God  should  be  personal  to  each  of  us.  (3)  He  also  rent
his  mantle.  The  term  here  employed  {'"'?'?  m'il)  describes  an  oiBcial  robe.  It  isi
used  for  the  robe  of  the  ephod  worn  by  the  high  priest;  also  for  the  kingly  rObe  of
David,  and  that  of  Saul,  the  skiit  of  which  was  cut  off  by  David  (I  Sam.  xxiv.  4;
1  Chron.  xv.  27).  The  "mantle"  in  which  the  ghost  of  Samuel  was  seen  is  described
by  the  same  word  (1  Sam.  xxviii.  14).  In  Ezra's  case  it  might  be  his  official  robe
either  as  a  priest  or  as  a  civil  ruler,  or  both.  In  rending  his  mantle,  therefore,  he
expressed  his  distress  as  representing  the  people.  Religious  men  are  the  truesti
patriots.  2.  He  plucked  off  his  hair.  (1)  The  liair  of  his  head.  As  the  head  is  the
symbol  of  rule,  so-the  hair  of  the  head  was  regarded  as  a  natural  crown  (1  Cor.  xi.  7).
Righteousness  is  the  crown  of  our  glory  (2  Tim.  iv.  8).  Sin  plucks  this  crown  from
us,  and  reduces  us  to  the  deepest  humiliation  (Neb.  xiii.  25).  This  humiliation  was
expressed  by  Ezra.  (2)  The  hair  of  his  beard.  This  sign  of  manhood  was  regarded
as  a  symbol  of  honour,  and  a  greater  insult  could  scarcely  be  given  to  an  Oriental
than  to  pluck  or  cut  off  his  beard  (2  Sam.  x.  5).  This  action  of  Ezra  set  forth  how
he  regarded  the  honour  of  his  nation  to  be  wounded  in  the  tenderest  place  by  this
mingling  of  the  holy  seed  with  the  people  of  the  land.  3.  He  sat  down  astonied.
(1)  The  slate  of  silent,  awful  desolation  in  which  Ezra  sat  is  not  inaptly  expressed
by  this  old  English  word,  which  suggests  the  idea  of  beiug  stunned  as  by  thunder.
He  was  awed  by  hearing  as  it  were  the  rumbling  of  the  approaching  thunder  of
God's  judgments  upon  a  guilty  people.  (2)  Then  were  assembled  to  him  "every  one
that  trembled  at  the  words  of  the  God  of  Israel."  The  sympathy  of  a  common  fear
brought  them  together,  as  a  terrified  flock  would  gather  when  the  elements  become
sulphurous  for  tlie  tlninder-storm.  Good  men  love  to  meet  in  joy;  so  do  they  love
to  meet  in  grief.  Let  us  admire  and  imitate  (a)  this  zeal  for  God.  This  grief  fos
his  honour  being  outraged  by  sinners.  (6)  This  purest  patriotism  which  repents
yicariously  for  our  people. — J.  A.  M.  ,,.■..  ^^^^


Vers.  1 — 4. — Disappointment  and  disobedience.  And  now  then  for  rest  and  satis-
faction! now  for  spiritual  enjoyment!  now  for  the  continuous  exercise  of  the  soul
in  sacred  privileges  iu  the  holy  place!  now  for  the  goodly  sight  of  a  holy  people
walking  in  the  commandments  of  the  Lord  blameless!  Such  was  probably  Ezra's
feeling  as  he  first  settled  down  in  Jerusalem  with  the  children  of  the  captivity.  It
would  have  been  natural  and  human  for  him  to  think  thus;  but  if  he  did  thus  think
he  was  mistaken.     He  was  to  be  an  Instance  of —  .

I.  DiBAPPOiNTMBNT — the  lot  of  the  Christian  workman.  Hardly  had  he  estab-
lished himself  in  the  city  of  God  when  he  found,  with  painful  experience,  that  it
was  an  earthly  Jerusalem  in  which  he  had  come  to  dwell.    Zerubbabel  was  dead.


OA.  IX.  1—15.]  the:  BOOK  OF  EZBA.  141

and  Haggai  was  no  longer  prophesy  lug,  and  some  of  those  who  had  the  direction
of  public  affairs — "princes"  they  are  called  (ver.  1) — came  to  Ezra  with  a  very
serious  complaint.  They  came  to  tell  him  that  several  of  the  Jews,  including  many
of  the  Levltes,  and  even  of  the  priests,  and  also  (and  notoriously)  some  of  the  princes,
had  broken  the  clear  and  plain  commandment  of  the  Law  by  mingling  and  even
intermarrying  with  the  people  of  surrounding  hmds,  in  fact  with  the  heathen  (see
Exod.  xxiii.  33,  and  ixxiv.  12,  15,  16  ;  Deut,  vii.  3).  It  is  not  quite  certain  that  they
had  not  gone  further  than  this  in  the  way  of  laxity  and  worldliness  ;  but  as  far  as
this  they  had  certainly  gone,  and  the  fact  that  the  leaders,  secular  and  spiritual,
were  setting  the  example  (ver.  3)  made  the  matter  one  of  the  greatest  consequence.
The  soul  of  Ezra  was  filled  with  sadness  ;  with  extreme  disappointment  and  dis:nay
that  there  should  be  found  so  serious  a  blemish  in  the  holy  nation.  When  he  was
thinking  that  everything  promised  well,  here  was  an  evil  in  the  midst  of  them  which
threatened  to  undo  all  that  had  been  done,  to  bring  down  the  wrath  of  God,  and  to
demolish  the  good  work  which  he  and  others  before  and  beside  him  had  so  labori-
ously built  up.  He  "  rent  his  garment  and  his  mantle  ;  "  he  "  sat  astouied  until  the
eveningsacriflce "  (vers.  3,  4).  Such  is  the  common  experience  of  Christian  work-
men. When  the  Master  himself  gathered  disciples,  the  scribes  and  the  Pharisees
sought  to  sow  estrangement  and  separation  in  their  hearts.  When  Paul,  with  untir-
ing labour,  had  founded  Churches  in  Galatia,  Judaising  teachers  followed,  under-
mining his  influence  and  corrupting  the  truth  he  had  preached.  When  we  think  that
all  is  going  well  with  the  cause  of  God,  and  that  we  may  rest  in  spiritual  enjoyment,
then  we,  too  often,  find  that  tares  are  among  the  wheat,  that  dross  is  mixed  up  with
the  gold,  that  error  is  falsifying  and  distorting  truth,  that  sin  is  in  the  Church  of
Christ.  We  need  not  look  out  for  disappointment  as  a  thing  to  be  certainly  found,  but
■when  it  comes  we  may  remember  that  it  has  been  an  invariable  ingredient  in  the  Chris-
tian workman's  cup,  from  the  Master  down  to  the  humblest  teacher,  from  apostolic
days  to  our  own.  It  is  1/rying  in  the  last  degree.  It  tries  our  patience,  our  trust  in  God,
our  confidence  in  his  truth  ;  but  it  leads  us  to  him,  as  then  it  led  Ezra,  in  humble,
earnest,  united  prayer.     The  Jewish  people  at  this  period  afford  an  instance  of—

II.  DisoBBDiBNCB— a  recurring  note  in  the  life  of  the  Christian  Church.  Diso-
bedience had  seriously  affected  the  Jews  from  the  highest  social  rank  to  the  lowest.
Princes,  priests,  Levites,  and  the  common  people  were  all  compromised  to  a  greater  or
less  degree.  The  wrong-doing  may  not  seem  so  flagrant  to  us  as  it  did  to  Ezra,  for
wide-spread  intercourse,  national  intermingling,  is  a  marked  feature  of  our  times.
But  the  one  special  virtue  the  Jewish  Church  was  bound  to  exemplify  was  purity;
its  principal  duty  was  to  maintain  separateness  from  surrounding  evil.  It  was  now
failing  in  that  respect  in  which  it  was  most  urgently  required  to  be  steadfast  and  true.
Hence  the  intensity  of  the  feeling  of  Ezra  and  those  who  "  trembled  at  the  words  of
the  God  of  Israel"  (vers.  3,  4).  How  often  and  how  sadly  has  tlie  Christian  Church
disappointed  its  Lord  by  disobedience  to  his  will.  (1)  Sinful  alliances  with  the
secular  power  which  have  corrupted  and  enfeebled  it ;  (3)  guilty  conformity  to  the  (a)
idolatrous,  or  (J)  licentious,  or  (c)  convivial,  or  (0)  untruthfifl,  or  (e)  dishonest  practices
of  an  unrenewed,  unpuiified  world  ;  (3)  culpable  disregard  to  his  will  respecting  the
equality  of  his  disciples,  and  our  duty  to  the  "little  child, '  the  lowly  and  helpless
member  of  his  Church;  (4)  faulty  negligence  to  evangelise  the  surrounding  and
outlying  world— these  are  disobediences  which  (a)  disfigure  the  beauty  of  the
Churchf(P)  disappoint  and  displease  the  Master,  and  (■»)  delay  the  conversion  of  the
world.^C.

Vers  4r-\5.—8enamiUy.  Ezra  was  a  man  not  only  of  vigorous  mind  and  stron;?
will,  with  whom  things  soon  took  shape  and  form,  but  also  of  keen  sensibility,  in  tn
whOTe  heart  things  cut  deeply,  and  whose  soul  was  stirred  with  strong  emotion.
Therefore  he  knew  not  only  great  joys,  but  great  sorrows  also.

"Dearly  bought  the  hidden  treasure
Finer  feelings  can  bestow  ;
Chords  that  vibrate  deepest  pleasure
Thrill  the  deepest  notes  of  woe."

1.3


148  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  [CH.  ix.  1-16.

When  Be  learnt  how  the  «hll(ffen  of  Israel  had  gone  astray  in  the  matter  of  the
mixed  marriages,  he  was  overwhelmed  with  strong  and  profound  feeling.  There
was —

I.  DisMAT  AT  THE  PRBSENCB  OF  SIN  (ver.  5).  He  sat  "astonished  until  the  even-
ing sacrifice  "  (ver.  4),  having  just  given  way  to  an  Oriental  exhibition  of  extreme
agitation  (ver.  8).  This  blow  seems  to  have  stunned  him.  He  was  simply  dis-
mayed, appalled.  After  a  burst  of  grief  he  sat  overwhelmed  with  a  sense  of  the
exceeding  great  folly  and  iniquity  of  the  people.

II.  Shame  undbb  a  sense  op  sin  (vers.  5,  6,  16).  Placing  himself  in  penitential
attitude,  he  addressed  himself  to  God,  and  said,  "  0  my  God,  lam  ashamed  and  blush
to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee  "  (ver.  6).  He  went  on  to  identify  himself  (though  person-
all3' guiltless)  with  his  people:  "  Our  iniquities,"  &c  (ver.  6).  "  We  are  before  thee
in  our  trespasses  "  (ver.  15).  And  be  concluded  by  saying,  "  We  ciinnot  stand  before
thee  because  of  this"  (ver.  15).  Such  was  his  intense  fellow-feeling  and  sympathy
with  those  whom  he  was  serving,  that  he  felt  overwhelmed  with  shame  under  a
consciousness  of  tbeir  guilt.  Sin,  the  sin  of  our  family,  of  our  city,  of  our  country,
of  our  race — quite  apart  from  our  personal  share  in  it — is  a  shameful  thing,  something
to  humiliate  us  ftnd  cause  us  "confusion  of  face."

m.  Feak  of  the  consequences  of  sin.  "  Wouldest  thou  not  be  angry  with  us
till  thou  badst  consumed  us,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  He  lamented  that  the  brief  sunshine  they
were  enjoying  would  probably  disappear,  in  God's  rekindled  wrath,  in  utter  darkness.
God's  mercy  was  for  a  space  encompassi&g  them,  and  now  they  were  going  to  throw
it,  desperately  and  wantonly,  away.  No  sooner  were  they  out  of  bondage  than  they
were  inviting  the  great  Disposer,  in  his  righteousness,  to  send  them  back  into  cap-
tivity. Sin  had  ruined  them  before,  and  would  surely  ruin  them  again,  and  this
time  utterly  and  completely  (vers.  7,  8,  9,  14).    What  insensate  folly  1

We  may  look  at  sensibility  in  respect  of  sin  as  it  relates  to — 1.  Our  Divine  Lord
himself.  He  became  man  in  order  that  he  might  suffer  in  our  stead  ;  in  order  that,
as  man,  he  might  bear  the  penalty  we  must  otherwise  have  borne.  The  Sinless  One
was  never  conscious  of  sin,  nor  yet  of  shame  as  we  know  it ;  but  by  becoming
a  member  of  our  race,  thus  entering  into  perfect  fellowship  and  intense  sympathy
with  us,  he  could  be  affected,  sorrowfully  and  sadly,  by  a  sense  of  human  sin.  He
did,  in  a  way  necessarily  mysterious  to  us,  thus  suffer  for  us.  It  was  to  his  soul  a
dreadful,  horrible,  shameful  thing  that  mankind — to  whose  family  he  belonged,  and
of  which  he  was  a  member — should  have  sinned  so  grievously  as  it  bad.  3.  Owr
own  souls.  It  is  well  for  us  indeed  when  we  have  come  to  feel  the  shamefulness  of
our  own  sin.  The  heart  that,  thus  affected,  can  say,  "  O  my  God,  I  am  ashamed
and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  unto  thee  "  (ver.  6),  is  in  that  state  of  contrition,  of
poverty  of  spirit, ' '  of  which  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  3).  Sin  is  shame-
ful because  (1)  it  is  the  act  of  those  who  owe  everything  they  are  and  have  to  God,
and  (2)  It  is  directed  against  him  who  has  (a)  multiplied  his  mercies  unto  us  in  so
many  ways,  and  {b)  borne  so  long  with  us,  and  (c)  done  and  suffered,  in  Christ,  so
much  to  reclaim  us  ;  and  because  (3)  it  is  continued  in  spite  of  our  knowledge  of  what
is  right,  reasonable,  and  beneficial.  3.  Our  fellows.  We  may  well  be  sympatheti-
cally affected  by  the  sins  of  others — our  kindred,  our  fellow-citizens,  our  fellow-men.
Rivers  of  water  should  run  down  our  eyes  because  men  keep  not  his  law.  We  may
well  be  ashamed  and  appalled,  and  pour  out  our  souls  to  God,  under  a  sense  of  the
guilt  of  the  world. — 0.

Ver.  5. — ITie  dawn  oflutpe.  Here  is  a  graphic  scene.  Behold  Ezra,  the  chief  man
of  his  nation,  and  a  prince  of  the  Persian  Empire,  with  his  garment  and  his  mantle
rent,  his  hair  and  beard  torn  and  disordered,  bowed  in  silent  grief,  and  surrounded
by  the  best  men  of  his  people,  all  trembling  at  the  word  of  God.  But  lol  a  ray  of
hope  from  the  fire  of  the  altar  kindles  in  his  soul.  "And  at  the  evening  sacri-
fice," &c.    Here  learn —

I.  That  the  one  way  to  God  is  THROtroH  the  blood  op  atonbmbht.  1.  Bsra
tat  astonied  tiniil  the  evening  saarifke.  (1)  He  saw  the  sin  of  his  people.  Its  enor-
mity. Its  aggravations.  (2)  He  saw  the  gathering  storm  of  Divine  anger.  The
more  be  reflected,  the  blacker  became  the  cloud.    (8)  He  saw  no  way  of  escape.


OH,  IX.  1—15.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA


149


His  suspense  was  awful,  until  the  fire  of  the  altar  began  to  light  up  the  darkness  of
the  gathering  night.  2.  Now  he  it  encouraged  to  pray.  (1)  God  has  found  out  a
w?,y.  Bacrifice  would  never  have  occurred  to  the  unaided  reason  of  man;  or  even
had  it  occurred  to  him,  he  could  not  be  sure  that  God  would  accept  it.  (2)  God  has
mad«  his  wi^s  known  unto  men.  It  was  revealed  soon  after  the  fall  (Gen.  iii.  15,
24;  It.  4;  vili.  20,  21).  More  formally  established  in  the  Levitical  law.  This
was  authenticated  by  all  the  miracles  of  the  exodus.  Fulfilled  in  the  solemnities  of
Calvary.

II.  That  hb  mdbt  be  appsoachbd  in  the  bpibit  op  humiliation.  1.  Ezra  rent
his  garment  and  his  mantle.  (1)  His  "  garment "  to  express  ^x^s  personal  grief  at  the
dishonour  done  to  God.  At  the  wickedness  of  his  people.  At  their  consequent
liability  to  fearful  punishment.  (2)  His  "  mantle,"  which  was  such  a  robe  as  was
worn  by  persons  of  birth  and  station,  was  rent  to  express  his  distress  in  his  magisterial
and  representative  capacity.  Public  men  should  recognize  a  public  responsibility  to
God.  2.  This  he  now  did  the  second  time.  (1)  In  the  first  instance  he  rent  his
clothes  to  express  to  men  his  grief.  It  produced  the  desired  effect.  All  those  who
*'  trembled  at  the  word  of  God  "  gathered  round  him.  We  should  witness  for  God
to  man  against  sin.  "We  should  do  this  in  the  most  emphatic  manner,  so  as  to  pro-
duce conviction.  (2)  Now  by  similar  acts  he  expresses  his  grief  to  Ood.  This
second  rending  of  his  garment  and  mantle  was  in  connection  with  his  rousing  him-
self to  pray.  God  expects  from  us  a  formal  and  full  confession  of  sin.  He  does
not  need  Information,  but  requires  it  for  our  benefit.  3.  Ezra  also  now  fell  upon  his
kneet.^  (1)  Hitherto  he  had  been  sitting  in  his  grief,  bewildered  and  astonished,  not
knowing  what  to  do  to  avert  the  looming  vengeance.  To  pray  he  knew  not  how
until  his  spirit  was  stirred  within  him  "at  the  evening  sacrifice."  All  true  prayer  is
from  God(Prov.  xvl.  1).  The  Are  that  stirs  a  prayerful  soul  is  from  the  altar  of
Calvary  (see  Isa.  vl.  6,  7).  (2)  Kneeling  is  an  appropriate  attitude  for  prayer.  It
expresses  submission  (Phil.  ii.  10).  We  should  beware  of  the  hypocrisy  of  bowing
the  knee  when  there  Is  no  submission  in  the  soul.  (3)  Posture,  however,  is  not
essential  to  prayer.  Scripture  furnishes  examples  of  various  postures.  The  altitude
of  the  heart  is  of  vital  importance.  This  is  a  comfort  to  those  who  are  physically
incapacitated  for  kneeling  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).

in.  That  wb  uitbt  draw  nbas  to  God  in  faith.  Ezra  "  spread  out  his  hands
to  the  Lord  his  Gtod."  1.  He  recognised  God  as  his  covenant  friend.  (1)  Note  the
possessive  case.  All  that  is  meant  in  the  title  "  God "  he  claims  as  his.  What  a
proprietary  is  herel  (2)  There  is  a  glorious  complement  to  this.  If  the  Lord  be  our
covenant  God,  then  are  we  his  covenanted  people.  He  too  has  a  property  in  us
(Cant.  ii.  16).  We  are  his  "peculiar  treasure"  (Ps.  cxxxv.  4).  (3)  The  covenant
relationship  evermore  recognises  Christ  who  is  the  "Covenant  of  his  people,"  and
whose  blood  is  the  "  blood  of  the  covenant."  The  recognition  of  all  this  is  faith,
and  when  this  recognition  is  raised  in  us  by  the  Spirit  of  God  the  faith  becomes
saving.  2.  Therefore  he  spread  out  his  hands.  (1)  The  open  hand  is  the  symbol  of
truth.  Ezra  approached  (Jod  with  the  sincerity  of  a  genuine  faith  (see  Ps.  xxiv.  4).
The  open  hand  of  the  impenitent  hypocrite  is  bloody  in  the  sight  of  God  (Isa.  i.  16).
(3)  The  hands  spread  out  are  in  the  attitude  of  craving  and  receiving.  Correspond-
ing to  this,  the  outstretched  hands  of  God  denote  the  offers  of  his  mercy  (Prov.  i.  24).
Let  us  ask  and  receive,  that  our  joy  may  be  full. — J.  A.  M.

Vers,  6 — 16.  A  good  man's  sight  tf  sin.  I.  That  the  sight  of  sin  awakens
WITHIN  THK  aooD  MAN  A  SPIRIT  OF  EARNEST  PRATER.  "  I  fell  upon  my  knees,  and
spread  out  my  hands  unto  the  Lord  my  God  "  (ver.  6).  1.  The  humility  of  the
prayer.  Ezra  fell  upon  his  knees  in  deepest  self-abasement;  he  did  not  stand  erect
like  the  Pharisee  in  the  temple,  but  smote  upon  his  breast  like  the  publican  (Luke
xviii.  13).  Surely  the  sin  of  God's  chosen  people  could  not  but  inspire  humility  within
the  patriot.  2.  The  earnestness  of  the  prayer.  Ezra  spread  out  his  hands  in  earnest
entreaty  before  God;  the  solemnity  of  the  circumstance  awakened  hirn  toholy
fervour.  At  such  a  time  a  lifeless  prayer  could  be  of  no  avail.  3.  The  direction  of
the  prayer.  Ezra  directed  his  prayer  to  the  Lord  his  God;  he  felt  the  vanity  ol
human  belp,  u>d  that  God  only  could  avert  the  consequeqce  of  their  transgressiou.


150  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  tx.  1-14.

A  sense  of  sin  should  lead  to  Ood.  4  llie  pertonal  claim  of  the  prayer.  "  My  God,"
"OmyGoA,"  .  „„.

II.  That  the  bight  of  sin  awakens  within  the  good  maw  a  bensb  op  shame.
"I  am  ashamed  and  blush  to  lift  up  my  face  to  thee,  my  God:  for  our  iniquities  are
Increased  over  our  head,  and  our  trespass  is  grown  up  unto  the  heavens  "  (ver.  6).  He
is  ashamed — 1.  Because  he  is  morally  sensitive  to  Sin.     Purity  is  sensitive  to  evil.

2.  Because  he  understands  the  true  nature  of  sin.     "  Our  iniquities,"  "our  trespass."

3.  Because  he  realises  the  magnitude  of  sin.  "Our  iniquities  are  increased  over  our
head,  and  our  trespass  is  grown  up  to  heaven."  Bin  brings  shame;  this  the  good
man  feels.

m.  That  the  bight  of  bin  awakens  within  the  good  man  hemoihes  of
80BR0W.  "  And  for  our  iniquities  have  we,  our  kings,  and  our  priests,  been  delivered
into  the  hand  of  the  kings  of  the  lands,  to  the  sword,  to  captivity,  and  to  a  spoil "
(ver.  7).  1.  A  memory  of  degradation.  Sin  will  send  kings  and  priests  into  degrad-
ing captivity.  2.  A  memory  of  cruelty.  Sin  delivers  men  as  to  the  sword.  3.  A
memory  of  bondage.  Sin  is  slavery.  4.  A  memory  of  loss.  Sin  spoils  men  of  their
best  treasures.  The  history  of  sin  is  a  history  of  sorrow,  and  the  sight  of  sin  calls
up  to  the  mind  of  the  good  man  sad  memories.

IV.  That  the  bight  of  sin  awakens  within  the  good  man  the  thought  of
the  government  of  God.  1.  Its  mercy.  "  And  now  for  a  little  space  grace  hath
been  showed  from  the  Lord  our  God  "  (vers.  8,  9).  2.  Its  fidelity.  "  Yet  our  God
hath  not  forsaken  us  in  our  bondage  "  (ver.  9).  3.  Its  forbearance.  "  Seeing  that
thou  our  God  hast  punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities  deserve  "  (ver.  13).  This  life
is  not  the  scene  of  complete  punishment.  4.  Its  delay.  "  For  we  remain."  Sin  is
not  immediately  punished  in  this  life.  5.  Its  rectitude.  "  O  Lord  God  of  Israel,
thou  art  righteous  "  (ver.  15).  6.  Its  retribution.  "  For  we  cannot  stand  before  thee
because  of  this  "  (ver.  15).  Thus  Ezra  viewed  the  sin  of  Israel  in  its  relation  to  the
moral  government  of  Gk>d. — ^E.      j,„  ._  i^..^^    \  ^  ,    _,        u  jk  ^W^-i

Vers.  6 — 15.— Ezra's  prayer.  While  the  smoke  of  the  altar  rises  to  heaven  from
the  evening  sacrifice,  lo!  there  is  Ezra  before  the  temple  of  the  Lord  with  rent  gar-
ments and  disordered  hair,  bowed  upon  his  knees,  and  with  lifted  hands,  pouring
out  confession  of  sin  in  tones  of  plaintive  grief  and  shame  and  terror.  "  O  my  God,
I  am  ashamed,"  &c.    In  this  prayer  we  mark —  ^,

I.  The  crime  confessed  (vers.  11,  12).  1.  Here  were  open  violations  of  the  lau
of  Ood.  (1)  The  patriarchal  law  was  pronounced  against  the  intermarriages  of  the
holy  race  of  Seth,  with  whom  was  the  promise  of  the  Holy  Seed,  with  the  profane
race  of  Cain  the  excommunicate.  The  infraction  of  this  law  provoked  the  Deluge
(Gen.  vi.  2,  3).  Abraham,  who,  like  Seth,  was  the  depositary  of  the  Promise,  was
averse  to  the  intermarriage  of  his  issue  with  the  daughters  of  the  accursed  Cainan
(Gen.  xxiv.  3,  4;  see  also  xxviii.  1,  2).  (3)  This  patriarchal  law  became  incorporated
in  the  Mosaic  system  (Deut.  vii.  3).  (3)  The  prophets  also  declared  against  these
mixed  alliances.  In  particular,  it  would  seem,  Haggai  and  Zechariah  (ver.  11  with
vi.  21).  (4)  This  law,  in  the  spirit  of  it,  is  still  binding  upon  Christians  (1  Cor.  viL
89;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).  2.  The  reasons  given  for  this  law  are  most  weighty.  (1)  The
holiness  of  God's  people.  This  reason  holds  in  all  ages.  (2)  The  tendency  to  be
swayed  from  true  worship  to  idolatry  (Exod.  xxiii.  32;  xxxiv.  16).  (3)  These  reasons
were  vividly  before  the  mind  of  Ezra.  So  should  they  be  ever  present  with
Christians.  3.  Nothing  should  induce  men  to  commit  this  sin.  (1)  The  wealth  of
idolaters  is  dearly  purchased  by  the  imperilling  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints.  (2)
Peace  with  idolaters  is  costly  at  the  sacrificing  of  the  peace  of  God.

n.  The  aogkavationb  acknowledged.  Ezra  confessed  for  his  people — 1.  That
thMr  escperiencea  in  the  captivity  should  have  taught  them  differently  (ver.  7).  (1)
Their  humiliation  was  deep.  They  suffered  from  the  "sword,"  viz.,  of  the  Baby-
lonians who  in  the  days  of  Nebuchadnezzar  invaded  their  land.  Fi-om  "  captivity,"
for  their  Babylonish  victor  carried  them  away.  Who  can  estimate  the  sufferings
entailed  by  that  deportation?  From  the  "spoil"  which  they  suffered  from  the
invaders,  and  fr»m  those  who  removed  them.  And  from  "  confusion  of  face,"  riz.^
in  the  remeDi)>»*oce  thjit  all  their  lufferings  were  on  .account  of  their  tiiig.    This


en.  IX.  1—15.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


151


sbaine  Uity  felt  iu  Ihe  prosence  o£  their  Babylonish  lords  (see  Dan.  ix.  7,  8).  Also
before  their  Persinn  masters.  (3)  Their  calamities  were  sweeping.  The  people
were  involved  in  them.  So  were  their  "  kings."  What  a  contrast  between  the  con-
dilion  of  David  and  Solomon  and  that  of  Jehoiachin  and  Zedekiah  (3  Kings  xxv.  7)1
So  were  their  "  priests  ;  "  and  iu  the  ruin  of  the  priests  the  ruin  of  the  temple  also
was  involved.  (3)  They  were  also  of  long  continuance.  There  were  the  initial
sufferings  from  the  time  of  the  first  invasion  of  the  Babylonians.  Then  the  interval
of  seventy  years  from  the  date  of  the  captivity  to  the  first  year  of  Cyrus,  when
Zerubbabel  led  back  the  larger  body  of  the  restoration.  Another  period  of  seventy
or  eighty  years  had  elapsed  before  this  second  contingent  was  led  back  by  Ezra.
What  excuse  then,  after  all  these  sufferings,  could  be  pleaded  for  theirsiu?  2.  The
mercy  of  Ood  should  have  been  better  requited  (vers.  8,  9).  That  mercy  was  shown
— (1)  In  his  "leaving  a  remnant  to  escape."  That  was  mercy  not  only  to. the  indi-
viduals spared,  but  also  to  the  world,  for  the  holy  Seed  was  among  them,  through
whom  the  blessings  of  an  everlasting  salvation  were  to  come.  (3)  In  "  giving  them
a  nail  in  his  holy  pluce."  The  margin  explains  this  to  be  "a  constant  and  sure
abode,"  and  refers  to  Isaiah  xxii.  23  iu  support  of  this  interpretation.  The  passage
in  Issiiah  points  to  Christ ;  so  may  this  point  to  him.  (3)  In  this  view  there  is  the
greater  force  in  what  follows,  "  that  our  God  may  lighten  our  eyes,  and  give  us  a
little  reviving  iu  our  bondage."  And  how  the  mercy  of  God  in  all  this  becomes
increased  when  the  spiritual  blessings  of  the  gospel  are  seen  in  it.  (4)  Even  in  their
bondage  God  had  not  forsaken  them.  For  he  gave  them  favour  in  the  sight  of  the
kings  of  Persia.  This  favour  enabled  them  to  return,  "gave  them  a  reviving,"  and
to  repair  the  desolations  of  the  temple,  of  the  holy  city,  and  the  wall.  Suck  mercy
claimed  gratitude,  but  was  requited  with  rebellion.  Ezra  is  without  apology
(ver.  10).

III.  The  submission  to  the  judgment  op  mbkcy  (vers.  6  and  15).  1.  Here  Tie
awaits  the  judgment  of  the  Lord.  (1)  He  is  ashamed  to  look  up.  Who  can  bear  to
look  into  the  face  of  an  injured  friend  when  we  have  nothing  to  plead  in  apology?
That  will  be  the  position  of  the  sinner  in  the  great  day  of  judgment.  (2)  He  is
oppressed  by  the  growing  weight  of  acciimulutiug  rebellion  and  ingratitude.  He  is
terrified  by  the  cloud  upon  the  face  of  God.  (3)  He  confesses  that  wrath  to  the
uttermost  is  deserved.  2.  Here  is  no  formal  plea  for  mercy.  (1)  There  is  the
silent  cry  of  misery  and  distress  and  blushing  shame.  But  who  can  trust  in  this?
It  is  only  the  consciousness  of  sin.  (2)  There  is  eloquence  in  the  evening  sacrifice.
The  victim  slain  is  a  vicarious  sufferer.  It  is  the  shadow  of  a  better  sacrifice. —
J.  A.M.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  X.

Repentance  of  the  people,  and
covenant  swokn  to,  on  the  kecommen-
dation  of  Shechaniah  (-ch.  X.  1 — 5).
While  Ezra  was  uttering  his  prayer  aloud,
upon  his  knees,  in  front  of  the  temple,
where  the  evening  sacrifice  was  being
offered  upon  the  great  brazen  altar  (ch.
iii.  3),  the  people  gathered  about  him,
heard  what  he  said,  and  had  their  feelings
so  stirred  that  numbers  of  them  burst  into
tears  and  "wept  very  sore"  (ch.  x.  1).
When  he  had  ended,  Shechaniah,  the  son
of  Jehiel  (one  of  those  who  had  married
an  idolatrous  wife — ^ver.  26),  took  the
word,  and  suggested  an  immediate
step  towards  that  reformation  which
Ezraseemedtohim  to  have  had  in  bis  mind


and  to  have  tacitly  recommended.  This
step  was  that  all  present  should  at  once
enter  into  a  special  covenant  with  God  that
they  would  do  their  utmost  to  have  the
mixed  marriages  dissolved,  and  the  idola-
trous wives,  with  their  children,  sent  out
of  the  country.  The  idea  of  such  a
special  covenant  was  no  new  thing.  One
such  had  been  made  under  Asa  (3  Chron.
IV.  12)  against  idolatry;  another,  more
general,  under  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii.  3) ;
a  third,  nearly  parallel  with  this,  since
it  touched  a  single  point  of  the  law
only,  under  Zedekiah  (Jer.  iiiiv.  8).
,The  proposition  of  Shechaniah  approved
itself  to  Ezra,  who  "  arose,  and  made
the  chief  priests  and  Levites "  present
and  "  all  the  people  "  present,  to  swear  to
this  covenant.     "  And  they  swore."    An


isa


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[en.  X.  1—41


engagementof  a  most  sacred cliaracter  was
thus  entered  in'to  by  a  number  of  influen-
tial persons,  and  tlie  way  was  prepared  for
the  actual  reformation  which  followed.

Ver.  1. — When  Ezra  had  prayed,  and
when  he  had  confessed.  Bather,  "As
Ezra  prayed,  and  as  he  confessed. "  (Vulg. :
"  Orante  Esdra  et  implorante."  LXX. :  'fis
irpoo-ijv^aTO  "Eo-Spas  Kal  us  4$t|Y6peu(re.)
Weeping  and  casting  himself  down.  Ezra
had  knelt  at  first  (ch.  ix.  5);  but  as  he  pro-
ceeded.andfelt  more  andmoretheheinous-
ness  of  the  people's  transgression,hethrew
himself  forward  upon  the  ground,  in  the
attitude  of  extremest  humiliation.  Before
the  house  of  God.  So  far  as  can  be  gathered
from  the  context,  Ezra  was  in  the  great
court  of  the  temple  when  the  princes  came
to  him  with  their  information  (ch.  ix.  1).
He  at  once  "  sat  down  astonied  "  (ver:  3).
So  he  remained  until  preparations  began  to
be  made  for  the  evening  sacrifice,  when  he
arose,  and  took  up  a  position  directly  in
frontofthealtar  and  tUeholyplace,  towards
which  he  proceeded  to  pray.  Doubtless
,  he  had  in  his  mind  the  words  of  Solomon,
assented  to  by  God  (1  Kings  ix.  3),  and
pleaded  by  Jehoshaphat  (2  Chron.  xx.  9):
"  What  prayer  and  supplication  be  made
by  any  man,  or  by  all  thy  people  Israel,
which  shall  know  every  man  the  plague  of
his  own  heart,  and  spread  forth  Ids  hands
towards  this  place :  then  hear  thou  in
heaven  thy  dwelling  place,  and  forgive,
and  do,"  &c.  (1  Kings  viii.  38,  39).

Ver.  2.— Jehiel.  Probably  the  "  Jehiel"
mentioned  again  in  ver.  26,  who  was  "of
the  sons  of  Elam,"  and  had  married  an
idolatrous  wife.  Yet  now  there  is  hope.
The  penitence  of  the  people,  evidenced  by
their  "sore  weeping,"  gave  hope  that
they  might  be  brought  to  amend  their
ways  and  return  to  God.

Ver.  3. — Now  therefore  let  vs  make  a
covenant.  Shechaniah  had  probably  in  his
thoughts  the  (comparatively)  recent  cove-
nant which  the  people  had  made  in  the
reign  of  Zedekiah  (Jer.  ixxlv.  15)  on  the
subject  of  releasing  their  Hebrew  slaves
after  six  years  of  servitude.  Thatcovenant
was  entered  into  before  God, in  the  temple,
by  the  princes  and  all  the  people  (ibid.  ver.
10).  To  put  away  all  the  wives.  Shechaniah
probably  heldthatmarriagesmadecontrary
to  the  law  were  not  merely  wrongful,  but
invalid.  At  any  rate,  since  the  lawof  Moses,
as  interpreted  by  the  Babbis,  allowed  di--
Torce  "for  every  cause"  (Matt.  xix.  3),
the  remedy  suggested  was  feasible,
though  scarcely  one  which  the  civil
power  could  enforce.  And  such  as  are
horn  of  them.   "  Filii  matrem  sequuntur  "


was  a  maxim  of  Roman,  and,  apparently,
also  of  Jewish  law.  Young  children  re-
quire especially  a  mother's  care.  Older
ones  might  be  already  tainted  with  idola-
try. It  was  best,  Shechaniah  thought,  to
make  a  clean  sweep,  and  dismiss  the
children  as  well  as  the  mothers.  According
to  the  counsel  of  my  lord.  Ezra  had  nut
yet  advised  any  course ;  but  Shechaniah
gathers  from  the  horror  which  he  has  ex-
pressed what  his  wishes  must  be.  Let  it  be
done  according  to  the  law.  Either,  ' '  Let
the  law,  which  forbids  these  marriages,  be
in  this  way  satisfied"  (Dathe);  or,  "Let  the
repudiation  of  the  wives  take  place  in  the
mode  prescribed  by  the  law  "  (see  Deut.
xxiv.  1).

Ver.  4. — This  matter  belongeth  urto
the*.  Ezra's  commission  was  to  "  let
judgment  be  executed  on  those  who  would
not  do  the  law  of  God  "  (ch.  vii.  26),  and
so  to  constrain  them  to  obedience.  It  was
therefore  his  place  to  inquire  into  the
serious  matter  brought  before  him,  and
set  it  right.  We  will  be  with  thee.  We,
the  "very  great  congregation"  which  had
gathered  around  Ezra,andof  whom  Shech-
aniah was  the  spokesman,  undertake  to
be  with  thee,  and  support  thee,  in  the
steps  which  thou  takest  in  this  matter.
Only  be  of  good  courage,  and  act.

Ver.  5. — Then  arose  Ezra,  and  made  the
chief  priests ...  to  swear.  Bather,  "made
the  princes,  the  priests,  &c.  to  swear"
(upKio-E  Tons  apxovTas>  rovs  Upets  k.t.X. —
LXX.).  That  they  would  do  according  to
this  word.  That  they  would  act  in  the  *
matter  as  Shechaniah  had  recommended,
and  put  away  the  idolatrous  wives.

Ezra's  fast  (ver.  6).  Matters  having
reached  this  point,  the  covenant  having
been  made,  and  theonly  question  remaining
for  consideration  being  how  the  decision
come  to  should  be  carried  out,  Ezra  "rose
up,"  and  withdrew  himself  for  a  timefrom
the  people,  entering  into  one  of  the  side
chambersof  thetemple,  and  secludinghim-
self  there.  The  guilt  of  his  brethren  still
pressed  heavily  on  his  spirit,  and  he  con-
tinued the  mourning  which  he  had
commenced  as  soon  as  it  came  to  his  ears.
To  this  mourning  he  now  joined  a  fast
of  the  strictest  kind,  an  entire  ab-
stinence both  from  eating  and  drinking,
like  that  of  Moses  on  Mount  Sinai
(Eiod.  xxxiv.  28).  Natural  piety  seems
to  have  taught  men  generally  (Jonah  iii.  5
— 7),  and  the  Jews  among  them,  that  such
abstinence  was  a  fitting  accompaniment  of


OH.  X.  1—44.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA,


163


penitential  prayer, and  might  beooun  ted  on
to  lend  it  additional  force  witli  Almighty
God,  Compare  the  private  and  personal
fasts  of  David  (2  Sam.  zii.  16),  Ahab  (1
Kings  xxi.  27),  Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  3),  and
Nehemiah  (Neh.  i,  4),

Ver.  6. — The  chamber  of  Johanan. — On
the  temple  chambers  see  comment  on  ch.
viii.  39.  Johanan  appears  by  Neh.  zii.  22,
23,  compared  with  vers.  10 — 11,  to  have
been  really  the  grandson  of  Eliashib,  who,
as  high  priest,  would  have  the  right  of  as-
signing him  a  chamber  in  the  temple(com-
pare  Neh.  xiii.  4,  5).  I  did  eat  no  bread  nor
drink  water.  Strict  fasts  of  this  kind  had
been  observed  by  Moses  twice(Exod.xxxiv.
28,  andDeut.  ix.  18),  and  by  the  Ninevites
(Jonah  iii.  7),  but  they  were  very  uncom-
mon. Usually  it  was  considered  enough  to
abstain  from  eating  (1  Sam.  i.  7;  xx.  34;  2
Sam,  iii.  35).  Sometimes  the  person  who
fasted  merely  abstained  from  "meat  and
wine,  and  pleasant  bread"  (Dan.  x.  3).
Ezra's  great  earnestness  appears  in  the
severity  of  his  fast,  which  (it  is  to  be  re-
membered) was  not  for  his  own  sins,  but
for  those  of  his  brethren,

Pboclamation  made,  STJMMONINO  AIX
THE  Jews  to  Jekubalem  (vers.  7 — 9).
After  due  deliberation  between  Ezra,  the
princes,  and  the  elders  (ver.  8),  it  was  re-
solved, as  a  first  step,  to  summon  all  Jews
— or,  rather,  all  those  who  had  returned
from  the  captivity,  whether  they  were
Jews  or  Israelites — to  Jerusalem,  in  order
that  the  decision  come  to  with  respect  to
the  mixed  marriages  might  be  communi-
cated to  them.  The  limit  of  three  days  was
fixed  as  the  latest  date  at  which  any  one
might  make  his  appearance,  and  absentees
were  threatened  with  the  heavy  penalties
of  excommunication  and  forfeiture  of  all
their  possessions.  Proclamation  having
been  made  to  this  effect  "throughout
Judah  "  (ver.  7),  there  was  a  gathering  of
all  the  males  of  full  age  toJerusalem with-
in the  prescribed  time.  The  place  of  meeting
was  the  great  court  of  the  temple  (ver.  9).
According  to  Hecatseus  of  Abdera(Fr.  14),
this  was  "  a  stone- walled  enclosure,  about
500  feet  long  and  150  feet  wide,"  which
might  perhaps  afford  sittingroom  for  20, 000
men.  Deducting  the  aged  and  infirm,
the  sick,  and  those  between  twelve  and
twenty  years  of  age,  the  country  Jews
would  scarcely  have  reaehed  this  number.

Ver.  7, — They  made  proclamation.  Liter-


ally, "they  made  to  pass  a  voice  "  (irap^  vcyv-
Kov  ^avf\v. — LXX.).  They  sent  criers  to
make  the  matter  known.  To  all  the  chil-
dren of  the  captivity.  /.  e.  to  all  those
who,  having  returned  from  the  captivity,
were  now  in  the  land.  The  expression  is
a  favourite  one  with  Ezra  (see  ch,  ii.  1;
iv.  1;  vi.  16,  19;  viii.  35,  &c.),

Ver.  8. — Within  three  days.  The  limits
of  Judaea  at  this  time  appear  to  have  been
Bethel  on  the  north,  Beersheba  on  the
south,  Jericho  on  the  east,  and  the  Medi-
terranean upon  the  west.  As  the  frontier
was  nowhere  much  more  than  forty  miles
from  Jerusalem,  three  d.a.js  from  tlis  day
that  they  hea/rd  the  proclamation  would  be
sufficient  time  to  allow  all  the  able-bodied
men  to  reach  the  capital.  Forfeited.  Liter-
ally, "  devoted,"  i.  e.  confiscated  to  the
temple  treasury.  Separated  from  the  con-
gregation.    I.  e.  excommunicated.

Ver.  9. — All  the  men  of  Judah  and  Ben-
jamin gathered  themselves  together  unto
Jerusalem.  This  is  of  course  to  be  under-
stood with  certain  necessary  or  natural  ex-
ceptions, as  of  the  sick,  the  aged  and  in-
firm, and  the  youths  under  full  age.  Still
it  would  be  avast  gathering,  doubling  pro-
bably for  the  time  the  population  of  the
city.  It  was  the  ninth  month.  The  month
Chisleu,  corresponding  nearly  to  our  De-
cember. All  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of
the  house  of  God.  The  word  translated
"street"  means  any  broad  open  space,  and
is  probably  used  here  to  designate  the  great
court  of  the  temple  (Patrick).  By  "all  the
people"  we  must  understand  as  many  aa
the  court  would  conveniently  hold.  If  the
court  had  the  dimensions  given  it  by  Heca-
taeus  of  Abdera,  it  may  have  accomodated
the  whole  body  of  the  country  Jews.  The
great  rain.  December  isarainy  month inPal-
estine;  and  the  incidental  mention  of  "the
great  rain"  is  one  of  those  small  touches
which  stamp  the  writer  as  an  eyewitness,

Addbbss  of  Ezra,  and  consent  of  thb
people  to  put  away  thb  stkanse  wives
(vers.  10—14).  Hitherto  Ezra  seems  to
have  allowed  the  leading  part  in  the  matter
to  be  taken  by  the  civil  authorities,  whom
he  had  found  established  in  Jerusalem  on
his  arrival  (ch,  Ix.  1 — 8),  Now  he  came  for-
wardboldly ,  denouncing  the  sin  committed,
and  as  supreme  governor  commanding  the
repudiation  of  the  strange  wives.  The  as-
sembled multitude  consented,  but  urged
that  the  matter  required  time ;  that  the  sea-
son was  unsuitable  for  a  prolonged  stay  of
the  whole  body  of  country  Jews  at  Jerusa-
lem, aiid  that  the  business  would  be  most
conveniently  carried  through  by  astanding


154


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


[CH,  X.  1—44.


commission  consisting  of  the  chief  authori-
tiesofthecityofJerusalem.whoshouldtake
the  case  of  each  country  town  separately,
and,  in  conjunction  with  the  elders  and
judgesof  each  to  wn,inTestigate  the  alleged
mixed  marriages  of  each  locality,  andadju-
dicateupon  them.  By  this  arrangement  the
bulk  of  the  country  Jews  wouldbe  allowed
atoncetoreturnhome;  and  the  case  of  each
locality  beingtaken  separately,  only  a  small
number  would  at  any  given  time  be  sufEer-
ing  the  inconvenience  of  a  compulsory  ab-
sence from  their  residences,  and  the  expense
of  a  stay  of  some  duration  in  the  capital.
Theproposal  was  reasonable,  and  it  appears
to  have  approved  itself  to  Ezra  and  his
advisers,  and  to  have  been  at  once  adopted.

Ver.  10.— Ezra  the  priest  stood  up.  Now
that  the  time  had  come  for  action,  Ezra
was  not  wanting  to  his  duties.  The  chief
authority  had  been  put  into  his  hands  by
the  Persian  king  (ch.  vii.  25,  26),  and  he
was  bound  to  exercise  it.  Accordingly,
the  great  bulk  of  the  nation  being  assem-
bledinobedieneetothe  proclamation,  Ezra
tame  forward  in  person,  and  declared  that
the  "6trangewives"mustbeput  away.  Ye
have  taken  strange  wives.  Literally,"  have
caused  to  dwell,"  i.  e.  have  made  them
come  and  live  with  you  in  the  holy  land.

Ver.  11. — Make  confession.  This  is  un-
doubtedly the  true  meaning  ott'nu  thodah
in  this  place,  and  not  "give  praise"  (86tc
atvcoriv),  as  the  LXX.  render.  Separate
yourselves  from  the  people  of  the  land.  The
marriages  naturally  led  on  to  familiar  in-
tercourse with  the  relatives  and  friends
of  the  women,  and  so  tended  to  break
down  the  barrier  between  Jew  and  Gentile
which  it  had  been  the  special  object  of
the  Mosaic  legislation  to  erect.

Ver.  13. — We  are  many  that  have  trans-
gressed. The  marginal  rendering,  "we
have  greatly  ofEended  in  this  thing,"  is
nearer  to  the  original.  No  doubt,  however,
the  greatness  of  the  offence  consisted  part-
ly in  the  large  number  that  had  offended.

Ver.  14. — Let  now  our  rulers  of  the  con-
gregation stand. '  Let  Ezra,  together  with
the  princes  and  the  elders  atJerusalem(ver.
8),  form  a  standing  body  to  act  with  the
elders  and  judges  of  the  provincial  towns
in  this  matter,  and  let  the  case  of  each  tovm
be  taken  separately,  and theinhabitantsof
each  attend  at  Jerusalem  in  their  turn.
TTntil  the  fierce  wrath  of  our  Ood  for  this
matter  be  turned  from  ni.  This  is  probably
the  true  meaning  of  the  writer,  but  it  is
not  to  be  obtained  from  the  ordinary  text.
To  produce  it  we  most  read  bj  for  12>  and


hadddb&r  for  ladddbdr  hazzeh.
text  stands,  it  is  nnintelligible.


As  the


Oppositions  of  Jonathan  and  oth-
ers (ver,  15).  It  was  natural  that  some  op-
position should  manifest  itself  when  so
trenchantameasure  was  announced  as  that
which  Ezra  had  declared  to  be  necessary.
To  compel  men  to  divorce  their  wives  was
to  touch  many  in  the  tenderest  place.  Nor
was  it  difficult  to  bring  forward  very  plau-
sible arguments  to  show  that  the  marriages
— or  at  any  rate  some  of  them — were  allow-
able. Joseph  had  married  an  Egy  ptian(Qen.
xli.  45),  Moses  a  Midianite  (Exod.  il.  21).
True,  these  marriages  had  taken  place  be-
fore the  law  was  given;  but  subsequently,
also,  Boaz  had  married  Ruth  theMoabitess
(Ruthiv.  13);David  had  taken  to  wife  Maa-
cah,  a  Qeshurite  (3  Sam.  iii,  3) ;  and  Solomon
had  without  blame  married  the  daughter
of  a  Pharaoh  (1  Kings  iii.  1).  These  exam-
ples might  be  pleaded  in  proof  that  the
Law  admitted  of  exceptions,  and  individ-
uals might  argue  that  their  cases  were  of
an  exceptional  characte'r.  Again,  in  some
instances  the  foreign  wives  may  have  be-
come proselytes,  and  the  children  may  have
been  circumcised,  and  so  accepted  into  the
congregation;  which  would  give  them  a
claim  to  remain,  which  would  extend  in
some  degree  to  the  mothers.  We  there-
fore cannot  be  surprised  that  an  opposition
was  made.  Bather,  it  is  remarkable  that  it
was  so  slight,  only  extending  (so  far  as  ap-
pears)to  four  persons,  and  so  easily  quelled.

Ver,  15. — Only  Jonathan  . .  .  and  Jaha-
ziah , . .  were  employed  about  this  matter.  If
this  were  the  true  meaning  of  the  passage
it  would  contradict  the  next  verse,  by  which
it  appears  thatEzra himself,  together  with
several  "chiefsof  the  fathers" — probably
identical  with  the  "rulers  and  elders"  of
ver.  14 — took  the  matter  in  hand,  and  were
occupied  with  it  for  three  months.  The
true  meaning  of  the  clause,  however,  is
almostcertainly  that  which  was  assumed  in
the  precedingparagraph:  "Only  Jonathan
and  Jahaziah  stood  up  ajram«t  this  matter,"
or  "opposed"  it  (seelChron.  xxi.  1;  Dan.
viii.  25;  xi.  14,  where  the  same  expression
has  the  sense  of  "  oppose,  resist ").  Me-
shullam  and  Shabhethai  the  levite  helped
them.  The  "MeshuUam"  intended  isper-
haps  the  person  of  the  name  mentioned  in
ver.  29  as  having  married  an  idolatrous
wife.  The  others  seem  not  to  have  had  any


CH.  X.  1-44.]


THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.


155


personal  interest  in  thwarting  Ezra  and
preventing  the  reform.
Settlement  OF  the  ■whole  matter  by

THE  repudiation  OF  THE  STRANQEWIVES

(vers.  16,  17).  The  opposition  made  did
notdelay  the  business  more  than  a  fewdays.
The  great  assembly  had  been  held  on  the
twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month.  On  the
first  day  of  the  tenth  month,  little  more
than  a  week  later,  the  commission  for
examining  into  the  matter  met  under  the
presidency  of  Ezra,  and  commenced  pro-
ceedings. The  method  of  proceeding  sug-
gested at  the  great  meeting  was  no  doubt
followed.  The  case  of  each  city  was  taken
separately.  Its  male  inhabitantsof  full  age
attended,  and  its  "elders"  and  "judges"
sat  on  the  commission  as  assessors  while
the  conjugal  position  of  their  townsfolk
was  being  investigated.  Where  a  "mixed
marriage"  was  proved  the  wife  was  repu-
diated. In  112  cases  the  necessity  of  repu-
diation was  made  out  to  the  satisfaction  of
the  commission ,  and  this  number  of  wives
was  put  away.  Probably  the  entire  number
of  cases  adjudicalied  upon  was  very  much
greater,  since  the  commission  continued
at  work  for  three  months,  and  probably  sat
on  seventy-five  different  days,  judging  (we
may  presume)  three  or  four  cases  a  day.
On  the  whole,  the  small  extent  to  which
the  evil  had  prevailed  is  remarkable ;  for
113  mixed  marriages  in  a  population  where
the  adult  males  were  about  40,000  would
give  only  one  such  marriage  to  three  hun-
dred or  three  hundred  and  fifty  legitimate
ones.  Nevertheless,  evils  in  a  community
are  not  to  be  judged  simply  by  their  pre-
valence. Great  evils  must  be  checked  at
once,  even  though  they  have  not  extended
far,  lest,  if  they  spread  at  all  widely,  they
become  irreniediable.  Ezra  is  to  be  com-
mended for  having  perceived  the  great-
ness of  the  peril,  and  for  having  taken
prompt  and  decided  measures  to  check  it,
without  waiting  till  it  had  got  to  a  head,
and  so  become  uncontrollable.

Vers.  16. — The  children  of  the  captivity
did  so.  Thepeoplegenerally,  notwithstand-
ing the  opposition  of  Jonathan,  acquiesced
in  Ezra's  decision,  and  acted  accordingly.
Ezra  tli«  priest,  with  certain  chief  of  the
fathers.  There  is  no  "with, "or  other  con-
nective, in  the  original;  but  our  translators
did  right  In  supplying  one,  since  the  con-


junction 1,  "and,"  has  almost  certainly
fallen  out  of  the  text  by  the  mistake  of  a
copyist.  After  the  house  of  their  fathers.
Rather,  "for  each  father's  house" — i.  e.
"for  each  family."  It  would  seem  from
this  clause  that  each  recognised  family  Was
represented  on  the  commission  by  its  head.
The  number  of  such  families  appears  by
ch.  ii.  3 — 61  to  have  been  ninety-eight.
And  all  of  them  by  their  names.  Compare
with  this  ch.  viii.  20.  In  botii  places  Ezra
probably  means  that  a  list  of  the  names
was  made  out,  and  was  in  his  possession,
though  he  does  not  think  it  necessary  to
give  them.  Were  separated.  J.  e.  "set
apart  for  the  business."  And  they  sat
down,  i.  e.  "began  their  sittings,"  on  the
first  day  of  the  tenth  month ,  the  month  Te-
beth,  corresponding  nearly  to  our  January.

Ver.  17. — They  made  an  end  with  all  the
men.  They  ran  through  the  whole  list  of
those  who  were  accused  of  having  taken
strange  wives,  and  adjudicated  on  every
case,  by  the  first  day  of  the  first  month,
Nisan.correspondingnearly  withourApril.
Deducting  Sabbaths,  the  number  of  days
in  the  three  months  would  be  seventy-five
or  seventy-six ;  but  it  is  of  course  possible
that  the  court  did  not  sit  continuously.

Thbnambs  ofthosb  who  hadmarribd
THE  STRANGE  wiTEB(vers.l8 — 44).  Aware
of  the  danger  that  the  nation  might  relapse
into  the  sin  which  he  was  seeking  to  root
out,  Ezra  punishes  the  wrong-doers  by
placing  their  names  on  record,  that  others
might  fear  to  do  the  like.  He  assigns  the
first  place  in  his  catalogue  of  offenders  to
the  priests,  doubtless  because  in  them  the
sin  was  greatest ;  they,  as  the  special  cus-
todians of  the  Law,  were  most  bound  to
have  observed  the  Law.  Next  to  the  priests
he  puts  the  Levites,  on  the  same  principle,
because  of  their  semi-sacerdotal  character.
He  then  concludes  with  the  laymen,  ar-
ranged under  their  several  families.  By
the  list  of  laymen  it  appears  that  ten  only
out  of  some  thirty-six  lay  families  were
implicated  in  the  sin.  Three  of  the  four
priestly  families,  on  the  other  hand,  and
even  the  near  kindred  of  the  high  priest,
were  among  the  guilty.  It  is  remarkable
that  it  is  Ezra,  a  priest,  and  one  by  many
accused  of  over-sacerdotalism,  who  gives
this  testimony  against  his  own  order.

Ver.  18. — Jeshna  the  son  of  Jozadak  is,
undoubtedly,  the  high  priest  of  chs.  iii.
and  V.  Four  members  of  his  family  had
committed  the  sin  (compare  Neh.  xiii.  28).

Ver.  19.— They  gave  their  hands  that


166


THE  BOOK  0^  EZRA.


[CH.  X.  1—44.


they  would  put  away  their  wives.  It  is  not
clear  wlietlier  tbis  is  intended  to  be  said
of  Maaseiala,  Eliezer,  Jarib,  and  Qedaliali
only,  or  of  the  entire  body  of  persons
found  guilty  of  having  married  strange
wives.  Most  probably  the  co'urt  made  out
tlie  divorces  in  the  generality  ^of  cases,
but  were  content  to  take  a.  solemn  pledge
from  members  of  the  high  priest's
family.

Vers.  20 — 32. — On  the  priestly  families
of  Immer,  Harim,  and  Pashur  see  above,
ch.  ii.  87—39.

Ver.  24. — The  singers  and  porters.  These
vcere  special  subdivisions  of  the  Levitical


order,  appointed  originally  by  David  (2
Chron.  xxv.  1;  xxvi.  1 — 19).
Ver.  25.— Of  Israel,  /.e.  "of  the  laity."
Ver.  26.— Jehiel.  Probably  the  father
of  the  Shechaniah  who  counselled  Ezra
(ch.  X.  2—4).

Ver.  44. — And  some  of  them  had  wives
by  whom  they  had  children.  Rather,  "And
there  were  some  among  the  wives  who
had  given  birth  to  children."  The  fact  is
implied  above  in  the  advice  of  Shechaniah
(ver.  S),  but  is  here  alone  distinctly  as-
serted. No  doubt  it  was  more  difficult  to
arrange  the  terms  of  the  divorce  where
the  marriage  had  been  f ruitfuL


HOMILETICS.


Vers.  1 — 5. — A  gleam  of  Twpe.  The  only  trace  of  comfort  In  Ezra's  previoua  prayer
(Ix.  6 — 15)  was  of  a  negative  kind.  Notwithstanding  all  the  aggravated  evil  which
he  had  bad  to  confess,  tbe  people  were  not  destroyed.  That,  at  least,  could  be  said,
"We  remain  yet  escaped."  Tluit  being  the  case,  "who  can  tell"  (see  Jonah  lii.  9)
what  it  m.ay  please  God  to  do  for  usf  In  the  present  passage  this  little  suspicion  of
light  becomes  a  positive  ray  of  encouragemenl,  gradually  bringing  before  us  (1)
hopeful  feelings,  (2)  hopeful  thoughts,  auiJ  (3)  hopeful  resolves.

I.  Hopeful  FEELINGS.  There  was  something  of  this  description — 1.  In  Skra  him-
self. From  silting  originally  in  almost  despairing  astonishment  (ix.  3,  4),  he  had
afterwards  knelt  in  prayer  (ibid.  ver.  5) ;  and  now,  in  the  depth  and  intensity  of  his
feelings,  he  seems  to  have  cast  himself  prostrate  before  tbe  house  of  God.  The  more
he  turns  the  matter  over,  the  more  he  feels  it.  This  is  a  good  sign  in  repentance
(comp.  Mark  xiv.  72,  "As  he  thought  thereon,  he  wept;"  and  see  Alford  in  loc).  A
good  sign  because  a  sign  of  sincerity,  without  which  there  is  no  possible  room  for
any  hope  (Ezek.  xiv.  1 — 8).  2.  In  the  people  at  large.  Not  only  were  more  persons
continually  led  to  sympathise  with  his  sorrow,  until  "there  assembled  to  him  out  of
Israel  a  very  great  congregation;"  but  this  congregation  was  composed  of  persona
of  both  sexes  and  various  ages  ("men  and  women  and  children")  whose  iufluenci!
would  tell  respectively  in  the  state,  the  home,  and  the  future,  and  who  were  affected,
also,  with  a  degree  of  grief  hardly  less  than  his  own  (see  end  of  ver.  1).  In  a  case
such  as  this,  in  which  a  national  sin  was  involved,  this  was  also  a  very  good  sign.
The  more  numerous  and  varied  the  penitents,  and  the  deeper  their  sorrow,  the  better,
of  course,  the  prospect  of  that  thoroughly  national  repentance  which  was  requiied  in
this  case.  So  far,  therefore,  things  were  not  of  such  a  nature  as  to  give  a  ground  of
hope,  though  not  more.  It  was  something  to  find,  in  so  many  quarters,  so  much
sorrow  for  sin.

n.  Hopeful  Thoughts,  One  man,  e.g.,  out  of  the  many  present  next  expressed
such  thoughts  for  the  rest.  His  words  were  all  the  more  worthy  of  attention  because
tbe  evil  bewailed  seems  to  have  had  place  amongst  his  own  family  and  connections ;
possibly  in  the  household  of  his  own  father,  Jehiel  (comp.  vers.  2  and  26).  Yet  even
7i«,felt,  though  so  near  the  evil,  that  tbe  case  was  not  beyond  hope.  It  was  not  a
case,  i.  e.,  (1)  in  which  a  remedy  of  any  kind  was  impossible.  There  are  some  evils
which,  if  once  begun,  must  necessarily  continue;  but  that  was  clearly  not  the  case
here.  Besides  the  obvious  fact  that  there  was  no  necessity  for  any  further  marriages
of  this  unhappy  description,  it  was  at  least  possible  to  think  of  a  method  of  undoing,
to  some  extent,  tbe  harm  already  accomplished.  Wheiever  such  forbidden  wives
bad  been  "taken,"  or  brought  home  to  dwell  (Liuige),  they  might  be  again
"brought  forth"  (margin),  or  brought  out — the  exactly  opposite  course  (Lange  again).
Even  if  children  had  been  born  to  them — a  worse  form  of  the  evil  no  doubt  on  many
accounts — there  was  still  a  remedy  conceivable,  however  distressing  it  might  be,
and  however  harsh  it  might  seem.  These  children  might  be  sufficiently  provided
for,  and  then  sent  away  with  their  mothers  as  at  once  the  most  salutary  and  the


OH.  I.  1—44.]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  167

most  natural  course  of  proceeding.  Only,  in  short,  let  all  those  concerned  "  covenant
with  their  God  "  to  act  in  this  manner,  and  it  would  evidently  be  possible  for  them
to  become  free  of  this  plague.  (2)  The  case  was  one  in  which  such  a  remedy  waa
quite  lawful.  They  would  not  be  endeavouring,  by  the  proposed  process,  to  get  rid
of  one  sin  by  another.  The  plan  proposed,  in  fact,  was  the  "  counsel "  of  Ezra  him-
self. Either  he  had  taught  as  much  beforehand  in  explaining  generally  the  Law  of
Moses,  or  they  understood  as  much  now  from  his  actions,  or  from  some  unrecorded
words  of  his  at  this  time.  In  any  case,  as  being  ?iis  counsel,  it  was  the  counsel  of  an
adequate  authority — of  one  to  be  addressed  as  "  my  Lord  " — on  this  subject.  It  was
also  the  counsel  of  all  those  among  the  people  who  were  known  for  their  profound
and  even  "trembling"  reverence  for  the  commandment  of  God.  There  could  be  no
doubt,  therefore,  if  this  remedy  should  be  adopted,  that  all  "would  be,"  or  "  would
happen  "  (so  Lauge),  according  to  the  law.  (3)  Theproposed  remedy  was  ii\so  feasible —
anollier  capital  point.  There  was  a  fitting  person  to  undertake  its  application,  viz.,
Ezra  himself.  "  This  matter  belongeth  unto  thee."  It  is  the  kind  of  thing  we  expect
from  thee  ;  it  is  within  thy  commission  to  do  it.  There  were  those  also  ready  to
assist  iiim,  when  once  the  thing  was  begun— even  the  speaker  himself  and  his  friends.
One  can  imagine  all  that  "great"  and  penitent  "  congregation  "  murmuring  their
willing  assent  at  this  point  ;  and  the  speaker,  in  consequence,  feeling  enabled  to
assure  him  that  he  would  be  sure  to  succeed  if  he  tried.  "We  also  will  be  with
thee  :  be  of  good  courage,  and  do  it "  (ver.  4).

III.  Hopeful  resolves.  The  proposal  and  declaration  of  Shechaniah  were  great
points  gained  —very  great — but  they  did  not  embrace  all.  The  nail  was  driven  through.
It  still  required  to  be  clenched.  A  rncre  vague  and  general  willingness  to  assist  in
so  extiaordinarily  difflfiult  and  invidious  a  task,  and  one  affecting  so  many  persons
in  BO  piiinful  and  (in  their  eyes,  perhaps)  so  inquisitorial  a  manner,  would  never  be
sufficient  to  carry  that  task  through.  The  people  assembled,  therefore,  must  be
solemnly  pledged  and,  as  it  were,  bound  over  to  tlie  undertaking.  What  better  time
for  so  doing  than  that  very  moment  before  they  dispersed  ?  What  better  place  than
that  very  spot  in  front  of  God's  house?  What  better  manner  than  with  Jehovah  as
witness,  and  by  a  solemn  oath  in  his  name  ?  Such,  accordingly,  was  the  next  thing
done.  "  Then  arose  Ezra  " — then  at  last,  so  it  seems  to  signify,  as  though  feeling  at
last  that  he  could  exert  himself  to  some  purpose — "and  made  them  swear  to  do
according  to  this  word."  "  Chief  priests,  and  Levites,  and  all  Israel,"  he^made  them
all  swear,  for  they  were  all  concerned  in  it ;  and  were  all  required  to  help,  also,  in  so
great  an  enterprise.  When  he  let  them  disperse,  therefore,  it  was  with  tbe  legitimate
feeling,  doubtless,  that  a  beginning,  at  least,  had  been  made.  There  was  a  great  and
dreadful  evil,  it  was  true.  In  their  midst.  But  there  was  also  among  them  a  great
and  influential  body  who  had  been  brought  to  feel  it  most  acutely,  and  who  had  also
been  pledged  to  a  distinct  plan  for  removing  it  in  the  name  of  Jehovah  himself.  So
far,  in  much  sorrow,  there  was  also  some  hope.

Observe  here,  in  conclusion,  how  we  find  in  all  true  repentance — 1.  The  idea  of
cessation  "  Repentance  is  that  whereby  we  forsake  sin."  "  If  I  have  done  iniquity,
I  will  do  so  no  more  "  (Job  xxxiv.  32).  A  well-known  children's  hymn  teaches  that,
on  this  point,  which  many  adults  never  learn —

"  Repentance  means  to  leave  .     ■,

the  sins  we  loved  before ;
And  show  that  we  in  earnest  grieve
By  doing  so  no  more."

2.  The  idea  of  urgency  and  promptness.  "I  made  haste,  and  delayed  not,  to  keep
thy  commandments,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxix.  59,  60).  3.  The  idea  of  restitution,  or  of  undo-
ing the  evil  done,  so  far  as  lies  in  our  power  (Luke  xix.  8  ;  Acts  ix.  3,  22  ;  xix.  19 ;
Eph  iv.  28).  4.  But  not  the  idea,  in  any  way,  of  propitiation  or  atonement  thereby.
It  is  noticeable,  rather,  how  the  language  employed  seems  to  avoid  this  idea.  The
evil  done  to  Israel  by  contracting  such  marriages  can  be  undone  (in  part)  by  dissolv-
ing them  ;  hut  as  to  the  position  of  the  people,  in  consequence,  before  God,  they
have  notliing  to  urge  (ix.  15.  See,  also,  as  understood  by  some,  Ps.  xlix.  7  ;  Matt.
xvi.  end  26  ;  Luke  vii.  42).


168  THE  BOOK  OF  EZEA.  [CH.  x.  1—44

Vers.  6 — 13. — A  national  call.  We  have  traced  before  the  probable  influeace  of
Ezra's  piety  and  instructions  ;  bow  they  seem  to  have  aroused  the  national  con-
science, and  so  to  have  brought  to  light  the  secret  national  sin  ;  and  hovr  they  after-
wards brought  together  so  many  of  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  first  to  grieve,  for
it,  and  then  to  renounce  it,  and  resolve  to  suppress  it-  But  tliese  men,  however  in-
fluential, were  only  a  fractional  part  of  the  nation.  If  their  resolves  were  to  be  carried
out.satisfactorily,  and  so  as  to  insure  a  truly  national  forsaking  of  the  evil  amongst
them,  they  required  the  general  consent,  and,  at  least,  the  partial  co-operation,  of  all
the  children  of  the  captivity.  And,  as  a  first  practical  step  towards  obtaining  these
things,  they  would  naturally  desire,  in  Jerusalem  itself,  the  presence  of  all  such.
Accordingly,  we  find  described  to  us  in  this  section  (1)  such  a  national  call  to
assemble,  and  (2)  such  a  national  call  to  amend.

I.  Thb  call  to  assemble.  This  call  is  deserving  of  notice — 1.  Aa  to  its  origin.
Where  did  it  really  arise?  In  that  chamber  to  which  we  find  Ezra  retiring  after
pledging  the  assembled  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  to  suppress  the  evil  bewailed  by
them.  At  first  sight  it  seems  strange,  when  there  was  so  much  requiring  to  be  done
in  public,  that  he  should  seek  privacy  in  this  manner ;  but  doubtless  in  that  priestly
chamber  (see  Neli.  xii.  10,  22)  to  which  he  retired  he  was  in  frequent  communication
with  the  most  like-minded  of  the  princes  and  priests  ;  and  doubtless,  also,  his  peni-
tent abstinence  there  from  bread  and  water,  with  other  signs  of  his  still  continuing
grief  and  alarm,  would  be  an  effectual  means  of  stirring  them  up  to  do  their  part  of
the  work.  Wherever  he  was,  at  this  time,  there  was  but  one  thought  in  his  heart.
This  would  lead  in  them  to  but  one  endeavour,  that  of  putting  a  stop  to  the  plague.
Hence  the  "proclamation"  which  "they  made"  (vcr.  7).  2.  As  to  its  extent.
Here,  also,  see  Ezia's  influence.  The  proclamation  was  universal ;  made  "through-
out," and  made  to  "all;"  to  all -the  "children  of  llie  captivity"  (ver.  7) — to  ali
"  those  that  had  been  carried  away"  (ver.  8) — to  all  those,  i.  «.,  for  whose  transgres-
sions (ver.  6)  Ezra  was  mourning  at  that  time.  In  this  thrice-rrpoated  description  of
them  can  we  not  trace  the  mainspring  of  bis  grief,  the  recoUectiou,  viz.,  of  the  great
judgment  and  still  greater  deliverance  which  those  who  thus  sinned  had  experienced
(comp.  ix.  7 — 9)?  It  is  to  all  such,  therefore,  as  thus  described,  that  the  proclama-
tion goes  forth.  3.  As  to  its  urgency.  How  speedily  these  "  children  of  the  cap-
tivity "  arc  called  to  come  up.  Within  "  lliree  days"  they  must  all  be  at  Jerusalem.
One  day,  probably,  for  receiving  the  mcssnge  ;  one  day  for  preparing  and  travelling ;
on  the  third  day  to  be  there  (comp.  Mark  viii.  31  ;  ix.  31).  Also,  how  peremptorily.
Every  man  summoned  must  come  up  on  pain  of  two  things,  the  confiscation  of  his
property  (comp.  vii.  26,  as  connecting  this  with  Ezra's  influence)  and  the  excommu-
nication of  his  person.  No  man  so  refusing  would  be  considered  by  the  returned
remnant  as  still  belonging  to  their  company.  If  he  did  so  refuse,  the  sin  of  it  should
belong  exclusively  to  himself  (see  1  Tim.  v.  23).  4.  As  to  its  success.  "All  the
men  of  JudaU  and  Jerusalem  "  came  up  within  the  required  time.  It  is  also  evident
that  they  came  up  in  the  requisite  spirit.  It  was  .i  great  day — a  wonderful  scene.
Both  seem  to  have  impressed  themselves  upon  tlic  national  memory.  "It  was  the
ninth  month  ;  the  twentieth  day."  Tbty  could  see  it  all  still;  the  restored  house,
the  open  court  before  it,  the  multitudes  ILere  assembled,  their  weary  altitude,  their
trembling  grief.  They  could  even  hear  still  the  heavy  showers— not  unusual  indeed
at  that  season,  yet  evidently  at  this  time  of  very  unusual  severity — -which  would  help
so  much,  in  that  land  of  siiusUiue,  to  intensify  the  prevailing  gloom  ;  not  impossibly,
also,  reminding  some  of  those  present  of  1  Sam.  xii.  18.  See  how  well  tLis  call  had
succeeded  ;  and  how  much  reason  there  was  to  trace  its  success  (when  we  remember
Prov.  xvi.  1  ;  Matt.  vi.  6)  to  the  secret  intercessions  of  Ezra  in  the  "  chamber  of
Johanan,  the  son  of  Eliashib."

II.  The  call  to  amend.  This  again  was  very  successful,  and,  doubtless,  from
much  the  same  cause.  Not  only  had  tbe  people  come  together,  as  we  have  already
seen,  most  willing  to  hear  ;  but  all  lliat  followed  wns  also  correspondingly  bright.
For  example,  observe — 1.  How  fniihful  the  counsel  given.  Doubly  distressing  as
the  distress  of  the  people  must  have  been  to  Ezra  himself,  he  will  not  attempt  to
remove  it  by  any  cry  of  false  pence  (Jor.  vi.  14).  Ou  the  contrary,  he  states  the
fact  plainly,  "  Te  have  transgressed  ; "  that  is  certain.     Also  he  states  it  exactly,  "  Ye


cu.  X.  1—44.  J  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  15f

have  laken  strauge  wives  ;"  tliat  is  the  main  point  of  your  trespass.  Also,  onoe  more,
he  slates  it  fully,  "To  increase  the  trespass  of  Israel;"  to  add  to  that  which  was
already  too  great,  and  which  once  before,  in  fact,  except  for  God's  wonderful  mercy,
would  have  ruined  Israel  beyond  recovery.  That  being  the  case,  what  ought  to  be
done?  First  of  all,  let  the  truth  be  acknowledged.  The  sin  has  been  public.  Avow
it.  '■  therefore,"  publicly.  Make  open  "  confession  "  of  it  before  "Jehovah;"  before
"Jehovah  the  God  of  your  fathers,"  against  whom  ye  have  sinned.  Next,  let  the
sin  be  forsaken.  You  have  greatly  displeased  God  by  this  conduct.  Now,  therefore,
seek  the  opposite,  and  be  ready  to  "  do  his  pleasure,"  and  not  your  own  Also  do  it
voluntarily.  "Separate  yourselves"  from  these  evil  associations;  and  that,  more-
over, at  whatever  sacrifice,  and  with  however  much  pain — "  from  the  people  of  the
laud,  and  from  the  strange  wives."  To  all  this  observe — 2.  How  hearty  their
response.  Observe  its  purport,  as  direct  as  an  echo:  "  As  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we
do."  Its  unanimity,  from  "all"  those  present,  however  many,  however  diverse.
Its  manner,  with  outspoken  clearness,  and  therefore  without  hesitation,  or  reluctance,
or  false  shame,  or  indifference— all  these,  as  we  know,  being  things  which  restrain
the  utterance  and  prevent  it  from  being  "  loud  "  Very  grave,  very  brave,  very
distinct,  and  very  determined,  in  the  midst  of  the  descending  rain-storm,  was  this
their  response — a  truly  national,  a  truly  faithful  pledge  of  amendment  of  life.

Hence  we  may  see,  in  conclusion — 1.  How  national  aflfairs  are  determined,  viz.,86
far  as  men  are  concerned,  rather  by  the  supplication  of  God's  servants  than  by  the
proclamations  of  rulers.  Not  cabinet  councils  so  much  as  closet  prayers  shape  the
history  of  the  world.  The  will  of  Ezra  in  Johanan's  chamber  was  in  communication,
by  the  way  of  God's  throne,  with  all  the  wills  in  the  land  (comp.  Gen.  xviii.  23 — 33;
xix.  29;  XX.  7;  1  Sam.  vii.  5;  Job  xlii.  8;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2;  and,  in  a  certain  sense,
1  Kings  xix.  16;  Ps.  cxlix.  5 — 9;  Jer.  i.  10).  2.  How  national  judgmenlia  may  be
averted,  viz.,  by  that  which  amounts,  however  expressed,  tea  really  national  con-
fession and  subsequent  forsaking  of  sin.  The  exact  mode  of  making  this  confession
is_of  minor  importance,  anil  may  perhaps  be  a  subject  admitting  of  considerable
diversity  oi  opinion,  provided  only  tl(at  there  is  no  real  room  for  uncertainty  as  to
its  meaning  and  sc(jpe.  The  voice  that  said  what  was  forbidden,  must  be  the  voice,
it, is  clear,  to  unsay  it,  so  far  as  lies  in  its  power.  This  applies  not  only  to  nations,
but  to  cities,  to  Churches,  to  families,  to  all  associations,  in  fact,  of  human  beings.
"Wherever  there  is  association  tn  evil,  there  must  be  like  association  in  its  repudiatiou.
The  fact,  also,  that  such  repudiation  of  evil  is  the  only  step  that  we  can  tak^  on  our
part  towards  its  ultimate  forgiveness,  only  makes  the  duty  of  taking  it,  if  that  be
possible,  more  impeiative  still  (see  Jer.  iii.  12,  13).  The  less  God  asks,  the  less  excuse
for  our  refusing  to  give  it  (see  2  Kings  v.  18).

Vers.  13—44. — A  satisfactory  dose.  When  a  nation  has  openly  resolved  on  the
reformation  of  a  national  sin,  there  is  still  one  thing  remaining  to  be  accomplished,
viz.,  th;it  reformation  itself.  This,  accordingly,  is  that  which  we  read  of  in  the
remaining  part  of  this  chapter.  "  As  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we  do."  Such  was  the
resolve  of  all  as  expressed  in  ver.  12  In  vers.  13—44,  which  come  before  us  now,
we  see  that  resolve  carried  out.  We  shall  find  that  it  was  so  carried  out,  first,  with
ver3'  great  zeal;  and  secondly,  with  very  great  care.

I.  Very  great  zeal.  When  the  people  had  spoken,  as  just  noted,  they  did  not
stop  short.  Neither  did  they  wait  for  Ezra  or  the  rulers  to  arrange  proceedings  for
them.  They  themselves,  on  the  contrary,  made  proposals  for  so  doing.  We  may
suppose  that  they  all,  as  a  body,  joined  in  the  resolve  of  ver.  12.  Afterwards,
probably,  some  one  or  two  of  them  spoke  in  the  name  of  the  rest,  suggesting  the
method  of  action  described  to  us  in  vers.  13,  14.  This  spontaneous  promptness  in
such  a  direction  was  itself  a  proof  of  much  zeal.  It  is  true  of  all  men  in  earnest
that  they  show  their  desire  of  success  by  the  plans  which  they  form  for  securing
it  (see  Ps.  xxxvi.  4;  Isa.  xxxii.  8).  In  the  present  instance,  moreover,  it  is  to  be
noticed  that  the  people  formed  such  plans  (1)  in  the/ae«  of  great  diffleulties.  It  was
no  light  task  which  had  been  resolved  on  by  them.  With  all  the  good  will  in  the
world  they  could  not  do  it  where  and.  as  they  were  then — their  numbers  so  gi'eat,
their  circumstances  so  trying,  the  operation  required  so  cumbrous,  the  transgression
itself  so  deep  (see  margin,  end  ver.  18).    And  yet  if  they  were  once  allowed  to  di»


160  THE  BOOK  Otr  EZRA.  ["•■  x.  1—44

perse,  how  could  its  accomplishment  be  secured  at  all?  How  much  might  be  lost  in
such  a  case  beyond  their  power  to  regain  !  Equally  unattainable  the  thing  appeared,
whatever  they  did.  Any  persons  less  in  earnest  would  have  given  it  up  altogether.
With  them,  however,  this  only  caused  them  to  form  their  plans  (2)  vyith  very  great
wisdom.  That  which  they  suggested  met  fully  all  the  difficulties  in  question.  First
of  all  there  was  to  be  a  tribunal— a  "  commission,"  as  we  might  call  it — a  tribunal
easily  constituted  and  recognised  because  composed  in  the  main  of  the  acknowledged
national  heads  ("  the  rulers  of  all  the  congregation  ") — on  whom  was  to  rest  the
responsibility  of  seeing  this  thing  carried  through.  Next,  this  commission,  sitting  at
Jerusalem,  was  to  have  power,  by  the  vote  of  that  assembly,  to  appoint  times  and
summon  persons  as  they  might  find  to  be  needed,  care  being  taken,  in  every  separate
case  of  investigation,  to  have  the  support  of  the  local  "  elders"  with  their  weight  of
influence  and  character,  and  the  assislance  of  the  local  "  judges  "  with  their  weight
of  authority  and  knowledge.  Also  the  powers  of  this  commission  were  not  to  cease
nor  their  labours  to  be  relinquished  till  they  had  done  all  in  this  matter  that  could  be
done  in  the  way  of  averting  God's  wrath.  So  feasible,  so  effectual,  so  complete  was
the  plan  they  proposed  in  their  zeal.  And  this  wise  plan  was  proposed  (3)  with
wonderful  unanimity.  Amongst  the  many  heads  of  households  (some  113  it
appears  in  number)  directly  concerned  in  this  evil,  there  must  have  been  some  who,
from  pride  of  wealth  or  position,  or  dread  of  public  exposure,  or  strength  and
tenacity  of  natural  affection,  would  be  tempted  to  feel  peculiar  repugnance  to  such  a
proposal.  It  does  not  appear,  however,  that  any  of  these  said  anything  against  it.
If  any  others  did  on  their  behalf,  we  have  their  names  in  ver.  15,  as  some  under-
stand one  expression  in  the  former  half  of  that  verse  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,
we  rather  understand  that  the  four  persons  there  referred  to  were,  as  it  were,  the  two
"secretaries"  and  two  "assistant  secretaries  "  of  this  commission,  who  therefore  at
once  "stood"  (see  margin,  and  comp.  "stand"  in  ver.  13)  to  organise  and  arrange
for  the  commission  according  to  the  just-carried  "  resolution  "  of  that  great  assembly,
then  we  have  no  expressed  divergency  of  opinion  at  all.  In  either  case  the  practical
unaqimity  was  exceedingly  great;  so  great,  in  the  one  case,  that  the  opposition  of
these  four  conspicuous  Israelites  could  do  nothing  against  it;  so  great,  in  the  other,
that  there  was  no  opposition  in  existence  worthy  of  being  named.

II.  Vbkt  great  cakb.  These  things  being  agreed  on,  the  meeting,  no  doubt,
dispersed.  No  time  appears  to  have  been  lost  in  carrying  out  the  resolution  passed.
We  find  evidences,  however,  of  the  care  this  was  done  with — 1.  In  the  final  settle-
ment of  the  commission  resolved  on.  Ezra,  it  appears  (so  some  understand  ver.  16),
did  not  take  all  those  who  were  qualified  by  position  to  act  upon  it;  but  himself
"  separated  "  off  only  "  certain  "  men  of  each  principal  "  house  "  among  them.  Also,
In  order  to  prevent  all  mistake,  or  confusion,  or  subsequent  possibility  of  objection,
he  enrolled  and  announced  publicly  the  "  names  "  of  all  such.  And,  finally,  not-
withstanding the  urgency  of  the  matter,  he  took  ten  full  days  for  this  work  of  selec-
tion and  enrolment,  viz.,  from  the  twentieth  day  of  the  ninth  month  to  the  first  day
of  the  tenth.  This  was  time,  we  may  be  certain,  very  well  spent,  but  it  was  in  great
contrast  to  the  "three  days"  of  ver.  8,  and  a  great  evidence,  therefore,  of  his  great
care  in  preparing  for  this  work.  3.  In  the  a^tital  operationi  of  the  commission,  when
thus  fixed.  The  very  manner,  «.  g.,  of  their  commencing  seems  to  be  indicative  of
this  spirit.  "  They  sat  down  to  examine  this  matter,"  as  men  who  felt  how  long
and  arduous  a  task  they  had  on  their  hands,  and  who  wished,  therefore,  to  give  to  it
their  undivided  attention  and  care  (comp.  Matt,  xxvii.  36).  We  see  the  same  spirit  in
the  long  continuance  and  persevei'ance  of  their  work.  It  took  them  three  months  to
"  make  an  end  "  of  the  examination;  but  it  was  a  full  end  when  they  did.  By  the
"  first  day  of  the  first  month  "  (ver.  17),  of  the  next  year,  there  was  nothing  left  to
be  done.  And  we  see  it  also  in  the  impartiality  and  thoroughness  of  their  work.  On
the  one  hand,  there  was  no  respect  of  persons  on  the  side  of  the  great.  "  Among  the
sons  of  the  priests  "  (ver.  18)  were  found  those  who  had  taken  strange  wives,  some
of  these  being  even  amongst  the  high  priest's  own  relations.  What  was  to  be  done
about  these?  As  teachers  and  ministers  of  the  truth,  were  they  in  as  much  danger
as  others  from  idolatrous  connections  in  their  houses?  Even  if  so,  was  it  necessary
for  their  severance  from  such  connections  to  be  made  an  occasion  of  public  scandal  ?
Must  the  names  of  each  be  made  known  7  Must  they  be  made  known  as  those  of
offenders?     Must  men   of  such  standing  be  openly  bound  over  to  reform  their


cii.  X.  1-44.J  Till!;  BOOS  OP  E2hA.  161

honselioliU?  If  Iho&e  q\ii'Slions  were  ever  ftsked,  we  see  from  ver.  19  Low  they
were  answered.  If  anylhiug,  the  severest  measure  was  dealt  out  to  these  distinguished
offenders.  They  had  to  lead  the  way  in  repentance;  also  a  written  promise  of
amendment,  and  an  open  confession  of  transgression,  were  required  in  each  case.  Ou
the  01  her  hand,  there  was  no  respect  of  persons  with  regai-d  to  tlie  lowly  (Exod.  xxiii.
3J.  Whosoever  had  offended,  whether  priests  (vers.  20 — 22),  or  Levites  (ver.  23),  or
singers  (ver.  24),  or  porters  (ver.  24  again),  or  lay  members  of  the  house  of  Israel;
and  however  diliScult  and  painful  in  some  cases  the  circumstances  might  be  (end  ver.
44),  there  was  but  one  measure  for  all.  Tliis,  indeed,  is  what  makes  this  catalogue
here  a  fit  conclusion  to  the  whole.  This  apparently  unnecessary  list  of  names  had
great  value  in  its  day.  It  was  the  formal  "report,"  so  to  speak,  of  Ezra  and  his
brother  "  commissioners,"  the  last  part  of  their  labours,  the  final  proof  of  their  care.
That  "  report"  being  presented,  the  "commission"  ceased  to  exist.

Let  us  learn,  in  conclusion,  the  following  lessons  respecting  the  eradication  of
evil  in  God's  congregation,  yiz. — 1.  lis  peculiar  diffloulty.  From  the  time  when
Ezra  first  heard  of  this  mixed-marriages  evil  to  the  last  day  of  the  last  month  of
that  year,  when  the  last  case  of  the  kind  was  disposed  of,  what  a  long  succession  of
ditficulties  and  obstacles  he  had  to  encounter  and  overcome  1  Also,  what  tears,
prayers,  fastings,  watchings,  efforts,  and  seeming  extremity  of  severity  on  his  part
and  that  of  others  were  required  in  order  to  overcome  them  I  Yet,  even  so,  some
years  afterwards,  what  do  we  find  (Neb.  xiii.  23—29)?  2.  Its  peculiar  costliness.
See  what  had  to  be  given  up  in  this  particular  case.  It  reminds  one  of  Matt.  v.  30;
Deut.  xiii.  6—11.  Tlie  only  way  to  prevent  the  destruction  of  the  whole  house  of
Israel  and  of  each  individual  Israelite,  by  the  spreading  of  the  infection,  was  by
"stamping  it  out,"  wherever  found,  and  whatever  the  cost.  3.  Its  peculiar  import-
ance. If  it  costs  much,  how  much  more  is  it  worth !  Well  does  the  account  of  the
completion  of  this  reformation  come  in  at  the  end  of  this  book.  It  is  indeed  "  the
crowning  of  the  edifice,"  to  borrow  a  modern  phrase.  All  that  we  read  of  in  the
previous  chapters  would  have  been  valueless  without  this.  Of  what  avail  the  strong-
est fortification,  if  in  treacherous  hands.  It  was  much  to  have  restored  to  them  the
material  house  of  God's  presence.  It  was  much  more  to  have  such  a  reformed
spiritual  "  house."  or  congregation,  rightly  to  use  that  material  house  for  God's  glory.
So  much  more,  in  fact,  this  spiritual  congregation,  when  it  finally  arrives  at  its  best,
will  be  without  any  house  of  that  other  kind  (Rev.  xxi.  22).  ~  "


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Th«  ^eech  of  Shechaniah.  Ezra  was  a  very  remarkable  man.  He
represented  the  Persian  court  as  governor  in  Judaea.  But  ttiis  was  the  least  feature
of  his  distinction.  He  was  a  man  of  the  most  exemplary  piety,  a  very  profound
scholar,  and  withal  the  subject  of  Divine  inspiration.  When  it  was  noised  in  the
city  that  such  a  man  had  rent  his  clothes,  there  was  naturally  a  vast  concourse  of
people.  In  the  presence  of  this  assembly  he  offered  his  prayer  to  God,  in  the  whole
of  which  there  is  not  an  expression  of  hope.  This  stirred  the  soul  of  Shechaniah  to
deliver  his  speech,  which  was  eminently  wise  and  most  appropriate  to  the  occasion.

I.  It  contained  a  pull  confession  of  sin  (ver.  3).  1.  This  had  been  done  lefore
by  Ezra.  (1)  He  did  this  for  himself,  to  express  to  God  the  grief  of  his  soul  that
the  Divine  honour  should  have  been  so  insulted;  that  his  people  should  have  been
80  wicked  and  foolish  as  to  have  exposed  themselves  to  the  vengeance  of  heaven.
(2)  But  not  on  the  part  of  the  people  who  were  involved  in  the  ciime.  Ezra  had  no
ground  for  hope;  for  without  repentance  a  sinner  has  no  plea  for  mercy  (Ps.  Ixvi.
18;  Isa.  i.  11—15).  To  Ezra,  therefore,  the  smoke  of  the  evening  sacrifice  could
only  be  a  symbol  of  wrath.  2.  Now  it  is  done  on  behalf  of  the  people.  He  does
not  appear  himself  to  have  been  guilty;  but  his  father  and  other  members  of  his
family  were  implicated  (ver.  26).  He  was  in  a  position  to  know  that  the  "  sore
weepmg"  of  the  people,  sympathetic  with  the  weeping  of  Ezra  (ver.  1),  was  the
expression  of  a  genuine  contrition.  Note— By  weeping  for  the  sins  of  others  we  may
set  them  weeping  for  themselves.

BZBA.  w


168  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  fCH.  x.  1—44

II.  It  proposed  a  national  rbpentance  aJtd  reformation  (ver.  3).  1.  Tbej
were  to  pledge  themselves  to  put  away  all  t/ie  strange  wives  and  their  issue.  (1)  This
extreme  raesisuie  was  required  by  the  law.  For  in  ancient  times  it  was  the  duly  of
the  children  of  Israel  to  exterminate  the  idolatrous  people  of  the  land  (Deut.  vii.  1 —
3).  (2)  The  genius  of  the  gospel  is  different  (see  1  Cor.  vii.  12,  13).  Now  if  tbeie
be  one  believing  parent  the  offspring  may  receive  baptism  and  Church  recognition.
2.  This  was  to  be  done  in  the  moat  solemn  manner.  (1)  "  Let  us  make  a  covenant,"
literally,  let  ns  cui  (n^3  earath)  a  covenant.  The  allusion  is  to  the  custom  of
dividing  a  victim,  and  laying  the  pieces  over  against  each  other,  so  that  the  people
covenanting  might  pass  between  them  (see  Gen.  xv.  10).  (3)  This  ceremony  on  the
part  of  the  people  expressed  their  willingness  to  be  treated  as  the  victim  had  been,
viz.,  to  be  cut  up  by  the  sacrificing  knife  of  Divine  justice  if  they  proved  faithless
to  their  pledges  (see  Jer.  xxxiv.  18 — 20).  (3)  This  ceremony  points  to  the  gospel
of  Christ,  who  is  our  covenant  or  purification-saeiifice,  securing  to  us  all  blessings  if
we  comply  with  the  terms  of  mercy.  It  also  admonishes  us  that  if  we  do  not  comply,
then  the  sword  of  flame  will  be  turned  upon  us,  and  we  shall  be  made  ourselves  the
sacrifices  for  our  sin.

III.  It  suggested  measures  for  carbtino  out  the  reformation.  1.  Bzra  was
himself  to  be  the  prime  actor  in  this^.  "  This  matter  belongeth  unto  thee."  (1)  He
had  the  moral  qualifications  for  the  work.  His  very  soul  was  in  it.  His  influence
with  his  people  was  unequalled.  He  was  the  most  eminent  servant  of  God.  (2)  He
had  the  political  qualifications  Governor,  &c.  2.  He  was  to  associate  with  him  as
his  council  "those  that  tremble  at  the  commandment  of  Ood."  (1)  These  were  the
godly  persons  whose  sympathies  led  them  first  to  gather  round  him  (ch.  ix.  4).  (2)
With  such  a  council  the  leformation  would  be  the  more  likely  to  be  carried  out
"according  to  the  law."  3.  Tlie  chiefs  of  the  people  pledged  themselves  to  be  with
him.  (1)  Surely  then  "tbeie  is  hope  in  Israel."  "The  valley  of  Achor,"  t.  e.  of
trouble,  has  ever  been  "  the  door  of  hope"  (Hosea  ii.  15).  God  promises  to  return  to
those  who  return  to  him  (I  Sam.  vii.  3;  Isa.  It.  7;  Hosea  vi.  1).  (2)  This  speech
of  Shechanifth  was  surely  God's  answer  to  the  prayer  of  Ezra.  He  was  to  Ezra  what
the  angel  was  to  Daniel  (comp.  Dan.  ix.  20).  (3)  Now  is  the  moment  for  action,  and
Ezra  is  equal  to  the  occasion.  "Then  arose  Ezra,"  &c.  (ver.  5).  "  There  i«  a  tide
In  the  affairs  of  men,"  &c. — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Ihings  exceptional.  Human  life  is  a  river  which  flows  evenly  along
from  day  to  day;  but  it  is  a  river  like  the  Zambesi  or  the  Congo  (Livingstone),  not
without  its  rapids  and  its  falls.  Usually  it  flows  silently,  but  sometimes  it  dashes
along  with  impetuosity  and  uproar.  So  is  it  with  our  Christian  life,  with  our
religious  course.  There  are  things  exceptional  as  well  as  things  ordinary  and  regiilar,
for  which  room  must  be  made  by  ourselves  and  allowance  by  other  people.  There
may  be,  as  here  at  this  juncture  in  the  life  of  Ezra  and  the  returned  Jews,  a  time  of
exceptional —  ^

I.  Exhibition  of  feeling.  "  When  Ezra  had  prayed  . . .  weeping  and  casting
himself  down,"  &c.  (ver.  1).  Ezra  "wept,"  t.  e.  made  lamentation,  audible  and
visible,  in  presence  of  all  the  people,  and  instead  of  standing  or  kneeling  he  cast
himself  down,  and  lay  prostrate  in  the  temple  court.  In  order  to  impress  on  the  multi-
tude the  strength  of  his  feeling,  and  the  critical  character  of  the  present  emergency.
And  his  example  proved  contagious,  for  all  the  people  "  wept  very  sore "  (ver.  1),
and  there  was  a  great  and  general  outpouring  of  emotion.  Ordinarily  our  feelings
are  wisely  kept  under  control.  In  this  country  we  are,  indeed,  apt  to  press  this  a
few  points  too  far,  and  let  self-control  pass  into  a  chill  or  cold  reserve.  But  self-
control  gives  force  and  dignity  to  character,  and  almost  anything  is  better  than
habitually  giving  way  to  tempestuous  feeling.  Men  that  are  constantly  violent  in
their  expression  of  feeling  are  disregarded  if  not  despised;  they  lose  all  influence
over  others;  they  expend  themselves  in  trifles,  and  have  nothing  in  reserve  for  large
occasions.  But  there  are  times  when  feeling  may  be  freely  poured  forth;  when,  as  in
Ezra's  case,  there  is  (1)  urgent  reason  for  exciting  others  to  feel  as  we  do ;  or  when,
as  in  the  case  of  the  people,  there  is  (3)  general  fervour  in  which  it  would  be
unsympathising  or  unpatriotic  not  to  share.  It  Is  a  very  noble  sight  when  a  whole
people  mourns  with  an  honourable  repentance,  or  arises  in  holy  indignation,  or  braces


CH.  X.  1—44.]  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  IM

Itself  up  to  a  geuerous  struggle,  or  rejoices  with  a  pure  and  holy  joy.  Then  let  feeling
■well  to  its  highest  tide  ;  let  it  pour  itself  forth  as  "the  mighty  waves  of  the  gea."

II.  Attestation.  "Let  us  make  a  covenant  with  our  God"(ver.  8).  "Then
arose  Ezra,  and  made  ...  all  Israel  to  swear  that  they  should  do  according  to  his
woi-d  "  (ver.  5).  Usually,  as  our  Lord  tells  us,  it  is  far  better  to  speak  simply  with-
out strengthening  our  word  by  protestation  or  oath  (Matt.  v.  83—37)  ;  but  there  are
times  when  we  feel  called  on  to  add  to  the  word  of  promise  which  we  make  either
to  God  or  to  man,  something  which  shall  confirm  and  secure  it.  We  may  (1)  malce
a  formal  covenant  with  Qod,  as  Shechaniah  recommended  (ver.  3) ;  we  may  take  upon
us  his  vows,  alone  or  in  company,  (a)  to  do  some  duty  which  is  binding  on  us,  but
which  we  are  strongly  tempted  to  leave  undone  ;  or  (6)  to  render  some  service  which
we  may  lawfully  leave  alone,  but  which,  in  our  better  hours,  we  are  inspired  to  under-
take ;  or(c)  to  leave  untouched  that  which  is  either  wrong  in  itself  or  dangerous  or  hurt-
ful to  ourselves  or  those  we  have  in  charge.  Or  we  may  (2)  enter  into  a  solemn  and
sacred  pledge  with  our  fellows.  Ezra  felt  that  this  was  an  occasion  on  which  it  was
of  the  utmost  consequence  that  everything  should  be  done  thoroughly  ;  not  only
begun  in  zeal,  but  carried  out  and  perfected  ;  and  for  this  purpose  he  made  the  chief
priests,  Levites,  and  all  Israel  bind  themselves  with  a  solemn  oath  to  sustain  him
(ver.  5),  and  they  did  so.  It  is  right  and  wise,  on  occasion,  to  require  something  more
than  a  word  of  promise.  We  do  well  to  demand  a  written  engagement,  or  even  a
declaration  made  before  God  that  what  is  promised  shall  be  done.  .««,  ,    .t_.

III.  Severity.  "When  he  came  thither,  he  did  eat  no  bread,  nor  drink  water"  (ver.
6).  "  Whosoever  would  not  come  ....  all  his  substance  should  be  forfeited  (ver.  8).
Ezra  showed  some  little  (1)  severity  toward  himself:  he  neither  ate  nor  drank  (ver.  6).
He  allowed  the  public  concerns  so  to  occupy  his  mind  and  affect  his  heart  that  he
gave  himself  no  time  or  felt  in  himself  no  inclination  for  the  ordinary  comforts  and
refreshments  of  life.  We,  too,  on  occasion,  if  not  only  sincere  but  zealous  for  the
public  good,  shall  deny  ourselves  that  which  we  usually  and  rightly  allow  ourselves.
There  are  demons  (iniquities,  sins,  propensities)  only  to  be  cast  out  with  that  intensity
of  thought,  and  feeling,  and  action  which  implies  "prayer  and  fasting"  (Malt.  xvii.
31).  He  also  showed  considerable  (2)  severity  toward  others.  With  the  concurrence
of  the  leaders  (princes),  those  who  did  not  present  themselves  in  three  days  were  to
suffer  forfeiture  of  goods  and  excommunication  (ver.  8) — a  heavy  penalty  for
recusancy.  Severe  crises  justify  strong  measures.  There  are  times  when  leniency
is  only  another  name  for  cruelty.  An  Achan  must  perish  that  Israel  may  be  saved  ;
the  immoral  mcmljer  of  Corinth  must  be  cast  out  that  the  Church  may  be  pure.lWe
must  "  make  a  difference  "  according  to  requirement  (Jude  23,  23). — C.  ,„„^

Vers.  6 — 44. — The  reformation.  Roused  by  the  speech  of  Shechaniah  to  the  work
of  reformation,  Ezra  promptly  took  his  measures.  These  are  set  forth  in  the  words
before  us.  The  consideration  of  the  subject  may  be  conveniently  arranged  under
three  heads,  viz. —

I.  The  proclamation.  1.  This  wot  drawn  up  in  the  temple  (vers.  6,  7).  (1)  In
the  "  chamber  of  Johanan,  the  son  of  Eliashib."  Eliasbib  was  high  priest,  in  which
office  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Joiada  (Neh.  xii.  10).  Some  think  Johanan  was
another  name  for  Joiada  ;  but  Joiada  had  a  son  Jonathan,  who  more  probably  was
this  Johanan  (Neh.  xii.  11).  In  this  case  Ezra  consulted  with  the  grandson  of
Eliashib.  Sagacity  for  counsel  is  not  always  found  with  age.  (3)  Perhaps  the
chamber  of  Johanan  was  the  place  in  which  a  council  of  priests  assembled.  The
plural  "  they  "  who  "  made  proclamation  "  shows  that  Ezra  did  not  issue  it  upon  his
sole  authority.  It  would  go- forth  with  the  sanction  of  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical
rulers  of  the  nation  (see  ver.  8).  (3)  It  was  also  drawn  up  in  a  spirit  suited  to  the
solemnity  of  the  occasion  and  the  place.  Ezra  still  continued  his  fast ;  "  for  he
mourned  because  of  the  transgression  of  them  that  had  been  carried  away."
Mourning  should  not  cease  until  sin  is  abandoned.  Under  the  influence  of  this  true
spirit  the  document  was  framed.  3.  Its  measures  were  strong  and  peremptory.  (1)
All  the  children  of  the  captivity  were  to  assemble  in  Jerusalem  within  three  days.
Sufficient  time  was  given.  No  man  can  plead  that  God  has  not  given  him  sufficient
time  for  the  lecuring  of  his  salvation.    But  there  was  no  time  to  waste.    We  must

h2


164  THE  BOOK  OP  EZRA.  [ch.  x.  1-  14

not  pliiy  with  roptntance.  Procrastiuation  is  peril.  (2)  Failing  to  appear,  the
ecclesiastical  penalty  was  excommunication.  Exclusion  from  the  society  of  God's
people  upon  earth  is  a  fearful  forfeiture.  But  what  must  be  the  calamity  of  permanent
exclusion  from  the  holy  universe  1  (3)  There  was  also  a  civil  penalty,  viz.,  "  that
all  his  substance  sliould  be  forfeited."  The  Hebrew  for  "  forfeited  "  here  is  in  tlii;
margin  construed  "  devoted,"  which  suggests  that  it  should  be  given  to  the  sacred
uses  of  the  temple.  Tliis  was  fitting  where  civil  and  ecclesiastical  laws  were  the
same  ;  but  here  is  no  justification  for  the  infliction  of  civil  penalties  by  ecclesiastical
authority  under  the  gospel.

II.  The  appeal  (vers.  10,  11).  1.  The  people  were  prepared  to  Tiear  it.  (1)  The
fear  of  God  was  upon  them.  "All  the  people  sat  in  the  street  of  the  house  of  God,
trembling  because  of  this  matter."  The  spirit  of  God  had  wrought  this  conviction
in  their  hearts  in  answer  to  Ezra's  prayer.  (3)  They  were  also  terrified  because  of
the  rain.  This  rain  may  have  been  natural  and  seasonable,  for  it  was  then  December,
and  the  Septuagint  construes  tlie  word  for  ' '  rain  "  by  winter.  It  was  probably
miraculous  (comp.  1  Sam.  xii.  18).  This  agrees  best  with  the  terror  it  occasioned.
3.  It  urged  upon  tliem  tJie  duty  of  reformation,  (1)  It  brought  home  to  them  their
sin.  Simply  the  heads  of  the  discourse  are  given  here ;  but  many  arguments  were
doubtless  used  to  force  home  conviction.  (2)  It  urged  them  to  make  full  confessiim
to  God.  Where  conviction  is  deep  and  real  there  will  be  full  confession.  God  re-
quires this  (Prov.  xxviii.  13,  1  John  i.  9).  It  moved  them  to  forsake  their  sin.  There
is  an  impudent  confession  of  sin  which  aggravates  its  turpitude.  ■  Sincere  confession
leads  to  reformation.  "  _^^^

III.  The  response.  1.  Ihe  people  consented  to  the  reformation.  (1)  The  consent
was  emphatic.  "As  thou  hast  said,  so  must  we  do."  We  must  do  it  or  we  are  un-
done. (3)  It  was  hearty.  They  said  this  "with  a  loud  voice."  It  is  well  to
pronounce  ourselves  against  our  sins.  It  strengthens  our  courage  for  God.  (3)  It
was  unanimous.  "  All  the  congregation  answered."  There  is  a  wonderful  unanimity
in  seasons  of  religious  revival.  God  uses  the  sympathy  of  numbers.  2.  They  sug-
gested measures  for  carrying  it  on.  (1)  The  business  was  too  heavy  to  be  finished  in
a  day.  Nice  points  might  arise  to  be  consideied.  For  example,  some  of  the  reputed
strange  wives  may  have  become  Jewish  proselytes.  (2)  The  rulers  of  all  the  congre-
gation were  to  be  represented  by  the  elders  of  every  city  and  the  judges.  Befoie
these  local  courts  justice  might  be  carried  out  with  reasonable  expedition.  3.
Ezra  consented  to  their  proposal.  (1)  Three  months  were  accordingly  occupied  with
this  business  (vers.  16, 17).  During  this  time  113  delinquents  were  convicted  (vers.
18—44).  (2)  Amongst  these  were  members  of  the  high  priest's  family.  They  gave
their  hands  in  token  of  their  submission  (see  1  Chron.  xxix.  24,  margin)  to  put  away
their  wives.  They  also  offered  a  ram  for  their  trespass.  This  example  was  doubtless
followed  by  the  people,  for  everything  was  to  be  done  according  to  the  law  (ver.  3  ;
also  Lev.  vi.  4,  6).  (3)  In  these  sacrifices  the  gospel  was  foreshadowed.  Note — "  All
the  children  of  the  captivity  "  appear  to  have  been  settled  ' '  in  Judah  and  Jerusalem, "
which  suggests  that  there  were  but  few  of  the  "  ten  tribes  "  among  them,  who  would
naturally  seek  their  inheritance  in  other  parts  of  Palestine.  Agreeable  to  this,  the
peop]e  who  assembled  in  response  to  the  proclamation  are  described  as  "  all  the  men
of  Judah  and  Benjamin." — J.  A.  M.

Vers.  9 — 44. — Sin  and  repentance.  A  very  memorable  scene  was  witnessed  that
day,  the  twentieth  of  the  ninth  month,  in  the  year  of  Ezra's  return.  All  the  Israelites
of  Judah  and  Benjamin  assembled  together  in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  shaken,
troubled,  trembling  for  fear  of  the  anger  of  an  oSended  God,  ready  to  yield  to  the
demands  of  his  faithful  servant  who  spoke  in  his  name,  even  to  the  breaking  up  of
their  domestic  ties ;  it  was  an  hour  when  sin  was  coming  out  into  the  light,  and  was
to  be  sternly  cast  out  from  the  midst  of  them.    We  look  at—

I.  The  character  of  their  sin,  and  op  all  bin.  It  was  (a)  widespread  (vers.  18,
23,  24),  not  touching  the  top  only,  or  only  sinking  to  the  bottom  of  their  society.  It
went  quite  through  the  whole  mass.  Among  them  that  bad  taken  strange  wives  were
"sons  of  the  priests"  (ver.  18);  "also  of  the  Levites"  (ver.  23);  "  of  the  singers  also,
and  of  the  porters  "  (vers.  23,  24).    No  class  or  grade  was  free  from  its  infection.    It


OH.  X.  1—44]  THE  BOOK  OF  EZRA.  165

was  something  (/S)  that  struck  home  ;  it  was  not  a  mere  political  offence  ;  it  invaded
their  family  life  ;  it  was  under  their  roof  ;  it  concerned  their  dearest  affections,  their
tenderest  ties,  their  brightest  hopes  ;  it  was  a  matter  with  wbicli  their  own  wives  and
their  children  had  closely  to  do.  Moreover,  it  was  (y)  a  radical  fault.  They  existed,
as  a  nation,  on  purpose  that,  being  separated  from  the  surrounding  people  by  very
distinct  lines  drawn  by  the  liand  of  the  Supreme,  they  might  bear  witness  to  certain
great  truths  in  the  preservation  of  which  lay  the  one  hope  of  the  race.  But  by  this
step  they  were  becoming  mixed  up  witli  tlie  heathen  world  ;  their  one  characteristic
was  being  lost ;  their  virtue  was  being  assailed  ;  their  very  life  was  at  stake.  Their
separateness  gone,  everything  for  which  they  existed  would  be  gone  too  ;  they
might  perish,  for  they  answered  no  end.  The  salt  would  have  lost  its  savour  ;  let  it
be  ciist  out  and  trodden  underfoot  of  men.  This  is  the  character  of  all  sin.  (a)  It
is  widespread.  As  the  leprosy,  which  was  the  chosen  picture  and  type  of  it,  spreads
over  the  whole  body,  so  sirl  spreads  over  all  the  nature,  poisoning  every  faculty  and
instinct  of  the  soul ;  communicating  itself  from  one  member  of  society  to  anotber,
till  the  whole  social  body  is  covered  with  its  loathsome  aud  deathful  malady.  (/3)
It  is  something  t7iat  strikes  home;  it  works  discord  in  the  family  circle  ;  it  introduces
strife  and  contest  into  the  sanctuary  of  a  man's  spirit,  making  it  the  arena  on  which
conscience  and  passion,  heavenly  wisdom  aud  worldly  ambition,  voices  of  good  and
voices  of  evil,  continually  and  fiercely  battle.  Moreover,  (y)  it  is  a  radical  fault.
It  is  the  soul  turning  away  from  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  created,  failing  to  be
and  to  do  that. for  which  its  Creator  brought  it  into  being.

II.  The  characteb  of  their  kepbntanck,  and  of  all  repentance.  It  included
(a)  contrition — "We  are  many  that  have  transgressed "  (ver.  13);  and  (yS)  amend-
ment— "  They  gave  their  hands  that  they  would  put  away  their  wives  "  (ver.  19).
The  Jews  who  had  ofEended  saw  that  they  were  guilty ;  they  freely  acknowledged
their  fault,  and,  what  was  the  best  sign  and  proof  of  their  shame,  they  resolved  to
put  away  the  evil ;  they  set  about  it  vigorously  and  methodically,  as  men  that
seriously  meant  to  do  tlmt  to  which  they  "  gave  their  hands,"  to  which  they  solemnly
pledged  themselves  (vers.  13,  14, 19).  All  repentance  is  of  this  character.  Its  essentials
are — (a)  Contrition.  There  must  be  a  real  recognition  by  the  soul  of  the  evil  of  sin.
Something  more  than  mere  catching  up  and  repeating  the  formulae  of  repentance;
the  falling  into  the  ruts  of  expression  made  by  those  who  have  gone  before  us.  Not,
necessarily,  the  violent,  pungent,  overwhelming  feelings  which  have  shaken  some
souls,  and  found  vent  in  agonising  utterances;  but  a  genuine  and  deep  regret  and
shame,  more  or  less  agitating,  nnder  a  sense  of  wrong-doing  in  the  past  life  and  of
sin  within  the  soul.  (/Jj  Confession  and  amendment.  There  must  be  a  solid  and
living  determination  to  "  put  away  the  evil  thing,"  whatever  it  may  be  ;  to  surrender
the  long-cherished  and  perhaps  miich-loved  habit  which  is  hurtful  and  injurious  ;  to
turn  from  selfishness  and  from  worUlliuess  and  from  pride  ;  to  separate  the  soul  friim
all  that  offends  God,  that  coriupis  the  nature,  that  works  mischief;  and  to  walk
in  purity  of  heart  and  blaraelessness  of  life  before  God,  the  heavenly  Father  ;  untt
Ohri»t,  the  Divine  Redeemer  ;  by  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Sanctifier.— C.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


THE    BOOK    OF   EZRA.


CHAPTER  L

CHAPTER  TV.

PAGE

THEME

»A<n

The  Crisis

...

8

The  Work  endangered         .«

.».

46

The  Edict              ...            ^

...

i

The  Work  checked

.M

47

The  Sovereignty  of  God

.»

6

Peace  and  Purity  ...

...

49

The  wide  Koach  of  the  Rule  of  Cod

...

7

A  Sinful  Alliance  souijht  and  rejected

50

The  Muster

...

10

The  Friendship  of  the  World

...

51

God's    Action   on   the   Minds  of

his

Human  Hatred

. ..

62

Teople

...

11

The  Work  maligned

...

54

The  Return

...

12

The  World's  Opposition  to  the  Church

56

The  Response

...

\i

Three  Thoughts  from  Old  Documents

57

The  Beginning  of  a  great   IMigious

The  AVork  stopped

...

69

Movement

...

15

Man  hindering  the  Work  of  God
Hindrances

...

?1
61

CHAPTER  IL

Spiritual  Amendment

«

63

The  Mnster-Roll   ...            ™

M.

19

The  Restoration  of  Israel    .^

.*.

21

CHAPTER  V.

Spiritual  Significances

The  Privileges  of  the  Priesthood

The  Arrival

Men  forsaking  the  Worldly  Life

Social  and  Spiritual  Gradations

•"

22
23

9i

The  Work  revived

The  Inspiration  of  Prophecy

•••

6fi

68

.M

*4

26
27

A  Faithful  Ministry  in  the  Church

Opposition  revived

The  Eye  of  God

•  »•

69
72
74

CHAPTER  III.

Wisdom  in  Trial   ...

The    Providence    of    God    over

the

75

The  First  Sacrifice

..^

80

Church                ...             ...

76

The  First  Feast     .„

.«

32

The  Letter  to  Darius

77

The  Altar  rubuilt

.~

33

Things  a  Church  should  understand

Acceptahle  Service               .„

.„

34

concerning  Itself

...

78

Aspects  of  Worship

...

85

The  Worship  of  the  First  Y.  ar

._

86

CHAPTER  VL

The  First  Stone     ...

...   .

88

Thought,  Work,  and  feeling

...

40

Opposition  silenced

_

81

The  Fournliiig  of  the  Temple

...

41

The  Decree  of  Cyrus

...

84

The  Joyful  and  Sorrowful  in  Religi

ous

Some  Useful  Tilings

...

85

Worship

...

42

The  Decree  of  Darius          .>.

.~

85

The  Foundation  laid

...

42

The  Work  completed           _

-..

88

iiS'uE.V.


rmm

Overthrow  and  Upbuilding
The  Successful  Issue  ...

The  Temple  finished  .„

Church-Prosperity
Church-Building  ...
The  Dedication  of  the  Temple
Timely  and  Wise  Enthusiasm
Church-Dedication  ...

The  Passover

CHAPTER  VII.

The  Eeformer

The  Exodus  under  Ezra

Ezra :  his  Character  and  Work

Ezra  the  Type  of  an  Ideal  Minister

Ezra  and  his  Mission

The  Reformer's  Commission

The  Reformer's  Psalm

The  Royal  and  the  Religious

Pagan  Piety

Ezra's  Commission  from  Artaxerxes

The  Decree  of  Artaxerxes  to  the  Trea-
surers ...

The  Extension  of  the  Mercy  of  the
Covenant

Aspects  of  the  Divine  and  Human

Influence


CHAPTER  VIII.
Th*  Baadesvous,  or  the  Second  Mnater  123


PAOB

THEME

rAOE

.      9

The  Church  preparing  Itself  for

Duty

126

.      92

The  Halt  at  Ahava

•  •.

126

.      93

Before  Starting     ...            .„

■  ■•

128

.      95

After  Aniving      ...            ,«

•  ■■

130

.      95

The  Fast  at  the  Ahava

■  •>

132

.       95

The  Spiritual  and  Secular  Aids  of  Life

133

.      97

The  Sacred  Trusts  of  Life    ...

134

.       98

The  Custody  of  the  Treasure

...

134

.      88

Zionwards             ...            _

•■•

135

Progress                 m.            m.

-

136

.     102

CHAPTER  IX.

.     104

An  Astounding  Discovery  ...

M.

141

.     105

A  Flood  of  Tears

•M

143

.     106

Spiritual  Separation            .«

••.

145

.     107

Ezra's  Grief

...

146

.     112

Disappointment  and  Disobedience

...

146

.     114

Sensibility

...

147

.     116

The  Dawn  of  Hope

...

148

.     116

A  Good  Man's  Sight  of  Sin

...

149

.     117

Ezra's  Prayer

.-

160

-

.     118

CHAPTER  X.

e

A  Gleam  of  Hope                ~.

M.

156

.     120

A  National  CaU    ...            ^

M«

168

.     121

A  Satisfactory  Close

^

169

.     121

The  Speech  of  Shechaniah  —

_

161

Things  Exceptional

...

162

The  Reformation    ...             .«

...

163

er  123

Sin  and  Repeutaso*            »

m»

164

THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED  BY  THE


REV.  CANON  II.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

nCAt    AKD   RURAL  DEAN   OP   ST.    PANCRAS,   AND   EXAMINING   CHAPLAIN  TO  THB   LORO
BISHOP   OF  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL  ;


AND   BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH    S.    EXELL,

F.pITOR  OF  "THE   IIOMILETIC  QUARTERLV."


NE  HE  MI  AH.

(Exposition :
By  rev.  GEORGE  RAWLINSON,  M.A.,

MMDEN    PROFESSOR  OF   ANCIENT   HISTORY    IN   THE   UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD;   AND  CANOB  Of

CANTERBUKY.

i^omilctics  :
By  rev.   G.   wood,   B.A.

l^otnilieB  bji  llarions  l^ntljore :

REV.  PROF.  R.  A.  BEDFORD,  LL.B.,  M.A.;  REV.  J.  S.  EXELL;
REV.  \V.  CLARKSON,  B.A.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toeonto.


THE

BOOK   OF   NEHEMIAH.

INTRODUCTION.


I  1.  Subject  of  thk  Book.

Thb  Book  of  ITeliemiah  is,  in  the  main,  a  personal  narrative,  containing  an
Account  of  Nehemiah  himself,  and  of  certain  proceedings  in  'whicli  lui  was
engaged,  between  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  (or  b.o.
444)  and  hia  thirty-second  or  thirty-third  year  (b.  o. '432 — 1).  It  is  a
natural  sequel  to  the  Book  of  Ezra,  with  which  it  has  always  been  nnited  in
the  Jewish  canon,  though  recognised  as  a  "  Second  Part "  of  the  Book.  The
principal  object  of  the  writer  is  to  describe  the  circumstances  attending  the
rebuilding  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  in  B.o.  444,  and  its  dedication,  some  years
later,  with  great  pomp  and  ceremony.  To  explain  the  part  which  he  himseli
took  in  these  transactions,  he  has  to  preface  his  account  with  a  purely  personal
sketch,  descriptive  of  the  circumstances  under  which  he  became  engaged  in  the
work  aa  its  director  and  superintendent.  This  sketch  occupies  the  first  two
chapters.  The  main  narrative  then  commences,  and  is  carried  on  uninterrupt-
edly to  the  fifth  verse  of  ch.  vil,  when  it  is  broken  in  upon  by  the  introduction
of  a  list,  identical  (or  nearly  so)  with  one  given  by  Ezra  in  the  second  chapter
of  his  Book — a  list  of  the  families  which  returned  from  the  Babylonian  cap-
tivity under  Zerubbabel,  with  the  number  of  each  family,  and  the  names  of  the
principal  chiefs.  This  occupies  ch.  viL  from  verse  6  to  the  end.  The  narrative
is  then  resumed,  and  continued  through  three  chapters  (chs.  vilL— -x.),  the
principal  subject-matter  in  this  part  being  the  religious  instruction  of  the  people,
their  celebration  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  the  voluntary  covenant  with
Almighty  God  into  which  they  entered,  by  the  advice  of  the  Levites.  After
this,  the  sequence  of  the  history  is  again  interrupted — this  time  by  the  insertion
of  six  distinct  and  independent  lists,  which  occupy  a  chapter  and  a  half  (chs.  xi.
and  xii.  1 — 26).  The  dedication  of  the  wall  is  then  related  (ch.  xii.  27 — 43).
In  conclusion,  an  account  is  given  of  certain  religious  arrangements  and  reformi
which  Ifebemiah  effected  (ch.  xii.  44—47,  and  eh.  zUL).

■UUHUH.  •


II  INTRODUCTION  TO


i  2.  Author.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Nehemiah  himself  is  the  author  of  those  portions
of  the  woik  ■which  are  of  most  interest,  and  give  it  its  distinctive  character.
The  initial  sentence — "  The  words  of  Nehemiah  the  son  of  Hachaliah " —
applies  beyond  all  question  to  the  parts  which  are  written  in  the  first  person
(chs.  L — vii :  xii.  27 — 47 ;  xiii.).  So  much  ia  generally  allowed.  It  is
argued,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  parts  where  Nehemiah  is  spoken  of  in  tiie
third  person — notably,  chs.  viii.,  ix.,  and  x. — are  not  from  his  pen  ;  and  theii
authorship  has  been  attributed  to  Ezra.*  It  may  be  admitted  that  the  internal
evidence  of  style  and  manner  favours  strongly  the  view  that  this  section  is  not
the  original  composition  of  Nehemiah.f  There  is  nothing,  however,  to  militate
against  the  supposition  that  it  was  drawn  up  by  his  authority,  and  received  the
sanction  of  his  approval.  Ezra's  claim  to  have  written  it  cannot  be  substanti-
ated; on  the  contrary,  a  careful  analysis  of  the  language  leads  to  the  very
opposite  conclusion.  "We  must  regard  it  as  an  anonymous  work,  which,  how-
ever, Nehemiah  probably  saw,  and  placed  in  its  present  position.  With  respect
to  the  lists,  which  make  up  the  remainder  of  the  Book,  that  of  ch.  viL  is  probably
an  official  document,  drawn  up  in  the  time  of  Zerubbabel,  extracted  by  Nehemiah
from  the  national  archives ;  that  of  ch.  xi.  is  the  official  account  of  his  own
census ;  those  of  ch  xii.  cannot  have  taken  their  present  shape  much  before  tlie
time  of  Alexander  the  Great,  since  Jaddua  (vers.  12  and  22)  was  his  contem
porary  ;  but  it  is  quite  possible  that  Nehemiah  may  have  originated  them,  and
that  certain  additions  may  have  been  made  to  them  subsequently.  In  this  case
Nehemiah  would  be,  either  as  original  composer  or  as  compiler,  the  responsible
author  of  the  whole  Book,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  verses.)

§  3.  Date.

The  earliest  date  at  which  Nehemiah  can  have  composed  the  last  section  of
the  work  (ch.  xii.  27 — xiii.  31)  is  b.o.  431,  the  year  in  which,  after  visiting
Babylon,  he  came  to  Jerusalem  the  second  time  (ch.  xiii.  6).  Prohably  he
wrote  very  soon  after  carrying  through  his  reforms,  since  he  expresses  himself
with  a  warmth  only  natural  if  the  struggle  had  been  recent.  §  These  considera-
tions limit  the  date  of  the  original  work  to  about  b.o.  431 — 430.  The  final
recension  may  have  been  made  about  a  century  later.

$  4.  General  Chabaoteb,

In  general  character  the  Book  of  Nehemiah  very  much  resembles  that  of
Ezra.     It  b  a  plain,  straight-forward,  simple  history  of  a  short  period  of  the

•  Havemick,  ' Einleitung  in  d.  Alt.  Test,'  §  805;  Bishop  A.  Hervey  in  Dr.  Smitb'i
'Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  vol.  ii.  p.  494.

t  See  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'  voL  iii  p.  426,  note  2.

{  To  wit,  Ten.  11,  22,  and  23  of  ch.  xiL  g  See  especiallr  oh.  xiii  8,  26,  uid  3&


ttiB  BOOK  0^  N^BEMIAM.


Jewish  state,  containing  in  it  nothing  miraculous,  nothing  particularly  exciting
or  extraordinary.  The  Jewish  community  is  in  a  depressed  condition;  and
though  external  adversaries  are  resisted,  and,  on  the  whole,  resisted  with  suc-
cess, no  great  triumph  is  achieved,  no  very  remarkable  deliverance  effected.
At  the  same  time,  the  internal  condition  of  things  is  far  from  satisfactory ;  the
evUs  which  Ezra  had  resisted  have  recurred,  and  brought  others  in  their  train,
which  cause  those  who  are  at  the  head  of  affairs  much  anxiety.  !Nehemiah
writes  in  a  depressed  tone,  like  a  man  who  is  not  appreciated  by  his  generation,
and  who  is  unhappy.  The  language  which  he  uses  is  simple,  and  somewhat
rough,  as  if  he  had  not  enjoyed  the  advantage  of  much  education.  Like  that
of  Ezra  and  of  the  writer  of  the  Book  of  Esther,  it  contains  a  good  many  Persian
words.  It  is,  however,  Hebrew  throughout,  with  no  intermixture  of  Chalde&
The  style,  as  might  be  expected  from  the  diversity  of  source  already  noticed,  is
far  from  being  uniform.  The  lists  are  bald  and  dry,  as  was  natural  with  official
documents.  The  section  extending  from  ch.  viiL  to  the  end  of  ch.  z.  is  free
and  flowing,  betrays  the  hand  of  a  practised  writer,  but  is  not  characterised  by
much  originality.  On  the  other  hand,  the  parts  written  by  i^ehemiah  himself
are  quite  peculiar.  Vigorous,  rough,  strikingly  dramatic,  and  markedly  devo-
tional in  their  tone,  they  show  us  an  author  of  an  original  turn,  who  thought  for
himself,  felt  strongly,  and  expressed  himself  tersely  and  aptly,  if  with  some
rudeness.  There  is  no  portion  of  Scripture  on  which  individuality  is  more
impressed  than  the  opening  and  concluding  sections  of  this  composite  "  Book,"
which  are  evidently  the  direct  work  of  ITehemiah.

§  6.    ClBCUMSTAKCES  AKD   ChaBAOTES  OF  THB  AUTHOa

Nehemiah  was  the  son  of  Hachaliah,  of  the  tribe  of  Judah.*  He  belonged,
apparently,  to  the  "Jews  of  the  dispersion," t .And,  while  still  a  youth,  became
attached  to  the  Persian  court,  where  his  merit,  or  his  appearance,  enabled  him
to  obtain  the  "  important  and  lucrative  office  of  a  royal  cupbearer."  J  This
position  brought  him  into  direct  contact  with  the  king  and  queen  of  the  time,
who  were  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  and  Damaspia.  Longimanus  had  already
shown  himself  friendly  to  the  Jews,  and  being  of  a  kindly  and  affable  temper,
appears  to  have  become  attached  to  his  attendant,  and  to  have  been  on  terms
of  familiarity  with  him  which  we  should  scarcely  have  expected.  Nehemiah
relates  how,  while  he  was  in  attendance  on  the  court  at  Susa,  the  chief  royal
residence,  he  heard  of  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem  through  his  brother,  Hanani,
who  had  recently  visited  the  holy  city  and  seen  its  sad  condition  (ch.  L  1 — 3).
Pierced  to  the  heart  by  the  description,  he  gave  himself  up  for  many  days  to
fasting  and  mourning  and  prayer.  The  king  for  some  time  did  not  observe  his
grief;  but  after  three  or  four  months  it  had  so  altered  him,  that,  on  his  appear-
one  day  to  take  up  his  term  of  service,  Artaxerxes  noticed  the  change,

*  See  ch.  IL  8,  and  the  comment  on  it.

t  Ewald,  '  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  159,  E.  Tr.  t  Ibid,  f,  148.

a2


INTBODUCTION  TO


Hid  aaked  for  an  explanation.  Nehemiah  upon  tliis  unbosomed  him 'elf,  and
finding  the  king  sympathetic,  obtained  leave  of  absence  from  the  court,  an
appointment  to  be  governor  of  Jerusalem,  and  permission  to  rebuild  the  wall,
to  restore  the  temple  fortress,  and  to  repair  the  residence  of  the  governor,  of
which  ho  was  to  take  possession.  With  these  instructions,  and  with  letters  to
the  satraps  of  the  provinces  through  which  he  had  to  pass,  Nehemiah  quitted
Snsa,  accompanied  by  a  strong  escort,  in  the  spring  or  early  summer  of  B.C.  441.
"We  are  not  told  how  much  time  was  occupied  by  his  journey;  but  having
arrived  in  safety  at  Jerusalem,  he,  like  Ezra,  rested  "  three  days  "  (comp.  Ezra
viii  32  with  Neh.  iL  11).  He  then  proceeded,  under  cover  of  night,  to  make
a  survey  of  the  waU.  It  was  well  known  to  him  that  any  attempt  to  put  the
city  into  a  state  of  defence  would  meet  with  a  formidable  opposition  on  the
part  of  powerful  persons  in  the  neighbourhood.*  He  therefore  kept  his  com-
mission secret,  effected  his  survey  of  the  wall  secretly,  and  let  no  word  of  his
intentions  go  forth,  until  he  had  made  such  preparations  that  the  whole  work
might  be  begun  and  ended  within  a  few  weeks.  The  essence  of  his  arrange-
ment was  the  partitioning  out  of  the  task  among  a  large  number  of  working-
parties,!  all  prepared  to  act  simultaneously,  and  each  completing  its  own  portion
of  the  wall  without  reference  to  the  remainder  (ch.  iii.).  The  plan  succeeded.
Though  opposition  of  various  kinds  was  made,  and  open  violence  threatened,  no
actual  collision  took  place  between  the  Jews  and  their  adversaries ;  and  in  little
more  than  seven  weeks  the  entire  wall  was  repaired  and  restored  to  its  full
height  (ch.  vL  15).  Solid  folding-doors  were  then  placed  in  the  gateways,  guards
established,  and  a  rule  laid  down  that  the  gates  should  be  closed  at  nightfall,
and  not  opened  in  the  morning  "until  the  sun  was  hot"  (ch.  vii  3).  Thus
the  main  work  which  Nehemiah  had  set  himself  to  do  was  accomplished  within
six  months  of  the  day  that  he  obtained  his  commission  from  Artaxerxes.

His  administration  during  the  remainder  of  the  time  that  he  governed
Judaea,  which  was  certainly  not  less  than  thirteen  years,  was  characterised  by
the  same  vigour,  promptness,  and  energy  which  had  marked  its  opening  months.
It  was  also  remarkable  for  the  consideration  which  he  showed  for  those  under
his  rule,  and  for  the  noble  hospitality  which,  he  dispensed  both  towards  natives
and  towards  foreigners  (ch.  v.  14 — 18).  He  augmented  the  population  of
Jerusalem,  too  scanty  for  the  size  of  its  walls,  by  bringing  men  in  from  the
country  districts  (ch.  xi.  1);  redeemed  large  numbers  of  Jews,  who  had  been
sold  into  slavery  among  the  heathen,  and  restored  them  to  their  native  land
(ch.  V.  8)  ;■  put  an  end  to  a  system  of  borrowing  money  upon  mortgage,  or
raising  it  by  selling  sons  and  daughters  into  servitude,  which  was  reducing  the
lower  class  of  Jews  to  the  condition  of  the  poor  Eoman  plebeians  of  the  early
commonwealth  (ibid.  vers.  1 — 13;  oL  x.  31);  restored  the  strict  observance  of

•  This  knowledge  is  Indicated  by  the  mention  of  Sanballat  and  Tobiah,  before  they  ccms
naturally  upon  the  scene,  in  ch.  ii  10.

T  Thirty-seven  at  the  least ;  forty-two,  aooording  to  Ewald  ('  History  of  Israel,'  ToL  %
f.  168,  E.  Tr.).


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH,


the  Sabbath,  and  of  the  sabbatical  year  (ch.  x.  31 ;  xiii.  15 — 22) ;  established  thB
annual  payment  of  one-third  of  a  shekel  by  each  adult  male  towards  the  temple
service  and  fabric  (ch.  x.  32),  together  with  a  system  for  supplying  the  wood
necessary  for  the  sacrifices  (ibid.  ver.  34)  j  prevented  the  temple  from  being
polluted  by  the  heathen,  and  prof  med  by  being  used  for  secular  purposes  (ch.  xiiL
<t — 9) ;  enforced  the  payment  of  tithes,  which  was  falling  into  disuse  (ch.  x.  37;
xiii.  10 — 13);  and,  like  Ezra,  compelled  all  those  who  had  married  foreiga
wives  to  divorce  them,  and  send  them  back,  with  their  children,  to  their  own
people  (ch.  xiii.  1 — 3,  and  23 — 28).  His  efforts  to  effect  these  reforms  were
thwarted  and  resisted  by  an  important  party  among  the  priests  and  nobles,
which  leant  towards  secularism,  was  addicted  to  intermarriage  with  the  heathen,
and  desirous  of  fusion  with  the  surrounding  nations.  An,  ordinary  man  might
have  shrunk  from  aiTronting  the  views  of  a  party  so  stn  ng  and  so  powerful,
one  supported  by  neighbouring  princes,  and  upheld  at  J«k  lisalem  by  the  high
priest  of  the  time,  Eliashib.  Nehemiah  set  himself  to  '  'contend  with  the
rulers"  (ch.  xiii.  11)  and  the  "nobles"  (ibid.  ver.  17);  "chased  from  him"
the  grandson  of  the  high  priest  (ibid.  ver.  28);  "cursed,"  or  at  any  rate
"  reviled,"  those  who  had  married  the  foreign  wives,  and  even  "  smote  certain
of  them,  and  plucked  off  their  hair  "  (ibid.  ver.  25).  "When  Eliashib  himself,
the  natural  guardian  of  the  temple,  disregarding  its  sacredness,  assigned  one  of
the  chambers  within  its  precincts  to  Tobiah  the  Ammonite,  who  furnished  it  and
made  it  into  a  residence,  Nehemiah  of  his  own  authority  turned  all  the  furiuture
out  of  duors  {ibid.  ver.  8).  Strict,  zealous,  prompt,  uncompromising,  he  would
allow  no  relaxation  of  the  old  law,  no  departure  from  primitive  custom,  no  con-
sorting with  foreigners.  Not  only  did  he  re-establish  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  on
their  ancient  foundations,  but  he  built  up  the  state  too  on  the  old  lines,  "  sup-
plementing and  completing  the  work  of  Ezra,"  and  giving  it  "internal  cohesion
and  permanence."  *

There  was  one  day  in  the  latter  part  of  his  administration  which  must  have
been  to  him  a  day  of  exquisite  pleasure,  and  have  almost  repaid  him  for  all  the
anguish  that  he  had  endured  from  the  perversity  of  the  people  and  the  opposi-
tion of  the  nobles.  After  holding  office  for  twelve  years,  he  had  had  occasion
to  visit  the  court,  either  to  make  some  special  report,  or  because  "  his  leave  of
absence  had  expired."  t  While  there,  he  had  perhaps  obtained  permission  to
conduct  a  ceremony  which  he  must  have  long  had  in  his  mind,  but  which  ho
may  have  been  afraid  to  venture  on  without  the  king's  express  sanction.  This
was  the  dedication  of  the  walL  On  returning  to  Jerusalem,  in  Artaxerxes'
thirty-third  year,  b.o.  431,  he  felt  that  the  time  was  come  to  inaugurate  hia
great  work  with  appropriate  pomp  and  circumstance.  By  hia  arrangement,
"  two  vast  processions  passed  round  the  walls,  halting  at  one  or  another  of  those
venerable  landmarks  which,"  twelve  years  before^  <'had  aignalised  the  vaiioui

•  iiraid,  p.  161.  fnu.t,in,


iNTilOCUCTlOlI  to


stages  of  their  labour  j  whose  shadows  had  been  their  daily  and  nightly  com-
panions for  such  weary  weeks  of  watching  and  working.  The  Levites  came  up
from  their  country  districts,  with  their  full  array  of  the  musical  instruments
which  still  bore  the  name  of  their  royal  inventor ;  the  minstrels,  too,  were
summoned  from  their  retreats  on  the  hills  of  Judah  and  in  the  deep  valley  of
the  Jordan  (1).  They  all  met  in  the  temple  court.  The  blast  of  the  priestly
trumpets  sounded  on  one  side ;  the  songs  of  the  minstrels  were  loud  in  propor-
tion on  the  other.  It  is  specially  mentioned  (ch.  xii.  43)  that  even  the  women
and  children  joined  in  the  general  acclamation,  and  '  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was
heard  even  afar  off.'  Perhaps  the  circumstance  that  leaves  even  a  yet  deeper
impression  than  this  tumultuous  triumph  is  the  meeting,  which  on  this  day,
and  this  day  alone,  Nehemiah  records  in  his  own  person,  of  the  two  men  who
in  spirit  were  so  closely  united — himself  as  heading  one  procession,  and  'Ezra
the  scribe '  as  heading  the  other."  •

It  is  impossible  to  determine  the  time  at  which  K'ehemiah  ceased  to  'he
governor  of  Judaea,  or  to  say  whether  he  was  recalled,  or  died  at  his  post.  We
may  gather  from  his  last  chapter  that,  at  the  time  when  he  wrote  it,  he  still
retained  his  office ;  but,  as  we  have  seen  that  he  probably  completed  his
"  Book  "  about  B.o.  431,  or  430,  we  cannot  positively  assign  a  longer  duration
to  his  governorsliip  than  fourteen  or  fifteen  years.  Jewish  tradition  does  not
help  us  in  the  matter,  for  Josephus  adds  nothing  to  what  we  know  from  Scrip-
ture, beyond  the  statement  that  Nehemiah  lived  to  a  good  old  age.

The  character  of  Nehemiah  is  sufficiently  clear  from  his  writings,  "He
resembled  Ezra  in  his  fiery  zeal,  in  his  active  spirit  of  enterprise,  and  in  the
piety  of  his  life;"t  but  he  was  of  a  bluffer  and  a  fiercer  mood;  he  had  less
patience  with  transgressors;  he  was  a  man  of  action  rather  than  a  man  of
thought,  and  more  inclined  to  use  force  than  persuasion.  His  practical  sagacity
and  high  courage  were  very  markedly  shown  in  the  arrangements  by  which  he
carried  through  the  rebuilding  of  the  wall,  and  baulked  the  cunning  plans  of
the  "  adversaries."  The  piety  of  his  heart,  his  deeply  religious  spirit,  and  con-
stant sense  of  communion  with  and  absolute  dependence  upon  God,  are  strik-
ingly exhibited,  first,  in  the  long  prayer  recorded  in  cL  L  5 — 11 ;  and  secondly,
and  most  remarkably,  in  what  have  been  called  his  "  interjectional  prayers  " —
those  short  but  moving  addresses  to  Almighty  God  which  occur  so  frequently
in  his  writings — the  instinctive  outpouring  of  a  heart  deeply  moved,  but  ever
resting  itself  upon  God,  and  looking  to  God  alone  for  aid  in  trouble,  for  the
frustration  of  evU  designs,  and  for  final  reward  and  acceptance.  *At  the  same
time,  there  is  no  fanaticism  in  his  religion ;  whUe  trusting  in  God  foi  the  issue,
he  omits  no  necessary  precaution.  "  N"evertheless,"  he  says,  "  we  made  ouJ
prayer  unto  our  God,  and  set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night "  (ch.  It.  9).
Ifoi  does  he  trust  to  faith  alone,  without  works.     He  is  self-denying,  hospitabl*

*  Stanley,  '  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'  Third  Seiiei,  pp.  128, 12Sb
t  Swald,  '  Histoiy  of  Israel,'  toL  t.  p^  117,  £.  Tc


tHE  BOOK  OF  NESEMlAfl.


active  in  deeds  of  mercy  (ch.  v.  8,  14,  17),  unresting,  indefatigable.  Many  an
the  "  good  deeds  "  which  he  does  for  the  house  of  his  Ood,  "  and  for  the  offices
thereof"  (ch.  xiii.  14).  And,  besides  his  heavenly,  he  had  an  earthly  reward.
His  memory  remained  fresh  for  a  long  term  of  years  in  the  minds  of  his
countrymen,  who  "  glorified  him  in  their  traditions,"  and  for  a  time  set  him
even  above  Ezra.  He  finds  a  place,  where  Ezra  has  none,  in  the  heroic  cata-
logue of  the  son  of  Siraoh  (Ecclus.  xlix.  13).  He  was  believed  in  the  next  age
to  have  rebtdlt  the  iempln  and  the  altar  (2  Mace.  i.  18).  It  was  even  reported
of  him  that  he  fouudoKl  a  library  in  Jerusalem,  collected  the  acts  of  the  kings,
and  gathered  the  holy  l)ooks  into  a  volume  (ibid.  ii.  13).  The  place  of  his
death  and  burial  seems  to  have  been  unknown.  No  tomb  is  spoken  of  as  raised
in  his  honour.  Such  a  memorial  was  perhaps  felt  to  be  unnecessary  *,  for,  as
Josephus  observes,  "  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  constituted  his  best  and  most  endur-
ing monument."  *


LlIEBATDRE   OF  JfEQEJIUO.


Bertheau's  work  on  the  Books  of  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Esther  contains  the  fullest
commentary  on  Nehemiah  as  yet  published.  Valuable  contributions  to  the  history  at
the  period  will  be  found  in  Ewald's  '  Geschichte  Volkes  Israel '  (vol.  v.  of  the
English  translation,  by  Estlin  Carpenter),  and  in  Dean  Stanley's  'Lectures  on  the
Jewish  Cliurch,'  Third  Series.  The  articles  on  *  Nehemiah '  in  Eitto's  '  Cyclopwdia,'
Dr.  W.  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  and  Winer's  '  Bealworterbucb '  may  also
be  studied  with  advantage.

Abranoement  of  the  Book  ih  Seotioits.
The  following  will  be  found  the  most  convenient  arrangement  of  Nehemiah  :—

Part  I.  (chs.  i. — ^vii.).  Nehemiah's  account  of  the  rebuilding  of  the  wall  of
Jerusalem,  and  of  the  register  which  he  found  of  those  who  had  returned  with
ZerubbabeL

Subdivisions,

Section  1  (chs.  i.,  ii.).  Introductory.  Circumstances  under  which  Nehemiah
obtained  his  commission,  and  steps  which  he  took  preliminaiy  to  the  building  of  the
wall.

Section  2  (ch.  iii.).  Commencement  of  the  work.  Arrangement  of  the  working
parties.

Section  3  (ch.  iv.).  Open  opposition  offered  to  the  work  by  Sanballat  and  Tobiab,
with  Nehemiah's  counter- arrangements.

Section  4  (ch.  v.  1 — 13).  Internal  difficulties,  and  the  manner  in  which  Nehemiah
overcame  them.

Section  5  (ch.  v.  14 — 19).     General  account  of  Nehemiah's  government.

Section  6  (ch.  vi.).  Secret  proceedings  of  Sanballat  and  his  friends,  with  their
failure.

Section  7  (ch.  vii.  1 — 6).  Completion  of  the  work,  and  arrangements  for  guarding
the  gates.

Section  8  (ch.  vii.  6—73).     Register  of  those  who  returned  with  ZerubbabeL

•  'Ant  Jud.,'  xL  6,  {  8,  adJSn.


th  introduction  to  the  book  of  nehemiah.

Part  11.  (chs.  viii. — x.).  Account  of  the  state  of  religion  among  the  Jews  unJei
the  administration  of  Nehemiah.

Subdiviiumt.

Section  1  (ch.  viii.).  Religious  instruction  of  the  people  by  Ezra,  and  celebration
of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.

Section  2  (ch.  ix.).  Solemn  fast  kept,  with  confession  of  sin ;  and  voluntary
covenant  entered  into  with  God  by  the  people,  and  sealed  to  by  the  princes,  priests,
and  Levites.

Section  3  (ch.  z.).    Names  of  those  that  sealed,  and  terms  of  the  covenant.

Part  III.  (chs.  xi.,  xii.  1—26).  Enlargement  of  the  population-  of  Jemsalem ;
number  of  the  adult  male  inhabitants,  and  names  of  the  chiefs.  Various  lists  of
priests  and  Levites  at  different  periods.

Sttbdivinons.

Section  1  (ch.  xi.  1,  2).     Artificial  enlargement  of  the  population  of  Jerusalem.

Section  2  (ch.  xi.  3—19).  Number  of  the  adult  male  inhabitants,  and  names  of
the  chiefs.

Section  3  fch.  xi.  20 — 36).     Geographic  disposition  of  the  rest  of  the  population.

Section  4  (ch.  xii.  1 — 9).  List  of  the  priestly  and  Levitical  houses  which  returned
with  Zerubbabel.

Section  5  (ch.  xii.  10,  11).     List  of  the  high  priests  from  Jeshua  to  Jaddua.

Section  6  (ch.  xii.  12 — 21).  List  of  the  heads  of  the  priestly  courses  under
Joiakim.

Section  7  (ch.  xii.  22 — 26).  List  of  the  chief  Levitical  houses  at  this  period  an<j
afterwards.

Part  IV.  (ch.  xii.  27 — 47,  and  oh.  xiii.).  Dedication  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem
under  Nehemiah  and  Ezra,  with  Nehemiah's  arrangement  of  the  temple  oSBcera,  and
his  efEorts  for  the  reform  of  religion.

Subdivisions.

Section  1  (ch.  xii.  27 — 43).     Dedication  of  the  wall.

Section  2  ?ch.  xii.  44 — 47).     Arrangement  of  tlie  temple  officers.

Section  3  (ch.  xiii.).     Keligious  reforms  carried  into  effect  by  Nehemiah.


THB


BOOK   OF    NEHEMIAH.


PART    L


laTBODOoroBT  Seotion.    CHAmsa  I.,  U.  1— IL


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  L


OntOniBTANOEa  VNVEB  WHICH  NXHK-
HIAB  OBTAINED  HIS  COMMISSION  TO  BEBUILD
THE  WALL  OV  JEKITSALEM  (chs.  L,  IL  1 — 8).

Living  at  the  Persiaii  court,  far  from  the  laud
vrhich  he  looked  on  as  his  true  country,  though
perhaps  he  had  never  seen  it,  Nehemiah
seems  to  have  known  but  little  of  its  con-
dition and  circumstances ;  and  it  is  quite
possible  that  he  might  have  remained  in  his
ignorance  during  the  term  of  his  natural  life
but  for  an  accident.  Some  event — we  do
act  know  what— called  his  brother  Hanani
to  Jerusalem ;  and  on  hu  return  to  Susa
this  brother  gave  him  a  description  of  the
dismantled  state  of  the  holy  city,  and  the
"affliction  and  reproach"  of  the  inhabitants
consequent  thereupon,  which  threw  him  into
a  paroxysm  of  grief.  With  the  openness  and
passion  of  an  Oriental,  he  abandoned  him-
self to  his  feelings ;  or,  in  his  own  words,
"  sat  down  and  wept,  and  mourned  for  days,
and  fasted,  and  prayed  before  the  God  of
heaven"  (ch.  L  4).  Whether  he  was  in
regular  attendance  at  this  time  upon  the
king  does  not  appear.  Perhaps  the  court
was  absent,  wintering — as  it  sometimes  did
— at  Babylon,  and  he  had  not  accompanied
it ;  perhaps  it  was  at  Susa,  but  the  ofiSce  of
cupbearer  was  being  discharged  by  others.
NBBBHUB.


At  any  nte,  mar*  than  thie«  months  had
elapsed  from  the  time  when  he  heard  of  the
affliction  of  Jerusalem  before  his  changed
appearance  was  noted  by  the  king.  It  was
the  month  Nisan,  that  which  followed  the
remal  equinox,  the  first  of  the  Jewish  year,
when  Artazerxes,  observing  the  sadness  of
his  attendant,  inquired  its  cause.  Nehemiah
revealed  it,  and  the  king  farther  inquired,
"  For  what  dost  thou  make  request  V  This
was  the  origin  of  Nehemiah's  commission.
He  asked  and  obtained  permission  to  quit
the  court  for  a  definite  time  (ch.  ii  6),
and  to  go  to  Jerusalem  with  authority  to
"  build  "  the  city.  This  was  understood  to
include  the  repair  of  the  governor's  house,
of  the  fortress  which  commanded  the  temple
area,  and  of  the  city  wall  (Md.  vet.  8).  It
necessarily  involved  Nehemiah's  appoint-
ment as  governor,  and  the  notification  ol
this  appointment  to  the  existing  satraps
and  pashas.  Leave  was  also  given  him  to
cut  such  timber  as  was  needed  for  the  work
in  the  "king's  forest"  or  "park,"  a  royal
domain  situated  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Jerusalem.  Nehemiah,  having  obtained  this
firman,  left  Susa  early  in  the  spring  of  B.O.
444,  accompanied  by  an  escort  of  Persian
troops  ( ver.  9),  and  reached  Jerusalem  in  safety,
having  on  his  way  communicated  his  appoint-
ment to  the  officials  of  the  Syriaik  jrovino*.


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[oh.  1. 1—11


Ver.  1.  — The  words  of  Nehemiah  the
■on  of  Eachaliah.  Compare  Jer.  L  1  ;
Hosea  L  2 ;  Amos  i;  1,  &c.  No  other  his-
torical book  commences  in  this  manner,  and
we  may  best  account  for  the  introduction  of
the  clause  by  the  consideration  that  "  Nehe-
miah "  having  been  originally  appended  to
"Ezra,"  it  marked  the  point  at  which  a  new
narrative  began  by  a  new  author.  The
month  Chislen.  The  word  Chisleu,  or
rather  Kislev,  is  probably  Persian.  It  was
unknown  to  the  Jews  before  the  captivity,
and  is  found  only  in  this  passage  and  in
Zech.  yii  1,  where  Kislev  is  said  to  be  "the
ninth  month,"  corresponding  nearly  to  our
December.  The  twentieth  year.  The  twen-
tieth regnal  year  of  Artaxerxes  (Longimanus)
is  intended  (see  eh.  ii.  1).  This  began  in
B.O.  445,  and  terminated  in  B.o.  444.  Shu-
ihan  the  palace,  where  Daniel  saw  the
vision  of  the  ram  with  two  horns  (Dan.  viii.
2),  and  Ahasuerus  (Xerxes)  made  his  great
feast  to  all  his  princes  and  servants  (Esther
i.  3),  is  beyond  all  doubt  Susa,  the  capital
city  of  Kissia,  or  Susiana,  one  of  the  most
ancient  cities  in  the  world,  and  the  place
which,  from  the  time  of  Darius  Hystaspis,
was  the  principal  residence  of  the  Persian
court.  It  was  situated  in  the  fertile  plain
east  of  the  Lower  Tigris,  and  lay  on  or  near
the  river  Choaspes,  probably  at  the  spot
now  known  as  S^M,  or  Shush.  Bemains  of
the  palace  were  discovered  by  the  expeditton
under  Sir  Fenwick  Williams  in  the  year  1852,
and  have  been  graphically  described  by  Mr.
Loftus  ('Chaldaeaand  Susiana,'  pp.  373 — 375).
Ver.  2. — Hanani,  one  of  my  brethren.
Afterwards  given  the  charge  of  the  gates  of
Jerusalem  by  Nehemiah  (ch.  vii.  2).

Ver.  8. — The  wall  of  Jerusalem  also  is
broken  down.  It  has  been  supposed,  either
that  the  demolition  of  the  wall  here  referred
to  was  quite  recent,  having  occurred  during
the  space  of  twelve  years  which  intervenes
between  the  Books  of  Ezra  and  Nehemiah,
or  else  that  it  belonged  to  a  time  of  depres-
sion which  followed  shortly  after  the  com-
pletion of  the  temple  by  Zerubbabel  (Ewald,
'History  of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  pp.  120,  121,
and  148,  note  3,  E.  Tr.) ;  but  there  is  really
no  reason  to  believe  that  the  demolition
effected  under  the  orders  of  Kebuchadnezzar
(2  Kings  XXV.  10)  had  ever  hitherto  been
repaired,  or  the  restoration  of  the  wall  even
attempted.  The  Samaritan  accusation  in
Ezra  IV.  12  falls  short  of  a  statement  that
the  wall  was  restored,  and,  if  it  asserted  the
fact,  would  be  insufficient  authority  for  it.
The  supposition  of  Ewald,  that  "  as  soon  as
the  city  was  rebuilt,  the  attempt  would  be
made  to  fortify  it "  (p.  121,  note  3),  ignores
the  jealousy  of  the  Persians  and  their  power
to  step  in  and  prevent  a  subject  town  from
fortifying  itself.


Ver.  4. — When  I  heard  these  things,  I  sat
down  and  wept.     The   revelation  of  ths
actual  condition  of  Jerusalem  came  npon
Nehemiah  with  a  shock.    He  had  perhaps
not  thought  much  upon  the  subject  before  ;
he  had  had  no  means  of  exact  information ;
he  had  supposed  the  city  flourishing  under  the
superintendence  of  Ezra,  whose  piety  and
patriotism  were  no  doubt  known  to  him.    It
was  a  bitter  grief  to  him  to  find  that  his
people  were  still  "a  reproach  to  their  neigh-
bours," laughed  to  scorn  by  those  whose
walls  had  never  been  destroyed,  or  who  had
been  allowed  to   rebuild   them.    And  he
may  have  felt  that  his  city,  onder  the  cir-
cumstances of  the  time,  was  in  real  danger.
As  Dean  Stanley  observes :  "  In  those  days,
rather  one  may  say  in  those  countries  of
disorder,  a  city  without  locked  gates  and
lofty  wails  was  no  city  at  all "  ('  Lectures  on
the  Jewish  Church,'  Third  Series,  p.  124).
A  few  years  previously  Egypt  had  Been  in
revolt ;  she  might  revolt  again,  and  carry  her
arms  into  Syria.  Arab  tribes  from  the  desert
might  extend  their  raids  into  Judsea,  and  be
tempted  by  the  known  value  of  the  temple
treasures  to  swoop  upon  the  unwalled  town.
Such  thoughts  occurring   to   an   excitable
Oriental,   produced  not  grief   and  anxiety
merely,  but  a  flood  of  tears  (comp.  Ezra  z.
1).    And  fosted.     Fasting  had  become  a
i^quent  practice  among  the  Jews  during  the
captivity.  Solemn  fasts  had  been  introduced
on  the  anniversaries  of  the  taking  of  Jeru-
salem, the  burning  of  the  temple,  and  the
murder  of  Gedaliah  (Zech.  viii.  19)1    Fasting
had  also  taken  a  prominent  place  in  the
devotions    of   Individuals.     Daniel    fasted
(Dan.  ix.  3;  x.  3) ;  Esther  fasted  (Esther  jv.
16) ;  Ezra  fasted  (Ezra  x.  6) ;  and  now  Nehe-
miah  fasted.     On  the  grounds  of  natural  .
piety  out  of  which  the  practice  arises,  see  the
comment  on  Ezra  x.  6.    The  Ood  of  heaven
See  the  comment  on  Ezra  i.  2.

Ver.  6.  —And  said,  I  beseech  thee.  The
opening  of  Nehemiah's  prayer  follows  so
closely  the  thoughts  and  words  of  Daniel's
(Dan.  it.  4),  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to
suppose  that  one  of  the  two  writers  had  not
the  words  of  the  other  before  him.  As  there
are  no  sufficient  grounds  for  questioning  the
generally  received  date  of  Daniel's  prophecy
(b.o.  536),  we  must  suppose  Kehemiah  fa-
miliar witii  his  writings,  and  an  admirer  of
their  tone  and  spirit.  In  this  verse  he  differs
from  Daniel  only  in  substituting  "  Jehovah  "
for  "liurd"  {Adonai),  and  introducing  his
own  favourite  phrase  "  God  of  heaven."

Ver.  6, — ^Both  I  and  my  lather's  honsa
have  sinned.  Ewald  well  observes,  "  In  th;
prayer  of  Nehemiah  the  keynote  is  struck  in
the  words,  '  I  and  my  father's  house  have
sinned"'  ('History  of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  149,
note  1).    The  desolation  wUch  he  mourns  is


1. 1— ILJ


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


the  result  of  the  people's  sins,  and  in  those
gins  are  included  his  own,  and  those  of  his
ancestors.  His  own  may  nut  have  been
very  grievous,  but  those  of  his  fathers  weigh
upon  him  as  if  his  own,  and  oppress  Us
spirit.

Ver.  7. — We  have  not  kept  the  command-
ments, nor  the  statutes,  nor  the  judgments.
The  ordinances  of  th?  Law  are  frequently
summed  up  under  these  three  heads  (Deut.
T.  31  ;  Ti.  1 ;  xi.  1,  &c.);  but  it  would  be  a
mistake  to  regard  them  as  constituting  a
logical  division  of  the  various  precepts  con-
tamed  in  the  Pentateuch,  or  to  suppose  that
every  precept  is  to  be  referred  absolutely  to
one  or  other  of  the  three.

Ver.  8. — If  ye  transgress,  &&  This  is
not  a  quotation,  but  a  reference  to  the
general  sense  of  various  passages,  as,  for
mstance,  Lev.  xxvi  27 — 45 ;  l)eut.  xxx.
1 — 6,  &C.  The  sacred  historians  habitually
refer  to  the  older  Scriptures  in  this  way,
quoting  them  in  the  spirit  rather  than  in
the  letter.

Ver.  10. — Thy  people  whom  thou  hast
redeemed  by  thy  great  power.  It  would  be
better  to  translate,  "  Whom  thou  didst
redeem."  The  reference  is  especially  to  the
deliveisnce  from  Egypt,  which  is  so  con-


stantly spoken  of  as  effected  "  with  a  mighty
hand  and  with  an  outstretched  arm  "  (Deut
iz.  29;  xxvi.  8,  &c.).

Ver.  11. — ^Prosper  thy  servant  this  day.
"This  day"  does  not  perhaps  mean  more
than  "  at  this  time  " — in  connection  with  this
matter  which  is  now  in  my  thoughts.  And
grant  him  mercy  in  the  sight  of  this  man.
"This  man"  is,  of  course,  Artaxerxea,
though  as  yet  he  has  not  been  named,
Nehemiah's  thoughts  have  far  outstripped
his  words.  He  has  made  up  his  mind  that,
in  order  to  remove  the  reproach  of  Jerusalem,
he  must  go  there  in  person  ;  that,  to  do  so,
he  must  obtain  the  king's  permission  ;  and
that,  to  get  his  permission,  he  needs  to  be  in
very  special  favour  with  him.  All  depend-
ing on  one  man  only,  he  has  one  man
only  in  his  mind,  who  becomes  to  him,
therefore,  "this  man."  I  was  the  king'i
cupbearer.  Literally,  "I  was  cupbearer
to  the  king."  Not  his  sole  cupbearer,
but  one  of  many.  He  mentions  the  fact
here,  partly  to  explain  the  meaning  of  "  this
man  to  the  reader,  partly  because  it  was
his  o£Sce  which  would  give  him.  access  to
Artaxerxes,  and  enable  him  to  profit  by  tb*
royal  "mercy  "  or  favour.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1—4,— A  godly  patriof*  sorrow.  Israel  was  both  a  nation  and  a  Chnrcb  ;  •
■acred  nation  representing  and  embodying  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth.  Hence
such  men  as  Nehemiah  may  be  regarded  as  examples  either  of  patriotism  or  o£  zeal  in
the  service  of  God  and  his  Church.  The  latter  aspect  of  their  character  is  most  suit-
able, as  a  rule,  for  exhibition  in  the  pulpit.    Viewing  Nehemiah  in  this  light,  observe—

I.  His  secular  position.  Prosperous,  rich,  occupying  high  office  in  the  court  of
the  Persian  monarch,  he  nevertheless  felt  a  deep  interest  in  the  condition  of  his
brethren  at  Jerusalem.  His  worldly  good  fortune  did  not  quench  the  flame  of  his
piety  or  deaden  his  sympathies  with  God's  people.  Bather  was  he  the  more  im-
pressed with  a  sense  of  his  obligation  to  aid  them  ;  which  he  was  willing  and  even
eager  to  do  at  the  cost  of  much  trouble,  self-denial,  pecuniary  expense,  and  even
peril  to  himself.  An  example  to  the  rich  and  influential,  who  are  not  always  the
most  ready  to  serve  Christ  and  his  people.

II.  The  interest  hb  displayed  in  the  welfare  op  Israel.  Shown  by — 1.  Inquiry
as  to  their  condition.  Concern  for  the  prosperity  of  the  Church  of  Christ  will  prompt
to  similar  inquiries  when  like  opportunities  present  themselves.  2.  Sorrom  over
their  calamities.  Public-spirited  men  have  sorrows  which  others  escape.  Blessed
are  such  sorrows.  There  is  often  much  in  the  state  of  religion  to  grieve  zealous
Christians:  coldness,  indifference,  ineonsistenoies,  divisions,  errors,  opposition,
reproach;  "broken  walls"  through  which  the  Church's  foes  enter  to  injure,  to
scatter,  and  destroy.  These  evils  must  awaken  sorrow  in  the  godly,  on  account  both
of  the  dishonour  they  do  to  God  and  the  damage  they  inflict  on  men.  3.  Prayer  for
their  deliverance.  Genuine  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Church  cannot  but  express
itself  in  prayer.  The  weakest  can  pray ;  the  most  powerful  need  to  begin,  continue,
and  end  their  plans  and  labours  for  the  good  of  God's  people  with  prayer.  4.  Deter-
mination to  assist  them,  if  possible  (ver.  11).  It  i8_  a  worthless  sympathy  which
only  prays  when  it  has  power  to  help.  That  which  is  real  will  move  the  hands  as
well  as  the  feelings  and  the  lips.

From  the  whole  let  us  learn  to  reoognJM  and  thankfully  acknowledge  God  ■  can

>8


4  THR  BOOK  OF  NEHBMUH.  [CH.  t  1—11.

for  his  Ohnroh  in  the  care  he  awakeni  in  the  hearts  of  such  aa  arc  able  to  render  ber
Taluable  service.  Especially  let  us  be  grateful  for  and  to  the  liord  Jpsua,  w)io  from
•n  incalculably  loftier  position  than  Nehemiah's  reganled  w  in  "  our  low  estute "
with  love  and  pity,  and  came  down  to  save  us  by  the  sacrifice  ol  himself.

Ver,  6. — Love  and  ohedienee.  "  God  that  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy  for  them
that  love  him  and  observe  his  commandments."    We  have  here —

I.  Two  CHARACTERISTICS  OF  Qod's  pboplr.  1.  Love  to  God.  Old  Testament  piety
is  sometimes  wrongly  represented  as  though  it  consisted  mainly  in  a  strict  observance
of  outward  rules,  from  fear,  with  little  or  no  love.  The  "  first  commandment,"  and
many  of  the  Psalms,  not  to  speak  of  other  Scriptures,  should  have  precluded  such  an
idea.  A  just  conception  of  Old  Testament  religion  is  not  to  be  obtained  from  the
Pharisees.  God  is  presented  in  the  Old  Testament  as  an  object  of  love  on  account
of  (1)  his  character;  (2)  his  works  of  creation  and  providence;  (3)  Lis  redemption
of  Israel  from  Egypt,  and  constant  goodness  to  them ;  (4)  his  special  favour  to  the
true  Israel,  "  those  who  love  him,"  &c.  Much  more,  doubtless,  are  the  manifesta-
tions of  God  in  Christ  adapted  to  awaken  and  nourish  love  to  him.  2.  Observance  of
his  commandments.  This  includes  obedience  and  watchful  care  ("  observe ")  to
obey ;  and  therefore  to  obtain  the  knowledge  of  them,  avoid  or  overcome  tempta-
tions to  neglect  or  disobedience,  and  to  secure  the  grace  needful  for  knowing  and
doingthem(see  Ps.  cxiz.,j7a««m).  3.  The  combinatidn  of  the  two.  They  are  essen-
tial to  each  other,  and  act  and  re-act  for  each  other's  growth.  Obedience  without  love
is  as  nothing.  (1)  Love  to  God  necessarily  produces  obedience.  It  includes  delight
in  his  rule,  reverence  for  his  authority.  It  is  love  for  his  character,  and  therefore  for
those  excellences  which  are  "  commanded  because  they  are  right."  It  will  work
confidence  in  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  such  laws  as  rest  simply  on  his  authority,
"  right  because  they  are  commanded."  The  obedience  of  love  will  be  spiritual — not
the  mere  service  of  the  letter — prompt,  joyful,  universal,  constant,  and  persevering.
Love  will  give  strength  for  difficult  duties,  and  to  overcome  all  temptalions  to
disobey.  (2)  Obedience  is  a  necessary  evidence  of  love.  No  professions,  know-
ledge, orthodoxy,  devotional  excitements,  or  gifts  of  money  are  sufficient  without  it
(Matt.  vii.  21 ;  John  xiv.  21 ;  1  John  v.  3).

II.  Theib  blessedness.  1.  They  enjoy  the  friendship  of  "  the  great  and  terrible
God."  2.  Tliey  experience  his  merci/  and /aith/ulness.  To  keephis  covenant  with
them  is  to  keep  mercy.

Vers.  5 — 11. — A  godly  patriots  prayer.  Nehemiah's  prayer;  the  substance  of
the  prayers  which  he  offered  day  and  night  for  a  considerable  period.  It  is  in
various  respects  a  model  for  our  intercessions.     In  it  are —

I.  Lowly  and  trustful  adoration.  He  addresses  God  as  *'  Jehovah,"  the  self-
existent,  immutable,  and  everlasting,  the  God  of  Israel  ;  "  God  of  heaven,"  he  who
dwells  and  reigns  in  heaven,  and  thence  ruh's  the  en^th ;  "  the  great  God,"  infinite  in
all  his  perfections,  filling  heaven  and  e^ith  with  \  is  presence,  exalted  above  all ;
"  the  terrible  God,"  to  be  dreaded  by  his  foes  and  revered  by  his  friends  ;  "  that
keepeth,"  &c.,  faithful  to  his  engagements,  merciful,  and  kind  ;  yet  discriminating,
showing  his  truth  and  mercy  to  those  whi.'  love  and  obey  him.  By  these  rejiresenta-
tions  Nehemiah  at  once  expresses  and  increases  his  own  reverence  and  confidence  in
approaching  God  on  behalf  of  his  people.

II.  Earnest  entreaty  (vers.  5,  6,  8,  11);  "  I  beseech  thee."  "  Let  thine  ear  be
attentive,"  &o.  Earnestness  and  importunity  necessary  to  success  in  prayer  (Luke
xi.  8).

IIL  Humble  CONFESSIONS  (vers.  6,  7).  Of  the  sins  not  only  of  the  people  in
general,  but  of  his  family  and  himsell  It  is  easy  to  confess  the  sins  of  otliura,  but
may  conduce  to  self-flattery.  The  holiest  men  will  be  deeply  conscious  of  their  own
sins,  and  of  their  part  in  the  sins  of  the  community,  and  ready  to  associate  theiu-
■elves  with  others  in  the  confession  of  sin.  In  his  confessions  Nehemiah  mentions
the  aggravations  of  the  guilt  of  Israel's  sins.  They  were  committed — (1)  By  Israel,
a  people  so  favoured.  (2)  Against  God.  (3)  Agdnst  specific  commandments,
■tatuteg,  and  judgments,  (4)  £^ven  by  Moses,  so  distinguished  a  "  servant "  of  God,


OH.  I.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  6

and  under  circumstances  so  impressive.  Observe,  that  in  seeking  God's  mercy
towards  sinners  we  ought  ever  to  acknowledge  their  ill  deserts,  and  his  justice  in  the
punishment  of  their  sins.

IV.  Powerful  fleas.  1.  The  name  of  God  (ver.  6),  The  representation  of  God
with  which  he  commences  is  virtually  a  plea.  "  Thou  hast  shown  thyself  to  be  all-
powerful,  faithful,  merciful ;  act  once  more  according  to  thy  nature,  and  thy  regard
for  thy  servants."  2.  The  promise  of  God  (vers.  8,  9).  Nehemiah  recognises  that
the  threat  to  scatter  the  people  had  been  fulfilled,  and  in  effect  prays  that  the  pro-
mise to  restore  may  be  fulfilled  also.  "  Do  as  thou  hast  said."  3.  The  relation  of
Israel  to  God.  "Thy  servants,"  "thy  people."  4.  HiB  former  exercise  of  power  on
their  behalf.  "  Whom  thou  hast  redeemed,"  &c.  Referring  to  the  deliverance  of
Israel  from  Egypt  (comp.  Isa.  li.  9 — 11,  and  the  Christian  parallel.  Bom.  viii.  32).
6.  The  description  of  persons  uniting  m  the  prayer  (ver.  11).  Not  only  Nehemiah,
but  many  others  were  praying  for  the  returned  Jews.  It  was  (1)  united  prayer  (2)
of  godly  men — "thy  servant,"  "thy  servants,  who  desire  [delight]  to  fear  thy
name."  6.  Nehemiah's  own  perseverance  in  the  prayer  (ver.  6),  "The  prayer
which  I  pray  before  thee  now,  day  and  night."

V.  A  PARTICULAR  REQUEST  (ver.  11).  Purposing  to  apply  to  the  king  for  a  com-
mission and  all  facilities  for  leading  his  brethren  out  of  their  difBculties,  and  feeling
hoVr  much  depended  on  his  obtaining  his  request,  he  begs  him  in  whose  hand  is  the
heart  of  kings  (Prov.  xxi.  1)  to  grant  success.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  is  the  only
■pecific  request.  The  prayer  he  and  all  good  Jews  were  ofEering  (vers.  6 — 11)  is  not
•et  forth.  For  his  own  part,  he  may  have  seen  that  the  one  thing  needed  for  the
relief  of  his  brethren  was  a  ruler  and  leader  of  character,  authority,  and  capacity,
armed  with  suSicient  powers  from  the  monarch,  and  that  this  was  the  oneihing  to
pray  for  at  present.  His  willingness  to  be  their  leader  evinced  the  sincerity  of  his
concern  for  them.  His  prayer  made  manifest  the  humble  dependence  on  Divine  aid
with  which  he  was  looking  forward  to  the  responsibilities  of  the  enterprise  he  hoped
to  undertake,

Ver.  10. — A  powerful  plea  with  God.    "  Now  these  are  thy  servants,"  &c.

I.  When  such  an  appeal  is  suitable.  When  praying  for  a  Church — (1)  declining
(2)  divided,  (3)  distressed,  or  (4)  persecuted.

II.  The  nature  of  the  appeal.  It  is  an  appeal  to  God's  (1)  relation  to  his  people—
a  relation  he  has  himself  established  ;  (2)  love  for  them ;  (3)  regard  for  his  own
honour  as  involved  in  their  welfare  (Deut.  ix.  26 — 29 ;  Jer.  xiv.  21)  ;  (4)  pity  in  view
of  their  condition ;  (6)  past  deeds  on  their  behalf — showing  kindness  ;  a  pledge  of
more ;  manifesting  purposes  not  yet  completed.  The  appeal  is  suitable  for  individual
ChristianB,  praying  for  themselves  (see  Pb.  cxiz.  94).

Ver.  11. — Delight  in  fearing  God.  "Thy  servants,  who  desire  [delight]  to  fear
thy  name."  If  the  English  version  be  correct,  this  description  of  God's  servants
reminds  us  how  largely  their  religion  in  this  world  consists  of  "  desire."  They  have
real  piety,  but  are  dissatisfied  with  their  attainments,  and  aspire  to  better  things.
Their  desire  is,  however,  to  be  carefully  distinguished  from  that  of  many  who  sub-
stitute occasional  good  wishes  for  actual  piety.  The  real  Christian's  desire  impels
him  to  the  diligent  use  of  all  those  means  by  which  a  higher  life  is  reached.  He
"  exercises  himself  unto  godliness ; "  and  what  he  attains  he  employs  in  spiritual
and  moral  living.  But  the  word  used  rather  signifies  "  delight,"  expressing  the
pleasure  which  God's  servants  feel  in  their  religion.     The  text  then  indicates —

I.  The  nature  of  theh-  fear  of  God.  Such  fear  as  is  a  delight.  Not,  therefore,
mere  dread — the  fear  which  "  hath  torment "  (1  John  iv.  18).  Not  the  fear  of  a
slave,  not  the  dread  of  the  feeble  towards  a  .capricious  mighty  tyrant,  or  of  the
guilty  towards  a  just  ruler ;  but  reverence — that  fear  which  consists  witli  confidence
and  love,  and  is  blended  with  them.

II.  The  object  of  their  fear.  "Thy  name."  The  manifested  nature  of  God.
God  as  revealed  by  his  works  and  word ;  his  perfections ;  his  relations  to  the
universe — to  good  men  and  bad  ^  his  authority.  Ail  are  adapted  to  awaken  rever-
ence, and  do  awaken  it  in  his  servants.


•  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHBMIAH.  [oh.  1. 1—11

m.  Their  pleasure  in  its  exercise.  1.  Wfience  it  arises.  From  the  felt  rightnesi
and  harmony  of  such  fear  with  their  position  towards  God ;  the  satisfaction  it  imparts
to  their  conscience  ;  the  evidence  and  promise  which  it  gives  of  Divine  favour  ;  the
elevating  and  sanctifying  power  it  exerts ;  the  defence  it  supplies  against  sin  and  its
consequences.  2.  How  it  will  be  shown.  By  frequent  conscious  exercise  of  such
fear  in  devout  thought  and  acts  of  worship  ;  by  yielding  to  its  practical  influence,  in
producing  a  service  abundant,  joyous,  and  persevering.  When  religion  is  a  delight
it  will  not  be  stinted,  nor  likely  to  decline.  Finally,  if  the  fear  of  God's  name  be
delightful,  how  much  more  the  faith,  hope,  and  love  which  the  gospel  inspires.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  ADTHORa

Ver.  1. — Piety  in  a  palace.  I.  Piety  and  position.  "  As  I  was  in  Shushan  the
palace."  Piety  tends  to  prosperity  ;  it  inculcates  habits  favourable  to  advancement;
it  imparts  graces  calculated  to  attract.  Goodness  is  often  rewarded  ;  it  will  dwell
in  a  better  palace  in  the  life  to  come.

II.  Piety  and  purity.  Nehemiah  was  humble  amidst  the  pride  of  the  palace ;  he
was  pure  amidst  the  luxury  of  the  palace  ;  he  was  faithful  to  his  Jewish  faitli-and
to  his  God  amidst  tlie  heathenism  of  the  palace  ;  he  was  sympathetic  amidst  the
conventionality  of  the  palace  ;  he  was  prayerful  amidst  the  levity  of  the  palace ;  he
was  pious  amidst  the  anxieties  of  the  palace  life.

III.  PiKTY  and  patriotism.  1.  Inquiiina:.  Nehemiah  asked  concerning  the
welfare  of  his  brethren  ;  his  own  comfort  did  not  render  him  indifferent  to  the
suffering  of.  others.  2.  Sorrowful.  He  wept  because  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  wag
broken  down  ;  his  patriotism  was  manifested  in  holy  grief.  3.  Prayerful.  See  here
the  prayer  of  the  patriot.

IV.  Piety  and  Providence.  Nehemiah  in  the  palace  was  able  to  render  effective
aid  to  Israel ;  God  places  his  instruments  where  they  can  best  serve  his  purpose.
Christ  in  heaven  pleads'  the  cause  and  helps  the  service  of  the  good. — E.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Prosperity  and  adver^ty.  It  is  a  fact  of  no  small  significance  that
the  Hebrew  author  of  this  book  was  in  the  palace  at  Susa.  "  I  was  in  Shushan  (in)
the  palace  "  (ver.  1 ).  The  Jewish  captives  in  Persia  were  by  no  means  all  in  a  forlorn
or  destitute  condition.  We  find  them  filling  honourable  offices-=-Neliemiah  was  cup-
bearer to  the  king — and  even  attaining  to  the  highest  posts  in  the  state,  as  in  the  case
of  Daniel.     We  are  reminded  that —

I.  We  may  find  some  mitigation  in  our  evil  condition.  We  have  evidences
enough,  both  in  the  Bible  and  in  secular  history,  of  the  evils  of  absolutism,  of
intrusting  the  power  of  life  and  death,  of  prosperity  and  adversity,  to  one  man  ;  but
we  have  proof  that  in  Persia  men  of  humble  station  could  rise  to  exalted  position.
Here  was  "  a  career  open  to  ability."  Seldom  an  evil  estate  without  one  mitigating
feature  ;  seldom  a  cloudy  day  without  an  interval  of  blue  sky  ;  few  lives  without
some  sources  of  happiness.  Obscurity,  with  all  its  duliiess,  has  freedom  from  the
glare  and  hatred  of  public  life.  Hard  work  knows,  as  luxury  and  indolence  cannot,
Uie  enjoyment  of  repose.

"  Not  always  fall  of  leaf,  nor  ever  spring  j
No  endless  night,  nor  yet  eternal  day.
The  saddest  bud  a  season  finds  to  sing,
The  roughest  storm  a  calm  may  soon  allay.
Thus,  with  succeeding  years,  God  tempers  all
That  man  may  hope  to  rise,  yet  fear  to  fall."

II.  We  bhau,  reap  satisfaction  if  we  sow  piety  and  virtue.  Wherever  th«
Jew  has  gone,  whether  forcibly  deported  or  whether  \\f  has  voluntarily  migrated,  he
has  carried  witn  him  the  virtues  of  his  race.  Beyond  question  the  law  of  Moses
trained  a  people  to  the  practice  of  a  severe  morality.  Purity,  temperance,  industry,
and  frugality  have  been  the  characteristics  of  the  race  in  every  land  and  age.  And
these  have  placed  them  everywhere  in  positions   of  honour  and  of  trust.     Thus


CH.  1.  1—11.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  7

Nehemiah  comes  from  the  king's  presence  to  see  his  countrymen  from  Jerusalem.
Under  the  righteous  government  of  God  we  shall  find  that  the  same  virtues  will
conduct  us  to  sufficiency,  contentment,  honour,  prosperity.

III.  We  have  one  unfailing  besgurcb  in  time  of  trouble  (vers.  2,  3).  Evil
tidings  come  to  Nehemiali  in  his  prosperity  and  cloud  his  life  (vers.  2,  3).  Certain
of  his  countrymen  bring  tidings  from  Jerusalem  wliich  are  most  distressing  to  him.
The  city  of  God  is  "  in  great  affliction  and  reproach  "  (ver.  3)  ;  its  "  wall  is  broken
down  ; "  its  "  gate's  are  burned  with  fire  "  (ver.  3).  There  are  those  who  would
hardly  allow  their  day's  enjoyment  to  be  disturbed  if  they  heard  of  the  most  terrible
calamities.  In  nothing  is  our  spirit  more  clearly  shown  than  in  the  way  in  wnicli
we  receive  tidings  of  the  welfare  or  misfortune  of  others.  Nchemiah  was  a  large-
hearted,  sympathetic  man.  He  entirely  forgot  his  own  comfortable  prosperity  in
the  adversity  of  his  race ;  to  him  the  sufferings  of  his  people  were  his  own  misfor-
tunes. Under  these  circumstances  Nehemiah  had  recourse  to  (1 )  two  Oriental  sourcet
of  relief :  lie  (a)  gave  himself  up  to  formal  lamentation — ^he  "  sat  down  and  wept,  and
mourned  certain  days"  (ver.  4) ;  and  (6)  he  fasted  (ver.  4).  These  expressions  of
grief  were  national.  Oriental ;  to  him  they  were  therefore  natural  and  helpful.  We
may  weep,  we  may  abstain  from  food  because  appetite  is  killed  by  sorrow ;  but  it  is
not  natural,  and  therefore  not  riglit,  for  us  to  affect  the  tokens  of  grief  which  belon,,'
to  other  times  or  other  peoples.  But  Nehemiah  had  also  recourse  to  (2)  one  universal
source  of  comfort.  He  "  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven  "  (ver.  4).  He  took  his
Borrow  to  the  throne  of  grace,  to  the  "God  of  all  comfort;"  he  presented  himself
with  aching  heart  to  him  who  alone  can  "  bind  up  the  broken  heart."  This  refuge
in  time  of  trouble  is  not  Jewish,  nor  Oriental ;  it  is  human,  universal,  unfailing.  In
every  clime  and  every  age  the  stricken  spirit  can  go  to  God,  pour  out  its  woe  to
heaven,  and  find  calm  and  comfort  in  the  sympathy  of  the  unchangeable  Friend.
"God  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble"  (Ps.  xlvi.  1).
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  g^ve  you  riest "
(Matt.  xi.  28).— C.

Vers.  1 — 11. — God  and  his  people.  We  may  notice  here  four  things: — ^The  stale
of  the  Jews  that  had  escaped  who  were  left  of  the  captivity.  The  position  and
character  of  Nehemiah.  The  prayer  which  was  mingled  with  the  lamentation.  The
practical  aim  and  purpose  which  followed  the  prayer.  All  are  based  upon  the  one
foundation  of  the  special  gracious  relation  of  God  to  his  covenant  people.  We  may
therefore  distinguish  the  following  practical  points  in  this  chapter: —

I.  An  illustration  of  the  Divine  method  and  character  in  dealing  with  those  who
are  the  objects  of  special  regard.  1.  Faithfulness.  The  Jews  suffered  because  they
rebelled.  They  suffered  still  because  they  still  needed  discipline.  They  were  "  in
great  affliction  and  reproach  "  that  they  might  be  taught  to  seek  help  of  God.  They
had  no  walls  to  their  city  that  they  might  be  labourers  together  with  God  in  rebuild-
ing them.  They  were  surrounded  with  opponents  that  their  holiness  might  be
maintained,  th(-ir  zeal  and  constancy  developed  and  tried,  their  victory  made  manifest.
2.  Forbearance  and  compassion.  A  remnant  left.  The  burning  bush  unconsumed.
The  "  day  of  small  things  "  in  which  the  Spirit  of  God  reveals  his  might,  full  of
promise.     Eminent  saints  are  more  sought  after  and  more  appreciated  at  such  times.

II.  A  conspicuous  example  of  religious  character.  Nehemiah.  1.  Found  in  a
palace,  in  a  heathen  palace,  in  a  king's  cupbearer.  Resistance  to  temptation.  Culti-
vation of  faith  in  unfavourable  circumstances.  A  friend  made  of  the  mammon  of
unrighteousness.  A  testimony  borne  to  the  superiority  of  the  man  of  God,  as  in  the
case  of  Daniel  and  his  associates.  Mercy  granted  in  the  sight  of  the  heathen.
2.  Deep  feeling  of  brotherhood  vdth  Gods  people.  A  tender  heart.  An  inquiring
mind.  An  unselfish  regard  for  the  condition  of  those  afar  off.  Anxious  concern
that  God's  glory  should  be  seen  in  his  Church.  3.  Strong  faith.  Keeping  hold  of
Divine  promises,  looking  for  their  fulfilment,  troubled  by  delay,  turning  from  external
facts  to  God.  4.  Prayerfulness  and  humiliation  before  God.  "  He  sat  dowH  and
wept,  and  mourned  for  davs,  and  fasted  and  prayed  before  the  God  of  heaven."
There  is  no  emergency  in  which  the  man  of  faith  loses  sight  of  his  great  resource  in
letting  himself  and   his   desires  before  God.     When  he  does  so,  he  will  not  b«


H  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  I.  1— 11,

ashamed  of  his  tears.  To  the  true  heart  the  condition  of  the  Church  is  a  personal
sorrow  or  a  personal  joy.  5.  The  practical  aim  mingled  with  the  supplications.
The  faith  which  prays  is  the  faith  which  works.  When  we  ask  God  for  help  we
■hould  be  ready  for  service.  Nehemiah  did  not  satisfy  himself  with  weeping  and
praying.     He  said,  "  Here  am  I,  send  me."     The  true  prayer  is  always  consecration.

III.  An  eminent  instance  of  peayer  at  A  great  crisis.  The  characteristics  of
Nehemiah's  prayer  were — 1.  Adoring  faith.  He  believed  that  God  was  God.  2.
Remembrance  of  the  word  of  God,  and  his  gracious  revelation  of  himself  in  keeping
covenant  and  mercy.  3.  Confession  of  sin  and  acknowledgment  of  God's  righteous-
ness. 4.  Humble  boldness- in  appealing  to  him  who  has  given  his  word  to  fulfil  it.
6.  Spiritual  insight  and  foresight.  Looking  on  the  world  and  its  rulers  and  all  its
affairs  as  in  the  hand  of  him  whose  throne  is  the  throne  of  grace,  to  which  his  people
can  come  at  all  times.  To  such  a  faith  the  Persian  monarch  is  only  "  this  man,"  a
mere  instrument  in  the  hands  of  God.  6.  Identification  of  the  personal  life  and
feelings  with  the  interests  and  doctrines  of  God's  Church.  "Prosper  thy  servant."
Not  for  liis  own  sake,  but  for  thy  people's  sake.  "  I  was  the  king's  cupbearer ;  "  but
I  was  the  representative  of  Zion,  and  the  intercessor  for  Jerusalem.

IV.  A  GREAT  ENTERPRISE  Undertaken  in  dependence  upon  God.  1.  Thefoundor
tion  was  sure.  It  was  an  enterprise  on  which  God's  blessing  could  be  sought.  2.
The  instrument  was  fit.  Nehemiah  was  conscious  both  of  intense  desire  and  con-
secration, and  of  personal  quality  by  which  he  was  adapted  to  the  work.  3.  The
method  was  wise.  He  did  not  break  away  from  his  connection  with  Persia,  but
sought  to  use  tlie  earthly  power  for  the  heavenly  purpose.  4.  The  spirit  was  truly
religious.  "  Prosper  thy  servant  this  day."  Without  God  nothing  is  strong.  With
his  help  all  things  are  possible.     He  rules  both  men  and  things  for  his  people. — R.

Vers  4 — 11. — Piety  and  prayer.  I.  The  sorrow  of  prayer  (ver.  4).  Prayer
was  designed  to  be  a  glad  communion  with  God  ;  but  sin  has  embittered  it.  Now  it
is  often  suffused  witli  tears  ;  but  it  will  soon  rejoice  in  God.  Hannah's  prayerful
sorrow  soon  became  her  prophetic  song.  The  sorrows  of  prayer  are  more  joyoiu
than  the  rejoicings  of  sin.

II.  The  iJiroR'irNiTY  of  prayer  (ver.  5).  Nehemiah  besought  God  to  hear  hit
prayer  ;  his  whole  being  was  engaged  in  his  devotion.  Sorrow  makes  men  earnest ;
things  spiritual  must  be  earnestly  sought.

III.  The  THEOLOGT  of  prayer.  True  prayer  has  a  right  conception  of  the  Divine
character;  it  will  see  in  God — 1.  The  Divine.  2.  The  exalted.  3.  The  faithful.  4.
The  powerful.  All  true  prayer  is  based  on  a  right  conception  of  the  Deity  ;  the
more  we  know  of  God,  the  more  true  and  acceptable  will  our  worship  become.

IV.  The  duration  of  prayer  (ver.  6).  Nehemiah  prayed  day  and  night.  We  must
pray  without  ceasing.  "  I  will  not  let  thee  go,  except  thou  bless  me  "  (Gen.  xxxii.
26).

V.  The  CONFESSIONS  of  prayer  (vers.  6,  7).  1.  Personal.  2.  Domestic.  8.
National.     4.   Unreserved.

VI.  The  SDPPLICATION  of  prayer.  Prayer  generally  has  some  specific  request  to
urge.  1.  The  Divine  promise  (vers.  8,  9).  2.  The  Divine  mercy.  3.  The  Divine
aid  in  the  past. — E.

Vers.  5 — 11. — A  prayer  :  its  characteristics.  We  have  many  recorded  prayers  in
the  sacred  Scriptures.  They  have  various  characteristics,  as  we  should  expect  they
would  have  ;  for  our  individuality — that  in  which  God  has  made  us  to  be  different
from  every  one  else — should  appear  in  prayer  as  much  as  in  any  other  act.  More
rather  than  less,  for  if  there  be  one  thing  more  especially  in  which  we  should  "  be
ourselves,"  it  is  when  we  approach  him  who  requires  "  truth  in  the  inward  parts."
Nevertheless,  we  shall  find  in  the  prayer  of  Nehemiah  those  characteristics  which  we
should  expect  to  find  in  any  address  to  God  from  a  holy  man,  and  which  should  mark
our  devotion.

I.  Ebvbrencb.  "I  beseech  thee,  0  Lord  God  of  heaven,  thf  great  and  terriblo
fiod"  (ver.  6).  "Let  thine  ear  be  attentive,  and  thine  eyes  open"  (veT.  6).
Nehemiah  speaks  as  one  who  feels  that  it  is  an  infinite  condescension  for  the  Majesty


OH.  I.  1—11.]


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


on  high  to  "  humhle  himself  to  heboid  the  things  -which  are  done  upon  the  earth."
In  our  "  access  with  boldness  "  there  is  danger  lest  we  run  into  irreverence.  Who
can  help  marking  a  painful  familiarity  in  the  addresses  of  some  men  to  the  Saviour
of  mankind?  If  we  feel  that  our  Maker  is  our  friend,  we  must  never  forget  that
our  friend  is  our  Maker.

II.  Adoration.  "  Thou  keepest  covenant  and  mercy,"  &c.  (ver.  5).  Critics  who
raise  an  easy  sneer  about  our  "telling  God  the  truth  concerning  himself"  must  not  be
allowed  to  deprive  ua  of  the  privilege  and  drive  us  from  the  duty  of  adoration.  It
is  a  fitting  thing,  well  sanctioned  in  Scripture,  fruitful  of  humility  and  sacred  joy,  to
ascribe  in  prayer  "  the  greatness,  and  the  power,  and  the  glory,  and  the  victory,  and
the  majesty  "  to  our  God  (1  Chron.  zxix.  11 ;  Rev.  iv.  11,  &c.).

III.  Confession.  "  The  sins  which  we  have  sinned  against  thee,"  Ac.  (vers.  6,
7).  Here  is  confession  of  national  sin.  Our  consciousness  tells  us  of  our  own  guilt,
and  should  lead  us  to  confess  (a)  our  transgressions  ("we  have  dealt  corruptly")
and  (6)  our  shortcomings  ("  we  have  Moikept,"  &c.).  Our  confession  of  sin.shouUl  be
simple  and  natural,  not  conventional  or  ostentatious.  The  truer,  the  more  acceptable.
Beside  the  acknowledgment  of  our  own  personal  faultiness,  our  sympathy  with  our
fellows  (of  the  same  family.  Church,  nation)  will  lead  us  to  confess  our  sins  as
members  of  a  community.

IV.  Supplication,  pleading  (vers.  8,  9,  10).  Nehemiah  pleads  with  God  his
ancient  promises,  and  he  reverently  affirms  that  they  for  whom  he  is  making  inter-
cession are  such  as  these  promises  included.  We  cannot  do  better  than  plead  (a)
God's  word  of  promise,  and  (6)  his  past  deliverances  (ver.  10) :  "  Thou  hast  delivered
my  soul  from  death :  wilt  thou  not  deliver  my  feet  from  falling  ?  "  (Ps.  Ivi.  1.3).

V.  Earnestness.  In  verse  11  Nehemiah  urges  his  petition :  "  0  Lord,  I  beseech
thee,"  &c.  Earnestness  is  not  content  with  one  clear  utterance.  It  returns  and
repeats.  The  language  of  entreaty  is  naturally  redundant.  It  does  not  spare  words  :
it  pleads  and  pleads  again.

VI.  Definiteness.  "  Prosper  thy  servant  .  .  and  grant  him  mercy  in  the  signt
of  this  man.  For  I  was  the  king's  cupbearer"  (ver.  11).  Nehemiah  prays  not  only
generally  for  God's  merciful  regard  to  be  given  to  his  people,  but  he  asks  especially
that  the  mind  of  the  king,  Artaxerxes,  may  be  favourably  disposed  towards  himself.
We  should  consider  what  we  urgently  require  when  we  draw  nigh  to  God  in  prayer,
and  ask  him  for  those  special  and  definite  favours  which  are  most  calculated  to  meet
the  need  of  our  circumstances  and  life.  Only,  as  here,  we  must  be  unselfish  and
high-minded  in  the  desires  we  cherish. — C.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IL


Ver.  1.— In  the  month  Nisan.  The  fourth
month  after  Chisleu,  corresponding  nearly
to  our  Apiil.  How  it  came  about  that
Nehemiah  did  not  put  the  king's  favour  to
the  proof  until  more  than  three  months  had
gone  by  we  can  only  conjecture.  Perhaps
the  court  had  been  absent  from  Susa,  passing
the  winter  at  Babylon,  as  it  sometimes  did,
and  he  had  not  accompanied  it.  Perhaps,
though  present  at  the  court,  ho  had  not
been  called  on  to  discharge  his  office,  his
turn  not  having  arrived.     Possibly,  though

Eerforming  his  duties  from  time  to  time,  he
ad  found  no  opportunity  of  unbosoming
himself,  the  king  not  having  noticed  his
grief  He  may  even  have  done  his  best  to
conceal  it,  for  Persian  subjects  were  expected
to  be  perfectly  happy  in  the  presence  of  their
kiug.     He  had  probably  formed  no  plan,  but


waited  in  the  confident  hope  that  God's  pro-
vidence would  so  order  events,  that  some
occasion  would  arise  whereof  he  might  take
advantage.  In  the  twentieth  year  of  Arta-
xerxes. Like  Daniel,  Zechariah,  Haggai,  and
Ezra,  Nehemiah  dates  events  by  the  regnal
year  of  the  existing  Persian  king.  His
Artaxerxes  is,  by  common  consent,  the  same
as  Ezra's,  and  can  scarcely  be  supposed  to  tie
any  monarch  but  Longimanus,  who  reigned
from  B.O.  465  to  B.O.  425.  Now  I  had
not  been  beforetime  sad  in  his  presence.
Other  renderings  have  been  proposed,  but
this  is  probably  the  true  meanmg.  Hitherto
I  had  always  worn  a  cheerful  countenance
before  him  —  now  it  was  otherwise  —  my
sorrow  showed  itself  in  spite  of  me.

Ver.  2. — The  king  said  unto  me,  Why  if
thy  countenance  sad?  This  "  kindly  ques-
tion "  put  by  the  great  king  to  his  humble
retainer  ia  his  best  claim  to  the  favouiabla


id


TfiE  fiOOK  Ot'  NEHEMIAfl.


[cH.  n.  1— A


judgment  of  later  ages.  History  puts  him
Defore  us  as  a  weak  monarch,  one  who  could
oorapromise  the  royal  dignity  by  making
terms  with  a  revolted  subject,  while  he  dis-
graced it  by  breaking  faith  with  a  conquered
enemy.  But  if  weak  as  a  king,  as  a  man
ke  was  kind-hearted  and  gentle.  Few  Persian
monarchs  would  have  been  sufficiently  in-
terested in  their  attendants  to  notice  whether
they  wore  sad  or  no  ;  fewer  still  would  have
shown  sympathy  on  such  an  occasion.  A
Xerxes  might  have  ordered  the  culprit  to
iistffnt  execution.  Longimanus  feels  com-
passion, and  wishes  tc  assuage  the  grief  of
nis  servant  Then  I  was  very  sore  afraid.
Notmthstanding  the  king 's  kind  and  com-
passionate words,  Nehemiah  feels  his  danger,
lie  has  looked  sad  in  the  king's  presence,
lie  is  about  to  ask  permission  to  quit  the
court.  These  are  both  sins  against  the
fundamental  doctrine  of  Persian  court  life,
that  to  bask  in  the  light  of  the  royal  coun-
tenance is  the  height  of  felicity.  Will  the
king  be  displeased,  refuse  his  request,  dis-
miss him  from  his  post,  cast  him  into  prison,
or  will  he  pardon  his  rudeness  and  allow  his
request?

Ver.  3.  —May  the  king  live  for  ever.  A
common  form  of  Oriental  compliment  (1
Kings  i.  31  ;  Dan.  ii.  4  ;  iii.  9,  &c.),  but  said
now  with  special  intention  to  conciliate,  and
meant  to  express  a  deep  interest  in  the  royal
life  and  person.  The  city,  the  place  of  my
fathers'  sepulchres.  We  see  by  this  that
Nehemiali's  family  must  have  belonged  to
the  capital.  The  Persians,  like  the  Jews,
had  a  great  respect  for  the  tomb,  and  re-
garded its  violation  with  horror.  Artaxerxes
would  naturally  sympathise  with  the  wish
of  his  follower  to  give  security  to  the  city
where  his  ancestors  were  interred.  It  would
seem  that  the  Persians  generally  at  this  time
(Herod.,  i.  140),  the  kings  certainly  ('An-
cient Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.  p.  231,  second
edition),  buried  their  dead.  Lieth  waste.
Neliomiah's  warmth  of  feeling  exaggerates
tlie  fact ;  but  he  may  have  been  unconscious
of  the  exaggeration.  He  repeats  the  phrase
to  the  chief  men  of  Jerusalem  after  making
his  survey  of  the  wall  (ver.  17).

Ver.  4. — Then  the  king  said  unto  me,
For  what  dost  thou  make  request !  Arta-
xerxes understood  that  a  complaint  was  con-
tained in  Nehemiah's  speech,  and  that  he
must  liave  a  request  to  make.  With  gracious
kiii  Jliness  he  facilitates  its  utterance.  So  I
prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven.  Nehemiah
was  emphatically  a  man  of  prayer.  In
every  danger,  in  every  difficulty,  still  more
at  any  crisis,  prayer  rose  to  his  lips  (see  ch.
iv.  4,  9;  V.  19;  vi.  9,  14;  xiii.  14,  &c).
Sometimes,  as  now,  the  prayer  was  offered
silently  and  swiftly.


Ver.  6. — The  queen.  It  appears  from
Ctesiaa  ('Exc.  Pers.,'  §  44)  that  Artaxerxes
Longimanus  had  but  one  legitimate  wife — a
certain  Damaspia.  Nothing  more  is  known
of  her  besides  this  mention,  and  the  fact
that  she  died  on  the  same  day  as  her  hus-
band. (The  Septuagint  rendering  of  ha-
ghegal  by  r;  iraXKaKii  is  wrong.)  Sitting
by  him.  Not  an  unusual  circumstance.
Though,  when  the  monarch  entertained
guests,  the  queen  remained  in  her  private
apartments  (Esther  i.  9 — 12),  yet  on  otiier
occasions  she  frequently  took  her  meals
with  him  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iii.
p.  214).  I  set  him  a  time.  Nehemiah
probably  mentioned  some  such  time  as  a
year,  or  two  years — such  a  space  as  would
suffice  for  tlie  double  journey,  and  the
restoration  of  the  fortifications.  He  stayed
away,  however,  as  he  tells  us  (ch.  v.  14),
twelve  years,  obtaining  no  doubt  from  time
to  time  an  extension  of  his  leave  (Bertheau).
Ver.  7. — Let  letters  be  given  me  to  the
governors  beyond  the  river.  It  is  not  quite
clear  why  no  letters  were  needed  to  the
governors  between  Susa  and  the  Euphrates.
Perhaps,  while  travelling  was  safe,  at  any
rate  mth  an  escort,  in  the  more  central
provinces,  beyond  the  river  it  became  unsafe
(see  Ezra  viii  31).

Ver.  8.  — The  king's  forest.  Patrick
supposes  the  forest  on  Mount  Lebanon  to
be  intended  ;  but  Nehemiah  would  scarcely
have  desired  to  transport  timber  for  ordinary
building  purposes  from  such  a  distance.
Moreover,  the  word  used  is  one  not  applic-
able to  a  natural  forest,  but  only  to  a  park,
or  pleasure-ground  planted  with  trees,  and
surrounded  by  a  fence  or  walL  The  word  is
pardes,  the  Hebrew  representative  of  that
Persian  term  which  the  Greeks  rendered  by
vapaSiiaoi,  whence  our  "paradise."  We
must  understand  a  royal  park  in  the  vicinity
of  Jerusalem,  of  which  a  Jew,  Asaph,  was
the  keeper.  The  palace  which  appertained
to  the  hOQse.  The  "  house  "  here  spoken  of
is  undoubtedly  the  temple ;  and  the  birah
appertaining  to  it  is,  almost  certainly,  the
fortress  at  the  north-west  angle  of  the
temple  area,  which  at  once  commanded  and
protected  it  Josephus  says  ('Ant  Jud.,'
XV.  11,  §  4)  that  this  fortress  was  called
Baptf  originally.  In  Roman  times  it  was
known  as  the  "  Turris  Antonia. "  The  house
that  I  shall  enter  into.  The  governor's
residence.  Nehemiah  assumes  that  the
powers  for  which  he  asks  involve  his  being
appointed  governor  of  Judeea.  The  king
granted  me,  according  to  the  good  hand  of
my  God  upon  me.  Through  God's  special
favour  towards  me,  the  king  was  induced  to
grant  my  request


OH.  II.  1— «.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  11


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Prayer  answered.  Three  or  four  months  liad  passed  since  Nehen  Jah
first  heard  of  the  distressed  condition  of  his  bretliren  at  Jerusalem,  and  began  to
pray  for  them,  and  that  he  might  be  permitted  to  visit  and  relieve  them.  So  long
the  answer  to  his  prayer  was  delayed.  But  he  doubtless  continued  to  pray,  and  at
length  the  answer  came.  Meanwhile,  he  would  be  able  to  ripen  his  plana,  and
prepare  himself  for  his  enterprise.     Notice —

I.  The  opportunity  -at  length  afforded  him.  Arising  from — 1.  His  access  to
the  king.  2.  The  king's  notice  of  his  sadness  and  kind  inquiry  respecting  it  (ver.  2).
An  example  to  superiors  in  relation  to  inferiors ;  to  masters  and  mistresses  in  respect
to  their  servants.  The  highest  are  liable  to  suffer,  and  may  be  glad  of  the  sympathy
and  services  of  those  beneath  them,  who  will  render  them  all  the  more  cheerfully  ft
kindness  has  been  shown  to  them.  God  intends  the  relationships  of  life  for  mutual
comfort  and  benefit.  Sympathy  benefits  alike  the  giver  and  receiver.  Sympathy
is  as  oil  to  the  machinery  of  life.  It  unites  classes  in  bonds  more  sacred,  happy,  and
lasting  than  laws  or  self-interest.  Every  one  has  it  in  his  power,  by  cherishing  and
displaying  it,  to  render  invaluable  service  to  society.  Sympathy  between  employers
and  employed  is  one  of  the  greatest  wants  of  England.  3.  His  reply.  Describing  the
sad  condition  of  Jerusalem,  and  intimating  its  preciousness  to  him  as  "  the  place  of
Ills  fathers'  sepulchres  "  (ver.  3).  4.  Tlie  king's  encouragement  to  him  to  present
liis  request  (ver.  4).  A  kind  word  will  do  nmch  to  alleviate  sorrow  ;  a  readiness  to
give  practical  relief  more.  The  king  encouraged  Nehemiah  to  hope  for  this ;  nor  was
tlie  hope  disappointed.

II  The  dsb  he  made  of  his  opportunity.  1.  It  filled  him  with  fear  (ver.  2).
The  uoment  lie  had  so  long  desired  had  come ;  but  at  first  its  arrival  only  made
liim  "very  sore  afraid."  So  much  depended  on  it;  so  uncertain  was  he  of  his  power
to  produce  the  right  impression  on  the  king,  whose  will  would  determine  whether  his
plan  should  be  executed.  2.  It  led  him  to  prayer  (ver.  4).  As  he  stood  before  the
monarch,  embarrassed  and  trembling,  he  lifted  up  his  heart  to  God,  imploring  assist-
ance and  success.  The  best  thing  he  could  do.  Prayer  calms  the  anxious  (Phil.  It.
6,  7),  gives  the  soul  possession  of  itself,  brings  God  to  the  help  of  man.  In  the
strength  of  God  Nehemiah  could  address  the  king.  3.  He  presented  his  petition  to
Artaxerxes  (ver.  5).  Humbly  and  courteously,  as  became  him,  and  was  best  adapted
to  secure  his  object.  4.  He  made  further  and  larger  requests  when  the  first  was
granted  (vers.  7,  8).  .  The  general  lesson  is.  Seize  your  opportunities,  whether  for
getting  or  doing  good.  "  There  is  a  tide  in  the  affairs  of  men,"  &c.  The  impression
made  by  a  young  man  in  a  short  interview  may  determine  the  complexion  of  the
whole  of  his  after  life.  Failure  is  often  only  lost  opportunities  avenging  themselves.
It  is  80  not  only  in  secular  matters,  but  spiritual.  "  The  golden  moments  in  the
stream  of  life  rush  past  us,  and  we  see  nothing  but  sand ;  the  angels  come  to  visit
us,  and  we  only  know  them  when  they  are  gone  "  (G.  Eliot).

III.  His  success.  The  king  not  only  granted  him  his  requests,  but  gave  him
apparently  more  than  he  asked  for  (ver.  9).

IV.  His  pious  acknowledgment  of  its  supreme  source.  "  According  to  the  good
hand  of  my  God  upon  me "  (ver.  8).  Many  fail  in  this.  Even  those  who  have
prayed  for  what  they  have  received  do  not  always  make  due  acknowledgment.
Thanksgivings  are  not  so  plentiful  as  prayers.

In  conclusion,  observe-^1.  Christians  always  have  access  to  the  throne  of  the  King
of  kings.  He  feels  deep  interest  in  them,  sympathy  with  them ;  encourages  them  to
tell  him  their  sorrows  and  present  their  petitions.  They  may  come  to  him  not  only
at  stated  periods,  but  at  any  moment,  through  the  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  2.
They  should  avail  themselves  of  this  privilege  not  only  for  their  own  advantage,  but
for  the  good  of  others.  They  should  pray  constantly  "  for  the  peace  of  Jerusalem,"
for  the  "good  estate  of  the  Catholic  Church."  God  purposes  and  promises  good  to
his  Church,  but  enjoins  prayer  for  what  he  has  promised  (see  Ezek.  xzxvi.  37).  Our
Lord  teaches  us,  in  the  model  prayer  he  has  given  us,  to  pray  first  for  the  hallowing
of  God's  name  and  the  coming  of  his  kingdom.  Yet  many  Christians  are  selfish  in
their  prayers,  and  thus  nourish  their  selfishness.    3.  They  may  ask  for  great  things.


1«  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  il  1—8

He  to  whom  they  come  is  "  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  oi
think,"  and  has  done  great  things  in  answer  to  prayer.  4.  Past  answers  to  prayer
■hould  embolden  to  further  and  larger  requests.

Ver.  2. — Sorrow  and  its  Consoler.    "  This  is  nothing  else  but  sorrow  of  heart."

I.  Sorrow  of  heart  may  co-exist  with  external  well-being.  Nehemiah  was
healthy,  honoured,  rich,  yet  sad.  So  are  many  in  similar  circumstances.  The
sorrows  of  sympathy,  patriotism,  and  piety,  as  Nehemiah's  were  ;  those  of  penitence
or  remorse ;  of  wounded  affection  or  disappointed  confidence ;  those  occasioned  by
family  troubles,  &o.,  may  invade  the  hearts  of  the  most  prosperous.  And  it  ia  well
that  they  should.     Prosperity  without  sorrow  tends  to  moral  ruin.

II.  Sorrow  of  heart  is  graciously  noticed  and  assuaged  by  the  King  of  kings.
1.  He  observes  the  sorrowful  heart.  It  will  commonly  reveal  itself  in  the  counten-
ance ;  but  if  not,  God  sees  it  (Ps.  xxxi.  7 ;  xxxviii.  9).  2.  He  delights  to  comfort
the  sorrowful  heart  "  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bindeth  up  their  wounds."
He-sent  his  Son  "to  heal  the  broken-hearted."  The  Spirit  whom  he  sends  is  "the
Comforter."  By  his  providence,  by  the  revelation  he  gives  of  his  fatherly  pity  and
the  benevolent  ends  of  affliction,  by  his  assurances  of  favour  and  love,  by  his
promises,  by  human  sympathy  and  solace,  he  comforts  now  his  children ;  and
ultimately  he  will  wipe  all  their  tears  away.

III.  Sorrow  of  heart  should  receive  tendeb  human  sympathy  and  succoub.
We  should  be  -sensitive  to  its  signs,  and  prompt  to  feel  with  and  for  it,  and  to
proffer  consolation  and  relief.  This  course  is — 1.  Prompted  by  nature.  To  decline
this  duty  is  to  do  violence  to  ourselves.  It  is  to  "  shut  up  our  bowels  of  compas-
sion "  (1  John  iii.  17),  unless,  indeed,  we  are  so  far  below  the  level  of  humanity  as  to
have  none.  2.  Enjoined  by  religion.  The  law  and  the  gospel  coincide  here.  3.  Be-
quired  by  our  relation  to  sufferers.  The  brotherhood  of  man  to  man,  of  Christian  to
Christian.  4.  Enabled  by  our  possession  of  the  gospel.  Which  is  a  collection  of
cordials  for  all  varieties  of  human  sorrow.  He  who  has  this,  though  he  has  little
besides,  may  be  a  comforter  of  many.  5.  Illustrated  by  Divine  example  (see  II.).
6.  Enforced  by  the  revelation  of  the  last  judgment  (see  Matt.  xxv.  35 — 45;  1  John
iv.  17).  Finally,  there  is  sorrow  coming  on  the  impenitent  which  _will  receive  no
comfort  from  God,  angel,  or  man  (see  Luke  xvi.  24 — 26).

Ver.  3. — Sadness,  when  and  Iww  far  justificMe.  "Why  should  not  my  counte-
nance be  sad  ?  "

I.  Sadness  is  often  justifiable,  or  even  commendable.  1.  Under  great  troubles.
Stoicism  is  neither  natural  nor  Christian.  Troubles  are  meant  to  trouble  us.  If  they
do  not,  they  afford  no  trial  to  faith  and  patience,  and  cannot  effect  their  purpose  for
discipline  and  improvement.  2.  Under  the  consciousness  of  sin.  In  view  of  its
essential  evil  as  committed  against  God,  his  rights,  laws,  and  goodness ;  its  injurious-
ness  to  ourselves  and  to  others ;  its  final  consequences  unless  forgiven.  3.  In  sym-
pathy with  the  troubles  of  others.  Which  makes  them  our  own.  Christian  fellow-.
ship  includes  community  of  suffering.  "If  one  member  suffer,  all  the  members
suffer  with  it."  4.  On  account  of  the  sins  of  others  (Ps.  cxix.  136,  168 ;  Ezek.  is.
4;  Phil.  iii.  18).  5.  On  account  of  the  troubles  of  the  Church.  Nehemiah's  sadness
was  honourable  to  him.

II.  Yet  sadness  should  not  be  inconsolablb.  1.  It  need  not.  For  a  sure
remedy  is  furnished  in  the  truths  and  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  the  ever-available
aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  It  ought  not.  For  faith  and  prayer,  opening  the  heart
to  the  Divine  consolations,  and  securing  the  Divine  aid,  would  turn  sadness  into
peace,  if  not  joy.  Those  cases  are,  however,  to  be  excepted  where  melancholy
springs  from  physical  causes,  and  needs  bodily  rather  than  spiritual  treatment.

III.  Sadness  should  never  be  predominant  in  the  Christian.  For  his  habitual
sadness  of  spirit,  countenance,  or  speech — 1.  Dishonours  God.  2.  Bobs  himselL
Counteracting  the  design  of  our  religion,  everywhere  prominent  in  thp  New  Testa-
ment. "That  they  may  have  my  joy  fulfilled  in  themselves."  "In  the  world  yo
shall  have  tribulation,  but  be  of  good  cheer."  "The  kingdom  of  God  is  .  .  .  joy  in
the  Holy  Ghost."     "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,"  &o.     "  These  things  writs


OH.  II.  1—8.  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  II

we  unto  you,  that  your  joy  may  be  full.''  3.  Hinders  Christian  service.  "The  joy
of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  4.  Retards  the  progress  of  religion.  Discouraging
inquirer,  and  giving  occasion  to  adversaries  to  speak  ill  of  the  religioua  life.

Ver.  4. — Ejaculaiory  prayer.  "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven."  Nehemiah,
saddened  by  the  report  ho  had  received  of  the  condition  of  the  Jews  who  had
returned  to  their  land,  had  formed  a  purpose  to  visit  them,  that  he  might  encourage
them,  and  take  the  lead  in  fortifying  the  city,  and  putting  aSairs  into  a  more  hopeful
condition.  His  doing  so  depended  on  the  consent  of  the  monarch  whose  cupbearer
he  was,  and  his  obtaining  a  commission  from  him.  Already  he  had  prayed  for  success
in  his  intended  application,  and  now  that  the  desired  opportunity  presented  itself  he
felt  the  importance  of  the  moment,  and  in  the  king's  presence  sent  up  mentally
another  prayer.     We  have  here —

I.  Prayer  bt  a  great  and  wealthy  man.  Such  have  many  temptations  to
neglect  prayer ;  temptations  to  pride  and  self-dependence,  to  worldliness  and  self-
indulgence,  tending  to  the  loss  of  all  sense  of  their  need  of  God  and  spiritual  good  ;
to  entire  absorption  in  the  cares  of  their  position ;  to  false  shame  before  their  equals,
&o. ;  yet  they  need  prayer  as  much  as  the  poorest,  and  in  some  respects  more.  They
equally  need  Divine  mercy  as  sinners,  and  Divine  help  and  guidance  ;  and  they  have
•pecial  responsibilities,  temptations,  and  power  for  good  or  evil,  and  so  need  special
grace.  In  undertaking  such  a  work  as  Nehemiah  proposed  to  himself,  the  greatest
may  well  feel  their  need  of  Divine  aid.  It  is  pleasing  to  contemplate  such  men  when
they  are  men  given  to  prayer.  Many  instances  in  the  Bible :  Abraham,  Jacob,
Moses,  David,  Solomon,  Hezekiah,  Daniel,  Cornelius.

II.  Prayer  at  an  nNUSnAL  place  and  time.  Not  in  temple  or  synagogue  oi
secret  chamber;  but  in  the  presence  of  a  king  and  queen,  and  while  engaged  in
ministering  to  them.  Learn  that  no  place  is  unsuitable,  no  time  unseasonable,  for
prayer ;  for  God  is  everywhere,  and  his  ear  always  open.

III.  Silent  prayer.  Was  perhaps  an  exercise  of  mind  and  heart,  unknown  to
the  king.  Prayer  is  not  confined  to  audible  utterance..  This  is  desirable  where
practicable,  even  in  private  worship ;  for  utterance  aids  thought  and  feeling  ;  and  it
IS  indispensable  to  common  prayer.  One  must  speak  that  all  may  unite.  A  silent
meeting,  as  amongst  the  Friends,  may  be  a  true  prayer-meeting  to  individuals,  but
hardly  a  meeting  for  united  prayer.  But  in  Nehemiah's  circumstances  audible  words
would  have  been  unsuitable  :  and  always  the  worth  and  efBcacy  of  prayer  spring  not
from  the  words,  but  the  principles  and  feelings  they  represent.  It  is  ever  what
passes  in  the  mind  and  heart  which  makes  prayer  to  be  prayer.  As  much  m  there  ia
of  degire,  directed  to  Ood  in  faith,  so  much  is  there  of  prayer.

"  Prayer  is  the  soul's  sincere  desire,
Uttered  or  unexpressed,
The  motion  of  a  hidden  fire,
That  trembles  in  the  breast"

Much  of  the  truest  prayer  cannot  be  spoken.     "  Groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered."

IV.  A  SHORT  PRAYER.  Length  is  in  some  measure,  and  under  some  circuiiistahces,
•n  element  of  true  prayer.  He  who  satisfies  himself,  in  his  regular  seasons  of
worship,  with  a  sentence  or  two,  is  guilty  of  irreverence,  and  shows  that  he  has  no
delight  in  communion  with  God.  But  on  such  an  occasion  as  that  in  the  text,  only
brief  prayer  is  possible  or  needful.  And  how  much  may  be  expressed  or  implied  in
a  few  words ;  how  much  love,  or  trust,  or  longing  I  In  like  manner  much  meaning
may  be  in  a  short  prayer.  Instances:  the  Lord's  prayer ;  the  publican's ;  that  of  the
thief  on  the  cross.

V.  An  ejaculatoht  prater.  A  short,  fervent  prayer  "  darted "  upwards  on  a
sudden  occasion,  when  special  need  of  God's  help  was  unexpectedly  felt.  The  habit
of  thus  praying  is  muph  to  be  desired.  1.  Occasions  for  such  prayers  are  as  numer-
ous as  tne  varying  exigencies  of  life,  especially  the  sudden  and  unanticipated,  and
when  longer  prayer  is  impossible.  (1)  On  receiving  some  great,  unexpected  bless-
ing, or  becoming  suddenly  conscious  of  preservation  from  imminent  peril.  To  cry,
"  Bless  the  Lord  1 "  in  the  hearing  of  others  may  often  be  inexpedient ;  but  in  the  heut


U  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  ii.  1—8.

i«  always  suitable.  (2)  When  involved  in  unexpected  perplexity.  "Lord,  guide
me."  The  "  cry  "  of  Moses  at  the  Red  Sea,  referred  to  in  Exod.  xiv.  16,  may  have
been  a  mental  ejaculation.  (3)  When  suddenly  exposed  to  obvious  danger.  Bodily,
as  the  disciples  in  a  storm  ;  "  Lord,  save  us  ;  we  perish."  Peter  sinking ;  "  Lord,  save
ine."  Or  moral  and  spiritual  :  sudden  assaults  of  fierce  temptation.  "Lord,  help
me."  (4)  When  suddenly  betrayed  into  sin.  Wait  not  for  the  hour  of  prayer
before  seeking  pardon,  but  lift  up  your  heart  at  once  in  a  "  Lord,  have  mercy  upon
me."  (5)  When  any  special  demands  on  Christian  principle  are  unexpectedly  made,
and  the  consequent  special  need  for  Divine  assistance  is  felt.  (6)  In  connection
with  any  important  and  diflScult  duty.  In  business,  family  life,  Christian  activity,
(visiting  the  poor,  distributing  alms,  seizing  an  opportunity  for  giving  religious
counsel).  On  entering  church ;  before  sermon  (short  prayer  for  the  preacher  and
yourself) ;  on  leaving  church,  &c.  (7)  Under  all  varieties  of  feeling.  When  the
heart  is  touched  and  tender  towards  God  (gratitude,  admiration,  penitence,  love,
desire)  or  towards  men  (affection,  solicitude,  &c. — Gen.  xliii.  29).  When  pleasure  is
felt  at  the  sight  of  happiness  or  goodness,  or  pain  at  sight  of  misery  or  sin.  (In
walking  through  the  streets;  prayer  for  those  you  feel  you  cannot  help  or  save.)
2.  The  vahie  of  such  prayers.  (1)  As  evidencing  and  cultivating  the  devout  spirit.
Those  who  have  the  spirit  of  prayer  can  hardly  be  content  with  stated  times,  or  fail
to  look  to  God  in  unexpected  necessities,  or  praise  him  at  once  for  unexpected  bless-
ings. And  thus  the  spirit  of  prayer  is  cherished  and  maintained.  Is  one  way  of
Culfiiling  the  command,  "Pray  without  ceasing."  (2)  As  maintaining  habitual  con-
verse with  God.  We  should  esteem  it  a  calamity  if  he  were  to  restrict  our  approaches
to  him  to  certain  hours  ;  let  us  not  limit  ourselves  in  a  similar  manner.  (3)  As  aid-
ing to  sanctify  the  whole  life.  By  blending  worship  and  devout  sentiment  with
every  part  of  it.  (4)  As  securing  constant  Divine  assistance.  Nehemiah'a  prayer
was  heard  j  so  virill  ours  be.

Ver.  8. — Success  ascribed  to  God.  "And  the  king  granted  me,  according  to  the
good  hand  of  my  God  upon  me."  Nehemiah,  like  Ezra  before  him  (Ezra  vii.  6),
ascribes  the  success  of  his  application  to  the  king  to  the  "  good  hand  of  God  ; "
wliich  had,  indeed,  been  conspicuous.  The  circumstances  which  had  paved  the  way
for  the  presentation  of  his  petition,  the  readiness  of  the  king's  consent  to  his  requests,
the  largeness  of  the  facilities  granted  him,  all  indicated  that  his  God,  whose  aid  he
had  suuglit,  had  ordered  events  and  influenced  the  monarch's  heart.

I.  The  good  hand  of  God  is  in  all  the  successes  of  his  servants.  The  hand
of  God  is,  indeed,  in  the  successes  of  all ;  and  in  their  failures  and  reverses  too  ;  and
it  is  always  a  good  hand.     For  it  is  the  hand  of  him  who  is  good,  who  seeks  the

•good  of  his  creatures,  and  will  surely  "do  good  unto  those  that  be  good"  (Fa.
ciiv.  4).  Nor  is  it  easy  to  say  whether  the  goodness  of  God's  hand  is  most  showii
in  successes  or  reverses.  It  is  of  success,  however,  that  the  text  speaks ;  and  this
comes  from  God,  as  he — 1.  Arranges  the  events  which  conduce  to  success.  2
Supplies  the  qualities  which  contribute  to  it.  Wisdom,  power,  goodnes=i,  in  our-
selves or  otiiers.  3.  Overrules  adverse  circumstances  or  endeavours.  4.  Works  in
ways  inconceivable  and  indescribable  to  render  all  efficient.

II.  The  good  hand  of  God  is  EsrisciALLY  conspicuous  in  some  successes.  We
pass  over  those  effected  by  the  display  of  Divine  power  in  miracles.  Nehemiah
records  no  miracle.  The  hand  of  God  is  especially  apparent  in  successes  obtained
wnere  (1)  great  difficulties  are  surmounted,  or  (2)  strenuous  opposition  is  over-
come, or  (3)  feeble  instruments  have  been  employed,  or  (4)  unexpected  valuable
help  arises,  or  (5)  many  unlikely  conditions  concur,  and  (6)  signal  good  is  accon*
plished.  All  these  were  combined  in  the  successes  of  the  gospel  in  early  times,  and
in  many  a  revival,  reformation,  or  deliverance  in  later  days.

III.  The  good  hand  of  God  should  ever  be  devoutly  recognised  and  acknow-
ledged. With  admiration,  gratitude,  and  praise.  This  is  meet  and  right  and  pro-
fitable. To  be  unable  to  see  God's  hand  is  to  be  in  the  condition  of  a  brute.  To
shut  our  eyes  and  refuse  to  see  it  is  the  part  of  a  determined  infidel.  To  see,  and
not  in  suitable  ways  to  acknowledge,  is  at  least  to  be  guilty  of  impiety,  ingratitude,
»nd  cowardice.


ca.  II.  1—8.]  TAB  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  1*

IV.    TnE  GOOD  HAND  OF  OuU  WILL  BE  RECOGNISED  AND  ACKNOWLEDGED  BY  GODLY  MEN.

They  have  the  faith  which  discerns  it,  the  love  which  delights  to  trace  its  operation,
the  gratitude  which  impels  to  the  acknowledgment  of  it.  Especially  will  this  be
the  case  when  the  success  achieved  is  a  manifest  answer  to  their  prayers.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Sadness.  I.  That  it  was  the  outcome  op  a  true  patriotism  (ver.  2).
This  sadness  was  not  occasioned  by  temporal  loss,  by  domestic  bereavement,  or  by
nnfiiithful  friendship,  but  by  the  desolated  condition  of  Jerusalem.  The  city  was
"  waste."  Many  cities  of  our  own  country  are  laid  waste  by  sin ;  the  good  man
cannot  be  indifferent,  he  must  sympathise  with  and  help  the  work  of  moral  restoration.
If  men  are  anxious  about  the  walls,  they  ought  to  be  much  more  so  about  the  morals
of  a  city  ;  if  for  the  tombs  of  the  dead,  much  more  for  the  welfare  of  the  living.  Sin
coMsuines  a  city  as  by  fire.  The  desolation  wrought  by  sin,  in  commerce,  in  society,
in  the  home,  and  especially  amongst  the  young,  cannot  but  awaken  deep  sorrow  of
heiirt.

II.  That  it  was  KxruniENCED  in  the  course  of  his  daily  avocations.  "  And  I
took  up  the  wine,  and  gave  it  to  the  king  "  (ver.  1).  How  many  raengo  to  their  daily
toil  with  a  heart  sorrow  which  occupation  and  industry  cannot  make  them  forget.
Nehemiah  was  wont  to  be  cheerful  before  the  king ;  business  should  be  done  in
joyous  mood  ;  but  there  are  times  when  sorrow  will  prevail.

III.  That  it  was  manifested  in  the  appearance  of  the  physical  frame.  "Why
is  thy  countenance  sad  ?  "  (ver.  2).  How  much  of  the  world's  sorrow  is  concealed.
In  a  very  true  sense  it  is  sorrow  of  heart ;  it  is  never  vocal  in  explanation  or
complaint.  But  such  sacred  grief  is  not  hidden  from  God.  The  face  reflects  the
emotions  of  the  soul;  it  revealed  the  sorrow  of  Nehenr'ah,  the  joy  of  Steplien.
How  many  sorrowful  faces  do  we  meet  in  a  day.  A  sad  countenance  should  awaken
tender  inquiry,  wise  consideration,  and  willing  aid.  Let  us  not  be  heedless  of  tlie
world's  sorrow.     Christ  is  only  true  consolation.

IV.  That  it  was  aided  by  secret  communion  with  the  Divine.  "  So  1
prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven"  (ver.  4).  1.  Sorrow  often  has  great  opportunities
opened  up  to  it.  "  For  what  dost  thou  make  request  ?  "  Nehemiah's  sorrow  opened
up  the  king's  resources  to  him.  Our  sorrows  often  make  heaven  rich  to  us.  2.
Sorrow  needs  guidance,  so  as  to  make  good  use  of  the  opportunities  presented  to  it.  3.
Sorrow  finds  in  prayer  the  guidance  and  culture  it  needs  to  use  aright  its  opportunity.
(1)  Memory  is  aided;  (2)  dilficulty  is  anticipated ;  (3)  preparation  is  accomplished
(ver.  7) ;  (4)  agencies  are  perfected  (ver.  8).

V.  That  it  was  employed  in  the  wondrous  providence  of  Heaven.  "  And  the
king  granted  me,  according  to  the  good  hand  of  my  God  upon  me  "  (ver.  8).  1.
Tlic  sorrow  of  Nehemiah  was  allied  to  the  welfare  of  his  people.  It  led  to  the
rebuilding  of  the  broken  wall  of  Jerusalem.  Our  trials  are  often  the  means  of
promoting  the  welfare  of  others.  Christ's  sufferings  are  allied  to  our  best  delights,  and
to  our  noblest  achievements.  It  is  indeed  true  that  others  build  because  we  have
suffered.  2.  The  sorrow  of  Nehemiah  was  allied  to  the  beneficence  of  ike  Icing.  It
awakened  the  monarch's  sympathy  and  help.  The  sorrows  of  men  awaken  loving
ministries.  3.  The  sorrow  of  Nehemiah  was  allied  to  the  providence  of  God.  By  its
means  Heaven  opened  the  heart  of  the  heathen  king  in  sympathy  and  his  li:ind  in
help.  The  pain  of  the  world  is  made  to  achieve  high  moral  ends ;  a  wise  providence
employs  it  in  the  building  of  broken  walls. — E.

Vers.  1 — 8.  Gaining  the  cause.  It  was  a  time  of  great  suspense,  hardest  of  "11
things  for  human  hearts  to  bgar.  The  future  of  Jerusalem  now  hung  on  the  build-
ing of  the  wall,  and  this  depended  on  Nehemiah's  personal  interposition  and  upon
Artaxerxes'  pleasure.  When  great  events  depend  on  a  single  circumstance,  issues
deep  and  grave  on  the  charge  of  a  regiment,  on  the  skill  of  a  statesman,  on  the  caprice
of  a  king,  we  may  well  wait  in  anxiety.  Nothing  could  be  done  now  for  Jerusalem,
•peaking  humanly,  without  this  Persian  sovereign's  consent.     There  was —

L  Absence  OF  OFFOBTUNITT.      More  than  three  months  intervened  between  Neh^


U  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  fcH.  n.  1— ».

miah's  receiving  the  tidings  and  his  appeal  to  Artaxerxes.  Wlience  this  delay  ?  Un-
doubtedly the  actual  or  virtual  inaccessibility  of  the  king.  Either  he  was  not  called  to
the  royal  presence,  or  the  sovereign  was  obviously  not  in  the  mood.  How  unlike
this  to  the  ever-open  throne  of  grace  to  which  at  any  time,  and  in  any  place,  we  may
go.  sure  of  an  attentive  hearing  from  "  him  who  giveth  liberally  and  upbraideth  not.

II.  Diplomacy.  Nehemiah  showed  great  skill  —  1.  In  me  introdiiction  of  hit
cause.  How  should  he  ask  to  be  sent  elsewhere  when  he  was  already  "  standing
before  the  king "  ?  This  was  regarded  as  the  height  of  a  man's  ambition,  as  our
Scriptures  plentifully  intimate.  To  "  stand  before  kings,"  to  stand  in  the  "  king's
presence,"  "  before  his  face,"  was  the  acme  of  hope  and  satisfaction.  To  ask  to  be
dismissed  was  discourteous  and  dangerous.  It  was,  indeed,  going  in  this  direction,
to  seem  otherwise  than  joyful  (vers.  1,  2).  But  Nehemiah  ventured  thus  far ;  he  did
not  disguise  or  restrain  his  sorrow ;  it  was  evident  in  his  countenance.  This  would
be  a  forceful  appeal  to  the  king,  and  still  more  so  to  the  queen,  who  was  present
(ver.  6).  2.  In  his  lament.  It  was  the  "  one  touch  of  nature  that  makes  the  whole
world  kin,"  to  allude  to  "  the  city  of  his  fathers'  sepulchres  lying  waste  "  (ver.  3)  ;
this  would  strike  a  chord  in  any  human  heart ;  it  did  within  the  king.  3.  In  hit
request.  He  was  mentally  prepared  for  utterance  ;  he  had  even  calculated  the  neces-
sary time  (ver.  6),  and  the  materials,  &c.  he  required  for  the  work  (vers.  7,  8).  We
must  not  expect  to  succeed  in  any  delicate  enterprise  unless  we  enter  upon  it  with
calculation  and  care.  There  are  things  to  be  done  for  God  which  may  be  wroughtby
sheer  and  simple  earnestness  ;  but  there  are  times  when,  if  we  cannot  furnish  it  our-
selves, we  must  give  place  to  the  man  who  can  bring  to  the  task  refinement,  delicacy,
tact.  We  must  give  way  to  the  Nehemiah  of  our  Church  or  society;  he  will
succeed  admirably  where  we  should  fail  ingloriously.

III.  Prayer.  "  So  I  prayed  to  the  God  of  heaven  "  (ver.  4).  This  is  a  beautiful
and  suggestive  parenthesis.  Between  the  king's  question  and  the  courtier's  reply
there  was  a  momentary  appeal  to  heaven.  "  The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of
the  Lord  ;  as  rivers  of  water,  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he  will  "  (Prov.  xxi.  1).  An
excellent  thing  is  it  for  a  man  so  to  walk  with  God,  to  live  so  near  to  him,  that  at
any  moment,  and  at  any  time  of  special  need,  he  can  ejaculate  a  prayer;  so  that  it
will  be  natural  for  him  to  withdraw  for  a  brief  interval  from  this  world  and  from
man,  and  lift  up  the  heart  to  heaven.  This  is  one  way  in  which  we  may  be  "  praying
always"  (Eph.  vi.  18),  "without  ceasing"  (1  Thess.  v.  17).

IV.  Gratitude  for  success.  "  The  king  granted  me,  according  to  the  good  hand
of  my  God  upon  me  "  (ver.  8).  Nehemiah,  like  all  praying  men,  was  grateful.  He
ascribed  success  not  to  his  own  ingenuity,  but  to  the  "  good  hand  of  God."  Men
that  are  undevout  are  necessarily  unthankful  and  self-complacent ;  they  congratulate
themselves  instead  of  blessing  God.  Far  more  beautiful  and  appropriate  is  it  to
realise  that  the  hand  of  the  Supreme  is  controlling  all  issues,  and  thus  conferring  all
good.  With  some  prosperity  leads  to  pride  and  spiritual  injury,  while  in  others  it
inspires  gratitude  and  devotion. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 8.  These  verses  describe  the  circumstances  in  which  Nehemiah  obtained
his  commission  as  restorer  of  Jerusalem.  They  show  that  he  was  prospered,  and
that  his  prosperity  was  due  to  the  blessing  of  God.     We  may  notice —

I.  The  KEWAKD  OF  FAITH  IN  THE  ANSWER  TO  PRAYER.  1.  The  faith  was  tried  by
waiting.  Opportunity  must  not  be  made  by  hasty,  presumptuous  attempts  to  com-
mand events,  but  by  watching  Providence.  Nehemiah  still  prayed,  and  then  on  a
certain  day  he  could  say,  "  It  came  to  pass."  2.  The  Divine  interposition  was  mani-
fested in  the  control  of  the  monarch! s  thoughts  and  disposition.  It  m'gbt  easily  have
been  otherwise.  A  suspicious  Eastern  despot  might  have  been  jealous  and  angry.
When  it  is  the  purpose  of  God  to  help,  even  the  secrets  of  the  inner  man  are  swayed
by  it.  We  must  leave  it  to  him  to  answer  the  prayer  when  and  as  he  pleases.  3.
There  was  a  special  bestowal  of  grace  upon  Nehemiah  himself.  He  needed  self-
command,  prudence,  boldness,  adroitness.  And  when  challenged  to  disclose  what
was  in  his  neart,  making  his  countenance  sad,  he  must  depend  upon  inspiration  to
be  able  to  say  exactly  the  right  thing,  and  to  say  it  so  as  to  obtain  his  desire.  His
patriotism,  his  purity  of  motive,  his  confidence  in  liis  own  vocation  to  fulfil  so  great


OH.  II.  1—8.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIKMIAH.


IT


a  commission,  all  required  at  that  moment  to  be  sustained.  He  "prayed  to  the  God
of  heaven."  Tlje  answer  was  immediately  sent,  in  the  courage,  the  wisdom,  the  self-
devotion,  the  simplicity  of  the  cupbearer  in  the  presence  of  an  Eastern  despot,  ask-
ing to  be  intrusted  with  poworthat  lie  might  use  it  forGod  and  his  people.  4.  There
was  a  Providential  conjunction  of  circumstances,  both  in  the  past  and  present.
Nehemiah  was  already  in  the  palace  to  aid  the  important  work  of  rebuilding  the
wall  of  Jerusalem.  How  little  we  can  follow  the  working  of  the  Divine  hand  I  The
answer  to  our  prayer  may  be  already  provided,  even  before  we  present  the  petition.
What  seems  hard  to  obtain  is  not  hard  for  God  to  give,

II.  The  DEVELOPMENT  OF  CAPACITY  ON  THE  BASIS  OF  RELIGION.  1.  The  begin-
ning of  all,  devoutness,  intercourse  with  God,  spirituality  of  aim  and  motive,  larga
desires  for  the  welfare  of  God's  people,  and  so  of  the  world.  2.  On  thisis  built  the
purity,  and  strength,  and  unselfishness  which  so  wins  confidence  in  others.  Nehe-
miah found  favour  with  Artaxerxes  because  there  was  that  in  his  very  countenance
which  the  monarch  delighted  to  look  upon.  We  Should  recommend  religion  by
transparent  honesty,  cheerfulness,  and  unselfishness.  3.  Intellectual  power  rests
upon  moral,  and  both  upon  spiritual.  The  cupbearer  could  not  have  undertaken  to
be  a  ruler  and  leader  of  men  in  most  difficult  circumstances  unless  there  had  been  the
making  of  a  ruler  in  him.  Some  of  our  greatest  statesmen  have  owed  much  of  their
superiority  to  their  religion.  "  The  entrance  of  thy  word  giveth  light,  it  g^veth
understanding  to  the  simple."  4.  One  who  places  himself  in  a  position  of  great
responsibility  requires  a  far-seeing  eye  and  a  strong  will.  These  are  wonderfully
helped  by  the  cultivation  of  a  deeper  nature.  Nehemiah  knew  what  to  ask  for,
materials  and  men  ;  foresaw  the  demands  of  the  work  and  its  dangers ;  with  steadfast
confidence  in  himself,  and  fearless  trust  in  his  influence  over  the  king,  he  made  great
requests,  and  they  were  "  granted,  according  to  the  good  hand  of  his  God  upon  him."
The  root  of  all  his  strength  was  his  entire  dependence  upon  God.  6.  In  the  cha-
racter of  Nehemiah  there  is  an  illustration  of  the  effect  of  religion  in  cherishing  the
higher  elements  of  the  nature,  and  keeping  them  in  beautiful  and  powerful  harmony
He  loved  "  the  place  of  his  fathers'  sepulchres,"  he  loved  his  nation  ;  but  above  all,
he  loved  the  Church  of  God.  Personal  feeling,  patriotic  enthusiasm,  and  rel'gioug
faith,  when  they  all  unite  together  as  active  principles  in  one  man,  produce  aluftinew
and  heroism  which  prepare  him  for  the  greatest  efforts  and  successes. — B.


EXPOSITION.


Nbhemiah's  journey  to  Jerusalem
(ch.  |ii.  9 — 11).  On  his  way  to  Jerusalem,
Nehemiah  would  pa.ss  through  the  provinces
of  various  Persian  satraps  and  governors.
To  those  beyond  the  Euphrates  he  carried
letters,  which  he  took  care  to  deliver,  though
by  doing  so  he  aroused  the  hostility  of  San-
ballat.  Being  accompanied  by  an  escort  of
Persian  soldiers,  he  experienced  neither  diffi-
culty nor  danger  by  the  way,  but  effected  his
journey  in  about  three  months.

Ver.  9. — I  came  to  the  governors  beyond
the  river.  Josephus  gives  the  name  of  the
s;itiap  of  Syria  at  this  time  as  Adseus  ('  Ant.
Jud.,'  xi.  5,  §  6,  ad  fin.),  but  it  is  uncertain
on  what  authority.  The  other  "governora"
he  calls  Hipparchs.

Ver.  10.  —  Sanballat  According  to  Jo-
sephus, Sanballat  was  "satrap  of 'Samaria"
under  the  Persians,  and  by  descent  a  Cnthsean
('Ant.  Jud.;'  xi.  7,  §  2).  He  was  probably
included  among  the  "governors"  to  whom
Nehemiah  had  brought  letters,  and  learnt
NEHBMIAH.


the  fact  that  "  a  man  was  come  to  seek  the
welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel"  by  th»
delivery  of  the  letters  to  him.  The  Horonite,
Bom,  i.  e.,  at  one  or  the  two  Beth-horons,
the  upper  or  the  lower,  mentioned  in  Joshua
(xvi.  3,  5)  as  belonging  to  Ephraim,  and
now  under  Samaria.  Toblah  the  servant,
the  Ammonite.  It  has  been  usual  to  regard
Tobiah  as  a  native  chief  of  the  Ammonites,
who,  after  having  been  a  page  or  other
servant  at  the  Persian  court,  had  been  made
head  of  the  nation.  But  it  seems  to  be
quite  as  likely  that  he  was  a  servant  of
Sanballat's,  who  stood  high  in  his  favour,
gave  him  counsel,  and  was  perhaps  his
secretary  (ch.  vi.  17,  19).  It  grieved  them
exceedingly.  From  the  time  that  Zerub-
babel  rejected  the  co-operation  of  the  Sa-
maritans in  the  rebuilding  of  the  temple
(Ezra  iv.  3),  an  enmity  set  in  between  th«
two  peoples  which  continued  till  the  de-
struction of  Jerusalem  by  Titus.  The  two
capitals  were  too  near  not  to  be  rivals  ;  and
the  greater  (general)  prosperity  of  Jerusalem
made  Samaria  the  bitterer  adversary.
0


II


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  n.  9—20


Ver.  11. — I  ,  .  .  was  there  three  days.
Compare  Ezra  viiL  32.  After  the  long
journey,  throe  Jays  of  rest  were  necessary.

Steps  TAKEN  by  Nehemiah  preliminary

TO  HIS  BUILDING  OP  THE  WALL,  AND  FIRST
APPEARANCE  OF  OPPOSITION  (ch.  ii  12 — 20).

Hitherto  Nehemiah  had  communicated  his
purpose  to  no  one  but  the  king  and  queen  of
Persia.  He  expected  opposition,  and  re-
•olrad  to  baffle  his  opponents,  as  long  aa
possible,  by  concealing  his  exact  designs.
Even  when  further  concealment  was  on  the
point  of  becoming  impossible,  he  made  his
survey  of  the  wall  by  night,  that  it  might
escape  observation.  At  last,  the  time  for
•ction  being  come,  he  was  obliged  to  lay  the
matter  before  the  head  men  of  the  city  (ver.
17),  whom  he  easily  persuaded  when  he
assured  tliem  of  Artaxerxes'  consent  and
goodwilL  Preparations  then  began  to  be
made  ;  and  immediately  murmurs  of  opposi-
tion arose.  Three  opponents  are  now  spoken
of — Sanballat,  Tobiah,  and  an  Arabian,
Geshera  or  Gashmu,  not  previously  men-
tioned. Those  persons  appear  to  have  sent
a  formal  message  to  the  authorities  of  Jem-
salem  (ver.  19),  taxing  them  with  an  inten-
tion to  rebel.  Nehemiah  made  no  direct
reply  to  this  charge,  but  boldly  stated  his
resolve  to  ''arise  and  build,"  and  denied
Sanballat's  right  to  interfere  with  him  (ver.
20).

Ver.  12. — Some  few  men  with  me.  All
the  arrangements  are  made  to  avoid  notice.
Nehemiah  goes  out  by  night,  with  few  at-
tendants, and  with  only  one  beast.  He  is
anxious  to  see  with  his  own  eyes  what  is  the
extent  of  the  repair  needed,  but  wishes  as
few  as  possible  to  know  of  his  proceedings.

Ver.  13. — The  valley  gate.  A  gate  on  the
western  or  south-western  side  of  Jerusalem,
opening  towards  the  valley  of  Hinnom.
There  are  no  means  of  fixing  its  exact  posi-
tion. It  was  one  of  those  which  Uzziah
fortified  (2  Gliron.  xxvi.  9).  The  dragon
well.  Dean  Stanley  suggests  that  "  the
dragon  well  "  is  the  spring  known  generally
as  "  the  pool  of  Siloam,"  and  that  the  legend,
which  desci-ibes  the  intermittent  flow  of  the
Siloam  water  as  produced  by  the  opening
«nd  closing  of  a  dragon's  mouth,  had  sdready
sprang  up  ('Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'
Third  Series,  p.  125) ;  but  the  Siloam  spring
seems  to  lie  too  far  to  the  eastward  to  suit
the  present  passage,  and  is  most  likely  re-
presented by  the  king's  pool"  of  ver.  14.
The  dnng  port.  "  The  gate  outside  of  which
lay  the  piles  of  the  (weepings  and  ofiscourings


of  the  streets"  ('Stanley,'  1.  s.  c.) ;  situated
towards  the  middle  of  the  southern  walL

Ver.  14.— The  gate  of  the  fountain.  A
gate  near  the  pool  of  Siloam  (which,  though
bearing  that  name  in  ch.  iii.  1 5,  seems  to  be
here  called  "the  king's  pool") ;  perhaps  the
"  gate  between  two  walls  "  of  2  Kings  xxv.
4.  There  was  no  place  for  the  beast  that
was  under  me  to  pass.  The  accumulated
rubbish  blocked  the  way.  The  animal  could
notproceed.  Nehemiah  therefore  dismounted,
and  "  in  the  night,"  dark  aa  it  was,  pursued
his  way  on  foot.

Ver.  15.— By  the  brook.  "The  brook
Kidron,"  which  skirted  the  city  on  tlio  east.
From  this  he  would  be  able  to  "look  up  at
the  eastern  wall "  along  its  whole  length,
and  see  its  condition.  Following  the  brook,
he  was  brought  to  the  north-eastern  angle
of  the  city ;  on  reaching  which  ho  seems  to
have  "turned  back"  towards  the  point
from  which  he  had  started,  and  skirting  the
northern  wall,  to  have  re-entered  by  the  gate
of  the  valley.

Ver.  16. — The  rulers.  On  Nehemiah's
arrival  at  Jerusalem  he  found  no  single
individual  exercising  authority,  but  a  num-
ber of  persons,  a  sort  of  town-council,  whom
he  calls  khorim  and  saganim.  It  is  not
clear  that  he  made  his  commission  known  to
them  at  first,  or  indeed  that  he  divulged  it
before  the  interview  mentioned  in  vers.  17
and  18.  The  rest  that  did  the  woik.  This
seems  to  be  said  by  anticipation,  and  to
mean  those  who  subsequently  built  the  wall.

Ver.  17. — Then  said  I  unto  them.  EwaUl
boldly  assumes  that  this  happened  tlie  next
day ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  show  that  it
was  so  soon.  The  original  contains  no  note
of  time — ^not  even  the  word  "then."  Nehe-
miah simply  says,  "And  I  said  to  them."
The  distress.  Or  "affliction,"  as  the  word
is  translated  in  ch.  i.  3.  No  special  suffering
seems  to  he  intended,  beyond  that  of  lying
open  to  attack,  and  being  a  "reproach"  in
the  sight  of  the  heathen.  Lieth  waste.  On
this  hyperbole  see  the  comment  upon  ver.  3.

Ver.  18.— Then  I  told  them  of  the  hand
of  my  God.  Nehemiah  sketched  the  history
of  his  past  life,  and  showed  how  God's
providence  had  always  shielded  him  and
supported  him.  This,  however,  woulil
scarcely  have  had  any  great  effect  had  he
not  been  able  to  appeal  further  to  the  king's
words  that  he  had  spoken.  These  word*
clearly  contained  permission  to  rebuild  the
wall,  and  took  away  the  danger  of  their  so
doing  being  regarded  as  an  act  of  rebellion
hy  the  Persians.  What  others  might  think
was  not  of  very  much  account.  And  they
said,  Let  ns  rise  up  and  build.  Nehemiah's
address  had  all  the  effect  he  hoped  for  from
it.  He  was  anxious  to  carry  the  nation  will]
him,   and   induce  them,   one  and    all,    t(


OH.  II.  9—20.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


II


engage  heartily  in  the  work,  which  must  be
accomf.lished,  if  it  was  to  be  accomplished
at  all,  by  something  like  a  burst  of  enthu-
siasm. Such  a  burst  he  evokes,  and  its
result  is  seen  in  the  next  chapter.  Almost
the  whole  people  came  forward,  and  set  to
work  with  zeaL  So  they  strengthened  their
hands  for  this  good  work.  The  original  is
briefer,  and  more  emphatic — "And  they
strengthened  their  hands  for  good. "  They
embraced  the  good  cause,  took  the  good
part,  set  themselves  to  work  heartily  ou  the
right  side.

Ver.  19. — Geshem  the  Arabian,  elsewhere
called  Gashmu  (ch.  vi  6),  may  have  been  an
indepoiident  sheikh  possessing  authority  in
Idumea,  or  in  the  desert  country  adjoining
upon  Ammon ;  but  it  seems  quite  as  likely
that  he  was  merely  the  head  of  a  body  of
Arab  troops  maintained  by  Sanballat  at
Samaria  (ch.  iv.  7).  Sanballat,  Tobiah,  and
Geshem  are  united  so  closely,  and  act  so
much  together  (oh.  iv.  1—7  ;  vi.  1,  2,  6,  12,
14),  that  it  is  difficult  to  suppose  them  to  be
three  chieftains  residing  on  three  sides  of
Judsea,  the  north,  the  east,  and  the  south,
merely  holding  diplomatic  intercourse  with
each  other,  which  is  the  ordinary  idea.  Note
that  Tobiah  is  present  with  Sanballat  in
Samaria  on  one  occasion  (ch.  iv.  3),  and  that
Geshem  and  Sanballat  propose  a  joint  inter-
view with  Nehemiah  on  another  (ch.  vi.  2).
They  laughed  us  to  scorn,  and  said.  Either
by  messengers,  like  Sennacherib  (2  Kings
xviii.  17 — 35),  or  by  a  formal  wTitten  com-
munication, as  Ewald  supposes  ('History  of
Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  154,  E.  Tr.).  Will  ye
rebel  I  Compare  ch.  vi.  6 ;  and  see  also
Ezra   iv.   12  — 16.      Had    Artaxerzes    not


granted  permission,  ITehemiah's  proceedings
might  naturally  have  borne  this  interpreta-
tion.

Ver.  20. — Then  answered  I.  It  is  re-
markable that  Nehemiah  takes  no  notice  of
the  serious  charge  brought  against  him,
does  not  say  that  he  had  the  king's  permis-
sion, but  rather  leaves  the  ' '  adversaries  "  to
suppose  that  he  had  not.  Perhaps  he  thought
that  to  reveal  the  truth  would  drive  them  to
some  desperate  attempt,  and  therefore  sup-
pressed it  The  God  of  heaven,  he  will
prosper  us.  Instead  of  a  human,  Kchemiah
claims  a  Divine  sanction  for  his  proceedings.
He  and  his  brethren  will  build  as  servants
of  the  God  of  heaven.  Compare  the  answer
made  to  Tatnai  in  Zerubbabel's  time — "  We
are  the  servants  of  the  God  of  heaven  and
earth,  and  build  the  house  that  was  builded
these  many  years  ago"  (Ezra  v.  11).  Ye
have  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memorial,  in
Jerusalem.  As  the  claim  ol'  the  Samaritans
to  interfere  in  the  affairs  of  the  Jews  had
been  disallowed  when  they  came  with  an
offer  of  aid  (Ezra  iv.  2,  3),  so  now,  when
their  interference  is  hostile  in  character,  it
is  still  more  fiercely  and  indignantly  rejected.
They  are  told  that  they  have  no  part  in
Jerusalem,  no  right,  not  even  so  much  as  a
place  in  the  recollections  of  the  inhabitants.
Their  interference  is  officious,  impertinent —
what  have  they  to  do  with  Nehemiah,  or  the
Israelites,  or  Jerusalem !  Let  them  be  con-
tent to  manage  the  affairs  of  their  own
idolatrous  community,  and  not  trouble  the
worshippers  of  the  true  God.  Neliemiah
avoids  opposition  by  concealment  as  long  as
he  can ;  but  when  opposition  nevertheless
appears,  he  meets  it  with  defiance.


H0MILBTIC8.

Vers.  9 — 20. — Preparation  for  a  great  work,  A  record  of  the  first  steps  taken  by
Nehemiah  in  the  execution  of  his  comraissioii.

I.  HiR  JOURNEY  TO  Jeedsalem  (vers.  9,  11).  He  no  doubt  lost  no  time  in  setting
out ;  and  lie  made  the  journey  witli  suitable  dignity,  and  in  safety,  owing  to  the
escort  granted  by  the  king,  and  the  obedience  of  the  "  governors  beyond  the  river  "
to  "  the  king's  letters."

II.  His  preliminary  investigation  (vers.  12  — 15).  This  was — 1.  Personal.
He  would  see  with  his  own  eyes  the  condition  of  the  wall,  so  as  to  judge  of  the
practicability  of  his  plan  for  restoring  it.  2.  Secret.  Perhaps  that  foes  without
might  not  be  able  to  hinder  Iiim,  nor  their  partisans  within  inform  them  of  his  move-
ments. 3.  Thorough.  Notwithstanding  the  difiRculty  of  completing  it.  In  all
enterprises  careful  inquiry  must  precede,  action  if  they  are  to  prosper.  Our  Lord
enjoins  those  who  are  thinking  of  becoming  his  disciples  to  "  count  the  cost ;  "  and
a  similar  previous  consideration  is  necessary  in  endeavours  to  advance  his  kingdom.
Whoever  would  revive,  reform,  or  restore,  must  first  ascertain  the  existing  state  of
things,  and  reckon  up  his  resources  for  effecting  his  object.  "  The  knowledge  of  a
disease  is  half  its  cure."  Rash  zeal  is  likely  to  end  in  failure.  Only  we  must  take
heed  of  putting  consideration  in  the  place  of  action ;  of  "  thinking  about "  decision
in  religion  instead  of  deciding ;  of  "  considering  "  how  we  can  do  good  until  ths
opportunity  of  doing  it  is  gone.

at


20  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [rn.  ii.  9—20

III.  HiB  BCCCESSFUL  APPEAL  TO  THE  PEOPLE.  Notwitlistanding  the  ruinous  con-
dition of  the  wsll,  and  the  feebleness  of  the  Jews — 1.  He  was  confident  and  resolute
himself.  Assured  that  the  work  could  be  done,  and  prepared  to  do  his  part,  and
more.  2.  He  infused  his  spirit  into  the  people.  (1)  He  appealed  to  all  classes:
rulers,  priests,  nobles,  working-men.  The  co-operation  of  all  was  essential.  (2)
His  appeal  was  to  all  assembled  together.  Thus  insuring  the  enthusiasm  generated
by  numbers.  (3)  His  appeal  was  forcible,  (a)  Reminding  them  of  the  present  con-
dition of  the  city.  Buinous,  defenceless,  exciting  contempt.  (6)  Informing  them  of
the  favourable  turn  which  affairs  had  taken.  God's  kind  interposition.  The  king's
commission  to  him,  and  gracious  words,  (c)  Summoning  them  to  join  him  in  build-
ing the  wall.  (4)  His  appeal  was  successful.  It  roused  them  to — (a)  Prompt  and
determined  resolve,  (b)  Mutual  incitement,  (c)  Confidence  and  courage.  "  So  they
strengthened  their  hands  for  the  good  work."  Observe — 1.  The  worth  of  competent
leaders.  The  multitude  helpless  without  them.  One  man,  able  and  resolute,  may  turn
weakness  into  strength,  and  depression  into  prosperity.  In  the  work  of  Christ  good
leaders  are  of  incalculable  value.  The  advent  of  such  oftefi  changes  the  whole  aspect  of
things.  2.  The  duty  of  those  who  are  fitted  to  be  leaders.  A  great  respohsibility  rests
on  them.  Let  them  not  decline  the  posts  for  which  they  are  litted  on  account  of  the
expense  or  self-denial  involved  in  filling  them.  Let  them  study  to  lead  well,  not  for
the  sake  of  their  own  honour,  but  for  the  glory  of  Christ  and  the  good  of  their
brethren.  Let  them  lead  by  their  example  as  well  as  their  speeches ;  so  that  they
can  say  with  Nehemiah,  "  Come,  and  let  us  build,"  &c.  3.  The  duty  of  the  people
towards  them.  To  recognise  them,  welcome  them  thankfully,  co-operate  with  them
heartily.  If  the  people  are  weak  without  good  leaders,  these  are  equally  weak  with-
out the  people.     But  both  uniting  heartily,  they  maj'  work  wonders.

IV.  His  treatment  of  ill-disposed  NEiGHBonBS.  1.  How  they  regarded  his  pro-
ceedings. (1)  With  great  displeasure  and  mortification  (ver.  10).  (2)  With  undis-
guised contempt  (ver.  19).  "Will  ye  rebel  against  the  king?"  is  perhaps  to  be
viewed  as  ironical  rather  than  as  insinuating  a  serious  charge.  "  Ye  puny  Jews,  do  you
imagine  you  can  defy  the  power  of  Persia  to  which  you  are  subject?"  Otherwise
we  may  add — (3)  With  misrepresentation.  2.  How  he  dealt  with  them.  (1)  He
addressed  them  seriously,  expressing  his  confidence  in  God ;  his  determination,  in
common  with  his  brethren,  to  proceed  with  the  enterprise ;  his  rejection  of  their
unjustifiable  interference.  (2)  He  just  went  on  with  the  work.  Observe — 1,
Every  good  work  will  meet  with  opposition,  if  not  with  contempt  2.  Such  oppo-
sition is  best  met  by  trust  in  God,  earnest  resolution,  and  increased  activity.

Ver.  10.— Seeking  the  welfare  of  the  Church.  "  There  was  a  man  come  to  seek  the
welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Thus,  with  some  contempt,  Sanballat  and  Tobiah
thought  and  spoke  of  the  coming  of  Nehemiah  to  Palestine.  But  if  meant  as  a  scoff,
it  may  bo  accepted  as  a  eulogiura;  like  "  a  friend  of  publicans  and  sinners."^  Nehe-
miah is  correctly  described  in  the  words.  They  set  before  us  conduct  to  be  imitated
by  citizens  and  statesmen  in  respect  to  the  general  community,  by  Christians  in
respect  to  the  Church,  and  to  the  world  at  large.

I.    To    SEEK    THE    VTELFABE    OF    THE    ChUBCH    OF    ChRIST   IS    INCUMBENT    ON   ALL

Christians.  The  maintenance  of  religious  ordinances,  the  spread  of  Christianity,
the  increase  and  prosperity  of  the  Church,  the  benefit  of  its  individual  members,  are
the  concern  of  every  Christian,  and  ought  not  to  be  left  to  a  few.  The  efforts  of  all
are  needed  ;  each  can  do  something,  and  should  do  it  heartily  and  cheerfully.  The
great  motives  to  zeal  apply  to  all,  as  really  as  to  the  few  who  feel  their  power.  When
the  many  can  be  described  as  those  who  with  all  their  might  "  seek  the  welfare  "  of
the  Church  and  kingdom  of  God,  a  new  era  in  the  history  of  Christianity  will  begin.

1.  How  we  should  seek  the  welfare  of  the  Church.     By  our  exertions,  gifts,  prayers.

2.  Why  we  are  bound  to  do  so.  The  nature  of  our  religion,  which  is  love  ;  the  pur-
pose of  our  calling  as  Christians — to  be  "lights  in  the  world;"  the  express  com-
mands of  our  Lord  ;  the  Divine  examples  and  many  human  ;  the  blessings  we  have
received  from  the  gospel  and  the  Church  ;  the  blessings  we  may  impart ;  the  noble-
ness of  the  unselfish  spirit  and  pursuits,  and  the  increase  they  secure  to  the  true
wealth  and  blessedness  of  our  own  being — all  are  powerful  reasons  why  we  shoul  1


OH.  n.  9-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH,  21

interest  ourselves  in  the  good  of  the  Church,  and  so  of  the  world,  and  do  all  we  car
to  prdhiote  it.

II.  It    is    ESPECIALIiT    INCnMBENT    ON    THOSE    WHO    HAVE    SPECIAL    TALENTS.      All

talents  can  find  employment  in  this  service ;  all  should  be  consecrated  to  it.  The
more  we  have  of  faculty  and  aptitude,  the  more  we  are  bound  to  employ  them.
Bodily  energy,  mental  power  and  culture,  spiritual  attainments,  wealth,  social  posi-
tion and  influence,  should  all  be  cheerfully  devoted  to  Christ  and  the  good  of  men.
"  Unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much  required."

III.  The  public  spibit  shown  bt  ant  who  abb   specially  qualified  to  do

GOOD    SHOULD  AWAKEN    THANKFULNESS,   AND    THEIB   SERVICES    BE    GLADLY    ACCEPTED.

Because  such  men  are  greatly  needed,  and  if  well  supported  can  do  much  more  good
than  ordinary  men;  and  because  the  number  of  such  is  comparatively  small,  so
strong  are  the  temptations  to  a  lower  style  of  life.  Yet  even  in  a  time  of  depression,
the  appearance  on  the  scene  of  a  man  of  unusual  ability  and  resources,  willing  to
devote  himself  to  the  general  good,  is  not  always  welcomed  by  all.  Not  only,  outside,
the  Sanballats  and  Tobiahs  are  grieved  and  angry,  but  within  are  found  some  who'
feel  their  own  importance  in  the  community  threatened,  and  allow  jesilousy,  envy,
and  uncharitableness,  culminating  perhaps  in  open  hostility,  to  prevail  over  such
faint  love  for  Christ,  his  cause  and  people,  as  they  may  possess.

IV.  The  mission  and  work  of  Nehemiah  may  well  remind  us  of  his  who  in
LOVING  service  IS  "HIGHER  THAN  THE  HIGHEST."  He  came  " to  Seek  the  welfare "
not  of  "  the  children  of  Israel "  only,  but  of  the  world.  He  came  with  the  commis-
sion not  of  an  earthly  monarch,  but  of  the  Father  in  heaven.  His  personal  qualifi-
cations were  not  simply  those  of  an  excellent  and  able  man,  but  of  perfect  humanity
united  to  perfect  Deity.  His  compassion  for  men  was  that  of  incarnate  love.  His
toils  and  sufferings,  ending  in  a  death  of  agony  and  shame,  surpass  incalculably  all
that  the  best  men  have  ever  endured  in  serving  their  fellows.  His  resources  are
those  of  the  universe — "  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth."  The  benefits  he  confers  are
of  corresponding  magnitude  and  duration.  Yet  men  viewed  him  with  hate  and  envy,
and  still  turn  away  from  him ;  and  his  people  render  him  a  love  and  co-operation
miserably  small,  far  inferior  to  what  Nehemiah  received  from  his  fellow  Jews.  Let
us  be  careful  to  receive  him  with  hearty  faith  and  submission  for  our  own  salvation  ;
and  then  consecrate  our  all  to  his  service,  counting  nothing  too  great  to  do  for  him,
no  sacrifice  too  painful  to  make  in  promoting  his  designs  for  the  present  and  eternal
welfare  of  men.

Vor.  12. — God-given,  ihaaghtt  and  impulsa.  /'Neither  told  I  any  man  what  my
God  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do  at  Jerusalem."

I.  When  we  may  safely  ascribe  to  God  what  has  arisen  in  our  hearts.
There  is  a  danger,  to  which  fervent  religiousness  exposes  men,  of  delusion,  fanaticism,
and  impiety  in  ascribing  their  thoughts,  feelings,  or  purposes  to  God.  When  may
we  safely  say,  "  God  put  it  into  my  heart "  ?  1.  When  the  thought,  feeling,  or  pur-
pose is  manifestly  good.  God  is  the  author  of  all  good,  and  only  of  good.  He
cannot  put  evil  into  the  heart.  To  ascribe  it  to  him  is  blasphemy.  Hatred,  malice,
uncharitableness,  misrepresentation,  injustice,  cruelty,  even  though  they  assume  the
garb  of  piety,  cannot  be  from  him.  They  bear  upon  them  the  stamp  of  their  father,
the  devil.  Let  furious  bigots,  calumniators  of  their  Christian  brethren,  and  perse-
cutors, lay  this  to  heart.  Before  ascribing  to  God  what  is  in  our  heart,  we  must
compare  it  with  what  we  know  to  be  from  hi™ — the  teaching  of  our  Lord,  hiB
character,  the  enumerations  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23  ;  Bph.  v.  9).
Whatever  corresponds  with  these  we  may  safely  conclude  to  be  from  God.  And  the
closer  the  correspondence,  the  more  certain  the'conclusion.  2.  When  it  issues  in  great
good.  Nehemiah,  writing  after  he  had  executed  his  purpose  and  seen  its  beneficial
results,  could  speak  confidently  as  to  its  source.  This  rule  for  determining  the
Divine  origin  of  our  mental  operations  must,  however,  be  applied  with  caution.  It
is  only  subordinate,  not  sufScientof  itself.  For  (1)  God  brings  good  out  of  evil.
Sin  and  Satan,  and  bad  __men,  evil  in  themselves,  are  God's  slaves  to  work  good
(comp.  Gen.  1.  20 ;  Acts  ii.  23,  seq.).  (2)  Good  desires  are  not  always  accomplished.
David  purposed  to  build  the  temple ;  his  purpose  is  pronounced  good,  and  therefore


2S  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  ii.  9—20

from  God,  although  it  was  not  the  will  of  God  that  he  should  execute  it.  Sti!l,  when
our  thoughts,  &c.  are  carried  into  action  and  produce  great  and  lasting  good,  oui
confidence  is  rightly  increased  that  they  were  from  him.

II.  Why  wk  should  ascribe  to  God  the  good  which  arises  in  our  hearts.

1.  It  is  manifestly  according  to  truth.  2.  It  is  required  by  gratitude  A  great  benefit
and  honour  is  thus  conferred  upon  us.  3.  Humility  demands  and  is  promoted  by  it.
Yet  the  human  heart  is  so  deceitful,  that  under  a  show  of  humility  pride  and  seif-
cDtnplacency  may  hide,  and  be  fostered  by  the  thought  of  the  distinction  thus
enjoyed.  4.  Due  regard  for  the  glory  of  God  will  induce  us  to  do  this.  6.  It  is
acceptable  to  God,  who  will  reward  by  "  more  grace."

III.  The  propeiett  and  wisdom  of  sometime^  concealing  from  men  whai
God  HAS  PUT  into  our  hearts.  There  is  "a  time  to  be  silent;"  yet  there  is  also
"  a  time  to  speak."  1.  Beticence  as  to  our  pious  thoughts,  emotions,  and  purposes
may  be  right.  As  for  instance  when  indulged-^(l)  From  a  sense  of  their  sacredne<s.
(2)  To  test  their  goodness.  In  the  case  of  the  emotions  of  personal  religion,  to  ascer-
tain their  genuineness.  In  the  case  of  plans  of  usefulness,  to  determine  their  practi-
cability. So  Nehemiah.  (3)  To  promote  their  maturity.  2.  Reticence  may  be,  or
become,  wrong.  It  is  so — (1)  When  cowardice  produces  it,  and  the  confession  of
Christ  is  thereby  evaded.  "A  Secret  disciple"  may  be  borne  with  at  first,  but
Christ  requires  confession  on  pain  of  rejection.  (2)  When  others  are  thereby  de-
prived of  help  and  encouragement.  (3)  When  the  course  of  action  to  which  what  is
put  in  our  hearts  points  is  unreasonably  delayed.  Nehemiah  soon  revealed  his  plans
to  others,  that  he  might  through  their  co-operation  accomplish  them.

Ver.  18. — Mutual  encouragement.  "And  they  said,  Let  us  rise  up  and  build.
So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  the  good  work."  Narrates  the  effect  produced
on  all  classes  at  Jerusalem  by  Nehemiah's  address.  ,

I.  What  moved  them.     1.  There  was  a  plain  need  for  energetic  and  united  action.

2.  They  had  a  good  leader.  Competent,  resolute,  courageous,  generous,  devoted,
eelf-denying ;  and  withal  having  authority.  3.  There  were  many  encouragements
and  helps.     4.  In  all,  the  will  and  favourable  providence  of  God  seemed  manifest.

II.  To  what  it  led  them.     1.  Ardeijt  enthusiasm.     2.  Resolute  determination.

3.  Mutual  exhortation.  "Let  us  rise  up  and  build."  4.  Confidence  and  courage.  5.  All
combining  to  impart  vigour  for  the  work.  "  They  strengthened  their  hands,"  braced
tliemselves  "  for  the  good  work."  Note  throughout  that  Christians  have  similar  in-
centives to  their  work,  and  should  be  similarly  afEected  by  them.  There  is  sadder  and
more  wide-spread  ruin  to  move  our  hearts ;  we  have  a  Divine  leader ;  the  word,  the  grace,
and  the  providence  of  God  combine  to  urge  and  encourage  us.  Let  us  "  provoke  "
one  another  "  to  love  and  good  works,"  and  give  ouiselves  to  them  with  unanimous
zeal,  resolution,  and  confidence;  thus  "strengthening  our  hands  for  the  good  work."

Ver.  20. — Assurance  of  Divine  co-operation.  "The  God  of  heaven,  he  will
prosper  us,"  &c.  Nehemiah's  reply  to  opponents  who  wished  to  deter  him  from  the
work  he  was  undertaking.

I.  When  we  may  cherish  the  assurance  of  Divine  aid  and  blessing  in  ou«
endeavours.  In  general  when  our  endeavours  are  in  accordance  with  the  will  of
God — in  the  line  of  his  plans  and  purposes.  And  this  is  the  case  when — 1.  The
work  is  good.  2.  The  Divine  call  to  it  is  clear.  This  is  ascertainable  from  (1)  the
word  of  God,  its  revelations,  commands,  promises.  (2)  The  grace  of  God,  producii.g
desire  and  willingness  in  our  hearts  ;  or  in  some  cases  placii  g  us  in  such  relation  to
his  Church  as  gives  us  the  right  to  act.  (3)  The  providence  of  God, .giving  ability,
opportunity,  and  facilities.  3.  Our  motives  are  pure  and  Christian.  4.  Our  methods
right.  Bein^  according  to  the  directions  and  in  harmony  with  the  spirit  of  Christ.
6.  The  blessing  of  God  is  relied  upon  and  earnestly  sought.

II.  The  effects  which  such  assurance  will  produce.  1.  Confidence  of  success.
Notwillisfarding  difficulties,  misrepresentation,  contempt,  opposition  (see  ver.  19),
and  ociiisiunal  desponding  thoughts.  2.  Strenuous  exertion.  "  Thtrefore"  &c.,
not,  "Therefore  we  need  not  work,  or  may  be  lux  in  our  endeavours."  Confidence
which  thus  operates  is  presumption.     God  will  do  most  when  men  do  their  best


OH.  11. 9—20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  if

3.  Rejection  of  alien  interference.  This  took  the  form  of  opposition  in  the  case  of
Sanballat,  &c.  Yet  Nehemiah's  language  seema  to  imply  that  these  objectors  would
have  co-operated,  if  allowed  to  do  so,  on  terms  acceptable  to  them.  "  We  his  ser-
vants will  arise  and  build ;  bjit  y«  have  no  portion,"  &c.  So  it  was  at  least  as  to  the
erection  of  the  temple  (Ezra  iv.  1 — 3).  And  in  our  day  many  who  are  "  of  the
world  "  are  willing  to  unite  with  the  Church  in  her  works.  The  peril  is  that  in  wel-
coming their  aid  the  Church  should  imbibe  their  spirit,  and  so  lose  her  own  proper
strength.  We  cannot,  it  is  true,  draw  as  sharp  a  line  between  the  Church  and  the
world  as  Nehemiah  between  Jews,  and  not-Jews.  But  we  have  great  need  to  be  on
our  guard  against  the  insidious  influence  of  the  worldly  spirit,  and  the  adoption  of
worldly  means  of  doing  what  professes  to  be,  but  then  censes  to  be,  Christ's  work.
We  may  not  be  justified  in  rejecting  the  material  aid  of  worldly  men  when  proffered
without  conditions  (Nehemiah  had  accepted  that  of  Artaxerxes),  but  we  must  never
accept  their  counsels.  The  world  is  more  dangerous  within  the  Church  than  in  open
opposition.  Faith  in  Divine  aid  will  preserve  from  such  a  policy.  Cherishing  this,
we  shall  feel  that  whether  the  world  smile  or  frown  we  shall  succeed  in  the  end ;  but
that  if  God  were  to  withdraw  his  help  we  must  fail  (however  we  may  for  a  time  appear
to  succeed) ;  and  that  he  is  likely  to  abandon  us  if  we  so  rely  on  others  as  to  be  un-
faithful and  disobedient  to  him,  by  surrendering  our  distinctiveness  as  the  disciples
of  Christ.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Ungodly  (unchristian)  jealousy.  Nehemiah,  attended  by  a  Persian
escort,  came  safely  to  Jerusalem.  The  king  had  dealt  liberally  with  liim ;  he  pro-
vided him  with  a  military  guard  to  protect  him  from  the  dangers  of  the  road,  and
with  letters  of  instruction  to  use  at  his  journey's  end  (ver.  9).  But  the  prophet
Boon  found — what  we  all  find  soon  enough — that  the  work  we  attempt  for  God  can
only  be  accomplished  by  triumphing  over  difficulty.  The  path  of  holy  service  lies
over  maTiy  a  scorching  plain,  up  many  a  steep  mountain,  along  many  a  "  slippery
place."  Nehemiah's  great  obstacle  was  to  be  found  in  the  virulent  enmity  of  Sanballat
and  Tobiah.  When  these  men  heard  of  his  arrival,  "  it  grieved  them  exceedingly
that  there  was  come  a  man  to  seek  the  welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel "  (ver.  10).
Looking  at  this  statement  concerning  these  men,  we  notice —

I.  Their  'jompabative  innocency  when  judged  by  human  standards.  At  first
thought  it  seems  almost  incredible  that  they  should  have  been  "  grieved  exceed-
ingly "  because  a  man  had  come  to  seek  the  welfare  of  their  neighbours.  But  when
we  ask  if  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  were  so  very  milch  worse  than  mankind  in  general,
we  are  compelled  to  own  that  theirs  was  but  an  instance  of  ordinary  human  selfish-
ness. In  every  land  and  through  every  age  men  have  been  jealous  of  their  rivals'
prosperity.  These  men  concluded  that  the  elevation  of  Jerusalem  virtually  meant
the  depression  of  Samaria  ;  that,  indirectly,  Nehemiah  had  come  to  lower  the  dignity
if  not  to  lessen  the  prosperity  of  their  state,  and  they  counted  him  an  enemy.  So
have  men  argued  everywhere  even  until  now.  Wars  that  were  avowedly  waged
on  some  small  pretext  were  really  fought  because  one  strong  nation  was  jealous  of  the
growing  vigour  of  some  neighbouring  power.  Not  only  nations,  but  tribes,  families,
societies,  and  (it  must  be  sorrowfully  admitted)  Christian  Churches  have  allowed
themselves  to  be  jealous  of  the  growth  of  other  nations,  other  tribes,  other  Churches,
and  have  been  grieved  when  men  "sought"  and  promoted  "their  welfare."  So
general  and  widespread  is  this  selfishness,  taking  the  form  of  jealousy  of  the
prosperity  of  others,  that  it  is  not  for  us  to  "  cast  the  first  stone  "  of  bitter  reproach.
But  we  must  see —

II.  Their  actual  guilt  in  the  sight  of  God.  A  selfish  jealousy  like  this  of
Sanballat  and  Tobiah,  a  grief  at  the  prosperity  of  neighbours  and  competitors,
whether  in  the  civil  or  religious  world,  is  in  the  sight  of  God  (a). unrighteous.  Our
neighbours  have  every  whit  as  much  right  to  make  the  most'  of  their  powers  and
opportunities  as  we  have  of  ours  ;  to  rise  above  us  by  lawful  means  as  we  tfi  remain
above  them.  We,  as  well  as  they,  have  received  our  heritage  from  men  and  from
God,  ind  we  have  no  moral  right  to  limit  their  success,  or  to  object  to  their  power,
or  be  ofEended  at  their  superiority,     (fi)  Short-sighted-     We  ought  to  understand


24  THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIEMIAH.  [ch.  ii.  9—20.

that  we  are  enriched  by  one  another's  prosperity.  "  We  are  members  one  of  another,"
and  should  rejoice  in  one  another's  welfare.  This  is  so  with  (1)  neighbouring
nations ;  (2)  sister  Churches ;  (3)  capital  and  labour ;  (4)  various  contemporary
industries.  The  more  one  prospers,  the  more  another  will  prosper  too.  If  a  man
comes  to  "  seek  the  welfare "  of  any  "  Israel,"  we  should  not  be  "  exceedingly
grieved,"  but  heartily  glad,  (y)  Sinful.  Though  we  may  not  denounce  one  another,
we  are  all,  together,  under  the  condemnation  of  God.  How  can  he  be  otherwise
than  grieved  with  us  when  we  envy  the  welfare  of  our  own  brethren  ?  That  those
who  are  children  of  the  same  Divine  Father  and  members  of  the  same  family  should
wish  ill  to  one  another  must  vex  his  loving  spirit.  {S)  Something  of  which  we  shall
live  to  be  vMerly  ashamed.  How  many  have  to  remember  with  shame  that  when
men  "  carne  seeking  the  welfare  of  God's  people,"  they  were  antagonistic  when  they
should  have  been  friendly. — C.

Vers.  10 — 20.  —  True  work  Divinely  succeeded.  Here  is  the  enterprise  briefly
sketched  out :  the  ruin  to  be  built  up ;  the  surrounding  sea  of  scorn,  hatred,  and
opposition  to  be  kept  back  ;  the  co-operation  of  rulers  and  people  to  be  maintained.
One  man  evidently  to  be  the  life  and  soul  o£  the  whole  work.  "  I  told  not  a  man
what  my  God  had  put  in  my  heart  to  do  for  Jerusalem."

I.  All  truly  religious  work  should  be  accomplished  in  the  spirit  of  cncomphomis-
INQ  FAITHFULNESS.  1.  Complete  independence  of  those  who  have  no  heart  to  "  seek
the  welfare  of  the  children  of  Israel."  2.  Fearlessness  of  opposition,  whether  open  or
treacherous.  3.  Wise  discretion  in  the  use  of  methods.  The  less  confident  must  be
held  up  by  the  men  of  stronger  faith.  It  is  well  sometimes  to  commit  the  energies
of  good  men  to  a  worthy  enterprise  before  they  calculate  too  much,  lest  their  hearts
should  misgive  them.  4.  The  true  leader  must  not  wait  for  others.  Promptitude  is
the  soul  of  activity  and  the  seal  of  success.  Nehemiah  begins  with  his  niglit  expe-
dition of  survey:  "  I  and  some  few  men  with  me."

II.  Rralitt  and  tkuth  is  the  basis  of  all  faith  and  zeal  for  God.  Look  at  the
facts.  "Ye  see  the  distress."  Jerusalem  lying  waste;  its  gates  burned  with  fire;
actual  reproach  on  the  people  of  God.  Whatever  we  attempt  to  build  up,  whether
the  edifice  of  our  own  religious  life,  or  the  prosperity  of  the  Church,  or  the  structure
of  Christian  evidence,  let  us  be  sure  that  we  understand  the  real  state  of  the  case  ;
what  is  in  ruins,  what  remains  unshaken,  what  will  be  expected  of  us,  what  is  the
reproach  which  has  to  be  wiped  away  ;  we  must  neither  extenuate  nor  exaggerate.

III.  Fellowship  and  co-opebation  the  hope  of  a  revived  Church.  "  Come  and  let
us  build."  However  needful  that  good  men  should,  in  some  respects  and  for  a  time,
work  alone  (Nehemiah  told  nothing  at  first  to  the  Jews — "  priests,  nobles,  rulers,  and
the  rest"),  when  the  great  efEort  has  to  be  made,  it  should  be  made  in  the  spirit  of
union  and  brotherly  love.  "  I  told  them."  "  And  they  said,  Let  us  rise  up  and
build."  The  true  co-operation  will  not  be  a  mere  association  of  individuals,  but  a
spiritual  brotherhood,  a  covenant  with  God  and  with  one  another,  recognising  the
"hand  of  God,"  and  the  "good  work,"  and  the  Divinely-appointed  ministry,  and
the  special  guidance  and  grace,  both  already  bestowed  and  promised.

IV.  All  SUCCESS,  as  against  the  world  and  its  enmity,  in  face  of  scorn,  contumely,
falsehood,  and  evil  devices,  must  come  out  of  the  harmony  between  God's  purposes
AND  OUR  WILL.  He  will  prosper.  We  will  arise  and  build.  We  must  look  to  it
that  our  portion,  our  right,  our  memorial  are  in  Jerusalem.  There  are  the  three
great  supports  to  every  earnest  worker's  confidence  and  hope.  He  has  cast  in  his
lot  with  God's  people;  he  has  entered  into  covenant  relation  with  God,  and  has  there-
fore a  right  in  Jerusalem ;  it  is  the  seat  and  fountain  of  his  most  blessed  memories.
"  There  his  best  friends,  his  kindred  dwell ;  there  God  his  Saviour  reigns."  All
happy,  successful  work  in  the  Church  of  Christ  will  be  work  done  by  spiritual  men,
actuated  by  spiritual  motives,  and  depending  on  spirituiil  strength.  The  greatest
hindrance  to  the  progress  of  true  religion  has  been  the  meddling  with  its  operations
by  those  who  "have  no  portion,  nor  right,  nor  memorial  in  Jeiusalera." — R.

Vers.  11 — 20. —  Wise  procedure  in  presence  of_  a  great  wm-k.  Nehemiah  before
Jerusalem,  the  earnest  patriot  prophet  before  the  city  of  God,  lying  waste  and  exposed,
•aggesta  to  ui —


CH.  iL  9-20.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  Si

I.  TlII£    I'RESKNCE   OF    A    GREAT    WORK    AWAITING    VS.       "  Su     1    Cllllie    tO    JerilSliU'lll  "

(ver.  11).  There  are  to-day  many  Cljiirches,  societies,  interests,  more  or  less  dear  to
God,  which  are  "in  distress"  (ver.  17),  urgently  needing  restoration  and  defence,
Miat  they  be  not  open  to  attack,  and  that  tliey  may  "  be  no  more  a  reproacli "  (ver.  17)
to  the  people  of  God.  Our  work,  like  tlmt  of  Nehemiah  before  Jerusalem,  may  be
great,  inasnuuli  as  (1)  it  will  be  costly,  demanding  time  and  treasure  ;  (2)  it  will  be
delicate  and  difficult,  requiring  the  co-operation  of  men  of  many  minds  and  various
interests ;  (3)  it  will  have  large  issues,  the  end  being  either  a  sad  and  humiliating
collapse  or  a  noble  and  useful  triumph.  The  steps  which  Nehemiah  took  to  carry
out  his  great  project  suggest  points  in  a —

II.  Wise  procedure  in  our  work.     The  first  and  very  essential  point  is — 1.  Full


enough ;  "  indeed,  on  another  and  better  still,  "  He  that  believeth  shall  not  make
haste"  (Isa.  xxviii.  16).  After  waiting  three  days  at  Jerusalem,  he  made  a  very
careful  inspection  of  the  city,  going  all  round  and  examining  it  thoroughly  (vers.
12 — 15).  He  "  went  out  by  night "  (ver.  13),  in  order  that  he  might  be  ttie  more
unobserved,  and  he  took  care  that  "  the  rulers  knew  not  whither  he  went,  or  what  he
did"(ver.  16) ;  nor  did  he  tell  any  one,  priest,  ruler,  noble,  or  workman  (ver.  16), what  he
was  about.  First  he  took,  as  we  should,  "  counsel  with  himself ;  "  he  examined  search-
ingly,  considered  fully,  went  into  and  went  round  the  matter  in  his  own  mind.  A
little  time  spent  in  earnest,  devout  meditation  beforehand  will  often  save  an  "  age  of
care,"  and  a  "  world  of  trouble  "  afterwards.  Then  Nehemiah  spake.  2.  Free  con-
sultation before  other  action.  "  Then  said  1  unto  them,"  &c.  (ver.  17).  Evidently
he  made  a  full  statement  to  them  "  in  public  meeting  assembled."  He  called  them
together,  no  doubt  using  the  king's  commission.  He  took  counsel  with  the  leaders
(those  specified  in  ver.  16).  Consultation  is  wise,  just,  with  a  view  to  co-operation.
It  (a)  conciliates  those  whose  goodwill  we  need.  Men  do  not  like  to  be  treated  as  i£
their  judgment  were  worthless  and  their  consent  unnecessary.  (6)  Brings  out  valuable
suggestions.  The  wisest  man  overlooks  some  things,  and  they  who  devote  all  their
powers  to  particular  industries,  obtain  a  knowledge  and  can  furnish  help  in  council
m  matvers  relating  to  their  own  department  which  others  cannot  contribute.  3.
Forcible  presentation  of  motives.  Nehemiah  laid  the  whole  case  before  them,  and
appealed  to — (a)  The  urgency  of  their  need  :  the  distress  they  were  in ;  Jerusalem
waste  ;  the  gates  burnt  (ver.  17).  (6)  The  sign  of  God's  favour  resting  upon  them.
"  The  hand  of  my  God  which  was  good  upon  me  "  (ver.  18).  (c)  The  encouragement
they  had  from  manas  well  as  God.  "  The  king's  words"  (ver.  18).  (c^)  The  need  there
was  to  regain  the  honour  they  had  lost  among  the  nations.  "  That  we  be  no  more  a
reproach."  (1)  Necessity,  (2)  God's  manifest  presence,  (3)  available  human  help,
(4)  our  reputation  (and  therein  the  repute  of  God's  work),  will  often  be  leading
motives  with  us.  We  should  omit  none  that  can  be  brought,  for  all  are  helpful,  and
one  will  avail  with  one  man,  and  another  with  another.  4.  Energetic  resolution.
"  They  said.  Let  us  arise  and  build.  So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  this  good
work  "  (ver.  18).  Zest  at  the  commencement  is  not  everything,  but  it  is  much.  It
is  vastly  better  than  contention  or  cold-heartedness.  Let  us  gird  ourselves  to  the
fight  with  energy  of  soul,  and  the  battle  is  half  won  already.  5.  Disregard  of
ridicule  (vers.  19,  20).  Zeal  is  deaf  to  sarcasm  ;  it  brushes  aside  the  spearB  of
scorn  ;  it  turns  the  idlers  out  of  the  field. — C.

Vers.  12 — 20. — 7%e  way  to  view  and  repair  ruined  fortunes.  I.  The  way  to
VIEW  ruined  fortunes.  "  And  viewed  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  which  were  broken
down  "  (ver.  13).  There  are  broken  fortunes  in  the  Church,  in  business,  and  in
the  home ;  let  us  see  how  we  are  to  regard  them.  1.  Thoughtfully.  Nehemiah
made  a  careful  inspection  of  the  ruined  city.  2.  Religiously.  "  What  God  hath
put  in  my  heart  to  do  at  Jerusalem"  (ver.  12).  3.  Conscientiously.  "Which  were
broken  down,  and  the  gates  thereof  were  consumed  with  fire  "  (ver.  13).  Nehemiah  did
not  try  to  persuade  himself  that  the  city  was  in  a  better  state  than  it  really  was  ;  he
saw  things  in  their  right  aspect.    4.  Independently.     "And  the  rulers  knew  not


M


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  II.  9—20


whitlier  I  wont"  (ver.  16).  Nehemiah  was  animated  by  a  strong  purpose.  5.
Cautiously.  "And  I  arose  in  the  night"  (ver.  12).  6.  Reproachfully.  We  must
look  on  our  broken  fortunes  as  a  reproach  to  us.     7.  Hopefully.

II.  The  way  to  Bepaib  ruined  fortunes.  1.  Energy  must  be  awakened.  "  Come
and  let  us  build  up  the  wall."  2.  Providence  must  be  recognised.  "The  hand  of
my  God  which  was  good  upon  me."  3.  Circumstances  must  be  utilised.  "As  also
the  king's  words  that  he  had  spoken  unto  me."  4.  Mutual  co-operation  must  be
efEected.  "  So  they  strengthened  their  hands  for  this  good  work."  5.  Scorn  jnust
be  withstood  (vers.  9— 20).— E.

Vers.  19,  20. — Religion  and  ridicule.  I.  That  religion  is  often  made  the  subject
of  RIDICULE.  "They  laughed  us  to  scorn."  1.  Its  doctrines  are  ridiculed.  Men
laugh  at  the  supernatural.  2.  Its  enterprise  is  ridiculed.  Men  scorn  the  idea  of  a
world-wide  moral  conquest.  3.  Its  agencies  are  ridiculed.  "  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's
son?"  4.  Its  experiences  are  ridiculed.  "Much  learning  doth  make  thee  mad."
This  ridicule  is  (1)  envious;  (2)  imbecile;  (3)  contemptuous;  (4)  ignorant;  (5)
libellous.  "  Will  ye  rebel  against  the  king  ?  "  Christ  was  despised  and  rejected
of  men.    *

II.  The  REPLY  which  religion  should  make  to  ridicule.  1.  That  it  is  often  wise  to
reply  to  ridicule.  "  Then  answered  I  them."  2.  That  religion  must  meet  ridicule
by  expressing  confidence  in  God.  "The  God  of  heaven,  he  will  prosper  us."  3.
That  religion  must  meet  ridicule  by  determination  which  cannot  be  moved  by  it.
"  Therefore  we  his  servants  will  arise  and  build. "  4.  That  religion  must  meet  ridicule
by  denying  its  right  or  ability  to  interfere.  "  But  ye  have  no  portion,  nor  right,  noi
memorial,  in  Jerusalem."  5.  That  religion  must  meet  ridicule  by  declaring  it  alien
to  the  high  privileges  of  the  truth.  It  has  no  portion  in  Jerusalem.  This  is  the
ideal  reply  to  derision. — ^E.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  III,


Commencement  of  the  work,  and
arrangement  of  the  working  parties,
with  the  names  of  those  who  superin-
TENDED THE  BUILDING  (ch.  iil. ).  The  especial
object  of  this  chapter  seems  to  be  the  render-
ing of  honour  where  honour  was  due — the
putting  on  record  of  the  names  of  the  men
who  boldly  came  to  the  front  on  this  occa-
sion, sacrificed  their  ease  to  their  duty,  and
exposed  themselves  to  a  threatened  hostile
attack  (ch.  iv.  8—20).  Though  Nehemiah's
eloquence  had  carried  over  to  him  the  bulk
of  the  nation  (ch.  ii.  18),  it  had  not  carried
the  whole.  There  were  those  who  refused
to  take  any  part  in  the  work — even  though
it  was  "the  work  of  their  Lord"  (ch.  iii.-5)
— and  these  laggards  were  of  the  "noble"
class.  The  more  credit  was  therefore  due  to
the  head  men  who  chose  the  better  part,
supported  Nehemiah  with  zeal,  and,  sword
in  hand  (ch.  iv.  17),  either  worked  themselves
or  superintended  the  workers.  Nehemiah
records  the  names  of  thirty-eight  such  per-
tons,  and  in  thirty  cases  adds  to  the  name
«f  the  individual  that  of  his  father.    Whei«


this  designation  is  wanting,  he  for  the  most
part  supplies  its  place  by  some  other,  bo  aa
definitely  to  mark  out  the  person  intended.
With  this  general  purpose  of  doing  honour
to  the  deserving  is  combined  the  wish  gra-
phically to  place  the  whole  scene  before  the
reader.  This  is  done  by  means  of  a  profusion
of  topographical  details.  Nehemiah  takes
us  along  the  entire  circuit  of  the  wall — shows
us  "the  tower  of  Meah,"  "the  tower  ol
Hanaueel,"  "the  fish  gate,"  "the  old  gate,"
"the  throne  of  the  governor,"  "the  broad
wall,"  "the  tower  of  the  furnaces,"  "the
valley  gate,"  "  the  dung  gate,"  "  the  gate  ol
the  fountain,''  "the  pool  of  Siloam,"  "the
king's  garden,"  "the  stairs,"  "the  sepul-
chres of  David,"  "  the  pool  that  was  made,"
"the  armoury,"  "the  tower  that  lay  out,"
"Ophel,"  "the  horse  gate,"  "the  gate
Miphkad,"  "the  sheep  gate,"  and  "the
ascent  of  the  corner" — exhibits  to  us  the
party  at  work  in  each  place,  repairing  ■
portion  of  the  wall,  or  rebuilding  a  gateway
— notes  the  zeal  of  those  who,  completing
the  piece  first  assigned  to  them  rapidly,
then  undertook  a  second  piece  (vers.  11,  19,
21,  24    &C.),  and    altogether  gives  tu    ■


oi.  ui.  1—^2.]


TflE  BOOK  Of  NEHEMlAH.


2f


description  which  is  full  of  life  and  activity.
The  passage  is  invaluable  to  the  topographer,
and  though  not  resolving  all  the  difficultiea
with  which  he  meeta  in  his  attempta  to
reproduce  the  plan  of  the  ancient  city,
furnishes  more  effectual  help  than  all  other
existing  notices  on  the  suhject  put  together.

Yer.  1. — ^Then  Eliashib  the  high  priest
rose  up.  It  is  satisfactory  to  find  Eliashib
the  high  priest  taking  the  part  which  be-
fitted him  on  this  occasion.  Subsequently
we  find  him  "allied"  by  marriage  to  Tobiah
(ch.  xiii.  4),  and  guilty  of  a  profanation  of
the  temple  {ibid.  ver.  5).  By  the  line  of
high  priests  given  in  ch.  xii.  10,  11,  it
appears  that  Eliashib  was  the  son  of  Joiakun,
and  the  grandson  of  the  Jeshua  who  returned
from  Babylon  with  Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  2 ;
ui.  2).  With  bis  brethren,  The  priests
generally.  Compare  ver.  28,  which  shows
that  the  priests  undertook  a  portion  of  the
eastern  wall,  besides  the  work  here  men-
tioned. Bnilded  the  sheep  gate.  The
"sheep  gate"  appears  to  have  been  a,  gate
in  the  eastern  wall,  the  jrpo/Sartn)  of  St
John  (v.  2),  which  was  close  to  the  pool
of  Bethesda.  By  this  gate  were  brought  in
the  sheep  needed  for  sacrifice,  which  were
then  washed  in  the  adjoining  pool,  and
conveyed  from  it  into  the  temple  area,
whereon  the  pool  abuts.  The  priests  dwelt
principally  in  this  portion  of  the  city.  They
sanctified  it.  This  appears  to  have  been  a
dedication  quite  distinct  from  that  whicli  is
described  in  ch.  xii.  27 — 43.  The  priests,
having  completed  the  rebuilding  of  the  sheep
gate,  and  of  the  wall  extending  from  it
northwards  as  far  as  the  tower  of  Hananeel,
anticipated  the  general  dedication  by  a
special  one,  which  "sanctified,"  or  conse-
crated, their  own  portion  of  the  wall.  Thus
a  sacred  character  was  impressed  on  the  work
at  the  earliest  possible  moment,  and  it  was
placed  under  the  protection  of  the  Almighty.
Tiie  tower  of  Meah  (or  rather  Hammeah,  i.  e.
"the  Hundred")  and  the  tower  of  Hana-
neel appear  to  have  been  situated  almost  at
the  same  point  of  the  wall.  Perhaps  they
were  opposite  each  other,  like  the  towers  in
the  walls  of  Babylon  (Herod.,  I  179).

Ver.  2. — Next  to  Eliashib  build  ed  the
men  of  Jericho,  who  were  assigned  the  north-
eastern corner  of  the  wall,  as  the  part  nearest
to  their  own  town.  The  inclusion  of  Jericho
in  the  restored  Judaea  had  appeared  from
Ezra  ii  34.

Ver.  3. — It  is  strange  that  the  sons  of
Hassenaah,  who  built  the  fourth  piece  of
wall,  are  not  mentioned  by  name.  There  is
no  other  similar  omission.  The  fish  gate,
which  they  built,  was  in  the  northern  wall,
towards  its  eastern  extremity,  and  not  far


from  the  modem  "Damascus  gate."  It  u
thought  to  be  so  called  from  being  the  gate
through  which  fish  were  brought  in  from
the  Jordan  and  the  Sea  of  Galilee.  The
looks  thereof  should  rather  be  "  the  bars
thereof";  and  the  bars,  "the  sockets,"  or
"catches,"  which  held  the  bars.  The  gates
of  towns  in  ancient  times  were  almost  always
Secured  in  this  way.

Ver.  4.— The  son  of  Koz.  Rather  "the
son  of  Hakkoz."  Ueshullam  the  son  of
Serechiah  is  mentioned  again  in  ch.  vi  18.

Ver.  5. — The  Tekoites  are  the  people  of
Tekoah,  whence  came  the  "wise  woman"
whom  Joab  sent  to  incline  David  to  fetch
home  Absalom  (2  Kings  xiv.  2,  3).  It  was
a  small  place,  and  does  not  appear,  either  in
the  catalogue  of  those  who  returned  with
Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  20—35  ;  Neh.  vii.  25 —
88),  or  in  the  census  list  of  Nehemiah  (ch.
XL  26 — 35).  Their  nobles  put  not  their'
necks  to  the  work.  This  imputation  of
blame  has  been  thought  out  of  harmony
with  the  general  narrative  contained  in  the
chapter,  and  various  emendations  have  been
proposed  to  remove  the  so-called  difficulty.
But  it  has  really  first  to  be  shown  that  a
difficulty  exists.  Surely  it  would  have  been
more  strange  if  there  had  been  no  opposition
to  Nehemiah's  wishes — no  withdrawal  from
the  work,  than  if  there  were  the  amount  of
opposition  that  is  recorded.  And  supposing
opposition  to  be  made,  why  should  Nehe-
miah not  notice  it  ?  In  music,  the  force  and
value  of  harmonious  notes  is  brought  out
by  an  occasional  discord,  A  desire  to  do
honour  to  those  who  deserved  it  would  be
quite  compiitible  with  a  determination  to
brand  with  disgrace  the  undeserving.  And
the  contrast  would  enhance  the  value  of  the
praise.  Thus,  there  is  no  reason  for  disturb-
ing the  existing  text,  nor  for  questioning  its
plain  meaning.  The  upper  classes  at  Tekoah,
the  adirim  or  "  exalted,"  withdrew  from  the
work,  like  oxen  withdrawing  their  necks
from  the  yoke,  and  stood  aloof,  leaving  it  to
the  common  people  to  engage  in  it,  or  not,
as  they  pleased.  The  common  people  were
perhaps  moved  to  the  greater  zeal  by  the
defection  of  their  natural  leaders.  They
were  among  those  who  accomplished  a  double
task,  repairing  a  second  portion  of  the  wall
(ver.  27)  after  having  finished  their  first.

Ver.  6. — The  old  gate  must  either  have
corresponded  to  the  modern  "  Damascus
gate,"  or  have  been  in  its  near  neighbour-
hood.    It  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere.

Ver.  7. — Gibeon  and  Uizpah  lay  due  north
of  Jerusalem,  at  the  distance  respectively  of
about  5^  and  4^  miles.  The  inhabitants
were  set  to  repair  the  middle  part  of  the
north  wall.  Unto  the  throne  of  the  governor
on  this  side  the  river.  So  the  Septuagint ;
and,  among  modems,  Michaelis,  Fool,  and


28


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[oh.  III.  1—32


A.  Clarke.  Others  translate — "  the  men  of
Giheon  and  Mkpah,  who  belonged  to  the
jurisdiction  of  the  governor  across  the  river."
But  this  can  scarcely  have  been  the  fact,
since  Gibeon  is  mentioned  among  the  re-
occupied  cities  in  ch.  vil  26,  and  if  Bethel
was  Jewish,  as  we  know  that  it  was  &om
ch.  zi.  31,  Gibeon  and  Mizpah,  which  were
nearer  Jerusalem,  cannot  have  remained
Syrian.  Altogether,  there  is  no  reason  to
dispute  the  commonly  received  rendering,
since  Nehemiah  again  uses  ^  for  "^jj  in  ver.
32,  and  the  governor  of  Syria  may  well  have
had  a  "throne,"  or  tribunal,  at  Jerusalem,
which  was  usually  under  his  jurisdiction,
though  exempted  &om  his  authority  under
the  existing  r^ime.

Yer.  8.  —  Hananiah  the  son  of  one  of
the  apothecaries.  Or  "the  son  of  Harak-
kashim."  They  fortified  Jerusalem  nnto
the  broad  walL  The  Septuagint  has  Kari-
\iirov,  "thqyleft,"  and  the  Vulgate  dimi-
serunt  in  the  same  sense,  which  is  given
also  as  an  alternative  rendering  by  our
translators,  in  the  margin.  And  no  doubt
the  verb  3T1>  has  this  for  one  of  its  mean-
ings. But  the  clause  has  thus  no  satis-
fectoiy  sense.  That  3tl?  is  used  for  "to
fortify "  by  Nehemiah  is  plain  from  ch.  iv.
2,  and  we  may  therefore  well  understand  it
in  this  sense  here.  Why  he  uses  3HJ  here
and  pin  in  every  other  place  is  difficult  to
explain,  unless  we  suppose,  with  Pool,  that
the  wall  did  not  need  regular  repairs  in  this
part,  but  only  a  little  strengthening.

Ver.  9. — The  ruler  of  the  half  part  of
Jerusalem.  Compare  verse  11.  The  city
itself  does  not  seem  to  be  intended,  but
rather  the  territory  outside  which  was
considered  to  belong  to  the  city.  This
was  divided  into  two  portions,  under  two
"princes"  or  "rulers,"  Bephaiah  and  Shal-
lum.

Ver.  11. — Malchijah  and  Eashub,  who
are  here  said  to  have  repaired,  not  the  other
piece,  but  "a  second  piece"  of  the  wall,
have  not  been  previously  mentioned  in  our
present  text ;  whence  it  has  been  concluded
with  reason  (Bertheau)  that  the  text  is  de-
fective, some  whole  verses  having  fallen  out
(comp.  ver.  20).  The  tower  of  the  furnaces
is  mentioned  again  in  ch.  xii  38.  Its  exact
position  cannot  be  fixed,

Ver.  12. —He  and  his  daughters.  It
seems  to  be  almost  impossible  that  women
were  pressed  into  the  service,  especially
when  it  was  one  of  so  much  danger  (ch.  iv.
18 — 21).  By  "daughters"  we  must  there-
fore understand  the  villages  contained  in
ShaUum's  district,  which  is  agreeable  to  the
use  of  the  term  in  ch.  zi  26,  27,  28.

Ver.  13.— The  valley  gate.  A  gate  in  the
western  walL  (See  the  comment  on  ch.  iL
13.)    Zanoah  was  situated  to  the  west  of


Jerusalem  at  the  distance  of  some  nine  oi
ten  miles.  It  is  mentioned  in  Josh.  xv.  Zi
as  a  city  of  Judah,  but  was  not  a  place  oi
much  importance.  We  can  scarcely  suppose
that  the  inhabitants  had  »a  mnch  as  a  thou-
sand cubits  of  the  wall  assigned  to  them,
since  that  is  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  mile,
and  the  entire  circuit  was  under  foar  miles.
Bertheau  suggests  that  Nehemiah  merely
means  to  note  that  the  distance  between  the
two  gates,  the  VaUey  and  the  Dung  gate,
was  a  thousand  cubits,  and  that  he  says
nothing  of  the  repairs  because  no  repairs
were  needed.

Ver.  14. — The  dung  gate.  See  the  com-
ment on  ch.  ii.  13.  The  ruler  of  part  of
Eeth-haccerem.  Rather  "ruler  of  the  dis-
trict of  Beth  -  haccerem,"  or  head  man  of
the  region  within  which  Beth-haccerem,  was
situated.  This  was  a  district  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Tekoah  (Jer.  vi  1).

Ver.  16. — The  gate  of  the  fountain.  See
the  comment  on  ch.  iL  14.  The  niler  of
part  of  Mizpah.  Bather,  "ruler  of  the
district  of  Mizpah,"  which  is  distinguished
from  the  town  of  Mizpah  (vers.  7,  19),  and
shown  to  have  furnished  a  distinct  working
party.  The  wall  of  the  pool  of  Siloah  was
probably  an  outwork  designed  to  protect
those  who  at  a  time  of  siege  frequented  this
fountain.  The  pool  must  always  have  been
outside  of  the  main  wall  of  the  city.  It
furnished  water  to  the  royal  garden,  which
was  at  the  junction  of  the  Ki£ron  and  Ein-
nom  valleys  (Joseph.  'Ant  Jud.,'  vii  11 ;
2  Kings  xzv.  4).  The  stairs  that  go  down
from  the  city  of  David  may  well  be  the  ilight
of  stone  steps  cut  In  the  rock  which  is  still
to  be  seen  on  the  western  flank  of  Ophel,
leading  from  the  valley  of  the  Tyropceon  in
the  direction  of  the  temple  (see  Stanley,
'Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'  Third
Series,  p.  126  ;  Tristram,  'Land  of  Israel,'
p.  190).

Ver.  16. — Kehemiah  the  son  of  Azbuk.
Not  the  writer,  who  was  "the  son  of  Hacha-
liah"  (ch.  i  1),  but  another  person  of  the
same  name.  It  was  the  frequent  bearing  of
the  same  name  by  two  or  more  contempora-
ries which  made  it  necessary  to  designate
men  generally  by  their  own  names  and  the
names  of  their  fathers.  Bethzur  ("  House
of  the  Rock")  is  now  Beit-Sur,  and  lies  on
the  ordinary  route  from  Jerusalem  to  Hebron,
about  fifteen  miles  south  of  Jerusalem.  It  is
mentioned  in  Josh.  zv.  68  among  the  cities
of  Judah,  and  appears  to  have  become  a
place  of  consideraAue  importance  under  the
Maccabees  (1  Mac  iv.  29 ;  vi  31 — 60  ;  xiv.
7  ;  &C.).  The  sepulchres  of  David  and  the
kings,  his  descendants,  to  the  time  of  Heze-
kiah,  were  excavated  in  the  rock  upon  which
the  temple  stood  (Ezek.  zliiL  7 — 9),  appa-
rently on  its  western  side.     They  have  not


om.  ni.  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEUEMIAH.


31


hitherto  been  discovered.  Here  too  was  the
pool  that  was  made  hy  Hezekiah  when  he
was  about  to  be  besieged  by  Sennacherib
(2  Cliron.  xxxii  30  ;  Isa.  xxiL  9^-11).  The
house  of  the  mighty  —  the  Gibborim,  or
"mighty  men"  of  David  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  8  ;
1  Chron.  xi.  10) — is  not  elsewhere  mentioned.
It  was  no  doubt  the  barrack  where,  according
to  tradition,  David  had  quartered  his  best
troops.

Ver.  17.— The  ruler  of  the  half  part  of
Keilah.  Rather,  "ruler  of  one-lialf  of  the
re^on  of  K."  The  district  within  which
Keilah  stood  was  divided  into  two  parts,  one
of  which  was  under  Hashflbiah  and  the  other
under  Bavai  (ver.  18).  Both  took  part  in
the  work  of  restoration,  and  the  two  work-
ing-parties were  assigned  adjacent  portions
of  the  walL  In  his  part.  Rather,  "for  his
part " — pro  tractu  suo,  as  Rambach  renders.

Ver.  18. — Keilah  is  probably  the  modem
Kila,  which  is  situated  about  twelve  miles
S.S.W.  of  Jerusalem,  in  the  Shephelah,  or
Itw  plain  of  the  Philistines  (1  Sam.  xxiii,
1 — 3).  It  was  assigned  to  Judah  by  Joshua
(Josh.  XV.  44),  threatened  with  capture,  but
"saved"  by  David  (1  Sam.  xxiii.  5),  and
apparently  reoccupied  on  the  return  from
the  captivity.

A'^er.  19. — Another  piece.  Ezer  has  not
been  previously  mentioned  as  repairing  any
portion  of  the  wall ;  but  "  the  men  of  Miz-
pah "  have  been  mentioned  as  so  doing
(ver.  7).  Ezer  had  apparently  succeeded  to
"Jadon  the  Meronothite,"  as  the  superin-
tendant  of  the  Mizpah  working-party.  The
going  up  to  the  armoury  at  the  turning  of
the  wall.  Literally,  "the  ascent  to  the
armoury  of  the  comer."  There  were  pro-
bably several  armouries  in  Jerusalem  (see
Isa.  xxii.  8).  This  one  was  called  "the
armoury  of  the  comer,"  being  situated  at  the
north-western  angle  of  the  special  wall  of  the
city  of  David.  There  was  an  "ascent"  to
it,  either  by  steps,  or  by  a  steep  pathway,
from  the  Tyropoeon  valley.

Ver.  20. — Earnestly  repaired.  So  Geso-
nius.  Pool,  and  Bertheau.  The  construction
is  not  free  from  difficulty,  and  the  reading  is
somewhat  doubtful  (the  Vulgate  "in  monte  "
showing  a  different  one) ;  but  on  the  whole
the  translation  of  the  A.  V.  may  stand.
Baruch  has  the  high  honour  of  being  singled
out  for  special  praise,  as  having  shown  a
burning  zeal  which  deserved  this  recompense.
He  rapidly  accomplished  the  task  first  set
him,  the  mention  of  which  must  have  acci-
dentally fallen  out  (see  the  comment  on  ver.
11),  and  now  undertook  a  "second  piece,"
which  extended  from  the  north-western  angle
of  the  inner  wall  to  the  door  of  the  high
priest's  house.  It  would  seem  that  this  door
was  in  the  wall,  npon  which  the  house  must
h»Te  abutted  (see  the  next  verse).


Ver.  21. — Meremoth's  first  piece  is  men*
tioned  in  ver.  4.  The  second  piece  cannot
have  been  very  long,  since  it  only  extended
along  a  portion  of  the  high  priest's  house.

Ver.  ^2. — The  priests  who  had  lands  in
the  Jordan  valley  seem  to  be  intended  by
the  men  of  the  plain,  hak-kikkar,  "the
plain,"  without  further  addition,  liaving
always  that  meaning  in  Scripture.  We  have
already  heard  that  the  men  of  Jericho  were
engaged  in  the  work  (ver.  2).

Ver.  24. — After  him  repaired  Binnui  the
son  of  Henadad  another  piece.  The  name,
Binnui,  has  not  occurred  previously,  but
probably  ought  to  be  substituted  for  Bavai
(*133  for  'U)  in  ver.  18.  He  was  a  Levite
(ch.  x.  9),  of  the  important  Levitical  family
of  Henadad,  mentioned  in  Ezra  iii.  9.  Unto
the  turning  of  the  wall,  even  unto  the
corner.  As  far  as  the  north-east  angle  of
the  special  wall  of  the  city  of  David,  which
here  adjoined  the  main  wall  of  Jerusalem.
A  tower  here  stood  out  (ver.  25),  and  the
wall  turned  at  a  right  angle,  both  north-
ward and  southward.

Ver.  25. — The  tower  which  lieth  out  from
the  king's  high  house.  In  the  original  it
is  uncertain  whether  the  word  translated
"high"  belongs  to  "tower"  or  "house."
Most  commentators  attach  it  to  "tower."
The  "king's  house"  of  this  place  can  be
nothing  but  the  old  palace  of  David,  which
was  in  this  quarter,  while  Solomon's,  was  on
the  opposite,  or  western,  hill.  This  palace,
like  Solomon's  (Jer.  YYTfii,  2),  would  natur-
ally have  its  prison,  which  would  stand
in  its  own  court.  From  this  prison,  the
"  prison  gate  "  of  ch.  xii  39  took  its  name.
Ver.  26.— The  Nethinims  dwelt  in  Ophel.
Ophel  was  "the  long,  narrowish,  rounded
spur  or  promontory  which  intervenes  be-
tween the  central  valley  of  Jerasalem  (the
Tyropoeon)  and  the  Kidron,  or  Valley  of
Jehoshaphat"  (Grove).  The  Nethinims,
who  had  their  dwellings  on  this  spur,  were
set  to  fortify  a  portion  of  the  eastern  circuit,
but  apparently  restored  not  so  much  their
own  wall  as  that  which  lay  north  ol  it,  at
the  edge  of  the  present  Haram  area.  Here
must  have  been  the  water  gate,  which  carried
off  the  superfluous  water  from  the  temple
reservoirs ;  and  here  was  the  great  tower
that  lieth  out,  whose  foundations  have  been
recently  discovered.  It  stood  at  the  south-
eastern angle  of  the  great  platform  on  which
the  temple  was  built.

Ver.  27.— The  Tekoites  repaired  another
piece.  Compare  ver.  6.  Their  "second
piece"  appears  to  have  extended  from  the
"great  tower"  to  the  wall  built  by  Shallum
on  the  western  side  of  the  spur  which  reached
as  far  as  the  pool  of  Siloam  (ver.  16).  This
is  here  called  "  the  waU  of  Opheh"
Ter.  28.— 7roa  above  the  horse  %%t».


Mi


Ttlfc  Book  Of  NEliEJVllAit.


[cH.  III.  i—ii.


This  was  a  gate  in  the  eastern  wall  (Jer.
xxxl  40)  through  which  horses  could  enter
the  city.  It  probably  adjoined  the  old
palace,  being  at  or  near  the  "  turning  of  the
wall "  mentioned  in  vers.  24,  25.  Nehe-
miah  seems  here  to  return  to  the  point
quitted  in  ver.  26,  and  to  proceed  thence
northwards  in  order  to  complete  the  entire
circuit.

Ver.  29.— Shemaiah  the  soa  of  Shcohan-
iah  is  very  possibly  the  descendant  of  David
mentioned  in  1  Chron.  iii  22.  He  must
have  been  an  old  man,  as  his  son,  Hattush,
had  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  Ezra  (Ezra
viii.  2,  3) ;  but  still  he  may  have  taken  part
in  the  work.  That  he  was  keeper  of  the
east  gate  does  not  militate  against  this
hypothesis,  for  that  post  was  an  honourable
one,  and  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  all  the
descendants  of  David  were  in  flourishing  cir-
cumstances. By  "  the  east  gate "  we  are
perhaps  to  understand  "the  water  gate
towards  the  east "  of  ver.  26.

Ver.  30. — After  him.  The  traditional  text
gives  "  after  me;  "  and  it  has  been  supposed
that  Nehemiah  assigned  himself  a  certain
portion  of  the  wall  and  repaired  it,  but  sup-
pressed his  own  name  through  modesty.
But,  as  general  superintendent  of  the  whole
(£h.  iv.  13 — 23),  he  could  scarcely  take  any
special  work  ;  and  the  argument  that  might
have  been  founded  upon  a  single  occurrence
of  the  expression  "after  me"  is  deprived  of
all  force  by  its  double  occurrence,  here  and
in  ver.  31.     Another  piece.    A  Hanun  haa


been  mentioned  (ver.  13)  among  the  leaders
of  the  working  parties,  and  also  a  Uananiah
(ver.  8) ;  but  they  were  not  coupled  together ;
and  it  may  well  be  questioned  whether  either
is  identical  with  his  namesake  of  this  verse.
Probably  we  have  here  another  instance  ol
the  incompleteness  of  oxa  present  text  of
this  chapter  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  11).

Ver.  31. — Ualohiah  the  goldsmith's  son.
Or  "  the  son  of  Hazzorephi."  But  the  men-
tion of  goldsmiths  {zorephim)  in  ver.  32
lends  support  to  the  rendering  of  the  A.  V.,
which  is  accepted  by  most  crincs.  Unto  the
place  of  the  Nethinims.  Bather,  "the
house."  The  exact  position  cannot  be  fixed ,
but  the  gate  Miphkad  must  have  been  situ-
ated in  the  east  wall,  a  little  to  the  soath  of
the  sheep  gate.  The  going  up  of  the  corner
may  have  been  an  "ascent,"  like  Solomon's
(2  Chron.  jx.  4),  which  was  probably  a  flight
of  steps  ;  or  the  word  translated  "  going  up  "
may  mean  "  an  upper  chamber"  (iirtpifov) —
a  chamber  situated  over  the  gate.

Ver.  32. — Unto  the  sheep  gate.  Compare
ver.  1.  The  circuit  is  completed,  and  the
point  reached  from  which  the  commence-
ment was  made.  The  goldsmiths  and  the
merchants  were  required  to  repair  the  piece
of  wall  immediately  to  the  south  of  the  sheep
gate,  for  which  no  individual  had  volunteered.
Probably  they  had  houses  in  the  neighbour-
hood. They  consented ;  and  thus  the  entire
wall  was  taken  in  hand,  and  the  peat  work,
which  Kehemiah  had  conceived  in  his  heart
while  still  in  Susa,  was  inaugoiated.


HOMILETICS.

Ch.  iii. — An  honourable  record.  In  the  preceding  chapter  the  good  resolutions  of
the  people  are  recorded  ;  here,  what  is  more  satisfactory,  their  performances.  It  is  a
record  of  those  who  united  to  restore  the  wall  of  Jerusalem,  and  the  part  which  each
principal  person,  or  group  of  persons,  took  in  the  vsrork.  The  account  may  appear  of
little  interest  for  us ;  but  it  would  be  of  much  to  the  Jews,  especially  the  descendants
of  those  whose  names  are  so  honourably  recorded,  as  long  as  they  preserved  their
genealogies.     To  us  also  it  need  not  be  barren  of  interest  or  profit

I.  The  wobkees  and  their  work.  A  very  great  undertaking  carried  through
rapidly  (ch.  vi.  15)  and  successfully ;  because— 1.  A  voluntary  work.  All  animated
with  zeal,  and  labouring  heartily,  not  of  compulsion.  What  is  especially  reported  of
one  (ver.  20)  was  doubtless  true,  in  good  measure,  of  all:  they  "earnestly  repaired."
2.  By  a  united  people.  With  a  few  exceptions  (ver.  5),  all  appear  to  have_  done
their  part.  Priests,  nobles,  merchants,  tradesmen,  working-men;  dwellers  in  the
city  and  dwellers  in  the  country  (for  the  welfare  of  the  metropolis,  with  its  temple,
&c.,  was  felt  to  be  of  common  concern),  all  combined  their  energies.  3.  By  a  people
acting  in  orderly  co-operation.  Without  this,  their  number  and  zeal  would  have
availed  little.  The  work  was  distributed  into  many  parts,  and  each  individual  and
group  took  the  part  assigned  them  by  those  at  the  head  of  affairs.  Each  band  of
men  repaired  that  part  of  the  wall  which  fell  to  its  lot;  and  of  each  band  the  various
classes  did  what  they  were  best  fitted  for ;  some  finding  means,  some  superintending,
some  clearing  away  rubbish  and  picking  out  serviceable  stones,  others  doing  the
masonry.  Hence  confusion  vm  avoided,  and  the  time  and  labour  of  none  wasted.
Many  •  good  undertaking  is  rendered  abortive,  or  much  hindered,  for  the  w«nt  of


OB.  lu.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF.  NEHEMIAH.  N

Buch  willing  order  and  subordiniition,  wliich  cannot  be  secured  because  of  tlie  pride,
self-will,  jealoiisy,^c.  of  those  who  should  co-operate.  4.  With  religious  services
(ver.  1).  The  high  priest  and  his  fellow-priests  led  the  way,  and  "sanctified"
(dedicated)  their  work  to  God ;  most  likely  having  regard,  in  this  solemn  act  of
piety,  to  the  whole  work.  The  account  is  instructive,  as  showing  how  much  may  be
done  by  even  a  feeble  people  when  united,  zealous,  and  willing  each  to  do  the  part
allotted  to  him,  and  offering  all  to  God  in  dependence  on  his  aid  and  blessing.

II.  The  regokd.  May  be  of  use  as — 1.  An  example.  The  names  and  works  of
those  who  have  done  good  service  to  the  nation,  the  city,  or  the  Church  should  be
commemorated — (1)  For  the  glory  of  God,  whose  product  and  gift  good  and  use-
ful men  are.  (2)  For  the  honour  of  the  workers.  (3)  As  an  illustration  of  great
principles.  Their  nature,  operation,  worth  (comp.  Heb.  xi.).  (4)  As  a  stimulus
and  encouragement  to  others.  The  young  should  be  familiarised  with  the  names  and
deeds  of  the  noblest  men  and  women,  and  the  principles  which  formed  their  cha-
racter, that  they  may  imbibe  their  spirit  and  imitate  their  nobleness.  Hence  tlie
value  of  history  and  biography,  whether  sacred  or  ordinary.  2.  A  reminder.  There
is  a' record  of  good  men  and  good  deeds  in  another  book — the  memory  of  God  (Heb.
vi.  10),  a  record  which  is — (1)  Exact.  Excluding  many  who  receive  honour  from
meii,  but  including  all  who  have  served  God  and  their  brethren  with  sincere  piety  and
love.  Only  the  few  can  be  mentioned  by  name  in  human  records  ;  but  all  are  "in
the  book  of  life  "  (Phil.  iv.  3).  Many  who  are  of  little  account  here  stand  hiuh
there.  And  small  services  as  well  as  great  find  a  place  in  that  record  (Matt.  x.  42).
(2)  Indelible.  No  names  or  deeds  registered  there  drop  out,  or  are  erased,  or  fade
away.  (3)  To  be  published.  At  the  great  day,  when  many  who  are  now  obscure
and  thinking  little  of  themselves  will  become  famous.  (4)  To  be  the  guide  in  con-
fer) ing  re  wards.  Everyman  according  to  his  works  (comp.  Luke  xix.  15  — 19  ;  2  Cor.
ix.  6).  Tile  thought  of  this  record  should — (1)  Incite  us  to  active  and  devoted
service,  leading  us  to  do  our  part,  and  do  it  well,  aspiring  to  "honourable  mention  "
in  the  Divine  record  and  at  the  last  day.  (2)  Encourage  us  under  undeserved
neglect,  misrepresentation,  or  censure.  So  Nehemiah  again  and  again  beseeches  God
to  remember  his  good  deeds,  as  if  despairing  of  due  estimation  or  recompense  from
men.  (3)  Nourish  joyful  expectation.  Another  record  is  kept,  of  evil-doers  and
their  works,  and  all  hypocritical  pretenders  to  Christian  zeal  and  faithfulness.  This
also  will  be  published.  Hence  "  some  will  rise  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt"
(Dan.  xii.  2  ;  comp.  1  Cor.  iv.  5).

Ver.  5. — Indifference  in  high  places.  "  But  their  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  the
work  of  their  Lord."  Nehemiah,  or  other  human  ruler,  is  supposed  by  some  to  be
meant  by  "tlieir  Lord."  Better,  as  our  translators  evidently  understood  it,  "God."
The  word  tran^ilated  "  w'ork  "  means  the  work  of  a  servant  :=  "  service."

I.  The  work  of  the  Church  is  the  Loed's  sbbvice.  All  work  is  to  be  so  regarded,
and  cannot  be  done  rightly  otherwise.  But  the  work  of  the  Church  "is  emphatically
the  service  of  God  ;  whether  the  directly  spiritual  (evangelisation,  instruction  of
Christians  and  their  children),  or  the  provision  and  maintenance  of  whatever  is  need-
ful for  it  (ministers,  teachers,  buildings,  &c.),  or  charitable  aid  to  the  poor.  1.  God
has  redeemed  and  constituted  his  Chuioh  for  these  very  ends.  "Ye  are  not  yout
own,  for  ye  are  bought  with  a  price,"  &c.  (1  Cor.  vi.  20).  2.  He  has  committed
•  he  work  to  his  people.  3.  He  has  given  them  directions  for  its  fulfilment.  4.
Hence  loyalty  to  him  requires  them  to  do  it.  And  only  those  who  have  faith  and
love  towards  him  can  do  it  truly  and  acceptably.  We  may  judge  of  any  work  by
this  test :  Can  it  be  described  as  "  the  service  of  the  Lord  "  ?  Much  which  goes  by
that  name  is  misnamed,  either  because  it  is  not  of  his  appointment,  or  is  not  done  in
the  spirit  of  love  and  obedience  to  him.

II.  This  service  calls  fob  strenuous  exertion.  Like  that  of  draught-oxen
"  putting  their  necks  "  to  their  work.  The  Christian's  work  is  worthy  of  earnest
effort,  and  cannot  be  well  done  without  it.     His  "  Lord  "  has  a  right  to  expect  it.

III.  Some  who  profess  to  be  servants  of  God  decline  this  part  of  his  bervioi.
Even  amid  general  enthusiasm  they  remain  unmoved.  1.  The  causes  of  theirrefnsaL
May  be  a  total  want  of  the  piety  they  profess  j  or  the  dominance  of  indiSerence,


88  THE  BOOK  OP  NBHEMUH.  tcH.  m.  1—82.

selfishness,  indolence,  or  pride  (towards  God,  or  those  who  wouid  be  their  fellow-
labourers).  2.  Its  guilt.  To  refuse  to  take  part  in  a  common  work  is  (1)  injustice
to  others,  who  have  thus  an  undue  burden  cast  upon  them ;  and  (2)  rebellion
against  God.  3.  Its  consequences.  Loss  of  great  honour  and  blessing,  now  and
hereafter.     Punishment  for  unfaithfulness  (Matt.  xxv.  26 — 30).

IV.  Such  neglect  is  often  found  amongst  those  who  should  be  leaders  of
OTHERS.  "  The  nobles."  The  higher  and  richer  classes  have  special  gifts  for  the
service  of  the  Lord  ;  but  also  special  temptations  to  neglect  it,  from  their  position,
education,  habits  of  luxury  and  self-indulgence,  sense  of  superiority,  &c'. ;  and  too
often  they  succumb  to  such  temptations.  They  are  reminded  here  that,  however
exalted  they  may  be  above  their  fellow-men,  God  is  "  their  Lord,"  their  Owner  and
Master,  and  has  a  right  to  their  service  equally  with  that  of  their  social  inferiors.
The  example  of  these  should  stimulate  them.  And  great  as  their  earthly  dignity
may  be,  it  is  not  comparable  to  the  honour  of  being  humble  and  devoted  servants
of  God.

V.  Pious  zeal  and  laboub  on  the  part  of  the  common  people  is  the  moke

COMMENDABLE  WHEN  THEY  ARE  DEPRIVED    OF    THE  CO-OPERATION   OP   THEIR  NATURAL

LEADERS.  "  The  Tekoites,"  instead  of  imitating  their  nobles,  repaired  two  lengths  of
the  wall  (see  ver.  27).  The  middle  and  lower  classes  not  unfrequently  outstrip  in
godly  and  benevolent  works  the  great  of  the  earth,  and  make  up  in  a  measure  for
their  indifference.  It  is  not  well,  however,  to  waste  time  in  reflecting  upon  others.
Let  each  consider  whether  he  is  taking  his  own  part  in  works  of  piety  and  charily,
according  to  the  measure  of  his  ability  and  opportunities.  "Every  one  of  us  shall
give  account  of  himself  to  God."

Ver.  12. — Family  zeal  iri  good  work.  "He  and  his  daughters."  Some  take
"daughters"  here  in  the  sense  which  it  bears  in  ch.  xi.  25,  27,  viz.,  "villages"
(regarded  as  the  daughters  of  the  town  or  district  to  which  they  belong),  and  would
lead,  "  it"  (i.e.  the  half-part,  or  district,  of  Jerusalem)  "  and  its  villages."  If,  how-
ever, we  take  the  word  "  daughters "  in  the  sense  of  women,  they  present  us  an
instance  of  a  father  and  his  daughters  uniting  in  a  good  work.  Probably  the
daughters  had  independent  means.  They  remind  us  of  the  numerous  instances
in  which  piety  and  public  spirit  animate  families — parents  and  their  sons  and
daughters  uniting  in  works  of  Christian  usetulness.  Such  families  are  the  strength
of  congregations.     Union  of  a  family  in  Christian  work —

I.  Indicates  good  and  effectual  education.  It  shows  that  the  parents  have
trained  their  children  in  piety  and  zeal,  taught  them  to  take  an  interest  in  the  work
of  the  Lojd,  and  set  them  the  example ;  and  that  the  children  have  yielded  to  the
influence  thus  exerted,  imbibing  the  spirit  of  their  parents,  and  imitating  their  deeds.
Parents  should  early  associate  their  children  with  them  in  go6d  works,  teaching  and
enabling  them  to  give  to  the  cause  of  Christ  and  to  the  poor,  &c.  Young  pcuple,
who  have  if  only  a  small  income  of  their  own,  should  devote  part  of  it  to  the  good  uf
others,  and  should  employ  part  of  their  time  in  doing  good.

II.  Forms  a  sacred  family  bond.  Sanctifies  the  natural  ties  ;  binds  parents  and
children  in  a  holy  fellowship.

III.  Elevates  family  life.  Supplying  objects  of  common  interest,  topics  for
conversation,  subjects  for  prayer,  employments,  occasions  of  mutual  encourage-
ment and  help,  all  tending  to  uplift  the  thoughts,  affections,  motives,  and  aims
above  the  region  of  self-interest,  worldliness,  and  vanity  :  and  thus  form  noble
characters.

IV.  Increases  and  exalts  family  happiness.  No  other  pursuits  in  common,
however  innocent  or  laudable,  can  supply  pleasures  equal  to  those  which  spring  from
common  consecration  to  the  service  of  God  and  man.

V.  Prepares  young  people  for  higher  and  larger  service.  Thus  supplying
the  Church  with  a  succession  of  well-qualified  workers.  Such  families  are  the  best
nurseries,  not  only  for  the  Church,  but  for  the  ministry  and  the  missionary
work.

VI.  Aids  in  insuring  and  preparing  for  family  rednion  in  the  heavenly
HOMI.     Let  parents  then  resolve  with  Joshua,  "As  for  nie  and  my  house,  we  will


CH.  III.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  ■>

serve  the  Lord."    Let  sons  and  daughters  heartily  co-operate  with  fathers  and
mothers  in  executing  this  resolution.

Ver.  20. — Earnest  work.  "  Baruch  the  son  of  Zabbai  earnestly  repaired  another
piece."  It  is  singular  that  this  word  "  earnestly  "  should  be  used  of  Baruch  and  of
none  else.  Perhaps  it  is  a  mis-reading.  Or  quite  as  likely  it  alludes  to  circumstances
unknown  to  us.  The  word  signifies  "burning,"  and  is  commonly  used  of  anger ;  here,
however,  of  zeal,  or  perhaps  emulation.  Baruch  is  set  before  us  as  "  an  earnest  worker."
Such  should  all  Christians  be.  It  is  one  of  the  marks  of  the  "  peculiar  people  "  of
Clirist  wliom  he  has  redeemed  by  giving  himself  for  them,  that  they  are  "  zealous  of
good  works  "  (Titus  ii.  14).    The  subject  then  is — earnestness  in  Christian  work.

I.  What  it  is.  Not  zeal  without  knowledge,  nor  zeal  fed  by  worldly  motives,
nor  the  ardour  of  a  bigoted  sectarianism,  nor  yet  tlie  warmth  of  transitory  emotion,
excited  by  speech  or  sermon  or  passing  incident ;  but  a  steady  flame  of  pious  zeal,
springing  from  Christian  knowledge,  faith,  and  love,  and  sustaining  resolute  purpose
and  endeavour.  It  is  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul,  in  a  state  of  vigour  and  animation,
directed  to  practical  service.

II.  Its  causes.  1.  Ardent  gratitude  for  blessings  received.  It  does  not  spring
from  a  desire  or  expectation  of  earning  or  deserving  salvation  by  diligent  works,  but
from  the  experience  and  hope  of  salvation  freely  bestowed,  and  reahsation  of  tb«
manifold  benefits  included  in  it.  Its  language  is,  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the
Lord  for  all  his  benefits  towards  me  ?  "  2.  Love  to  God  and  Christ  and  men.  It  u
— love  in  action  ;  love  to  God  and  the  Saviour,  inciting  to  obedience  and  making  ser-
vice a  delight ;  lovs  to  men,  impelling  to  the  effort  to  do  them  good.  3.  Contempla-
tion of  the  condition  and  prospects  of  mankind.  4.  Faith  in  the  Divine  remedies  for
human  sin  and  misery.  5.  The  example  of  others.  Of  such  men  as  St.  Paul.  Pre-
eminently of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  "who  went  about  doing  good,"  and  could  say,
"My  meat  is  to  do  the  will  of  him  that  sent  me,  and  to  finish  his  work."  The
example  of  known  living  Christians  eminent  for  zeal  has  a  mighty  influence  in  pro-
ducing like  characters.  Earnestness  of  men  in  other  pursuits.  6.  The  very  indif-
ference and  neglect  of  which  some  are  guilty.  Stirring  the  heart  to  excusable,  if  not
holy  indignation ;  fear  lest  the  work  should  suffer  in  consequence,  and  determination
that  it  shall  not.  7.  Anticipation  of  the  final  account.  8.  Fervent  prayer.  For
pure  Christian  earnestness,  by  whatever  means  excited,  is  a  gift  of  the  Holy
Ghost.

III.  Its  signs  and  effects.  1.  Generosity  of  gift  and  labour.  Not  meting  these
out  according  to  a  careful  calculation  of  our  share,  or  of  what  is  "  necessary "  in
order  to  retain  a  hope  of  eternal  life,  but  delighting  to  do  all  that  is  possible.  2.
Ready  self-denial.  3.  Cournge  in  facing  difficulty  and  opposition.  Earnestness  is
slow  to  believe  in  impossibihty.  4.  Thoroughness  of  work.  Doing  our  best  as  alone
in  any  sense  worthy  of  the  Lord  and  his  work.  5.  Constancy  and  perseverance.
Superiority  to  the  influence  of  bad  examples,  and  all  other  temptations  to  remissj/esfi
in,  or  abandonment  of,  the  service.

ly.  Its  blessedness.  1.  As  a  clear  and  abiding  evidence  of  true  faith  and  love.
Giving  "  assurance  of  hope,"  which  without  practical  and  benevolent  earnestness  is
unfounded,  if  it  exist.  No  strictness  of  orthodoxy,  or  raptures  of  religious  emotion,
are  sufficient  without  it.  2.  As  making  the  Christian's  work  happy.  3.  As  securing
the  Divine  approval  and  blessing.  4.  As  insuring  success.  6.  As  anticipating
abundant  recompense.

Ver.  28. — Doing  good  near  home.  "Every  one  over  against  his  house."  Tlie
priests  and  others  (Vers.  10,  23,  29,  30),  whose  houses  were  near  the  wall,  repaired
tliat  part  of  the  wall  which  was  opposite  each  of  their  dwellings.  This  suggests  an
important  rule  for  Christian  workers.

I.  The  order  to  be  observed  in  seeking  the  good  op  others.  Let  every  one
do  the  work  which  lies  nearest  to  him.  Let  him  begin  with  his  own  family.  No
amount  of  good  work  elsewhere  will  compensate  for  neglect  there.  Christian  parents
can  do  most  good  to  the  community  by  training  well  their  children.  Then,  as  ability
and  opportunity  perir  it,  let  each  seek  the  good  of  his  dependents,  friends,  neighbours,
SJSHSMUH.  D


44  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  nL  I— SI

the  cona;regation  with  which  he  worships,  the  city  or  town,  the  country,  the  Churcll
at  large,  the  world.

II.  Rbarons  for  ADnriiN'G  THIS  ORDER.  1.  That  which  is  nearest  is  usually  best
known.  Its  needs  can  be  best  perceived,  and  how  to  meet  them.  2.  It  appeals  most
powerfully  to  our  heaits.  Partly  because  best  known.  The  eye  affects  the  heart
(Lain.  iii.  61).  Partly  because  of  the  natural  affections  which  belong  to  the  closer
rcliitionships.  Now  the  emotions  of  the  heart  are  both  a  call  to  duty  and  a  qualifi-
cation for  its  efBcient  performance.  Words  spoken,  gifts  bestowed,  with  feeling,
are  most  powerful  for  good.  .S.  It  has  the  first  claim  upon  us.  <Jod  has  placed  men
in  close  relationships  and  proximity  in  order  that  they  may  be  mutually  helpful  as
occasion  arises.  We  violate  the  Divine  order  when  we  care  for  the  distant  to  the
neglect  of  the  near.  4.  We  can  most  easily  reach  it.  6.  We  may  hope  for  more
success  in  dealing  with  it.  Because  our  work  will  be  with  more  knowledge  and
more  heart,  and  less  waste  of  resources ;  and  will  carry  with  it  the  weight  of  known
character,  of  personal  sympathy,  and  the  thousand  influences  which  spring  from
family  life,  friendship,  neiglibourliood,  &c.  A  man  can  nowhere  work  with  so  much
effect  as  "  over  against  his  house."  6.  In  caring  for  it  we  may  be  most  effectually
protecting  our  houses.  As  those  priests  and  others  who  built  up  the  piece  of  wall
nearest  them.  There  are  perils  to  us  and  our  families  which  may  be  averted  by
doing  our  duty  to  those  nearest  to  us ;  perils  from  the  sullen  enmity  which  indiffer-
ence and  neglect  may  generate  in  them ;  perils  from  their  ignorance,  grossness,  or
vice  ;  perils  from  their  diseases,  &c.  7.  When  each  does  the  work  nearest  to  him,  the
whole  work  will  be  most  surely  and  rapidly  done.  Christians  have  yet  thoroughly
to  follow  this  order.  Nevertheless,  it  must  be  admitted  that  there  is  much  to  be  done
which  cannot  thus  be  reached.  There  were  many  parts  of  the  wall  at  Jerusalem
which  were  opposite  the  house  of  no  one,  or  of  none  ablp  to  repair  them  ;  and  there
were  many  able  and  willing  to  assist  in  the  work  whose  dwellings  were  not  in  Jeru-
salem, or,  if  in  the  city,  not  near  the  wall.  And  so  they  had  to  labour  at  a  distance
from  their  houses.  In  like  manner,  there  is  much  Christian  work  to  be  done  where
no  Christians  exist,  or  none  capable  of  doing  it ;  and  so  there  is  ample  room  for
those  organisations  which  enable  the  benevolent  to  do  good  at  a  distance,  and  even
in  far-off  lands.

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ch.  iii. — Th«  Church  engaged  in  a  work  of  moral  repair.  I.  That  the  Chttecb
18  ENGAGED  IN  REPAIRING  MORAL  RUIN.  "  And  next  unto  them  repaired  Meremoth  "
(ver.  4).  Jerusalem  was  once  a  strong  and  beautiful  city;  now  it  is  in  ruins.
Society  has  not  always  been  a  ruin.  Man  has  not  always  been  a  wreck.  1.  The
desolation  was  extensive.  The  entire  city  was  waste  ;  not  a  wall  or  gate  remained
intact.  And  man's  entire  intellectual  and  moral  nature  is  laid  waste  hy  sin  ;  he  has
no  unf alien  faculty.  2.  The  desolation  was  varied.  The  sheep  gate,  the  doors,  the
beams,  the  locks  had  all  been  destroyed  ;  and  so  all  the  manifold  capabilities  of  man
have  been  injured  by  sin.  3.  The  desolation  was  pitiable.  It  was  sad  to  see
Jerusalem  in  ruins ;  but  much  more  so  to  see  the  ruin  of  the  human  soul.  4.  The
desolation  was  visible.  Travellers  saw  the  riuned  city ;  the  fallen  condition  of  man
is  evident  to  all.

II.     The    METHOD    WHICH    THE    ChURCH    SHOULD    PURSUE    IN    ITS    WORK   OP  MOBAL

RKrARATloN.  1.  There  must  be  good  ofBcial  leadership.  "  Then  Eliashib  the  high
piiest  rose  up  "  (ver.  1).  2.  There  must  be  a  wise  use  of  individual  talent.  "  Gold-
smiths," "apothecaries"  (ver.  8).  3.  There  must  be  pursued  a  common  purpose
lluiingh  a  variety  of  tasks.  4.  There  must  be  a  recognition  of  the  power  of  the
domestic  affections  (ver.  29).  6.  There  must  be  a  strict  attention  to  the  minute
deliiil  of  (lie  work.  "And  set  up  the  doors  thereof,  and  the  locks  thereof,  and  the
bars  thereof"  (ver.  6).  6.  There  are  always  those  in  the  Church  who  refuse  to  aid
in  its  enterprise.  — E.

Ch.  iii. — Doing  God's  loork.     Under  Nehemiah's  direction,  and  inspired  with  hia
own  earnestness,  the  children  of  Israel  gave  themselves  to  the  good  work  of  enci^


OH.  UI.  1—82.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  3i

oliiie  the  oity  of  God  with  walls.    The  account  of  their  building  in  this  chapter
reminds  us —

I.  That  all  wobk  wb  do  fob  God  is  considebed  important  and  is  recorded  bt
HIM.  We  should  hardly  have  expected,  judging  antecedently,  that  all  these  names
would  have  appeared  in  the  sacred  Scriptures  with  the  posts  assigned  them.  We
should  have  thought  that  the  space  thus  taken  would  have  been  better  occupied  with
more  of  the  miracles  or  parables  of  our  Lord,  or  of  the  acts  of  the  apostles.  The
fact  that  these  names  are  inserted  in  this  book,  which  is  to  go  over  all  the  woild  and
down  all  the  ages,  is  evidence  that  God  counts  of  importance  all  work  done  for  him,
and  that  he  records  it.  Other  books  of  remembrance  he  has  (Mai.  iii.  16.  Cf.  Ps.
xl.  7;  Ivi.  8  ;  cxxxix.  16  ;  Rev.  xx.  12)  in  which  the  endurances  and  the  actions  of
his  people  are  written.  All  is  recorded  there — the  work  in  building  the  city  wall,  the
ofEering  the  cup  of  cold  water,  the  kind  word  of  encouragement  or  sympathy.  Our
record  is  on  high.  The  notable  and  famous  deeds  of  wickedness  will  be  forgotten
when  humblest  actions  of  devout  usefulness  are  immortalised  in  one  or  other  of  the
books  of  God.

II.  That  if  donb  eapidly,  God's  wobk  should  be  done  begulablt  and  discern-
ingly. They  proceeded  with  all  speed,  losing  no  time,  but  everything  was  done  in
order.  There  was  no  hurry.  Every  man  had  his  proper  post,  and  took  it  without
interrupting  his  neighbour.  The  priests  "  builded  the  sheep  gate  "  (ver.  1).  "  Next
came  the  men  of  Jericho  "  (ver.  2)  ; .  . .  "  but  the  fish  gate  did  the  sons  of  Hasse-
naah  build "  (ver.  3),  &c.  Certain  priests  and  other  individual  workmen  had
assigned  to  them  the  wall  "  over  against  their  house  "  (vers.  10,  23,  28 — 30),  where
they  would  least  interfere  with  others,  and  in  which  they  would  naturally  take  the
greatest  interest.  So  also  the  Levites  had  for  their  share  the  part  nearest  the  temple
(ver.  17),  where  they  would  work  with  the  greatest  zeal.

III.  That  it  should  be  done  beliqiously.  It  is  only  too  possible  and  too
common  to  do  religious  work  in  an  umreligious,  if  not  positively  irreligious,  spirit
— meonanically  and  thoughtlessly,  if  not  sullenly  and  selfishly.  Three  things  in  this
record  point  to  religious  earnestness,  (a)  The  ministers  of  God  took  the  lead.
"  The  high  priest  rose  up  with  his  brethren  the  priests  "  (ver.  1).  When  the  leaders
of  religion  take  the  front  posts  of  danger,  difficulty,  and  toil,  there  is  a  guarantee  of
some  spiritual  zest  in  the  work.  (6)  They  stopped  to  dedicate  the  work  they  had
done.  "They  sanctified  it"  (ver.  1).  (c)  Of  one  of  them  we  read,  that  "Baruch
earnestly  repaired,"  &c.  He  was  conspicuous  for  the  zest  with  which  he  laboured,
outstripping  and  inciting  the  others.  Workmen  in  the  vineyard  of  Christ  should
often  remind  themselves  why  it  is  they  labour,  what  it  is  they  aim  to  do,  for  whom
they  are  employed.

IV.  That  the  co-opbration  of  all  who  will  heartily  help  should  be  cheer-
fully ACCEPTED.  Here  we  have  in  united  labour — (1)  priests  (vers.  1,  22),  (2)
Levites  (ver.  17),  (3)  Nethinims  (ver.  26),  (4)  outsiders  (vers.  2,  5,  7),  (5)  rulers  (vers.
16,  17,  19),  (6)  tradesmen  (vers.  31,  32),  (7)  women— "he  and  his  daughtors"  (ver.
12).  All  can  lend  service ;  what  one  cannot  do  another  may.  No  sincere  help«r  is
to  be  despised.  In  crises,  especially  such  as  this,  when  groat  things  depend  on  the
success  of  a  few  days'  labour,  all  distinctions  sliould  be  laid  aside.  By  those  who  have
the  kingdom  of  Christ  at  heart  they  viUl  be  laid  aside,  and  all  will  join  hands,  not
only  consentingly,  but  enthusiastically.

V.  That  negligence  is  noted  and  kecobded  by  the  Divine  Master.  "Their
nobles  (of  Tekoah)  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work  of  their  Lord."  Whether  it  was
from  indolence  or  pride,  whether  they  were  unwilling  to  task  themselves  with
unusual  labour,  or  whether  they  shrank  from  associating  with  their  social  inferiors,
we  cannot  tell.  We  know,  however,  that  both  indolence  and  pride  do  keep  many
from  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  we  know  that  such  refusal  of  help  is  both  unwise
and  guilty.  It  is  to  withhold  the  hand  from  that  which  is  worthiest  and  most
enduring  ;  it  is  to  stand  outside  the  blessing  of  those  whom  God  most  ho.nours.  It
is  to  invite  the  curse  of  Meroz  (Judges  v.  23),  the  condemnation  of  the  Son  of  man
•t  the  dojr  of  judgment  (Matt.  t.  46). — 0.

Ot


THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIEMIAII.


[oh.  it.  1 — 4.


Vers.  1 — 32. — Church  work.  Notice  several  points  in  this  record  of  the  laboun
and  the  distribution  of  their  work.

I.  Devotion  and  effort  in  the  cause  of  God  are  worthy  of  distinction  and  remem-
brance. Names  have  great  power,  both  among  contemporaries  and  successors.  We
are  stimulated  by  individual  examples.  1.  'ihe  priests  are  mentioned  first;  and  God's
ministers  should  be  first  and  foremost  in  every  good  work,  especially  that  which  ii
most  closely  connected  with  his  house.  2.  Not  only  individuals  are  honoured  in  this
record,  but  families.  Our  household  life  should  be  intimately  bound  up  with  our
Church  life.  The  best  family  title  is  that  which  is  won  in  the  field  of  holy  enterprise.
3.  While  all  were  invited,  some  refused.  The  "  nobles  put  not  their  necks  to  the  work
of  their  Lord."  But  over  against  that  disgraceful  idleness  we  can  place  the  super-
abundant zeal  of  others,  who  not  only  did  their  own  work,  but  the  work  of  others  as
well.

II.  Even  THE  WOMEN  WERE  HEADY  TO  DO  THEIR  PART,  and,  understanding"daughters"
in  the  sense  of  women,  the  daughters  of  Shallum,  "  ruler  of  the  half  part  of  Jerusalem,''
not  too  high  or  too  weak  to  unite  in  such  a  cause.  In  the  building  of  the  spiritual
Jerusalem  the  "  daughters  "  contribute  no  mean  portion.

III.  Some  undertook  the  work  "  over  against  their  own  house."  We  may
find  the  opportunity  close  at  hand.  No  greater  honour  can  we  attach  to  our  own
house  than  to  connect  it  with  the  praise  and  glory  of  Jerusalem.

IV.  The  EFFECT  of  this  general  and  contemporaneous  effort  of  all  the  Lord's
people  to  repair  the  ruins  of  their  city  in  uniting  them,  effacing  wrong  distinctions,
developing  great  qualities,  lifting  up  their  faith  to  a  higher  platform.  EeformcUwn
both  effect  and  cau^e  of  revival. — R.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Open  opposition  offered  to  the  work

BY  SANBALLAT  and  TOBIAH,  and  ARRANGE-
MENTS MADE  BY  NeHBMIAH  TO  MEET  IT  (ch.

iv.).     It  would  seem  that  Sanballat  and  his
friends,  'when  they  first  heard  that  the  wall
was   actually  being  restored,   the   working
parties  formed,  and  the  work  taken  in  hand,
could  scarcely  bring  themselves  to  believe  it.
"What?    These  feeble  Jews  undertake  so
heavy  b  task,  attempt  a  work  that  must
occupy  so  long  a  time,  and  for  which  they
had  not  even  the  necessary  materials  ?  (ch.  iv.
2).     Impossible  !    Such  a  wall  as  they  could
build  would  be  so  weak,  that  if  a  fox  tried  to
get  over  it  he  would  break  it  down  "  (ver.
3).    But  when,  despite  their  scoffs,  the  work-
ing parties  laboured  steadily,  and  the  whole
wall  was  brought  to  half  the  intended  height
(ver.  6),  and  the  gaps  made  in  it  by  the
Babylonians   were  filled  up  (ver.    7),  they
changed  their  tone,  admitted  the  seriousness
of  the  undertaking,  and  the  probability  that
it  would  succeed  unless  steps  were  taken  to
prevent  it.     The  natural  course  to  pursue,  if
they  really  believed  that  rebellion  was  in-
tended (ch.  ii.  19),  or  thai  llie  permission  of
Artaxerxes  had  not  been  obtained,  was  to


act  as  Rebum  and  Shimsbai  had  acted  in  the
time  of  the  Pscudo-Smerdis,  and  address  a
letter  to  the  king  infonning  him  of  Nehe-
miah's  proceedings,  and  recommending  that
a  stop  should  bo  put  to  them  (see  Ezra  iv.
11—22).     But   probably  they  had  by  this
time  become  aware  that  Arta.xerxes  was  privy
to  the  proceedings  of  his  cupbearer,  and  would
not  easily  be  induced  to  interfere  with  them.
The  letter  to  Asaph  which  Nehemiah  had
obtained  (ch.  ii  8)  must  have  been  delivered
to  him,  and  would  become  known  ;  the  fact
that  the  king  had  sanctioned  the  restoration
of  the  wall  would  he  apparent ;  and  all  hope
of  a  check    from  this  quarter,   if  it  ever
existed,  would  be  swept  away.     Besides,  at
the  rate  at  which  the  Work  was  progressing
under  Nehemiah's  skilful  arrangements,  it
would  be  accomplished  before  the  court  could
be  connnunicated  with,  unless  other  steps
were  taken.    Accordingly,  it  was  resolved  to
stop  the  building  by  main  force.     Sanballat
and  Tobiah,  his  Ammonite  hanger-on,  en-
tered into  a  league  with  the  neighbouring
peoples,    the    Philistines    of   Ashdod,    the
Ammonites,  and  some  Arab  tribe  or  tribes,
and  agreed  with  them  that  a  conjoint  attack
should  be  made  upon  Jerusalem  by  »  con-
federate army  (ch.  iii  7,  8).    It  was  hoped  ta


m.  IV.  1—6.]


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


n


take  the  working  parties  by  surprise,  and  to
effect  their  complete  destruction  {ibid.  ver.
11).  But  Nehemiah,  having  learnt  what
was  intended,  made  preparations  to  meet
and  repulse  the  assailants.  He  began  by
setting  a  watch  day  and  night  (ver.  9)  on
the  side  on  which  the  attack  was  expected.
When  an  assault  seemed  imminent,  he
stopped  the  work,  and  drew  np  the  whole
people  in  battle  array,  with  swords,  spears,
and  bows,  behind  the  wall,  but  in  con-
spicuous places,  so  that  they  could  be  seen
from  a  distance,  and  in  this  attitude  awaited
the  enemy  (ver.  13).  The  result  was  that
no  actual  assault  was  delivered.  Sanballat
and  his  allies,  when  they  found  such  pre-
parations made  to  receive  them,  came  to
the  conclusion  that  discretion  was  the  better
part  of  valour,  and  drew  off  without  pro-
ceeding to  blows  (ver.  15).  The  work  was
then  resumed,  but  under  additional  precau-
tions. The  labourers  were  compelled  to
work  either  with  a  weapon  in  one  hand,  or
•t  the  least  with  a  sword  at  their  side  (vers.
17,  18).  Nehemiah's  private  attendants
were  armed  and  formed  into  two  bands,  one
of  which  worked  on  the  wall,  while  the  other
kept  guard,  and  held  the  arms,  offensive
and  defensive,  of  their  fellow-servants  (ver.
16).  At  night  the  working  parties  retired
to  rest  within  the  city,  but  Nehemiah  him-
self, his  brothers,  his  servants,  and  his  body-
guard, remained  outside,  keeping  watch  by
turns,  and  sleeping  in  their  clothes,  until  the
wall  was  finished  (vers.  22,  23).

Ver.  2. — Before  his  brethren.  By  "his
brethren  "  would  seem  to  be  meant  his  "chief
counsellors — ^probably  Tobiah  among  them.
The  army  of  Samaria.  Some  imderstand  by
this  a  Persian  garrison,  stationed  in  Samaria
under  its  own  commander,  with  which
Sanballat  had  influence  (Ewald,  '  History
of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  153),  but  there  is  no
real  ground  for  such  a  supposition.  Ps.
IxxxiiL  belongs  probably  to  David's  time ;
•nd  as  Samariar  had  doubtless  its  own  native
force  of  armed  citizens,  who  were  Sanballat's
subjects,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  suppose
that  he  addressed  himself  to  any  other
"army"  than  this.  The  Persians  would
maintain  a  force  in  Damascus,  but  scarcely
In  Samaria  ;  and  Persian  soldiers,  had  there
been  any  in  that  city,  would  have  been
more  likely  to  support  a  royal  cupbearer
than  a  petty  governor  with  no  influence  at
3ourt.  We  can  really  only  explain  the  dis-
turbed state  of  things  and  approach  to  open


hostility  which  appears  in  Nehemiah's
narrative,  by  the  weakness  of  Persia  in
these  parts,  and  the  consequent  power  of
the  native  races  to  act  pretty  much  as  they
pleased — even  to  the  extent  of  making  war
one  upon  another.  Will  they  fortify  them-
selves? No  other  rendering  is  tenable.
Ewald  ('History  of  Israel,'  vol.  iii.  p.  154,
note  6)  defends  it  successfully.  Will  they
sacrifice?  Will  they  make  an  end  in  a
dayl  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  "Will
they  begin  and  make  an  end  in  a  day  ? "
It  is  assumed  that  they  will  begin  by  offer-
ing a  sacrifice  to  inaugurate  their  work.
Will  they  revive  the  stones  out  of  the  heaps
of  the  rubbish  which  are  burned  1  Bather,
"  Will  they  revive  the  burnt  stones  (the
stones  that  are  burned)  out  of  the  heaps  of
the  rubbish  ? "  Will  they  do  what  is  im-
possible— solidify  and  make  into  real  stone
the  calcined  and  crumbling  blocks  which
are  all  that  they  will  find  in  the  heaps  of
rubbish  ?  If  not,  how  are  they  to  procure
material  ?

Ver.  3. — ^Tobiah  the  Ammonite  was  by
him.  The  presence  of  Tobiah  on  this  occa-
sion, before  the  alliance  was  made  with  the
Ammonites  (ver.  8),  is  a  strong  indication
that  his  position  was  not  one  of  mdependent
authority,  but  of  dependence  upon  San-
ballat. 'There  is  nothing  to  show  that  he
was  more  than  a  favourite  slave  of  the
Samaritan  governor.  A  fox.  Or,  "a  jackal,"
which  would  be  more  likely  than  a  fox  to
stray  over  a  ruined  wall  into  a  town.

Ver.  4. — Hear,  0  our  God.  Compare
Ezra's  parenthetic  burst  of  thanksgiving
(Ezra  vii.  27,  28).  That  which  in  Ezra  was
a  sudden  impulse  has  become  a  settled
habit  with  Nehemiah  (comp.  ch.  v;  19  ;
vi.  9,  U ;  xiii.  14,  22,  29,  31).  Turn  their
reproach  upon  their  own  head.  The  im-
precations of  Nehemiah  are  no  pattern  to
Christians,  anymore  than  are  those:  of  the
Psalmists  (Ps.  Ixix.  22 — 28  ;  Ixxix.  12  ;.  cix.
6 — 20,  &c.);  but  it  cannot  be  denied! that
they  are  imprecations.  Before  men  were
taught  to  "love  their  enemies,"  and  "bless
those  that  cursed  them  "  (Matt.  v.  44),  they
gave  vent  to  their  natural  feelings  of  aiiger
and  indignation  by  the  utterance  of  male-
dictions. Nehemiah's  spirit  was  hot  and
hasty ;  and  as  he  records  of  himself  (ch.
xiii.  25)  that  he  "cursed"  certain  Jews
who  had  taken  foreign  wives,  so  it  is  not  to
be  wondered  at  that  he  uttered  impreca-
tions against  his  persistent  enemies.

Ver.  5. — Cover  not  their  iniquity,  &c.
Some  of  David's  imprecations  are  very
similar  (Ps.  cix.  7, 14,  15,  &c.),  as  also  some
of  Jeremiah's  (Jer.  xviii.  23).  They  have
provoked  thee  to  anger  before  the  builders.
It  is  not  as  if  they  had  merely  "  though
scorn  "  of  thee    or  insulted  thee  before  one


S8  THE  BOOK  OP  NBHEMIAH.  [oh.  iv.  1—6.


or  two.  They  have  uttered  their  insult
publicly,  so  that  it  is  known  to  the  whole
body  of  the  builders.  Therefore  they  de-
lerre  not  to  be  forgiven.

Ver.  6. — So  built  we  the  wall.  Rather,
"and  we  (still)  built  the  walL"  Insults
Kid  gibes  had  no  effect  on   us  —  did  not


soon  all  the  wall  was  joined  together  nut*
the  half  thereof — the  whole  continuoni
line  of  wall  was  completed  to  half  the  con-
templated height.  For  the  people  had  a
mind  to  work.  Literally,  "  there  was  a
heart  to  the  people  to  work."  They  wrought,
as  we  should  say,  "  with  a  will " — thw  had


touch  us.     Despite  of  them  we  steadily  kept   .   their  heart  in  the  work.     Insult  and  gibe
on  our  building,  and  the  result  was  that   I   rather  stimulated  than  daunted  them.

HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Ridicule  of  a  good  work.  Sanballat  and  his  friends  had  at  first
thought  it  impossible  that  Nehemiah  would  attempt  to  repair  and  restore  the  wall  of
Jerusalem.  But  when  they  found  that  the  work  was  actually  begun,  and  making
good  progress,  their  anger  was  equalled  only  by  their  astonishment,  and  they  gave
vent  to  their  wrath  in  scoffs  and  ridicule.  Happily  they  seem  to  have  been  so
misled  by  their  contempt  for  the  feebleness  of  the  Jews  as  to  have  deemed  it  impos-
sible that  they  could  really  complete  the  undertaking ;  and  so  they  contented  them-
selves with  ridicule  until  the  work  was  so  far  advanced,  and  the  people  so  organised
and  inspirited,  that  more  formidable  measures  were  unavailing.  Nehemiah,  however,
was  much  wounded  by  their  scorn,  expressed  as  it  was  not  only  before  "  the  army  of
Samaria  "  (ver.  2),  but  "  before  the  builders  "  (ver.  6),  and  adapted  to  discourage
them  ;  and  he  expressed  his  feelings  strongly  in  prayer  to  God.  But  he  and  the
people,  BO  far  from  being  disheartened,  had  only  the  greater  "  mind  to  work,"  and
speedily  completed  the  restoration  up  to  half  the  height  of  the  wall.     Note —

I.  The  contempt  and  ridicule  which  good  works  have  often  to  encounter,
■SPECIALLY  AT  THEIB  COMMENCEMENT.  Miiny  discoveries  and  inventions  of  a  secular
character  might  be  cited  in  illustration.  The  Copernican  system.  Gas.  Eailways,
and  the  speed  of  travelling  expected  on  them.  Ocean  steam-ships.  But,  confining
ourselves  to  Christian  enterprises,  the  first  preaching  and  avowed  aims  of  the  gospel,
the  efforts  of  Christian  reformers  and  evangelists,  the  work  of  modem  missions,  may
be  referred  to ;  and  many  an  effort  on  a  smaller  scale  to  evangelise  a  dark  and  god-
less population.  1.  The  circumstances  which  are  thought  to  justify  contempt  and
ridicule.  (1)  The  supposed  impossibility  of  accomplishing  the  proposed  object.
"  Will  they  revive  the  stones,"  &c.  (2)  The  feebleness  of  those  who  undertake  it.
In  number,  wealth,  mental  capacity,  and  culture,  &c.  "What  do  these  feeble
Jews  ?  "  (3)  Their  expectation  of  Divine  aid.  "  Will  they  sacrifice  ?  "  Thus  "  the
preaching  of  the  gospel  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness ; "  and  those  who  preach
it  are  sometimes  regarded  as  either  knaves  or  fools.  2.  Their  actual  causes.  (1)
Dislike  of  the  work  and  anger  against  the  workers  (ver.  1).  These  help  to  produce
blindness  as  to  the  real  facts  of  the  case.  (2)  Ignorance  and  unbelief.  The  world
knows  not  the  real  resources  of  Christians,  and  cannot  understand  their  motives.  It
has  no  faith  in  the  gospel  or  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  precepts  or  promises  which  impel
and  inspirit  Christian  workers,  or  the  Divine  love  which  constrains  them.  Hence
cannot  rightly  estimate  their  conduct  oi  the  probabilities  of  their  success.  What  the
world  can  see  is  manifestly  insufficient,  and  it  cannot  see  what  renders  success  certain.
(3)  Pelt  paucity  of  solid  grounds  of  objection.  Ridicule  often  used  as  a  substitute
for  argument.

II.  The  EFFECT  WHICH  CONTEMPT  AND  RIDICULE  SHOULD  HAVE  ON  THOSE  ENGAGED

III  GOOD  WORKS.  1.  Care  not  to  deserve  them.  It  must  be  confessed  that  sometimes
those  engaged  in  religious  enterprises  invite  ridicule,  if  not  contempt ;  by  manifest
ignorance,  by  cowardly  fears  of  advancing  science,  by  clap-trap  and  worldly  policy,
by  cant  or  weak  sentimentalism,  by  glaring  inconsistencies  between  their  lofty  pro-
fessions and  their  actual  conduct,  &c.  It  is  one  of  the  wholesome  functions  of
raillery  to  banish  such  follies  from  good  undertakings,  and  thus  make  the  work  truer
and  stronger.  2.  Prayer.  Not  like  Nehemiah's,  for  vengeance  on  the  despisers ;  but
forgiveness,  and  that  God  would  "turn  their  reproach  on  their  head  "  by  granting
iignal   success  to  the  work.     3.  Calm  confidence.     In  the  assurance  of  that  Divine


OH.  IT.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  M


favour  and  assistance  of  which  the  world  takes  little  account,  and  thus  of  good
success.  4.  Steady,  persevering  toil.  All  the  more  vigorous  because  of  the  opposi-
tion. Thus  Christian  workers  will  live  down  contempt,  even  if,  as  in  this  case,  it
give  place  to  violent  hostility.  It  may,  however,  be  followed  by  applause  when
the  work  has  proved  itseU  good  by  results  which  even  the  world  can  appreciate.

Ver.  4. — Bespising  the  godly.  "Hear,  0  our  God;  for  we  are  despised."  The
contempt  of  many  for  sincere  and  earnest.  Christians  has  respect  not  only  to  their
undertakings,  as  here,  but  their  whole  religious  life.  Taking  this  more  general
Bubject,  notice —

I.  The  treatment  lamented.  "  We  are  despised."  How  is  it  that  Christians
are  ever  despised  ?  Sometimes,  doubtless,  they  have  themselves  to  blame  (see,  on
the  whole  paragraph,  II.  1).  Thoroughly  consistent  Christians  often  obtain  high
respect  from  men  of  the  world.  But  the  feeling  of  others  is  that  of  contempt.  1.
What  they  despise.  (1)  Religion  itself.  Rejecting  and  disliking  it,  men  persuade
themselves  that  it  is  not  worthy  of  serious  regard ;  it  cannot  be,  or  persons  so
enlightened  as  they  would  be  sure  to  recognise  its  worth.  Hence  they  affect  to
thiiik  serious  Christians  credulous  and  foolish;  believing  what  is  unworthy  of  faith,
spending  thought,  feeling,  energy,  money  for  that  which  is  nought,  and  giving  up
real  advantages  and  pleasures  for  phantoms ;  solid  treasures  for  an  estate  in  the
clouds.  Gradually  tliey  come  to  believe  seriously  what  first  they  affected  to  believe,
until  all  earnest  Christians  are  regarded  as  ignorant  fanatics.  (2)  The  contempt  is
sometimes  increased  by  the  circumstances  with  which  religion  is  associated.  Some
Christians  have  so  much  which  the  world  esteems  as  respectable,  that  their  religion
is  overlooked  or  condoned.  It  may  excite  a  smile,  but  does  not  awaken  contempt.
But  when  such  things  are  wanting,  and  the  one  thing  most  prominent  is  piety,  it  is
more  apt  to  awaken  feelings  of  hostility,  and  these  to  become  contemptuous.  These
poor  and  ignorant  folk,  what  right  have  they  to  deem  themselves  wiser  and  better
than  "  tlieir  betters  "  ?  (see  John  vii.  48, 49).  (3)  In  some  cases  it  is  the  form  which
religion  assumes  that  awakens  or  intensifies  contempt.  A  large  part  of  the  world,  in  a
Christian  country,  deems  it  quite  right  to  have  a  religion,  hut  it  must  be  that  of  the
wealthy,  respectable,  and  fashionable  classes :  all  other  it  denounces,  or  with  proud
superciliousness  ignores  as  unworthy  of  serious  notice.  2.  The  real  causes  of  their
contempt.  (1)  Unbelief.  This  the  main  cause.  They  do  not  really  believe  the
truths  of  Christianity,  faith  in  which  is  tlie  mainspring  of  the  Christian  life.  The
Divine  estimate  of  the  relative  worth  of  men  and  things  is  not  accepted.  (2)  Ignor-
ance. Men  highly  intelligent  in  other  departments — men  of  science,  whose  judgment
is  worthy  of  all  respect  in  their  own  sphere — are  often  profoundly  ignorant  of  the
Christian  religion,  and  the  actual  principles  and  motives  which  animate  the  Christian ;
yet  "upeak  evil  of  the  things  wliich  they  understand  not."  (3)  Worldliness.  Esti-
mating all  things  by  the  worldly  standard,  "the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God"  are
"  foolisliness  unto  them."  (4)  Conceit  of  superiority.  Pride  of  intellect,  rank,  &c.,
blinds  them,  and  produces  disdain  of  those  whom  they  deem  inferior  to  them.
Hence  they  become  "despisers  of  those  that  are  good."  It  does  not,  however,
require  actual  superiority  to  produce  this  effect ;  the  conceit  of  it  is  enough.

II.  The  feeling  which  such  treatment  awakens.  The  feeling  expressed  in  the
text  is  evidently  that  of  pain.  It  is  singular  that  to  be  despised  is  harder  to  bear
than  any  other  kind  of  ill-treatment.  It  wounds  self-respect  more,  perhaps  pride.
It  is  felt  most  keenly  by  those  whose  knowledge,  or  refinement,  or  position  enables
them  best  to  appreciate  the  feelings  which  prompt  it.  St.  Paul  found  it  harder  to
bear  the  scorn  of  educated  men  than  St.  Peter.  To  be  deeply  affected  by  it,  is  in  all
cases  a  sign  of  too  great  regard  for  the  good  opinion  of  men.  Habitual  supreme
regard  for  "  the  praise  of  God  "  would  raise  us  above  it.

III.  The  considerations  which  will  support  us  under  it.  Let  good  men  bear
in  mind — 1.  Who  it  is  that  despise  them.  Those  whose  judgment,  for  the  reasons
given  above,  is  of  little  account.  2.  Forwhatthey  are  despised.  For  that  which  they
know  to  be  wise,  noble,  substantial,  worthy  of  all  honour.  3.  With  whom  they  are
despised.  God  (1  Sam.  ii.  30 ;  Ps.  x.  13).  Our  Lord  Jesus  (Isa.  liii.  3).  Apostles,
martyrs,   saints   in  general,  "the  excellent  of   the  earth."     4.  The  estimation  in


40  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  it,  1—6.

which  they  are  held  by  the  wisest  and  best  beings.  God  esteems  and  treats  them
as  especially  his  "sons  and  daughters."  Christ  "is  not  ashamed  to  call  them
brethren."  Angels  are  "  ministering  spirits  "  to  them,  and  rejoice  when  even  "  one
sinner  repents  "  and  is  added  to  their  number.  5.  The  vindication  of  themselves,
and  the  confusion  of  their  despisers,  which  will  take  place  at  the  last  day.

IV.  To  WHAT  WB  SHOULD  BBSORT  WHEN  BUFFERING  FROM  IT.  Prayer  for  those  who
despise  us.  "  Pray _/br  them  which  despitefuUy  use  you."  "  Being  reviled,  we  bless."
Prayer  for  ourselves ;  for  needful  strength  to  bear  contempt  meekly  yet  manfully,
"  Strengthened  with  might  by  Ood's  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,"  we  shall  not  heed  it.

Ver.  6. — A  mind  to  work.    "The  people  had  a  mind  to  work."    In  our  age
calls  and  opportunities  for  Christian  work  are  numerous  and  urgent.    The  prevalenc*
of  "  a  mind  to  work  "  is  therefore  of  great  importance ;  its  existence  throughout
•any  Christian  community  is  matter  for  thankfulness,  when  at  least  it  springs  from
Christian  principle,  and  is  directed  wisely  to  valuable  ends.

I.  Whence  a  tbult  Cheistian  "  mind  to  work  "  springs.  1.  Sense  of  necessity.
Perception  of  evils  needing  to  be  removed ;  of  good  requiring  to  be  done.  2.  Sense
of  duty.  3.  Gratitude  and  love  to  God  and  the  Redeemer.  4.  Benevolence.  5.
Hope.  Of  accomplishing  good ;  of  obtaining  good.  6.  All  these  may  be  excited
and  guided  by  good  leaders.     Such  as  Nehemiah.

n.  How  IT  WILL  SHOW  ITSELF.  In  actual  work.  1.  Prompt.  2.  Hearty.  3.
Happy.  4.  Abundant.  5.  Steady  and  persevering.  Notwithstanding  scofiers,
difficulties,  &c.

III.  What  it  WILL  SECURE.  1.  Freedom  from  fruitless  speculation  and  unhealthy
controversy.    2.  Growth  in  true  Christian  life.    3.  Success  in  doing  good.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Derision  a^d  devotion.  Not  the  first  nor  the  last  instance  was  this
one  here  recorded  of —

I.  Devotion  assailed  by  derision  (vers.  1 — 3).  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  were  con-
temptuously angry  when  they  heard  that  the  Jews  had  actually  begun  to  build  :  they
"  took  great  indignation,  and  mocked  the  Jews"  (ver.  1).  "What  do  these  feeble
Jews  ?  "  said  Sanballat  (ver.  2).  "  If  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  break  down  their  stone
wall,"  said  Tobiah  (ver.  3),  using  the  strongest  language  of  derision.  Here  was  (1)
misplaced  contempt.  A  very  ridiculous  thing  it  must  have  seemed  to  Noah's  contem-
poraries for  him  to  be  building  a  great  ship  so  far  from  the  sea ;  but  the  hour  came  when,
as  the  waters  rose,  the  scomers  who  had  laughed  at  him  knew  that  he  was  the  one  wisft
man,  and  they  the  fools.  A  pitiably  ruinous  thing  the  ministers  of  Pharaoh's  court  must
have  thought  it  in  Moses  to  sacrifice  his  princely  position  in  Egypt,  and  choose  to  "  sufEer
aniiction  with  the  people  of  God  "  (Heb.  xi.  25).  We  know  now  how  wise  he  was.
Many  others  beside  Festus  thought  Paul  mad  to  relinquish  everything  dear  to  man
that  he  might  be  a  leader  of  the  despised  sect,  "everywhere  spoken  against."  We
understand  what  he  did  for  the  world,  and  what  a  "  crown  of  righteousness  "  he  was
winning  for  himself.  To  the  shallow  judgment  of  the  Samaritans,  Nehemiah  and
his  workmen  seemed  to  be  engaged  in  a  work  that  would  come  to  nought — they
would  "  have  their  labour  for  their  pains  ; "  but  their  contempt  was  wholly  misplaced.
These  men  were  earnest  and  devout  workmen,  guided  by  a  resolute,  high-minded
leader,  who  had  a  plan  in  his  head  as  well  as  a  hope  in  his  heart ;  they  were  to  be
congratulated,  and  not  despised  So  now  {a)  fleshly  strength,  a  thing  of  muscle  and
nerve,  may  despise  the  mind  with  which  it  competes ;  or  {b)  material  force  (money,
muskets,  arms)  the  spiritual  strength  against  which  it  is  arrayed  ;  or  (c)  mere  numr
hers,  without  truth  and  without  God,  the  feeble  band  which  is  in  a  small  minority,
but  which  has  truth,  righteousness,  God  on  its  side.  Very  misplaced  contempt,  as  time
will  soon  show.  Sanballat  and  Tobiah,  in  their  superciUousness,  used  (2)  an  easily-
forged  weapon — ridicule.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  turn  good  things,  even  the  very
best  thiiigs,  into  ridicule.  It  is  the  favourite  weapon  of  wrong  in  its  weakness.
When  men  can  do  nothing  else,  they  can  laugh  at  goodness  and  virtue.  Any  sini-
pleton  may  make  filial  piety  seem  ridiculous  by  a  sneering  allusion  to  a  "  mother'i


ea.  IT.  1— 4(.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMUH.


41


apron-string."  The  -weakest-minded  man  can  raise  a  laugh  by  speaking  of  death  ot
of  devotion  in  terms  of  flippancy.  There  was  but  the  very  smallest  speck  of  clever-
ness in  Sanballat's  idea  of  turning  ashes  into  stones  (ver.  2),  or  in  Tobiah's  reference  t*
the  fox  breaking  down  the  wall  (ver.  3),  but  it  probably  excited  the  derisive  laughter
of  "  the  brethren  and  the  army  of  Samaria  "  (ver.  2).  Let  those  who  adopt  the  role
of  the  mocker  remember  that  it  is  the  weapon  of  the  fool  which  they  are  wielding.
But  though  easily  forged,  this  weapon  of  ridicule  is  (3)  a  blade  thai  cuts  deeply.
Nehemiah  felt  it  keenly.  "  Hear,  0  our  God ;  for  we  are  despised  "  (ver.  4).  And
the  imprecation  (ver.  6)  that  follows  shows  very  deep  and  intense  feeling.  Derision
may  be  easily  produced,  but  it  is  very  hard  to  bear.  It  is  but  a  shallow  philosopliy
that  says  "  hard  words  break  no  bones  : "  they  do  not  break  bones,  but  they  bruise
tender  hearts.  They  crush  sensitive  spirits,  which  is  more,  and  worse.  "  A  wounded
spirit  who  can  bear?"  (Prov.  xviii.  14).  The  full  force  of  a  human  soul's  contempt
directed  against  a  sensitive  spirit,  the  brutal  trampling  of  heartless  malignity  on
the  most  sacred  and  cherished  convictions  of  the  soul,  this  is  one  of  the  worst
Bufferings  we  can  be  called  to  endure.     But  we  have —

II.  Devotion  betakino  itself  to  its  refuge  (vers.  4,  5).  Nehemiah,  as  his
habit  was,  betook  himself  to  God.  He  could  not  make  light  of  the  reproaches,  but,
smarting  under  them,  he  appealed  to  the  Divine  Comforter.  "  Hear,  0  our  God,"
&c.  (ver.  4).  In  all  time  of  our  distress  from  persecution  we  should  (1)  carry  our
harden  to  our  God;  especially  remembering  "  him  who  endured  such  contradiction  of
sinners"  (Heb.  xii.  3),  and  appealing  to  him  who  is  "touched  with  the  feeling  of  our
infirmities  "  (Heb.  iv.  15),  having  been  himself  tried  on  this  point  even  as  we  are.
(2)  Ask  his  interposition  with  our  enemies;  only,  as  we  have  learned  of  Christ,  asking
not  for  retaliation  (ver.  6),  but  for  the  victory  of  love,  for  their  conversion  to  a
better  mind.

III.  Devotion  driven  to  do  its  best  (ver.  6).  Under  the  inspiration  of  an
attack  from  without,  Nehemiah  and  his  brethren  went  on  with  their  work  (1)  with
redoubled  speed.  "  So  built  we  the  wall ....  unto  the  half  thereof."  It  grew
rapidly  under  their  busy  hands,  nerved  and  stimulated  as  they  were  to  do  their  best.
(2)  With  perfect  co-ope7-ation.  "  All  the  wall  was  joined  together."  There  was  no
part  left  undone  by  any  idlers  or  malcontents:  each  man  did  the  work  appointed
him.  The  reproaches  of  them  that  are  without  knits  together  as  one  man  those  that
are  within.  (3)  With  heartiness.  "The  people  had  a  mind  to  work."  No  instru-
ments, however  cunningly  devised  and  well-made,  will  do  much  without  the  "mind
to  work  ; "  but  with  our  mind  in  the  work  we  can  do  almost  anything  with  such
weapons  as  we  have  at  hand.  Pray  for,  cherish  "  the  willing  mind"  (2  Cor.  viii.  12)
in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  and  then  the  busy  hand  will  quickly  "  build  the  wall." — C.


EXPOSITION.


Ver.  7. — It  came  to  pass,  that  when
Sanballat,  and  Tobiah,  at  Samaria,  and  the
Arabians,  and  the  Ammonites,  and  the
Ashdodites,  in  their  respective  residences,
heard  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were
made  up,  or  "  that  the  (entire)  wall  of
Jerusalem  was  of  a  (good)  height,"  they  were
wroth.  Observe  that  Tobiah  is  herer  quite
separated  from  the  nation  of  the  Ammonites,
and  in  no  way  represented  as  their  leader.
Jealousy  of  Jerusalem  on  the  part  of  the
Ammonites  and  Philistines  is  quite  natural ;
'and,  if  the  Arabs  are  the  Edomites,  their
opposition  would  be  equally  a  matter  of
course  (Ps.  cxxxviL  7  ;  Ezek.  xxv.  12 ;
Amos  i.  11 ;  Chad.  10, 14) ;  but  the  Edomites
are  not  called  Arabs  in  Scripture,  nor  do
Arahs  appear  very  often  among  the  enemies  of
Che  Jews.     It  has  been  suggesjtcd  that  the


"  Arabians  "  here  mentioned  are  the  descend-
ants of  a  colony  which  Sargon  planted  in
Samaria  itself.  This,  of  course,  is  possible  ;
but  they  may  perhaps  have  been  one  of  the
desert  tribes,  induced  to  come  forward  by
the  hope  of  plunder  (Ewald),  and  influenced
by  the  Ammonites,  their  neighbours.

Ver.  8. — To  hinder  it.  Rather,  "  to  do  it
hurt. "  The  word  used  is  a  rare  one.  Accord-
ing to  Gesenius,  it  has  the  two  senses  of
"  error  "  and  "  injury."

"Ver.  9.— We ...  set  a  watch  against  them
day  and  night,  because  of  them.  Rather,
"over  against  them,"  "opposite  to  them"
— opposite,  that  is,  to  the  point  from  which
they  were  expected  to  make  their  attack.

Ver.  10.— The  strength  of  the  bearers  ol
burdens  is  decayed.  The  complaint  seems
to  be,  that  by  the  drawing  off  of  men  from


THE  BOOK  0*"  NEaSMIAH.


[CH.  IT.  t— 23.


the  working  parties  to  act  as  guards,  those
parlies  were  so  weakened  that  they  could  not
continue  the  work,  the  quantity  of  rubbish
being  so  great.

V'er.  12. — If  the  text  is  sound,  it  can
only  mean  that  the  Jews  who  dwelt  in  the
outlying  towns,  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Ammon,  Samaria,  Ashdod,  &c.,  came  repeat-
edly to  Jerusalem,  and  tried  to  draw  off
their  contingents,  saying  to  them,  "  You
must  return  to  us."  But  it  is  suspected
that  there  is  a  corruption  of  the  original
words  of  Nehemiah,  and  that  what  he  wrote
was,  that  these  Jews  came  repeatedly  to
'  Jerusalem  and  warned  him  of  the  enemy's
designs.  (So  Ewald,  Houbigant,  Dathe,  A.
Clarke,  and  others.)

Ver.  13. — Then  set  I  in  the  lower  places
behind  the  wall,  and  on  the  higher  places.
There  is  no  "  and  "  in  the  original.  Nehe-
miah means  that  in  the  less  elevated  places,
where  the  wall  was  least  strong  by  nature,
he  had  his  men  posted  on  conspicuous  spots
within  the  walls,  where  they  could  be  seen
from  a  distance,  and  so  deterred  the  enemy
from  advancing.  He  drew  them  up  after
their  families,  that  each  man  might  feel  he
was  fighting  for  his  brethren,  sons,  &c.
(ver.  14).

Ver,  li. — And  I  looked,  and  rose  up,  and
said.  A  particular  occasion  seems  to  be
spoken  of.  The  allies  had  joined  their
forces  ;  the  army  was  advancing  ;  Nehemiah
had  obtained  information  of  the  quarter
from  which  the  attack  was  to  be  expected  ;
he  had  posted  his  men  (ver.  13) ;  when  he
' '  looked,  and  rose  up,"  and  spoke,  it  was
probably  as  the  enemy  was  coming  up  to  the
attack  ;  he  then  made  this  short  but  stirring
appeal.  That  no  conflict  followed  would
seem  to  show,  that  "  when  the  enemy
approached,  and  saw  from  a  distance  the
whole  people  awaiting  them  in  perfect  equip-
ment, order,  and  spirit,"  they  lost  heart
and  "turned  back"  (Ewald,  'History  of
Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  155).  The  Lord,  which  is
great  and  terrible.  See  the  comment  on
ch.  L  6.

Ver.  16. — The  half  of  my  servants
wrought  in  the  work.  Nehemiah  divided
his  "  servants  "  or  slaves  into  two  bodies,
one  of  which  laboured  at  the  wall,  while
the  other  kept  guard,  fuUy  armed,  and  held
the  spears,  bows  and  arrows,  shields,  and
corselets  of  their  fellows.  The  rulers  were
behind.  The  "rulers"  or  "princes"  did
not  labour,  but  stood  behind  the  labourers,
directing  them,  and  ready  to  lead  them  on
if  the  enemy  ventured  to  come  to  blows.

Ver.  17. — And  they  which  bare  burdens,
with  those  that  laded.  Rather,  ' '  both  they
which  bare  buidens,  as  they  laded."  The
builders,  or  those  engaged  upon  the  work,
«e    div'ded    into  two  classes — (1)    actual


builders,  and  (2)  those  who  carried  tha
materials.  Of  these,  the  latter  did  their
work  with  one  hand,  while  in  their  other
hand  they  held  a  weapon ;  the  former
needed  both  hands  for  their  employment,
but  even  these  wore  swords  in  their  girdles.

Ver.  18. — For  the  builders.  Rather,
"  and  the  (actual)  builders  " — ^masons,  brick-
layers, and  the  like,  as  distinct  from  the
bearers  of  burthens,  or  carriers  of  materiaL
He  that  sounded  the  trumpet.  The  signal-
man. Trumpeters  appear  both  in  the
Egyptian  and  the  Assyrian  sculptures  (see
'  Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  i.  p.  539,  second
ed.;  Wilkinson,  'Ancient  Egyptians,'  rol.  ii
p.  260).

Ver.  21. —  So  we  laboured:  and  half  of
them  held  the  spears.  This  is  a  summary
of  the  main  points  previously  related  :  "So
we  continued  to  work ;  and  one-half  of  my
personal  followers  continued  to  keep  watch,
and  to  hold  the  spears  "  (ver.  16).  From  the
rising  of  the  morning,  &c.  This  is  addi-
tional, and  shows  how  early  the  work  com-
menced each  morning,  and  .how  late  it
continued.

Ver.  22. — Every  one,  with  his  servant.
The  material  condition  of  the  people  had
much  improved  since  the  return  under
Zerubbabel.  Then  there  was  only  one  slave
to  every  six  Israelites  (Ezra  iL  64,  65) ;
now  every  Israelite  had  his  slave,  and  many
no  doubt  a  large  number.  Iiodge  within
Jerusalem.  /.  e.  "sleep"  or  "pass  the
night "  there,  instead  of  returning  to  their
several  villages  or  towns.  That  in  the  night
they  may  be  a  guard  to  us.  The  very  fact
that  they  were  in  Jerusalem,  and  known  to
be  there,  would  tend  to  prevent  an  attack  ;
and  if  the  enemy  assaulted  by  night,  they
would  be  at  hand,  and  able  to  take  their
part  in  guarding  the  work.

Ver.  23. — My  brothren.  Actual  brothers
probably.  That  Nehemiah  had  brothers
appears  from  ch.  i.  2  ;  that  one  of  them,
Hanani,  had  accon'panied  him  to  Jerusalem
is  evident  from  ch.  vii.  2.  My  servants.
See  above,  ver.  16.  The  men  of  the  guard
that  followed  me-  As  governor,  Nehemiah
would  maintain  a  body-guard,  in  addition  to
his  band  of  slaves.  Saving  that  every  one
put  them  off  for  washing.  So  the  Vulgate  :
"Unusquisque  tan  turn  nudabatur  ad  bap-
tismum ; "  but  it  is  at  least  doubtful
whether  the  Hebrew  words  can  possibly  have
this  meaning.  The  most  natural  and  literal
sense  of  them  ^is  that  given  by  Maurer  and
Eambach — "Each  man's  weapon  was  his
water ; "  the  supposed  connection  of  the
clause  with  the  preceding  being,  "No  one
took  off  his  clothes,"  not  even  for  the  bath
— no  one  bathed  ;  "  «  man's  only  bath  was
his  weapon."  Some  critics,  however,  defend
the  rendering  of  the  A.  V  ;  others  take  the


OH.  IV.  7— 23.  J


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


4S


words  in  the  same  way,  but  explain  the
term  "water"  differently,  of  a  natural
want  (Ewald,  Stanley)  ;  while  many  regard


the  text  as  unsound,  and  propose  emenda-
tions. None,  however,  that  has  as  yet  been
proposed  ia  aatbfactory.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  7 — 15. — Armed  opposition.  Ridicule  failing  and  the  work  progressing,
the  enemies  of  the  Jews,  more  angry  than  ever,  conspire  to  stop  it  by  force  of  arms
We  have  here —

I.  Enemies  without.  1.  Various  (ver.  7).  2.  Combined  (ver.  8).  3.  Angry
(ver.  7).     4.  Wily  (ver.  11).     5.  Ruthless  {ilid.).    6.  Determined  to  stop  the  work.

II.  Difficulties  WITHIN.  1.  The  weariness  and  discouragement  of  the  labourers
(ver.  10).  2.  Pressing  and  repeated  messages  to  those  of  them  who  came  from  the
country  to  return  to  their  homes.  Such  seems  the  meaning  of  ver.  12.  Their  neigh-
bours and  friends,  aware  of  the  designs  of  the  foe,  were  anxious  for  their  safety  and
that  of  their  families  whom  they  had  left  behind.

III.  Nehemiah's  measures.  As  difficulties  thickened  his  courage  rose,  his  capacity
became  more  evident,  and  his  ability  to  sway  the  many.  Full  of  confidence  and
resolution,  he  inspired  others  with  like  feelings.  1.  Prayer  (ver.  9).  2.  Setting
a  watch.  3.  Subsequently  a  general  arming  (ver.  13).  4.  Spirit-stirring  address
(ver.  14).

IV.  Their  results  (ver.  15).  1.  Determent  of  the  adversaries.  2.  Resumption
of  the  work.

Lessons: — ■!.  For  national  life.  (1)  Wars  of  defence  are  lawful  when  necessary,
and  should  be  waged  bravely  for  the  sake  of  homes,  wives,  and  children.  (2)  Pre-
paration for  war  is  a  security  for  peace.  2.  For  the  religious  life.  (1)  Christians
must  be  prepared  to  figlit  as  well  as  work.  The  enemies  of  their  souls  and  of  their
Lord  are  various,  numerous,  and  determined,  and  must  be  encountered.  (2)  Prayer,
watchfulness,  and  courage  must  be  combined  in  the  Christian  warfare  (comp.  Eph.
vi.  10 — 18).  (3)  Faith  in  God  and  fear  of  him  will  conquer  the  fear  of  our  adver-
saries, human  or  diabolic.  (4)  Regard  for  the  highest  welfare  of  their  families
should  inspire  Christians  in  opposing  the  enemies  of  religion.

Ver.  9. — Prayer  and  waichfulness.  "Nevertheless  we  made  our  prajrer  unto
God,  and  set  a  watch,"  &o.

I.  The  Christian's  PERILS.  His  enemies  are — 1.  Numerous.  Satan  and  his  angels,
his  own  corruptions,  the  world.  2.  Diverse.  DifEerent  in  nature,  and  mode  of
attack ;  assuming  different  forms  ;  appealing  in  turn  to  every  passion  and  principle
of  our  nature.  3.  Insidious.  "  The  wiles  of  the  devil."  He  can  take  the  form  of
"  an  angel  of  light."  Evil  often  appears  as  good.  Danger  lurks  where  we  should
least  suspect  it :  in  needful  occupations,  in  lawful  pleasures,  in  the  society  and
Influence  of  dearest  friends.  4.  Intent  on  our  destruction.  "  Seeking  whom  he
may  devour."    Our  highest  interests,  our  eternal  well-being,  are  imperilled.

II.  The  Christian's  safeguards.  1.  Prayer.  To  him  who  is  mightier  than  our
mightiest  foes;  who  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  them,  and  of  our  weaknesses,
whose  eye  is  ever  upon  them  and  us  ;  who  loves  us  and  desires  our  safety ;  who  has
promised  help  and  victory  to  those  who  call  upon  him.  In  his  strength  alone  can  we
conquer.  2.  Watchfulness.  Habitual  vigilance,  for  our  foes  may  spring  upon  us
from  unexpected  quarters  ;  special  watchfulness  "  over  against  them  "  (as  the  last
words  of  the  text  should  be  rendered).  Where  from  experience  we  have  learned
ihat  our  weakness  and  the  enemy's  strength  lie.  3.  The  two  combined.  God  will
protect  those  who  watch  as  well  as  pray.  Prayer  aids  watching,  and  watching
prayer.  "Watch  unto  prayer."  Prayer  without  watchfulness  is  presumption.
Watchfulness  without  prayer,  sinful  self-confidenoe.  Each  witliout  the  other  is  sure
to  fail.    Both  together  will  insure  deliverance.

Ver.  14. — Com-age  in  the  Christian  war.     "  Be  not  ye  afraid  of  them,"  Aa    A
stirring  battle-cry.     Suitable  in  the  Christian  warfare.
I.  The  Church's  wabfabb.    Each  for  himself  and  his  family ;  all  for  the  common


M  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMUH.  [oh.  iv.  7—23.

good.  Against  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  in  all  the  forms  they  assume :
infidelity,  heresy,  ungodliness,  wickedness  of  all  kinds.  The  war  i8— 1.  Defensive.
To  preserve  themselves,  and  their  households  and  Churches,  from  spiritual  and  moral
evil.  2.  Offensive.  To  subdue  the  world  to  Christ.  Destroying  the  errors  and  sins
which  prevail  in  it,  and  rescuing  their  victims.

II.  The  Church's  liability  to  feab.  On  account  of  the  number,  and  power,  and
subtlety  of  her  enemies,  and  the  hardships  and  perils  of  the  war.  There  is  a  fear
which  is  good.  "  Happy  is  the  man  that  feareth  alway."  But  not  the  craven  fear
which  shuns  the  fight.

III.  The  Church's  remedy  against  fear.  1.  Remembrance  of  God.  (1)  His
greatness.  "  Greater  is  he  that  is  in  you  than  he  that  is  in  the  world."  He  has  all
power  to  sustain  his  servants,  give  them  the  victory,  and  reward  the  victors.  (2)
His  terribleness.  To  his  enemies  to  subdue  them ;  to  his  professed  friends  if  they
decline  to  do  battle  for  him.

"Fear  him,  ye  saints,  and  you  will  then
Have  nothing  else  to  fear."

2.  Thought  of  the  interests  involved.  As  here,  of  brothers,  sons,  daughters,  wives,
and  houses.     3.  Mutual  encouragement.     "  Be  not  afraid,"  &c.

Vers.  16 — 23. — Armed  workers.  The  enemies  of  the  Jews,  who  meditated  an  attack
upon  them,  finding  that  they  were  aware  of  their  design  and  well  prepared  to  receive
them,  withdrew  their  forces,  and  the  work  of  restoring  the  wall  went  on  again.  Nehe-
miah,  however,  thought  it  necessary  that  the  people  should  be  prepared  for  resistance
at  any  moment.  He  therefore  kept  half  his  own  retinue  always  on  guard,  well  armed,
while  the  other  half  worked ;  he  appointed  that  every  labourer  should  work  armed :
those  whose  work  permitted,  holding  a  weapon  in  one  hand  while  labouring  with  the
other ;  the  masons,  whose  work  required  both  hands,  having  a  sword  by  their  side  ;
he  placed  the  rulers  behind  the  people,  to  direct  the  work  and,  if  need  were,  to  lead
the  fight.  He  himself  was  everywhere,  overlooking  the  workmen,  and  on  the  alert
for  the  enemy ;  having  a  trumpeter  by  his  side  to  summon  all  the  people  together  to
resist  any  assault  that  might  be  made.  As  an  additional  precaution,  he  ordered  those
of  the  people  whose  dwellings  were  elsewhere  to  lodge  by  night  in  the  city ;  while
he,  his  relatives,  slaves,  and  other  attendants,  though  compelled  to  sleep,  never  put  off
their  clothes  (unless  the  last  very  obscure  words  of  the  chapter  state  an  exception)
until  all  danger  had  passed.

The  lessons  from  this  paragraph  for  any  Christian  Church  or  society,  and  indeed
for  any  community,  are,  the  importance  of — 1.  Diligence  in  work,  combined  with
readiness  for  contest.  It  is  work  that  secures  prosperity,  but  cor.flict  may  be
necessary  for  the  work's  sake.  2.  Thorough  union.  3.  Division  of  duties.  Each
taking  what  he  is  best  fitted  for,  or  is  thought  to  be  by  those  in  authority.  4.  Good
organisation.  6.  Good  rulers.  6.  Obedience  to  them.  7.  Self-denial,  la  all — those
highest  in  authority  the  most  careful  to  practise  it.

Vers.  17, 18. — Building  in  readiness  to  fight.  "  They  which  builded  on  the  wall,
4c.  For  the  builders  ....  so  builded."  Regarding  the  work  of  building  the  wall
of  Jerusalem  as  an  image  of  Christian  edification,  whether  of  the  individual  or  of
the  Church,  notice —

I.  The  need  which  Christians  have  of  preparation  for  combat  while  engaged
IN  building.  1.  In  seeking  each  his  own  spiritual  profit.  Must  be  intent  on  im-
provement and  growth,  but  at  the  same  time  ready  to  fight.  For  his  spiritual  foes
are  near,  and  may  make  their  onset  at  any  moment  and  from  any  direction.  2.  In
seeking  to  profit  others.  Instruction  in  the  truth  is  of  primary  importance ;  but
there  must  be  preparedness  to  meet  objections  and  reprove  or  warn  against  errors
and  _sins._  Apphes  peculiarly  to  Christian  ministers.  Their  main  work  is  to  "  edify ; "
but  in  doing  so  they  must  not  only  be  ready  for  but  actually  do  battle  against  iniquity
and  false  teaching.  Besides  which,  they,  like  Nehemiah  and  his  retinue,  must
especially  mount  guard  for  the  protection  of  the  whole  community  against  threatened
assaults  of  unbelief,  'superstition,  immorality,  &c.,  and  be  ready,  if  necessary,  to
summon  all  to  fight  against  them  (see  Ezek.  iii.  17,  seq.;  zxxiii.  7  «y.)


01.  IT.  7—23.]  THS  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  4i

II.  Theib  BELATIOH  to  KACH  othbb.  _  1.  They  are  mutually  helpful.  Fighting,
or  readiness  for  it,  renden  building  possible.  If  infidelity  or  sin  get  the  upper  hand,
"  edification  "  ceases.  Building  aids  fighting.  Gives  strength  for  it,  supplies  with
strongest  motives  to  it.  He  who  is  well  "  built  up  "  in  Christian  faith  and  life  hu
an  experience  of  the  preciousness  of  that  which  the  enemy  assails  which  will  make
him  earnest  and  bold  in  contending  for  it.  So  with  a  Church  established  in  all  good-
ness, and  richly  enjoying  the  privileges  of  the  gospel.  In  the  end,  however  (as
when  the  wall  was  finished),  building  may  render  preparation  for  fighting  unnecessary.
The  Christian  who  has  arrived  at  great  maturity  becomes  unassailable  by  either  serious
error  or  temptation  to  sin.  Growth  in  grace  renders  the  disciple  more  and  more  like
his  Master,  who  could  say,  "  The  prince  of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in
me."  After  many  a  conflict,  he  settles  down  in  quiet  enjoyment  of  what  he  has  won ;
his  walls  BO  strong,  his  gates  so  secure,  that  no  enemy  can  enter,  even  if  he  do  not
cease  the  vain  attempt.  A  Church,  also,  well  built  up  at  once  in  Christian  life  and
character  and  in  numbers,  needs  not  take  much  heed  of  enemies  without.  Her  life
and  works  speak  for  her  more  powerfully  than  arguments.  2.  Readiness  for  fighting
may  hinder  or  stop  building.  The  attitude  of  mind  favourable  to  the  former  is  in
no  small  degree  unfavourable  to  the  latter.  Besides,  when  men  are  armed  for  con-
flict they  may  come  to  prefer  it,  and  engage  in  it  needlessly  or  excessively,  to  the
neglect  of  edification.  But  no  Church  (or  state)  can  live  by  fighting.  This  is  partly
true  of  direct  battling  with  evil  tendencies  and  habits  in  ourselves  and  others  ;  let
good  be  nourished  and  strengthened,  and  evil  will  decay.  It  is  especially -tiab  of
religious  controversy.  It  is  very  apt  to  injure  Christian  life  and  character.  The
antagonistic  spirit  which  it  engenders  is  unfavourable  to  meekness  and  charity,  and
even  justice  and  truthfulness.  A  Church  must  be  militant  and  ever  ready  to  fight ;
but  a  Church  mainly  militant  will  effect  little  good.

The  lessons  are — 1.  Be  "  ready,  aye,  ready  "  for  battle.  With  the  "  whole  armour
of  God  "  about  you,  and  trained  to  the  use  of  your  weapons.  But — ^.  Be  mainly
intent  on  building.

Ver.  20. — Godfighiingfrn"  his  people.  "  Our  God  shall  fight  for  us."  An  inspirit-
ing assurance.     Grounds  of  it  in  the  case  of  Nehemiah  and  the  Jews.

I.  When  we  mat  cherish  this  assueance.  When  we  fight  for  God  ;  which  we
do — 1.  When  we  contend  in  and  for  his  cause.  When  our  contest  is  against  Satan,
sin,  and  error ;  and  on  behalf  of  Christ  and  truth  and  righteousness  and  souls — our
own  and  others.  2.  When  we  are  actuated  by  sincere  and  supreme  regard  for  him.
Desiring  his  glory,  and  trusting  him  for  strength  and  victory.  3.  When  we  employ
the  weapons  which  he  has  given  us.  Not  using  Satan's  arms,  but  tlie  weapons  of
truth  and  love  (see  2  Cor.  x.  4).  4.  When  we  fight  in  the  spirit  which  he  prescribes
and  imparts  (2  Tim.  ii.  25 ;  James  i.  20).    6.  When  we  battle  witii  all  our  power.

II.  The  grounds  of  this  assurance.  1.  The  relation  of  God  to  us.  "  Oar  God."
2.  His  interest  in  the  contest.  It  concerns  his  "great  name,"  the  accomplishment  of
his  purposes  of  love  to  mankind  in  Christ,  the  destruction  of  his  enemies.  3.  His
summons  to  it.     4.  His  promises.

III.  The  effects  of  such  assurance.  1.  Alacrity  to  engage  in  the  combat.
2.  Courage.  3.  Confidence  of  victory.  "  If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "
Finally,  take  heed  lest  any  of  you  fight  agaitut  God.  "  Woe  unto  him  that  striveth
with  his  Maker."

HOMILIES  BY   VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  7 — 28. — The  wisdom  of  the  Christian  vmrhnan  in  the  hour  of  pertL  W«
•re  reminded  here  of —

I.  The  progress  of  sin  in  its  course  (ver.  8).  From  sneers  the  enemies  of
Israel  passed  on  to  plots ;  from  taunts  to  a  mischievous  conspiracy.  They  "  conspired
together  to  come  and  fight  against  Jerusalem,  and  to  hinder  it."  This  advance  of
theirs  was  brought  about  by  their  hearing  that  the  walls  of  Jerusalem  were  "  made
up."  The  steadfast  labour  of  the  good  led,  incidentally,  to  the  development  of  evil
in  the  unholy.    The  relations  of  David  with  Saul,  and  of  the  Apostle  Paul  with  his


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [OB.  iv.  7—23.


unbelieving  countrymen,  and,  indeed,  those  of  our  Master  himself  with  tlie  religiom
leaders  of  his  day,  show  that  speaking  the  truth  or  doing  the  work  of  God  may
prove  the  occasion  of  the  growth  and  outbreak  of  sin — the  occasion,  but  not  the
responsible  cause.  We  must  not  be  deterred  from  speaking  or  doing  the  will  and
work  of  God  by  fear  about  incidental  consequences  on  the  part  of  the  great  enemy.

II.  The  peril  to  the  work  op  the  Church  (vers.  10,  11,  12).  The  good  work  of
Neheraiah  was  in  serious  danger  from  two  causes : — 1.  The  craft  and  violence  of  itt
foes.  The  enemy  said,  "  They  shall  not  know,  neither  see,  till  we  come  in  the  midst
among  them,  and  slay  them,  and  cause  the  work  to  cease"  (ver.  11).  Here  was
force  combined  with  subtlety  ;  the  enemy  would  surprise  and  slay  them.  2.  The
faint-heariedness  of  its  friends.  Judah,  from  whom  better  things  might  have  been
expected,  said,  "  The  strength  of  the  bearers  of  burdens  is  decayed,"  &c.  (ver.  10) ;
and  the  neighbouring  Jews  who  had  come  in  to  help  kept  saying  ("  ten  times,"  ver.  12)
that  they  must  return,  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  Samaritans.  In  every  work  of  God
there  are  sure  to  be  some  if  not  "  many  adversaries  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9).  This  we  must
xxpect  whenever  we  "  put  our  hand  to  the  plough  "  in  the  field  of  Christian  labour.
And  happy  shall  we  be  if  we  have  not  to  contend  with  the  feebleness  and  pusil-
lanimity of  our  friends,  fainting  long  before  reaping-time  (Gal.  vi.  9),  or  even
shrinking  at  the  first  alarm,  and  talking  about  "  giving  up."

III.  The  wisdom  of  the  Church  in  the  hour  of  danger.  The  first  thing  to  do
when  the  work  of  the  Lord  is  threatened  is  that  which  Nehemiah  did.  1.  Mind-
fulness of  God.  "  We  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God"  (ver.  9).  "Eemember  the
Lord,  who  is  great  and  terrible  "  (ver.  14).  An  appeal  to  him  for  help,  and  the  recol-
lection of  the  fact  that  "  greater  is  he  that  is  for  us  than  all  they  that  can  be  agaihst
us."  "  Call  upon  me  in  the  day  of  trouble  :  I  will  deliver  thee,"  &c.  (Ps.  1.  16).  2.
Realisation  of  the  great  issues  which  are  at  stake  (ver.  14).  "Fight  for  your
brethren,  your  sons,"  &c.  When  we  are  working  or  fighting  for  the  cause  of  God
we  are  engaged  on  behalf  of  the  truest,  highest,  and  most  enduring  interests  of  those
who  are  dearest  to  us,  and  of  our  own  also.  The  cause  of  Christ  is  the  cause  of  our-
selves, of  our  families,  of  our  country,  as  well  as  of  our  race.  3.  Defence  (vers.  16 — 18).
We  must  fight  as  well  as  pray  and  work.  Nehemiah's  servants  wrought  with  their
weapon  of  defence  in  one  hand  and  their  instrument  of  labour  in  the  other  (ver.  17).
Or,  while  one  was  building,  his  fellow  stood  ready  behind  with  a  spear  to  put  at  once
into  the  labourer's  hand.  Usually  our  work  is  rather  to  build  than  to  strike,  but
there  are  times  when  we  must  be  ready  to  fight  our  foes  or  aid  those  who  are  engaged
in  conflict.  In  the  wide  field  of  the  Church's  work  there  is  always  some  work  for
the  Christian  soldier  as  well  as  for  the  Christian  labourer.  Let  the  one  be  the  cheerful
and  appreciative  co-operator  with  the  other.  The  spear  and  the  trowel  are  both
wanted.  The  apologist  and  the  preacher,  the  theologian  and  the  evangelist,  are  both
accepted  servants  of  Christ.  4.  Vigilance  (ver.  9).  We  "set  a  watch  against  them  day
and  night."  The  Christian  motto  must  ever  be  the  memorable  words,  "  Watch  and
pray."  5.  Industry.  Patient  (ver.  21)  :  "  We  laboured  in  the  work  .  .  .  from  the
rising  of  themorningtillthestars  appeared."  United  (ver.  15)  :  "All  of  us,.  .  .  every
one  to  his  work."  Self -forgetting  (ver.  23)  :  "  None  of  us  put  ofiE  our  clothes,"  &c.
6.  Order  (vers.  13,  19,  20).  Everything  was  dune  in  perfect  order.  Men  were  placed
where  most  required  (ver.  13) ;  those  whose  homes  were  outside  came  in  (ver.  22) ;
arrangements  were  made  to  concentrate  in  case  of  attack  (vers.  19,  20).  All  must
work  cordially  under  the  human  as  well  as  under  the  Divine  leader. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 23. — TJie  worjc  and  warfare  of  the  Church.  I.  The  work  of  the  Church.
1.  Derided.  "And  mocked  the  Jews  "  (ver.  1).  2.  Under-estimated.  "These  feeble
Jews"  (ver.  2).  3.  Misrepresented.  "If  a  fox  go  up,  he  shall  even  break  down
their  stone  wall  "  (ver.  3).  4.  Prayerful.  "  Hear,  0  our  God  "  (ver.  4).  6.  Hearty.
"  For  the  people  had  a  mind  to  work  "  (ver.  6).  6.  Advancing.  "  Heard  that  the  walls
of  Jerusalem  were  made  up,  and  that  the  breaches  began  to  be  stopped"  (ver.  7).

II.  The  WARFARE  of  the  Church.  1.  Defensive.  "And  conspired  all  of  them
together  to  come  and  fight  against  Jerusalem,  and  to  hinder  it "  (ver.  8).  2.
Watchful.  "  Set  a  watch  against  them  day  and  night"  (ver.  9).  3.  Judicious.  "  I
even  set  the  people  with  their  families"  (ver.  13).    4.  CourageouB.    "Be  not  ye


ca.  IV.  7—23.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


47


afraid"  (ver.  14).     6.  Religious.     "Remember  the  Lord"  (ver.  14).     6.   Soli-
denying  (ver.  23). — B.

Vers.  1 — 23.  —This  description  of  the  building  of  the  wall  of  Jerusalem  may  b«
taken  as  representing  the  life  of  the  Church  militant.     The  chief  points  are  these  :—

I.  The  spirit  which  pervades  and  actuates  it.  "  The  people  had  a  mind  to  work. "
Activity,  self-denial,  fellowship,  and  fortitude.

II.  The  method.  Division  and  distribution  of  the  work.  Builders,  fighterH,
burden-bearers.  Some  in  command,  others  waiting  upon  their  word.  A  place  foi
every  one  in  which  to  work,  and  every  one  keeping  his  place,  and  doing  his  utmost
in  it.

in.  The  difficulty.  To  do  the  work  surrounded  by  enemies.  Their  mockery,
their  defiance,  their  active  opposition.  Every  earnest  labourer  must  be  prepared  to
resist.  There  are  special  defenders  of  the  faith,  champions  of  truth,  those  who
"  hold  the  spears  and  the  shields  and  the  bows  and  the  corslets,  and  the  captains
behind  all  the  house  of  Judah." '  But  beside  these  special  fighters,  the  "  builders  had
every  one  his  sword  girded  by  his  side,  and  built."  All  the  people  of  God  should
regard  the  defence  of  his  truth  and  the  protection  of  the  life  of  his  Church  as  their
vocation.  We  cannot  know  at  what  point  the  attack  will  be  made.  Let  all  put  on
the  armour.

IV.  The  GRonND  op  confidence.  "  We  made  our  prayer  unto  our  God,  and  we  set  a
watch  against  them  day  and  night  because  of  them."  Watch  and  pray.  The  true
dependence  is  that  which  looks  up  to  heaven,  and  at  the  same  time  lifts  up  the  hands,
ready  for  activity.

V.-The  victory  over  human  infirmity.  Some  were  discouraged.  Judah  said,
The  strength  faileth,  there  is  much  rubbish,  we  are  not  able  to  build.  The  Jews
nearest  the  danger  were  afraid.  There  will  always  be  the  discontented  and  the
fearful  ones  to  provoke  discouragement.  But  there  are  the  Nehemiahs,  who  "  look,
and  rise  up;  and  speak."  The  true  leaders  "remember  the  Lord."  They  get
courage  for  themselves  and  for  their  brethren  from  the  high  places  of  faith  and
fellowship  with  God.  The  Church  should  keep  its  eye  upon  such  men,  and  its  ear
open  to  them.

VI.  The  trumpet-call.  "  In  what  place  ye  hear  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  thither
assemble  yourselves  unto  us.  Our  God  will  fight  for  us."  There  are  times  and
places  which  rally  God's  people.  They  must  draw  together.  They  must  forsake  for
a  while  their  special,  individual  appointment.  They  must  obey  the  trumpet  which
summons  them  to  united  effort  against  a  desperate  assault.  This  especially  true  in
connection  with  the  attacks  of  infidelity  and  superstition.

VII.  The  universal  requirement.  Unpausing,  unresting  toil  and  vigilance  till
the  work  is  done.  "  Night  and  day."  "  None  of  us  put  off  our  clothes."  The  Church
must  endure  hardness  if  it  will  accomplish  its  mission  to  build  the  wall  of  Jerusalem.
Special  need  at  times  to  guard  against  the  growth  of  the  spirit  of  self-indulgence,
sloth,  and  compromise.  Too  much  of  the  work  is  committed  to  the  few  wUling
labourers.    All  should  be  doing,  and  always  doing,  and  doing  their  all..— R


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  V.


Internal  difficulties,  and  Nehe-
miah's  mode  of  meeting  them  (ch.  V.
1—13).  While  the  building  of  the  wall
was  in  progress,  but  not,  so  far  as  it  is
stated,  in  direct  connection  with  the  em-
ployment of  the  mass  of  the  people  in  unre-
munerative  labour,  internal  evils  showed
themselves  which  demanded  prompt  atten-
tion and  remedy.     Complaints  were  made


to  Nehemiah  by  large  numbers  of  the  lower
orders,  both  men  ani  women — the  shrill
voices  of  the  latter  rising  to  the  intensity  of
a  "  great  cry  "  (ver.  1)— to  the  effect  that  the
oppression  of  the  rich  and  great,  combined
with  some  other  permanent  or  temporary
causes,  was  depriving  them  of  their  houses
and  plots  of  land,  and  forcing  them  to'  sell
their  sons  and  their  daughters  into  slavery
(vers.  2 — 5).  According  to  the  existing
text,  the  primary  caosea  of  the  general


M


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[OH.  T.  1— la


poverty  were  three : — 1.  Over-population
(ver.  2) ;  2.  A  recent  famine  (ver.  3) ;  and,
8.  The  weight  of  taxation,  arising  tram  the
large  amount  annually  demanded  from  the
province  by  the  Persians  in  the  way  of
tribute  (ver.  4).  As  there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  tribute  had  been  augmented
recently,  this  cause  must  be  viewed  as  con-
stant. The  over-population  may  have  arisen.
In  part,  from  the  influx  of  immigrants,  in
part  from  the  narrow  extent  of  the  territory
which  the  returned  tribes  had  been  allowed
to  occupy  (Ewald,  '  History  of  Israel,'  vol.
T.  pp.  80,  115,  &c).  The  famine,  which
has  been  attributed  to  the  calling  off  of  the
people  from  their  ordinary  employments
{ibid.  p.  162),  can  scarcely  have  had  this  as
its  main  origin  if  the  whole  work  was  begun
and  ended,  as  Kehemiah  tells  us  it  was  (ch.
tL  15),  in  less  than  two  months ;  but  sup-
posing that  already  there  was  a  scarcity  pro-
duced by  bad  harvests,  as  in  Haggai's  time
(Haggai  i.  9 — 11),  it  may  have  been  aggra-
vated by  this  circumstance.  The  entire
i«3ult  was  that  the  poorer  classes  were  com-
pelled, first  of  aU,  to  mortgage  their  houses
and  such  lands  as  they  possessed  (ver.  3),
and  secondly  to  pledge  the  persons  of  their
sons  and  daughters  (ver.  5),  in  order  to  raise
money,  with  the  near  prospect  of  having  to
allow  them  to  become  slaves  if  they  were
unable  to  repay  their  creditor  at  the  time
appointed.  Under  these  circumstances  they
appealed  to  the  new  governor,  probably
not  long  after  his  arrival,  for  relief  The
appeal  placed  him  in  a  position  of  great
difficulty.  He  was  not  rich  enough  to  take
upon  himself  the  whole  burthen ;  and  though  '
he  himself,  and  also  bis  brothers  and  per-
sonal attendants,  did  lend  freely,  out  of  their
private  store,  money  and  grain  (ver.  10,
with  comment),  yet  this  was  far  from  being
enough — it  did  not  go  to  the  root  of  the
evil  Had  he  stopped  at  this  point  and  done
no  more,  the  distress  would  have  continued,
and  with  it  the  discontent — the  mass  of  the
population  would  have  held  aloof  from  him
in  sullen  anger,  and  his  whole  undertaking
might  have  been  frustrated.  On  the  other
hand,  it  was  impossible  for  him,  under  the
Persian  system  of  government,  to  carry  mat-
ters with  a  high  hand,  as  a  Grecian  lawgiver
might  have  done,  and  order  a  general  can-
oelling   of  debt*.      He    could    only   have


recourse  to  persuasion,  argument,  and  per
sonal  influence.  He  therefore,  first  of  all,
spoke  to  the  "  nobles,"  who  were  the  money-
lenders, rebuked  them,  and  endeavoured  to
induce  them  to  desist  from  their  malprac-
tices (ver.  7)  ;  but  failing  to  produce  in  this
way  any  considerable  effect,  he  brought  the
matter  before  an  assembly  of  the  people
{ibid.).  There,  he  first  shamed  the  nobles
by  alleging  his  own  contrary  example,  and
then  called  on  them,  "for  the  fear  of  God
and  because  of  the  reproach  of  the  heathen,"
to  restore  the  forfeited  lands  and  houses  to
their  former  owners,  repay  all  that  they  had
received  in  the  way  of  interest  on  the  money
lent,  and  give  up  the  entire  practice  of  lend-
ing money  upon  pledge  or  mortgage  (vers.
7 — ^11).  Moved  by  this  public  appeal,  the
nobles  intimated  their  consent,  whereupon
he  made  them  clench  their  promise  by  an
oath  (ver.  12),  adding  on  his  own  part  a
malediction  if  the  oath  were  not  observed,
which  was  hailed  with  acclaun  by  the  people.
Thus  the  whole  matter  was  brought  to  a
happy  conclusion  —  the  promise  made  was
kept — "  the  people,"  i.  e.  the  whole  nation,
nobles  included,  "did  according  to  this
word  "  (ver.  13).

Ver.  1. — A  great  cry.    Compare  ver.  6,

where  the  "cry"  is  distinguished  from  the
"words."  The  Oriental  habit  -of  shrill
lamentation  must  be  borne  in  mind — ^it  is
always  shrillest  when  the  women  have  a  part
in  it,  as  on  this  occasion.  Their  wives.
Mothers,  whose  children  had  been  sold  into
slavery,  or  who  anticipated  losing  them  in
this  sad  way  speedily  (ver.  5).  Their  bre-
thren the  Jews.  /.  e.  the  richer  Jews,  who
had  adopted  the  practice  of  lending  upon
pledge.

Ver.  2. — There  were  that  said,  We,  onr
sons,  and  onr  daughters ,  are  many.  Those
who  had  large  families  were  foremost  in
making  complaint.  They  found  their  nu-
merous progeny  not  the  blessing  that  abund-
ant offspi'ing  is  ordinarily  reckoned  in  Holy
Scripture,  but  a  burthen  and  an  anxiety.
Therefore  we  take  up  com  for  them.  We
are  obliged  to  get  com  for  them,  or  they
would  die,  and  have  to  run  in  debt  for  it
Com,  wine,  and  oil  seem  to  have  been  lent,
no  less  than  money  (ver.  11).

Ver.  3. — Because  of  the  dearth.  Some,
who  could  not  say  that  their  families  were
large,  claimed  relief  on  account,  as  it  would
seem,  not  so  much  of  .a  present  as  of  a  past
famine,  which  had  forced  them  to  mortgage
their  fields,  vineyards,  and  houses.     Thai


OH.  T.  1—13.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIEMIAH.


49


Judsea  was  liable  to  famines  about  this  time
appears  from  Haggai  i.  6,  9 — 11 ;  iL  16—19.

Vev.  4.— The  king's  tribute.  Judsea,  like
other  Persian  provinces,  had  to  pay  a  tribute,
partly  in  money  and  partly  in  kind,  yearly
to  the  Persian  monarch  (see  the  comment
on  Ezra  iv.  13) ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to
believe  that  this  burthen  was  generally  felt
as  oppressive,'  nor  that  it  was  heavier  in
Judsea  than  elsewhere.  But  by  the  very
poor  even  a  small  amount  of  direct  taxation
13  felt  as  a  grievance ;  and  the  necessity  of
meeting  the  demands  of  the  tax-gatherer  was
in  the  ancient  world  often  the  turning-point,
which  compelled  the  contracting  of  a  debt
(Ltv.,  iL  23)  ;  and  so  it  seenu  to  have  been
with  these  complainants.

Ver.  5. — Our  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  our
brethren.  We  love  our  own  flesh  and  blood,
poor  as  we  are,  just  as  much  as  do  our
richer  brethren  ;  our  children  are  as  dear  to
us  as  theirs  to  them.  The  necessity  which
compels  us  to  bring  into  bondage  our  sons
and  our  daughters  is  therefore  most  grievous
to  us.  Some  of  our  daughters  are  brought
into  bondage  already.  On  the  power  of
fathers  to  sell  their  daughters,  see  Exod.
xxi.  7.  Neither  ia  it  in  our  power  to
redeem  them.  Literally,  "nor  is  aught  in
the  power  of  our  hands  "  (see  Gen.  xxxi.  29).
We  have  no  remedy  ;  it  ia  not  in  our  power
to  effect  any  change.

Ver.  6.  — I  was  very  angry.  It  is  not
clear  that  the  letter  of  the  law  was  infringed,
unless  it  were  in  the  matter  of  taking
interest  (ver.  11),  of  which  the  people  had
not  coinpliiined.  Tliat  men  might  sell  their
daughters  to  be  concubines  or  secondary  wives
is  clear  from  Exod.  xxi.  7 ;  and  it  is  there-
fore probable  that  they  might  sell  their  sons
for  servants.  But  the  servitude  might  only
be  for  six  years  (Exod.  xxi.  2) ;  and  if  a
jubilee  year  occurred  before  the  sexennial
period  was  out,  the  service  was  ended  (Lev.
XXV.  10).  Land  too  might  be  either  mort-
gaged or  sold  (ibid.  vers.  14 — 16),  but  under
the  condition  that  it  returned  to  the  seller,
or  at  any  rate  to  his  tribe,  in  the  jubilee
year  {ibid.  vpts.  10,  13).  The  spirit,  how-
ever, of  tlie  law — the  command,  "  Ye  shall
not  oppress  one  another  "  {ibid.  vers.  14,  17)
— was  transgi-essed  by  the  proceedings  of  the
rich  men.  It  was  their  duty  in  a  time  of
scarcity  not  to  press  hard  upon  their  poorer
brethren,  but  freely  to  alleviate  their  neces-
sities. Nehemiah,  his  near  relations,  and
his  followers  had  done  so  to  the  utmost  of
their  power  (ver.  10,  with  the  comment).
The  rich  men  had  acted  difl'erently,  and
made  all  the  profit  that  they  could  out  of
the  need  of  their  fellow-countrymen.  Hence
Nehemiah's  anger.

Ver.  7. — I  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the
rulers,  and  said  unto  them,  Te  exact  usuiy.

NEHEMIAH.


So  the  Yulgate,  and  most  commentatoia  ;
but  Bertheau  has  shown  that  the  expression
used,  which  is  peculiar  to  Nehemiah,  can-
not have  this  meaning,  since  it  is  not  tha
taking  of  usury  that  has  been  complained  of,
or  that  Nehemiah  is  especially  anxious  to
stop,  but  the  lending  of  money  upon  the
security  of  lands,  houses,  or  children,  with
its  consequences,  the  forfeiture  of  the  lands
and  houses,  with  the  enslavement  of  the
children.  He  therefore  translates,  "I  re
buked  the  nobles,  and  the  rulers,  and  said
unto  them,  Ye  lend  iipon pledge."  I  set  a
great  assembly  against  them.  It  is  evident
that  Nehemiah's  rebuke  had  no  effect.  The
nobles  gave  him  no  reason  to  think  that
they  would  change  their  conduct.  He  was
therefore  compelled  to  bring  the  matter
before  the  people  ;  not  that  they  had  any
legal  power,  but  he  felt  that  the  nobles
mi^ht  be  ashamed  or  afraid  to  continue
their  oppression  when  it  was  openly  de-
nounced by  the  chief  civil  ruler  in  the  hear-
ing of  a  great  assembly  of  their  countrymen.

Ver.  8. — We  after  our  ability  have  re-
deemed our  brethren.  "We,"  here,  may
be  either  "we  Jews  of  the  captivity,"  iu
contract  with  "you  who  have  long  returned
from  it,"  or  "we  of  my  house  and  house-
hold" (equivalent  to  the  ''I,  my  brethren,
and  my  servants"  of  ver.  10),  in  contraEt
with  "you  rich  Jews  not  of  my  househol  1."
Nehemiah  must  appeal  to  a  well-known  fact,
that  he  and  others  had  been  in  the  haliit  of
redeeming  enslaved  Jews  among  the  heathen.
Will  ye  even  sell  your  brethren  ?  An  argu-
mentum  ad  verecundiam.  Will  ye  do  tlie
exact  opposite  ?  Cause  your  brethren  to  be
sold  into  slavery  ?  And  not  to  heathen  mas-
ters, but  to  men  of  their  own  nation,  unions?
Roman  creditors,  if  they  sold  their  debtor
slaves,  were  required  by  law  to  sell  them
across  the  Tiber— to  men  of  a  different  race.
It  was  felt  to  add  to  the  indignity  of  the
slave  condition  that  one  should  have  to
serve  one's  own  countryman,  recently  one's
equal  and  (2)erliaps)  acquaintance.  They
held  their  peace,  and  found  nothing  to
answer.  Or,  "  found  never  a  word. "  The
argument  told.  It  admitted  of  no  reply.
The  nobles  were  ashamed,  and  had  not  a
word  to  say.

Ver.  9.— Also  I  said.  To  silence  the
nobles  was  not  enough.  To  shame  them
was  not  enough.  What  was  wanted  was  to
persuade  them.  Nehemiah  therefore  con-
tinued his  address.  It  is  not  good  that  ye
do.  It  is  not  good  in  itself,  apart  from  any
contrast  with  what  I  have  been  doing.
Ought  ye  not  to  walk — or,  literally,  "will
ye  not  walk  "—in  the  fear  of  our  God  1  Will
ye  not  really  "fear  God  and  keep  hie  com-
mandments," not  iu  the  letter  only,  but  in
the  spirit?    Will  ye  not  cease  to  jppresi


50


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  V.  1—13


your  brethren  ?  Will  ye  not  deal  kindly
and  gently  with  them  ?  Because  of  the  re-
proach of  the  beattien  our  enemies.  If  the
mere  fear  of  Cod,  the  desire  to  escape  his
displeasure  and  win  liis  approval,  is  not
enough,  will  not  the  thought  of  the  light
in  which  you  will  appear  to  the  heathen
influence  you?  You  make  a  profession  of
religion ;  you  claim  to  be  actuated  by  high
motives  ;  to  be  merciful,  compassionate,
and  self-denying.  If  they  see  you  as  keen
after  gain  as  any  of  themselves,  as  regard-
less of  others,  as  pitiless  and  oppressive,  what
a  reproach  will  not  this  bring  on  your
religion  !  What  a  proof  will  it  not  seem  to
he  that  you  are  no  better  than  your  neigh-
bours, and  your  religion,  therefore,  no  whit
superior  to  theirs !

Ver.  10. —I  likewise.  .  .  might  exact  of
them.  Rather,  "have  lent  them."  I  and
mine  have  advanced  to  the  poorer  classes,  in
th  is  period  of  their  distress,  money  and  corn ;
but  not  as  you  have,  not  upon  security.
Let  us  then,  all  of  us,  you  as  well  as  I,
henceforth  relinquish  this  practice  of  mort-
gaging and  pledge-taking.

Ver.  11. — Eestore,  I  pray  you,  &c.  Nay,
more.  Let  ns  not  only  give  up  this  practice
in  the  future,  but  let  us  remedy  its  evils  in
the  past.  You  are  in  possession  of  lands
and  houses  that  have  become  yours  through
lliese  mortgages,  and  you  have  received  a
heavy  interest  on  the  sums  of  money,  or  on
the  corn,  wine,  and  oil  that  you  have
advanced.  I  bid  you  restore  it  all.  Give,
back  at  once  the  houses  and  the  lands  that
you  will  in  any  case  have  to  restore  in  the
year  of  jubilee.  Give  back  the  interest  that
you  have  illegally  taken,  and  so,  as  far  as
is  possible,  undo  the  past ;  make  restitution
of  your  ill-gotten  gains,  relinquish  even
your  legal  rights,  and  become  self-denying
patriots,  instead  of  tyrants  and  oppressors.

Ver.  12. — Then  they  said.  We  will  r«-
itore  them.  Nehemiah's  eloquence  pre-
vailed, and  brought  about  a  "  day  of  sacri-
fices." The  nobles,  one  and  all,  agreed  not
only  to  give  back  the  interest  that  they  had


illegally  received  on  the  com  and  money
borrowed  of  them,  but  to  restore  the  forfeited
lands  and  houses,  which  must  have  been  o)
far  greater  value,  and  to  which  they  were
by  law  fully  entitled.  "  We  will  restore
them,"  they  said,  "  and  will  (in  future)
require  nothing  of  them,  neither  interest
nor  security,  but  will  do  as  thou  sayest"
The  promise  was  sweeping  in  its  terms,  and
probably  not  insincere  ;  but  Nehemiah  mis-
trusted all  sudden  impulses.  He  would  have
something  more  than  a  promise.  Then
called  I  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of
them  (the  nobles),  that  they  should  do
according  to  this  promise.  /,  e.  he  swore
the  nobles,  in  the  sacred  presence  of  the
priests,  to  the  performance  of  the  promise
which  they  had  made.

Ver.  13.-^Also  I  shook  my  lap.  Even
the  taking  of  the  oath  did  not  seem  suffi-
cient to  the  prudent  governor.  He  would
strengthen  the  oath  by  a  malediction,  and  a
malediction  accompanied  by  a  symbolical
act,  to'  render  it  the  more  impressive.
Among  the  nations  of  antiquity  few  things
were  so  much  dreaded  as  falling  under  a
curse.  The  maledictions  of  Dent,  xxviii.
16 — 44  were  the  supreme  sanction  which
Moses  devised  for  the  Law,  whereof  he  was
the  promulgator.  Curses  protected  the  tombs
and  inscriptions  of  the  Assyrian  and  Persian
kings,  the  contracts  of  the  Babylonians,  and
the  treaties  of  most  nations.  Nehemiah's
curse  is  an  unusual  one,  but  very  clear  and
intelligible.  He  prays  that  whosoever  de-
parts from  his  promise  given  may  be  cast
forth  a  homeless  wanderer,  emptied  of  all
his  possessions,  as  empty  as  the  fold  in  his
own  dress,  which  he  first  gathers  into  a  sort
of  bag  or  pocket,  and  then  throws  fi'om  him
and  so  empties  out.  To  this  the  assembly
responded  by  a  hearty  "Amen,"  and  then
praised  the  Lord  for  the  happy  ending  of
the  whole  affair.;  in  which  they  piously
traced  the  directing  and  over-ruling  hand  of
God,  "  restraining  the  fierceness  of  men,"
and  ''  turning  it  to  his  praise "  (fa.  IxxvL
10 — Prayer-Book  version)i


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Extortion  rebuiced.  Rulers  of  men  have  no  easy  task.  No  sooner
have  they  provided  a  remedy  for  one  evil  than  another  presents  itself.  Nehemiuh
found  this  to  be  the  case.  He  had  preserved  the  city  from  the  enemies  outside,  and
was  fast  proceeding  with  the  fortifications  which  would  be  a  permanent  protection  ;
but  before  they  were  completed  a  cry  arose  within  which  called  his  attention  to
dangers  quite  as  threatening.  "Of  what  avail  to  have  secured  the  people  from  the
foreign  foe  if  they  were  to  destroy  one  another  by  extortion  and  dissension?  The
wisdom  and  courage  of  the  governor,  however,  proved  equal  to  the  occasion.   Observe —

I.  The  loud  complaint  madb  (vers.  1 — 5).  A  large  number  of  the  people  "  and
of  their  wivet "  came  to  Nehemiah  and  complained  bitterly  of  their  condition,  and  oi
the  extortion  to  which  they  were  subjected  by  their  rich  and  noble  brethren.     The


CH.  T.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  fl

complainers  were  of  three  classes.  Some  who  were  originally  poor  found  themselves,
with  large  families,  unable  to  obtain  food  for  them  on  account  of  the  pressure  of
the  times.  They  desired  that  corn  might  be  distributed  among  them.  Others  had
borrowed  money  to  obtain  food,  and  given  up  their  lands  and  houses  in  pledge.  A
third  class  had  taken  a  like  course  to  enable  them  to  pay  the  taxes  of  the  Persian
monarch.  Some  (of  each  class  probably)  had  already  been  compelled  to  obtain
supplies  by  selling  sons,  and  even  daughters,  as  servants,  and  saw  no  resource  but  to
sell  others  of  their  children.  Moreover,  contrary  to  the  Mosaic  law,  heavy  interest
was  being  charged  for  the  loans.  The  rich  were  taking  advantage  of  the  necessities
of  their  poorer  brethren  to  enrich  themselves  yet  more,  regardless  of  the  sufEering
and  humiliation  they  were  inflicting.  The  sufferers  felt  and  said  that  they  were  of
the  same  flesh  and  blood  oa  their  rich  oppressors,  and  their  children  as  dear  to
them.

II.  The  effect  on  Nehemiah  op  this  complaint.  "  I  was  very  angry  "  (ver.  6).
A  very  just  anger ;  the  anger  of  a  righteous  man  at  flagrant  wrong ;  of  a  noble  and
generous  spirit  at  base  rapacity ;  of  a  lover  of  the  people,  who  was  making  great
■acrifices  for  their  good,  against  those  who  cared  not  for  the  welfare  of  the  com-
munity, so  that  they  could  accumulate  wealth  for  themselves  and  their  families ;  of
one  who  feared  God,  that  his  nam»  should  be  dishonoured  by  tiie  very  people  whose
mission  was  to  exalt  it,

III.  The  course  he  took.  1.  He  carefully  considered  the  matter  (ver.  7).
2.  He  rebuked  the  offenders  (ver.  7).  3.  He  called  an  assembly  upon  the  case.
4.  He  publicly  remonstrated  with  the  offenders.  (1)  Contrasting  their  conduct  with
that  of  himself  and  his  immediate  friends  (vers.  8,  10).  He  and  others  like-minded
had  bought^  Jews  out  of  slavery  to  the  heathen,  while  these  were  selling,  or  causing
to  be  sold,  into  slavery  to  Jews  their  brethren  around  them.  He,  hia  brothers  and
servants,  had  also  lent  money  and  corn  to  the  needy,  but  without  exacting  pledge  or
interest.  (2^  Reminding  them  of  the  reproach  they  were  bringing  on  the  Jewish
name  and  religion,  and  which  the  fear  of  God  should  have  prevented  their  incurring.
(3)  Entreating  them  to  give  up  to  their  owners  the  property  they  held  in  pledge,  and
cease  to  require  interest  on  the  money  due  to  them  (ver.  11).

IV.  The  eesolts.  1.  The  self-conviction  of  the  offenders  (ver.  8).  2.  Their
promise  to  comply  with  his  proposals  (ver.  12).  A  promise  solemnly  ratified  by — (1)
An  oath  administered  by  the  priests.  (2)  A  malediction  pronounced  by  Nehemiali,
with  a  significant  ceremony  (ver.  13).  3.  The  joy  and  thankfulness  of  the  people
(ver.  13).  They  responded  "Amen"  to  the  malediction,  and  "praised  Jehovah."
4.  The  performance  of  the  promise  (ver.  13).

Lessons :— 1 .  The  hideousness  of  avarice.  "  The  love  of  money  is  the  root  of  all  evil. "
It  here  appear8_  as  inhumanity,  oppression,  violation  of  Divine  law,  disregard  of  the
claims  of  patriotism.  Especially  odious  and  injurious  in  nobles  and  rulers,  who
ought  to  be  examples  of  generosity,  protectors  of  the  poor,  and  promoters  in  every
way  of  the  general  good.  2.  The  duty  of  discountenancing  and  suppressing  this
vice.  Rulers  and  magistrates  are  peculiarly  bound  to  do  so.  3.  The  power  of  good
example.  Gives  confidence  in  reproving  iniquity  and  urging  amendment,  and  force
to  reproofs  and  appeals.

Ver.  b.—H^iman  equality.  "  Yet  now  our  flesh  is  ae  the  flesh  of  our  brethren,
our  children  as  their  children."  The  doctrines  of  the  kinship  and  equality  of  all
classes  of  men  have  a  terrible  sound  when  they  come  from  the  lips  of  a  starving
multitude  in  times  of  general  distress,  and  are  likely  to  assume  in  their  minds  an
exaggerated  form,  and  be  pushed  to  dangerous  extremes  ;  but  they  contain  sub-
stantial truth,  notwithstanding,  which,  in  order  that  it  may  not  be  perverted  to  evil
in  troublous  times,  Bhould  be  well  learnt,  and  pondered,  and  applied  to  practice  in
quiet  times  by  those  who  are  raised  above  their  fellows  in  wealth  and  position

I.  The  ESSENTIAL  EQUALITY  OF  MEN.  1.  In  nature.  (1)  They  have  like  bodies.
Our  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren."  Similar  in  origin,  composition,  organisa-
tion, needs,  susceptibilities  ;  equally  feeling  pains  and  pleasures.  (2)  They  have
siimlar  minds  With  Uke  faculties,  capacities,  &c.— intellectual,  emotional,  moral
spmtual     If  Chnstians,  are  ahke  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature."    2.  In  relation-

It


82  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIaH.  [ch.  v.  1—13.

ships.  (1)  Divine.  They  have  the  same  Maker  (Job  xxxi.  15  j  Prov.  rrii.  2),  the
same  Redeemer.  Equally  as  sinners  need  salvation.  (2)  Human.  The  family  ties  aa
real  and  valuable.  "  Our  children  as  their  children."  Are  similarly  related  to  the
state,  and  of  equal  wortli  to  it.  If  Christians,  are  alike  children  of  God,  members  of
Christ,  "brethren"  to  each  other.  3.  In  affections.  (1)  Have  the  same  natural
affection.  "  Our  children  as  their  children,"  equally  beloved.  The  poor  equally  with
the  rich  rejoice  in  their  children's  joys,  grieve  over  their  sorrows,  are  pained  at  their
degradation.  (2)  Are  alike,  when  regenerate,  in  religious  affections.  4.  In  pros-
pects. Must  alike  die  and  appear  before  the  bar  of  God.  Will,  if  accepted,  occupy
the  same  heaven ;  if  condemned,,  be  consigned  to  the  same  hell.  5.  In  rights.
Which  follows  from  what  has  been  said.  The  poor  and  the  rich  should  be  "  equal
before  the  law,"  as  they  are  in  every  well-governed  community,  civil  or  ecclesiastical.
They  are  entitled  to  equal  social  justice ;  they  should  receive  like  sympathy  and
brotherly  consideration  and  help  in  times  of  loss  and  suffering.

II.  The  DmiES  which  arise  from  it.  1.  What  they  are.  (1)  Mutual  respect
and  good  will.  "Honour  all  men,"  as  human  beings.  "  Love  the  brotherhood,  as
fellow  Christians.  "Thou  shall  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself,"  for  he  equally
deserves  love.  (2)  Mutual  consideration  and  sympathy.  Men  the  most  unlike  in
many  respects  ought  to  be  able,  much  better  than  they  often  do,  to  understand  each
other,  and  enter  into  each  other's  feelings,  because  of  their  essential  likeness.  And
they  should  consider  one  another,  that  they  may  appreciate  and  sympathise  with  each
other.  These  rich  creditors  would  not  have  dealt  so  hardly  with  their  poor  debtors
if  they  had  tried  to  realise  what  the  loss  of  all  property  and  the  sale  of  their  children
would  have  been  to  themselves.  (3)  Mutual  helpfulness.  Men  are  made  of  various
capacities  and  conditions  that  they  may  form  in  society  a  more  perfect  unity,  and
be  able  to  serve  one  another  the  better  (comp.  1  Cor.  xiL  14 — 26).  2.  By  whom
owing.  The  poor  are  bound  thus  to  feel  and  act  to  the  rich,  as  well  as  the  rich  to  the
poor;  the  employed  to  the  employer,  as  well  as  the  employer  to  the  employed,  and
the  former  are  as  hkely  to  neglect  these  duties  as  the  latter.  Selfishness  is  not  con-
fined to  any  class.  Those,  however,  who  from  their  circumstances  have  acquired
most  of  intelligence  and  culture,  and  have  most  power  individually,  may  be  expected
to  take  the  lead  in  the  understanding  and  practical  application  of  the  truths  and
duties  just  stated.  In  doing  so  they  will  show  a  tender  consideration  for  the  feel-
ings of  the  poor;  they  will  be  concerned  for  their  elevation,  improvement,  and  salva-
tion ;  they  will  not  use  their  advantages  selfishly  or  hardly  (even  though  legally) ;
they  will  not  push  too  far  the  doctrines  of  political  economy,  and  feel  quite  content
to  swell  their  own  fortunes  by  giving  helpless  people  starvation  wages,  or  lending
money  at  rates  ruinous  to  the  borrower,  merely  because  the  law  of  "  supply  and
demand  "  justifies  them ;  their  power  will  be  used  to  rebuke,  restrain,  and  remedy
oppression  ;  to  protect  and  aid  the  weak  ;  to  soften  the  inequalities  of  life  by  kind-
ness and  thoughtful  charity  ;  and,  generally,  to  bless  others  rather  than  aggrandise
themselves.  In  thus  acting  they  will  obey  the  dictates  of  prudence  as  well  as  those
of  Christianity,  and  will  aid  in  uniting  society  by  bonds  stronger  far  than  Acts
of  Parliament,  armies,  or  police  regulations — bonds  which  the  strain  of  the  most
Cklamitous  times  will  not  burst  asunder.

Vers.  6, 7. — Righteom  anger.  "And  I  was  very  angry  when  I  heard  their  cry  and
these  words,  i'hen  I  consulted  with  myself,  and  I  rebuked  the  nobles,  and  the
rulers."  Anger  is  always  dangerous,  often  evil.  The  anger  is  sinful  which  has  its
root  in  selfishness,  which  is  excited  by  slight  causes,  or  is  blended  with  hatred,_or
issues  in  malice  or  revenge,  or  lasts  long  in  any  form.  But  there  is  an  anger  which
is  righteous,  and  the  absence  of  which,  so  far  from  being  a  commendable  meekness,
may  be  occasioned  by  indifference  to  great  principles,  and  to  the  general  welfare  of
men.     The  text  illustrates —

I.  The  nature  of  biohteous  anoeb.  1.  Whence  it  springs.  Love  to  God  and
man ;  love  to  righteousness,  hatred  of  sin.  2.  By  what  it  is  excited.  (1)  Flagrant
wrong-doing,  (2)  consequent  injury  to  society,  and  (3)  counteraction  of  efEorts  for
its  good.

II.  Its  vem.    To  stimulate  to — 1.  The  rebuke  and  restraint  of  evil-doers.    2.


OH.  T.  1—13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  63

Efforts  for  their  reformation.    3.  The  discovery  and  application  of  remedies  for  the
mischief  tiiey  have  wrought.

III.  Its  best  peeservativb  fbom  evil.  Reflection  before  acting.  "  I  consnlted
with  myself."  No  passion  more  demands  self-control,  that  it  run  not  to  excess,  noi
hurry  into  unwise  and  sinful  words  and  deeds.  A  pause  to  consider,  and  the
exercise  of  reflection  itself,  will  supply  the  needful  corrective,  and  enable  us  so  to
govern  and  guide  our  anger  that  it  may  subserve  the  ends  for  which  this  passion  wag
given.

Ver.  7.— Self-consultation  "Then  I  consulted  with  myself."  The  power  of  con-
sulting with  himself  is  one  of  the  chief  things  which  distinguish  men  from  brutes.
A  man  can  be  both  the  subject  and  the  object  of  his  own  thought ;  as  if  there  were
in  him  two  persons — one  thinking,  feeling,  suggesting,  &c. ;  the  other  observing  the
processes,  judging  of  their  worth,  and  determining  accordingly.  "  My  heart  con-
sulted with  me,"  says  Nehemiah  (translating  literally).  "  Commune  with  your  own
heart,"  says  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  iv.  4).  The  exercise  of  this  power  of  self-consulta-
tion, or  reflection,  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  the  wise  direction  of  our  lives.  "  A
reflecting  mind,"  says  an  ancient  writer,  "  is  the  spring  and  source  of  every  good
thing ; "  although  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  it  may  become  the  source  of  the
worst  wickedness.  For  the  evil  which  is  deliberately  planned  is  far  worse  than  that
which  is  unpremeditated.

I.  On  WHAT  WE  SHOULD  consttlt  ouESELVEB.  1.  With  respect  to  personal  religion.
Our  condition  before  God,  and  in  view  of  eternity.  Our  sins — ^their.  peculiar  nature,
aggravations,  &c.  Our  duty  to  God  and  ourselves  in  view  of  them — repentance,
confession  of  sin,  faith  in  Christ,  self-surrender  to  God,  a  new  life.  Or,  again,  a
higher  and  fuller  Christian  life  than  we  have  hitherto  lived.  What  we  must
encounter  if  we  adopt  the  better  course.  A  Christian  life  growing  out  of  reflection
will  be  richer,  nobler,  more  decided,  and  more  stable  than  one  which  springs  merely
from  emotion.  2.  With  respect  to  our  work.  What  we  are  best  fitted  for,  and  have
opportunity  to  do.  How  it  can  be  best  done.  What  are  its  difficulties,  and  how
they  can  be  surmounted.  Motives  to  its  performance.  Work  thus  begun  and
conducted  will  be  done  wisely  and  confidently,  and  be  likely  to  succeed.

II.  The  CONDITIONS  op  successful  self-consultation.  1.  That  it  be  conducted
with  the  aid  of  the  best  advisers.  The  two  within  us  consulting  must  call  in  a
third — the  all- wise  Ood  (comp.  Ps.  xxv.  4,  5  ;  cxxxix.  23,  24).  And  all  that  can
help  us  to  the  understanding  of  his  will  should  be  welcomed.  2.  That  it  be  accom-
panied with  serious  purpose.  To  do  what  is  seen  to  be  right  and  wise.  "  If  any
man  wills  to  do  his  will,  he  shall  know,"  &c.  3.  That  it  be  followed  by  corree^ond-
ing  practice.  Consideration  may  be  too  prolonged.  Some  go  through  life  "  con-
sidering," or  pretending  to  do  so,  as  to  the  plainest  duties ;  perhaps  also  they
"resolve  and  re-resolve,   yet  "die  the  same."

Ver.  9. — Avoidance  of  reproach.  "  Ought  ye  not  to  walk?"  &o.  The  "  reproach  "
n>oken  of  here  is  supposed  by  some  to  be  that  arising  from  the  feeble  condition  of
the  Jews,  which  the  conduct  of  these  extortioners  was  likely  to  perpetuate  and
increase.  Better,  however,  to  interpret  it  of  the  just  reproach  which  such  conduct
would  occasion.

I.  Befboaches  of  hen  which  abb  not  to  be  begabded.  Those  which  are  directed
•gainst — 1.  The  Christian  faith.  2.  Christian  confession.  The  bold  acknowledg-
ment of  Christ.  3.  Christian  life  and  work.  "  Fear  ye  not  the  reproach  of  men,"
&c.  (Isa.  11.  7.     See  also  Bom.  xv.  3  ;  Heb.  xi.  26).

II.  Eepboaches  that  should  be  begabded.  Those  which  are  directed  against
manifest  inconsistencies  between  our  faith  and  our  life,  our  professions  and  our
practices.  Men  of  the  world  can  understand  our  religion  sufBciently  to  discern
wherein  wo  fail.  Their  judgment  of  some  things  in  our  conduct  may  be  just,  and  is
then  fitted  to  quicken  our  consciences  and  lead  us  to  improvement.  "  Fas  est  et  ab
hoste  doceri."  We  should  be  careful  not  to  give  just  "  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the
Lord  to  blaspheme,"  for  the  sake  of  the  credit  of  religion,  the  good  of  enemies  them-
selves, and  of  other  men  who  may  be  well  disposed,  but  to  whom  our  inconsistencies


04  THE    BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  ▼.  1—13

are  a  stumbling-block.  Amongst  the  occasions  of  just  reproach  may  be  named —
1.  Untruthfulness  and  dishonesty  in  worldly  transactions.  2.  Insincerity  and  cant
in  rehgious  utterances.  3.  Selfishness  and  self-indulgence.  4.  Dissension  and  con-
tention among  Christians.  5.  Censoriousr.ess.  6.  Gloominess.  As  contrasted  with
our  representations  of  the  happiness  of  religion.  7.  Worldly  ambition  or  policy  in
Church  life  and  work.

III.  The  surest  way  to  avoid  just  RErROACH.  "  Ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear
of  God."  Genuine,  habitual  piety,  actuating  our  whole  life,  will  produce  such  fruits
as  will  commend  themselves  even  to  the  irreligious  who  are  not  malignant  foes  of
what  is  good,  and  "  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of  foolish  men."  Thus  fearing  God
we  shall  not  need  to  be  much  concerned  about  the  judgment  of  men.  Finally,  those
who  reproach  Christians  with  their  inconsistencies  condemn  themselves.  The  hght
by  which  they  do  so  reveals  their  own  duty.  They  are  as  really  bound  to  be  genuine
and  consistent  Christians  as  those  whom  they  reproach.  The  obligation  to  piety  and
goodness  does  not  spring  from  the  profession  of  rehgion,  though  this  may  add
strength  to  it ;  it  rests  on  all  to  whom  the  gospel  is  known,  and  if  you  know  enough
to  condemn  others,  you  know  enough  to  teach  you  what  you  ought  to  be,  and  to
leave  you  without  excuse.

Ver.  13. — Promise-heeping.  "And  the  people  did  according  to  this  promise."
Nehemiah  wrote  this,  we  may  be  sure,  with  peculiar  satisfaction.  It  would  be  well
if  the  history  of  all  promises  of  amendment,  &c.  could  be  thus  concluded.  But
it  is  far  otherwise.  Men  of  ten  "  say  and  do  not."  Even  vows  made  to  God  in
secret  or  before  the  Church,  and  with  solemnities  resembling  those  recorded  here,
are,  alas,  often  broken.  In  view  of  such  failures  it  may  be  profitable  for  those  who
are  contemplating  a  solemn  profession  of  religion  to  consider  how  they  may  best
secure  that  they  shall  fulfil  their  vows.

I.  By  care  in  making  them.  1.  With  right  understanding  of  their  import.  2.
With  deep  conviction  of  the  truths  and  duties  to  which  they  relate.  3.  With  due
deliberation.  Not  hastily,  under  the  influence  of  passing  emotion,  but  carefully  con-'
sidering  what  they  involve,  and  counting  the  cost  of  keeping  them.  4.  Of  free  and
hearty  choice.  Not  merely  because  of  pressing  solicitations  from  others.  6,  In
dependence  on  the  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  With  consciousness  of  weakness,  and
humble  reliance  on  God  and  prayer  to  him.

II.  By  frequent  remembrance  and  renewal  of  them.  "  0  my  soul,  thou  hast
said  unto  the  Lord,  Thou  art  my  Lord."  "  Thy  vows  are  upon  me,  0  God."  "  I
have  sworn,  and  I  will  perform  it,  that  I  will  keep  thy  righteous  judgments."  Such
exercises  are  especially  suitable :  1.  In  anticipating  and  celebrating  the  Lord's
Supper.  2.  When  assailed  by  powerful  temptations.  3.  When  called  to  difficult
duties.  Such  as,  though  requiring  toil  and  self-denial,  are  involved  in  our  professed
consecration  to  God.

III.  By  constant  watchfulness  and  prayer.  In  conclusion,  notice — 1.  The
blessedness  of  those  who  do  according  to  their  promises  to  God.  He  will  fulfil  his
promises  to  them.  2.  The  guilt  of  unfulfilled  promises.  3.  The  comfort,  under  the
sense  of  partial  failure,  which  arises  from  the  Divine  compassion  and  readiness  to
forgive.  "For  in  many  things  we  ofiEend  all."  But  our  God  knows  and  values
sincere  purpose  and  endeavour.  He  knows  also  our  weakness.  He  accepts  imperfect
service,  and  forgives  the  imperfections  of  his  true-hearted  servants.  4.  Obligation
to  piety  and  holiness  is  independent  of  our  promises.  These  recognise  obligations,
do  not  create  them.  Those  who  "  make  no  profession  "  must  not,  therefore,  console
themselves  as  if  they  were  guiltless.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 13. — jf%«  rich  rehukedfor  taking  advantage  of  the  poor.  I.  The  foci.
1.  Numbers  tend  to  poverty.  "  We,  our  sons,  and  our  daughters,  are  many :  theref  or«
we  take  up  com  for  them,  that  we  may  eat,  and  live  "  (ver.  2).  2.  Borrowing  tends
to  poverty.  "We  have  mortgaged  our  lands"  fver.  3).  3.  Taxation  tends  to
poverty      "We  have  borrowed  money  for  the  kings  tribute"  (ver.'  4).     4.  Poverty


CH.  V.  1-13.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  B5

may  sometimes  have  cause  for  protest  against  injustice.    6.  Poverty  is  experienced
by  the  people  of  God  who  are  engaged  in  holy  toils.

II.  The  rich.  1.  The  rich  must  not  take  undue  advantage  of  calamitous  circum-
stances. "  Because  of  the  dearth  "  (ver.  3).  2.  The  rich  must  not  he  inconsiderate.
"  Yet  now  our  flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren  "  (ver.  5).  3.  The  rich  must  not  be
cruel.  "  Our  daughters  are  brought  unto  bondage  "  (ver.  5).  4.  The  rich  must  not
violate  the  law  of  God.     "  Ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our  God  ?  "  (ver.  9).

III.  The  rebuke.  1.  Angry.  "And  I  was  very  angry."  2.  Reflective.  "I
consulted  with  myself "  (ver.  7).  3.  Impartial.  "The  nobles  and  the  rulers."  4.
Sustained.  "And  I  set  a  great  assembly  agariijst  them."  6.  Argumentative  (ver.  8).
6.  Unanswerable.  "  They  held  their  peace,  and  found  nothing  to  answer.  "  7.
Successful.    "We  will  restore." — E.

Vers.  1 — 13. — Error  and  return.  In  the  very  midst  of  apparent  success,  when
the  Church  is  building  its  walls  and  seems  likely  to  be  triumphant  and  secure,  there
may  be  an  aggravated  evil  springing  up  and  spreading  to  its  very  heart.  Such  was
the  case  at  Jerusalem  when  the  walls  of  its  defence  were  rising.  When  priests  and
people  were  repairing  the  defences,  there  was  circulating  a  deadly  mischief  within
the  whole  body.    We  look  at —

I.  The  worst  evil  prom  which  the  CHnRCH  of  Christ  can  suffer  (vers.  1 — 5).
1.  An  internal  einl,  always  more  dangerous  and  deadly  than  an  external  one.
Better  a  hundred  carping  or  even  conspiring  Samaritans  than  ■  ten  Jews  inside  the
walls  carrying  a  curse  within  their  breast.  Better  an  army  of  Canaanites  in  battle
array  than  one  Achan  in  the  camp.  2.  The  evil  of  discord.  One  Jew  was  complaining
of  another,  one  class  of  another  class ;  seeds  of  dissension  and  strife  were  springing
up  and  bearing  bitter  fruit.  Internal  evil  in  a  Christian  society  may  take  many  forms
— error,  sloth,  pride,  &c. — but  the  worst  of  all  is  discord.  The  Master  is  never  so
grieved  as  when  his  first  commandment  is  broken,  and  when  they  who  are  specially
bound  to  love  one  another  are  indulging  in  "bitterness,  wrath,  anger,  clamour,
malice."  3.  Discord  springing  from  oppression.  The  richer  Jews  had  made  use  of
a  time  of  want,  arising  from  dearth  (ver.  3),  to  compel  the  necessitous  to  (a)  mortgage
their  children  (ver.  2)  and  (6)  their  ancestral  property  (ver.  3)  in  order  to  save
themselves  and  their  families  from  starvation  (vers.  2,  3),  as  well  as  to  pay  the
tribute  to  the  king  of  Persia  (ver.  4).  What  naturally  afflicted  them  the  most  was,
that  through  the  cupidity  and  hardness  of  the  wealthy  they  had  been  obliged  to
sell  into  servitude  their  own  sons  and  daughters  ;  said  they,  in  their  forcible  lament,
"  Yet  our 'flesh  is  as  the  flesh  of  our  brethren,  our  children  as  their  children  "  (ver.  5).
Nor  were  they  able  to  redeem  them  (ver.  6).  There  is  great  bitterness  of  soul  when
one  member  of  a  Christian  Church  is  heedless  of  the  natural  human  affections  of  any
of  his  brethren :  guilt  can  hardly  go  further.

II.  Its  deplorable  consequences  (vers.  1, 9).  1.  Misery  (ver.  1).  "  There  was  a
great  cry  of  the  people  and  of  their  wives  "  (ver.  1).  When  one  part  of  a  society
is  sinning  and  the  other  part  "  sinned  against,"  when  the  Church  is  divided  into
wrOng-doers  and  wrong-sufferers,  misery  sinks  to  its  depth.  There  is  no  gladness  of
heart  so  great  as  when  harmony  and  love  prevail ;  so,  there  is  no  wretchedness  of
Boul  so  complete  as  when  hatred  and  injury  abound.  2.  Reproach  (ver.  9).  "  It  is
not  good  that  ye  do :  ought  ye  not  to  walk  in  the  fear  of  our  God  because  of  the
reproach  of  the  heathen  our  enemies  ?  "  It  is  our  primary  duty,  and  should  be  our
most  earnest  desire,  so  to  let  our  light  shine  that  men  may  glorify  Christ,  to
"  adorn  the  doctrine  "  of  our  Sai'iour ;  when  we  so  act  as  to  cause  the  enemy  of  God
to  blaspheme,  we  are  "verily  guilty  before  God."

III.  The  WAT  OF  escape  and  recovery  (vers.  6—13).  Happily,  in  this  instance,  it
did  not  go  too  far,  because  it  was  not  allowed  to  do  its  work  too  long.  There  was — 1.
An  appreciation  of  its  enormity  (ver.  6).  Nehemiah  was  "  very  angry  when  he  heard
their  cry  and  these  words."  Angry,  but  certainly  not  sinful  (Eph.  iv.  26) ;  angry
with  a  holy  wrath,  roused  by  a  profound  sense  of  the  magnitude  of  the  guilt  and  the
danger.  %  Self-control  (vei.  7).  He  "consulted  with  himself."  Instead' of  acting
with  injurious  haste,  he  waited  till  he  had  well  considered  the  best  course  to  take-
When  wrath  ia  roused,  it  is  well  indeed  to  "  consult  with  ourselves  "  before  we  speak


56  THE  BOOK  OF  NBHEMIAH.  [ch.  v   1—13.

to  others  or  act  on  othera.  8.  Concerted  action  (ver.  7).  "  I  set  a  great  assembly
against  them."  Nehemiah  directed  against  the  evil  the  full  force  of  public  sentiment
— the  national  conscience.  4.  Boldness  on  the  part  of  the  leader.  There  is  a  time  for
decided  speech  and  action.  "  I  rebuked  the  nobles  "  (ver.  7).  "  We . . .  have  redeemed
our  brethren ;  . . .  and  will  ye  even  sell  your  brethren  ?  "  (ver.  8).  "  Bestore  their  lands,
their  vineyards, '  &c.  (ver.  11).  "I  shook  my  lap,"  &c.  (ver.  13).  In  times  of  great
defection  or  oppression,  when  things  are  going  ill  with  the  cause  of  God,  it  is  not
honied  words,  but  the  language  of  reproach  that  is  wanted.  "  Reprove,  rebuke,
exhort,"  though  "with  all  long-suffering"  (2  Tim.  iv.  2).  6.  Repentance  on  the
part  of  tlie  errinj.  This  includes — (a)  Conviction  of  sinfulness — having  "  nothing  to
answer "  (ver.  8),  under  a  sense  of  guilt.  (6)  Acknowledgment  and  promise  of
reform  (ver.  12).  This  may  well  be  accompanied  by  the  most  solemn  vows  uttered
before  God  (ver.  12).  (c)  Amendment  (ver.  13).  And  the  people  did  according  to
this  promise.  (1)  Conviction,  (2)  confession,  (3^  the  solemn  vow,  (4)  the  homeward
step — this  is  to  walk  in  the  way  of  recovery.— -0.

Vers.  1—19. — An  example-of  successful  activitvfor  God.  A  great  practical  reform-
ation carried  out  by  a  religious  ruler  on  the  highest  religious  principles,  and  by  the
strength  of  religious  character.  No  more  diflicult  task  than  to  deal  successfully
with  such  circumstances  in  which  men's  selfish  interests  were  involved,  and  the
monied  classes  would  be  against  reform.  Nehemiah,  by  his  wisdom,  boldness,  and
simple-minded  appeal  to  God,  achieved  a  marvellous  success.    Notice —

I.  The  direct  appeal  to  great  moral  and  religious  pnisciPLES.  We  cannot  do
better  than  bring  men  face  to  face  with  conscience.  1.  Hujnanity.  2.  Patriotism.
They  are  brethren.  3.  Fear  of  God,  who  is  no  respecter  of  persons.  The  Jews  all
professed  to  be  fearers  of  God.  All  civil  law  and  common  life  were  based  upon  the
Divine  law.  That  which  was  manifestly  displeasing  to  God  could  not  be  legally
right.  We  acknowledge  the  same  principle.  All  human  law  rests  on  the  word  of
God.  We  cannot  directly  appeal  to  the  letter  of  Scripture  in  dealing  with  ungodly
men,  but  we  may  use  it  to  make  the  law  of  nature  clearer.  4.  The  universal  con-
science. "  I  set  a  great  assembly  against  them."  No  wrong-doers  can  withstand  the
appeal  to  the  common  sentiment  of  right.  Educate  the  moral  sentiment  of  society,
and  it  becomes  a  protection  against  the  self-will  of  individuals.  Vox  populi  should
be  vox  Dei.  In  a  truly  progressive  society  it  will  be  more  and  more  so.  The  great
leaders  of  thought  and  action  should  not  be  afraid  of  making  their  appeal  to  great
assemblies,  in  Nehemiah's  spirit.

II.  An  bxample  of  wise  method.  Much  depends  on  method  in  every  successful
reformation.  1.  The  means  used  were  moral.  Remonstrance,  persuasion,  appeal  to
the  heart  and  conscience.  No  violence.  No  craft.  No  resort  to  mere  worldly
expediency.  No  compromise  of  religious  position.  No  truckling  to  rich  men.  2.
Personal  chara^er  was  brought  to  bear  upon  those  whose  conduct  must  be  changed.
Nehemiah's  moral  indignation  had  great  influence.  His  bold  challenge  of  the  wrong-
doing. His  appeal  to  his  own  example  and  that  of  others.  His  tender  interest  in
the  poor,  and  imploring  earnestness  in  their  cause.  3.  While  acting  as  a  ruler,  and
with  a  ruler's  authority,  the  public  feeling  is  enlisted  in  support  of  reform.  It  is  a
great  matter  to  enlist  the  sympathy  of  the  majority.  4.  In  all  practical  measures
and  social  reformations  we  should  endeavour  to  unite  the  two  forces  of  religious  and
civil  law.  "  I  called  the  priests,  and  took  an  oath  of  them,  that  they  should  do
according  to  this  promise.  With  solemn  appeal  to  God,  and  in  the  presence  of
all  the  congregation,  who  "  said  Amen,  and  praised  the  Lord,"  Nehemiah  bound  the
\*rong-doers  to  carry  out  their  word.

III.  An  illustration  of  the  beneficial  effect  of  decisive  and  speedy  reform  when
effected  on  religious  principles  and  by  wise  methods.  1.  Liberation  of  human
energy,  both  for  the  Church  and  for  the  state.  What  could  the  people  do  when  they
were  so  oppressed  ?  How  could  they  work  with  men  who  treated  them  so  cruelly  ?
All  real  reformation  is  the  setting  free  of  power  for  the  future.  We  must  not  look
at  temporary  inconveniences,  but  at  permanent  benefits.  2.  The  value  of  great
moral  and  political  precedents.  Such  an  instance  of  heroic  championship  in  the  cause
of  God  and  humanity  becomeB  an  inestimable  treasure  for  future  generations.    What


OH.  V  14—19.1


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


57


power  there  is  in  the  histories  of  all  great  reformations  I  3.  We  cannot  doubt  that,
under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  the  moral  and  social  work  which  Nehemiah
accomplished  was  intended  to  prepare  the  way  for  that  more  directly  religious  work
which  followed.  All  true  reformation  is  a  preparation  for  advancement.  John  the
Baptist  heralds  the  kingdom  of  God.  4.  An  immense  service  to  the  cause  of
righteousness  when  governors  and  statesmen  identify  their  names  with  great  move-
ments for  the  lifting  up  of  the  people.  Their  self-sacrifice,  their  faithfulness,  their
victory  become  part  of  God's  word.  God  thinks  upon  them  for  good,  and  will
make  the  world  think  of  them.  The  best  monument  to  •  great  man  is  "  what  b«
bas  done  for  the  people." — B.


EXPOSITION.


Oenbsal  acoottnt  or  Nerbmiah's
GOVERNMENT  (vers.  14  — 19).  Having
(^ven  this  account  of  the  internal  difficulties
which  threatened  to  put  a  stop  to  the  build-
ing of  the  wall  before  it  was  well  begun,  and
been  led  in  the  course  of  it  to  speak  of  the
poverty  and  sufferings  of  the  common  people,
Nehemiah  not  unnaturally  goes  on  to  inform
us  of  the  methods  by  which  in  his  general
government  he  endeavoured  to  alle^<Iate  the
distress,  or  at  any  rate  to  avoid  adding  to
the  burthens  which  pressed  upon  the  poorer
classes.  From  the  time  that  he  entered  upon
his  office,  in  the  twentieth  year  of  Artaxerxes,
B.O.  444,  to  the  time  of  his  writing  this  por-
tion of  his  Book,  in  the  thirty -second  year  of
the  same  king,  B.O.  432,  he  had  lived  entirely
at  his  own  expense,  requiring  no  contribu-
tions from  the  people,  either  in  provisions
or  money,  for  the  support  of  himself  or  his
court  (ver.  14).  This  was  quite  contrary  to
the  previous  practice  of  Jewish  governors
(ver.  15),  and  indeed  of  Oriental  governors
generally,  whether  under  the  Persian  system
or  any  other,  such  persons  almost  univers-
ally taxing  their  provinces,  sometimes  very
heavily,  for  their  current  expenses,  and  often
accumulating  princely  fortunes  by  their
exactions.  Nehemiah  had  also  maintained
a  noble  hospitality,  of  which  he  may  be
excused  for  being  a  little  proud,  during
these  twelve  years  of  his  governorship,  enter-
taining daily  at  his  table  150  of  the  chief
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  besides  many
foreign  Jews  who  from  time  to  time  came
on  visits  to  the  Judsean  capital  (vers.  17,
18).  It  is  conjectured  that  he  was  able  to
take  this  course,  and  spend  so  largely  with-
out receiving  any  income  from  his  province,
because  he  retained  his  place  of  cupbearer,
and  as  such  drew  a  large  salary  from  the
Peraian  court  (Ewald,    History  of  Israel,'


vol.  V.  p.  160,  E.  Tr.).  However  this  may
have  been,  he  certainly  disbursed  large  sums
of  money  in  Jerusalem,  and  must  hnve  done
something  to  alleviate  the  general  poverty
by  his  lavish  expenditure.  He  takes  credit,
further,  for  giving  the  services  of  his  private
attendants  to  the  work  of  the  wall  during  the
whole  time  that  it  was  in  building  (ver.  16),
and  for  having  abstained  from  the  purchase
of  any  land,  when,  through  the  general
poverty,  it  might  have  been  bought  at  a  low
price  from  those  who  were  anxious  to  part
with  it  [fliid. ).  His  conduct  beyond  a  doubt
stood  in  the  strongest  contrast  with  that  of
the  ordinary  Persian  satrap,  or  other  gov-
ernor, and  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  he
looked  on  it  with  some  complacency.  He
felt  that  he  had  done  much  for  his  people.
He  looked,  however,  for  his  reward  not  to
them,  not  to  man,  but  to  God  ;  and  desired
that  his  reward  should  be  not  present  grati-
tude and  thanks,  not  even  posthumous  fame,
but  God's  approval  and  remembrance  only
(ver.  19).  "Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for
good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done  for
this  people."

Ver.  14.  —  From  the  day  that  I  was
appointed.  Literally,  "from  the  day  that
he  (i.  d.  Artaxerxes)  appointed  me."  From
the  twentieth  year.  See  above,  ch.  ii  1.
The  appointment,  having  taken  place  in
NisTu,  was  in  B.c.  444.  Uato  the  two  and
thirtieth  year.  We  see  here  that  this  chap-
ter, and  therefore,  probably,  the  entire  first
section  (chs.  i.— vii.)  of  this  Book,  was  not
written  until  B.C.  432,  the  year  in  whioh
Nehemiah  returned  to  the  Persian  coij-t
from  Jerusalem  (eh.  xiii'  6).  I  and  my
brethren  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of  the
governor.  /.  e.  "have  not  lived  at  the
expense  of  our  subjects,  as  Persian  governors
do  ordinarily."  Nehemiah's  brethren  here
are  probably  not  his  brothers  only,  bat  his
entire  court.


58


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  V.  14—19.


Ver  15. — The  former  governors  that  had
keen  before  me.  Of  these,  two  only  are
known  to  us,  Zerubbabel  and  Ezra ;  but  it
is  probable  that  there  had  been  others.
Were  chargeable  nnto  the  people.  The
words  of  the  original  are  Btronger,  and
should  be  rendered  "had  oppressed  the
people''  {i^apwav,  LXX.),  "had  been
heavy  upon  them."  Had  taken  of  them
bread  and  wine,  beside  forty  shekels.
Kather,  "had  taken  from  them,  for  bread
and  wine,  above  forty  shekels."  (So  Ewald
and  Bertheau. )  Forty  shekels  a  day  from
the  whole  people  would  seem  to  be  intended
— ^not  forty  shekels  a  year  from  each  per-
son, as  some  explain.  Even  their  servants
bare  rule.  The  oppression  exercised  by  the
domestics  and  other  hangers-on  of  rulers  is
often  worse  than  their  own.  Tins  is  especi-
ally the  case  in  the  East,  where  eunuchs  and
other  domestics  have  been  the  most  fearful
tyrants.  Haman  under  Xerxes,  Sej  anus  under
Tiberius,  Narcissus  under  Nero,  are  examples.
So  did  not  I.  I  neither  exacted  money,  nor
allowed  my  servants  to  bear  rule.  Because
of  the  fear  of  God.  Because  I  felt  that  it
would  be  wrong,  either  absolutely  or  under
the  circumstances.

Ver.  16. — I  continued  in  the  work  of  this
wall  Literally,  "I  repaired,"  like  the
ethers  (ch.  iiL  4 — 31).  I  employed  myself
not  in  buying  up  men's  fields  at  -low  prices,
and  so  enriching  myself,  but  in  the  restoring
and  repairing  of  the  wall,  over  which  I  exer-
cised a  constant  superintendence.  All  my
servants  were  gathered  thither.  See  ch.
iv.  16.

Vet.   17.— An  hundred  and  fifty  of  the


Jews  and  rulers.  The  "hundred  and  fifty''
were,  all  of  them,  "rulers."  Neheraiah
means  to  say  that  he  entertained  continually
at  his  table  150  of  the  Jewish  chief  men  or
"rulers"  (segAnim),  and  also  an  indefinite
number  of  foreign  jews,  who  came  on  short
visits  to  Jerusalem.

Yer.  18.— Once  in  ten  days  stere  of  all
sorts  of  wine.  Literally,  "all  sorts  of  wine
in  abundance."  Wine  was  probably  drunk
every  day,  but  laid  in  every  ten  days.  Yet
for  all  this.  Or,  "  with  all  this  " — notwith-
standing this  great  expenditure,  I  took  no
allowance  as  governor.  Because  the  bond-
age was  heavy  npon  this  people.  The
bondage  intended  must  be  that  under  the
Persian  crown,  since  neither  the  labour  at
the  wall  nor  the  oppression  of  the  creditors
lasted  during  the  twelve  years  that  Nehe-
miah  was  governor.  It  would  seem  that  the
tribute,  already  complained  of  in  ver.  4,
must  have  been  felt  as  a  heavy  burthen  at
this  period,

Ver.  19. — Think  upon  me,  my  God.  Com-
pare ch.  xiii.  14,  22,  31.  This  is  no  "prayer
for  posthumous  fame"  (Stanley,  'Lectures
on  the  Jewish  Church,'  Third  Series,  p.
135),  but  simply  an  appeal  to  God,  be-
seeching him  to  bear  in  mind  the  petitioner's
good  deeds,  and  reward  them  at  his  own
good  time  and  in  his  own  way.  As  Butler
observes  ('Analogy,'  Part  I.  ch.  iit),  the
sense  of  good  and  ill  desert  is  inseparably
connected  with  ani  expectation  of  reward  or
punishment,  and  so  with  the  notion  of  a
future  life,  since  neither  are  the  righteous
adequately  rewarded  nor  the  wicked  ade-
quately punished  in  this  life.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  \i—\9.—An  example  of  disinterestedness.  In  contrast  with  the  selfishneM
of  others  Nehemiah  sets  his  own  generous  conduct.

I.  His  noble  coNDnoT.  1.  He  forewent  the  usual  allowances  to  the  governor,
for  twelve  years  ruling  without  charge  for  his  services  (vers.  14,  15).  2.  He
restrained  those  under  him  from  oppressive  and  extortionate  rule  (ver.  16).  Although
preceding  governors  had  permitted  such  rule  on  the  part  of  their  servants.  3.  He
and  his  assisted  the  needy  without  exacting  possession  of  their  land  (ver.  16).  Such
is  perhaps  the  meaning  of  the  words  "  neither  bought  we  any  land "  (comp.
ver.  10).  4.  He  and  his  servants  did  their  full  share  of  work  at  the  wall  (ver.  16).
6.  He  kept  open  table  at  great  expense  to  himself  (vers.  17, 18).  Thus,  not  only  did
he  take  nothing  from  the  people,  but  he  spent  his  own  fortune  freely  in  their  service.
That  he  had  tlie  means  for  so  large  expenditure  makes  the  more  conspicuous  his
piety  and  patriotism  in  leaving  the  court  of  Artaxerxes,  and  undertaking  work  so
arduous  for  the  benefit  of  his  fellow  Jews.

II.  The  princii'les  on  which  he  acted.  1.  The  fear  of  God  (ver.  15).  2.  Pity
for  the  overburdened  people  (ver.  18).     3.  Hope  of  Divine  recompense  (ver.  19).

Ver.  15.— The  practical  power  of  the  fear  of  God.  "  But  so  did  not  I,  because  of
the  fear  of  God.'*^  "  The  fear  of  God,"  as  a  description  of  piety,  is  more  common  in
the  Old  Testament ;  "  faith  "  and  "  love  "  in  the  New.  But  each  includes  the  other.
For  this  fear  is  not  mere  dread,  but  reverence.


DH.  V.  14—19.]  THE  BOOK  Of  NEHUMlAil.  69

I.  The  fear  of  God  is  a  practical  principle.  It  rules  the  life.  1.  As  a  motive,
iie  who  fears  God  must  be  concerned  to  please  and  obey  him.  AH  that  is  included
m  such  fear  tends  to  this  result.  (1)  Reverence  for  his  glorious  perfections,  his
infinite  power,  his  omniscience  and  omnipresence,  his  holiness,  justice,  loving-kindness.
His  infinite  excellences,  known,  admired,  revered,  will  impress  their  image  on  the
heart  and  life.  The  sense  of  his  presence,  his  knowledge  of  the  heart,  his  power  to
bless  and  to  curse,  must  stimulate  to  the  avoidance  of  sin  and  the  practice  of  right-
eousness. (2)  Reverence  for  his  authority.  As  Creator,  Lawgiver,  Ruler,  Judge.
(3)  Reverence  for  his  lawa.  (4)  Dread  of  his  displeasure.  2.  As  it  will  secure
Divine  assistance,

II.  The  fear  of  God  as  a  practical  principle  is  supreme  and  predominant.  It
recognises  God  as  supreme,  regards  his  favour  as  most  to  be  desired,  his  displeasure
as  most  to  be  dreaded.  Hence  it  raises  at  once  above  self-will,  the  desire  to  please
men,  and  the  influence  of  human  examples  and  customs.    It  follows  that  it  will —

1.  Rule  those  whose  position  renders  them  largely  independent  of  men.  Well  is  it
for  the  feeble  when  the  mighty  govern  themselves  by  this  fear ;  well  for  nations
when  their  rulers,  especially  where  despotic  government  prevails,  answer  to  the
description  of  a  good  sovereign  given  in  the  last  words  of  David  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  3).

2.  Restrain  from  common  sins.  Such  as  are  not  generally  condemned,  or  are  very
leniently  regarded  by  society.  3.  Incite  to  uncommon  virtues.  Nehemiah's  conduct
supplies  an  illustration  and  proof  of  all  three  propositions.

III.  Those  who  are  governed  by  the  fear  of  God  will  enjoy  happy  remem-
brances. Nehemiah  records  with  emphasis  and  evident  pleasure,  "  So  did  hot  I,"  &c.
Such  remembrances  are  pleasant,  as  they — 1.  Give  Scidsfaction  to  the  conscience,
which  pronounces  the  conduct  right  and  good.     2.  Afford  evidence  of  sincere  piety.

3.  Strengthen  the  hope  of  future  acceptance  and  recompense.  4.  Awaken  thankful-
ness to  God.  Let  the  young  begin  early  to  live  in  the  fear  of  God,  and  they  will
live  pure  and  noble  lives,  on  which,  in  old  age  and  in  the  prospect  of  death,  they  will
be  able  to  look  back  with  satisfaction.

Ver.  19. — Prayer  for  Divine  remembrance.  "  Think  upon  me,  0  my  God,"  &c.
This  and  other  similar  prayers  of  good  Nehemiah  strike  us  at  first  as  unseemly ;
and  certainly  they  are  more  consonant  with  the  spirit  of  the  Old  Testament  than  that
of  the  New.  Our  Lord  teaches  us  -to  say  after  our  best  works,  "  We  are  unprofitable
servants,  we  have  done  that  which  was  our  duty  to  do."  Besides  which,  the  sense
of  sin  on  the  one  hand,  and  of  entire  indebtedness  to  Divine  grace  for  all  the  good
we  have  and  do  on  the  other,  foster  a  humility  which  prevents  the  complacent
thought  of  our  good  deeds,  especially  before  God.  Still  the  doctrine  of  reward
according  to  works  belongs  to  the  Christian  equally  with  the  Mosaic  religion.  We
are  taught  to  hope  for  future  recompense  of  the  good  we  have  done ;  and  there  can,
therefore,  be  no  essential  impropriety  in  at  times  praying  for  it.  It  is  a  probable  sup-
position (Ewald)  that  Nehemiah  wrote  these  prayers  after  he  had  learned  by  painful
experience  how  little  of  appreciation,  gratitude,  or  reward  he  could  expect  from  men.
'  They  forget  or  neglect  me,  or  requite  me  evil,  but  do  not  thou  be  unmindful."

I.  Who  may  offer  such  a  prayer.  Those  who  have  served  God's  people,  and
Therefore  God  himself— 1.  With  sincere  regard  for  God.  His  will,  approval,  recom-
pense. They  whose  good  works  are  done  "  to  be  seen  of  men  "  "  have  their  reward,"
but  may  not  look  to  God  for  it.  2.  Disinterestedly.  Not  from  selfishness  or  ambi  tion
3.  Devotedly.  With  great  zeal.  4.  Abundantly.  Rendering  great  service.  6.  Self
denyingly.  At  considerable  sacrifice  of  ease,  time,  strength,  substance,  &c.  6.  Un
weariedly.

II.  When  such  a  prayer  is  suitable.  1.  When  reward  cannot  be  expected  from
men.  _  Either  on  account  of  their  want  of  appreciation  of  what  is  done  for  them,  ui
inability  from  poverty  or  otherwise  to  requite  it  suitably.  2.  When  men  show  poiii-
tive  ingratitude,  or  return  evil  for  good.  3.  Even  when  men  remember  and  reward.
For  the  godly  man  feels  that  without  the  Divine  favour  all  that  man  can  give  will  be
vain  and  unsatisfying.

III.  Why  a  favourable  answer  may  be  expected.  Because  of— 1.  The  relation
of  God  to  his  praying  servant.    "  My  God."    2.  The  Divine  character.     Rightiov/s,


60  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  v.  14—19.

and  loving  righteousness  ;  good,  and  approving  the  good  (see  Heb.  vi.  10).  3.  The
union  which  exists  between  God  and  his  people.  So  that  he  regards  what  is  done  to
"  this  people  "  as  done  to  bimselL  4.  The  DiTine  promises.  Such  aa  Matt.  x.  42 :
XXV.  34—40.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  14 — 19. — Self-regard  and  tnagnanimity.  In  each  one  of  these  yenea
Nehemiah  makes  a  personal  reference.  He,  the  writer,  is  the  theme  of  his  narrative.
He  writes  of  himself  more  than  is  customary  with  the  sacred  authors.  We  con-
sider—

I.  The  self-keqard  which  is  not  selfishness.  Though  Nehemiah  writes  about
himself,  there  is  no  painful  egotism  in  his  record.  He  does  not  obtrude  himself.
There  is  a  self-regard  which  is  not  selfishness.  It  is  right  and  needful  that  we
should  (o)  think  much  and  highly  of  our  spiritual  nature.  Not  to  do  this  is  the  sin
of  the  thoughtless  multitude.  Every  man's  first  duty  is  to  consider  how  he  himself
stands  before  God,  and  whether  he  is  entering  in  activity  and  life  into  all  the
holy  possibility  of  moral  character.  It  is  sometimes  right  that  we  should  (fi)  speak
or  write  about  ourselves.  Our  Divine  Master  without  egotism  spake  much  concern-
ing himself.  He  could  not  possibly  have  wrought  his  redeeming  work  with  any
completeness  had  he  not  so  done.  His  great  apostle  had  occasion  to  write  much
about  himself  in  order  to  make  clear  the  truth,  and  "  for  the  furtherance  of  the
gospel."  So  Nehemiah  writes,  using  often  the  first  person  singular,  but  in  no
egotistic  vein.  We  may  sometimes  aid  the  cause  of  Christ  and  serve  our  fellow -men
by  an  effective  personal  narration  of  motive,  experience,  and  work.  Only  we  must
remember  that  this  is  an  alluring  path,  and  we  may  easily  go  too  far  in  it.  It  is  not
every  one  who  can  be  as  autobiographic  and  as  unselfish  as  Nehemiah.  Often  it  is
cur  duty  to  (y)  pray  for  ourselves  (ver.  19).  Often  should  we  utter  such  a  prayer
as  "  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good."  Though  assured  that  "  the  Lord  thinketh
upon  us  in  our  poverty  "  (Ps.  xl.  17),  and  greatly  encouraged  thereby,  we  must  ask
him  to  have  us  in  his  gracious  and  bountiful  remembrance.  And  it  is  right  that  we
should  (i)  hope  for  a  personal  reward  for  our  labours  (ver.  19),  "  according  to  all
that  I  have  done  for  this  people."  We  cannot  be  more  evangelical  than  Paul,  but
with  him  we  may  hope  that  after  the  "  fight  is  fought "  and  the  "  course  is  finished,"
the  "  righteous  Judge  "  will  give  the  "  crown  of  righteousness  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  7).  Like
Moses,  we  may  "have  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward"  (Heb.  xi.  26).
But  we  have  our  attention  called  also  to —

II.  The  magnanimity  which  is  Christian  (vers.  14,  15,  16,  17).  Nehemiah  was
totally  unlike  those  governors  who  had  regarded  their  ofiSce  as  a  means  when  by
to  secure  emolument.  His  thoughts  rose  high  above  the  line  of  the  mercenary
and  the  perfunctory.  There  was  a  large-mindedness,  and  therefore  an  open-
heartedness  about  him  worthy  of  all  admiration  and  imitation.  He  not  only  did  his
own  appointed  work  faithfully  and  energetically  (ver.  16),  but  he  declined  to  receive
the  usual  remuneration.  For  twelve  years  he  "did  not  eat  the  bread  of  the  governor"
(ver.  14).  Beside  this,  he  kept  a  very  hospitable  table,  entertaining  diiily  "  an
hundred  and  fifty  of  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  beside  those  that  came  from  the  heathen  "
(ver.  17).  Generosity  may  be  shown  in  many  ways:  (1)  in  large  and  costly  gifts,  (2)
in  free  expenditure  of  time  and  strength,  (3)  in  a  noble  overlooking  of  injury,  (4)  in
refusal  to  claim  what  is  justly  due.  It  is  sometimes  (a)  the  overflow  of  natural  dis-
position. We  find  in  some  ungodly  men  this  open-hearted  riess  and  nobility  of
conduct.  With  Nehemiah  it  was  partly,  indeed  largely,  (j3)  the  outcome  of  genuine
godliness  (ver.  15).  "  So  did  not  I,  because  of  the  fear  of  God."  If  animated  by
this  motive,  we  shall  not  live  to  ourselves,  hut  shall  (1)  give  freely,  and  (i)  forego
gladly,  that  God  may  be  glorified,  and  the  welfare  of  his  people  promoted. — 0.

Vers.  14 — 19. — A  man  of  public  spirit.  I.  That  he  has  more  regard  for  thb
FUBLic  WELFARE  THAN  FOR  PERSONAL  REMUNERATION.  "  Moreover  from  the  time  that
I  was  appointed  to  be  their  governor  in  Uie  land  of  Judah,  from  tiie  twentieth  year


JH.  V.  14—19.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NBHEMIAH.


61


even  unto  the  two  and  thirtieth  year  of  Artaxerxes  the  king,  that  is,  twelve  years,  I
and  my  brethren  have  not  eaten  the  bread  of  the  governor     (ver.  14).

II.  That  he  has  more  bbqabd  for  necessary  reforms  than  for  traditional
CUSTOMS.  "  But  the  former  governors  that  had  been  before  me  were  chargeable  unto
the  people"  (ver.  16).  Men  are  chargeable  to  their  fellows — 1.  In  the  state.  2.  In
morals.  3.  In  society.  4.  In  the  family.  6.  In  the  Church.  Men  have  often  to
pay  and  suffer  for  their  governors.

III.  That  he  has  more  regard  fob  pophlar  liberty  than  for  orrRnssivE
EXACTIONS.  "  Yea,  even  their  servants  bare  rule  over  the  people  :  but  so  did  riot  I,
because  of  the  fear  of  God  "  (vers.  15,  18).  Nehemiah  would  not  allow  the  few  to
oppress  the  many  ;  he  made  his  servants  work  (ver.  16).

IV.  That  he  has  more  regard  for  earnest  industry  than  for  luxurious
INDOLENCE.  "  Yea,  alio  I  continued  in  the  work  of  this  wall  "  (ver.  16).  1.  Personal
work.     2.  Continuous  work.     3,  Effective  work.     4.  A  good  example.

V.  That  he  has  more  regard  for  wise  beneficence  than  for  a  mean  policy.
"  Now  that  which  was  prepared  for  me  daily  was  one  ox  and  six  choice  sheep  ;  also
fowls  were  prepared  for  rae,  and  once  in  ten  days  store  of  all  sorts  of  wine :  yet  for
all  this  required  not  I  the  bread  of  the  governor,  because  the  bondage  was  heavy
upon  this  people  "  (ver.  18).

VI.  That  he  has  more  regard  for  the  Divine  benediction  than  for  human
praise.  "  Think  upon  me,  my  God,  for  good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done  for  this
people  "  (ver.  19).  1.  The  Divine  contemplation  of  man.  2.  The  beneficent  regard
of  God  for  man.  .  3.  God  will  reward  those  who  aid  his  people.  4.  The  measure  of
the  Divine  favour  not  according  to  what  we  have  done,  but  according  to  what
Christ  has  done  in,  by,  and  for  us. — B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VL
Secret  proobedinos  of  Sanballat  and
his  friends  to  hinder  the  building  op

FHE  WALL,  AND  THEIR  FAILURE.    ThE  WALL

COMPLETED  (ch.  vi).  When  the  open  op-
position failed,  when  it  was  found  that
Nehemiah'a  arrangements  for  guarding  the
wall  (ch.  iv.  13 — 23)  were  such  that  success
was  not  likely  to  attend  the  employment  of
force  by  the  confederates,  with  such  resources
as  they  had  at  their  disposal,  and  the  idea
of  an  assault  was  therefore  given  up,  re-
course was  had  to  artifice  and  intrigue.
First  of  all,  Sanhallat  sent  to  propose  a
meeting  between  himself,  Geshem,  and
Nehemiah  in  the  open  country  about  Ono,
twenty -five  or  thirty  miles  from  Jerusalem,
hoping  thus  to  draw  him  to  a  distance  from
his  supporters,  and  intending  to  "do  him  a
mischief"  (ver.  2).  Nehemiah,  who  per-
ceived the  snare,  declined ;  but  Sanballat
persisted,  and  made  four  other  proposals  for
conferences,  probably  varying  the  place,  hut
all  without  avail.  On  the  fifth  and  last
occasion  the  letter  sent  to  Nehemiah  was  an
open  one,  and  taxed  him  with  an  intention
tombnl  and  make  himself  king,  an  intention


which  was  sure  to  come  to  the  ears  of
Artaxerxes,  and  would  bring  the  Jews  into
trouble.  An  open  letter  on  a  delicate  subject
is  in  the  East  an  insult,  and  this  step  of
Sanballat's  could  only  have  been  taken  in
order  to  excite  the  mind  of  Nehemiah's  sub-
jects, and  to  bring  pressure  to  bear  on  him
from  them.  Nehemiah,  however,  was  not
to  be  intimidated,  or  diTerted  from  his
purpose.  He  protested  that  the  charge
made_  against  him  was  a  piire  calumny,  in-
vented by  Sanballat  himself,  and  still
declined  a  conference  (ver.  8).  Hereupon
intrigues  began  between  Sanballat  and
Tobiah,  on  the  one  hand,  and  some  of
Nehemiah's  subjects,  on  the  other.  Tobiah
was  connected  by  marriage  with  Jews  of
high  position  in  Jerusalem  (ver.  18),  and
had  thus  an  excuse  for  holding  frequent
correspondence  with  them  (ver.  17).  His
letters  seem  to  have  been  allowed  free  ad-
mission into  the  Jewish  capital,  and  he  was
thus  enabled  to  cause  serious  trouble.  At
one  time  he  addressed  Nehemiah  himself,
and  tried  to  intimidate  him  (ver.  19).  At
another  he  worked  upon  certain  members
of  the  prophetical  order,  and  by  bribes  or
promises  induced  them  to  beccme  his  aiden


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


[oh.  VI.  1—19.


and  abettors.  A  certain  Shemaiah,  who  ap-
pears to  have  been  at  once  a  prophet  (ver.
12)  and  a  priest  (ver.  11),  allowed  himself  to
be  "hired"  by  Tobiah  and  Sanballat,  and
laid  a  plot  to  bring  Nehemiah  into  discredit.
He  sought  an  interview  with  the  governor,
and  told  him  that  his  life  was  iu  danger — he
knew  by  his  prophetic  gift  that  on  the  very
next  night  an  attempt  would  be  made  by  some
one,  and  Nehemiah  would  be  murdered —
that  is  to  say,  unless  he  took  precautions.
And  he  had  a  plan  to  propose.  As  a  priest,
he  had  free  access  to  the  temple  building ;
he  would  take  Nehemiah  with  him,  at  some
risk  to  himself,  for  a  bodily  impurity  made
it  illegal  for  him  to  enter  the  holy  place,
and  they  would  pass  the  night  together  in
the  sanctuary.  So  Nehemiah's  life  would
be  preserved  (ver.  10).  The  object  was  to
induce  Nehemiah,  though  a  layman,  to  enter
the  sanctuary,  and  so  break  the  law  (ver.
13).  But  the  simple  manliness  and  straight-
forward piety  of  the  governor  frustrated  this
.plot  also.  "Should  a  man  in  my  position
run  away  from  danger  and  hide  ? "  he  said.
"And  if  so,  should  a  layman  enter  the
temple?  I  will  not  enter"  (ver.  11).  It
was  not  till  afterwards  that  he  found  out
that  the  prophecy  was  a  fiction,  and  the
prophet  a  bribed  liar  (ver.  12).  Other  simi-
lar attempts  seem  also  to  have  been  made,
about  the  same  time,  by  other  members  of
the  prophetical  order,  among  whom  one
only  is  particularised — the  prophetess  Noa-
diah  (ver.  14).  Nehemiah,  however,  stood
firm  as  a  rock  throughout ;  and  he  is  able  to
boast  that  "in  fifty  and  two  days,  on  the

25th    of   Elul,   THE    WALL  WAS   FINISHED"

(ver.  15).  It  was  a  proud  moment  for  the
indefatigable  and  stout-hearted  governor,
who  saw  his  dearest  wish  accomplished,  and
must  have  known  that  the  accomplisliment
was  mainly  due  to  his  own  untiring  efforts.
But  he  does  not  claim  the  glory  for  himself.
"When  the  enemies  (i.  e.  Sanballat,  Tobiah,
and  Geshem)  heard  of  it,"  he  says,  "and
the  heathen  round  about  us  saw  it,  they
were  much  cast  down."  And  why  ?  " They
perceived  that  this  work  was  wrowjht  of
ow  God."

Ver.  1. — When  Sanballat,  and  Tobiah,
and  Oeshem  the  Arabian  heard.  Literally,
"When  it  was  heard  by  Sanballat  and  Tobiah,


and  by  Geshem  the  Arabian."  The  pre-
position \  is  repeated  with  Geshem,  but  not
with  Tobiah,  probably  because  Tobiah  wa«
Sinballat's  subordinate;  but  Geshem  an
independent  chie£  Hence,  too,  it  was  not
proposed  that  Tobiah  should  be  at  the  con-
ference. At  that  time  I  had  not  set  np  the
doors.  This  may  appear  to  contradict  cli.
iii.  1,  8,  6,  13,  &C.  But  the  account  of  the
building  in  ch.  iii  is  carried  on  to  the  com-
pletion of  the  whole  work,  the  object  there
being  to  state  by  whom  the  different  parts
were  done,  and  not  at  what  time.  Chrono-
logically, chs.  iv.,  v.,  and  vi  are  parallel  to
ch.  iii.,  relating  events  that  happened  while
the  wall  was  being  built  The  hanging  of
the  doors  in  the  gateways  was,  naturally,
the  last  thing  done.  Upon  the  gatei.  Rather,
"in  the  gateways."

Ver.  2.— In  some  one  of  the  villages.
The  Hebrew  has  "in  the  villages,"  which
seems  too  vague.  Bertheau  therefore  sug-
gests, "in  Hakkiphirim,"  taking  the  word
as  the  name  of  a  particular  village,  which  is
probably  right.  Ono  was  near  Lydda,  in
the  plain  country  bordering  on  Philistia.
They  thought  to  do  me  mischief.  A  euphe-
mism for  "they  thought  to  murder  me."

Ver.  6.— An  open  letter.  Letters  in  the
East  are  usually  placed  in  silken  bags,
which  are  then  tied  np  and  carefully  sealed.
An  "open  lett*"  invited  perusal;  and  the
object  of  sending  this  one  "open"  must
have  been  to  create  alarm  among  the  Jews,
and  to  excite  them  against  Nehemiah.
Compare  the  conduct  of  Sennacherib's  am-
bassadors (2  Kings  xviiL  27 — 33).

Ver.  6. — Gashmn  saith  it.  "Gashmu"
is  probably  the  native  Arabic  form  of  the
name  which  in  a  Hebrew  mouth  commonly
became  "Geshem."  Thon  and  the  Jews
think  to  rebel.  Compare  ch.  iL  19,  and
Ezra  iv.  13,  with  the  comment.  According
to  these  words.  /.  «.  "Agreeably  to  what
is  reported."

Ver.  7. — Then  hast  also  appointed  pro-
phets to  preach  of  thee  at  Jerusalem,  saying,
There  is  a  king  in  Judah.  Expressions  of
the  religious  teachers  of  the  time,  parallel
to  that  of  Zechariah, — "  Behold,  thy  king
Cometh  "  (Zech.  ix.  9), — ^may  have  been  re-
ported to  Sanballat,  and  misunderstood  or
purposely  misinterpreted.

Ver.  9. — They  all  made  ns  afraid.  Rather,
"sought  to  affright  us."  Their  attempts
did  not  succeed.  Now  therefore,  0  God,
strengthen  my  hands.  "  0  God  "  is  not  iu
the  original ;  whence  some  critics  do  not  see
in  the  words  used  a  prayer,  but  only  a  state-
ment— "  But  I  now  strengthened  my  hands  "
(so  the  Septuagint,  Ymgate,  Syriac,  and
Arabic  versions).  This  meaning,  however,
cannot  be  obtained  from  the  present  text.
Ver.  10. — ^A  Shemaiah  appears  in  the  list


CH.  VI.  1—19.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


08


of  priests  who  afterwards  signed  the  cove-
nant (ch.  X.  8) ;  but  the  names  in  that  list
do  not  appear  to  he  personal.  There  is  a
Shemaiah  also  among  the  priests  who  took
part  in  the  dedication  of  the  wall  (ch.  xii.
42) ;  he  is  not  said,  however,  to  be  "  the
son  of  Delaiah."  Shut  up.  Prevented,  i. «.,
by  some  legal  impurity  from  taking  part  in
the  temple  service,  or  even  entering  the
temple.  In  the  house  of  God,  within  the
temple.  Rather,  "within  the  sanctuary."
The  heykal  was  the  same  as  the  holy  place,
and  meant  that  part  of  the  temple  building
which  intervened  between  the  porch  and  the
holy  of  holies.  It  corresponded,  as  Gesenius
observes,  to  the  body  or  nave  of  modem
cathedrals.  Let  us  shut  the  doors.  Folding
doors  of  fir  wood  separated  the  holy  place
from  the  porch  in  the  temple  of  Solomon
(1  Kings  vi  34) ;  and  these  had  no  doubt
'  their  counterpart  in  the  restored  temple.
Shemaiah  suggested  the  shutting  of  these
doors  for  greater  security

Ver.  11. — Should  such  a  man  as  I  fleet
/. «.  Should  a  man  in  my  position,  the  head  of
the  state,  bound  to  set  an  example  to  others,
fly  from  danger  and  hide  myself?  Surely
not  And  who  is  there,  that,  being  as  I
am,  would  go  into  the  temple  to  save  his
life!  Eather,  "could  go  into  the  temple
and  live  i "  Dean  Stanley  compares  Becket's
noble  words, — "  I  will  not  turn  the  cathedral
into  a  castle," — but  the  parallel  is  not  close.
Nehemiah  feels,  not  that  he  would  profane
the  temple-^  by  making  it  into  a  place  of
refuge,  but  that  he  would  break  the  law  by
simply  entering  it.  Ewald  shows  that  he
has  caught  the  point  of  the  objection  when
he  says,  "Neheraiah  thought  that,  as  a
layman,  he  must  not  break  the  Divine  com-
mand by  entering  the  sanctuary  itself"
(•  History  of  Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  157).

Ver.  12.  —And,  lo,  I  perceived,  &c.  Eather,
"  And  I  considered ;  and  lo  !  God  had  not
gent  him."  I  reflected  on  the  whole  matter,
and  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  though  he
might  be  a  prophet,  he  had  not  on  this
occasion  exercised  his  prophetical  oiRce — he
had  not  declared  to  me  God's  will  (com-
pare the  case  of  the  "  old  prophet,"  1  Kings
xiiL  11 — 18).  And  I  was  right,  "for  (in
&ct)  he  had  pronounced  this  prophecy  against
me,  because  lobiah  and  Sauballat  had  hired
him."  "Tobiah  and  Sanballat"  here — not
"  Sanballat  and  Tobiah;"  as  elsewhere  (ch,
IL  10,  19  ;  iv.  7  ;  vi  1),  because  Tobiah  was
no  doubt  the  immediate  briber,  Sanballat
merely  furnishing  the  funds.

Ver.  13. — Therefore  was  he  hired,  &c.
Their  motive  for  bribing  him  was,  that  I
might  be  induced  by  fear  to  do  as  Shemaiah
tnggested,  and  so  to  commit  sin ;  whereby
they  would  have  a  just  ground  for  spreading
an  evil  report  concerning  me,  and  making


my  misconduct  a  constant  reproach  to  me,
Neheniiah's  inliuenee  depended  greatly  on
the  weight  of  his  moral  character.  One
false  step,  and  he  would  have  been  lost ;  his
influence  would  have  been  gone ;  and  the
work  on  which  his  heart  was  set  would  have
come  to  nought.

Ver,  14,  — ^Tobiah  and  Sanballat,  See
ver.  12,  with  the  comment.  The  prophetess
Noadiah  is  not  elsewhere  mentioned.  She
has  been  supposed  to  have  succumbed  to  %
bribe,  like  Shemaiah  (Ewald) ;  but  this  is
wholly  uncertain.  We  only  know  that,
together  with  certain  soi-disant  prophets,
she  endeavoured  to  "  put  Nehemiah  in  fear."
It  is  clear  that  she  was  unsuccessful,

Ver.  IS, — So  the  wall  was  finished  in  the
twenty  and  fifth  day  of  the  mouth  Elul,  in
fifty  and  two  days.  According  to  Josephus
('  Ant.  Jud.,'  xi  5,  §  8),  the  work  of  restora-
tion occupied  two  years  and  four  months,  or
840  days,  instead  of  fifty-two.  And  this
period  has  been  thought  so  much  more  pro-
bable than  tiie  smaller  one,  that  modems
generally  have  accepted  it,  while  some  have
even  proposed  to  alter  our  present  text  of
Nehemiah  by  the  insertion  of  u-sh/nAthayim,
"and  two  years,"  at  the  end  of  this  verse
(Ewald).  But  the  authority  of  Josephus  on
matters  of  remote  history  is  so  small,  and
the  whole  account  of  Nehemiah  is  so  har-
monious and  consistent  with  itself,  that
alteration  seems  C[uite  unnecessary.  Nehe-
miah  leaves  Susa  in  Nisan,  probably  towards
the  middle  or  close  of  the  month,  for  his
preparations  must  have  taken  him  some  time.
He  would  be  likely  to  be  nearly  three  months
on  his  journey,  and  would  thus  reach  Jeru-
salem about  the  middle  of  July— say  July
15.  He  then  rested  three  days,  surveyed
the  wall,  laid  his  plan  before  the  nobles,
arranged  the  workm^  parties,  and  set  to
work.  It  was  his  object  to  hasten  mattoii
as  much  as  possible ;  and  he  may  well  have
commenced  the  rebuilding  within  ten  days
of  his  arrival  Fifty-two  lays  from  July  25
would  bring  him  to  Sept.  15,  which  corre-
sponds, as  nearly  as  may  be,  to  the  25th  of
EluL  There  is  no  difficulty  in  supposing
that  the  wall  could  have  been  repaired  in
this  space.  The  materials  were  ready  at
hand ;  the  working  parties  were  numerous ;
the  workmen  full  of  zeaL  If  we  estimate
the  circumference  of  the  wall  at  four  miles,
which  is  probably  beyond  the  truth,  and  the
working  parties  at  forty-two  (Ewald),  it  will
follow  that  each  party  had,  on  the  average,
to  repair  168  yards,  or  at  the  rate  of  between
three  and  four  yards  a  day.  There  was  pro-
bably no  work  done  on  the  sabbaths,  and
there  may  have  been  one  or  two  days  of
interruption,  when  attack  seemed  imminent
(ch.  iv.  13— 15);  but  otherwise  the  work
was  carried  on  without  pause  from  early  daws


64


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMUH.


[OH.  Tt  1—19.


to  dark  {ibid.  v^r.  21).  Tho  wall  attained
to  half  its  height  in  a  reiy  short  time  (ibid.
Te*  6), — there  was  then  a  brief  interruption,
— after  which  came  the  main  work  of  com-
pleting the  entire  circuit  to  its  full  height
It  is  possible  that  the  fifty-two  days  are
counted  ftom  the  "return  to  work"  (ibid,
ver.  15).

Ver.  16.— Onr  enemies.  The  Samaritans,
the  Ammonites,  the  Ashdodites,  and  the
Arabians  under  Geshem  are  the  special
"  enemies  "  here  spoken  o£  The  Phoenicians,
Syrians,  Moabites,  &c  are  the  other  "heathen
round  about "  the  Jews.  Even  these  last
were  unfriendly,  and  disliked  any  increase
of  Jewish  power  and  prosperity.  They  per-
ceived that  this  work  was  wrought  of  onr
God.  _  They  could  not  but  recognise  a  special
Providence  as  befriending  and  protecting
the  Jews,  who,  after  having  been  utterly
crashed  and  rooted  out  by  ^Nebuchadnezzar,
were  now  re-established  in  a  commanding
position  in  Palestine,  and  allowed  to  make
their  city  once  more  an  almost  impregnable
fortress.

Ver.  17. — Moreover  in  those  days.  Ewald
supposes  that  the  circumstances  here  related
(vers.  17 — 19)  were  subsequent  to  the  com-
pletion of  the  wall  ('  Histoiy  of  Israel,'  vol.


V.  p.  157) ;  but  the  expression  "  in  those
days  "  seems  rather  to  throw  back  the  events
into  the  time  during  which  the  wall  was  in
building.  The  passage  is  a  sort  of  explana-
tory note,  showing  us  how  Tobiah  came  to
be  able  to  raise  those  intrigues  inside  Jeru-
salem which  have  been  mentioned  in  vers.
12—14.  And  the  letters  of  Tobiah  came
unto  them.  Kather,  "and  many  were  the
letters  of  Tobiah  which  came  to  them."

Ver.  18. — He  was  the  son-in-law  of
Shechaniah.  Bather,  "  related  by  marriage
to  Shechaniah  " — perhaps,  but  not  certainly,
by  having  married  his  daughter.  Son  of
Arah.  Member,  i.  e:,  of  the  family,  palled
the  Beni-Arah,  which  had  returned  with
Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii.  5  ;  Neh.  vii  10).  Me-
shullam  the  son  of  Berechiah  is  mentioned
in  ch.  iii.  as  repairing  two  portions  of  the
wall  (vers.  4,  80).

Ver.  19. — Also  they  reported  his  good
deeds,  &C.  Rather,  "they  even  reported"
— they  went  so  far  as  to  speak  to  me  of  his
good  actions,  perhaps  representing  the  bribes
which  he  dispensed  (ver.  12)  as  given  from
charitable  motives.  And  they  uttered  my
words,  or  "communicated  my  affairs,"  to
him.  They  made  him  acquainted  with  all
my  procee&igai


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 9. — Crqft  detected  and  baffled.  The  enemies  without  make  onnning
proposals  in  vain.

I.  The  occasion  of  theib  interfeeence.  They  heard  that  the  wall  was  com-
pleted, though  the  gates  were  not  yet  set  up;  and,  thinking  that  further  open
opposition  would  be  useless,  adopted  craft.

II.  The  manner  of  their  interference.  1.  They  repeatedly  proposed  a  confer-
ence. Pretending  probably  that  they  wished  to  come  to  a  good  understanding  with
Nehemiah,  but  really  intending  to  get  him  into  their  power,  that  even  now,  their
leader  being  gone,  the  Jews  might  leave  undone  the  rest  of  the  work,  or  that  in  th«
confusion  thus  caused  they  might  march  on  the  city  and  take  possession  of  it,  or
undo  what' had  been  done.  But  Nehemiah  was  too  wise  to  be  thus  caught.  Without
letting  them  know  that  he  saw  through  their  cunning  design,  he  replied  truly  enough,
though  not  the  whole  truth,  that  he  could  not  leave  the  great  work  he  was  doing,  and
let  it  cease,  to  come  down  to  them  ;  and  as  often  as  they  repeated  their  proposal  he
Bent  the  same  answer.     2.  They  endeavoured  to  induce  him  to  comply  with  their

iroposal  by  sending  openly  a  false  accusation  against  him.  What  they  had  insinuated
efore  (ch.  ii.  19)  they  declare  now  to  be  matter  of  common  report,  viz.,  that  he  and
the  Jews  had  fortified  Jerusalem  with  the  intention  to  rebel  against  the  Persian
monarch,  adding  that  the  report  was  also  that  Nehemiah  was  purposing  to  be  king,
and  had  indeed  induced  certain  prophets  to  proclaim  him  king.  And  as  these  re-
ports must  needs  reach  the  ears  of  Artaxerxes,  they  begged  him  to  come  to  consult
with  them,  wishing  him  apparently  to  understand  that  they  would  take  such  steps  as
might  be  agreed  upon  to  prevent  any  ill  consequences  to  himself ,  should  this  prove  to
be  the  case.  The  letter  containing  these  accusations  and  proposal  was  sent  "  open,"
that  the  people  at  Jerusalem  might  know  them,  and  be  intimidated,  and  decline  to  put
the  finishing  stroke  to  the  work.  Nehemiah,  however,  strong  in  the  consciousness  of
rectitude,  not  only  denied  the  truth  of  these  pretended  reports,  but  charged  Sanballat
with  inventing  them.
HL  Nehemiab'b  besocbok  ih  bis  difficulties.     He  prayed  God  to  strengtliea


I


ru.  VI.  1— I'J.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  U

his  liarids,  i.  e.  to  give  him  vigour  and  courage  to  complete  his  undertaking,  and
keep  the  people  sled  fast  in  the  work  until  it  was  ddne.  The  paragraph  suggests —
1.  The  persisteTice  of  the  enemies  of  Christ  in  their  opposition  to  his  cause.  His
work  in  the  individual,  or  in  the  Church  as  a  whole.  Now  violence,  and  now  craft  is
used ;  at  one  time  flattery,  at  another  calumny  ;  now  open  enmity,  and  then  pre-
tended friendship ;  to-day  appeal  to  hopes,  to-morrow  to  fears.  Leaders  in  the
Church  are  particularly  assailed,  as  the  officers  of  an  army  in  battle.  2.  Their
frequent  unscrupulousness.  Inventing,  for  instance,  as  here,  false  reports,  and
sometimes  repeating  them  until  they  believe  them.  But  we  need  be  the  less  sur-
prised at  this  when  we  watch  controversies  amongst  Cliristians  themselves,  and
observe  how  ready  they  are  to  believe  and  repeat  any  slander  concerning  those  they
oppose,  and  to  put  obviously  false  constructions  on  their  words  and  deeds.  3.  The
manner  in  which  they  are  to  be  met.  (1)  By  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity.  "  Harm-
less as  doves."  (2)  By  wariness  and  wisdom.  "  Wise  as  serpents."  (.S)  By  firm
refusal.  (4)  By  steady  persistence  in  Christian  life  and  work,  every  fresh  stage  of
which,  as  here,  furnishes  additional  defence  against  the  foe.  (5)  By  prayer.  4.  The
liability  of  the  best  men  to  be  slandered.  Even  in  respect  to  their  noblest  actions ;
for  many  cannot  understand  nobleness,  and  enemies  will  not  believe  it  of  those  they
hate.  Hence  the  best  deeds  may  be  ascribed  to  the  worst  motives.  We  should,
therefore,  be  slow  to  believe  evil  reports,  especially  respecting  men  otherwise
irreproachable.  Rather  than  hastily  receive  thenl  as  true,  we  should  suspect  that
they  have  originated  in  ignorance  or  malice.

Ver.  3. — Hindrances  repelled.  "  I  am  doing  a  great  work,  so  that  I  cannot  come
down."  This  reply  of  Nehemiah  to  his  subtle  enemies  is  worthy  of  adoption  by  us
in  relation  to  all  tliat  would  hinder  us  in  Christ's  service.  In  giving  them  this  turn,
we  may  employ  the  words  "  come  down,"  used  here  of  locality,  in  the  sense  of
descending  to  a  lower  mental  or  moral  level.

I.  Who  mat  well  adopt  these  words.  1.  All  Christians.  (1)  In  relation  to
their  spiritual  culture,  the  working  out  of  their  own  salvation,  which  is  indeed  "a
great  work."  (2)  In  relation  to  their  special  calling  in  life.  Which  is  to  each  his
"  great  work  " — that  which  must  occupy  most  of  his  time  and  thought  and  toil ;  that
in  which  he  is  especially  to  glorify  God.  (3)  In  relation  to  any  work  of  Christian
benevolence  in  which  each  may  be  engaged.  2.  Those  who  occupy  positions  of
peculiar  responsibility.  Whether  in  secular  life  or  in  the  Church.  Statesmen ;
parents,  the  nurture  and  training  of  whose  families  is  "a  great  work ;  "  ministers
of  religion  ;  all  on  whom  others  depend  for  guidance,  &c.

II.  To  WHOM,   AND  OF  WHAT,  THEY  MA?  BE   EMPLOYED.     To'  all  who  WOuld  tempt

US — 1.  Into  obvious  sin.  2.  Into  whatever  practice  would  hinder  us  in  our  duty.
What  is  right  for  one  may  be  wrong  for  another,  because  it  would  hinder  him  in  his
Christian  life  or  work.  Each  must  judge  for  himself  what  would  be  a  hindrance  to
him.  Let  every  one  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness,"  intent
^upreinely  on  serving  God  and  serving  his  generation  according  to  the  will  of  God,
and  all  inferior  things  will  be  seen  in  their  true  light,  and  take  their  proper  place.
Let  every  one  also  leave  his  fellow  Christians  to  order  their  lives  according  to  their
own  judgment  of  what  is  right  and  good  for  them.  He,  however,  who  would  live
greatly  for  great  ends  must  often  say  as  to  pursuits,  amusements,  gratifications  of
taste,  social  intercourse,  &c.,  lawful  or  laudable  in  others,  "  I  am  doing,"  &c.

III.  The  ebasonablejjess  of  the  words  as  thus  employed.  Concentration  of
mind  and  energy  is  essential  to  success  in  all  important  pursuits,  and  is  adopted  by
all  who  determine  to  succeed.  Whatever  would  hinder,  however  tempting,  has  to  be
resolutely  renounced.  The  same  concentration  and  self-denial  are  required  in  the
Christian  life,  and  are  the  more  imperative  and  reasonable  on  account  of  the  great-
ness of  its  aims  and  the  peculiar  perils  which  attend  it.  In  conclusion — 1.  The
sentiment  of  the  text  may  be  misapplied.  As  when  (if  such  cases  may  be  supposed
possible)  a  pastor  "  cannot  come  down  "  from  his  studies  to  visit  the  sick  or  the  poor
or  to  give  counsel  to  the  inquiring  or  the  perplexed.;  or  parents  "  cannot  come  down  "
from  any  other  employment,  secular  or  spiritual,  to  care  properly  for  the  good  of
their  children  ;  or  the  contemplative  and  studioils  Christian  "  cannot  come  down  "  to

NEBBMUH.  f


66  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  vi.  1—19

works  of  active  benevolence,  or  even  to  diligence  in  his  secular  calling.  2.  The
sentiment  may  he  pushed  too  far.  Human  nature  cannot  bear  a  perpetual  strain  ;  is
not  the  better  for  incessant  concentration  on  even  the  highest  subjects  £nd  pursuits.
We  need  variety.  Recreation  (truly  such)  is  as  much  a  duty  as  serious  occupation.
Sin  is  always  to  be  renounced,  but  not  always  are  we  to  refuse  to  "  come  down  "  to
lighter  matters  than  those  of  our  main  business  in  life.  The  highest  life  we  can
reach  will  be  not  hindered,  but  promoted,  by  a  wise  descent  to  lower  things ;  and  that
not  only  because  of  the  relief  thus  gained,  but  because  the  highest  principles  can  be
exercised  and  nourished  by  employment  in  the  smallest  matters.  3.  To  all  tempt-
ations to  real  neglect  of  our  work  the  words  of  the  text  should  be  perseveringly
applied.  Like  Nehemiah,  let  us  to  every  renewed  temptation  "  answer  after  the
same  manner."

Ver.  9. — Prayer  for  strength.  "  Now  therefore,  0  God,  strengthen  my  hands."
Another  instance  of  Nehemiah's  prayerf  ulness.  In  every  diflSculty  he  calls  upon  God,
and  not  in  vain.  Thus  he  obtains  strength,  and  teaches  us  where  to  seek  it,  with
assurance  of  finding  it.  The  manner  in  which  the  prayer  is  recorded  is  noticeable.
He  does  not  say.  Then  I  ofEered  this  prayer,  &c.,  but  abruptly  writes  down  the
prayer  itself.  It  seems  as  if,  while  recording  the  events  of  those  times,  he  lived  them
in  imagination  and  feeling  over  again ;  and  so,  experiencing  the  old  anxiety,  he  half
unconsciously  prayed  and  wrote  the  old  prayer  as  a  present  suppUcation  to  God.

I.  What  will  incite  the  Christian  to  buch  a  pbayer.  1.  A  great  and  good
undertaking.  Such  as  God  approves.  2.  Dependence  of  others  engaged  in  the
enterprise  on  our  lead  and  spirit.  Influence  which  our  weakness  would  have  on
tliera.  3.  Great  difficulties  in  the  work.  4.  Great  opposition  to  it.  5.  Feebleness
of  fellow  workers.  In  numbers,  ability,  zeal,  courage.-  Fear  of  their  defection.  6.
Depression  of  spirit  arising  from  these  or  other  causes.  7.  Strong  desire  to  accom-
plish the  work  notwithstanding.

II.  How  THE  PBAYER  MAT  BB  ANSWERED.  1.  By  the  gift  of  internal  strengtli
(see  Ephes.  iii.  16).  This  may  be  g^ven  direct  from  heaven,  or  through  the  medium
uf  encouragement  from  men  (see  ch.  ii.  18).  2.  By  affording  better  external  assist-
ance. More  and  better  helpers,  or  more  favonrable  circumstances.  Finally,  some
hive  good  reason  to  offer  this  prayer  with  special  emphasis  on  its  last  two  words.
They  are  strong  in  the  head,  and  have  strong  emotions,  but  are  weak  in  the  hands
for  giving  or  doing.  Unhappily,  those  who  most  need  thus  to  pray  are  least  disposed
to  do  so.

Vers.  10 — 19. — Unemies  within.  I.  False  prophets.  Who  prostituted  their  office
by  hiring  themselves  to  the  enemies  without.  For  they  "  loved  the  wages  of  unright-
eousness." 1.  One  tempted  him  to  break  the  law  by  fleeing  into  the  holy  place,
and  shutting  himself  up  there,  where  no  one  but  a  priest  or  Levite  might  enter.
This  he  did  on  the  pretence  that  Nehemiah's  life  was  in  danger  (ver.  10) ;  and  he
hoped  that  the  governor,  consenting  to  the  proposal,  would  bring  himself  into
disgrace  with  the  people,  and  so  lose  his  influence  with  them  (ver.  13).  Nehemiah
was  preserved  from  this  peril  at  once  by  his  magnanimity  and  his  reverence  for
the  law  (ver.  11).  And  if  not  immediately,  he  afterwards  perceived  the  true  source
,111(1  motives  of  the  proposal  (vers.  12,  13).  2.  Others,  by  other  unrecorded  means,
endeavoured  to  excite  his  fears  (ver.  14).  Perhaps  by  pretended  messages  from
heaven.

II.  Treacherous  nobles  (vers.  17 — 19).  These,  some  of  whom  were  allied  to
Tohiah  by  marriages,  maintained  an  active  correspondence  with  him,  and  sought  to
influence  Nehemiah  in  his  favour.  They  had  many  confederates.  Probably  Nehe-
niiiih's  reforming  zeal,  which  had  already  restrained  their  avarice,  and  was  likely  to
proceed  to  other  measures  distasteful  to  them,  fostered  their  disaffection.

III.  The  rapid  completion  of  the  fortifications,  notwithstanding  all  opposi-
tion (ver.  15).

IV.  The  impression  which  this  made  on  the  external  foes,  and  other  peoples
around  (ver.  16).  1.  Great  mortification.  Disappointment,  envy,  despair  of  tie
success  of  further  opposition.     2.  Perception  of  God's  hand.

From  this  paragraph  we  learn — 1.  The  pec  aliar  danger  to  any  community  of  internal


OH.  TL 1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  «7

disaffection  anj  division.  2.  The  baseness  of  treachery.  3.  The  heinous  wiokednesB
of  those  who  from  worldly  motives  prostitute  sacred  functions.  4.  The  duty  and  wisdom
of  private  judgment  (see  1  John  iv.  1).  Spiritual  teachers,  not  only  through  love  of
money,  but  from  other  motives  and  influences,  or  from  incapacity,  may  give  counsel
which  our  own  sense  of  truth  and  right  may  pronounce  evil.  In  such  case  we  must
follow  our  own  convictions,  although  they  may  possib'y  be  mistaken  (see  Jer.  v.  30,
31 ;  xxiii.  31,  32 ;  Micah  iii.  11).  6.  The  insight  and  safety  against  temptation  of
a  devout,  pure,  and  manly  heart,  6.  The  evil  influence  of  close  alliances  between
God's  people  and  his  enemies.  7.  The  propriety  of  due  regard  for  our  reputation.
Our  character  is  not  only  precious  to  ourselves,  but  an  invaluable  element  of  useful-
ness. Injury  to  the  reputation  of  a  Christian  is  injury  to  the  Church.  Care  for  our
good  name  is  a  help  against  temptation.  8.  The  active  providence  and  grace  of
God.  Preserving  his  servants  from  evil,  and  giving  success  to  their  pious  endea-
vours. Finally,  we  are  reminded  by  this  chapter  of  the  conflicts  and  victories  of  a
greater  than  Nehemiah,  in  whose  conquests  as  our  Leader  we  are  more  nearly
interested.

Ver.  11. — Regard  far  tpedal  obligations.  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  "  Thus
magnanimously  Nehemiah  gave  one  reason  for  not  following  the  counsel  of  the  lying
prophet.  The  words  remind  us  of  the  special  obligations  under  which  some. are  laid
to  avoid  evil  and  practise  good.  Indeed  every  one  of  us  has  some  specialty  in  his
case  which  he  should  feel  as  binding  him  peculiarly  to  a  right  course.

I.  Some  special  obligations  to  Christian  consistency.  May  be  expressed  thus :
"Should  such  a  man  as  I?"— 1.  So  greatly  favoured.  By  the  providence  or  by
the  grace  of  God — ^forgiven  so  much,  so  richly  endowed,  &c.  2.  Occupying  such  a
position,  to  which  I  have  been  so  manifestly  called.  Position  in  the  family,  the
Church,  the  world.  3.  Who  have  made  such  professions.  4.  Who  have  served  the
Lord  so  long,  and  done  so  much.  5.  Whose  influence  is  so  great,  for  good  or  evil,
upon  others.

II.  Sins  against  which  the  thoxtoht  of  such  obligations  should  be  a  defence.
"  Should  such  a  man  as  I " — 1.  Flee.  From  Christ.  Prom  his  post  of  duty.  2.
Act  unworthily.  By  inconsistencies  of  any  sort — indifference,  sloth,  self-indulgence,
intemperance,  cowardice,  parsimony,  &c.  Temptations  to  each  and  all  may  be  met
by  this  thought :  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  be  guilty  of  this  sin  ?  "

III.  Considerations  which  should  deepen  the  sense  op  obligation.  If  "  such  a
man  as  I "  fall,  then  I  shall — 1.  Incur  deserved  disgrace.  2.  Bring  reproach  on  the
name  and  cause  of  Christ.  3.  Give  joy  to  his  enemies.  4.  Discourage  and  enfeeble
his  fidends.  6.  Cause  injury  and  ruin  to  others.  "  Such  a  man  as  I "  cannot  fall
alone.     6.  Insure  a  heavier  doom.

Ver.  16. — Go^t  work  recognised.  "  They  perceived  that  this  work  was  wrought
of  our  God."  The  work  which  had  been  done  was  so  great;  it  had  been  accom-
plished by  so  feeble  a  people,  in  spite  of  so  much  opposition  and  so  many  obstacles,
and  in  so  short  a  time,  that  the  people  around,  even  those  most  opposed,  could  not
but  recognise  that  the  God  of  Israel  had  wrought  with  his  servants.  The  work  of
Christ's  servants  may  produce  a  similar  impression  on  others,  not  only  fellow  Chris-
tians, but  those  without.  It  is  much  to  be  desired  that  our  work  should  be  of  such  a
kind,  and  so  favoured  of  God,  as  to  make  such  an  impression.

I.  When  is  God's  hand  apparent  in  the  work  of  his  people  ?  1.  When  the
work  done  is  manifestly  good  in  itself.  This  can  hardly  be  said  of  the  merely  out-
ward :  of  the  erection  of  churches,  however  grand  and  beautiful ;  of  the  mainten-
ance of  imposing  services ;  of  the  gathering  of  great  crowds,  or  the  making  of  mere
proselytes.  Such  work  may  spring  from  good  and  tend  to  good ;  but  it  may  not.
Merely  human  motives  and  impulses,  perhaps  quite  unchristian,  may  explain  all.
But  when  the  bad  become  good,  and  the  good  become  eminently  so ;  when  through
Christian  teaching  and  influence  the  licentious  become  pure,  drunkards  sober,  the
proud  humble,  the  selfish  benevolent,  the  harsh  kiiid  ;  when  a  Christian  people  shines
in  the  beauty  of  the  loftiest  Christian  holiness  and  love,  and  especially  in  those
practical  virtues  which  all  can  appreciate,  then  the  conviction  is  likely  to  be  pro-


68  THB  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  vi.  1— 1».

daced  on  others  that  God  is  working  in  and  hy  them.  2.  When  the  work  done  ii
•ztenBive.  Whole  neighbourhoods,  a  whole  claes  of  irreligious  and  morally  degraded
men,  have  sometimes  been  transformed  by  the  preaching  of  the  gospel ;  even  a  nation
to  a  great  extent  quickened  and  elevated.  He  must  be  blinded  by  sin  or  the  worst
bigotry  who  fails  to  see  in  such  changes  the  agency  of  God.  3.  When  such  bene-
ficial changes  are  wrought  very  rapidly.  As  the  work  to  wliicl)  tlie  text  refers.  4.
When  serious  di£Bculties  and  fonnidable  opposition  are  overcome.  5.  When  the
work  proves  lasting.  6.  When  the  human  instrumentality  is  manifestly  insufficient
to  account  for  the  results.

11.  The  effects  which  the  perception  of  God's  hand  in  sdch  work  will
PRODUCE.  1.  On  the  workers.  Gratitude,  humility,  encouragement  to  labour  on.  2.
On  fellow  Christians.  Praise  to  God.  Becognition  of  the  workers  as  their  brethren.
Prayer  for  them.  Congratulations  and  good  wishes.  Co-operation  if  practicable.
At  least  respect,  and  the  withholding  of  censorious  criticism.  3.  On  those  desiring
good  for  themselves.  Attraction  toward  such  people.  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for
we  have  heard" — nay,  we  see — "that  God  is  with  you."  4.  On  enemies.  Dis-
couragement, mortification,  perhaps  abandonment  of  active  opposition  (see  Exod.  xiv.
25)  ;  perhaps  transformation  into  friends  and  fellow  workers,  which  is  best  of  all.

In  conclusion — 1.  The  evidences  of  Divine  agency  in  Cliristianity  and  its  effects
should  be  seriously  pondered  by  unbelievers,  2.  Blihdness  to  God's  agency  in  the
work  of  Christians  is  a  fearful  symptom.  Yet  it  is  foilnd  in  some  who  profess  to  be
Christians  in  respect  to  the  work  of  those  who  "folio*  not  with"  tliem.  Let  thorn
beware  lest  they  become  partakers  of  the  guilt  of  those  highly  religious  men  of  our
Lord's  day  who  saw  not  God  in  the  works  of  Christ,  but  ascribed  tliera  to  the  agency
of  the  devil,  and  whom  he  warned  against,  if  he  did  not  pronounce  guilty  of  the
unpardonable  sin  of  "  blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost."  3.  Let  all  Christians  pray
for  such  manifestations  of  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  Church  as  shall  pro-
duce general  conviction  of  his  agency.  Tlie  ordmary  condition  of  our  Churclies,
and  results  of  their  work,  are,  alas,  little  fitted  to  produce  such  a  convictioji
I'  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength,  0  arm  of  the  Lord ;  awake,  aa  in  the  ancient  days,
IB  the  generations  of  old."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  Christian  workman.  Nehemiah  was  an  instance,  and  will  ever
be  the  type,  of  a  faithful  workman  in  the  cause  of  God  ;  from  his  conduct  and  career
we  may  learn —

I.  How  VALUABLE  ONE  WORKMAN  MAY  PROVE  (vers.  1,  2).  Sin  sdinetimos  pays  an
unconscious  tribute  to  integrity  and  worth.  It  acts  on  the  assumption  that  righteous-
ness is  more  than  equal  to  its  energy,  and  that,  to  gain  its  evil  end,  it  must  have  recourse
to  "  poisoned  weapons."  Thus,  e.  g.,  Philip  of  Spain,  striving  vainly  to  extinguish
Protestantism  in  Holland,  concluded  that  it  could  only  be  done  by  "  finishing  Orange,"
and  set  plots  on  foot  to  murder  that  noble  patriot.  Saiib  illat  concluded  that  he  could,
not  accomplish  his  evil  designs  until  Neliemiali  was  subdued ;  hence  his  murderous
plans.  What  a  tribute  to  one  man's  influence  I  Men  "  full  of  faith  "  are  also  "  full
of  power "  (Acts  vi.  8).  One  single  soul,  animated  by  faith,  love",  and  zeal,  may
defeat  all  the  agencies  of  evil.

II.  What  need  he  has  of  wariness  (vers.  2,  4).  "  They  sought  todo  me  mischief  "
(ver.  2)  ;  "  they  sent  unto  me  four  times  after  this  sort''  (ver.  4).  The  enemies  of
God  endeavoured,  with  a  persistency  worthy  of  a  better  cause,  to  entrap  Nehemiah
and  despatch  liim.  But  he,  feariess  as  he  afterwards  proved,  was  not  to  be  taken  by
their  craft.  Heroism  is  unsuspicious  ;  but  it  is  not,  tlierefore  credulous.  It  can  dis-
tiTigiiiNh  between  tlie  overtures  of  a  friend  and  the  machinations  of  an  enemy.  We
read  of  "the  deceitfulness  of  sin"  (Heb.  iii.  13)  ;  and  both  in  tlie  guarding  of  our
own  personal  integrity,  and  in  the  defence  of  the  Churcli  of  Christ,  we  must  be  on
the  alert  against  the  enemy,  who  after  the  failure  of  open  assault  will  probably
resort  to  stealth.

III.  What  need  he  has  of  colrage  (vers.  6,  6,  7,  8,  9).     SaiibulUil,  failing  to


CH.  VI.  1—19.]  TUB  BOOK  OF  NBHEMIAH.  69

impose  on  the  charity  of  Nehemiah,  adopts  another  course  :  he  intimates  in  an  open
letter  which  every  one  may  read,  that,  if  the  interview  be  not  given  him,  he  will
send  an  evil  report  to  the  king  of  Persia,  putting  the  worst  construction  on  the
proceedings  at  Jerusalem  (vers.  5,  6,  7).  Nehemiah,  feeling  that  ceremony  would
be  out  of  place,  charges  Sanballat  with  direct  falsehood  (ver.  8).  "  Thou  feignest
them  out  of  thine  own  heart."  There  are  times  when  softness  of  speech  is  not
courtesy,  but  weakness ;  when  hard  words  are  not  rudeness,  but  faithfulness.  But
this  ruse  of  the  enemy  threatened  to  succeed,  notwithstanding  the  governor's  un-
varnished retort.  "  For  they  all  made  us  afraid  "  (ver.  9).  Fear  seems  to  have  possessed
the  minds  of  many,  and  Nehemiah  was  driven  to  prayer.  "  Now  therefore,  0  God,
strengthen  my  hands."  When  other  hearts  are  trembling,  and  timidity  is  within  us,
we  must  seek,  and  we  shall  gain,  renewed  courage  at  the  throne  of  grace.  "  In  the
day  when  I  cried  thou  answeredst  me,  and  strengthenedst  me  with  strength  in  my
soul "  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  3).  "  For  this  cause  I  bow  my  knees  ...  .  .  to  be  strength-
ened with  might  by  his  Spirit  in  the  inner  man"  (Eph.  iii.  16).

IV.  How  EXCELLENT  IS  DEVOTEDNESS  TO  WOEK  (ver.  3).  An  admirable  message
was  that  of  the  patriot :  "  I  am  doing  a  great  work,  so  that  I  cannot  come  down,"  &c.
His  place  was  amongst  his  friends,  encouraging  and  helping  them  to  build,  not  out-
side, parleying  with  the  enemy.  To  have  left  his  post  of  active  duty,  of  useful
wjk,  for  such  discussion  would  have  been  to  "  come  down  "  indeed.  To  forsake
the  good  and  great  work  of  building  for  Christ  in  order  to  debate  with  those  who  are
hostile  to  it  is  to  "  come  down,"  is  a  descent  from  devotion  to  danger.  We  are  safer
and  better  employed  in  the  high  places  of  prayer  and  activity. — C.

Vers.  1 — 14. — "  God  with  us.''  The  true  safety  of  God's  people  in  the  midst  of
the  world's  opposition.  Nehemiah  represents  the  spirit  Of  consecration,  zeal,  single-
mindedness,  dependence  upon  God,  personal  responsibility,  and  confidence  in  final
issues,  which  should  be  the  spirit  of  all  God's  people,  and  especially  of  those  who
hold  prominent  places  in  the  Church.

I.  TheT  FACT  OF  OPPOSITION.  1.  It  is  a  constant  faet.  The  form  may  change,  but
the  substance  is  the  same.  Sleepless  vigilance  is  necessary.  When  violent  assault
is  out  of  the  question,  we  must  fear  treachery.  "  Come,  and  let  us  meet  together  "  is
the  most  dangerous  shape  of  the  world's  mischievous  attempt.  Special  watchfulness
required  in  times  like  these,  lest  we  forsake  our  work  and  put  ourselves  into  the
hands  of  the  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  people.  2.  We  must  expect  that  times  of
special  success  and  rapid  advancement  will  be  the  times  when  we  have  most  to
encounter  from  the  world.  When  the  work  of  God  is  making  no  way  his  enemies
will  leave  it  to  itself.  When  they  see  that  it  approaches  completion  ("  the  wall  built,
and  no  breach  therein  "),  then  they  will  make  desperate  efforts  to  circumvent  us,
and  to  overthrow  our  work  ;  and  Ihe  more  open  our  success,  the  more  crafty  will  be
their  schemes.  3.  In  appreciating  the  dangers  of  our  position,  wo  should  not  be
content  with  looking  outside  the  Church ;  look  vjithin  it  too.  There  will  be  traitors
among  the  Lord's  people.  There  will  be  lying  prophets,  timid  friends,  worldly-
minded  fellow  labourers.     The  true  heart  must  be  strong  in  God.

II.  The  victory  of  faith  in  the  time  of  special  temptation.  1.  It  was  a  victory
obtained  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in  the  spirit  of  man.  What  Nehemiah  needed  was
penetration,  wisdom,  self-control,  fortitude,  fearlessness,  devotion  to  his  work.  All
these  iqualities  are  given  by  the  Spirit  of  God  and  maintained  by  his  grace.  So  long
as  they  were  uppermost  in  the  individual  man,  the  enemies  had  no  chance.  2.  It
was  a  victory  which  was  bestowed  as  a  reward  of  faith,  and  in  answer  to  prayer.
The  whole  attitude  of  Nehemiah  was  that  of  dependence  upon  God.  "  My  God,
strengthen  thou  my  hands."  3.  It  was  a  very  decided  and  definite  faith  which  gained
the  victory.  "  I  am  doing  a  great  work,  and  I  cannot  come  down."  The  best  defence
against  temptation  is  to  be  pledged  to  a  positive  public  life  of  active  service.  The
spirit  of  work  should  be  set  against  the  spirit  of  compromise.  To  leave  duty  un-
fulfilled is  always  to  come  down,  and  to  come  down  is  to  be  in  the  hands  of  enemies.
4.  The  victory  was  renewed  many  times.  Each  occasion  added  strength  to  the  true
heart.  If  God  helps  us  to  say  No  once,  we  shall  find  it  easier  each  tune  afterwards.
CJourage  grow8  by  action.    The  conscious  resistance  of  evil  is  both  the  best  pr»»


10  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  vi.  1— 1».

paration  to  detect  its  presence,  and  the  best  uplifting  of  the  heart  above  actual  feara
tor  life  and  safety. — II.

Vena.  1 — 16. — The  temptations  of  earnest  moral  life  and  service.    I.  The  way  ra

WHICH  THB  ACHIEVEMENTS  OF  EARNEST  MOKAL  LIFE  AND.  SERVICE  ARE   MADE   KNOWN   TO

WICKED  MEN.  "  Now  it  came  to  pass,  when  Sanballat,  and  Tobiah,  and  Geshem  the
Arabian,  and  the  rest  of  our  enemies,  heard  that  I  had  builded  the  wall,  and  that
there  was  no  breach  left  therein  "  (ver.  1).  Christian  life  and  service  will  make  them-
selves known — 1.  Naturally.  The  finished  walls  must  be  seen.  2.  Influentially.
The  rising  walls  affect  oilier  peoples;  Christian  life  reveals  itself  in  the  moral
influence  it  wields.  3.  Rumour.  The  enemies  of  the  good  soon  hear  of  the  wall
that  has  been  built.  4.  Vigilance.  The  wicked  .watch  the  activities  of  the  good.
The  service  of  the  good  man  must  be  thorough  ;  there  must  be  no  "  breach  "  left  in
it,  though  oftentimeit  is  incomplete;  its  "doors"  are  not  set  upon  the  gates  (ver.
1).     Piety,  truth,  earnest  toil  cannot  be  hid.

II.  The  way  in  which  earnest  moral  life  and  service  are  sure  to  be  tempted
BT  WICKED  MEN.  The  temptations  to  which  Nehemiah  was  exposed  were — 1.  Subtle.
"  Come,  let  us  meet  together  "  (ver.  2).  2.  Persistent.  "  Yet  they  sent  unto  me  four
times  "  (ver.  4).  3.  Intimidating.  "  The  fifth  time  with  an  open  letter  in  his  hand  "
(ver.  5).  4.  Calumniatory.  "  That  thou  and  the  Jews  think  to  rebel ; "  "  That  thou
mayest  bo  their  king  "  (ver.  6).  5.'  Allied.  A  faithless  prophet  lends  himself  to  the
cause  of  the  enemy  (vers.  10—13).

III.  The  way  in  which  earnest  moral  life  and  service  must  meet  temptation.
1.  With  discernment.  "  But  they  thought  to  do  me  mischief "  (ver.  2).  2.  With
industry.  "  I  am  doing  a  great  work  "  (ver.  3).  3.  With  determination.  "  And  1
answered  them  after  the  same  manner  (ver.  4).  4.  With  exposure.  "But  thou
feignest  them  out  of  thine  own  heart."  6.  With  prayer.  "Now  therefore,  0  God,
strengthen  my  hands  "  (ver.  9).  6.  With  courage.  "  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  "
(ver.  11).

IV.  The  WAT  in  which  earnest  moral  life  and  service  complete  their  task
Kotwithstandinq  severe  trial.  "  So  the  wall  was  finished  "  (ver.  15).  1.  The  end
of  the  task.  "So  the  wall  was  finished."  2.  The  time  of  the  task.  "  In  fifty  and
two  days."  3.  The  effect  of  the  task,  "Were  very  much  cast  down  in  their  own
eyes."  4.  The  praise  of  the  task.  That  it  was  completed  under  such  difScult
circumstances. — £.

Vers.  10 — 19. — Trial  and  victory.  Defeated  again,  the  enemy  has  recourse  to
other  schemes.  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  what  were  the  expectations  with
which  Nehemiah  set  out  from  Susa  to  enter  upon  the  work  before  him.  If  we  could
tell  what  was  then  in  his  mind,  we  should  probably  find  there  anticipations  very  un-
like indeed  to  his  actual  experiences.  Probably,  if  he  could  have  foreseen  his
difficulties,  he  might  have  shrunk  from  the  task.     Happily  we  do  not  foresee  the

Eerplexities  of  Christian  toil ;  seen  as  by  a  prophetic  glance,  they  would  overwhelm  us  ;
ut  coming  upon  us  one  by  one,  they  can  be  met  bravely,  and  conquered  success-
fully.    We  look  now  at —

I.  The  trial  of  faith  in  the  work  op  God.  1.  Their  former  plots  failing,
another  yet  more  subtle  is  tried.  Sanballat  and  Tobiah  induce  a  prophet,  Shemaiah
(ver.  10),  and  a  prophetess,  Noadiah  (ver.  14),  to  urge  Nehemiah  to  take  refuge  Irom
assassination  in  the  temple ;  to  hide  himself  unlawfully,  lest  he  should  be  smitten  at  his
post  of  duty ;  in  fact,  "to  be  afraid,  and  sin,"  and  thus  give  occasion  for  "an  evil
report,  that  they  might  reproach  "  him  (ver.  13).  The  insidiousness  of  the  temptation
may  be  gathered  from  the  words  of  indignation  in  which  Nehemiah  invokes  the
Divine  reprobation  on  the  guilty  tempters  (ver.  14).  But,  2.  Nehemiah  is  yet  further
tried.  His  own  people  are  keeping  up  a  correspondence  with  the  enemy.  Nobles  of
Judah  are  writing  to  and  hearing  from  Tobiah  (ver.  17).  A  dangerous  alliance  led  to
intimacy,  to  perversion,  to  conspiracy  (ver.  18).  These  men  who- should  have  been
the  first  and  the  strongest  to  help  are  those  who  come  to  hinder ;  praising  the  man
wlio  was  doing  his  utmost  to  overturn  and  ruin  everything  (ver.  19),  and  carrying
iuack  to  the  enemy  the  words  of  the  governor  (ver.  19).     When  we  are  doing  oui


OH.  yi.  1—19.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  71

best  to  Berve  our  Master  and  our  fellows,  and  are  naturally  looking  to  those  who  aw
bound  in  the  same  holy  bonds  with  ourselves,  more  especially  to  those  who  are  as

prophets  "  or  "  prophetesses  "  in  our  ranks,  or  to  those  who  are  as  "  nobles  "  amongst
ns,  to  stand  by  our  side  and  aid  us  in  our  toil,  and  when,  instead  of  succour,  we  find
them  underminiiig  our  influence,  we  are  tempted  to  despair,  bo  keen  is  the  trial  of
our  faith.     Yet  we  may  win —

II.  The  viotort  op  the  beave.and  true  (vers.  11,  16,  16).  Here  we  have — 1.
The/aci  of  success.  The  wall  was  built :  it  was  "  finished  in  fifty  and  two  days  "
(ver.  15).  Neither  open  threats  nor  secret  plots  weakened  the  strength  or  lessened
tho  labour  of  the  busy  workmen,  and  the  good  work  was  accomplished.  2.  A  power-
ful incentive  leading  to  victc/ry.  Nehemiah  made  an  excellent  appeal  to  himself.  He
considered  who  he  was,  and  what  was  worthy  and  unworthy  of  the  post  he  held.
"  Should  such  a  man  as  I  flee  ?  "  (ver.  11).  3.  The/riti<«  of  victory  (ver.  16).  The
enemy  and  all  the  heathen  "were  much  cast  down  in  their  own  eyes,"  and  they
"perceived  that  this  work  was  wrought  of  our  God."  Their  humiliation  was  an
excellent  thing  for  them,  and  the  name  of  God  being  glorified  was  a  source  of  joy
and  gratulation  to  the  good.  There  is  victory  to  be  won  under  the  fiercest  teinptii-
tion  if  we  only  be  true  to  all  we  know.  Let  us,  in  the  dark  hour  of  the  trial  of
faith — 1.  Consider  what  is  worthy  of  the  position  we  hold.  Should  such  as  we  are
— ^missionaries,  ministers,  evangelists,  teachers,  leaders,  members  of  the  Church  of
Christ— ^e  from  the  post  of  duty  or  danger?

"  Put  on  the  gospel  armour,  and,  watching  unto  prayer.
Where  duty  calls,  or  danger,  be  never  wanting  there.

The  "g^ard"in  his  array  "  dies,  but  does  not  surrender."  2.  Consider  what  will
redound  to  the  glory  of  Christ.  If  only  we  hold  on,  "faint  yet  pursuing,"  fighting
till  the  day  is  won,  the  enemy  will  be  humiliated,  and  his  holy  name  be  honoured.
Our  once  crucified  Saviour  shall  be  "  exalted  and  extolled,  and  be  very  high  "  (Isa.
lii.  13).— C.

Vers.  15 — 19. — The  good  work  finished  in  spite  of  man  by  the  power  of  6od.
I.  A  great  manifestation  of  Divine  power  is  a  great  casting  down  of  God's
enemies.  1.  There  is  real  weakness  in  all  sin.  "  In  their  own  eyes  "  defeat  meant
shame  and  confusion ;  but  the  true  heart  never  doubts  that  its  cause  is  right,  even
whensuccess  is  delayed.  2.  The  world  will  perceive  God's  hand.  When  the  finished
work  is  before  them  they  will  not  dare  to  deny  who  has  accomplished  it.  Therefore
we  should  hasten  it  on,  and  be  more  eager  to  bring  it  to  completion.  3.  The  great
facts  of  Divine  grace  spread  their  message  not  only  among  the  enemies  of  the
Church,  but  among  the  heathen,  who  have  been  sitting  in  darkness.  A  revived
zeal  and  energy  in  God's  people  will  have  a  mighty  effect  in  casting  down  the
imaginations  which  exalt  themselves  against  the  name  of  Christ.

II.  The  best  preparation  of  the  true  Church  against  discouragements,  both  from
without  and  from  within,  is  to  know  that  its  walls  are  built  dp,  and  its  gates
IN  their  places.  1.  That  will  put  a  stop  to  the  corrupting  intercourse  between
the  Church  and  the  world.  2.  It  will  help  the  people  of  God  to  know  their  true
leaders.  The  nobles  were  traitors  ;  but  henceforth  men  after  the  example  of
Nehemiah  will  be  the  defenders  of  Judah.  3.  In  the  sight  of  the  finished  work  the
hearts  of  God's  people  are  strong.  In  the  best  sense  success  makes  success.  "  Tobiah's
letters "  will  do  no  harm,  for  there  are  the  walls  speaking  in  the  name  of  God,
"  epistles  written  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  known  and  read  of  all  men."  Let  the  world
trust  as  it  may  in  its  devices,  we  rejoice  in  "the  walls  of  Jerusalem,"  which  ar*
"salvation,"  and  "  her  gates  "  "praise." — R.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VII
Completion  of  the  work,  and  arranob-

MBNTS  rOR   QUARDINQ  THE  OATES  (ch.   vii


1 — 5).  The  wall  and  gate-towers  being  com-
pleted, nothing  remained  but  to  hang  th«
doors  in  the  gateways,  and  to  arrange  foi
the  guard  of   the  gates  and    the  general


78


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  VII.  1-


■ecarity  of  the  fortress.  Neliemiah  speaks
here  of  his  having  set  up  the  doors  (ver.  1) ;
but  it  appears  from  ch.  iii  that  the  actual
work  of  so  doing  was  intrusted,  like  the
repairs  of  the  wall,  to  the  various  working
parties.  Eliashib,  with  his  brethren  the
priests,  set  up  the  doors  of  the  sheep  gate
(ch.  iii.  1)  ;  the  sons  of  Hassenaah  those  of
the  fish  gate  {ibid.  ver.  3),  &c.  Nehemiah  had
only  the  general  superintendence,  and  saw
that  all  was  properly  executed.  But  the
entire  work  being  at  length  accomplished,  it
devolved  upon  him  to  make  the  necessary
arrangements  for  the  security  of  what  had
now  become  a  first-rate  fortress.  Accord-
ingly, he  seems  himself  to  have  assigned  the
guard  of  the  gates  to  certain  bodies  of  Levites
(ver.  1),  as  being  experienced  in  the  business
of  keeping  watch ;  after  which  he  committed
the  task  of  appointing  other  guards  to  his
brother  Hanani,  and  to  a  certain  Hananiah,
already  the  commandant  of  the  Birah,  or
temple  tower  (ver.  2).  They  devised  a
system  by  which  the  adult  male  inhabitants
were  made  to  partition  the  watch  of  the
wall  among  themselves,  each  on  the  part
which  was  nearest  to  his  own  house  (ver.  3).
At  the  same  time,  it  was  ordered,  for  greater
precaution,  that  all  the  gates  should  be
closed  at  night,  and  none  of  them  opened
"until  the  sun  was  hot"  {ibid.),  i.  e.  until
some  hours  after  sunrise.  The  city  was
thus  made  as  secure  as  the  circumstances
admitted  ;  but  in  the  course  of  the  arrange-
ments it  became  clear,  at  any  rate  to  Nehe-
miah, that  the  population  of  the  city  was
too  scanty  for  its  size  (ver.  4),  and  that
some  steps  ought  to  be  taken  to  augment
the  number  of  inhabitants.  As  a  first  step,
a  necessary  preliminary  before  he  could  lay
any  definite  proposal  before  the  "rulers,"
the  governor  thought  it  necessary  to  make  a
census  of  the  entire  peo[ile  (ver.  5).  It  seems
to  have  been  in  the  course  of  his  prepara-
tions for  this  purpose  that  he  "found  a
register  of  the  genealogy  of  them  which
came  up  at  the  first."  The  list  in  vers.  7 —
69  has  been  regarded  as  the  result  of  his
own  census ;  but  reasons  have  been  already
given  against  this  view  in  the  comment  upon
Ezra ;  and  it  would  seem  to  be  most  probable
that  we  have  the  actual  result  of  Nehemiah's
census,  so  far  as  he  thought  fit  to  give  it  to
01,  in  ch.  zi.  8—86.


Ver.  1.— The  porters  and  the  singers  and
the  Levites.  The  porters  and  the  singei-s
were  themselves  Levites,  but  are  often  dis-
tinguished from  their  brethren,  who  had  no
such  special  ofiBice  (see  Ezra  ii.  40 — 42,  70 ;
vil  24  ;  X.  23,  24  j  Neh.  vii.  43—45,  73  ;
X.  28,  ■&C.).  Nehemiah's  choice  of  Levites
to  guard  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  may  seem
strange ;  but  we  must  remember — 1.  That
the  priests  and  Levites  formed  nearly  one
half  the  population  of  Jerusalem  (ch.  xi
6 — 19  compared  with  1  Chron.  ix.  9—22).
2.  That  the  office  of  guarding  the  temple
gates  had  always  been  discharged  by  Levites
(1  Chron.  ix.  17—22 ;  xxvi.  12-19).

Ver.  2. — Hanani  and  Hananiah.  This
appointment  of  two  municipal  officers  to
have  charge  of  Jerusalem  recalls  the  mention
of  two  "rulers"  in  ch.  iii.  9,  12,  each  of
whom  had  authority  over  half  the  district
dependent  on  Jerusalem,  and  amounts  to  an
"undesigned  coincidence."  The  rnler  of
the  palace.  Rather,  "the  commandant  of
the  fort,"  i.  e.  the  officer  in  charge  of  the
temple  fortress  (see  above,  ch.  ii  8).

Ver.  3. — Let  not  the  gates  be  opened
until  the  sun  be  hot.  The  gates  of  towns
in  the  East  are  usually  opened  at  sunrise ;
but  this  cannot  be  the  intention  here.  Some
extra  precaution  is  signified— not,  however,
so  much  as  Dathe  supposes,  who  renders
ante  tempus  meridianum,  "before  noon;"
but  rather  something  inteimediate  between
this  and  the  ordinary  practice.

Ver.  4. — The  eity  was  large.  Literally,
"broad  everyway."  The  houses  were  not
builded.  Much  of  the  city  consisted  of  open
spaces,  in  which  no  houses  had  been  as  yet
built.

Ver.  5. — And  my  God  pnt  into  mine  heart
to  gather  together  the  nobles,  &c.  As
Nehemiah  contemplated  the  vast  empty
spnces  within  the  city  walls,  and  considered
with  himself  how  they  might  best  be  peo]iled,
the  thought  came  to  him— and  he  haiUd  it
as  a  Divine  inspiration — that  by  taking  a
census  of  the  people  he  might  pave  the  way
for  some  transfer  of  the  inhabitants  of  the
country  districts  into  the  capital,  which
would  at  any  rate  strengthen  the  latter,  and
lessen  the  desolate  appearance  of  its  streets
and  squares,  which  had  so  pained  him.  The
census  would  show  what  proportion  the
country  and  town  populations  bore  to  each
other,  aud  would  point  out  which  were  the
)ilaces  in  the  country  districts  that  could
best  afford  to  lose  a  portion  of  their  inhabit-
ants. A  census,  therefore  was  resolved  upon,
and,  according  to  ordinary  Jewish  usage
(Num.  i.  17 — 47 ;  1  Chron.  xxi.  5,  6 ;  Ezra
ii.  3 — 62),  it  was  genealogical.  The  tribes
of  Judah,  Benjamin,  and  Levi  were  numbered
separately  (ch.  xi.  4 — 19) ;  and  in  the  tribe
of  Judah  the  children  of  Pharei  were  reckoned


OH.  Til.  1—6.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


78


apart  from  those  of  Zerah  (1  Chron.  ix.  4,
6).  No  doubt  the  genealogical  principle
was  acted  upon  throughout,  but  further  evi-
dence upon  the  point  is  wanting.  It  would
Beem  to  hare  been  in  the  course  of  his  pre-


parations for  this  census,  perhaps  in  search-
ing for  precedents,  that  Nehemiah  found
the  "register  of  the  genealogy  of  them
which  came  up  at  the  first,"  which  ia  the
subject  of  the  next  section.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Provision  for  safety  and  numerical  increase.  The  wall  being  com-
pleted and  the  gates  set  in  their  places,  Nehemiah  takes  measures  for  the  regular
defence  of  the  city,  and  for  increasing  its  population.

I.  The  QUABDINQ  of  the  city-gates  he  assigns  to  the  gate-keepers  of  the  temple,
the  singers,  and  the  other  Levites  ;  "  that  of  the  walls,"  to  the  general  inhabitants  in
turn,  some  to  keep  watch. at  certain  appointed  posts,  others  before  their  own  houses  ;
not  only  perhaps  to  be  ready  to  rouse  the  city  and  rush  to  the  walls  or  gates  in  case
of  attack  from  without,  but  to  act  as  police  against  thieves  or  disorderly  persons  witliin.
Over  the  whole  he  placed  his  brother  Hanani,  and  Hananiah,  who,  as  commander  of
the  citadel,  had  had  experience  in  managing  similar  matters.  Of  the  latter  he
records,  in  explanation  of  his  choice,  that  he  was  a  faithful  man  who  feared  God
more  than  many.

II.  The  increase  of  the  population  of  the  city  was  a  matter  of  pressing  import-
ance ;  for  the  ample  space  within  the  walls  was  very  sparsely  occupied  with  houses,
and  thinly  inhabited.  Before  resolving,  however,  on  the  steps  to  be  taken,  it  occurred
to  Nehemiah  (and  he  regarded  the  suggestion  as  from  God)  to  call  a  general  assembly,
that  he  might  make  a  census  of  the  population,,  as  a  basis  for  further  measures.  The
result  does  not  appear  until  ch.  xi.

Lessons  : — 1.  The  strength  and  worth  of  a  community  lies  in  its  living  members.
Walls  aie  useless  without  men  to  defend  them;  a  city  feeble,  though  spacious,
whose  inhabitants  are  few.  So  a  religious  community  may  extend  itself  over  a  wide
space,  and  erect  numerous  and  costly  places  of  worship,  without  adding  to  its  real
strength.  Increase  of  converts  shouM,  therefore,  be  the  chief  aim  of  those  who
seek  its  good.  2  All  the  members  of  a  community  should  be  willing  and  ready  to
exert  themselves  for  the  common  good,  Each  according  to  his  capacity  and  oppor-
timity.  Nor  in  times  of  pressure  should  any  refuse  to  act  because  the  duties  assigned
him  do  not  belong  to  his  ordinary  functions.  These  porters,  singers,  and  Levites
undertook  for  the  protection  of  Jerusalem  duties  quite  outside  their  respective  offices.
It  was  not  a  time  to  stand  upon  their  dignity  or  rights.  For  some  reason  they
could  best  be  spared  for  the  work,  and  they  did  it.  3.  Organisation,  including  rule
and  subordination,  is  essential  to  the  welfare  of  a  community.  4.  It  is  a  happy
thing  when  men  eminently  God-fearing  can  be  found  for  offices  of  trust  and
authority.     In  secular  life  such  men  are  invaluable.     In  the  Church  essential.

Ver.  2. — Uncommon  excellence.  "He  was  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above
many."  Nehemiah  records  this  of  Hananiah  as  his  reason  for  giving  him,  with
Hanani,  his  own  brother,  "  charge  over  Jerusalem."  Perhaps  he  felt  it  necessary,  on
some  account  not  specified,  thus  to  justify  the  selection.

I.  The  character  here  described.  1.  Its  elements.  (1)  Faithfulness.  Upright-
ness, integrity,  strictness  in  performing  promises,  truthfulness.  (2)  Unusual  piety.
These  two  are  closely  related  to  each  other.  He  who  greatly  fears  God  will  be
eminently  faithful  both  to  God  and  man.  The  piety  which  does  riot  produce  upright-
ness is  good  for  nothing.  On  the  other  hand,  uprightness  towards  nlan,  if  allowed
its  proper  development,  will  lead  to  uprightness  towards  God,  and  so  to  piety  in  all
its  branches.  Where  this  is  fiot  the  case  (of  which  the  instances  are  innumerable)
the  quality  of  the  uprightness  is  questionable.  It  can  hardly  include  a  love  of  right-
eousness for  its  own  sake.  Bather  is  its  basis  the  desire  to  stand  well  with  men ;
and  as  it  regards  not  God,  it  has  no  claim  upon  him.  2.  How  it  is  produced.  As
all  piety  and  goodness  are  due  to  the  gfa'-e  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  unusual  measures  of
them  are  to  be  ascribed  to  greater  abundance  of  his  sacred  influences.  But  it  is  the
human  history  of  eminently  godly  men  to  which  wo  now  refer.    To  what,  humaijly


1*  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  vii.  1—4.


Hpeaking,  may  marked  superiority  in  godliness  and  goodness  be  traced  ?  Amongst
their  causes  may  be  mentioned — (1)  Tlie  careful  teaching,  the  excellent  example,
and  holy  influence  of  devotedly  Christian  parents.  The  noblest  men  of  the  Church
have  generally  sprung  from  homes  of  which  piety  was  the  pervading  spirit ;  often
from  very  pious  mothers.  Let  parents  who  profess  godliness  think  of  this.  The
Church  looks-  to  them  to  train  for  her  N^hemiahs  and  Hananiaha.  (2)  Early
religious  decision.  Those  who  begin  to  serve  God  late  in  life  are  little  likely  to
attain  to  special  excellence.  (3)  Diligent  spiritual  self-culture.  In  reading,  medita-
tion,^ prayer,  watchfulness,  the  practice  of  all  good.  (4)  Early  consecration  to  some
special  service.  (5)  Overwhelming  sense  of  gratitude  for  conversion  and  forgive-
ness after  many  years  of  godless  living.  3.  When  such  a  character  is  especially
interesting.  When,  as  here,  seen  in  men  of  high  worldly  position  and  command,
much  occupied  with  secular  affairs,  and  thrown  much  into  the  society  of  men  of
another  spirit.

II.  The  effects  which  such  a  characteh  should  produce.  1.  Admiration.  2.
Praise  to  God.  3.  Confidence.  Which  should  be  shown,  as  by  Nehemiah,  in  placing
those  who  possess  it  in  responsible  positions.  It  is  well  when  such  men  can  be
found  for  important  posts,  and  are  placed  in  them  by  those  with  whom  the  appoint-
ment lies,  instead  of  unworthy  motives  leading  to  the  selection  of  less  desirable  men.
4.  Imitation.  To  have  such  men  within  our  sphere  of  observation  increases  our
responsibility.  We  ought  to  be  as  they  are.  They  show  us  what  is  attainable.  6.
Commemoration.  In  some  cases,  at  least.  That  their  example  may  stimulate  and
encourage  many  to  whom  it  would  be  otherwise  unknown.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Moral  guardianship.  I.  The  things  in  the  Church  which  heed
TO  BE  GUARDED.  "Charge  over  Jerusalem"  (ver.  2).  1.  The  doctrines  of  the
Church.  2.  The  members  of  the  Church.  3.  The  temporal  interests  of  the  Church.
4.  The  work  of  the  Church.  5.  The  reputation  of  the  Church.  6.  The  civil  pri-
vileges of  the  Church.  7.  The  discipline  of  the  Church.  This  defence  is  needed
because  infidelity,  slander,  bigotry,  and  laxity  threaten  to  lay  waste  the  Church.

II.  The  men  who  should  bb  the  guardians  of  the  Church.  "For  he  was  a
faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  many"  (ver.  2).  1.  They  must  be  duly
appointed.  "And  the  porters  and  the  singers  and  the  Levites  were  appointed."
"  That  I  gave  "  (ver.  2).  2.  They  must  be  truly  sympathetic.  The  men  who  had
helped  to  rebuild  the  city  would  be  the  most  likely  to  defend  it.  3.  They  must  be
wisely  cautious.  "  Let  not  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  be  opened  until  the  sun  be  hot "
(ver.  3).  4.  They  must  be  sufficiently  numerous.  "And  appoint  watches  of  the
inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  3).  6.  They  must  be  eminently  pious.  "  And  feared
God  above  many  "  (ver.  2).  6.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  good  men  ought  to  be
guardians  of  the  Church.

III.  The  WAT  in  which  the  Church  mat  best  be  guarded.  1.  By  having  regard
to  the  Church  in  times  of  special  danger.  "  Let  not  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  be  opened
until  the  sun  be  hot "  (ver.  3).  The  Church  stands  in  need  of  watchful  care  during
the  night  of  error  and  sin ;  then  its  gates  must  not  be  opened.  2.  By  having  regard
to  the  Church  at  points  where  it  is  most  liable  to  attack.  "  Let  not  the  gates  of
Jerusalem  be  opened."  3.  By  having  regard  to  mutual  co-operation  amongst  the
watchers.  4.  By  putting  our  trust  in  God  to  supply  the  necessary  lack  and  imper-
fection of  huinan  vigilance. — E.

Vers.  1 — 6  (for  rest  see  Ezra  ii.). — Israel  vnthiil  the  walls.  In  less  than  two
months,  notwithstanding  the  undisguised  hostility  of  the  Samaritans,  and  the  covert
disloyalty  of  some  of  the  inhabitants,  the  sacred  city  was  surrounded  with  u  wall  of
protection ;  and  with  supreme  satisfaction  and  profound  thankfulness  the  gates  were
closed  and  the  doors  were  shut.  Jerusalem  was  secure.  But  Nehemiiih  was  not
the  man  to  settle  down  into  passive  complacency.  The  accomplishment  of  one  duty
me  mt  the  undertaking  of  another.     His  conduct  suggests —


CH.  VII.   1 — 6.J


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


n


I.  Thb  need  of  the  human  (and  spiritital)  element  to  give  vcorth  to  thb
MATERIAL  (vers.  1, 2, 3).  It  was  well  indeed  to  have  the  wall,  but  that  was  worthless
without  men  to  guard  it.  Immediately  the  circle  was  complete  and  the  "  doors  were  set
up,"  the  three  classes  of  porters,  singers,  and  Levites  were  appointed  (ver.  1).  Charge
of  the  city  was  given  to  two  capable  and  trustworthy  men  (ver.  2),  and  directions
were  given  that  the  gates  should  not  he  opened  till  long  after  sunrise,  "  till  the  sun
was  hot,"  and  not  until  the  watches  were  all  on  guard,  every  man  in  his  place  (ver.
3).  Behind  the  stone  wall  were  to  be  the  living  men,  quick  of  eye,  strong  of  arm,
bold  of  heart.  Not  a  little  reliance  on  the  bulwark  they  had  raised,  but  much  more
on  the  steadfastness  and  alertness  of  the  patriots  within  them.  It  is  well,  indeed,
to  have  the  "  new  and  beautiful  "  sanctuary,  the  well-appointed  schools  and  class-
rooms ;  but  these  will  avail  us  nothing  if  within  them  there  be  not  (1)  minds  alight
with  redeeming  truth,  (2)  hearts  aglow  with  holy  love,  (3)  souls  aflame  with  fervent
zeal.

II.  The  desirableness  of  doing  right  things  religiously  (vers.  1,  5).  With  the
porters  were  associated  "  the  singers  and  the  Levites"  (ver.  1).  "  It  is  probable  that
the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  temple  gates  was  made  with  song."  If  with  song,
certainly  with  sacred  song.  Thus  the  manual  labour  of  opening  and  shutting  the
city  gates  was  associated  with  men  of  a  sacred  office,  and  with  words  and  sounds  of
devotion.  We  read  also  (ver.  6)  how  "God  put  it  into  the  heart"  of  Nehemiah  to
gather  the  people,  and  take  a  census.  This  thought,  which  in  another  and  less  godly
man  would  have  been  complacently  referred  to  his  own  sagacity,  is  ascribed  by  him
to  Divine  instigation.  As  servants  of  God,  it  is  not  only  needful  to  do  the  right
things,  but  to  do  them  in  a  religious  spirit.  The  secular  is  to  be  most  intimately
associated  with  the  sacred.  Things  done  with  ordinary  prudence,  in  daily  occupation,
are  to  be  done  as  UTito  Christ.  "  Whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever  we  do," —
plant  or  build,  buy  or  sell,  read  or  write,  work  or  play, — we  must  do  all,  realising  that
the  power  to  do  them  is  from  him,  and  endeavouring  to  please  him  in  all  things —
rightly  because  religiously.

III.  The  place  of  special  piety  (ver.  2).  "Igave  .  .  Hananiah  .  .  charge
over  Jerusalem :  for  he  was  a  faithful  man,  and  feared  God  above  many."  The  best
place  for  those  who, are  eminently  godly  men  is  not  the  cloister  or  chamber,  but  the
more  influential  posts  in  the  kingdom.  They  who  most  honour  God  in  their  heart
Honour  him  most  and  serve  him  best  when  they  occupy  busy  and  important  spheres.
Piety,  wisely  employed,  and  powerful,  in  the  chamber  of  commerce  or  in  the  House
of  Commons,  is  at  least  as  pleasing  to  God  as  piety  in  the  house  of  prayer ;  but  to  be
at  its  best  at  either  it  should  be  found  sometimes  at  both.

IV.  The  spaciousness  of  the  city  of  God  (ver.  4).  "  The  city  was  large  and
great:  but  the  peof)le  were  few."  1.  There  is  ample  room  within  the  Church  of
Christ  for  the  multitudes  outside.  Many  are  within  its  walls,  but  "yet  there  is
room  ;  "  we  must  go  out  and  "  compel  them  to  come  in,"  with  a  persuasiveness  that
will  not  be  denied.  2.  There  is  building  to  be  done  within  the  Church.  "  The  bouses
were  not  builded."    There  is  much  room  for  edification  within  its  walls. — C.


EXPOSITION.


Thb  REOISTBB  of  those  who  RETtrRNBD
UNDER  ZeRUBBABEL,  WITH  THE  NUMBER  OF
THEIR  slaves,  BEASTS,  AND  OBLATIONS  (ch.

vlL  6 — 73).  It  is  no  doubt  a  curious  circum-
stance that  this  list  should  occur  twice,  with
no  important  differences,  in  the  two  Books  of
Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  Perhaps  it  was  not  in
the  original  Ezra,  that  oTiter  not  having
had  the  good  fortune  to  "find"  the  docu-
ment; but  Nehemiah  having  "found"  it
and  inserted  it  here,  in  connection  with  its
discoveiy,  a  later  arranger  (Malachi?)  n-


moved  it  to  the  early  part  of  Ezra,  becatue
it  belonged  to  that  portion  of  the  Jewish
history  chronologically.  The  double  record
enables  us  to  make  out  a  more  perfect
catalogue  than  we  could  have  obtained  from
either  separately,  since  there  are  corruptions
in  each  which  may  be  corrected  by  means
of  the  other.  See  the  comment  which
follows.

Ver.  7.— Jeshna,  Kehemiah,  ke  To  the
eleven  names  given  by  Ezra,  Nehemiah  adds
one,   "Nahamani,"  the   sixth.      He  gives


7a


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  VII.  6—73


the  others  in  the  same  order  as  Ezra,  but
spells  some  of  the  names  differently— «.  g,
"Azariah"  for  "Seraiah,"  "Eaamiah"  for
"Reelaiah,"  "Mispereth"  for  "Mizpar,"
and  "Nehum"  for  "Rehvun."

Ver.  15. — BinnnL  Ezra  has  "Bani,"
which  receives  confirmation  from  Neh.  x.  14
and  1  Esdras  v.  12.

Ver.  21.— The  children  of  Ater.  Up  to
this  Nehemiah  observes  the  same  order  as
Ezra ;  but  the  remaining  personal  names
(three)  are  placed  differently.

Ver.  24.— The  children  of  Hariph.  Ezra
has  "Jorah"  instead  of  Hariph  (Ezra  ii
18) ;  but  "  Haiiph "  is  confirmed  by  Neh.
x.  19.

Ver.  25. — The  children  of  Oibeon.  For
"Gibeon"  Ezra  has  "Gibbar"  —  a  name
otherwise  unknown  to  us.  "  Gibeon  "  should
probably  be  read  in  both  places.

Ver.  33. — The  men  of  the  other  Neho.
No  Nebo  has  as  yet  been  mentioned,  which
makes  it  unlikely  that  the  text  is  correct
here.  Apparently  the  word  translated  "  the
other"  (acher)  has  been  accidentally  re-
peated from  the  next  verse.  Ezra  has  "  the
men  of  Nebo  "  simply.

Vers.  39 — 42. — This  section  exactly  re-
produces Ezra  ii  36 — 39.

Ver.  43. — The  children  of  Jeshna,  of  Kad-
miel,  and  of  the  children  of  Hodevah  may
be  corrected  from  Ezra  ii.  40  and  iiL  9.  It
should  be  "Jeshua  and  Kadmiel,  of  the
children  of  Hodevah."  This  ancestor  of
Jeshua  and  Kadmiel  appears  under  the  three
fonns  of  Hodevah,  Hodaviah  (Ezra  iL  40),
and  Judah  (Ezra  iil  9).

Ver.  46.— The  Nethinims.  The  list  which
follows  is  very  close  to  that  of  Ezra  (ch.  iL
43 — 54).  A  few,  names  are  differently  spelt,
and  one  of  Ezra's  names  (Akkub — ch.  ii.  45)
is  omitted.

Vers.  67 — 62. — The  children  of  Solomon's
servants.  This  section  and  the  section
which  follows  (vers.  63 — 65)  are  nearly  iden-
tical in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  A  few  names
only  are  slightly  different.

Ver.  66.  —  The  whole  congregation  to-
gether was  forty  and  two  thousand  three
hundred  and  threescore.  It  makes  against
liie  view  of  Bishop  Patrick  and  others,  who
regard  Ezra's  list  as  made  at  Babylon,  some
time  before  the  final  departure,  and  Nehe-
miah's  as  made  at  Jerusalem,  after  the  arrival
of  the  exiles,  that  the  sum  total  is  in  each
cue  the  same  (see  Ezra  iL  64).     Bishop


Kennicott's  theory,  that  the  three  lists —
that  of  Ezra,  that  of  Nehemiah,  and  that  in
the  first  of  Esdras — had  all  one  original,  and
that  the  existing  differences  proceed  entirely
from  mistakes  of  the  copyists,  is  the  only
tenable  one.  It  is  especially  remarkable
that  the  differences  in  the  numbers  of  the
three  lists  consist  chiefly  in  a  single  unit,
a  tingle  ten,  or  a  single  hundred— ot  in  a
five  ;  less  often  in  two  units,  or  two  tens,  or
two  hundreds,  or  in  a  six— -differences  pro-
bably arising  from  the  obliteration  of  one
or  two  signs  in  a  notation  resembling  the
Roman  or  the  Egyptian,  where  there  are
special  signs  for  a  thousand,  a  hundred,  ten,
five,  and  the  unit,  complex  numbers  being
expressed  by  repetition  of  these,  as  3438  in
Latin  inscriptions  by  MMMCCCCXXXVIII.
Any  fading  of  a  sign  in  such  a  notation  as
this  causes  a  copyist  to  diminish  the  amount
by  one,  five,  ten,  a  hundred,  a  thousand,  &c.
A  fading  of  two  signs  may  produce  a  dimi-
nution of  two  thousand,  two  h  un  d  red,  twenty,
two  ;  or  again  of  eleven  hundred,  one  hun-
dred and  ten,  one  hundred  and  five,  fifteen,
eleven,  six,  and  the  like.

Ver.  67. — Two  hundred  and  forty-five
singing  men  and  singing  women.  Ezra  says
200  ;  but  this  must  be  a  round  number.
1  Esdras  confirms  Nehemiah  (ch.  v.  42).

Vers.  68,  69.  — The  numbers  of  the  animals
are  identical  in  Ezra  and  Nehemiah.  The
apocryphal  Esdras  has  an  enormous  and
most  improbable  augmentation  of  the  num-
ber of  the  horses  (7036  for  736).

Ver.  70. — The  Tirshatha  gave.  This  is
additional  to  the  information  contained  in
Ezra,  who  does  not  separate  Zerubbabel's
offering  from  that  of  the  other  heads  oi
families  (oh.  ii.  69).  The  account  of  the  obla-
tions is  altogether  more  exact  in  Nehemiah
than  in  the  earlier  historian.  For  the  value
of  the  contributions  made,  see  the  comment
on  Ezra  (L  s.  c).

Ver.  73. — And  all  Israel,  dwelt  in  their
cities.  The  document  found  by  Nehemiah
(ver.  5)  probably  ended  with  these  words
(comp.  Ezra  iL  70) ;  and  ch.  viL  should
here  terminate,  as  it  does  in  the  Septuagint.
Having  completed  the  account  of  what  hap-
pened in  the  sixth  month,  Elul  (ch.  vL  15),
and  transcribed  the  register  which  he  had
the  good  fortune  to  discover  at  that  date,
Nehemiah  proceeds  to  relate  events  belong-
ing to  the  seventh  mouth.


HOMILBTICS.

Vers.  6 — 69. — An  hnumrdhle  register.  Account  of  those  who  had  returned  to  the
Holy  Land  under  Zerubbabel,  Jeshua,  and  other  leaders ;  found  by  Nehemiah  when
seeking  gmdance  in  making  a  general  census  of  the  people.  In  reading  this  record,
the  foUowini;  obserrationa  suggest  themselves : —


ca.  vu.  6—73.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.


I.  The  comparative  fewness  and  gesf.kal  poverty  of  the  betukning  fboplb.
The  majority  of  their  brethren  preferred  their  position  among  the  heathen  to  the
honour  and  peril  of  aiding  to  re-establish  their  nation  in  their  own  land.  The
temptation  to  this  course  was  greatest  in  the  case  of  men  of  substance,  and  most  of
them  appear  to  have  jdelded  to  it.  We  are  reminded  that  of  professing  Christians  a
large  number,  perhaps  the  majority,  do  not  really  accept  the  invitation  pressed
continually  upon  them  to  undertake  the  journey  to  heaven,  and  that  still  the  rich
find  it  hard  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.

II.  Although  few  and  poor,  the  returning  people  included  all  the  elements

NEEDFUL  FOB  THE  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  A  REGULARLY  ORGANISED  JEWISH  STATE.      They

were  not  a  mere  rabble.  There  was  the  civil  governor,  Zerubbabel ;  the  high  priest,
Jeshua ;  a  considerable  number  of  ordinary  priests ;  there  were  Levites  and  other
temple  servants,  even  singers ;  besides  the  body  of  the  people.

III.  Their  faith,  zeal,  and  courage  are  to  be  noted  and  admired.  All  left
some  sort  of  settled  home  to  which  they  were  accustomed ;  some,  businesses  more  or
less  lucrative ;  a  few,  the  positions  which  wealth  or  talent  affords.  They  encountered
certain,  though  untried,  privations,  struggles,  and  dangers,  the  end  of  which  to  each
one  was  very  uncertain.  But  they  were  men  "  whose  spirit  God  had  raised,  to  go
up  to  build  the  house  of  the  Lord  which  is  in  Jerusalem"  (Ezra  i.  5).  They  believed
the  prophets,  and  anticipated  a  glorious  future  for  their  nation.  They  loved  their
God,  their  nation,  and  their  country,  though  to  the  last  most  of  them  were  strangers.
The  priests  particularly  distinguished  themselves,  as  is  shown  by  the  number  of
them  who  returned,  as  compared  with  that  of  the  people.  They  surpassed  the
Levites,  who,  both  under  Zerubbabel  and  Ezra,  showed  backwardness.  Yet  this
class  had  formerly  been  more  zealous  than  the  priests  (2  Chron.  xxiz.  34]).  The
leaders  are  especially  worthy  of  commendation.  Their  sacrifice  must  have  been
greater,  and  the  cares  and  responsibilities  they  undertook  were  much  heavier.
Numbers  followed  at  subsequent  periods,  after  the  first  difficulties  had  been  over-
come and  a  settlement  effected ;  but  they  could  not  attain  to  the  honour  of  those
who  led  the  way.

IV.  The  failure  of  some  who  accompanied  the  expedition  to  prove  themselves  by
genealogy  Israelites,  of  others  to  prove  themselves  priests,  suggests  that  God's
true  Israel  and  priesthood  require  no  genealogy.  They  belong  to  a  higher
order  of  things,  not  regulated  "  after  the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the
power  of  an  endless  life"  (Heb.  vii.  16).  God's  spiritual  Israel  become  such  by
faith ;  each  one  belonging  to  it  is  "  born  not  of  blood,  but  of  God  "  (John  i.  13).
And  while  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  have  a  pious  ancestry,  those  who  have  it  not  are
admitted  as  freely  and  fully  into  all  the  privileges  of  citizenship,  on  their  acceptance
of  Christ,  as  those  who  have  it.  One  of  these  privileges  is  that  of  being  "  priests
unto  God."  Nor  is  special  ministry  in  the  Church  inherited ;  it  is  the  privilege  of
those  who  are  fitted  for  it,  and  called  to  it  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  distributes  his
gifts  "to  every  man  severally  as  he  will "  (1  Cor.  xii.  11).

v.  The  lack  in  the  newly-established  community  of  some  privileges  enjoyed
BY  THEIR  FOREFATHERS  is  Seen  in  the  absence  of  "  a  priest  with  Urim  and  Thummim."
The  time  was  eagerly  expected  when  this  and  other  like  advantages  would  be
restored,  but  in  vain.  For  a  while  the  gift  of  prophecy  lingered,  and  then  passed
away.  The  losses  were  deplored,  but  proved  to  be  gains.  The  guidance  withdrawn
belonged  to  the  period  of  childhood.  God's  people  were  more  and  more  to  be
prepared  for  the  time  of  moral  manhood,  when  they  would  reaUse  the  guidance  and
help  of  God  in  the  exercise  of  their  own  spirits  in  connection  with  the  written  word
remaining  as  a  permanent  legacy  from  the  past.  One  more  outburst  of  the  miracul-
ous, the  grandest  and  most  fruitful  of  all,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  God  would  abide
with  the  Church  as  never  before,  its  permanent  Teacher  and  Guide  through  the  at
length  completed  word ;  but  the  miraculous  would  cease.  We  long  at  times  for  the
return  of  "  signs  from  heaven,"  but  "  it  is  expedient "  for  hb  that  we  should  be  with-
out them.

VI.  The  variations  in  the  several  copies  of  this  document  suggest  that  happily

THERE  ABE,  AND  CAN  BE,  NO  MISTAKES  IN  God's  BEOISTEB  OF  HIS  SFIBITtlAI.  ISBAKL.

Finally,  the  perusal  of  this  and  similar  lists  may  well  lead  us  to  exclaim  with  good


W  THE  BOOK  OF  NBHEMIAH.  [ch.  vii.  6—73.

Matthew  Henry,  "  Blessed  be  God  that  our  faith  and  hope  are  not  built  upon  the
niceties  of  names  and  numbers,  genealogy  and  chronology,  but  on  the  great  things
of  the  law  and  gospel."

Ver8._  70 — 73. — A  good  collection.  The  conclusion  of  the  document  found  by
Nehemiah,  being  chiefly  an  account  of  the  gifts  of  the  returned  people  towards
the  cost  of  rebuilding  the  temple  and  restoring  its  services.

^  I.  The  object  of  the  collection.  The  restoration  of  the  temple  and  its  services
lay  very  near  their  hearts.  It  was  the  chief  object  of  their  return  to  Palestine
(Ezra  i.  5),  and  would  be  regarded  by  them,  and  justly,  as  the  surest  foundation,
under  God,  of  their  unity  and  prosperity — of  their  welfare  at  once  as  individuals,
families,  and  a  state.  Equally  concerned  should  we  be  for  the  erection  of  churches
and  the  maintenance  of  public  worship,  and  for  like  reasons.

II.  The  liberality  displayed.  Very  considerable,  if  we  bear  in  mind  their
general  poverty,  the  recentness  of  their  return,  and  the  many  demands  upon  their
resources  which  their  re-settlement  in  the  land  would  make.

III.  The  union  op  all  classes  in  conteibuting  to  the  collection.  They  were
well  led  by  the  Tirshatha,  Zerubbabel,  who  was  well  followed  by  "  some  of  the  chief
of  the  fathers."  The  rest  of  the  people  contributed  according  to  their  means.  It
seems,  however,  from  the  words  "  some,"  &o.,  that,  as  usual,  there  were  some  that  did
not  contribute ;  yet  these  may  have  been  among  the  loudest  to  express  their  pleasure
that  so  good  a  collection  had  been  made.  With  this  exception,  we  have  here  a  model
collection.  1.  It  was  well  started.  Much  depends  on  this.  The  many  take  theii
ideasof  what  is  needful  and  fitting  from  their  leaders,  and  are  fired  by  their  ardour,
or  chilled  by  their  coldness.  2.  All  classes  contributed.  The  rich  as  well  as  the
poor,  the  poor  as  well  as  the  rich.  Neither  can  be  spared,  neither  should  be  passed
over.  Not  the  rich,  for  a  few  of  them  can  easily  give  as  much  as  all  the  rest,  and
for  their  own  sake  they  need  to  be  generous  in  their  gifts  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 — 19).  Not
the  poor,  for  to  give  to  God's  cause  is  a  privilege  which  they  should  delight  to  share,
and  the  aggregate  of  their  smaller  gifts  may  equal  or  exceed  that  of  the  larger  con-
tributions of  the  wealthy.  3.  All  contributed  voluntarily  (see  Ezra  ii.  68 — "  freely  ").
4.  All  appear  to  have  contributed  liberally.

IV.  Their  subsequent  settlement  in  their  respective  cities.  Which  they,
could  effect  with  a  good  conscience  and  cheerful  hope  of  God's  blessing,  after
liaving  first  ihown  their  zealous  care  for  the  establishment  of  his  worship.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

Vers.  6 — 73. — The  true  method  of  prosperity.  Here  are  the  three  great  aims  of
God's  people  distinguished.  The  walls  of  the  city  are  built.  The  place  of  habita-
tion is  prepared.  The  doors  are  fixed.  Then  the  true  citizens  of  Zion  will  see  to
it ;  God  will  put  it  in  their  hearts.

I.  To  provide  for  the  safety  of  the  city.  There  must  always  be  the  possibility
of  attack  from  without.  Watch  the  walls  and  the  gates.  1.  The  leading  men  of  the
Church  should  be  faithful,  and  fearers  of  God  above  many.  It  is  a  terrible  danger
when  prominent  men  are  not  examples  of  piety.  Those  who  have  a  great  charge
should  be  above  suspicion.  2.  The  gates  must  be  specially  watched,  and  their  shut-
ting and  opening  special  matter  of  anxious  care.  When  Churches  are  indifferent  as
to  the  admission  of  members  they  are  doing  incalculable  harm  to  the  cause  of  their
religion.  Wide  and  unwatched  gates  mean  an  unsafe  city,  an  approaching  ruin.  3.
Let  every  one  take  part  in  the  guardianship  of  Jerusalem.  "  Every  one  over  against
his  own  house."  There  are  eminent  men  who  occupy  prominent  posts,  but  the
humblest  believer  has  his  part  in  the  work  of  defending  truth  and  guarding  the
spiritual  prosperity  of  Zion.  It  was  a  good  regulation  which  Nehemiah  made :  "  Let
not  the  gates  be  opened  till  the  sun  be  hot."  Do  nothing  in  the  dark.  See  the  men
who  ask  for  admission  in  the  clear  daylight ;  know  who  they  are,  and  what  they
mean.  It  is  the  multitudinousness  of  the  Church  which  endangers  it.  If  there  be  no
light  at  the  gates  there  will  soon  be  enemies  within  the  walls,  traitors  in  the  camp,
and  the  safety  of  the  Church  will  be  undermined.


OH.  VII.  6—73.]


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


n


II.  Those  who  seek  the  welfare  of  Zion  will  desire  increase  of  numbers.  The
farge  city  and  the  great  walls  are  no  honour  to  God  without  many  people  therein.
"The  houses  not  built"  represent  the  lack  of  individual  and  family  life.  It  is  the
living  souls  that  are  the  city's  glory.

III.  The  TRUE  METHOD  OF   ESTABLISHING  THE  PBOSPEBITY  OF  JERUSALEM  is  to  LOOK

WELL  TO  THE  puRriT  of  its  inhabitants.  God  put  it  into  Nehemiah's  heart  to  search
for  the  genealogy,  to  distinguish  the  true  Israel  from  the  false.  1.  The  variety  of
office  and  degrees  of  honour  quite  consistent  with  unity  of  origin  and  community  of
spirit.  It  is  better  to  have  a  place  in  the  genealogy  of  God's  people  than  to  be  high
in  this  world's  rank.  2.  The  preservation  of  the  record  was  a  help  to  subsequent
generations  to  maintain  the  cause  of  Zion,  and  to  tread  in  the  footsteps  of  the  fathers.

3.  The  position  of  absolute,  uncompromising  purity  and  faithfulness  to  God  is  the
only  ground  upon  which  discipline  can  be  maintained.  In  the  case  of  the  priests,  if
the  register  could  not  be  found  "they  were,  as  polluted,  put  from  the  priesthood."

4.  The  mere  external  purity  of  ritual  is  insufficient;  the  great  requisite  is  direct
intercourse  with  God.  In  all  difficult  cases  the  Urim  and  Thummira  of  immediate
revelation  must  be  sought.  What  is  the  mind  of  God  ?  How  little  would  the  Church
have  erred  if  it  had  followed  this  rule:  to  sufEer  no  caprice,  no  departure  from
principle,  at  compromise,  but  depend  upon  the  word  of  God. — B.


PART  II.

Account  of  the  State  of  Religion  among  the  Jews  under  the
Administration  of  Nehemiah.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  VIIl.


Rblioiovs  instruction  of  the  people
BT  Ezra,  and  celebration  of  the  feast
OF  tabernacles  (eh.  viii. ).  It  can  scarcely
be  Imagined  that  Ezra  had  been  present  in
Jerusalem  during  the  exciting  scenes  which
have  been  enacted  in  the  first  part  of  this
Book,  and  had  never  come  forward  in  such  a
way  as  to  obtain  notice  from  the  historian.
Nehemiah  entertained  no  jealousy  of  him,
and  when  the  time  came  for  the  great  cere-
mony of  dedicating  the  wall,  assigned  him
the  second  part  in  it  (ch.  xii.  36).  Wo
must  therefore  suppose  either  that  accidental
circunistauces  had  caused  his  temporary
absence  from  Jerusalem  during  the  summer
of  B.O.  444,  or  that,  having  quitted  the  city
soon  after  the  proceedings  narrated  in  the
last  chapter  of  the  Book  which  bears  his
name,  he  now  resumed  his  residence  after
having  lived  elsewhere  for  nearly  thirteen
years.  If  Kehemiah's  work  had  been  a
continuous  history  composed  throughout  by
himself,  it  would  have  been  strange  that
this  doubt  should  not  have  been  cleared  up,


and  that  Ezra's  name  should  have  been
introduced  so  suddenly  and  without  explan-.
ation,  as  it  is  in  ch.  viii  1.  But  the  narra-
tive in  this  place,  as  abeady  observed
(Introduction,  §  2),  is  by  another  hand,  and
is  a  particular  relation  of  certain  events
which  the  writer  was  probably  set  to  de-
scribe, rather  than  a  chapter  on  the  general
history  of  the  Jewish  people.  It  was  not
written  with  any  knowledge  of  what  exactly
was  to  precede  it,  and  so  does  not  fit  on
very  neatly  to  the  previous  section.  We
are  left  to  conjecture  Ezra's  personal  history
between  March,  B.C.  456,  and  September,  B.c.
'444.  Now  the  condition  in  which  Nehe-
miah found  Jerusalem — the  oppression  of
the  rich  men  (ch.  iv.),  the  prevalence  of
mixed  marriages  (ch.  vi  18  ;  x.  30  ;  xiiL
23—30),  the  desecration  of  the  Sabbath  (ch.
X.  31 ;  xiii  15—18),  the  negligence  with
respect  to  tithes  and  offerings  (ch.  x.  33
—  39)  —  is  almost  incompatible  with  the
supposition  that  Ezra's  ministry  had  been
continuous  during  these  years,  or  only  inter-
rupted by  brief  absences,  like  that  of  Nehe-
miah in  B.C.  433—432  (ch.  xiii.  6).    H  seems.


80


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  VIII.  1 — 12.


therefore,  to  be  most  probaUe  that  he  had
been  recalled  to  the  court  early  in  B.O.  456,
and  that  he  was  only  now  in  the  summer  of
B.O.  Hi  allowed  to  return,  perhaps  at  his  own
instance.  If,  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventh
month,  Tisri,  the  most  sacred  of  the  year,
Ezra  had  just  come  back  to  Jerusalem  from
a  prolonged  absence,  it  would  be  most
natural  that  he  should  be  asked  to  resume
his  work  of  instniction  by  reading  and  ex-
pounding the  law  of  Moses  to  the  people
(ch.  viii.  1).  The  people's  marked  "atten-
tion "  (ver.  3)  would  also  be  natural ;  and
such  a  reading  and  expounding,  after  such
an  interval,  would  naturally  have  a  great
effect.  It  would  stir  penitence ;  it  would
wake  thought ;  it  would  lead  to  greater
exactness  in  observing  the  law.  These  are
the  results  which  seem  to  have  followed.
Ezra's  reading  was  on  the  first  day  of  the
month  (ver.  2),  the  "feast  of  trumpets,"
as  the  day  was  called.  It  led  to  a,  great
weeping — "all  the  people  wept,  when  they
heard  the  words  of  the  law "  (ver.  9).  As,
however,  the  day  was  one  of  the  chief  festi-
vals of  the  year,  and  therefore  the  disjilay
of  grief  was  unfitting,  Ezra  checked  it  for
the  time,  and  recommended  liberal  alms-
giving in  the  place  of  tears  (ver.  10).  His
advice  was  taken  (ver.  12) ;  and  an  increased
desire  to  hear  the  law  having  been  produced
by  hearing  it,  the  people  met  again  on  the
second  of  Tisri,  to  be  present  at  a,  second
reading.  Ezra  thereupon  directed  their
attention  to  the  impending  "feast  of
tabernacles,"  which  had  not  now  for  some
considerable  time  been  celebrated  with  the
proper  solemnities,  and  read  to  them  the
portions  of  the  law  which  bore  upon  it
(ver.  14).  A  much  more  exact  and  scrupul-
ous observance  of  the  legal  regulations  was
the  consequence — ^the  dwelling  in  booths,
vhich  had  been  given  up,  was  revived
(ver.  17) ;  the  feast  was  continued  during
the  full  eight  days  (ver.  18) ;  the  solemn
assemblies  on  the  first  day  and  the  eighth
were  held  {ibid.) ;  and,  above  all,  "day  by
day,  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day,"
Ezra  took  care  to  "  read  in  the  book  of  the
law  of  God  "  before  the  people,  thus  bringing
before  them  their  practical  duties  in  the
most  solemn  and  effective  way,  and  stirring
them  np  to  holiness  and  repentance.     The


good  effect  of  these  proceedings  on  hia  part
appears  in  the  next  two  chapterSi

Ver.  1. — The  chapter  should  commence,
as  in  the  Septuagint,  with  the  last  two
clauses  of  ch.  vii,  and  should  run  thus:—
"  And  when  the  seventh  month  was  come,
and  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  theii
cities,  all  the  people  gathered  themselves
together,  as  one  man,  into  the  court  that
was  before  the  water  gate ;  and  they  spake
unto  Ezra  the  scribe,"  &a  The  "court"
(rehob)  spoken  of  appears  to  have  been
situated  between  the  eastern  gate  of  the
temple  and  the  city  wall,  at  the  point
where  it  was  pierced  by  the  "water  gate."
They  spake  unto  Ezra.  It  is  remarkable
that  the  people  ask  for  instruction.  Though
they  do  not  keep  the  law,  they  have  a
yearning  after  it.  They  are  not  contented
with  their  existing  condition,  but  desire
better  things,  and  they  have  an  instinctive
feeling  that  to  hear  God's  word  will  help
them.

Ver.  2.— Ezra  the  priest  bronght  the  law.
Ezra,  God's  true  priest,  at  once  responded  to
the  call.  He  did  not  say,  "The  law  is
difficult,  hard  to  be  understood,  might  mis-
lead you,  should  be  reserved  for  the  learned ; "
but  at  once  "brought  it,"  and  "read
therein"  before  the  congregation  both  ol
men  and  women,  and  of  all  that  could
hear  with  understanding,  i.e.  qf  all  (youths
and  maidens)  that  were  old  enough  to  under-
stand the  words.

Ver.  3. — From  the  morning  until  mid-
day. Or,  "from  daylight."  He  began  as
soon  as  it  was  light  enough,  and  read  on
(he  and  his  assistants — ^ver.  7)  till  noon,  that
is,  for  six  hours  or  mor^.  The  reading
appears  to  have  been  varied  by  occasional
exposition  (vers.  7,  8).  The  ears  of  all  the
people  were  attentive.  Though  there  is
no  word  in  the  Hebrew  for  "ittentive,"  yet
the  meaning  is  quite  correctly  given :  "  the
ears  of  all  9ie  people  were  to  uie  book " —
fixed  on  that,  and  on  nothing  else.

Ver.  4. — Ezra  .  .  .  stood  upon  s  pulpit
of  wood.  Compare  2  Kings  xi.  14  ;  xxiii.
8,  where,  however,  the  term  used  is  TIDB,

"stand,"  and  not  7130,  "tower."  In
either  case  an  elevated  platform  seems  to  be
meant.  Uattithiah,  and  Shema.  These
persons  are  commonly  supposed  to  have  been
priests,  but  there  is  nothing  to  prove  it.
They  need  not  even  have  been  Levites,  since
they  were  there  not  to  teach,  but  only  to  do
honour  to  Ezra.

Ver.  6. — All  the  people  stood  np.  The
Jews  commonly  sat  to  hear  and  stood  up
to  pray ;  but  in  hearing  they  occasionally
stood  up,  to  do  greater  honour  to  the  person
01  the  occasion  (see  Judges  iii  20).     It  ii


OH.  vin.  1—12.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


«1


not  to  be  supposed  that  they  stood  during
the  whole  of  the  six  hours  that  Ezra's  read-
ing lasted.

ver.  6. — ^Ezra  blessed  the  Lord.  Ezra
began  by  an  ascription  of  praise  to  Jehovah,
as  the  Levites,  probably  under  his  direction,
begin  in  ch.  ix.  5,  and  as  David  began  his
last  address  to  the  congregation  (1  Chron.
xxix.  10).  The  great  God.  The  epithet
belongs  to  the  writer  rather  than  to  Ezra
himself,  who  in  his  own  book  never  uses  it.
It  recurs  in  this  section  (ch.  ix.  32),  and  is
also  employed  by  Nehemiah  (ch.  L  5).
Amen,  Amen.  The  repetition  marks  in-
tensity of  feeling,  as  does  the  lifting  up
their  hands.  Compare  2  Kings  xi.  14 ;
Luke  xxiii.  21 ;  and  for  the  lifting  up  of
the  hands,  so  natural  in  prayer,  see  Ps.
cxxxiv.  2 ;  1  Tim.  it  8,  &c.  Worshipped
the  Lord  with  their  faces  to  the  ground.
Compare  2  Chron.  vii.  3  ;  Ezra  x.  2.

Yer.  7. — Jeshua,  Eani,  Sherehiah,  &c.
Levitical  families,  not  individual  Levites
(see  ch.  ix.  4,  5 ;  x.  10 — 13;  xii.  8,  &c.).
And  the  Levites.  I.  e.  "the  rest  of  the
Levites."  Caused  the  people  to  understand
the  law.  Expounding  it,  during  pauses  in
the  reading.  The  people  stood  in  their
place.  Rather,  "were  in  their  place"
—remained  throughout  the  whole  of  the
reading  and  exposition  without  quitting
their  places.  It  is  not  probable  that  they
stood.

Ver.  8. — They  read  in  the  book  in  the
law  of  God  distinctly.  That  is,  so  that
every  word  could  be  distinctly  heard.  Com-
pare Ezra  iv.  18,  where  a  cognate  word  is
translated  "plainly."  And  gave  the  sense.
Translated  the  Hebrew  words  into  the
popular  Aramaic  or  Chaldee.  And  caused
them  to  understand  the  reading.  Liter-
ally, "in  the  reading."    In  the  course  of


the  reading  they  cansed  the  people  to  un-
derstand by  explaining  the  meaning  of  each


Ver.  9. — Kehemiah,  which  ia  the  Tir-
shatha.  The  term  "  Tirshatha "  had  pre-
viously been  applied  only  to  Zerubbabel
(Ezra  ii.  63 ;  Neh.  viL  65),  but  it  was
applicable  to  any  governor.  The  writer  of
the  section,  introducing  Nehemiah  here  for
the  first  time,  naturally  gives  him  a  title  of
reverence.  Nehemiah's  modesty  had  made
him  content  to  describe  himself  by  the
general  and  comparatively  weak  term  pe-
chah.  Said  unto  the  people  .  .  .  mourn  not
A  combined  remonstrance  is  made  against
the  open  grief  of  the  people  by  the  civil
and  ecclesiastical  rulers,  and  by  the  order
of  Levites.  Mourning  was  unsuitable  for  a
day  of  high  festivity,  the  opening  day  of
the  civil  year  and  of  the  sabbatical  month,
itself  a  sabbath  or  day  of  rest,  and  one  to  be
kept  by  blowing  of  trumpets  (Lev.  xxiii  24,
25  ;  Num.  xxix.  1—6).

Ver.  10. —Then  he  said.  Either  Ezra
or  Nehemiah,  but  probably  the  foimer,  to
whom  it  appertained  to  give  religious  direc-
tions. Eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet
/.  e.  "Go  and  enjoy  yourselves,  eat  and
drink  of  the  best— let  there  be  no  fasting,
nor  even  abstinence,  on  such  a  day  as  this."
But  at  the  same  time  send  portions  unto
them  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared.  Make
the  poor  partakers  of  your  joy.  "The
stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow"
should  have,  their  part  in  the  feast  (Deut
xvL  14).  And  for  yourselves,  remember
that  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  i.  e.  religious  joy,
constitutes  your  strength.

Ver.  12. — To  make  great  mirth.  Or
"great  rejoicing,"  not  "mirth"  in  the
sense  which  the  word  now  commonly  bean,


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.  1 — 12. — Religicms  instruction.  "And  when  the  Beventh  month  came,"  Ac.
To  the  well-being  of  a  people  the  labours  of  the  religious  teacher  are  as  necessary
as  those  of  the  statesman.  Nehemiali  having  provided  for  the  safety  of  the  Jews
against  their  enemies,  Ezra,  the  priest  and  scribe,  steps  forward  to  instruct  them
in  the  law  of  God.  Of  the  manner  in  which  he  did  this,  and  the  reception  his
instructions  met  with,  we  have  a  specimen  in  this  narrative.

I.  The  T.IME  of  the  meeting.  "  The  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  "  (ver.  2),  the
oommenoement  of  the  civil  year,  the  feast  of  trumpets.  It  was  also  the  anniversary
of  the  restoration  of  the  altar  (Ezra  iii.  1 — 3),  and  as  such  would  be  regarded  with
"pecial  interest.  And  it  was  the  first  day  of  the  month  which  abounded  in  religious
solemnities.

II   The  PLACE.     The  open  space  before  the  water  gate  (ver.  1).

III.  The  CONGREGATION.  1.  Of  whom  it  consisted.  "All  the  people"  .  .  .  "men
and  women,  and  all  that  could  hear  with  understanding"  (vers.  1,  2).  Parents
brought  those  of  their  children  who  could  understand.  2.  Their  unanimity.  "  As
one  man  "  (ver.  1).     3.  Their  eagerness  to  learn.     "  They  spake  unto  Ezra,"  &c.

IV.  The  BEADING  AND  EXPLANAllON  OF  THE  LAW.     By  Ezra   and  a  number  o2

VBHBMIAH.  a


83  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  tiu.  1— U

Levites  who  assisted  him  (ver.  7).  Ezra  probably  read  the  Hebrew  text,  and  the
Levites  translated  where  necessary,  and  expounded,  each  perhaps  to  a  different
group.  These  exercises  were— 1.  Commenced  with  worship  (ver.  6).  2.  Conducted
with  great  care.  From  an  elevated  platform  (ver.  4).  The  reading  distinct,  the
exposition  intelligible  and  painstaking  (ver.  8).     3.  Long-continued  (ver.  3).

V.  The  BEHAVIOUR  or  the  people.  1.  Reverent  (vers.  5,  6).  "All  the  people
stood  up  .  .  .  bowed  their  heads,"  &o.  2.  Attentive  (ver.  3),  8.  Persistent.  For
some  six  hours  they  all  kept  their  places  (ver.  •?).

VI.  The  EFFECTS  produced  upon  them.  1.  Sorrow  (ver.  9).  So  Josiah  rent  his
clotlies  when  the  law  was  read  to  him  (2  Kings  xxii.  11).  The  precepts  of  the  law,
BO  greatly  in  contrast  with  the  conduct  of  the  nation;  its  promises,  of  blessings
once  largely  enjoyed,  but  forfeited  by  sin ;  its  threatenings,  the  fulfilment  of  which
the  hearers  so  painfully  experienced,  would  all  tend  to  produce  grief.  ."All  the
people  wept,"  and  the  proper  character  of  the  festival  seemed  likely  to  be  marred.
But  the  instructions  and  exhortations  of  Nehemiah,  Ezra,' and  the  Levites  prevailed
to  assuage  their  sorrow,  and  induce  them  to  celebrate  the  festival  in  accordance  with
its  design.  Thus  the  sorrow  was  turned  into — 2.  Joy  (ver.  12).  Which  they
indulged  not  simply  because  of  the  exhortations  to  joy  addressed  to  them,  bu(
"  because  they  had  Understood  the  words  that  were  declared  unto  them,"  i.  e.  the
words  of  the  law.  For  such  a  statement  would  hardly  be  made  of  the  addresses
referred  to  in  vers.  9 — 11,  since  there  was  no  difficulty  in  understanding  these.  The
fact  that  such  teaching  of  the  law  was  once  more  enjoyed  by  them  filled  their  hearts
with  thankfulness ;  and  although  much  which  they  had  heard  excited  their  sorrow,
there  was  much  also  to  awaken  gladness.  The  law  itself,  and  the  whole  history  of
their  fathers,  showed  that  their  God  was  gracious  and  forgiving ;  and  the  promises
interspersed  among  the  precepts  and  threatenings  (such,  for  instance,  as  those
referred  to  in  ch.  i.  8,  9)  would  encourage  their  hopes.

Lessons : — 1.  The  worth  and  power  of  the  word  of  God,  as  the  ever-enduring  spring
of  new  religious  life.  All  true  and  solid  reformation  and  revival  arise  from  the
earnest  republication  of  its  truths.  2.  The  necessity  and  value  of  enlightened  and
zealous  teachers  of  the  word.  Such  as  aim  to  give  the  people  a  right  understanding
of  it,  and  thus  to  quicken  them  to  godliness  and  holiness.  Without  good  teachers,
the  book,  even  when  possessed,  remains  comparatively  a  dead  letter.  3.  The  obliga-
tion and  importance  of  public  assemblies  for  instruction  aiid  worship.  All  ought  to
attend  them,  and  bring  such  of  their  children  as  can  "  hear  with  understanding,"  in
however  small  a  measure.  4.  The  conditions  of  obtaining  benefit  at  such  meetings.
Desire  to  learn,  reverence,  attention,  surrender  of  the  heart  to  the  power  of  the  truth.
5.  The  mingled  and  conflicting  emotions  awakened  by  Divine  truth.  Sorrow  and
joy.  Place  of  each  in  the  Christian  life.  Special  suitableness  and  worth  of  religious
joy.     "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."

Ver.  3. — Attentive  hearers.  "The  ears  of  all  the  people  were  attentive  unto  the
book  of  the  law."  Literally,  and  more  expressive,  "  were  unto  the  book  of  the  law,"
as  if  their  ears  had  been  directed  towards  the  book.  A  state  of  things  very  difierent
from  that  which  prevails  in  many  congregations,  especially  during  the  reading  of
the  Scriptures.  It  is  worth  considering  how  devout  attention  may  be  secured.
Doubtless  much  depends  on  the  reader  or  preacher.  It  is  impossible  to  attend  to
some  men.  Those  who  officiated  on  the  occasion  referred  to  in  the  text  are  good
models,  as  to  the  distinctness  of  their  utterance  and  the  pains  they  took  to  give  the
sense,  &c.  As  to  the  hearers,  they  will  acquire  the  habit  of  tixed  and  sustained
attention  by  care  in  reference  to  the  following  particulars  : —

I.  Pebvious  PRErARATioN.  Not  Waiting  until  within  the  walls  of  the  sanctuary
before  seeking  to  be  fitted  for  the  service,  but  by  definitely  laying  aside  the  world's
business  on  Saturday  night,  and  by  religious  exercises  at  home,  and  devout  thought
and  feeling  on  the  way  to  church,  cultivating  a  state  of  mind  and  heart  suitable  for
public  worship.  Yea,  the  whole  life  will  be  a  preparation  if  spent  earnestly  in  God's
service.

II.  Sebious  intention.  The  earnest  desire  and  purpose  to  obtain  spiritual  good
«t  the  service.


OH.  VIII.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIEMIAH.  93

III.  Consideration  of  the  presence  of  God.  Activ^e  faith  in  him  as  near,  invit-
ing to  communion  with  himself,  observing  the  state  and  conduct  of  each  professing
worshipper,  speaking  in  the  word  and  by  the  preacher,  claiming  a  reverent  regard
to  his  declarations,  ready  to  bless  and  save.

IV.  Self-control.  Over  the  thoughts  ;  swiftly  banishing  such  as  would  divert
from  the  sacred  business  in  hand.     Over  the  eyes,  lojit  tliey  conquer  the  ears.

V.  Withal,  PRAYER.  The  Divine  assistance  being  invoked  in  moment  iry  silent
ejaculations,  whenever  the  attention  fl  igs  or  wanlers.  In  coiiclusioM,  let  the  habitu-
ally inatteiitive  bear  in  mind  that — 1.  They  are  necessarily  great  losers.  Attention
is  the  first  condition  of  gaining  good  from  public  teaching.  The  loss  thus  sustained
is  of  the  highest  and  most  lasting  blessings.  It  is  likely  to  include  the  loss  of  their
souls.     2.  They  are  guilty  of  great  sin.

Ver.  9. — Penitential  sorrow.  "  All  the  people  wept  when  they  heard  the  words  of
the  law."

I.  A  NATURAL  SORROW.  "  By  the  law  is  the  knowledge  of  sin,"  and  this  knowledge
cannot  but  awaken  sorrow  as  to— ;1.  Guilt  contracted.  The  law  is  seen  to  be  "  lioly
and  just  and  good ;  "  the  Lawgiver  righteous  and  benevolent ;  and  so  sin  appears
"  exceeding  sinful."  It  is  rebellion  against  authority  the  most  just;  hatred  of  the
infinite  Excellence ;  base  ingratitude  towards  our  best  Benefactor ;  disregard  of  the
rights  and  welfare  of  our  brethren.  2.  Good  forfeited.  Physical,  moral,  spiritual,
eternal ;  in  this  case,  national.  The  thought  of  what  Israel  would  liave  been  but  for
disobedience  to  the  law  would  be  most  distressing  to  the  Jewg.  So  when  we  think
of  all  we  have  lost  through  sin  we  may  well  grieve.  3.  Evil  incurred.  Condenma-
tion,  remorse  of  conscience,  degradation  of  nature,  separation  from  God,  shame  and
sorrow,  diseases  and  death,  the  miseries  of  hell.  What  anguish  and  tears  is  the
thought  of  the  consequences  of  sin  fitted  to  produce  !

II.  The  PROPER  EFFECTS  OP  SUCH  SORROW.  1.  Confession.  "  I  will  arise  and  go
to  my  Father,"  &c.  2.  Repentance.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh  repentance,"  &c.  3.
Eager  acceptance  of  the  gospel.  Revealing  as  it  does  the  Divine  and  complete
remedy  for  all  that  gives  the  conscious  sinner  pain — a  glorious  Saviour,  a  perfect
atonement  for  sin,  the  Almighty  renewing  and  sanctifying  Spirit ;  and  thus  a  free
and  full  pardon,  restoration  to  the  Divine  favour,  renewal  unto  holiness,  peace,  hope,
ultimate  perfection  in  body  and  soul,  eternal  glory  and  blessedness.  4.  Watchful
obedience.  6.  Joy.  "Blessed  are  they  that' mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted."
But,  on  the  other  hand,  "  Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now,"  careless  and  impenitent,
"  for  ye  shall  mourn  and  weep."

Ver.  10. — A  Christmas  Homily. — The  joy  of  the  Lord.  "Go  your  way,  eat  the
fat ....  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength  "  [stronghold].  The  common  opinion
that  the  Jewish  religion  was  gloomy  and  austere  is  erroneous.  Its  ritual  and  ceremonial
observances  were  indeed  minute,  and  in  some  respects  buidensome,  but  there  was  much
that  was  joyous.  The  private  observance  o£  religion  consisted  a  good  deal  in  offer-
ing sacrifices  of  thanksgiving,  of  which  the  l.irgcr  portion  was  eaten  by  the  offerer
and  his  friends  in  a  social  festal  ineal  (Dent,  xxvii.  6,  7  expresses  the  spirit  of  the
Mosaic  law).  The  Sabbath  day,  as  originally  instituted,  was  far  from  being  the
gloomy  season  which  some  roprosont ;  and  of  the  other  seasons  set  apart  for  special
religious  observance,  only  oii'^  w  is  a  f.ist,  all  the  rest  were  festivals  for  the  com-
memoration of  God's  goodness,  and  the  offering  of  praise  to  him.  The  three  occa-
sions on  which  all  the  males  were  required  to  appear  at  the  temple  were  all  festivals,
and  how  the  festivals  were  to  be  kept  our  text  shows.  It  relates  to  the  feast  of
trumpets — the  new  year's  festival — as  observed  by  the  Jews  after  theii  re-settlement
in  Palestine  (for  the  law,  see  Levit.  xxiii.  23).  On  this  occasion  the  people  were
more  disposed  to  mourn  than  rejoice,  for  the  law  had  been  read  and  expounded  to
them,  and  they  were  reminded  by  it  of  the  nation's  sin  and  deserved  punishment.
But  Nehemiah  bids  them  not  mourn,  but  rejoice,  adding  that  the  joy  of  the  Lord
would  be  as  a  stronghold  to  them.  We  may  gather  from  his  words  hints  on
Christian  joy  and  feasting.

I.  The  JOT  WHICH  God  s  PEOPLE  SHOULD  INDULGE.  "The  joy  of  the  Lord."  Holy,
pious  joy.     It  is  joy — 1    In  God — his  existence  and  perfections  ;   his  relation  t«

g2


U  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  fcH.  viii.  1—12.

believers ;  his  works  and  government  (in  creation,  providence,  and  grace)  ;  his  special
interpositions — for  Israel,  for  mankind,  especially  in  and  by  the  Lord  Jesus;  his
word  and  the  understanding  of  it  (ver.  12)  ;  his  operations  in  each  heart  and  life.
2.  From  God.  All  joy  which  is  his  gift  has  his  stamp  of  approval:  innocent  plea-
sures of  sense,  reason,  social  affection,  as  well  as  the  higher  spiritual  joys.  But  these
last  are  specially  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord,"  which  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.
"■.  22).  3.  Wifli  God,  as  he  rejoices  in  his  works  (Ps.  civ.  31),  in  the  repentance  of
sinners  (Luke  xv.),  and  in  the  character  and  welfare  of  his  people  (Ps.  cxlvii.  1 1 ;
Isa.  Izii.  5 ;  Ixv.  19 ;  Zeph.  iii.  17).  We  are  capable  of  fellowship  with  him  in  his
joy.  4.  Directed  to  God.  In  gratitude  and  love,  in  praise  and  in  cheerful  service.
Natural  joys  regulated  by  and  culminating  in  religion,  in  thankfulness,  &c.,  become
thus  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord."  Such  joy,  not  sorrow,  should  be  the  predominant  feeling
of  Christians,  although  sorrow  has  also  its  place.  The  consciousness  of  redemption,
of  pardon,  peace  with  God,  sonsbip,  &c.,  should  produce  joy.  Such  joy,  not  sinful
mirth,  should  Christians  indulge.

II.  Why  such  jot  should  be  cherished.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  ttrength."
Literally,  your  stronghold,  fortress.  For  the  Jews  at  this  time,  feeble  as  they  were,
tlie  joy  of  the  Lord  would  be  safety  against  enemies.  It  would  unite  them,  inspirit
tliem,  make  them  brave,  stimulate  them  in  God's  service,  which  was  their  safety,  as
it  would  secure  his  protection  and  blessing.  And  in  all  times  religious,  holy  joy  is
a  defence  against  evil.  It  imparts  "  strength  "  in  another  sense — inward  power  to
do  and  endure  the  will  of  God,  and  overcome  temptation,  and  thus  becomes  a  strong-
hold— 1.  Against  discouragement  and  despondency  in  trying  times.  2.  Against  sin.
Making  God's  service  a  delight,  it  counterweighs  the  attractions  of  sinful  pleasure.
He  who  is  happy  in  God  is  raised  above  them.  3.  Against  infidelity.  For  it  gives
an  experimental  proof  of  the  reality  and  worth  of  religion  which  no  mere  argument
can  shake.  And  as  it  is  with  individuals,  so  with  families,  Churches,  nations,  the  joy
of  the  Lord  is  strength,  gloomy  religion  weakness,  sinful  joy  more  so.

III.  When  it  should  bb  indulged.  On  days  "  holy  to  the  Lord,"  which  every
day  should  be.  Then  on  days  specially  set  apart  for  religious  services — the  Lord's
day,  Easter,  Christmas.  Our  special  commemoration  of  God's  works  should  be  with
holy,  not  sinful,  joy.

IV.  How  IT  SHOULD  BE  EXPRESSED.  1.  It  may  be  eapressed  hy/easting.  So  here,
and  in  Jewish  religious  observances  generally.  Two  things  secured  by  such  asso-
ciation of  religion  and  feasting.  It  makes  religion  social,  cheerful,  and  attractive,
and  it  elevates  and  sanctifies  feasting  itself,  consecrating  it  to  God,  and  preserving
its  purity  by  associating  it  with  thoughts  of  him.  We  should  deem  it  singulai  to
hear  the  ministers  of  religion  say,  "  Eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet,  for  this  day  is
holy  to  the  Lord."  Yet  primitive  Christianity  had  this  element,  in  dropping  which
we  have  lost  much  good,  if  also  much  evil.  At  Christmas  time  we  in  a  measure
associate  feasting  with  religion.  Let  us  endeavour  so  to  unite  them  that  our  joy
may  be  "  the  joy  •£  the  Lord."  Let  us  blend  with  our  festivities  gratitude  for  Christ
and  Christianity.  Let  us  invite  Jesus  to  our  feasts,  and  enjoy  ourselves  as  in  his
presence.  It  is  easier  to  mix  religion  with  feasting  at  this  time,  because  of  the
occasion,  and  the  family  character  of  the  feast,  the  children  uniting.  2.  It  should
always  overflow  in  charity.  "  Send  portions  unto  them  for  whom  nothing  is  pre-
pared "  (see  Deut.  xvi.  11,  14).  Special  suitableness  of  this  at  Christmas  time,  not
only  on  account  of  the  time  of  year,  when  the  poor  have  to  bear  peculiar  hardships,
but  on  account  of  the  event  celebrated.  The  incarnation  sanctifies  human  nature,
uniting  it  to  the  Divine ;  teaching  us  to  reverence,  respect,  care  for  all ;  furnishing  n
new  and  sacred  bond  of  unity  and  brotherhood.  It  sanctifies  poverty,  as  Christ  was
born  of  a  poor  woman,  in  a  very  humble  lodging.  He  chose  to  be  a  poor  man,  and
esteems  kindness  to  the  poor  as  kindness  to  himself,  and  vice  versd.  It  affords  us  all
ground  for  utmost  thankfulness,  which  we  should  express  by  charity.  Even  selfish-
ness might  prompt  benevolence  at  this  season,  for  it  will  give  zest  to  our  own
feasting  to  be  conscious  that  others  are  sharing  it  through  our  gifts.  Even  if  we
must  curtail  our  own  feast  somewhat  in  order  to  give  to  others,  we  shall  be  thus
repaid.  Finally,  all  joy  should,  and  may,  be  a  joy  of  the  Lord.  That  which  cannot
is  unworthy  a  Christian,  and  will  lea(i  lo  ultimate  sorrow.


en.  Tm.  1—12.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  8f

Ver.  11. — Gomfortfor penitenis.  "Neither  be  ye  grieved."  God's  word  grieves,
yet  soon  says,  "  Be  ye  not  grieved."

I.  To  WHOM  THIS  MAT  BB  SAID.  1.  To  true  penitents.  Such  as  mourn  over  sin
■with  a  "  godly  sorrow,"  and  seek  mercy  through  the  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ ;  whether  sinners  first  awakened,  or  Christians  conscious  of  recent  sin.  2.
To  all  such.     Even  the  chief  of  sinners,  the  worst  of  backsliders.

II.  On  what  grounds  it  mat  be  said.  1.  The  assurance  of  forgiveness.  "  Though
your  sins  be  as  scarlet,"  Ac.  "  He  will  abundantly  pardon."  2.  The  certain  results
of  forgiveness.  Adoption  into  the  family  of  God.  The  enjoyment  of  his  favour.
The  constant  aids  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Supportin  conflict  and  trouble.  The  co-opera-
tion of  all  things  for  good.  Life  everlasting.  In  a  word,  salvation  now  and  for  ever.
8.  The  many  injunctions  to  rejoice.  4.  The  injurious  influence  of  over-much  and
over-prolonged  sorrow.  On  him  who  cherishes  it.  Christian  graces  thrive  best  in  an
atmosphere  of  confidence  and  joy.  Much  sorrow  blights  them.  On  others.  Dis-
couraging inquirers.     Repelling  unbelievers.     Bringing  discredit  on  religion.

III.  Bt  whom  it  should  be  said.  By  ministers  of  the  gospel,  and  by  the  Church
In  general."  We  should  not  be  afraid  to  comfort  mourning  sinners.  To  others  our
exhortation  should  be,  "Be  ye  grieved."  "Be  afflicted,  and  mourn  and  weep;  let
your  laughter  be  turned  to  mourning,  and  your  joy  to  heaviness."  (See  more  under
oh.  ii.  3 ;  viiL  10.)

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.^  1 — 8. — Tlie  word  of  life.  The  public  reading  and  exposition  of  the  law  of
Moses  in  the  presence  of  all  the  people  as  soon  as  possible  after  their  settlement
in  their  cities  and  the  rebuilding  of  Jerusalem.

I.  The  people  want,  and  must  have,  the  Sobiptures  both  familiarised  by  rbpe-
titionand  expounded,  that  they  may  "  have  the  sense,  and  understand  the  reading."
1.  As  individuals.  The  law  of  God  the  true  foundation  on  which  the  life  must  be
built  up.  In  that  law  is  not  only  the  will  of  God,  but  his  mercy.  The  Scriptures
make  wise  to  salvation.  The  law  was  the  root  out  of  which  the  gospel  came.  2.
As  a  eommonwealth.  The  Bible  the  true  law  of  nations  and  oominuriitiea.  3.  As
families.  The  men,  women,  and  children  were  there  together.  God  has  provided
his  word  for  our  household  life.  Those  who  neglect  its  reading  in  the  house  neglect
the  best  support  of  parental  authority,  the  truest  bond  of  love,  and  the  fountain  of
consolation  and  joy.  The  only  real  education  is  that  which  acknowledges  the  Scrip-
tures as  its  basis.  All  popular  reformation  and  advancement  has  been  achieved  with
the  written  word  as  the  instrument.

IL  Great  gatherings  are  opportunities  fob  great  impressions,  and  large
BEBULTS  MAY  BE  OBTAINED  BY  THEM.  Street  preachiTig  may  effect  more  than  any
other  on  some  occasions.  The  great  reformers  of  Israel  were  too  much  in  earnest  to
pay  much  heed  to  sanctities  of  place.  They  wanted  a  large  enough  assembly  to  be  a
true  representation  of  the  people.  The  reading  and  preaching  of  God's  word  can
never  be  dispensed  with.

III.  Ministers  must  be  men  who  can  help  the  people  to  hear  attentively
AND  UNDERSTAND  THE  WORD  OF  GoD.  They  have  no  right  to  occupy  Ezra's  place
unless  th'ey  have  Ezra's  qualification,  and  they  should  be  both  literally  and  figur-
atively "  above  all  the  people."  There  were  many  with  the  chief  reader  who  doubt-
less read  and  expounded  in  their  turns.  What  is  wanted  is  not  that  official  dignity
should  be  saved  at  any  price,  but  that  the  people  should  hear  arid  understand.  °  We
want  more  good  readers  and  preachers.

IV.  When  we  call  the  people  together  in  the  spirit  of  faith,  "blessing  the  Lord,
the  great  God,"  and  putting  truth  before  them  in  his  name,  there  will  be  a  ready
AND  hbabtt  besponse.  The  people  said,  Amen,  Amen  ;  lifted  up  their  hands,  bowed
their  heads,  worshipped  with  their  faces  to  the  ground.  We  should  expect  such
response. — R.

VeTS.  1—8.— The  word  of  God  and  the  ministry  of  man.  One  of  the  most  affect-
ing scenes  depicted  in  Holy  Writ  here  invites  our  thought.  Our  imagination  delights


86  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMlAlI.  [ch.  viii.  1—12.

to  dwnll  upon  it.  The  sacred  and  beloved  city  of  God  ia  now  eecnre,  its  walls  sra
rebuilt,  its  gates  replaced  and  shut :  its  inhabitants  are  no  longer  struggling  with
hope  and  fear, — a  trowel  in  one  hand  and  a  sword  in  the  other, — but  rejoicing  in  their
strength  and  peace ;  internal  discords  are  now  arranged,  and  brethren  are  dwelling
together  in  unity.  With  one  accord  they  now  come — all  the  multitude  of  them,
men,  women,  and  children,  as  many  as  "  could  hear  with  understanding  "  (ver.  2)—
to  one  large  square  (ver.  1).  In  the  midst  of  this  square  is  erected  a  broad  and  high
platform,  a  pulpit,  on  which  several  men  may  stand.  Room  is  made  through  the
crowd  for  Ezra  (who  now  again  appears  on  the  scene)  and  a  few  accompanying
ministers ;  they  ascend  the  pulpit.  As  Ezra  opens  the  book  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,
with  spontaneous  reverence  the  whole  company  rises  to  its  feet.  As  the  great
Scribe,  before  he  begins  to  read,  utters  a  few  words  of  thanksgiving,  "  blessing  the
Lord,  the  great  God,"  all  the  people  answer,  "  Amen,  Amen,"  bowing  their  head,  and
lifting  their  hands  in  reverent  joy  (ver.  6) ;  and  as  Ezra  reads  and  explains,  speaking
in  their  own  language  the  ancient  law  which  God  gave  to  Moses,  and  as  their  coun-
try's early  history  is  unrolled  before  their  eyes,  and  old  and  hallowed  memories  are
vividly  recalled,  the  strong  men  as  well  as  the  women  and  the  children  yield  to  their
emotion,  and  tears  stream  down  their  faces.  "  All  the  people  wept  when  they  heard
the  word  of  the  law  "  (ver.  9).

L  Two  FEATURES  OP    THIS    SCENE  WE    SHALL  BB  WISE    TO    DWELL    DPON.      1.    The

popular  appreciation  of  the  word  of  God.  "  All  the  people  .  .  .  spake  unto  Ezra
the  scribe  to  bring  the  book  of  the  law "  (ver.  1).  So  far  was  Ezra  from  being
obliged  to  urge  the  people  to  gather  together  and  listen  to  the  law,  that  they  them-
selves called  for  its  production,  and  demanded  that  it  should  be  read  to  them.  They
hungered  for  the  bread  of  life ;  they  craved  to  hear  the  word  of  the  living  God.
And  when  their  wish  was  granted  they  sliowed  themselves  in  real  earnest,  for  they
remainsd  six  hours  eagerly  listening  as  the  law  was  read  and  expounded.  Ezra  "  read
therein  from  morning  until  midday  ,  .  .  and  the  ears  of  all  the  people  were  attent-
ive unto  the  book  of  the  law  "  (ver.  3).  2.  The  ministerial  function  in  regard  to
it.  "  Ezra  the  scribe  stood  upon  a  pulpit  of  wood  .  .  .  and  beside  him  stood  Matti-
thiah  and  Shema,"  &c.  (ver.  4);  "also  Jeshua  and  Bani,"  &o.  (ver.  7);  and  "they
read  in  the  book  in  the  law  of  God  distinctly,  and  gave  the  sense,  and  caused  them  to
understand  the  reading"  (ver.  8).  Here  were  two  valuable  things:  (1)  the  distinct
reading  of  the  word  of  God ;  (2)  the  explanation  of  any  obscure  words  or  sentences,
or,  as  we  have  it,  "  giving  the  sense,"  or  "  causing  the  people  to  understand  the  law."
II.  Two  INFERENCES  THEREFROM  WE  MAY  SAFELY  DRAW.  We  may  Safely  reason —
1.  That  we  now  should  show  a  still  greater  popular  appreciation,  of  the  word  of  God.
For  we  must  consider  how  much  more  we  have  than  they  had,  or  than  David  had  when
he  exclaimed  how  he  "  loved  the  law,"  and  when  he  preferred  it  to  bodily  gratification
and  worldly  treasure  (Ps.  xix.).  We  have  not  only  more  in  quantity,  but  much  of
that  which  ought  to  be  to  us  more  deeply  interesting.  We  have,  beside  the  "  law  of
Moses  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to  Israel"  (ver.  1),  (1)  the  history  of  the
Jews  in  the  land  of  promise  ;  (2)  the  Psalms  of  David ;  (3)  the  wisdom  of  Solomon;
(4)  the  inspired  utterances  of  many  prophets  ;  (5)  the  letters  of  apostles ;  and  above
all,  (6)  the  very  word  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  the  story  of  his  redeeming  love,
with  (7)  the  revelation  of  the  golden  city  of  God.  How  should  we  hunger  and  thirst
for  this  bread,  for  these  waters  of  life ;  how  should  we  be  "  very  attentive  to  hear
him  I "  2.  That  there  is  as  much  need  now  as  ever  of  the  ministerial  function.  For
though  indeed  we  have  the  word  of  God  written  in  our  own  tongue,  in  our  own
home,  and  under  our  own  eyes,  there  remains,  and  will  remain,  the  important  func-
tion of  (1)  expounding  the  sacred  word.  There  are  words  and  sentences,  chaptem
and  books,  "  hard  to  be  understood ; "  there  are  now  more  things  than  there  were
then  to  harmonise ;  there  is  the  connection  between  the  two  Testaments  to  explain ;
and  there  are  heights  which  only  some  can  climb,  depths  to  which  only  a  few  can
dig,  treasures  which  only  "  the  ready  scribe  "  can  reach,  and  these  it  is  well  to  bring
forth  tliiit  all  may  be  enriched.  Moreover,  the  ministers  of  Christ,  like  Ezra  and  his
companions  on  this  eventful  day  (ver.  6),  have  the  high  and  noble  function  of  (2)
leading  the  people  in  prayer  and  in  Ihanl'sgiving  ;  reverently  addressing  God,  carrying
the  hearts  of  all  with  them,  bearing  on  the  wings  of  their  earnest  words  the  thought!


OH.  Till.  1—12.]  THB  BOOK  OP  NBHEMIAH.  M

and  feelings  of  the  people  heavenwards  to  the  very  throne  of  God,  so  that  "  all  tha
people  shall  answer,  Amen,  Amen,"  and  "worship  the  Lord"  in  spirit  and  in  truth
(ver.  6).  There  is  no  higher  or  greater  service  man  can  render  man  than  that  of
helping  him  to  come  into  close  and  living  fellowship  with  the  Father,  the  Saviour,
the  Sanctifier  of  his  spirit.

III.  One  abiding  fact.  The  fitness  of  the  sacred  Scriptures  for  every  child  of
man.  Men,  women,  and  children,  "  all  that  can  hear  with  understanding,"  gather
still  to  hear  the  word  of  God.  There  is  not,  nor  will  there  ever  be,  a  book  inspired
of  man  that  can  interest  and  instruct,  comfort  and  guide,  our  race  like  this  book
"  given  by  the  inspiration  of  God."  Childhood  will  never  read  with  such  devouring
eagerness  such  stories  elsewhere  as  those  of  Joseph  and  Moses  and  Daniel,  and  of
the  babe  that  was  cradled  in  the  manger  at  Bethlehem.  Youth  will  never  learn  else-
where to  remember  its  Creator  as  it  learns  here  in  the  stories  of  Samuel  and  Josiah,
and  of  him  who  "  grew  in  wisdom  and  stature,  and  in  favour  with  God  and  man  ;  "
here  prime  will  learn,  as  nowhere  else,  that  man  cannot  "live  on  bread  alone,"  or  grow
rich  only  by  making  money  and  building  fortunes;  here  sorrow  will  ever  find  its
sweetest  solace,  its  best  and  holiest  balm,  and  sickness  its  one  untiring  Companion  ;
and  here  death  itself  loses  its  darkness  and  its  sting,  as  these  pages  speak  to  it  of
him  who  is  "  the  Resurrection  and  the  Life." — C.

Vers.  1 — 18. — The  word  of  God  in  a  threefold  relationsJdp.  I.  The  word  of
God  and  PorDLAB  desire.  "And  they  spake  unto  Ezra  the  scribe  to  bring  the  book
of  the  law  of  Moses,  which  the  Lord  had  commanded  to  Israel."  1.  The  desire  of
the  people  for  the  word  of  God.  (1)  Natural.  It  was  interesting  as  their  national
history.  (2)  Wise.  The  word  of  God  is  of  the  highest  value  to  the  human  soul.
(3)  Prophetic.  The  word  of  God  shall  one  day  be  the  delight  of  a  sanctified
humanity.  2.  The  attitude  of  the  people  toward  the  word  of  God.  (1)  Attentive.
(2)  Intelligent.     (3)  Persevering.     (4)  Reverent.    (6)  Prayerful.

il.  The  word  of  God  and  spibitual  emotion.  "  This  day  is  holy  unto  the  Lord
your  God ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep.  For  all  the  people  wept,  when  they  heard  the  words
of  the  law  "  (ver.  9).  There  is  much  in  the  word  of  God  to  awaken  human  emotion;
its  record  of  sin  must  inspire  grief ;  its  tidings  of  Divine  mercy  should  beget  Joy.
The  emotions  awakened  by  the  word  of  God  must  be — 1.  Enlightened.  2.  Appro-
priate (ver.,  11).    3.  Benevolent  (ver.  10).

III.  The  word  of  God  and  Chuech  ordinance.  1.  Church  ordinances  should  be
remembered.  2.  Church  ordinances  should  be  Scriptural.  3.  Church  ordinances
should  be  joyous.    4.  Church  ordinances  should  not  be  exclusive. — E.

Vers.  8 — 12. — Penitence  turned  into  praise.  I.  All  true  bejoicinq  must  be
founded  on  reconciliation  with  God.  1.  The  righteousness  of  God  in  his  law,  while
it  condemns  man,  and  makes  the  people  to  weep  when  they  see  their  sin  in  its  light,
is  yet  declared  not  for  condemnation,  but  for  reconciliation.  2.  The  true  ministers
of  God  will  proclaim  mercy,  not  judgment,  as  the  substance  of  their  message.  "  This
day  is  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God;  mourn  not,  nor  weep."  There  is  a  time  to
weep,  but  there  is  a  time  to  turn  tears  to  praise.  3.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  which  is
our  strength  will  be  expressed  in  no  mere  selfish  forgetfulness  of  him  and  of  bur
neighbour,  but  in  cheerfulness  and  beneficence  ;  our  own  portions  will  be  the  sweeter
when  we  send  help  to  those  for  whom  nothing  is  prepared.

II.  The  conversion  and  befoemation  or  a  people  must  be  effected  through  the
WORD  OF  God.  They  "  understood  the  words  which  were  declared  unto  them."  A
ministry  which  leaves  the  people  either  without  the  word  or  without  understanding
the  word  is  no  ministry  of  God. — R.

Vers.  9 — 12. — Bdigious  emotion.  The  scene  through  which  the  redeemed  and
now  secured  nation  was  passing  was  fruitful  of  excitement.  Everything  conspired
to  affect  the  minds  and  stir  the  souls  of  the  people.  Large  multitudes  are  soon
wrought  into  intense  feeling,  and  aU  that  the  assembled  Israelites  were  then  seeing,
hearing,  and  doing, — this,  taken  with  all  they_  recalled  of  old  scenes  and  past  glories,
»nd  these  experiences   and   recollections  mingled  with  reviving  hopes  of  future


88  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  vm.  1—12.

freedom, — all  together  moved  and  swayed  their  souls  with  powerful  emotion ;  and
"  all  the  people  wept "  (ver,  9).  It  was  an  interesting  instance  of  religious  emotion,
and  what  followed  teaches  us —

I.  That  belioious  emotion  must  be  manfully  controlled  (ver.  9).  Nehemiah
and  Ezra,  and  "  the  Levites  that  taught  the  people,  said  unto  all  the  people,  This  day
is  holy  unto  the  Lord  your  God  ;  mourn  not,  nor  weep  "  (ver.  9).  "  So  the  Levites
stilled  all  the  people,  saying,  Hold  your  peace,  for  the  day  is  holy ;  neither  be  ye
grieved  "  (ver.  11).  Emotion  needs  control  and  correction  when — 1.  It  is  in  danger
of  being  carried  to  access.  Under  some  circumstances,  such  as  these  of  the  text,  when
a  very  large  number  of  people  were  all  agitated  by  the  same  feelings,  and  each  com-
municated something  of  his  own  enthusiasm  to  his  neighbour,  it  is  in  serious  danger
of  running  into  mere  physical  excitement.  Such  nervous  excitement  is  perilous,  for
— (1)  It  deludes  the  hearts  -of  men  with  the  idea  that  they  are  intensely  religious
when  they  are  the  subjects  of  a  bodily  rather  than  a  spiritual  affection.  (2)  It  often
carries  its  subjects  to  religious  and  even  bodily  excesses,  which  are  both  guilty  and
harmful  All  religious  emotion  is,  on  this  ground,  to  be  carefully  controlled.  It  has
its  place  and  its  use  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  in  the  spreading  of  the  kingdom ;  but
it  is  a  thing  to  be  watched  and  guarded  in  the  interests  of  morality  and  religion.  It
needs  correction  when — 2.  It  takes  a  vrrong  direction.  Weeping  was  ill-timed  on
this  occasion.  It  was  a  "  day  holy  unto  the  Lord  "  (ver.  9) ;  they  were  "  not  to
mourn  nor  weep."  It  was  unbecoming  the  occasion.  At  such  a  time  the  air  should
not  be  burdened  with  sighs  and  groans  ;  it  should  be  resonant  with  shouts  and  songs.
Often  our  religious  emotion  is  misplaced,  ill-timed :  we  lament  when  God  would  have
us  "  sing  with  joy,"  or  we  make  ourselves  merry  when  we  have  reason  to  humble
ourselves  in  the  dust.

II.  That  joy  should  be  the  preva;linq  note  in  our  religious  emotion  (ver.  10).
"  This  day  is  holy  unto  our  Lord :  neither  be  ye  sorry ;  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your
strength  "  (ver.  10).  It  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  the  will  of  God
that  sorrow  should  be  associated  with  a  holy  day.  The  high  priest,  with  "holiness  to
the  Lord  "  on  his  mitre,  was  not  allowed  to  mourn  as  others  might,  or  when  others
did  (Lev.  x.  6  ;  xxi.  10).  Sin  and  sorrow,  holiness  and  joy,  these  are  the  right  com-
panions. "  With  the  voice  of  joy  and  praise  "  we  should  "  keep  holyday  "  (Ps.  xlii.
4).  With  rejoicing  hearts,  full  of  the  joy  of  thankfulness  and  hope,  we  should  sit
down  to  the  table  of  the  Lord.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  and  again  I  say,
Rejoice  "  (Phil.  iv.  4).  Joy,  one  of  the  "  fruits  of  the  Spirit,"  is  commended  to  us
with  a  fulness  and  frequency  in  the  word  of  God  which  may  well  make  us  ask  our-
selves whether  we  are  not  negligent  in  this  matter.  Joy  in  Christ  Jesus  is  a  grace
(1)  which  we  are  repeatedly  summoned  to  show ;  (2)  which  makes  us  resemble  him
as  he  is,  crowned  with  glory  and  joy  ;  (3)  desirable  for  its  own  sake,  as  obviously,
intrinsically  better  than  either  sorrow  or  apathy ;  (4)  which  is  a  sign  and  source  of
spiritual  strength.  "The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength  "  (ver.  10).  It  is  so,  for  it
is  both  the  sign  and  the  source  of  it.  1.  It  is  the  utterance  of  our  spiritual  nature ;
not  when  it  is  weak  through  .-in,  but  when  made  whole  through  the  power  of  Christ,
and  when  the  "power  of  Christ"  most  rests  upon  us.  2.  It  is  an  incentive  and
encouragement  to  ourselves  to  proceed  in  the  path  of  heavenly  wisdom.  The  Christian
man  of  downcast  spirit  and  dreary  views  must  he  under  a  constant  temptation  to
leave  the  path  ;  but  he  who  finds  not  only  rest  and  peace  in  Christ,  but  also  "joys  in
God,"  and  delights  himself  in  the  service  of  his  Saviour,  has  the  strongest  inducement
to  walk  on  in  the  way  of  life.  3.  It  is  the  means  of  usefulness  to  others.  They
who  are  "  in  Christ "  would  be  "  strong  in  the  Lord,"  and  they  would  be  strong  in
him  that  they  may  be  strong  for  him,  extending  his  kingdom,  and  winning  souls  to
his  side.  But  how  become  thus  strong  for  him?  By  the  simple,  natural  exhibition
of  a  joyous  spirit  in  all  spheres  and  relationships ;  by  constraining  the  wife,  the
husband,  the  children,  the  servants,  the  fellow-workmen,  &c.,  to  feel  that  the  know-
ledge of  God  as  a  heavenly  Father  reconciled  in  Christ  Jesu  ^, — the  trust,  the  love,  the
hope  which  are  in  him, — that  this  does  gladden  the  spirit  and  brighten  the  hfe  as
nothing  else  can.  By  so  doing  we  shall  be  strong  for  Christ.  The  joy  of  the  Lord
will  prove  to  be  our  strength.

III.  That  stkonq  bblioious  feeling  finds  an  admiraslb  vsnt  in  FaAcricii*


tH.  VIII.  13—18.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


89


KINDNESS.  "Go  your  way,"  &o.  (vers.  10,  12).  1.  A  right  channel  it  finds  in
"  eating  and  drinking  fat  and  sweet  things,"  so  that  this  be  characterised  by  (1)
moderation,  self-restraint,  and  (2)  thankfulness— the  recognition  of  the  hand  of  the
great  Giver  of  all  good.  But,  2.  A  better  channel  in  "  sending  portions  to  them  for
whom  nothing  is  prepared"  (ver.  10).  Better  far  to  feel  that  we  are  loading
another's  table  with  sweet  things  where  they  are  seldom  found  than  to  be  helping
P<ir8elves  to  the  most  delicious  morsels  from  our  own ;  no  source  of  happiness  at
once  80  sure  and  so  pure  as  in  being  like  the  bountiful  Father,  and  opening  the  hand
to  aatisfy  the  wants  of  those  who  are  in  need. — 0.

EXPOSITION.


Ver.  18. — ^And  on  the  second  day  were
gathered  together  the  chief  of  the  fathers.
At  times  it  is  true  that  "  increase  of  appetite
doth  grow  by  what  it  feeds  .on."  Once  let
the  sweetness  of  the  Divine  word  be  tasted
and  appreciated,  and  there  springs  up  in  the
heart  instantly  a  desire  for  more — a  wish  to
continue  in  the  study — a  feeling  like  that  of
the  Psalmist  when  he  said,  "Lord,  what
love  have  I  unto  thy  law :  all  the  day  long
is  my  study  in  it"  (Ps.  cxix.  97).  The
Jews,  taught  by  Ezra  in  the  law  of  God  on
the  first  day  of  the  month,  return  to  him  on
the  second,  desirous  of  hearing  more,  hun-
gering and  thirsting  after  the  word  of  life,
of  which  they  have  felt  the  power  and  the
excellency.  To  understand.  Rather,  "to
consider,"  as  in  Ps.  xli.  1.

Ver.  14.— And  they  found  written.  The
practice  of  "dwelling  in  booths,"  com-
manded in  Lev.  xxiii.  42,  had  fallen  into
disuse,  probably  during  the  captivity,  and
•hough  the  feast  itself  had  been  revived  by
Zerubbabel  (E2Ta  iii.  4),  yet  this  feature  of
it,  from  which  it  derived  its  name,  had  re-
mained in  abeyance.  In  the  feast  of  the
seventh  month.  Though  the  "  feast  of
trumpets"  was  also  a  feast  of  the  seventh
month,  that  of  tabernacles  was  "  theieaat,"
being  one  of  those  which  all  Israelites  not
reasonably  hindered  were  bound  to  attend
(Exod.  xxiii.  14 — 17 ;  Dent.  xvi.  16),  and
which  was  placed  on  a  par  with  the  Passover
and  Pentecost.

Ver.  15.— And  that  they  should  publish.
See  Lev.  xxiii.  4.  Saying,  Go  forth,  &c.
These  words  are  not  found  In  any  existing
Scripture,  and  some  corruption  of  the  pre-
sent text  may  therefore  be  suspected.  The
Septuagint  interposes,  between  "Jerusalem"
and  "Go  forth,"  the  words  "AndEsdras
said,"  which  would  remove  the  difficulty ;
but  it  is  difficult  to  understand  how  Ezra's
name  should  haVe  fallen  out.  Perhaps
Houbigant  is  right  in  his  suggestion  of  an
fcinendation,  by  which  the  verse  would  run
thus:  —  "And  when  they  heard  it,  they
proclaimed  in  all  their  cities,  and  in  Jem-
salem,  saying.  Go  forth,"  &c  Into  the
mountain.  /.  e.  the  neighbouring  moun-
tain, the  Mount  of  Olives.    Fine  branches.


Rather  "oleaster  branches."  Branches  of
thick  trees.  The  same  expression  is  used  in
Lev.  xxiii.  40,  the  meaning  in  each  place
being  uncertain.  Perhaps  trees  with  thick,
viscous  leaves  are  intended.  It  is  remark-
able that  two  of  the  trees  commanded  in
Leviticus  are  omitted,  viz.,  the  hadar  and
the  "willow  of  the  brook,"  while  three  not
mentioned  in  Leviticus — the  olive,  oleaster,
and  myrtle — are  added.

Ver.  16. —The  flat  roofs  of  Oriental
houses,  and  the  court  round  which  they
were  commonly  built,  furnished  convenient
sites  for  the  booths,  and  would  be  preferred
by  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem.  The  in-
comers from  the  country  districts  (ver,  15)
would  have  to  occupy  the  open  places  or
"squares"  of  the  city,  and  the  temple
courts,  which  would  accommodate  large
numbers.  On  the  street  of  the  water  gate
see  the  comment  on  ver.  1.  The  street  of
the  gate  of  Ephralm  was  probably  a  similar
square,  inside  the  great  northern  gateway.

Ver.  17.  —  Jeshua  the  son  of  Nun.
" Jeshua"  and  "Joshua"  are  two  modes  of
contracting  the  full  name  of  Jehoshua,  the
latter  prevalent  in  early,  the  foi-mer  in  later
times.  The  Grecised  form  of  Jeshua  was
"Jesus"  (see  Acts  vii.  45;  Heb.  iv.  8).
When  it  is  said  that  since  the  days  of
Jeshua  had  not  the  children  of  Israel  done
80,  we  must  understand,  not  that  there  had
been  no  celebration  of  the  feast  of  taber-
nacles since  that  time — not  even  that  there
had  been  no  celebration  accompanied  by
"dwelling  in  booths,"  but  only  that  there
had  been  no  such  joyous  and  general  cele-
bration of  the  festival  (comp.  what  is  said
in  2  Kings  xxiiL  22  and  2  Chron.  xxxv.  18
of  the  passover  kept  in  Josiah's  eighteenth
year).  It  is  the  very  great  gladness  that
IS  especially  insisted  upon.

Ver.  18.— Also  day  by  day  ....  lie  read
in  the  book  of  the  law.  Ezra  must  be
intended  in  the  form  "he  read,"  though
there  has  been  no  mention  of  him  since
verse  13.  The  continuous  and  systematic
reading  seems  to  imply  that  the  year  was  a
Sabbatical  one,  and  that  the  rehearsal  com-
manded in  Deut.  xxxi.  10 — 13  now  took  place.
The  observance  was  perhaps  a  new  thuig  to


90


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.


[oh.  VIII.  13— la


the  newly-formed  commimity,  and  is  there-
fore recorded  with  so  much  emphasis.  They
kept  the  feast  seven  days.  See  Lev.  xxiii.
34 ;  Num.  xxix.  12—34 ;  Deut.  xvi.  13.
On  the  eighth  day  was  a  solemn  assembly,
acconding  to  the  manner.  Such  a  mode  of
solemnising  the  octave  was  commanded  in


Lev.  xxiiL  36  and  Num.  xxix.  35.  By
"according  to  the  manner"  seems  to  bo
meant  "according  to  the  regularly  estab-
li.shed  custom  " — one  proof  out  of  many  that
the  feast  had  been  constantly  observed,
though  not  perhaps  with  all  the  proper
ceremonies  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  17).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  18 — 18. — An  influential  conr/regation.  Accoimt  of  a  smaller  gathering  than
that  recorded  in  the  iirst  part  of  the  chapter,  but  likely  from  its  character  to  be
equally  or  more  fruitful  of  good.

I.  The  meeting  convened  (ver.  13).  1.  The  congregation.  Select ;  consisting
of  the  principal  heads  of  houses,  priests,  and  Levitea.  2.  Their  design.  To  study
the  law  with  a  view  to  the  better  understanding  of  it.  3.  Their  teacher.  The  ablest
doctor  of  the  day.

II.  The  discovery  made  (vers.  14,  15).  The  law  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.
Perhaps,  although  it  had  been  kept  on  the  first  return  from  Babylon,  it  had  beer,
omitted  in  recent  troublous  times,  or  some  important  particulars  had  been  neglected
for  want  of  instruction  in  the  law.  Now  they  come  face  to  face  with  the  original
precepts.

III.  The  obedience  rendered  (vers.  16 — 18).  The  chiefs  doubtless  proclaim  the
law  to  the  people  (ver.  15),  and  these  obey  it.  So  the  feast  was  kept— -1.  By  each
and  all.  2.  With  exactness.  Such  as  had  not  been  known  since  the  days  of  Joshua.
8.  With  gladness.  4.  With  daily  reading  of  the  book  of  the  law.  It  was  thus  a
very  pleasant  and  profitable  week.

Lessons  : — 1.  Tlie  value  of  well-instructed  rulers  and  ministers  of  religion.  Espe-
cially of  such  as  are  well  instructed  in  Holy  Scripture.  An  ignorant  clergy  is  one  of
the  greatest  evils,  and  scarcely  less  a  clergy  learned  in  everything  but  the  Bible,  the
teaching  of  whose  truths  is  their  main  business.  "  They  be  blind  leaders  of  the
blind.  And  if  the  blind  lead  the  blind,  both  shall  fall  into  the  ditch."  But  it  is  an
omen  of  good  when  pastors  and  teachers  are  diligent  students  of  the  word,  availing
themselves  of  the  assistance  of  the  ablest  scholars  of  the  time,  and  thus  becoming
"  instructed  unto  the  kingdom  of  heaven,"  "  able  to  teach  others  also."  2.  The  careful
student  of  God's  word  is  rewarded  by  important  discoveries.  He  will  find  truths,
precepts,  and  promises  which  are  new  to  him,  or  come  with  all  the  freshness  and
force  of  a  new  revelation,  to  correct  his  beliefs  or  his  conduct,  or  to  give  him  new
comfort  and  joy.  The  Bible  is  an  inexhaustible  mine  of  eternal  treasures.  It  will
repay  the  constant  study  of  a  life.  3.  A  condition  of  external  peace  and  settlement
is  eminently  favourable  to  the  study  and  general  practice  of  God's  law.  These  Jews
could  turn  their  serious  attention  to  the  instructions  and  ordinances  of  their  law  now
that  they  were  safe  from  the  assaults  of  their  enemies.  We  cannot  be  too  thankful
in  this  view  for  the  quiet  times  we  epjoy,  nor  too  earnest  in  promoting  to  the  utmost
of  our  power  the  peace  and  mutual  good  will  of  all  nations.  4.  God  is  to  be
worshipped  and  his  ordinances  observed  according  to  his  own  directions.  5.  The
celebration  of  Divine  ordinances  promotes,  and  should  be  with,  gladness.  The  glad-
ness of  gratitude  fur  Divine  favours,  the  joy  of  a  gooil  conscience  which  obedience
brings,  the  joy  of  mutual  love  and'  fellowship,  the  joy  of  hope,  &c.  Happy  the
people  who  thus  unite  in  the  service  of  God.  ,


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  13 — 18. — Keejnngthe  feast.  "On  the  second  day,"  the  day  after  the  great
and  affecting  assembly  of  all  the  citizens,  came  together  a  representative  company,
"  the  chief  of  the  fathers  of  all  the  people  "  (ver.  13),  beside  the  priests  and  Levites,
to  "  understand ''  or  consider  the  law,  that  they  might  encourage  all  the  children  of
Israel  to  a  regular  and  faithful  observance  of  it.     This  gathering  led  at  once  to —

I,  An  act  of  revived  and  bbjoicinq  obedience.   For  "  they  found  written  in  the  law


Ob.  VIII.  1^-18.]  THB  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAfl.  H

.  .  that  the  children  of  Israel  should  dwell  in  booths  in  the  feast  of  the  seventh  month  "
(ver.  14).  They  came  upon  the  commandment  recorded  in  Levit.  xxiii.,  enjoining  the
observance  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles  or  booths.  This  must  have  fallen  partially,  if
not  wholly,  into  disuse,  though  we  know  from  Ezra  iii.  4  that  this  feast  was  cele-
brated as  late  as  the  time  of  ZerubbabeL  Now,  however,  under  the  impulse  of
Nehemiah's  and  Ezra's  faithful  ministry,  and  in  the  glow  of  a  religious  revival,  they
returned  to  a  complete  and  hearty  observance  of  the  ancient  festival  The  law
required  that  the  sacred  feasts  should  be  "  proclaimed  "  (Levit.  xxiii.  4).  Giving  a
broad  sense  to  the  term,  they  took  pains  to  proclaim  it  with  all  particularity.  "  In
all  their  cities,  and  in  Jerusalem,  saying.  Go  forth  unto  the  mount,"  &c.  (ver.  15).
And  there  was  a  general  and  hearty  response.  "  The  people  went  forth,  and  brought
them,  and  made  themselves  booths"  (ver.  16)  ;  ''all  the  congregation  of  them  that
were  come  again  out  of  the  captivity  made  booths,  and  sat  under  them  "  (ver.  17).
Moses  commanded  that  once  in  seven  years  the  law  should  be  read  "  before  all  Israel
in  their  hearing"  (Deut.  xxxi.  11).  Whether  this  was  the  seventh  year  or  not,  the
injunction  of  Moses  was  obeyed.  They  were  in  the  mood  to  do  all — more  rather  than
less — that  was  enjoined,  and  "  day  by  day,  from  the  first  day  unto  the  last  day,  he
(Ezra)  read  in  the  book  of  the  law  of  God  "  (ver.  18).  There  had  been  no  such
celebration  of  the  feast  since  the  days  of  Jeshua  (ver.  17),  "  and  there  was  very
great  gladness."  Now  we  learn  from  this  that — 1.  It  is  possible  for  a  nation  (or  a
Church)  with  the  Bible  in  its  keeping  to  allow  plain  duties  to  fall  into  disregard.
2.  That  thia  negligence  is  due  to  a  blameworthy  inattention  to  the  word  of  God.  The
Bible  IB  too  much  on  the  shelf,  too  little  in  the  hand.  3.  That  a  return  to  obedience,
especially  to  a  hearty  and  general  (unanimous)  obedience,  is  attended  with  great
gladness  of  heart.  (1)  Devout  study,  (2)  earnest  obedience,  (3)  reverent  joy — ^these
are  successive  steps  in  a  true  revival.

II.  A  COMMEMORATIVE  SERjriCB.  The  feast  of  tabernacles  was  essentially  commemor-
ative. "  That  your  generation  may  know  that  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to
dwell  in  booths  when  I  brought  them  out,"  &o.  (Levit.  xxiii.  43).  It  was  well  indeed
that  the  children  of  the  captivity  should  have  their  attention  called  to  past  days  of
exile.  It  would  do  them  good,  as  it  did  their  fathers,  to  look  back  and  think  what
God  had  done  unto  them  and /or  them.  How  he  had  humbled  them,  and  how  he  had
redeemed  them.  Thus  they  would  think  of  two  things — (1)  past  sorrows,  not  to  bo
renewed,  froi.i  which  God  had  graciously  delivered  them  ;  and  (2)  past  sins,  never
to  be  repeated,  which  God  had  mercifully  forgiven  them.  One  thought  would  lead
to  thankfulness,  and  the  other  to  consecration ;  both  to  sacred  joy.  The  recalling
by  our  minds  of  past  evils  out  of  which  God  has  led  us,  and  past  errors  and  wrong-
doings which  he  has  blotted  out,  will  confirm  our  hearts  in  their  gratitude  and
devotion.

III.  An  opportunity  of  instruction  in  sacred  things.  Whether  the  Jews  felt
bound  to  observe  Deut.  xxxi.  10,  or  whether  the  reading  of  the  law  from  day  to  day
was  optional  on  their  part  (the  latter  is  the  more  probable),  we  have  them  associating
instruction  with  ceremonial  observance.  We  should  turn  all  occasions  into  oppor-
tunities of  "inquiring  the  way  of  the  Lord  more  perfectly,"  of  becoming  "JiUed
with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in  all  wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding  .  .  .
increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God  "  (Col.  i.  9, 10). — C.

Vers.  13 — 18. — Restoration  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles  in  its  plenitude.    I.  A

NOTABLE  INSTANCE  OP  NEGLECT.  The  commandment  was  plainly  wntten,  but  "since
the  days  of  Jeshua  the  son  of  Nun  the  children  of  Israel  had  not  done  so."  How  much
they  lost  I — gladness,  fellowship,  help  to  their  remembrance  of  Divine  mercy,  food
of  faith.  We  should  follow  the  directions  of  God's  book  without  question.  Much
yet  to  break  forth  from  the  written  pages.

II.  An  illustration  of  tbe  dependence  of  God's  people  on  one  another.  The
council  of  "  fathers,  priests,  Levites,  and  Ezra  the  scribe  gathered  together  to  under-
stand the  words  of  the  law."  All  cannot  pursue  the  same  inquiries.  The  progress
of  the  Church  is  greatly  advanced  by  the  consecration  of  some  to  the  study  of  the
Scriptures.  All  councils  and  conferences  should  be  held  with  a  practical  end  in  view,
to  understand  in  order  to  reformation  of  life  and  manners.    Much  of  the  deliberation


n


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  IX.  1— S8.


of  learned  men  has  failed  of  God's  blessing  because  it  has  been  merely  speculative  or
controversial.  We  can  scarcely  doubt  that  Ezra  was  the  leading  spirit.  One  eminent
man  of  God  can  wonderfully  animate  and  direct  his  Church  in  great  crises.  The  true
leader  will  never  despise  counsel,  but  be  on\y  primus  inter  pares.

III.   A  TYPICAL  BEPRESENTATION  OF  THE  BELIEVING  LIFE  OF  God's  PEOPLE.      Tho

festival  in  the  green  booths  fetched  from  the  mount.  1.  Grateful  memory  and
pilgrim  expectation.  2.  Free  fellowship  and  happy  intercourse,  with  Jerusalem  as
the  centre.  Church  life  ought  to  be  real  root  of  all  other  life.  We  go  from  our  own
cities  to  Jerusalem,  and  return  with  the  sanctity  of  the  feast,  to  be  distributed  over  all
the  common  ways  and  facts  of  an  every-day  ejdstence.  3.  Consecrated  seasons,
festival  times,  needed  in  all  service  of  God.  For  the  heart  must  be  lifted  up  that
the  hands  may  be  kept  busy.  Function  of  praise  in  the  life.  They  of  the  captivity
do  well  to  recognise  one  another  in  their  freedom.  God  invites  us  to  turn  nature  into
joy.  Consecrate  the  very  trees  to  him.  Rejoice  under  the  open  heaven  in  his  loving-
kindness.  Connect  his  holy  mount  with  the  simple  tent  that  covers  our  head.  He
waits  not  for  splendid  ritual  or  temple,  but  delights  in  the  homely  praise  of  those  who
■piead  the  beauty  of  his  name  over  all  the  earth. — B.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IX.


Solemn  fast  kept,  with  confession
of  sins  ;  and  voluntakt  covenant  with

God   ENTERED   INTO    BY   THE   PEOPLE,   AND
SFxALED  TO  BY  THE  PKINOES,  PRIESTS,  AND

Lbyitbs  (ch.  ix.).  When  the  law  was  first
read  to  them  on  the  opening  day  of  the
seventh  month,  the  people  had  shown  strong
feelings  of  compunction,  an  earnest  desire
to  letum  to  God  by  the  thorny  way  of  re-
pentance. In  checking  this  feeling  on  that
particular  day,  Ezra  and  Nehemiah  had  con-
formed to  prevalent  ideas  on  the  subject  of
festival  observance,  but  had  not  intended
to  thwart  the  popular  desire  for  some  dis-
tinct penitential  action,  some  marked  public
nroceedings,  which  should  at  once  furnish  a
vent  to  pent-up  feeling,  and  serve  as  a  start-
ing point  from  which  individuals,  or  even
the  nation,  might  enter  upon  a  new  career.
It  is  a  very  curious  circumstance,  and  one  not
easy  of  explanation,  that  they  did  not  fix  on
the  10th  of  the  month— the  "great  day  of
atonement  "—as  the  most  appropriate  day  of
nationalhumUiation  and  of  general  self-abase-
ment. The  proximity  of  that  occasion  would
naturally  and  almost  necessarily  suggest  it
to  them,  and  nothing  could  well  exceed  its
intrinsic  fitness.  On  that  day,  and  that  day
only  in  the  whole  of  the  year,  every  soul  was
to  afflict  itself,  and  whatsoever  soul  did  not
do  so  was  to  be  cut  off  and  destroyed  from
among  the  people  (Levit  xxiii  27—29).  It
tan  scarcely  be  that  the  observance  of  the


day  had  ceased.  Perhaps  the  time  for  pre-
paration which  the  selection  of  this  "  feast
of  sorrow "  would  have  allowed  seemed  too
short.  Perhaps  it  was  thought  undesirable
to  select  for 'an  extraordinary  national  act  of
self-humiliation  a  day  which  already  pos-
sessed its  own  routine,  and  possibly  its  own
ritual,  of  repentance.  In  any  case,  the  fact
was  that  the  civil  and  ecclesiastical  authori-
ties came  to  the  determination  not  to  make
any  special  use  of  the  regular  annual  fast
day,  but  to  leave  the  observance  of  that
occasion  to  the  people's  natural  bent,  and
appoint  a  different  day — one  which  had  no
traditional  customs  attached  to  it — ^for  the
solemn  act  of  penitence  on  which  the  heart
of  the  nation  was  set  As  the  feast  of  taber-
nacles lasted  from  the  IBth  of  Tisri  to  the
22nd,  it  was  necessary  either  to  select  a  day
before  that  holy  week  or  after  it  A  day
between  the  10th  and  the  IBth  would  have
followed  too  close  upon  the  day  of  atone-
ment ;  a  day,  therefore,  was  appointed  after
the  festival  was  over.  Not,  however,  the
very  next  day — the  transition  from  joy  to
sorrow  would  in  that  case  have  been  too
abrupt— but  the  next  day  but  one— the  24th
(ch.  ix.  1).  Then,  the  multitude  that  had
come  up  for  the  feast  being  still  present,  a
great  fast  was  kept — sackcloth  was  worn,
dust  was  sprinkled  on  the  head ;  for  half  the
day  the  vast  assembly  remained  in  the  great
court  of  the  temple,  listening  to  the  words
of  the  law  for  three  hoars,  and  for  three
honrs  confessing  their  sins  (ver.  S) ;  after


CH.  ix.  1—38.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


93


this  the  Leyites  took  the  word,  and,  in  the
name  of  the  whole  people,  blessed  God,
acknowledged  hia  gracious  providence  and
special  goodness  towards  Israel  throughout
the  entire  course  of  their  history  (vers.  6 —
25),  confessed  their  sins  and  the  sins  of
their  fathers  (vers.  26 — 35),  admitted  tbs
justice  of  their  present  low  estate  (vers.  36,
37),  and  finally  brought  forward  a  written
bond  or  covenant,  whereto  they  invited  those
present  to  set  their  seals  (ver.  38),  pledging
them  to  "  walk  in  God's  law,  and  observe  and
do  all  his  commandments,"  and  to  make
a  perpetual  provision  for  the  priests  and  for
the  temple  service  (ch.  x.  29—39).  The
words  of  the  formnla  were,  no  doubt,  care-
fully prepared  beforehand,  and  show  traces
of  the  influence  of  Ezra,  to  whose  prayer  (Ezra
Ix.  6 — 16)  they  bear  a  great  resemblance.
W«  may  perhaps  assume  that  they  were
his  composition,  and  that,  though  he  is  not
mentioned,  he  was  present,  directing  all  the
proceedings,  instructing  and  animating  the
Levites,  and  exercising  an  influence  for  good
over  all  grades  of  the  people.  (The  present
chapter  is  closely  united  with  that  which
follows,  and  must  be  studied  in  connection
with  it.)

Yei.  1. — With  laokolothes,  and  earth
npon  them.  On  the  use  of  sackcloth  in
mourning  see  Gen.  zzxvil  34 ;  2  Sam.  iil
31 ;  xxi.  10  ;  1  Kings  xxl  27,  &c  Putting
earth  or  dust  on  the  liead  was  less  common  ;
but  mention  of  it  is  made  in  1  Sam.  iv.  12  ;
2  Sam.  i  2  ;  and  Job  ii  12.

Ver.  2. — The  seed  of  Israel  separated
themselves  fi:om  all  strangers.  Compare
ch.  X.  28,  by  which  it  appears  that  the
"strangers"  are  "the  people  of  the  lands,"
or  neighbouring  heathen,  of  whom  there
were  at  all  times  considerable  numbers  in
Jerusalem  (comp.  ch.  xiiL  16).  It  was  not
fitting  that  these  aliens  should  take  part  in
a  ceremony  of  which  the  main  object  was
that  the  special  people  of  God  should  renew
their  covenant  with  him.  Stood  and  con-
fessed. Attitude  is  perhaps  scarcely  intended
here,  since  the  Jews  confessed  their  sins
kneeling  (Ezra  ix.  6),  or  prostrate  {ibid.  ch.
X.  1).  Hence  we  hear  in  the  next  verse
that  they  "stood  up,"  or  "rose  up"  {con-
tarrexenmi,  Vulg.).

Ver.  3. — ^In  their  place.  See  above,  ch.
viii.  7.  The  people  and  the  ministers  had
their  appointed  'places  "  in  every  gathering
of  a  religious  character.  The  former  now
"  stood  up  "  in  their  proper  place,  and  read,
i  A  "engaged  in  the  reading  of  the  law;"


not,  however,  aa  actual  readers,  but  as
listeners.  The  readers  would  be  the  Levites
(see  ch.  viii.  7,  8).  One  fourth  part  of  the
day.  The  day  and  the  night  were  alike
divided  by  the  Jews  into  four  parts,  each
of  three  hours  duration.  The  nocturnal
divisions  are  frequently  alluded  to  in  tho
New  Testament  (Mark  xiiL  35  ;  John  xviii
28,  &o.).  Worshipped.  Literally,  "bowed
themselves  down,"  or  "prostrated  them-
selves."

Ver.  i. — Upon  the  stairs,  of  the  levites.
Rather,  "upon  the  ^faybrm  of  the  Levites,"
the  same  probably  as  the  "pulpit"  of  ch.
viii.  4.  Bani  Rather,  "  Binnui  "  (see  ch.  i.
9  ;  xii.  8),  the  representative  of  the  "  sons  of
Henadad."  Jeshua,  Binnui,  and  Kadmiel
are  the  three  principal  families  of  the  Levites
(comp.  Ezra  ii.  40  ;  iil  9  ;  Neh.  iii  24  ;
viii.  7,  &c.).  Sherebiah  was  the  head  of  a
fiimily  which  returned  with  Ezra  (Ezra  viii
18).  Chenani  is  probably  the  "  Hanan  "  of
chs.  viiL  7,  and  x.  10.

Ver.  5.  —  Stand  up.  The  people  had
prostrated  themselves  (see  the  comment  on
ver.  3)  for  confession  and  prayer;  they
are  now  bidden  to  "stand  up"  for  praise.
Compare  the  practice  of  the  Christian
Church.  Blessed  be.  Literally,  "  let  them
bless."  The  Levites  turn  their  address,
after  its  opening  clause,  from  the  people  to
Jehovah  himself,  who  henceforth  becomes
the  subject  of  it.  Thy  glorious  name.  The
high  honour  due  to  the  "name"  of  God  is
taught  by  the  sacred  writers  with  one  uni-
form voice  from  Moses  (Exod.  xx.  7)  to  the
last  surviving  apostle  (Rev.  xv.  4).  The
"glorious  name"  of  God  is  an  expression
which  occurs  four  times  in  our  version  of
the  Old  Testament ;  but  the  exact  phrase
here  used  is  found  only  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  19.

Ver.  6. — Thou  art  Lord  alone.  Compare
Ps.  Ixxxvi.  10  and  Isa.  xxvii.  16.  In  the
latter  passage  the  phrase  used  is  almost
identicaL  The  heaven  of  heavens.  Com-
pare Dent.  X.  14  ;  1  Kings  viii.  27 ;  Ps.
cxlviii.  4.  The  expression  has  been  explained
as — 1.  The  very  highest  heaven ;  2.  The
heavens  in  all  their  infinity.  The  lattei
sense  best  suits  the  various  passages  whern
the  phrase  occurs.  With  all  their  host.
The  "host  of  heaven"  has  been  taken  to
mean  —  1.  The  angels  ;  2.  The  stars.  By
the  immediate  context  the  stars  would  seem
to  be  here  intended  ;  but  the  last  clause  of
the  verse  is  more  properly  applicable  to  the
angels.  Still,  it  must  be  remembered  that,
according  to  H.  S.  (Ps.  cxlviiL  3),  even  the
stars  "praise"  God.  Thou  preservest  them
all.  The  preservation  of  all  created  things
by  him  who  called  them  into  being  is  scarcely
taught  in  the  Old  Testament  elsewhere  than
in  this  passage.  The  Psalmist  says  in  one
place,  "Thou  preservest  man  and  beut"


94


The  SOOfe  OF  i^EIIEMIAfl.


fcH.  IX.  1—38.


(Ps.  xixvi.  6);  but  this  acknowledgment
falls  very  far  slwrt  of  the  universality  of  the
present  passage.  Man  naturally,  but  fool-
islily,  fancies  that  things  once  created  are
able  to  preserve  themselves.  Exact  thought
sees,  that  if  all  things  have  been  produced
from,  nothing,  it  requires  precisely  the  same
power  to  sustain  as  onginally  to  produce
them.  Hence  "preservation"  haa  been
c.illed  "a  continual  creation."

Vera.  7 — 31. —  Compare  with  this  long
historical  reaum^  the  still  longer  ones  in  Ps.
Ixxviii.  6 — 72  and  Acta  viL  2—47.  God's
dealings  with  his  people  furnished  a  moral
lesson  of  extraordinary  force,  and  moral
teachers,  naturally,  made  frequent  reference
to  them.  But  it  is  not  often  that  we  have
so  complete  and  elaborate  a  recapitulation  as
the  present,  which,  beginning  with  the  call
of  Abraham,  brings  the  history  down  to  the
time  of  the  Persian  servitude.  God's  good-
ness and  his  people's  ingratitude  form  the
burthen  of  the  whole.

Ver.  8.— Canaanites,  &c.  The  nations
driven  out  were  actually  «CTen  (Deut.  vii.  1),
but  it  is  a  common  figure  of  speech  to  put
the  part  for  the  whole.  In  the  present
enumeration  the  Hivites  are  omitted.  East
performed  thy  words.  Though  for  a  time
remnants  of  the  accursed  nations  were  left  in
the  land,  "to  prove  Israel"  (Judges  iii.  1),
yet  ultimately  all  were  either  driven  out  or
reduced  to  the  condition  of  slaves  (see  the
comment  on  Ezra  ii.  55).

Ver.  10.  —  They  dealt  proudly.  The
"  proud  dealing"  of  the  Egyptians  is  spoken
of  in  Exod.  xviii.  11.  That  God  "got  him-
self a  name  "  by  the  signs  and  wonders  shown
ill  Egypt  is  often  declared  (see  Exod.  iz.  16  ;
xiv.  17;  XV.  14—16,  &c.).

Ver.  11.— As  a  stone.  This  phrase  is
taken  from  the  "  song  of  Moses  "  (Exod.  xy.
5).  The  composer  of  the  address  has  also  in
his  mind  Exod.  xv.  10.  The  epithet  given
to  the  "waters"  is  not,  however,  the  same,
as  might  appear  from  the  A.V.

Ver.  13.— Bight  judgments,  true  laws,
good  statutes,  &c,  are  expressions  which
imply  an  immutable  morality,  a  standard  of
right  and  wrong  antecedent  to  command  or
precept,  which  standard  is  doubtless  the
eternal  goodness  of  God  himself.  The  repe-
tition of  the  epithets  here  shows  the  com-
poser of  the  form  to  be  penetrated  with  the
spirit  of  admiration  for  God's  commandments
which  breathes  so  remarkably  through  the
whole  of  Ps.  cxix.

Ver.  14. — Madest  known  unto  them  thy
holy  sabbath.  The  anterior  existence  of  the
sabbath  to  the  law  is  here  implied,  which
accords  with  Gen.  ii.  2,  3,  and  Exod.  xx.  11.
Precepts,  statutes,  and  laws.  Bather  a  peri-

Shrasisfor  "the  law"  generally,  than  a  logical
ivinon  of  the  law  iuto  distinct  parti.


Ver.  15. — Bread  from  heaven.  The
manna  had  been  already  called  the  "bread
of  heaven"  (Ps.  cv.  40)  and  the  "com  of
heaven"  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  24)  by  the  national
psalmists.  The  composer  of  this  prayer
now  for  the  first  time  calls  it  "  bread /ro»i
heaven  " — a  phrase  consecrated  to  Christians
by  its  employment  in  John  vi  (vers.  32,  61,
68).

Ver.  16. — They  and  our  fathers.  Bather,
"they,  our  fathers."  The  vau  is  used
exegetically.  Dealt  proudly.  /.  e.  "acted
insolently."  Compare  Deut.  L  43,  where
the  same  verb  is  translated  "  were  presump-
tuous'' {marg.).  Hardened  their  necks.
So  in  2  Kings  xvii.  14.

Ver.  17. — In  their  rebellion.  Several
MSS.  have  b'Mitzraim  for  Vmirydm,  which
would  give  the  sense  "appointed  a  captain
to  return  to  their  bondage  in  Egypt.'  So
the  Septuagint.  Appointed  a  captain.  The
reference  is  to  Num.  xiv.  4,  where  we  are
told  that  the  Israelites  "  said  one  to  another,
Let  us  make  a  captain,  and  let  us  returi
into  Egypt."  Tlie  Levites  speak  as  if  tht
appointment  had  been  made,  perhaps  re-
garding the  intention  as  morally  equivalent
to  the  act  A  God  ready  to  pardon.  Literally,
"a  God  of  pardons."  The  word  used  is  a
rare  one,  occurring  only  in  Dan.  ix.  9  and
Ps.  cxxx.  4,  besides  the  present  passage.
Gracious  and  merciful,  slow  to  anger,  and
of  great  kindness.  This  is  quoted  from
Joel  ii  13,  which  is  perhaps  a  conscious
reproduction  of  Jonah  iv.  2.

Ver.  18. — Great  provocations.  Or  "great
blasphemies,"  as  the  same  word  is  rendered
in  Ezek.  xxxv.  12.

Ver.  20. — Thou  gavest  them  also  thy
good  Spirit  to  instruct  them.  The  "good
Spirit"  of  God  is  mentioned  in  Ps.  cxliii.
10  ;  and  the  feet  of  God's  "instructing  and
teaching"  men  in  Ps.  xxxii.  8.  But  in-
struction by  God's  Spirit  is  nowhere  else
distinctly  mentioned  in  the  Old  Testament.

Ver.  22. — Thou  didst  divide  them  into
comers.  I.e.  " didst  plant  them  in  every
comer  of  the  Holy  Land," — "gave  them  to
possess  the  whole  of  it," — ultimately,  that
IS,  not  at  first  (see  the  comment  on  ver.  8).
The  land  of  Sihon,  and  the  land  of  the
king  of  Heshbon.  The  Levites  must  have
known  that  Sihon  was  king  of  Heshbon,
and  (if  the  text  is  sound)  must  have  ex-
pressed themselves  as  they  did,  by  way  of
rhetorical  amplification ;  perhaps,  however,
the  vau  after  "Sihon"  is  the  mistake  of  a
copyist.

Ver.  23. — As  the  stars  of  heaven.  There
is  a  reference  here  to  the  promise  made  to
Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  6;  xxiL  17).  On  th«
great  multiplication  which  took  place  in
Egypt  see  Exod.  L  7,  12.

Ver.  24.  •—  The  Canaanitsi.     Sometimes


CB.  IT.  1—38.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


as  in  ver.  8,  the  Canaanites  are  spoken  of  as
one  of  the  nations  cast  out ;  sometimes  the
word  is  used  in  a  larger  sense,  and  includes
the  other  six  nations.  Here  we  have  the
wide  sense.

Ver.  25.— They  took  strong  cities.  As
Jericho,  Ai,  Libnah,  Lachish,  Hazor,  Hebron,
&o.  A  fat  land.  Compare  Num.  xiv.  7,  8  ;
Deut.  viii.  7—9  ;  2  Kings  xviii.  32.  Houses
full  of  all  goods.  See  Deut.  vi.  11.  Fruit
trees  in  abundance.  The  fruit  trees  of
Palestine  are,  besides  the  vine  and  the  olive,
the  fig  tree,  the  carob  or  locust  tree  {cera-
tonia  siligua),  the  quince,  the  apple,  the
almond,  the  walnut,  the  peach,  the  apricot,
the  mulberry,  the  sycamore  fig,  the  prickly
pear,  the  pomegranate,  and  the  orange.
Date-palms  also  were  anciently  abundant
in  the  valley  of  the  Jordan.  They  .  .  .
became  fat.  Compare  Deut.  xxxiL  15  and
Jer.  V.  28,  the  only  other  places  where  the
expression  here  used  occurs.  The  comparison
will  show  that  dispraise  is  intended — "they
grew  wanton  and  self-indulgent."  Delighted
themselves.  Rather,  "luxuriated"  ((rp4-
tptfaav,  LXX. ).

Ver.  26. — They  .  .  .  slew  thy  prophets.
Compare  Matt,  xxiii.  37 ;  Luke  xi.  47.
Jewish  tradition  states  that  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,
and  Ezekiel  were  murdered .  Many  prophets
were  slain  by  Jezebel,  with  Ahab's  sanction
(1  Kings  xviii.  4).  Zechariah,  the  son  of
Jehoiada,  was  put  to  death  by  Joash  (2
Chron.  xxiv.  22).

Ver.  27.^Thou  gavest  them  saviours.
E.  g.  Othniel  and  Ehud  (who  are  called
"saviours,"  Judges  iii.  9,  15),  Shamgar,
Gideon,  Jephthah,  Samson,  Saul,  David,
&c.  The  writer  seems  to  have  the  history
of  "Judges"  especially  in  his  mind  (see  the
next  verse).

Ver.  28.— After  they  had  rest.  See  Judj^es
iii.  11,  30  ;  V.  31  ;  viii.  28.

Ver.  29. — Withdrew  the  shoulder.  Com-
pare Hosea  iv.  16  ("Israel  slideth  back  as  a
backsliding  heifer")  and  Zech.  vii.  11.  The
metaphor  is  taken  from  the  action  of  a  beast
of  burthen  which,  when  required  to  draw,
shrinks  from  the  yoke  and  starts  back.

Ver.  30.^Many  years  didst  thou  forbear
them.  The  ten  tribes  for  260  years  from
the  revolt  of  Jeroboam,  the  remaining  two
tribes  for  135  years  longer.  Testifiedst
against  them  by  thy  Spirit  in  thy  prophets.
Compare  2  Kings  xvii.  13,  where  the  phrase
used  is  nearly  the  same,  and  see  also  2  Chron.
xxxvi.  15,  16.  There  was  a  continual  suc-
cession of  prophets  from  the  time  of  Solomon
to,  and  through,  the  captivity.  Besides
those  whose  wntings  have  come  down  to  us,
we  find  mention  of  Ahijah  the  Sliilonite,
Iddo  the  seer,  Shemaiah  the  prophet,  Hanani,
Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani,  Elijah,  Elisha,
Hicaiah  the  ion  of  Imlab,  Zechariah  the


son  of  Jehoiada,  Huldah,  and  (perhaps)
Hosai.  The  guilt  of  the  Jewish  people  was
enormously  increased  by  the  fact  that  they
would  not  give  ear  to  the  exhortations  con-
stantly addressed  to  them  by  the  messengers
of  God.  Therefore  they  were  delivered  into
the  hands  of  the  heathen,  or  people  of  the
lands.

Ver.  32.— Our  God,  the  great,  the  mighty,
and  the  terrible.  Compare  ch.  i.  5,  with
the  comment.  Who  keepest  covenant  and
mercy.  This  phrase,  which  occurs  also  in
ch.  i.  6,  has  apparently  been  derived  from
the  Psalmist's  words— "My  mercy  will  I
Aeep  for  him  for  evermore,  and  my  covenant
shall  stand  fast  with  him  "  (Fs.  Ixxxix.  28).
All  the  trouble.  Literally,  "the  weariness;''
but  the  word  is  clearly  used  here  for  "  suf-
fering" generally.  Since  the  time  of  the
kings  of  Assyria.  The  kings  of  Assyria,
in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word,  had  been
God's  original  instrument  for  punishing  his
rebellious  people.  A  king  not  mentioned  in
Holy  Scripture  tells  us  that  he  defeated
Ahab,  and  forced  Jehu  to  pay  him  tribute.
Another  (Pul)  took  tribute  from  Menahem
(2  Kings  XV.  19,  20).  A  third  (Tiglath-
Pileser)  carried  two  tribes  and  n  half  into
captivity  {ihid.  ver.  29 ;  1  Chron.  v.  26).
A  fourth  (Shalmaneser)  laid  siege  to  Samaria
(2  Kings  xvii.  5),  and  a  fifth  (Sargon)  took
it.  A  sixth  (Sennacherib)  took  all  the  fenced
cities  of  Judah  from  Hezekiali,  and  forced
him  to  buy  the  safety  of  Jerusalem  (ibid.
oh.  xviii.  13 — 16).  A  seventh  (Esar-haddon)
had  Manasseh  brought  as  a  prisoner  to
Babylon  (2  Chron.  xxxiii.  11).  Hence  Isaiah
calls  the  Assyrian  monarch  "the  rod  of
God's  anger  "  (Isa.  x.  5).

Ver.  34. — Thy  testimonies,  wherewith
thou  didst  testify  against  them.  /.  e.  the
testimony  borne  by  the  prophets  (see  ver.
80).

Ver.  36. — ^Ihey  hare  not  served  thee  in
their  kingdom.  There  is  1 1,  need  of  altering
the  reading  here.  "In  their  kingdom"^
means,  "while  they  had  a  kingdom  of  their
own,  and  were  not  subjects,  as  now,  to  a
foreign  power."  Thy  great  goodness.  See
above,  ver.  25.  The  large  and  fat  land.
Compare  Exod.  iiL  8.  Although  the  limits
of  Palestine  are  narrow,  yet  the  land  which
God  gave  to  his  people,  extending  as  it  did
from  the  Euphrates  to  the  river  of  Egypt
(Gen.  XV,  18),  might  well  be  termed  a  "large"
or  "broad"  land.

Ver.  38.  —We  are  servants  this  day.  /.  «.
we  have  now  no  kingdom,  we  are  slaves —
the  Persian  is  our  master.  As  we  would
not  be  God'i^  servants,  we  are  handed  over
to  him  (comp.  2  Chron.  xii.  8,  where  "  the
service  of  God "  and  "  the  service  of  the
kingdoms  of  the  countries  "  are  contrasted),

Ver.  87. — It  yieldeth  mnch  inereaa*  unti


M


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


[cH.  nt.  1—88


the  kings.  "The  Persian  monarehs  derive
a  large  revenue  from  our  territory."  The
amount  paid  bjr  Judea  is  not  known ;  but
Syria,  in  which  Judsea  vis  included,  paid
annually  in  money  850  talents  of  silver
(Herod,  iii.  91),  or  ahout  £90,000.  There
was  also  a  further  contribution  in  kind.
They  have  dominion  over  our  bodies.  They
can  impress  us  either  as  soldiers  or  sailors,
and  make  us  fight  their  battles  for  them.
Jews  probably  took  part  in  the  expedition
of  Xerxes  against  Greece.  And  over  our
cattle.  They  can  impress  our  cattle  for
their  baggage-train.  :
y«r.  38.— Beoanm  sf  all  tUi.    Because


of  our  past  sins  and  their  punishment — to
prevent  a  recurrence  of  similar  conduct  and
simUar  afSictiona  We  .  .  .  seal  unto  it.
In  the  East  it  is  always  the  seal  that  authen-
ticates a  document.  Babylonian  documents
were  often  stamped  with  half  a  dozen  seals
or  more.  These  were  impressed  upon  the
moist  clay,  and  then  the  clay  was  baked.
Sometimes  each  party  to  the  contract  stamped
his  seal  upon  a  separate  piece  of  sealing  clay,
which  he  then  atkiched  to  the  document  by
means  of  a  string  (Layard,  'Kineveh  and
Babylon,'  p.  154).  Any  number  of  seals
could  be  attached  in  this  way.


H0MILETIC8

Vers.  1 — 8. — A  special  Fast  day — how  spent.    This  chapter  and  the  next  contain

an  account  of  the  proceedings  of  a  day  set  apart  for  special  fasting  and  humiliation
These  three  verses  give  a  general  description  of  the  proceedings.

I.  The  DATE.  The  249i  day  of  the  month  Tisri ;  only  one  clear  day  having
passed  since  the  rejoicings  of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  So  joy  and  sorrow  succeed
each  other  in  life ;  in  the  religious  life  also.  No  inconsistency  in  the  indulgence
of  each  in  turn.  The  people  had  shown  a  preparedness  for  special  humiliation  at
the  beginning  of  the  month,  at  the  feast  of  trumpets,  when,  the  law  being  read  to
them,  they  wept.  But  they  were  bid  to  restrain  their  grief  at  that  time  because  they
were  keeping  a  festival.  Since  then,  on  the  tenth  of  the  month,  the  day  of  atone-
ment, the  only  fast  day  prescribed  by  the  law,  had  doubtless  been  observed.  But
services  of  a  more  special  kind  were  felt  to  be  desirable,  in  which,  by  the  united
expressions  of  repentance  and  renewed  covenant  with  God,  the  foundation  should
be  laid  for  a  life  more  in  harmony  with  the  law.

II.  The  SEPARATION  from  aliens  effected.  The  meeting  and  its  exercises  were  to
be  strictly  for  "the  seed  of  Israel."  Others  could  not  really  have  fellowship  with
them  in  their  recital  of  God's  dealings  with  their  fathers  and  their  nation,  nor  share
their  sorrow  or  new  resolutions.  The  Jews  therefore  "  separated  themselves  from  all
strangers  "  for  the  time,  and  held  a  meeting  of  Jews  only.  Such  seems  to  be  the
meaning  of  the  words.  Observe  that  community  of  faith  and  feeling  is  essential  to
united  worship,  and  the  deeper  and  fuller  it  is,  so  much  the  more  real  and  profitable
will  the  united  worship  be.  The  mixed  congregation  has  its  advantages,  but  earnest
Christians  will  desire  a  closer  fellowship  than  it  affords,  and  which  can  be  found
only  in  meetings  of  those  like-minded,  apart  for  a  time  from  the  formal  and  half-
hearted.

III.  The  EXTERNAL  SIGNS  of  humiliation  adopted.  Pasting,  abstinence  from  food,
more  or  less  rigid.  A  practice  sanctioned  by  our  Lord,  and  employed  not  only  as  an
expression  of  humiliation,  but  as  an  aid  to  intense  devotion  (see  Matt.  iv.  2 ;  xvii.  21 ;
Acts  xiii.  2, 3).  Whether  its  very  general  disuse  amongst  Western  Protestant  Chris-
tians is  to  be  attributed  to  a  decreased  devoutness,  or  an  increased  spirituality  to  which
such  methods  and  instruments  of  piety  are  alien,  or  to  the  experience  that  in  Western
climates  fasting  does  not  aid  devotion,  is  worthy  of  consideration.  What  is  certain
is.  that  it  is  of  no  worth  as  a  religious  observance  except  as  it  promotes  or  expresses
spiritual  religion.  In  addition  to  fasting,  these  Jews  wore  sackclothes,  and  put  earth
on  their  heads — usages  not  uncommon  with  them  in  similar  circumstances.  Such
Bigns  of  humiliation  as  these  are,  however,  distinctly  forbidden  by  our  Lord,  at  least
in  the  case  of  private  devotion  (Matt.  vi.  16),  as  savouring  of  ostentation  ;  and,  doubt-
less, the  more  the  spirit  of  the  gospel  prevails,  such  external  signs  become  distasteful.
And  at  any  period  they  were  valuable  only  as  expressing  and  promoting  real  feelings
of  penitence.  We  can  easily  imagine  how,  where  they  were  recognised  signs  of
mourning,  a  whole  assembly  appearing  in  them  would  excite  each  other  to  deeper


CH.  IX,  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  97

grief,  as  in  fact  among  ourselves  is  done  when  hundreds  or  thousands  meet,  on  some
occasion  of  general  sorrow,  all  clothed  in  black.

ly.  The  RELIGIOUS  EXEECiSBS  of  the  day.  1.  The  worship  of  God.  Including — (1)
Praise.  Declarations  of  the  Divine  glory,  and  recitals  of  his  wondrous  works,  in
creation  and  in  their  national  history.  (2)  Confession  of  sins.  Their  own  sins  and
those  of  their  fathers.  The  substance  of  the  confession  made  is  given  in  vers.  7 — 35.
Confession  of  one's  own  sins  is  not  only  appropriate,  but  is  a  condition  of  forgive-
ness (Prov.  xxviii.  13 ;  1  John  i.  9).  But  why  confess  the  sins  of  their  fathers  ?  It
is  to  be  remembered  that  this  was  a  national  gathering  for  national  humiliation,
introductory  to  a  better  national  life.  In  such  an  assembly  a  review  of  the  nation's
sins  would  be  very  appropriate  and  profitable.  It  recalled  the  great  cause  of  past
national  suffering,  and  of  present  degradation  and  subjection.  It  brought  into  light
what  must  be  avoided  if  better  times  were  to  arise.  It  produced  the  personal  con-
viction of  participation  in  the  sins  of  those  gone  before,  and  the  necessity  of
abandoning  them.  It  enhanced  the  feeling  of  the  great  forbearance  and  mercy  of
God  towards  their  nation,  which  at  once  deepened  repentance  and  encouraged  hope.
(3)  Prayer  (ver.  32).  2.  Reading  of  the  law.  This  had  held  a  prominent  place  in
the  celebration  of  the  feasts  both  of  trumpets  and  of  tabernacles  (see  previous
chapter),  and  had  been  the  chief  means  of  awakening  that  general  sorrow  for  sin
which  had  prepared  the  people  for  this  special  fast  day.  It  would  seem  that  they
had  been  heretofore  unfamiliar  with  "  the  book  of  the  law,''  and  that  what  they  had
recently  heard  had  excited  a  hunger  not  easily  satiated.  On  this  occasion  half  the
time  was  spent  in  reading  and  hearing  portions  of  the  book.  Its  precepts  and
histories  would  increase  their  penitence;  the  declarations  which,  amidst  its  legal
enactments,  it  contained  of  the  pardoning  mercy  of  God,  and  the  instances  of  its
exercise  which  it  recorded,  would  assure  them  that  their  repentance  would  not  be  in
vain ;  and  the  whole  would  guide  and  stimulate  their  praises  and  confessions,  suppli-
cations and  good  resolutions.

V.  The  TIME  occuriED  (ver.  3).  It  was  a  "protracted  meeting."  For  six  hours
the  congregation  kept  together.  Half  the  time  was  employed  in  the  reading  of  the
law,  doubtless  with  explanations  similar  to  those  recorded  in  ch.  viii.  7,  8,  and  half
in  worship.  Perhaps  the  two  alternated  with  each  other  throughout  the  service.
In  times  of  general  religious  feeling  very  long  services  may  be  held  without  weari-
ness ;  ordinarily  they  are  undesirable;  but  the  demand  for  very  short  ones  is  usually
a  sign  of  the  decay  of  spiritual  life.  In  conclusion — 1.  The  foundation  of  a  new  or
improved  religious  life  must  be  laid  in  genuine  repentance.  2.  Knowledge  of  God's
word  is  essential  to  an  intelligent,  acceptable,  and  lasting  piety.  The  reading  and
exposition  of  Holy  Scripture  should  therefore  be  prominent  in  public  worship.  3.
The  reality  and  worth  of  our  religious  knowledge  is  to  be  estimated  by  its  influ-
ence on  our  heart  and  life.  Does  it  work  in  ua  repentance  and  a  more  godly  and
righteous  Ufe  ?

Vers.  4 — 6. — United  praise.  Commencement  of  the  worship  and  confessions  with
general  praise.   I.  The  leaders  of  the  worship.  An  honourable  and  responsible  office.

II.  Their  bxhobtation  to  the  people.  1.  As  to  the  attitude  in  which  they  were
to  pffer  praise.  "  Stand  up  " — the  fitting  posture  for  this  part  of  Divine  worship.
2.  As  to  the  praise  they  were  to  offer.  (1)  To  whom.  "  Jehovah  your  God."  The
true  and  living  God,  eternal  and  immutable ;  the  God  of  Israel — ^he  who  revealed
himself  specially  to  them,  took  them  into  peculiar  relation  to  himself,  made  them
the  objects  of  special  care  and  discipline,  gave  them  special  promises.  Christians
have  still  greater  reasons  for  calling  Jehovah  their  God,  and  giving  him  praise.  (2)
How  long.  "For  ever  and  ever."  Indicates  that  God  will  for  ever  exist,  and  bo
worthy  of  praise,  and  actually  praised  ;  and  that  we  should  aspire  and  may  hope  to
be  eternally  his  worshippers.

III.  The  united  praise.  1.  Introductory.  (1)  Praise  of  God's  name.  Of  God
as  revealed  and  declared  by  his  works  and  word.  (2)  Declaration  of  the  inadequacy
of  all  praise  of  God.  "Which  is  exalted,"  &c.  Not  only  can  no  words  sufScienllj
express  his  majesty  and  infinite  excellency,  but  no  thoughts,  no  emotions  (which
often  transcend  thought  as  well  as  language ;  see  Eom.  viii.  26)  are  worthy  of  them.

HBHJUIUH.  B


98  THE  BOOK  OF  KEHBMIAH.  [ch.  ix.  1—38.

And  not  only  is  our  praise  inadequate,  but  "  all  blessing  and  praise."  This  ia  not
a  reason  for  withholding  our  worship,  for  then  no  praise  would  be  offered  in  heaven
or  earth,  but  for  striving  after  nobler  thoughts  and  feelings  and  language,  and  offer-
ing all  witn  deepest  humility.  God  condescends  to  accept  the  poorest  worship,  if
sincere,  and  the  best  we  can  present.  2.  Praise  of  God  as  "Jehovah  alone."  3.
Ascription  to  him  of  the  creation  of  all  things  (ver.  6).  A  great  truth  not  only  un-
known to  most  of  the  heathen,  but  given  up  by  many  cultivated  men  in  Christian
lands.  In  the  praise  of  God  tlie  display  of  his  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  in  the
v/ork  of  creation  should  hold  a  prominent  place.  He  who  made  all  should  receive
homage  from  all  his  intelligent  creatures.

IV.  The  becognition  of  other  worshippers.  "  The  host  of  heaven  worshippeth
thee."  It  is  inspiring,  when  uniting  in  Divine  worship,  to  remember  our  fellow-
worshippers,  and  thus  cultivate  fellowship  with  them  (compare  the  beginning  of  the
Te  Deum).  The  Jews  had  not  this  satisfaction  in  respect  to  any  other  people.
They  alone  worshipped  the  true  God,  and  they  had  not  learned  to  think  and  feel
as  to  heathen  worship  that  it  was  about  equivalent  to  their  own.  All  the  more
gladly  did  they  recognise  that  their  God,  unknown  and  unworshipped  by  the  rest  of
the  world,  was  adored  and  praised  and  served  by  hosts  of  exalted  intelligences  in
other  worlds.  To  us,  also,  this  is  an  inspiriting  truth,  adapted  to  stimulate  and
elevate  our  worship.  The  greatest  beings  God  has  made  bow  down  with  lowliness
before  lum,  and  with  all  the  ardour  of  their  seraphic  nature  celebrate  his  praise.  We
need  not  be  ashamed  to  be  like  them,  but  should  seek  to  make  our  worship  resemble
theirs  as  nearly  as  possible,  and  be  thankful  that,  through  the  mediation  of  our  Ee-
deemer,  in  whom  heaven  and  earth  are  united,  it  is  as  acceptable  to  God.  They
praise  the  Saviour  as  well  as  the  Creator ;  we  praise  him  with  a  feeling  they  cannot
share  ;  for  he  redeemed  u»  by  his  blood,  not  them.

Vers.  7,  8. — God's  favour  to  Abraham.  The  multitude,  led  by  the  Levites,  now
begin  the  recital  of  God's  gracious  dealings  with  their  race ;  and,  first,  with  their
great  ancestor,  Abraham.  By  the  words,  "  Thou  art  Jehovah  God,"  they  allege  that
it  was  the  only  living  and  true  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  who  distinguished
Abraham,  and  through  him  their  nation,  by  his  favour.    They  then  recount —

I.  His  CHOICE  of  Abraham.  Of  his  own  gracious  will  separating  him  from  others,
to  preserve  the  knowledge  and  worship  of  himself,  and  to  he  the  Father  of  the  people
whom  he  appointed  to  be  peculiarly  his  own.

II.  His  LEADING  him  from  Chaldsea  to  Canaan.

III.  His  CHANGE  of  his  name  from  Abram  to  Abraham.  Thus  promising  him  a
numerous  posterity.

IV.  His  RECOGNITION  of  his  faithfulness.  A  reference  to  Gen.  xv.  6,  where  "  be-
lieved "  is  part  of  the  same  verb  as  the  word  "  faithful "  here  (comp.  Gal.  iii.  9 —
"  faithful  Abraham  ").  Abraham  was  faithful  in  heart,  and  that  before  God.  He
trusted  God,  and  continued  to  trust  him  through  all  trials  of  his  faith.  He  was
faithful  in  maintaining  the  worship  of  God  in  the  midst  of  idolaters,  and  i«  teaching
his  household  to  "  keep  the  way  of  the  Lord,  to  do  justice  and  judgment "  (Gen.
xviii.  19).     And  God  marked  and  rewarded  his  fidelity.

V.  His  COVENANT  with  him.  Gen.  xv.  18 — 21  seems  especially  referred  to.  The
larger  promises,  that  Abraham  and  his  posterity  should  be  a  blessing  to  all  men,  do
not  here  come  into  view.

VI.  His  PEBFOBMANCE  of  the  covenant.  In  which  God's  righteousness  is  recog-
nised (ver.  6).

Rejlections : — 1.  All  blessings  enjoyed  by  men  have  their  origin  in  the  free  grace
and  choice  of  God.  2.  Yet  God  in  his  treatment  of  men  has  regard  to  their  faithful-
ness!' to  him.  3.  The  righteousness,  as  well  as  the  goodness,  of  God  assures  us  that
he  will  fulfil  all  his  promises.  4.  We  as  well  as  the  Jews  have  reason  to  praise  God
fur  the  grace  shown  to  Abraham.  For  he  is  our  spiritual  ancestor,  "  the  father  of  aU
them  that  believe"  (Rom.  iv.  11).

Ver.  8. — Faithfulness  of  heart.    "And  foundest  his  heart  faithful  before  thee."
We  have  here —
I.  A  FBiNciFAL  cHARACTEBisTio  OP  A  ooDLT  HAN.    1.  Its  Beat    The  heart    N«


OH.  IX.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  9%

merely  outward  practices  constitute  faithfulness  before  God.  2.  Its  reality.  It  m
faithfulness  "  before  God,"  such  as  he  who  searches  the  heart  can  see  to  exist ;  not
merely  what  men  might  from  outward  appearances  erroneously  think  to  exist.  3.
Its  principle.  Faith  t»  God  (see  above,  IV.).  4.  Its  manifestations.  (1)  Confession.
Open  acknowledgment  of  God,  and  testimony  for  him.  (2)  Worship.  (3)  Obedience.
(4)  Fidelity  in  use  of  talents  for  God.  (5)  Constancy  and  perseverance  in  all.  Not-
withstanding temptations,  difficulties,  opposition,  persecution,  defections  of  others.

II.  The  Divine  recognition  of  it.  1.  He  knows  and  marks  it.  "  Foundest,"  &c.
"The  Father  seeketh  such,"  and  rejoices  to  find  them.  If  unobserved  by  men,  not
by  him.  2.  He  accepts  it.  Though  it  be  accompanied  with  imperfections,  as  in  the
case  of  Abraham.  3.  He  honours  and  rewards  it.  With  gracious  assurances,  and
the  fulfilment  of  them.  To  the  faithful  he  will  show  himself  faithful.  They  shall
at  length  be  -addressed,  "  Well  done,  good  and  faithful  servant,  enter  thou  into  the
joy  of  thy  Lord."    In  conclusion,  God  sees  all  hearts ;  what  does  he  find  in  ours  ?

Vers.  9 — 11. — Eedemption  from  Egypt.  The  j>eopIe  proceed  to  celebrate  the
power  and  goodness  of  God  as  displayed  in  the  deliverance  of  their  ancestors  from
Egyptian  bondage.

I.  The  condition  from  which  they  were  delivered.  It  was  one  of — 1.  Cruel
oppression.  "They  dealt  proudly,"  insolently  and  cruelly,  "against  them."  2.
Misery.     "The  affliction  of  our  fathers."

II.  The  snccEssivE  steps  of  their  deliverancb.  1.  The  Divine  notice  of  their
condition.  "  Didst  see,"  (fee. ,  "thou  knewest,"  &c.  God  seemed  to  have  forgotten
them,  but  he  had  not.  His  eye  was  on  them  ;,  their  condition  interested  him  ;  and  at
length,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  he  interposed  to  rescue  them.  2.  The  plagues  inflicted  on
the  ruler  and  people  of  Egypt.  3.  The  wonders  wrought  at  the  Eed  Sea.  In  utmost
apparent  peril,  the  people  and  Moses  cried  unto  God ;  he  heard  "  their  cry  "  (ver.  9),
divided  the  waters,  led  the  Israelites  safely  through,  and  overwhelmed  their  "pursuers."

III.  One  great  result  of  their  deliverance.  "  So  didst  thou  get  thee  a  name,"
Ac.  (comp.  Exod.  ix.  16).  Jehovah  secured  for  himself  a  name  for  power,  terrible-
ness,  special  favour  to  Israel ;  a  name  widespread,  lasting  ("  as  it  is  this  day,"  and
still  in  our  day)  ;  a  name  to  be  revered,  trusted,  loved,  rejoiced  in,  praised,  published.
The  Jews  never  wearied  of  proclaiming  in  their  Psalms  the  name  of  him  who
redeemed  them  from  Egypt  so  marvellously ;  and,  in  recalling  this  great  redemption
to  mind,  renewed  from  time  to  time  their  confidence  that  God  who  had  done  so  much
for  them  would  not  forsake  them.  Notice — 1.  The  importance  of  these  events  foi
the  Israelites.  Not  only  for  their  immediate  efEects ;  but  they  gave  the  nation  birth,
separated  them  from  the  spiritual, perils  of  Egypt,  its  idolatry,  &c.  Their  passage
through  the  Red  Sea  was  their  national  baptism  unto  Moses,  and  unto  God  by  him
(1  Cor.  X.  2),  consecrating  them  to  be  the  people  of  God,  to  learn  and  practise  his
laws,  maintain  his  worship,  preserve  the  knowledge  of  him  for  the  benefit  ultimately
of  the  world.  2.  Their  significance  for  us.  (1)  Direct.  As  a  display  of  the  power
and  goodness  of  our  God,  his  mindfulness  of  his  people  in  their  sorrows,  and  sure
deliverance  of  them,  though  they  may  long  have  to  "wait  for  him."  As  a  pledge
of  the  final  triumph  of  his  Church  over  all  its  enemies.  And  as  one  of  the  most
marvellous  of  that  series  of  interpositions  which  had  for  their  object  the  enlighten-
ment and  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  as  well  as  the  Jews.  (2)  Typical.  Of  the  great
redemption  wrought  for  us  in  Christ  by  his  death  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.
The  creation  and  consecration  of  a  new  and  larger  "  Israel  of  God."  This  redemp-
tion is,  like  that  of  the  Israelites,  a  deliverance  from  slaver^  into  freedom,  from
degradation  into  honour,  from  misery  into  happiness,  with  the  prospect  of  a  settled
and  blessed  rest;  but  vastly  superior  in  respect  to  the  marvels  by  which  it  was,  and
is,  wrought,  the  evils  from  which  it  saves,  and  the  blessings  to  which  it  introduces.
F;atiina(ing  these  aright,  we  shall  be  prepared  and  impelled  to  "  sing  the  song  of
I..' OSes  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb  "  (Eev.  xv.  3).

Ver.  10. — The  Divine  self-made  name.  "So  didst  thou  get  [make]  thee  a  name,
as  it  is  this  day."  "  What  is  thy  name  ?  "  is  a  question  asked  of  God  by  thoughtful
men  in  all  i-ges.     How  shall  we  conceive  and  speak  of  God  ?    The  answer  is  found

B  8


100  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [CH.  K.  1—38

in  the  various  manifestations  he  has  made  of  himself.     He  is  the  maker  and  pub-
lisher of  his  own  name.

I.  The  WATS  by  which  God  has  made  fob  himself  a  name.  1.  By  his  works.  Of
nature,  providence,  miracle,  grace.  2.  By  his  word.  Directly  instructing  men  how
to  think  and  speak  of  him,  and  enabling  them  to  interpret  his  works.  3.  Pre-
eminently by  the  manifestation  of  himself  in  his  Son.  The  character,  teaching,
and  works  of  Christ  present  a  perfect  revelation  of  the  invisible  God.  "  I  have
declared  thy  name,  and  will  declare  it"  (John  xvii.  26).

II.  The  name  he  has  thus  made  fob  himself.  The  Almighty,  All-wise,  All-
good,  the  Holy,  Just,  Faithful,  Merciful,  Terrible,  Father  and  Saviour  of  all,  especi-
ally of  believers,  Love,  &c.

III.  Its  ENiinEANCB.  "As  it  is  this  day."  He  remains  the  same  ;  his  name  is  so
written  that  it  can  never  be  blotted  out,  so  proclaimed  that  it  shall  resound  through
the  world,  through  the  universe,  for  ever.

IV.  Why  he  has  made  himself  sdch  a  name.  For  his  own  glory,  and  for  the
benefit  of  his  creatures ;  that  they  may  fear,  trust,  love,  worship,  and  obey  him,  and
thus  be  saved  and  blessed.  Finally,  we  shall  at  length  in  our  own  personal  experi-
ence know  and  illustrate  the  name  of  God.  Which  part  of  his  name  ?  This  depends
on  how  we  are  affected  by  and  towards  it  now.

Vers.  12 — 21. — Israel  in  the  desert.  The  people  now  recountthe  mercies  of  God  to
theirfathers  in  the  desert,  and  confess  the  sins  of  which  they  were  guilty  there.  After
deliverance  from  Egypt,  the  desert  had  to  be  passed  before  Canaan  could  be  reached ;
and  there  the  people  were  instructed  and  organised,  tried  and  proved,  disciplined  and
chastised,  and  thus  prepared  for  orderly  settlement  as  a  nation  in  the  promised  land.

I.  The  Divine  favours  by  which  they  webb  distinguished.  1.  Miraculous
guidance  (vers.  12,  19).  2.  Miraculous  provisions  (vers.  15,  20,  21).  3.  Miraculous
legislation  (vers.  13, 14).  (1)  How  the  laws  were  given.  Partly  by  the  voice  of  God
from  Sinai  (ver.  13),  chiefly  by  the  mediation  of  Moses  (ver.  14).  (2)  Of  what  they
consisted.  In  general  they  are  described  as  "  right  judgments  and  true  laws,''  &c.
(vers.  13, 14).  In  particular,  the  institution  of  the  Sabbath  is  mentioned  (ver.  14) —
one  of  the  greatest  and  best  gifts  of  God  to  them.  4.  The  gift  of  God's  "  good
Spirit"  (ver.  20).  Reference  may  be  made  to  the  Spirit  of  God  as  given  to  Moses
and  to  the  seventy  elders  (Numb.  xi.  17,  25),  or  even  Bezaleel  and  Alioliab  (Exod
XXXV.  31 — 35).  But  louking  at  such  passages  as  Ps.  li.  11 ;  cxiiii.  10,  it  is  quite
as  possible  that  the  enliglitening  influence  of  the  Spirit  on  the  minds  and  hearts  of
the  people  in  general  may  be  referred  to.  5.  The  command  to  enter  Canaan.  Ver.
15,  where  "  proinisedst  them  "  (lit.  "  saidst  to  them  ")  should  probably  be  "  com-
mandedst  them."  The  command,  however,  virtually  included  a  renewed  promise.
God  had  "  sworn  to  give  them  "  it;  now  they  are  bid  to  go  in  and  take  possession
of  it ;  implying  that  God  would  give  them  possession  if  they  obeyed  his  call.

II.  The  gboss  iniquities  by  which  they  distinguished  themselves.  Notwith-
standing the  wonderful  manifestations  of  God  amongst  them,  and  his  great  kindness.
].  Proud  and  stubborn  disobedience  (vers.  16,  17).  2.  Purpose  to  return  to  Egypt
(ver.  17 ;  see  Numb.  xiv.  1 — 4).  Just  on  the  borders  of  the  promised  land  they
refused  to  advance  into  it,  terrified  by  tlie  report  of  most  of  the  spies,  and  not  exer-
cising faith  in  his  power  who  had  wrought  for  them  so  mightily.  Yea,  they  proposed
to  return  to  the  land  of  bondage,  and  "  appointed  a  captain '  to  lead  tliein  thither.
8.   Idolatry  (ver.  18).,  A  violation  of  the  fundamental  principle  of  their  law.

III.  The  Divine  forbearance,  mercy,  and  constancy  (vers.  17,  19,  20).  They
"  wrought  great  provocations,"  and  numbers  of  them  were  heavily  punished  ;  yea,
all  who  came  out  of  Egypt,  except  two,  were  forbidden  to  enter  Canaan,  and  died  in
the  wilderness  ;  yet  even  these  continued  during  tlieir lives  to  enjoy  Divine  guidance
and  sustenance,  so  that  "they  lacked  notliing."  God  showed  himself  "ready  to  pardon,"
&c.  (ver.  17),  and  displayed  his  "manifold  mercies,"  and  did  not  forsake  them.  To
the  children  he  fulfilled  the  promises,  the  benefit  of  which  the  fathers  had  forfeited.

IV.  The  long  nuRATTON  of  his  mirapulous  sustenance  op  them  (ver.  21).
Lessons: — 1.  The  guu.lness   of  God   and  the  depravity  of  man.     Tlie  history  of

Israel  is  full  of  both.    So  is   til   history.     "The   earth  is  full   of  the  goodness


OH.  IX.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  101

of  the  Lord,"  and  also  full  of  human  wickedness.  Each  ia  rendered  more  con-
spicuous by  the  other ;  and  the  contrast  makes  one  appear  more  glorious,  the
other  more  hideous.  2.  As,  after  deliverance  from  Egyp't,  the  desert  had  to
be  traversed  before  Canaan  could  be  enjoyed,  so  is  it  in  the  Christian  life.  This
world  is  a  desert  in  comparison  with  heaven,  and  the  journey  through  it  is  dif-
ficult and  perilous.    But  it  lies  between  conversion  and  heaven,  and  must  be  crossed.

3.  Through  this  desert,  however,  God  conducts  his  people.'  He  guides,  provides,
protects,  instructs,  governs,  and  thus  trains  and  prepares  them  for  the  promised
inheritance.    This  is  our  comfort  amid  all  the  discomforts  and  dangers  of  the  journey.

4.  In  ordinary  mercies  the  agency  of  God  is  as  real  as  in  the  miraculous.  Our  food,
drink,  clothing,  &c.  are  as  truly  his  gifts  as  the  manna,  &c.  which  he  bestowed  on
Israel.  His  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  are  as  really  displayed  in  them,  and  both
more  extensively  and  more  marvellously.  6.  Amongst  God's  best  gifts  are  his  revel-
ations of  himself  and  his  laws ;  his  crowning  gift  is  his  Spirit.  Under  the  Christian
dispensation  all  these  are  far  superior  to  the  similar  blessings  vouchsafed  to  Israel.
Our  responsibilities  are,  therefore,  greater ;  our  moral  and  spiritual  state  should  be
far  higher,  our  thankfulness  more  ardent.  6.  We  have  a  promise  of  a  better  inherit-
ance than  Canaan,  with  a  command  to  journey  steadily  towards  it ;  lat  iH  beware
lest  we  come  short  of  it  through  unbelief  and  disobedience.

Ver.  20. — The  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Teacher.  "  Thou  gavest  also  thy  good  Spirit  to
instruct  them."  This  assertion  is  more  emphatically  true  of  Christians  than  of
Israel.  We  live  under  "  the  dispensation  of  the  Spirit,"  when  the  "  promise  of  the
Spirit"  is  more  abundantly  fulfilled.     We  have  here —

I.  A  WONDEBFUL  DISPLAY  OF  DiviNE  MEBOY.  It  is  in  the  midst  of  the  narration  of
Israel's  pride  and  stubbornness  that  this  statement  is  made.  So  it  is  to  a  rebellious
world  that  God's  Spirit  comes  to  instruct,  restore,  and  save.

II.  An  invaluable  gift.  1.  Its  nature.  Special  Divine  influence  and  operation —
the  Holy  Spirit  acting  on  and  in  the  minds  and  hearts  of  men.  (1)  In  and  through
inspired  men  and  their  utterances  by  speech  or  writing.  "  Holy  men  of  God  spake
as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  By  such  inspiration  what  might  have  been
otherwise  learned  is  taught  more  clearly  and  authoritatively,  and  the  truths  which
especially  relate  to  salvation,  which  could  not  have  been  otherwise  known,  are
revealed.  (2)  In  the  hearts  of  men  generally.  Those  especially  to  whom  the
gospel  comes  enjoy  this  great  blessing,  for  their  enlightenment,  conviction,  conver-
sion, regeneration,  and  sanotification.  (3)  Through  the  Church.  That  is,  through
the  speech  and  life  of  Christians,  and  in  connection  with  Christian  fellowship,
worship,  and  ordinances.  Not,  however,  as  a  magical  influence  to  ne  dispensed  at
the  will  of  men.  2.  Its  goodness.  "  Thy  good  Spirit"  Intended  not  to  describe
the  personal  goodness  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  the  value  of  his  influence  to  men.
Amongst  the  gifts  of  God  to  Israel  named  in  the  context,  this  was  incalculably  the
best.  The  gifts  of  God  which  we  call  providential  are  invaluable ;  those  of  his
grace  are  of  far  higher  value,  and  of  these  this  is  the  greatest.  Without  the  Spirit
no  other  Divine  gift  would  avail  for  our  highest  and  everlasting  well-being.  This
renders  all  other  blessings  truly  blessed.  The  good  Spirit  makes  aU  things  good  to
us,  even  those  which  we  call  evil,  yea,  those  which  in  themselves  are  evil.

III.  A  GBAND  OPPORTUNITY.  _  "  To  instruct  them."  Each  one  of  us  may  have  the
inestimable  advantage  of  a  Divine  Teacher  who  not  only  speaks  to  the  ear,  or  the
eye,  but  enters  the  heart,  and  whose  instructions  are  the  most  essential  to  our  welfare.
He  makes  "wise  unto  salvation."  The  only  conditions  are  faith  in  him  and  his
teaching,  willingness  to  learn  and  practise  his  lessons,  and  prayer  for  his  influences.

IV.  A  HEAVY  BE8P0NSIBILITY.  In  proportion  to  the  value  of  God's  gifts  are  the
responsibilities  they  impose.  No  responsibility  can,  therefore,  be  so  heavy  as  that
which  arises  from  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  the  presence  amongst  us,  the  influence
upon  us,  of  a  Divine  Person  profEering  and  pressing  his  aid  to  lead  us  to  God,  good-
ness, and  heaven.  Happy  those  who  receive  him  into  their  hearts  as  a  permanent
guest  and  guide — the  life  of  their  life,  the  soul  of  their  soul.  But  let  us  take  heed
lest  we  "  grieve  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,"  or  "  do  despite  unto  the  Spirit  of  grace,"
and  he  depart  from  us  utterly  and  for  ever,  leaving  us  to  the  "  sorer  ptmishment "


lOJ  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.  [ch.  ix.  1— 38,

which  falls  on  those  to  whom  Qod  comes  most  nearly  and  graciously,  and  is  rejected
by  them.

Vers.  22 — 25. — Canaan  conquered  and  possessed.  Continuing  the  recital  of  the
goodness  of  God  to  their  nation,  the  people  narrate  how  their  fathers  obtained
possession  of  the  promised  land.    All  is  ascribed  to  God.

I.  He  preserved  the  nation  to  enter  the  land  (ver.  23).  Although  those  who
left  Egypt  died,  two  excepted,  in  the  desert,  their  children  were  multiplied  "  as  the
stars  of  heaven."

II.  He  conquered  thb  conNTRT,  and  gave  them  possession  of  it.  First,  king-
doms east  of  the  Jordan  (ver.  22),  then  the  rest  of  the  land  (ver.  24).  Although
the  inhabitants  were  numerous  and  valiant,  he  subdued  them  ;  through  his  might  they
took  even  "  strong  cities  "  (ver.  25).

III.  The  land  he  gave  them  was  of  great  valdb,  and  afforded  thih  much
KNJOTMENT  (ver.  25).

IV.  He  thus  fulfilled  his  promises  (ver.  23).

R^kdions : — 1.  The  perpetuation  of  the  nation  of  Israel  reminds  ns  of  the  per-
petuity of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Notwithstanding  the  death  of  successive  generations
of  Christians,  the  ravages  of  error,  worldliness,  &o.,  its  continuance  is  guaranteed  by
the  promise,  "  The  gates  of  Hades  shall  not  prevail  against  it."  2.  The  fulfilment  of
the  promise  of  Canaan,  after  bo  long  a  period,  should  assure  us  of  the  fulfilment  of
all  the  promises  of  God.  "  He  is  faithful  that  promised,"  and  he  is  almighty  to
overcome  all  obstacles  and  opposition.  3.  The  possession  of  a  good  land  should
excite  our  gratitude  and  praise.  Our  land  is  superior  to  Canaan  in  many  respects,
supplied  with  all  kinds  of  advantages  wliich  the  labours  of  others  have  created  for
us  ;  and,  like  later  generations  of  Israelites,  we  inherit  it  without  conquest,  and  with
far  less  peril  of  invasion  than  they  experienced.  God  is  the  Giver  of  all,  and  should
ever  be  praised  for  all ;  and  we  should  be  concerned  lest  by  godlessness  and  unright-
eousness we  forfeit  our  inheritance.  4.  Christians  are  heirs  of  "a  better  country."
Heaven  is  like  Canaan,  as  the  gift  of  God,  according  to  his  promises  ;  as  a  "  rest "
after  much  wandering  and  unrest,  and  as  abounding  in  whatever  can  minister  to
enjoyment,  and  cause  its  inhabitants  to  "  delight  themselves  in  God's  great  good-
ness." But  it  is  vastly  superior,  as  a  country  never  polluted  by  idolatry  and  wicked-
ness ;  whose  inhabitants  are  all  holy  ;  which  no  foe  can  invade,  no  sin,  suffering,  ox
death  can  enter ;  whose  enjoyments  are  all  pure,  spiritual,  and  without  peril ;  and
from  which  is  no  expulsion.  It  is  "  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  and  undefiled,  and
which  fadeth  not  away  " — an  eternal  possession.

Vers.  26  —  31. — IsraeTs  wickedness  and  God's  goodnes$.  A  summary  of  the
national  history  from  the  entrance  into  Canaan  to  the  captivity.  A  dismal  story ;  but,
as  was  natural  and  suitable  in  a  confession  of  sin,  the  more  pleasing  facts  are  omitted.

I.  The  great  and  inveterate  wickedness  of  the  people.  This  is  described  by
various  terms  and  phrases,  and  its  heinousness  exhibited  in  many  particulars.  1.
Flagrant  disobedience  to  the  Divine  laws.  Although  so  good  and  so  adapted  to
promote  their  welfare,  "  which  if  a  man  do,  he  shall  live  in  them "  (ver.  29).  2.
Proud  and  stubborn  disregard  of  tlie  Divine  remonstrances  and  warnings.  3.  Per-
secution even  unto  death  of  God's  inspired  messengers  (ver.  26).  4.  Repeated
relapses  after  partial  reformation.  Notwithstanding — (1)  The  severity  of  the  chastise-
ments which  produced  it.  (2)  The  fervour  of  their  prayers  for  deliverance,  and
promises  of  amendment.  (3)  The  signal  and  numerous  deliverances  effected  for
them  in  answer  to  their  prayers.     6.  The  persistence  of  their  disobedience.

II.  The  marvellous  and  long-continued  goodness  op  God.  1.  In  sending  them
successive  messengers  to  warn  them  and  lead  them  to  repentance.  Even  when  they
slew  some,  he  sent  others.  2.  In  inflicting  punishment  upon  them  for  the  same  end.
3.  In  repeatedly  answering  their  prayers  for  deliverance.  4.  In  bearing  with  them
BO  long,  although  "  they  wrought  great  provocations."  6.  In  preserving  a  remnant
when  at  length  he  scattered  the  nation  (ver.  31).  Showing  himself  throv^hout  "  a
gracious  and  merciful  God."

Rejlectvms: — 1.  Sin  and  suffering  are  indissolubly  linked  together.     2.  Suffering


CH.  n.  l-as.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  103

is  inflicted  that  sin  may  be  subdued.  S.  Amendment  produced  by  suffering  is  often
only  temporary.  4.  Persistence  in  sin  insures  ultimate  ruin.  5.  The  goodness  of
God  is  shown  in  the  testimony  he  maintains  against  sin,  and  the  chastisements  be
inflicts  on  the  sinner.  6.  God  is  faithful  to  his  promises,  although  men  prov»
unfaithful  (ver.  31).  7.  The  history  of  Israel  is  a  mirror  in  which  all  may  see  their
own  likeness.  Nations  and  individuals ;  some  more,  some  less.  Even  sincere  Chrii-
tians  in  a  measure.     Many  can  say  with  good  George  Herbert —

"  Loril,  with  what  caro  hast  thou  begirt  us  round  1

Parents  first  season  us  ;  then  schoolmastori

Deliver  us  to  laws  ;  they  send  us  bound
To  rules  of  reason,  holy  messengers,
Pulpits  and  Sundays,  sorrow  dogging  sin,

AfiSictions  sorted,  anguish  of  all  sizes,

Fine  nets  and  stratagems  to  catch  us  in,
Bibles  laid  open,  millions  of  surprises,
Blessings  beforehand,  ties  of  gratefulness,

The  soimd  of  glory  ringing  in  our  ears  ;

Without,  our  shame  ;  within,  our  conscienee«|
Angels  and  grace,  eternal  hopes  and  fears  :

Yet  all  these  fenees  and  their  whole  array

One  cunning  bosom-sin  blows  quite  away."

Ver.  29. — The  Divine  testimony  against  sin.  "  And  testifiedst  against  them,  that
thou  mightest  bring  them  again  unto  thy  law."  The  Divine  testimony  against  sin
and  sinners  is  repeatedly  mentioned  in  this  confession  (see  vers.  26,  30).  We  may
take  a  general  view  of  it.

I.  The  witness  of  God  against  sin  and  sinners.  I.  In  his  holy  laws.  Declaring
his  will,  denouncing  disobedience,  and  warning  ag!ii7i.st  its  consequences.  2.  In  his
revelations  of  eternity,  judgment,  hell,  heaven.  "There  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into
it  anything  that  defileth."  3.  In  the  nature  of  man.  The  testimony  of  conscience ;
the  evil  effects  of  sin  on  the  body  (diseases,  death)  and  the  soul,  disordering,
debasing,  blunting  the  conscience,  hardening  the  heart,  &c.  4.  In  the  effects  of  sin
on  the  circumstances  of  the  sinner.  5.  In  the  effects  of  sin  on  society.  Destruction
of  mutual  esteem  and  confidence.  Disorders,  divisions,  miseries.  6.  In  the  methods
of  salvation  from  sin.  The  sufEerings  borne  by  our  Lord  in  atoning  for  sin.  The
pains  of  conviction,  penitence,  &o.  produced  by  the  word  and  Spirit  of  God.  7.  By
the  Church.  Its  constitution  as  a  society  avowedly  renouncing  sin,  and  called  to
battle  against  it  everywhere.  Its  ministry,  ordinances,  examples  of  holiness,  dis-
cipline on  offenders.

II.  Its  design.  1.  To  deter  from  sin.  2.  To  produce  repentance.  "  That  thou
mightest  bring  them  again  unto  thy  law."

III.  The  eevelation  of  God  which  is  thus  made.  Manifestations  of — 1.  His
hatred  to  gin.     Which  his  permission  of  its  prevalence  might  seem  to  put  in  question.

2.  His  benevolence.  His  testimonies  against  sin  are  so  many  entreaties  that  men
would  not  injure  themselves,  so  many  safeguards  against  their  doing  so,  so  many
strong  reasons  for  turning  from  sin  to  holiness,  and  thus  from  misery  to  blessedness.

3.  His  justice  in  condemning  the  impenitent.  Disregard  of  the  Divine  testimony
against  sin  will  work  final  ruin,  but  the  lost  sinner  will  have  only  himself  to
blame.  "To-day,"  then,  "  if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your  heart."  Let  it
not  be  said  of  you,  "  Yet  would  they  not  give  ear  "  (ver.  30).

Vers.  32 — 38. — A  sorrowful  appeal  to  the  Divine  compassion.  The  conclusion  of
the  public  united  confession.     It  contains —

I.  An  appropriate  invocation.  Similar  to  that  of  Nehemiah  (ch.  i.  6),  and  which
would  be  felt  as  suitable  after  the  preceding  recital  of  the  Divine  proceedings.

II.  An  appeal  to  the  Divine  pity.  In  view  of— 1.  The  greatness  of  their  patt
troubles  (ver.  32).  "  Let  not  all  the  trouble  seem  little."  "  Do  not  regard  it  as  too
little  to  require  notice  and  relief.  Rather  see  how  great  it  is,  and  bring  it  in  mercy-
tn  an  end  "     Perhaps,  however,  the  meaning  is,  "  Let  it  be  deemed  sufiicient  to


10*  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  ix.  1—38

answer  the  design  of  punishment,  and  therefore  he  now  terminated  "  fcomp.  Isa.
xl.  2).  2.  Their  present  depressed  condition  (vers.  36, 37).  A  condition  of  subjection
to  the  Gentiles,  of  spoliation,  and  of  "great  distress."

III.  An  acknowledgment  of  Divine  justice  in  their  treatment  (vers.  33 — 35).

IV.  A  declabation  of  their  making  a  solemn  and  faithful  united  covenant.
A  fitting  conclusion  of  the  day's  proceedings.  In  conclusion — 1.  The  justice  of  God
in  inflicting  chastisement  should  be  heartily  acknowledged  by  those  who  implore  its
cessation  or  mitigation.  2.  Review  of  our  past  lives  is  adapted  to  and  should  excite
humiliation,  penitence,  and  resolutions  of  amendment.     Therefore —

'  'Tis  greatly  wise  to  talk  with  our  past  hours,
And  ask  them  what  report  they  bore  to  heaven,
And  how  they  might  have  home  more  welcome  news."

Ver.  33. — The  justice  of  God  in  punishing  sinners.  "  Howbeit  thou  art  just  in
all  that  is  brought  upon  us ;  for  thou  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  done  wickedly."
The  words  express  a  just  and  salutary  conviction,  and  make  an  acknowledgment
suitable  to  accompany  an  appeal  to  the  Divine  compassion.

I.  The  conviction  expressed.  Of  very  great  importance  that  we  should  not  only
verbally  utter  it,  but  sincerely  feel  it.  How  may  we  arrive  at  this  conviction  ?
1.  By  faith  in  God's  essential  rectitude.  That  he  cannot  be  unrighteous  in  any
of  his  proceedings  (see  Deut.  xxxii.  4).  2.  By  considering  the  rectitude  and  good-
ness of  the  laws  against  which  we  have  sinned.  3.  By  remembering  all  that  God
has  done  to  guard  us  against  sin  (see  on  ver.  29).  If  we  sin  notwithstanding,  we  are
justly  punished.  4.  By  calling  to  mind  our  sins.  Their  essential  evil,  their  number
and  magnitude,  and  the  circumstances  which  aggravate  their  guiltiness  (God's
varied  kindness,  our  opportunities,  advantages,  knowledge,  convictions,  good  resolu-
tions, &c.).  Such  a  review  will  lead  us  to  exclaim  with  Ezra,  "Thou  our  God  hast
punished  us  less  than  our  iniquities  deserve  "  (Ezra  ix.  13).  5.  By  comparing  what
we  endure  with  the  Divine  threatenings.  The  Israelites  had  been  warned  of  the
consequences  of  their  rebellion  against  God.  He  was  only  fulfilling  his  word.  So  it
is  with  us.  What  we  sufEer  is  no  more,  is  indeed  less,  than  we  were  warned  to
expect.

II.  The  benefits  op  such  a  conviction.  1.  It  will  prevent  our  murmuring  at  our
suffering's.  "  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  punishment  of
his  sins  ?  "  (Lam.  iii.  39).  2.  It  will  greatly  aid  in  producing  repentance.  Suffering
is  likely  to  do  its  proper  work  in  humbling  us  and  making  sin  odious  when  we
recognise  the  justice  of  God  in  inflicting  it.  3.  It  will  lead  to  an  appeal  to  the
mercy  of  God  for  deliverance.  Such  an  appeal,  made  through  Christ,  will  be
regarded,  while  an  appeal  to  justice  would  be  as  futile  as  groundless.  Finally,
observe  that  the  goodness  of  God  is  as  conspicuous  as  his  justice  in  the  sufferings  he
inflicts  in  this  life.  They  have  in  view  "  our  profit,  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  his
holiness,"  and  so  of  true  and  everlasting  blessedness.  But  if  through  our  perversity
they  fail  of  this  result,  they  are  followed  by  the  penalties  of  "judgment  without
mercy."

HOMILIES  B'Y  VARIOUS  ADTHOEa

Vers.  1—6,  16—18,  26,  28—30,  33— 36.— Confession,  The  feast  of  tabernacles,
held  in  such  wise  as  Israel  had  not  known  since  the  days  of  Joshua  (ch.  viii.  17),
concluded,  "  according  unto  the  manner  "  of  that  festival,  with  a  "  solemn  assembly  "
on  the  eighth  day  (ch.  viii.  18) — "  the  last  day,  that  great  day  of  the  feast"  (John
vii.  37).  After  one  day's  interval,  when  nothing  unusual  was  done,  "  on  the  twenty-
fourth  day  of  the  month  the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled  with  fasting  "  (ver.  1),
and  a  very  great  day.  was  held  of  confession,  adoration,  and  prayer.  This  was
entirely  an  optional  act  on  their  part;  it  was  not  done  to  conform  to  any  injunction  •
it  was  felt  to  be  a  suitable  and  desirable  thing.  Under  the  law  there  was  some — under
the  gospel  is  more — room  for  spontaneous  service.  Not  only  the  ordinances  and
•■ervices  that  are  prescribed,  but  such  and  so  m  my  as  the  cultivation  of  our  spiritual
lit*  requires,  are  what  the  wise  and  the  good  will  practise.    These  should  not  be


OH.  IX.  1—38.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH  lOS

(1)  so  many  as  to  keep  us  from  taking  a  fair  share  in  the  duties  of  daily  life  and  oi
citizenship,  or  as  to  lead  insensibly  to  formality  and  ceremonialism ;  nor  should  they
be  (2)  so  few  as  to  starve  the  soul  or  withhold  from  it  the  full  nourishment  it  needs.
Ezra  and  Nehemiah  may  have  felt  that  the  intense  and  prolonged  exaltation  of  heart
in  which  they  had  been  luxuriating  was  not  without  its  dangers,  and  would  be  wisely
followed  by  a  calmer  service.  In  the  cultivation  of  our  religious  character,  one  hind
of  service  should  alternate  mth  another — the  contemplative  with  the  social,  the
spiritual  with  the  practical,  and  the  joyous  and  congritulatory  with  the  penitential.
Confession  of  sin  was  the  key-note  of  this  entire  service.  It  found  utterance  in  two
ways.

I.  Outward  signs  of  humiliation  (ver.  1).  "  The  children  of  Israel  were
assembled  with  fasting,  and  with  sackcloth  and  earth  upon  them  "  (ver.  1).  They
took  those  measures  to  indicate  humility  which  in  their  age  and  land  were  natural
to  them :  (1)  fasting,  (2)  wearing  sackcloth,  (3)  putting  earth  or  "  sprinkling  dust"
(Job  ii.  12)  on  their  head.  Whenever  outward  manifestations  of  this  kind — "  bowing
down  the  head  as  a  bulrush,  or  spreading  sackcloth  and  ashes"  (Isa.  Iviii.  5),  or
fasting — become  purely  formal  or  simply  ostentatious  (Matt.  vi.  16),  they  become
unacceptable  or  even  positively  repugnant  to  him  who  demands  sincerity  and  spirit-
uality (Ps.  li.  2 ;  John  iv.  24).  But  the  bent  head,  the  downcast  eye,  the  uncon-
trollable tear,  the  unconscious  sigh — these  are  often  the  inarticulate  but  eloquent
utterances  of  contrition  which  the  eye  of  the  all-seaing,  the  ear  of  the  all-hearing
Father  fails  not  to  see  and  hear.

II.  Words  of  penitence.  One  "  fourth  part  they  confessed,  and  worshipped  the
Lord  their  God  "  (ver.  3).  "  With  a  loud  voice  "  (ver.  4)  the  eight  Levites  led  their
devotions,  calling  on  them  to  "  stand  up  and  bless  the  Lord  their  God  for  ever  and
ever  "  (ver.  6),  and  then  the  people  followed  them  in  their  confession ;  thus : — "  Our
fathers  dealt  proudly,  and  hardened  their  necks,  and  hearkened  not  to  thy  command-
ments, and  refused  to  obey,  neither  were  mindful  of  thy  wonders  that  thou  didst
among  them"  (vers.  16,  17);  they  "wrought  great  provocations"  (ver.  18);  "they
were  disobedient,  and  rebelled  against  thee,  and  oast  thy  law  behind  their  backs
(ver.  26)  ;  "  they  did  evil  again  before  thee  "  (ver.  28) ;  "  they  dealt  proudly,  and
Binned  against  thy  judgments, .  .  .  they  withdrew  the  shoulder  "  (ver.  29).  "  We  have
done  wickedly :  neither  have  our  kings,  our  princes,  our  priests,  or  our  fathers  kept
thy  law ;  .  .  .  they  have  not  served  thee  ...  in  thy  great  goodness."  Here  is  ample
and  unreserved  confession  of  their  own  and  their  fathers'  guilt:  —  1.  Manifold
shortcoming — not  hearkening  to  commandments,  being  unmindful  of  wonders,  not
serving  God  in  his  great  goodness.  2.  Positive  and  aggravated  transgression —
dealing  proudly,  working  great  provocations,  rebelling  against  God,  casting  law
behind  them,  &c.  3.  Backsliding — "  withdrawing  the  shoulder  "  that  had  been  given
to  the  yoke.  We  are  summoned  to  "  take  with  us  words  and  turn  to  the  Lord  "
(Hosea  xiv.  2).  "  With  the  mouth  confession  is  made  unto  salvation  "  (Rom.  x,  10).
Our  confession  should  be  (1)  ample  and  unconstrained,  including  (a)  shortcoming,
(b)  transgression,  and,  if  called  for,  (c)  backsliding ;  it  must  be  (2)  sincere — not  a
mere  repetition  of  beer  ^ning  words  which  other  penitents  have  employed,  but  the
utterance  of  what  our  own  heart  feels. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 29. — A  prai/erftd  review  of  Divine  goodness  as  manifested  in  the  facts  of
human  life.  I.  This  is  a  prayerful  review  of  the  Divine  name.  "  And  blessed  be
thy  glorious  name,  which  is  exalted  above  all  blessing  and  praise''  (ver.  6).  1.  It
views  God  as  the  Creator  of  all  things  (ver.  6).  2.  It  views  God  as  electing  his
people  (ver.  7).  3.  It  views  God  as  covenanting  with  the  faithful  (ver.  8).  4.  It
views  God  as  delivering  his  people  in  the  time  of  sore  afSiction  (vers.  9,  10).

II.  This  is  a  prayerful  review  of  the  Divine  action.  "  And  thou  didst  divide  the
■ea  before  them  "  (ver.  11).  1.  The  act  of  deliverance  (ver.  11).  2.  The  act  of  guid-
ance. "  Moreover  thou  leddest  them  in  the  day  by  a  cloudy  pillar  "  (ver.  12).  3.  The
act  of  instruction  (vers.  13, 14).  4.  The  act  of  provision."  "And  gavest  them  bretid
from  heaven  for  their  hunger  "  (ver.  15).  6.  The  act  of  forbearance  (ver,  17).  C
Ihe  act  of  conquest  (ver.  24).    7.  The  act  of  retribution  (ver.  27). — E.


IM  THE  BOOK  OF  NEIlEMIAS.  [ch.  ix.  1—38.

Vers.  1 — 38. — The  solemn  fast  of  assembled  Israel.  Notice  three  features  in  the
people's  religious  life.  1.  Their  confession  of  sin.  2.  Their  external  reformat  on.
3.  Their  solemn  adoption  of  the  written  word  of  God  as  the  law  of  their  life.  Take
these  as  representative,  universal.

I.  Humiliation  and  confession.  1.  Public  and  united  as  well  as  private  and
solitary.  Great  impressiveness  in  numbers.  The  heart  needs  the  stimulus  of  con-
tact with  great  waves  of  feeling.  There  is  much  in  the  expression  of  religious
emotion  to  feed  and  sustain  it.  2.  The  sense  of  sin  should  not  be  merely  the
acknowledgment  of  individual  transgressions,  but  of  moral  helplessness.  "They
confessed  their  sins  and  the  iniquities  of  their  fathers."  They  recounted  the  history
of  Divine  grace  and  the  baokslidings  of  his  people.  It  kept  alive  in  their  hearts  the
sense  of  their  utter  dependence  on  the  free,  unmerited  mercy  of  Jehovah.  3.  The
penitential  spirit  will  clothe  itself  in  an  appropriate  dress.  The  people  fasted  and
put  on  sackcloth  and  earth,  as  signs  of  mourning  and  self-humiliation.  We  are
not  enjoined  to  adopt  their  religious  customs,  but  there  is  a  natural  expression  of
penitence  which  is  not  formality  or  self-righteousness.  Self-denial,  simplicity  of
life  and  manners,  practical  remembrance  of  the  nothingness  of  earthly  things.
"  Moderation  known  unto  all  men."

II.  The  kfpormation  op  the  outward  life.  There  are  external  conditions  under
wliich  alone  the  true  service  of  God  can  be  fulfilled.  Such  are — 1.  Complete  separa-
tion from  alliance  with  ungodly  strangers.  The  uncompromising  purity  of  our
conversation  is  our  only  safeguard.  The  truly  consecrated  heart  will  renounce  all
for  God.  Often  a  sacrifice  will  be  involved,  but  to  give  up  the  old  life  is  to  save  the
new.  2.  Attention  to  the  public  observance  of  religious  ordinances.  The  most
humble  and  sanctified  natures  appreciate  such  opportunities  tlie  most.  Neglect  of
the  house  of  God  is  a  sure  sign  of  decay  of  the  spiritual  life.  Nothing  can  be
substituted  for  it.  Solitary  raligion  mav  be  sincere,  but  it  cannot  be  entirely  healthy,
and  is  generally  apt  to  grow  morbid.  The  consecrated  gifts  of  God's  people  are
placed  at  our  disposal  by  the  mingling  together  of  hearts  and  voices,  and  the  use  of
a  prepared  expression  of  religious  feeling.  3.  The  service  of  God  in  the  daily  life.
"  In  the  land  which  thou  gavest  unto  our  fathers  ;  "  "  h^liold,  we  are  servants  in  it."
Religion  must  be  made  a  reality,  not  only  in  the  public  assembly,  but  in  the  house-
hold, in  the  place  of  business,  in  the  relations  we  sustain  to  fellow-men,  in  national
life,  in  all  the  land.

III.  The  solemn  covenant  sealed  by  God's  people,  adoption  of  his  word  as  the
ONE  ONLY  LAW  TO  BE  OBSERVED.  "  We  make  a  sure  covenant,  and  write  it."  1.  The
covenant  rests  upon  a  covenant.  We  stand  upon  the  ground  which  God  himself  has
prepared  for  us — the  history  of  his  faithfulness  and  love  in  the  past.  We  dare  not
undertake  to  live  by  the  law  of  God  except  we  have  the  assurance  of  his  grace.  The
Old  Testament  is  the  precious  support  of  our  faith  as  we  pledge  ourselves  to  Christ
in  the  new  covenant  of  the  gospel.  We  are  able  to  surround  ourselves  with  the
cloud  of  witnesses.  2.  The  fellowship  of  faith  our  help.  Those  who  have  set  their
seals  to  the  same  writing  hold  up  each  other's  strength  in  the  fulfilment  of  the  vow.
Princes,  Levites,  priests,  with  the  people.  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons ;  but  when
all  ranks  and  ofBces  are  united  in  his  service,  the  confidence  of  all  is  maintained,  and
the  spirit  of  brotherhood  feeds  the  spirit  of  self-sacrifice.  3.  Public  consecration
and  profession  of  obedience  should  be  the  result  of  a  deep,  inward  work  of  God's
Spirit,  in  the  renewal  of  the  heart  and  life.  All  rash  vows  are  wrong ;  how  much
more  those  made  in  the  name  of  religion !  Because  we  repent  and  return  to  the
Lord,  we  may  safely  make  a  covenant  of  faithfulness ;  but  a  mere  sealing  of  the
outward  man,  without  a  spiritual  renovation,  is  a  mockery  and  a  snare.  4.  Enlighten-
ment should  accompany  all  public  religious  acts.  The  people  heard  the  word  and
understood  it  before  they  solemnly  pledged  themselves  to  keep  the  law.  There  can
be  no  healthy  revival  of  religion  which  is  not  founded  on  enlightenment.  The  great
assemblies  are  easily  moved  to  common  action ;  but  the  preparation  for  it  should  be  the
clear,  full,  simple  announcement  of  the  gospel.  We  can  never  take  too  much  account
of  the  fact  that  the  human  heart  deceives  itself,  that  ignorance  blinds,  that  selfishness
and  slothfulness  hide  the  wonders  of  the  past  and  the  dangers  of  the  future.  The
vhole  word  of  God  should  be  the  foundation  on  which  religious  life  is  built  up.— B.


CH.  H.  1— 38.J  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.  IW

Vers.  2,  31—33,  36 — 38. — Appeal.  It  has  been  rom.irked  tliat  there  is  no  prayer
in  this  lengthy  address  to  God.  And  the  abasnoe  of  direct  supplication  is  certainly
very  noticeable.  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  may  make  our  appeal  to  God
in  more  ways  than  by  directly  asking  him  for  the  blessings  we  desire  at  his  hand.
The  comparative  and  almost  complete  absence  of  formal  petition  from  this  address
suggests  to  us  that  we  may  go  far  towards  winning  our  cause  by —

I.  Presenting  the  soul  before  God  in  a  receptive  srianuAL  state.  It  is  only
in  some  spiritual  conditions  that  we  can  expect  to  be  recipients  of  his  bounty.  Not
to  be  in  the  right  state  is  to  lock  the  door  at  which  we  stand.  By  such  an  address
as  tliia  the  Jews  either  showed  themselves  to  be  in,  or  brought  themselves  into,
an  acceptable  recipient  condition.  There  were — 1.  The  solemn  recognition  of  God's
excellency ;  of  his  greatness — "  Our  God,  the  great,  the  mighty,  and  the  terrible  God  "
(ver.  32);  of  his  goodness — "thy  great  mercies' sake ; "  .  .  .  "thou  art  a  gracious
and  merciful  God  "  (ver.  31)  ;  of  his  faithfulness — "  who  keepest  covenant  and  mercy  "
(ver.  32)  ;  of  his  justice — "thou  art  just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  us"  (ver.  33).

2.  Sense  of  their  own  ill-desert.  "  Thou  hast  done  right,  but  we  have  done  wickedly."

3.  Readiness  to  separate  from  sin.  "  The  seed  of  Israel  separated  themselves  from
all  strangers"  (ver.  2).  "If  we  regard  iniquity  in  our  hearts,  the  Lord  will  not
hear  us"  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18;  Isa.  i.  15).  4.  Preparedness  to  pledge  themselves  to  his
service.  The  Jews  were  prepared  to  "  make  a  sure  covenant,  and  write  it  and  seal
it"  (ver.  38).  Thus,  on  this  occasion,  the  children  of  Israel  prese  ted  themselves
before  God,  and  not  only  showed,  as  they  began  to  speak  reverently  and  humbly  to
him,  but  gained  more  as  they  proceeded,  a  fitting  spiritual  condition  for  receiving
his  Divine  communications.  It  is  not  by  "  loud  speaking,"  nor  by  "  much  speaking  "
(Matt.  vi.  7),  but  rather  by  asking  in  a  right  temper  and  jnode,  that  we  make  a
forcible  and  prevailing  appeal  to  the  Divine  Helper ;  presenting  ourselves  before
hiui  as  suppliants  in  the  spirit  of  (1)  profound  reverence,  (2)  -deep  humility,  (3)
genuine  consecration.

II.  Request  in  words  (vers.  32,  36,  37).  "Now  therefore,  our  God,  ...  let
not  all  the  trouble  seem  little  before  thee,  that  hath  come  upon  us,  on  our  kings,  and
on  our  princes,  and  on  our  priests,  and  on  our  prophets,  and  on  our  fathers,  and  on  all
thy  people,  since  the  time  of  the  kings  of  Assyria  unto  this  day  "  (ver.  32).  "  Be-
hold," continues  this  appeal,  "  we  are  servants,  and  the  land  thou  gavest  unto  our
fathers,  ...  we  are  servants  in  it :  and  it  j'ieldeth  much  increase  unto  the  kings
whom  thou  hast  set  over  us  :  .  .  .  they  have  dominion  over  our  bodies,  and  over  our
cattle,  at  their  pleasure,  and  we  are  in  great  distress  "  (vers.  36, 37).  This  is  (1)  a  direct
appeal  to  the  pitifulness  of  Jehovah  that  he  would  have  compassion  on  them  who
were  slaves  in  their  own  land — their  persons  and  their  property  being  at  the  mercy
of  a  foreign  prince  ;  it  was  also  (2)  an  indirect  appeal  to  his  faithfulness  and  justice.
For  had  not  God  chastened  them  very  long  and  very  sore  ? — he  who  had  promised
to  forgive  them  their  iniquities  when  they  returned  unto  him ;  he  who  would  not
make  his  punishment  to  be  out  of  proportion  to  their  offence.  They  desired  to  "  see
the  beauty  of  the  Lord  "  (his  righteousness,  his  equity),  that  they  might  be  "  made
glad  according  to  the  days  wherein  he  had  afflicted  them,  and  the  years  wherein  they
had  seen  evil"  (Ps.  xc.  15,  17).  In  making  our  appeal  to  God  there  are  two  things
which  will  ever  be  the  substance  and  burden  of  our  plea  : — (1)  the  soreness  of  our
necessity :  our  weakness,  our  want,  our  trouble,  our  humiliation,  our  darkness  and
ignorance,  our  repeated  failure,  our  distance  from  tlie  goal  and  the  prize ;  (2)  the
greatness  of  his  goodness:  his  pitifulness,  his  patience,  his  considerateness,  his
promised  mercy,  his  faithfulness.  We  may  come  hopefully  to  his  throne  because  he
18  "a  gracious  and  merciful  God,"  pleading  his  "great  mercies'  sake"  (ver.  31).
But  more  than  that,  we  may  come  "  boldly  "  to  the  throne  of  his  grace,  because  he
is  One  that  "  keeps  covenant "  (ver.  32)  as  well  as  "  mercy,"  because  he  has  pledged
his  word  to  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  he  will  be  "  faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  oui
sins,  and  to  cleanse  us  from  all  unrighteousness." — G.

Vers.  6 — 15,  19 — 25,  27 — 31. — Adoration  and  thanksgiving.  At  this  great  and
■olemn  gathering,  which  followed  the  feast  of  tabernacles,  Ezra  and  eight  Levites  led
the  whole  aisembly  in  a  reverent  address  and  appeal  to  God.     It  is  thought  by  som*


108  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEmAH.  [ch.  ix.  1—38.

that  the  record  of  it  in  this  chapter  (vers.  6 — 38)  is  the  exact  copy  of  it  as  then  written
down  for  the  use  of  the  Levites ;  or  it  may  be  the  leading  topics  of  it  as  afterwards
recollected  and  recorded.  We  have  seen  that  confession  of  sin  is  the  groundwork
and  substance  of  it.  But  it  includes  adoration  and  thanksgiving,  for  the  grateful
recital  of  the  excellences  of  God's  character  and  the  graciousness  of  his  dealings
would  be  the  very  t/iing  to  deepen  and  to  quicken  penitence  for  their  sin.  A  realis-
ation of  God's  holiness  and  a  remembrance  of  his  kindness  are  inseparably  con-
nected with  the  sense  of  our  own  guilt.  This  recital  of  the  goodness  of  God,  both
general  and  particular,  contains  reference  to — 1.  The  essential  greatness  of  God :  as  the
one  Lord  ;  Creator  and  Preserver  of  men  ;  Maker  of  heaven,  "  with  all  their  host ; "
.  .  .  whom  "  the  host  of  heaven  worshippeth "  (ver.  6).  2.  His  distinguishing
goodness  to  Israel :  choosing  Abraham  (ver.  7),  working  great  wonders  on  behaU
of  the  race  (vers.  10,  11),  giving  them  a  day  of  rest  and  a  human  leader  (ver.  14),
establishing  and  enriching  them  in  the  land  of  promise  (vers.  22 — 26).  3.  His
miraculous  and  his  abiding  care  for  their  wants :  giving  them  "  bread  from  heaven
for  their  hunger,"  and  bringing  forth  water  for  them  out  of  the  rock  for  their  thirst
(ver.  15) ;  forty  years  sustaining  them  in  the  wilderness  (ver.  21).  4.  His  faithful-
ness :  "  performing  his  words,  for  he  is  righteous  "  (ver.  8).  5.  His  pitifulness,  and
mercy,  and  patience  :  seeing  their  affliction  and  hearing  their  cry  (ver.  9)  ;  "  ready  to
pardon,  slow  to  anger,  and  of  great  kindness"  (ver.  17);  "many  times  delivering
them  "  in  answer  to  their  cry  (ver.  28) ;  "  not  utterly  consuming  nor  forsaking  them  "
(ver.  31).  6.  His  guidancaand  teaching:  giving  the  cloudy  pillar  and  the  pillar  of
fire  (ver.  12)  ;  speaking  to  them  from  heaven  and  giving  them  judgments  and  true
laws,  &c.  (ver.  13),  and  his  "  good  Spirit  to  instruct  them  "  (ver.  20).  7.  His  chast-
ening love  (vers.  28 — 30).     Let  us  consider —

I.  The  abundant  ground  fob  gratitude  on  the  part  of  evert  one  of  us.  We
worship  and  bless  God  as  (1)  our  Creator:  "  it  is  he  that  hath  made  t«,  and  not  we
ourselves ;  "  it  is  he  who  breathed  into  us  "  the  breath  of  life,"  and  made  us  "  living
souls ; "  as  (2)  our  Divine  Preserver  and  Sustainer,  whose  visitation  has  preserved
our  spirit ;  as  (3)  One  who  has  shown  many  peculiar  and  especial  favours  to  us
which  he  has  not  bestowed  on  others ;  as  (4)  One  who  has  been  opening  his  hand
and  satisfying  our  daily  want — "  daily  loading  us  with  benefits  ; "  as  (5)  One  who
has  been  faithful  in  all  his  dealings  with  us  ;  who  (6)  has  borne  much  and  long  with
our  waywardness,  our  fruitlessness,  our  imperfection  ;  as  (7)  One  who  has  been
guiding  us  continually,  "  ordering  our  steps,"  leading  us  by  a  way  we  knew  not,  by
a  right  and  a  wise  way ;  (8)  teaching  us  his  holy  will,  acting  on  us  by  his  "  good
Spirit,"  and  (9)  blessing  us  by  that  which  we  may  have  least  appreciated,  but  which
has  been  the  truest  instance  of  his  love — by  chastening  us,  correcting  us,  "  leading
us  into  the  wilderness,  humbling  us,"  weakeiung  us,  impoverishing  us,  taking  from
us  the  "  light  of  our  eyes,"  "  breaking  our  schemes  of  earthly  joy,"  that  we  might
return  unto  him,  to  find  our  rest  in  his  love,  our  portion  in  his  service.

II.  Good  reasons  why  wb,  as  erring  but  endeavouring  souls,  should  recall
AND  RECOUNT  IT.  There  are  four  very  strong  reasons  why,  in  the  presence  of  God
and  of  one  another,  we  should  recall  his  past  loving-kindness  and  his  everlasting
goodness.  1.  It  is  in  accordance  with  his  will,  and  will  give  pleasure  to  him  when
we  do  so  reverently  and  gratefully.  2.  It  will  deepen  our  sense  of  sin ;  for  we  shall
feel  that  it  is  against  all  this  goodness  and  mercy  we  have  rebelled.  3.  It  will  giva
spirituality  and  intensity  to  the  voice  of  our  praise.  Such  recollections  will  constrain
us  to  "  make  melody  in  our  heart "  when  we  make  music  with  our  voice.  4.  It  will
give  depth  to  our  abiding  gratitude — that  sense  of  unbounded  indebtedness  which
we  carry  with  us  from  the  sanctuary,  and  hold  in  our  hearts  everywhere. — 0.

Vers.  19— 27.— TA«  Divine  description  of  a  sinful  life.  I.  That  the  sinful  lifb
IB  FAVOURED  WITH  THE  DiviNE  FORBEARANCE.  The  sins  of  the  people  were  pride
(ver.  16),  disobedience  (ver.  17),  idolatry  (ver.  18),  murder  (ver.  26),  provocation,
obduracy.  "  Yet  thou  in  thy  manifold  mercies  forsookest  them  not  in  the  wilder-
ness "  (ver.  19).  1.  This  forbearance  is  merciful.  2.  This  forbearance  is  considerate.
In  the  wilderness  it  is  bo  much  needed.  3.  This  forbearance  is  unrecognised.  Sea
the  obduracy  of  sin.


CH.  X.  1—39.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


lOS


II.  That  the  sinful  life  is  favouked  with  all  the  beneficent  ministries  of
HEAVEN.  "The  pillar  of  the  cloud  departed  not  from  them"  (ver.  19).  1.  The  sinful
life  has  light.  2.  The  einful  life  has  guidance.  3.  The  sinful  life  has  spiritual
instruction  (ver.  20).     See  the  ingratitude  of  sin.

III.  That  the  sinful  life  is  sustained  by  the  kind  providence  of  God  (ver.  21).
1.  Suitable.  2.  Continuous.  3.  Sufficient.  4.  Various.  See  the  wilful  blindness
and  ingratitude  of  sin.

IV.  That  the  sinful  life  often  exferiences  great  temporal  pbosperitt  at  thb
hand  of  God  (ver.  22).  1.  Possession.  2.  Multiplication.  3.  Conquest.  4.  Plenty.
Yet  the  goodness  of  God  does  not  lead  to  repentance.

V.  That*  the  si.n'ful  life  is  also  disciplined  by  afflictivb  peovidencbs (ver.  27).
In  all  this  see  the  Divine  effort  to  awaken  the  sinner. — E.


EXPOSITION.


Cn AFTER  X.

The  names  of  those  who  sealed,
and  the  terms  of  the  covenant  (oh.  x.).
The  covenant  which  the  Levites  had  recom-
mended, prohably  at  the  suggestion  of  Nehe-
miah  and  Ezra,  whose  hand  may  perhaps  be
traced  in  the  long  address  of  the  preceding
chapter  (vers.  6 — 38),  was  at  once  accepted
by  the  heads  of  the  nation  in  Church  and
State,  and  was  "sealed  to"  by  Nehomiah,
by  his  secretary,  by  the  heads  of  the
priestly  and  Levitical  families,  each  sealing
for  his  house,  by  the  heads  of  various  lay
families  or  communities,  and  by  a  certain
number  of  individual  laymen,  sealing  (as  it
would  seem)  for  themselves  only.  The  rest
of  the  people,  those  who  did  not  actually
seal,  still  "clave  to  their  brethren,"  i.  e.
agi-eed  with  them,  and  accepted  the  obli-
gations of  the  covenant  as  fully  as  if  they
had  put  their  seals  to  it.  There  was  no  op-
position, no  dissentient  voice,  no  party  even
which  stood  sullenly  aloof.  That  sort  of
enthusiasm  had  come  upon  the  nation  which
carries  everything  before  it,  and  causes  a
whole  multitude  to  become  ' '  as  one  man  "
for  good  or  for  evil.  This  time  it  was  for
good.  The  people  bound  themselves,  first
of  all,  in  general  terms,  to  keep  the  whole
law,  "to  observe  and  do  all  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord  their  Lord,  and  his  judg-
ments and  his  statutes "  (ver.  29) ;  after
which  they  went  on  to  particularise  certain
special  points  of  the  law,  recently  infringed
upon,  which  they  bound  themselves  to  ob-
serve in  future.  These  were  chiefly  the
fo^llowing :  —  1.  The  prohibition  of  inter-
marriage with  the  neighbouring  idolatrous


nations  (ver.  30) ;  2.  The  command  to  hallow
the  sabbath  ;  3.  The  law  concerning  the  sab-
batical year  (ver.  31) ;  i.  The  law  of  first-
fruits  (vers.  35 — 37) ;  6.  The  obligation  to
pay  tithes  to  the  sacerdotal  order  (vers.
37,  38).  Finally,  they  undertook  certain
new  obligations,  not  expressly  contained  in
the  law,  but  perhaps  regarded  as  flowing  from
it  by  way  of  natural  consequence,  or  else
as  desirable  modes  of  carrying  out  its  pro-
visions.   These  were  three  in  number,  viz. —

1.  The  entire  abolition  of  the  custom  which
had  grown  up  of  lending  msney  to  their
bretliren  upon  pledge  (see  ch.   v.   3 — 13) ;

2.  The  support  of  the  temple  service  by  an
annual  tax  upon  each  adult  male,  which  was
fixed  for  the  present  at  the  rate  of  one-third
part  of  a  sliekel  (ver.  32) ;  and,  3.  The  supply
of  the  wood  requisite  for  keeping  the  fire
alight  upon  the  great  altar,  and  for  con-
suming the  various  offerings  (ver.  34).  It
is  remarkable  that  these  two  latter  regula-
tions became  pennanent  national  institu-
tions, maintaining  themselves  into  Roman
times,  when  we  find  them  still  continuing
(see  Matt.  xvii.  24;  Joseph.,  'BelL  Jud.,'
ii.  17,  §  6).

Ver.  1. — Nehemiah,  as  Tirshatha,  or  civil
ruler,  naturally  appended  his  seal  first  of  all
He  was  followed  by  Zidkijah,  or  Zadok,
probably  his  secretary  (ch.  xiii.  13).

Vers.  2 — 8. — The  heads  of  the  priestly
houses  attached  their  seals  next ;  ana  among
these  the  high-priestly  house  of  Seraiah
had,  very  properly,  the  precedence.  The
other  names  of  this  list  recur  for  the  most
part  in  ch.  xii.  1 — 6,  where  they  designate
"priests"  (i.  e.  priestly  houses)  "which  went
up  with  Zerubbabel."  Eliashib,  the  high
priest  of  the  time,  prohably  appended  ue
seal  of  the  house  of  Seraiah.


110


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.


[CH.  X.  1—39


Vers.  9 — 13.  — Jeahua,  Binnui,  and  Kad-
miel  represent  the  three  chief  families  of
returned  Lovitea  (see  Ezra  ii.  40  ;  iii.  9 ;
Neh.  yiL  48,  44 ;  ix.  4,  5,  &c. ).  Binnui,
it  may  be  remarked,  has  now  supplanted
Kadmiel,  and  stepped  into  the  second  place.
Of  the  remaining  names,  those  of  Hashabiah
and  Sherebiah  desis^ate  families  which  re-
turned with  Ezra  (Ezra  viii.  18,  19).  The
remaining  names  are  probably  also  those  of
families.

Vers.  14— 27.— The  chief  of  the  people.
Down  to  Magpiash  the  names  correspond  to
those  of  lay  families  which  returned  with
Zerubbabel  (Ezra  ii  3 — 80 ;  Neh.  vii  8—33),
the  first  eighteen  being  personal,  and  the
last  three  names  of  localities.  Nebai  is  the
same  as  "  Nebo  "  (eh.  vii  33),  and  Magpiash
the  same  as  Magbish  (Ezra  ii  30).  From
MeshuUam  to  Baanah  (vers.  20 — 27)  the
names  seem  to  be  again  personal ;  but  they
are  new,  and  therefore  probably  those  of
individuals  who  were  not  authorised  to  re-
present either  clans  or  localities.  In  ver.  17,
the  two  names  Ater  and  Hizkijah  should  be
united  by  a  hyphen,  since  it  is  clear  that
they  represent  the  single  family,  Ater  of
Elezekiah,  mentioned  in  Ezra  ii  16  and
Neh.  vii  21.  "  Hizkijah  "  and  "  Hezekiah  "
are  in  the  original  identical

Ver.  28. — The  rest  of  the  people.  /.  e.
those  who  had  not  appended  their  seals,
whether  others  had  sealed  for  them  or  no.
The  writer  makes  no  exception,  and  thereby
indicates  a  very  general,  if  not  a  universal,
concurrence  on  the  part  of  the  nation.  His
enumeration  of  classes  is  the  same  as  Ezra's
(Ezra  ii  70).  All  they  that  had  separated
themselves  from  the  people  of  the  lands  unto
the  law  of  God.  Such  proselytes  from  the
heathen  as  had  joined  themselves  to  the
Jewish  people  since  their  return  from  the
captivity  (comp.  Ezra  vi  21).  Every  one
having  knowledg^e,  and  having  nnder-
standing.  All  who  were  of  age  to  under-
stand the  nature  of  the  covenant  and  what
was  meant  by  sealing  to  it— not  a  specially
"intelligent"  or  "learned"  class,  as  Ewald
supposes  ('Hist,  of  Israel,'  voL  v.  p.  144,
note  4).

Ver.  89. — They  clave  to  their  brethren,
their  nobles.  They  gave  their  support  and
adherence  to  their  more  distinguished  bre-
thren who  had  attached  their  seals  to  the
document,  approving  what  they  had  done,
and  ratifying  it.  Entered  into  a  onrse,  and
into  an  oath,  to  walk  in  God's  law.  Some-
thing of  this  kind  seems  to  have  oecurred  in
the  wUderneas,  when  God's  law  was  first
given  to  his  people  (Deut.  zxix.  12) ;  and
therefore,  when  renewals  of  the  covenant
were  made,  and  the  people  were  required  to
ratify  the  act,  it  was  natural  to  recur  to  the
old  sanction.     An  oath  was  probably  taken


of  tlie  people  in  the  tiiue-of  Josiah  (2  Kings
xxiii.  3),  when  they  are  said  to  have  "  stood
to  the  covenant."  Moses  the  servant  ol
God.  The  epithet  "servant  of  God,"  or
"  servant  of  the  Lord,"  attaches  to  Moses  in
a  peculiar  way.  God  called  him  (Num.  xii
7)  "  my  servant  Moses,  who  is  faithful  in
all  my  house;"  and  henceforward  "servant
of  God  "  was  his  epitheton  usitatum  (see
Josh,  i  1 ;  viii  31,  33  ;  1  Chron.  vi  49 ;
2  Chron.  xxiv.  9  ;  Dan.  ix.  11 ;  Heb.  iii  6 ;
Rev.  XV.  3).  St.  Paul  contrasts  "  Moses,
the  servant"  with  "Christ,  the  Son"  (Heb
iii  1—6).

Ver.  30. — That  we  would  not  give  our
daughters,  &c.  On  the  recurrence  of  the
mixed  marriages  so  soon  after  the  reform-
ation of  Ezra,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  xiii  23.
Ver.  31. — If  the  people  of  the  land  bring
ware  ....  on  the  sabbath.  If  the  heathen
of  this  region  will  insist  on  bringing  their
wares  into  our  cities  and  ofibring  them  for
immediate  sale  on  the  sabbath,  we  Jews  bind
ourselves  not  to  deal  with  them  on  that  day.
Subsequently,  Nehemiah  carried  out  more
stringent  regulations  (ch.  xiii  15 — 22).  Or
on  the  holy  day.  Rather,  "or  on  a  holy
day."  The  people  bind  themselves  to  ab-
stain from  trade  not  only  on  the  sabbath,
but  on  any  holy  day.  That  we  would  leave
the  seventh  year.  By  "  leaving  the  seventh
year,"  leaving  the  lands  untilled  every
seventh  or  sabbatical  year  is  meant  This
precept  of  the  law  had  been  frequently  neg-
lected during  the  times  of  the  monarchy,
and  its  neglect  was  one  of  the  sins  which  the
captivity  was  expressly  intended  to  punish
(2  Chron.  xxxvi  21).  It  now  appears  that
after  the  return  the  precept  had  been  again
disobeyed.  The  exaction  of  every  debt.
Literally,  "the  pledge  of  every  hand."
Compare  ch.  v.  2—13,  and  note  that,  not-
withstanding Nehemiah's  curse  and  the
people's  assent  to  it  (ver.  13),  the  practice  of
lending  upon  pledge  had  recommenced.

Ver.  32.  — To  charge  ourselves  yearly
with  the  third  part  of  a  shekel.  Hitherto
the  Jews  had  had  no  impost  analogous  to
our  "church-rate."  The  "half-shekel  of
the  sanctuary,"  as  it  is  called,  being  only
payable  on  the  rare,  and  forbidden,  occasion
of  a  census  of  the  whole  people  (Exod.  xxx.
13 — 16),  could  not  possibly  have  served_  for
the  ordinary  support  of  the  temple  service  ;  ■
but  it  was  calculated  to  suggest  to  thought-
ful minds  the  need  of  some  regular  fund,  and
the  persons  on  whom  the  obligation  lay  to
provide  it.  While  the  Jews  were  an  inde-
pendent nation,  with  their  own  kings  and
their  own  revenue,  no  difficulty  had  been  felt
in  keeping  up  the  service,  since  the  kings
easily  provided  for  it ;  but  in  the  existing
condition  of  affairs  the  case  was  different.
A  "  governor"  was  not  like  a  king  ;  he  was


OH.  X.  1—39.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHBMIAH.


Ill


responsible ;  he  was  removable ;  he  was
bound  to  remit  the  great  bulk  of  th&  taxes
to  the  court.  Under  these  circumstances,
and  probably  in  connection  with  an  im-
mediate need,  the  idea  arose  of  a  special
(voluntary)  tax,  to  be  paid  annually  by  all
adult  males,  for  the  support  of  the  service,  the
continual  provision  of  tne  morning  and  even-
ing sacrifice,  the  incense,  the  shew-bread,
the  red  heifers,  the  scape-goat,  the  numerous
victims,  and  the  numerous  meat  and  drink
offerings  required  on  various  occasions,  and
especially  at  each  of  the  great  festivals.  It
was  felt  that  the  provision  in  the  law  ruled
two  things — 1.  The  uniformity  of  the  tax  ;
and,  2.  The  sphere  of  its  incidence— that  it
should  be  paid  by  all  adult  males.  With
regard  to  its  proper  amount,  that  had  to
be  fixed  by  a  consideration  of  existing  needs
in  comparison  with  existing  means.  The
third  part  of  a  shekel  was  determined  on,  as
sufficient  at  the  time  ;  but  it  was  not  long
ere  for  the  third  part  the  half-shekel  was
Bubstituted,  a  return  being  thus  made  to  the
■tandard  fixed  by  the  law,  and  an  ample
provision  made  for  the  maintenance  of  the
established  rites  in  full  completeness  and
efficiency  (eomp.  Matt.  xvii.  24 — 27).

Ver.  33. — For  the  shew-bread.  See  Levit.
xxiv.  S — 8.  Small  as  the  cost  of  the
shew-bread  was,  consisting,  as  it  did,  of  no
more  than  twelve  cakos  of  fine  flour  weekly,
it  is  yet  placed  first  on  account  of  its  import-
ance, being  the  bread  of  God's  presence,  the
type  of  the  sacramental  bread  of  the  new
covenant.  The  continual  meat  offering  is
that  offering  of  flour  mingled  vrith  fine  olive
oil  which  God  had  required  to  be  offered
twice  a  day,  at  morning  and  at  evening,  in
conjunction  with  the  two  lambs,  which  con-
stituted the  continual  burnt  offering  (Kum.
xxviii.  5).  Of  the  sabbaths.  /.  e.  "  for
the  offering  of  the  sabbath  days,''  which  con-
sisted of  two  lambs  with  appropriate  meat
and  drink  offerings,  in  addition  to  the
offering  of  every  day  (Num.  xxviiL  9,  10).
Of  the  new  moons.  Two  bullocks,  one  ram,
seven  lambs,  with  appropriate  meat  and
drink  offerings  {ibid.  vers.  11 — 14).  For
the  set  feasts.  The  passover,  the  feast  of
Pentecost,  the  feast  of  trumpets,  and  the
feast  of  tabernacles.  The  offerings  required
at  each  are  given  with  great  exactness  in
Num.  xxviii.  and  xxix.  The  holy  things.
'  Wave  -  offerings  "  and  "  peac«  -  offerings  "
(Lev.  xxiii.  10,  17, 19)  are  probably  intended.
They  were  "  holy  to  the  Lord  for  the  priest "
{ibid.  ver.  20).  The  sin  offerings  are  those
commanded  in  Num.  xxviii.  15,  22,  30 ;
xxix.  5,  11,  16,  19,  &c.  And  for  all  the
work  of  the  house.  The  internal  "work"
m  cleansing  and  keeping  in  proper  order  the
apparatus  of  worship  is  probably  intended,
not  external  repairs.


Ver.  34.— We  cast  the  lots  for  the  wood
offering.  The  "wood  offering"  is  now  first
heard  of  Fuel  had  probably  been  more
plentiful  in  the  times  of  the  monarchy  than
it  had  now  become,  and  the  temple  treasury
had  been  rich  enough  to  provide  what  was
needed  in  order  to  keep  the  altar  fire  per-
petually burning  (Levit.  vi.  13).  But  times
had  changed.  The  hill-country  of  Judaea
had  gradually  been  stripped  of  its  forests.
The  temple  was,  comparatively  speaking,
poor,  and  some  permanent  arrangement  for
the  supply  of  the  required  fuel  had  become
necessary.  It  would  seem,  from  the  present
passage,  that  the  arrangement  actually  made
was  one  by  which  different  families  or  dis-
tricts undertook  the  duty  of  furnishing  the
wood  in  turn,  and  lots  were  cast  to  deter-
mine the  order  in  which  they  should  dis-
charge the  office.  According  to  Josephus
('BelL  Jud.,'  ii.  17,  §  6),  the  wood  needed
for  a  year  was  brought  in  on  a  pai'ticular
day — the  fourteenth  day  of  the  fifth  month
— which  was  kept  as  a  festival,  and  known
as  the  "Xylophoria."  At  times  appointed
year  by  year.  It  may  be  gathered  from  this
that,  originally,  no  single  day  was  selected
for  bringing  in  all  the  wood  ;  much  less  one
and  the  same  day  appointed  for  every  year.
The  original  system  was  variable  and
elastic ;  but  in  course  of  time  a  rigid  uni-
formity was  introduced  and  established.  As
it  is  written  in  the  law.     See  Levit.  vi.  12.

Yer.  35.  And  to  bring  the  first-fruita
.  .  .  .  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The
idea  of  offering  ' '  first-fruits  "  may  be  ascribed
to  natural  piety.  They  were  well  known  to
the  Greeks  and  Romans  {airapxai,  primi-
tice).  But  in  the  Mosaic  law  they  were  com-
manded (Exod.  xxii.  29  ;  xxiii.  19  ;  Levit.
xxiii  10,  17,  &c.),  and  thenceforth  became
a  matter  of  religious  obligation.  The  pre-
sent passage  furnishes,  however,  distinct
evidence  that  the  obligation  had  now  for
some  time  been  disregarded.  The  first-fruits
of  all  fruit.  First-fruits  were  required  not
merely  of  wheat  and  other  grain,  but  also
expressly  of  wine  and  oil,  the  produce  of  the
vine  and  olive,  and  by  implication  of  all
other  fruit  trees  (see  Num.  xviii.  lA  ;  Deut
xviii.  4,  &c.).

Ver.  36. — The  first-bom  of  our  sons  and
of  our  cattle,  as  it  is  written  in  the  law.
See  Exod.  xxii.  29 ;  xxxiv.  19.  The  first-
born children  were  to  be  "redeemed."

Ver.  37.— The  first-fruits  of  our  dough.
See  Num.  xv.  18 — 21.  And  our  offerings.
Literally,  "  our  heave  offerings  "  (Num.  xv.
20  ;  Levit.  xxiii.  11,  17).  To  the  chambers
of  the  house.  The  store-chambers  attached
to  the  temple-building  (see  ch.  xiii.  4,  5).
The  tithes  of  our  ground.  As  with  the  law
of  first-fruits,  so  with  that  of  tithes  (which
was  more  burthenaome),  there  had  grown  np


112


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMUH.


[oh.  X.  1—39


•  practice  of  neglecting  it  on  the  part  of
many,  if  not  of  alL  The  natural  result
would  be  the  non-attendan6e  of  Levites  at
Jerusalem,  and  so  a  falling -off  in  the
•olemnity  and  grandeur  of  the  temple-wor-
ihip'  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  10).  It  was  now
covenanted  afresh  on  the  part  of  the  people
that  they  would  resume  the  legal  practice,
tt  any  rate  to  the  extent  of  paying  what  has
been  called  "  the  first  tithe,"  or  that  due  to
the  Levites  for  their  sustentation.  In  all
the  cities  of  our  tillage.  The  Levitical  tithe
was  not  taken  to  Jerusalem,  but  stored  up  in
gome  neighbouring,  generally  Levitical,  city.
Ver.  38. — The  priest ....  shall  be  with
the  Levites  when  the  Levites  take  tithe.
Some  representative  (or  representatives)  of
the  priestly  order  was  to  be  present  when-
ever the  Levites  received  their  tithes,  to  take
note  of  the  quantity,  and  prevent  the  Levites
from  depriving  the  priests  of  their  due  share
— the  tithe  of  the  tithe.  This  tenth,  being
thus  ascertained,  was  to  be  conveyed  to  Jeru-
salem at  the  expense  of  the  Levites,  and
deposited  in  its  appropriate  store-chamber.


Ver.  89. — The  children  of  Israel  and  the
children  of  Levi  shall  bring  the  offering.
The  priests  were  not  to  be  troubled  with  the
conveyance  of  any  of  the  offerings.  The
first-fruits  and  other  oblations  of  the  people
were  to  be  brought  to  the  temple  by  the
people  themselves;  and  the  "tithe  of  the
tithe,"  which  was  the  priests'  due,  by  the
Levites.  Thus  the  priests  would  not  be
drawn  away  from  their  duty  of  ministering
in  the  temple  by  secular  employments  and
matters  of  mere  worldly  business.  We  will
not  forsake,  or  neglect,  the  house  of  our
God.  We  will  not  suffer,  that  is,  any
interruption  of  the  continual  service  of  the
temple,  we  wiU  not  be  parties  to  any  neglect
or  slovenliness  in  the  conduct  of  it.  So  far
as  we  are  concerned,  everything  shall  be
done  to  enable  the  priests  and  Levites  to
remain  constantly  at  Jerusalem  in  full  num-
bers, and  to  devote  themselves  wholly  to
their  sacred  duties  in  God's  house.  With
this  emphatic  declaration  of  their  intentions
the  people  concluded  the  engagements  by
which  they  voluntarily  bound  themselves.


HOMILETICS.

Chu  X. — A  solemn  covenant.    The  public  confession  and  recital  of  God's  dealings

with  Israel,  recorded  in  the  previous  chapter,  concluded  with  a  declaration  of  the
making  of  "  a  sure  covenant,"  written  and  sealed.  This  chapter  contains  a  particular
account  of  the  transaction.

I.  Why  the  covenant  was  madb.  1.  For  the  reasons  contained  in  the  previous
confession.  "  Because  of  all  this"  (ch.  ix.  38).  (1)  The  covenant  of  God  with  their
fathers,  and  his  faithfulness  to  it.  They  had  been  chosen  as  his  people,  and  now  felt
they  ought  to  act  accordingly.  They  held  the  land  again  by  virtue  of  his  covenant
and  promises,  and  would  forfeit  it  by  unfaithfulness.  (2)  The  manifold  goodness  of
God  tt  them  as  a  nation  throughout  their  history.  "  The  goodness  of  God  leadeth
to  repentance,"  and  they  felt  its  influence  for  this  end,  as  they  recalled  the  displays
of  it  to  their  fathers  and  themselves.  (3)  The  long  succession  of  their  national
departures  from  God.  Showing  how  prone  they  were  to  evil ;  how  much  they  needed
every  safeguard  against  it.  (4)  The  successive  punishments  inflicted  upon  them.
Impressing  them  with  the  evil  of  sin,  and  the  necessity  of  godliness  and  righteousness
to  their  happiness.  2.  In  the  hope  that  so  solemn  an  engagement  would  greatly  aid
in  insuring  their  future  obedience.  Feeling  that  all  that  had  been  said  consisted  of
BO  many  reasons  for  conformity  to  the  Divine  law,  they  are  concerned  to  adopt  what-
ever means  were  likely  to  secure  it.  To  this  Bnd  they  unite  in  a  solemn  public  vow,
written  and  sealed,  by  which  they  engage,  not  only  to  God,  but  to  each  other,  to  obey
the  Divine  laws  and  maintain  the  Divine  worship.  And  doubtless  such  a  transaction
was  adapted  to  strengthen  their  good  resolutions,  and  promote  .the  fulfilment  of  them.

II.  By  whom  it  was  made,  and  in  what  manner.  By  all  the  assembly — priests,
Levites,  &c.,  and  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  men  and  women,  and  their  sons  and
daughters  who  were  of  understanding.  Included  amongst  them  wer«  ''  they  that  had
separated  themselves  from  the  people  of  the  lands  unto  the  law  of  God,"  partly,
perhaps,  proselytes  from  the  heathen,  but  including  probably  the  descendants  of
Israelites  who  had  been  left  in  the  land  by  the  Assyrians  and  Chaldeeans,  and  had
become  much  mixed  up  with  the  heathen  (see  Ezra  vi.  21).  1.  The  chiefs  of  the
people  afSxed  their  seals  to  the  document  (vers.  1 — 27).  At  their  head  was  Nehemiah
himself,  as  governor ;  then  follow  the  heads  of  the  priestly  and  Levitical  houses,  and
after  them  the  chiefs  of  the  laity.  2.  The  rest  of  the  people  signified  their  solemn
■taent  bj  an  oath  with  a  cursob


OH.  X.  1— 3».]  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  113

III.  The  pbomibbb  of  which  it  oonsistbd.  1.  A  general  comprehensive  promise
of  obedience  to  all  the  law  of  God  (ver.  29).  2.  Certain  special  promises.  (1)  Not
to  intermarry  with  the  heathen  (ver.  30).  A  matter  about  which  both  Ezra  and
Nehemiah  were  very  much  concerned  (see  Ezra  ix.  10 ;  Neh.  xiii.  23 — 30).
Laxity  in  this  respect  threatened  to  destroy  the  distinctiveness  of  Israel  in  respect
both  to  race  and  religion.  (2)  To  observe  strictly  the  sabbath  and  other  holy  days,
and  the  sabbatical  year,  including  the  remission  of  debts  (ver.  31 ;  see  Deut.  xv.  2).
(3)  To  contribute  to  the  support  of  the  temple,  its  ministers  and  services  (vers.  32 —
39).  The  promised  contributions  included  an  annual  money  payment  of  one-third  of
a  shekel  each  towards  the  expense  of  the  ordinary  services ;  the  bringing  up  in  turn
to  the  temple  of  the  wood  required  for  the  altar  fire ;  the  offering  of  the  first-fruits
of  all  produce,  the  firstlings  of  cattle,  and  the  first-born  children  (i.  e.  the  redemption
money  for  them) ;  and  the  payment  of  tithes  to  the  Levites,  who  on  their  part  would
pay  "  the  tithe  of  the  tithes  "  unto  the  priests.  (4)  Not  to  forsake  the  temple.  They
would  continue  to  support  it,  and  attend  its  services  at  the  appointed  times.

Reflectiom: — 1.  The  review  of  the  past  is  adapted  to  impress  on  our  hearts  the
duty  and  wisdom  of  serving  God.  2.  In  the  service  of  God,  the  observance  of  the
sabbath  and  the  maintenance  of  public  worship  are  of  the  greatest  importance.  As
Divine  ordinances,  and  for  the  well-being  of  individuals  and  families,  the  Church  and
the  State.  3.  All  should  unite  in  supporting  the  worship  of  God.  By  contributions,
attendance,  and  endeavours  to  induce  others  to  attend.  4.  Solemn  definite  engage-
ments are  aids  to  the  cultivation  and  practice  of  religion.  The  impressions  and
purposes  of  times  of  peculiar  religious  feeling  may  thus  become  of  permanent  value.
Obligations  thus  recognised  and  adopted  are  more  likely  to  be  called  to  mind  in
times  of  temptation.  The  Christian  settles  it  thus  with  himself  that  he  is  the
Lord's,  and  must  not,  will  not,  depart  from  him  ;  must  and  will  serve  him  in  all
things.  In  such  a  definite  settlement  are  peace  and  safety.  Hence  the  worth  of
those  ordinances  by  which  a  profession  of  piety  is  made,  and  from  time  to  time
renewed.     To  these  some  have  added  forms  of  "  covenanting  "  more  resembling  that

ecorded  in  this  chapter.     They  have  put  hand  and  seal  to  a  written  document.     Dr.

Joddridge  did  this,  and  in  his  'Rise  and  Progress'  recommends  the  practice  and
.supplies  forms  for  the  purpose.  The  Scottish  Covenants  present  probably  the  most
memorable  instances  of  documents  of  this  kind  publicly  agreed  to,  signed  by  thou-
sands of  all  classes,  and  exercising  a  great  and  lasting  influence  on  the  course  of
afEairs.  A  deiinite  promise  is  specially  appropriate  and  useful  in  respect  to  outward
practices,  such  as  the  devoting  of  a  certain  proportion  of  income  to  religion  and
charity.  Tlie  demands  for  money  for  the  ordinary  purposes  of  life  are  so  numerous
and  urgent,  that  the  claims  of  God's  cause  and  of  the  poor  are  likely  to  be  very
insufficiently  met,  unless  some  specific  portion  be  distinctly  devoted  to  them.  When
this  is  done,  the  other  branches  of  expenditure  adjust  themselves  to  the  income  as
thus  diminished.  Care,  however,  needs  to  be  taken  lest  vows  are  made  which  cannot
be  kept,. and  so  become  a  snare  and  burden  to  the  conscience.  They  should  for  the
most  part  be  simply  promises  to  do  what,  apart  from  them,  is  incumbent  upon  us,  or
to  avoid  what,  apart  from  them,  is  wrong,  or  commonly,  if  not  uniformly,  leads  us
into  wrong-doing.  5.  It  is  pleasing  when  all  classes  of  society  unite  in  solemn  acts
•  of  dedication  of  themselves  and  their  property  to  God,  and  in  arrangements  for  the
maintenance  of  religion  amongst  them.  6.  General  religious  excitement  and  pro-
fessions are,  however,  often  deceptive.  The  solemn  covenant  recorded  in  this
(liapter  was  soon  violated  (see  ch.  xiii.  10 — 29).

Ver.  32. — Divine  service. — "The  service  of  the  house  of  our  God."  Difference
between  this  in  the  temple  at  Jerusalem  and  in  Christian  sanctuaries.  Superiority  of
the  latter.  In  remarking  upon  it,  while  chiefly  thinking  of  the  part  taken  by  minis-
ters, we  have  in  view  also  the  "  service  of  song,"  and  all  else  that  is  needful  for
suitably  conducting  the  worship  of  God.  Note,  then,  that  the  service  of  God's
house — •

I.  Is  PECULIARLY  SACRED.  It  has  immediately  to  do  with  God,  and  Christ,  and  the
souls  of  men.  Should,  therefore,  be  attended  to  with  reverence,  devoutness,  purity
of  motive.     Frivolity,  selfishness,  covetousness,  and  worldly  ambition,  wrong  every-

NEHEMIAH. .  I


114  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  x.  1—39.

where,  are  flagrantly  wrong  here.     Every  part  of  the  service  should  have  a  distinct-
ively religious  aim,  and  should  be  done  in  a  religious  spirit.

II.  Should  be  conducted  according  to  Divine  directions.  Not  only  to  act  in
opposition  to  these,  but  to  go  beyond  them  into  "will-worship,"  is  impious  and
perilous.

III.  Should  engage  the  best  energies  op  the  best  men.  Requires,  doubtless,
first  good  men,  but  furnishes  scope  for  the  talents  of  the  ablest;  and  all  engaged  in
it  should  do  their  best.  .  To  leave  this  work  to  the  feeble,  or  do  it  in  a  perfunctory
or  slovenly  manner,  is  disgraceful  and  sinful.

IV.  Is  encouraged  by  special  Divine  promises.  The  preaching  of  the  gospel,
united  prayer,  united  praise,  the  celebration  of  the  sacraments,  all  are  thus  encouraged.

V.  Is  fruitful  of  blessing.  To  those  active  in  it,  to  those  uniting,  to  society,
&c.    Of  blessing  in  this  life  and  for  ever.

VI.  Should  be  generously  supported  by  all.  In  many,  the  sense  of  obligation
to  render  such  support  is  of  the  feeblest.

Ver.  39. — Cleaving  to  the  house  of  God.  "  We  will  not  forsake  the  house  of  our
God."    Introduce,  by  reference  to  the  context —

I.  The  place.  "  The  house  of  our  God."  The  temple  thus  designated  in  a  sense
quite  peculiar.  In  a  deeper  sense,  however,  the  Christian  Church  is  God's  house,
and  each  member  of  it  (1  Cor.  iii.  16;  vi.  19;  Ephes.  ii.  21,22;  1  Tim.  iv.  15).
In  a  lower  sense,  the  name  may  be  given  to  buildings  set  apart  for  Christian  wor-
ship. In  the  Old  Testament  seems  to  be  used  of  synagogues  (Eccles.  v.  1).  Sucli
buildings  may  be  called  houses  of  God  because — 1.  Devoted  specially  to  him.
There  is  a  sense  in  which  all  buildings  should  be  devoted  to  God  (motto  over  tlip
Boyal  Exchange) ;  but  the  meeting-houses  of  the  Church  are  peculiarly  consecrated
to  him,  his  worship ;  the  publication  of  his  great  name,  his  laws,  invitations,
promises,  threatenings ;  endeavours  to  promote  his  kingdom.  Yet  places  of  worshi]
are  not  always  devoted  to  God,  and  never  perfectly.  2.  Blessed  and  honoured  bj
him.  By  his  presence,  and  gracious  operations,  in  the  enlightenment,  conversion,
sanctification,  consoling,  strengthening,  &c.  of  the  worshippers.  God's  works  ii.
the  sanctuary  are  amongst  his  greatest  and  best^better  than  the  turning  of  tli<
material  chaos  into  Kotr/id;.

II.  The  resolve  respecting  it.  "  VCe  will  not  forsake,"  &o.  (see  also  ch.  xiii.  10,
11).  The  declaration  means  more  than  it  expresses.  It  is  equivalent  to  saying,
"  We  will  interest  ourselves  in  it,  support  it,  promote  its  prosperity."  1.  By  our
gifts.  The  main  point  here.  See  preceding  verses.  2.  By  attendance  on  its
services.  Temptations  in  the  present  day  to  a  total  or  partial  neglect  of  public
worship,  or  a  wandering  which  is  almost  as  injurious.  Temptations  from  unbelief,
worldliness,  perpetual  or  occasional  want  of  interest  in  the  services,  poverty,  even
sorrow.     3.  By  efEort  and  prayer  for  its  prosperity.

III.  Reasons  for  making  it  our  own.  1.  Because  it  is  God's  house — "the  house
of  our  God."  2.  Because  of  the  pleasure  to  be  there  enjoyed.  3.  Because  of  the
profit  to  be  there  gained.  4.  Because  of  attachment  to  the  people  who  meet  there.
5.  Because  of  the  good  of  others  which  is  there  promoted.  The  highest  welfare  of
individuals  and  of  society  is  bound  up  with  the  maintenance  cf  public  Christian  wor-
ship and  instruction.  6.  Because  of  what  has  been  already  expended  upon  it.  Love,
zeal,  contributions,  work.  They  who  have  done  most  for  their  place  of  worship  will
be  most  attached  to.it.  Let  the  young  make  and  keep  this  resolution.  Especially
let  those  who  have  left  home  and  the  minister  and  friends  of  their  early  life  be
careful  net  to  forsake  the  house  of  God.  They  will  thus  be  preserved  from  tempta-
tion, secure  new  friendships  helpful  to  their  character  and  happiness,  and,  if  sincere
in  their  worship,  the  guidance  and  blessing  of  God,  and  eternal  salvation.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ch.  X. — Entering  into  covewaret. —Nehemiah  and  Ezra,  and  those  who  acted  with
them,  showed  true  insight  into  character  when  they  provided —
I.  That  stbono  BSLiaions  feeling  should  take  definite  fobm.    "  Because  of  all


m.  X.  1— S9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  lU

this  we  make  a  sure  covenant,  and  write  it ;  and  our  princes,  Levites,  and  priests,  set
their  seal  unto  if"  (ch.  ix.  38).  And  Nehemiah  and  Zidkijah  (Zadolt),  and  many
others,  priests,  Levites,  and  heads  of  families,  formally  signed  and  sealed  u.  solemn
covenant,  pledging  themselves  and  the  people  generally  to  a  purer  and  more  loyal
service  of  the  Lord.  Feeling  was  running  strong  in  Jerusalem.  Many  things
concurred  to  call  it  forth.  At  the  great  gathering  which  followed  the  feast  of  taber-
nacles it  rose  to  its  height ;  the  multitude  had  to  be  calmed  by  the  leaders  (ch.  viii.
9) ;  then  followed  a  day  of  fasting  and  confession,  when  all  the  people  drew  very
near  to  God  in  humiliation.  In  what  should  it  all  end?  Should  it  pass  oS  in
emotion,  in  religious  excitement  ?  That  would  have  been  a  serious  mistake.  Nehe-
miah wisely  provided  that  they  should  formally  and  solemnly  pledge  themselves  to
the  purer  and  worthier  service  of  Jehovah,  turning  from  evils  which  had  grown  up,
and  returning  to  duties  which  had  been  neglected.  He  was  well  sustained  by  all  in
this  movement,  and  we  have  a  long  list  of  the  influential  men  who  added  their  seals
to  his,  committing  themselves  and  all  whom  they  represented  to  a  renewed  and
revived  national  holiness.  Let  strong  feeling  in  (1)  the  individual,  in  (2)  the  Church,
in  (3)  the  society  or  community  pass  soon  into  some  definite  shape ;  let  it  take
tangible  form ;  let  it  come  to  some  deliberate  resolution  that  can  be  formulated  and
written  down,  or  it  may  pass  away,  leaving  nothing  but  spiritual  lassitude  and
demoralisation  behind.     We  learn  further —

II.  That  a  beligiods  movement  should  be  headed  by  a  few,  but  should  havb
THE  ACTIVE  pabticipation  OF  ALL  (vers.  1 — 29).  "  Those  that  sealed  "  were  less  than
a  hundred  (vers.  1 — 27) ;  these  were  leading  men,  "  nobles,"  few  enough  for  their
names  to  be  attached  to  the  roll  and  to  be  entered  in  our  sacred  Scriptures,  there
enjoying  an  honourable  immortality  which  many  that  have  taken  great  pains  to
secure  it  will  assuredly  miss;  but  "the  rest  of  the  people,"  including  "porters,
singers,  Nethinims,"  .  .  .  "tiieir  wives,  their  sons,  and  their  daughters  "  (ver.  28),  all
these  "clave  to  their  brethren, the  nobles,  and  entered  into  a  curse,  and  into  an  oath"
(ver.  29).  They  publicly  and  audibly  swore  to  "walk  in  God's  law,"  thus  sustaining
all  that  the  leaders  initiated.  All  movements  of  revival,  and  indeed  of  any  religious
action  or  undertaking,  must  be  orderly ;  there  must  be  leaders  who  will  give  direction
and  counsel  ;  also  general  followers  who  will  give  practical  and  cordial  con-
currence. God  would  not  have  an  ill-regulated  service,  in  which  is  confusion  and
haphazard,  nor  j'et  does  he  desire  a  mere  representative  service,  in  which  a  few
act  for  the  many  without  their  sympathy.  All  must  join — (1)  the  humblest  clnsses
— porters,  Nethinims,  &c.  ;  (2)  the  weaker  sex  —  the  wives,  the  women  ;  (3)  the
young — "  the  sons  and  daughters,"  "  every  one  that  has  understanding  "  (ver.  28) ;
for  the  service  of  God  should  be  intelligent  as  well  as  general  and  orderly.  We  must
serve  him  "with  the  understanding"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  16).

III.  That  the  "  vows  of  God  "  should  be  not  only  general,  but  pabticular.
These  Jews  vowed  "to  walk  in  God's  law,  ...  to  observe  and  do  all  the  command-
ments of  the  Lord  our  God,  and  his  judgments  and  his  statutes  "  (ver.  29)  ;  but  they
were  not  content  with  such  a  general  covenant:  they  undertook  to  refrain  from
particular  evils — fiom -forbidden  marriage  alliances  (ver.  30),  sabbath  breaking,
usury  (ver.  31);  and  also  to  discharge  particular  obligations — they  charged  them-
selves with  (1)  payment  of  money  for  the  temple  service  (vers.  32,  33),  with  (2)
provision  of  wood  for  the  fire  that  never  went  out  (ver.  34),  (3)  with  rendering  the
first-fruits  and  titlies  according  to  the  law  (vers.  35 — 39).  There  are  times  of
revival  and  reconsecration  in  the  lives  of  men  and  the  history  of  Churches.  These  are
irregular,  coming  in  the  grace  of  God  we  know  not  when  or  whence.  "  The  wind
bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  &c.  (John  iii.  8).  And  regular:  anniversaries,  festivals,
&c. — ^times  when  we  are  moved  to  consecrate  or  reconsecrate  ourselves  to  the  service
of  the  Saviour.  These  should  bo  used  for  a  solemn  and  thorough  devotedness  of
OEnaelves  and  our  possessions ;  and  they  should  comprise  the  deliberate  separation
of  ourselves  from  worldly  entanglements  (ver.  30),  from  neglect  of  ordinances
(ver.  31),  from  injustice  and  hardness,  from  all  pressure  of  legal  right  which  is
indistinguishable  from  unchristian  severity  (ver.  31),  and  the  deliberate  'esolution
to  worship  the  Lord  and  dedicate  a  good  share  of  our  material  resources  tu  hi«
Mivice  and  the  glory  of  his  name. — C.

i3


116  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  x.  1—39.

Vers.  1 — 39. — Solemn  engagement  to  maintain  the  liouse  of  God.  I.  All  should
PLEDGE  THEMSELVES  "not  to  forsake  the  house  of  our  God.  Those  who  are  first  in
position,  influence,  capability  should  be  leaders  in  caring  for  God's  house.  Distinc-
tion of  rank  is  lost  in  the  unity  of  dedication.  The  service  of  God  will  call  to  itself
all  the  variety  of  human  faculty.  Where  there  is  the  heart  "  to  observe  and  do  all
the  commandments  of  the  Lord  our  God,"  there  will  be  found  an  ofSce  or  a  post  for
each  one,  from  the  nobles  to  the  children.

II.  The  bond  which  binds  us  to  the  house  of  God  and  his  service  should  be
regarded  as  the  most  solemn  and  irrevocable.  1.  We  should  be  ready  to  give
our  name  and  take  upon  us  the  vow  of  a  public  profession.  Tlie  Jew  placed  himself
under  the  oath  and  curse.  We  are  in  a  dispensation  of  liberty,  but  our  liberty  is  not
license.  The  bond  of  love  is  the  strongest  of  all  bonds.  We  are  made  free  by  the
Son  of  God ;  but  our  freedom  is  the  surrender  of  our  all  to  him,  that  we  may  take  his
yoke  upon  us,  and  bear  his  burden.  2.  We  shall  separate  ourselves  from  the  world
that  we  may  be  faithful  to  God.  We  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon.  We  must
be  free  from  entanglements,  that  we  may  be  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  enduring
hardness.  3.  Our  consecration  to  God  will  include  the  consecration  of  our  substance.
With  ungrudging  liberality  we  shall  fill  the  "  treasure  house  of  our  God,"  that  there
may  be  no  lack  in  his  service,  that  every  department  of  Divine  worship  may  be
praise  to  his  name.  While  the  proportion  of  contributions  was  a  matter  of  written
prescription  under  the  law,  for  the  guidance  of  the  people  in  their  lower  stage  of
enlightenment,  let  us  take  care  that  with  our  higher  privilege,  and  our  larger  know-
ledge, and  our  more  spiritual  principles,  we  do  not  fall  below  their  standard.  Our
hearts  should  not  require  any  formal  rule ;  but  it  is  well  to  systematise  our  giving  for
our  own  sake,  for  human  nature  requires  every  possible  assistance,  and  habit  holds
up  principle  and  fortifies  feeling.  The  efEect  of  a  universal  recognition  of  duty  in
giving  to  God's  house  would  be  immeasurable.  Any  true  revival  of  religion  will
certainly  be  known  by  this  test.  The  larger  hearts  will  secure  a  larger  blessing  in
the  future. — B.


PART  III.

Enlargement  of  the  Population  of  Jerusalem,  with  the   Number   of   tuk

Adult  Males,  and  the  Names  of  the  Chiefs.     Various  Lists  of  Priests

AND  Levites  at  different  Periods  (ch.  xi.,  xii.  1 — 26).

EXPOSITION.

A  T>TVTJ   TT  '  °^  capitals  by  transfers  of  this  kind  were  not

uncommon  iu  the  ancient  world,  where  the

The  nexus  of  ch.    xi.  is  with  ch .   vii.   i  strength  of  states  was  considered  to  depend

4,  5.     Having  spoken  in  that  place  of  the  ,  very  greatly  upon  the  size  and  predominance

insufficiency    of   the    population    of   Jeru-  '  of  the  capital.     Thucydides  attributes  the

greatness  and  prosperity  of  the   Athenian


salem,  Kehemiah  now  proceeds  to  explain
the  steps  which  he  took  to  remedy  it
He  made,  it  would  seem,  a  census  of  the
entire  nation,  and  required  each  town  and
district  to  transfer  one-tenth  of  its  popula-
tion to  the  capital.  The  men  in  the  various
localities  determined  among  themselves  by
lot  who  should  stay  and  who  should  go,  and
Nehemiah  no  doubt  made  the  necessary
arrangements  for  the  reception  of  the  new-
comers at  J  irusalem.     Forced  enlargements


community  to  an  artificial  enlargement  of
the  population  of  Athens  which  he  ascribes
to  Theseus.  Other  notorious  instances  are
those  of  Syracuse,  Megalopolis,  and  Tigra-
nocerta.  In  Jerusalem  at  this  time  the
special  need  of  an  increase  in  the  number  of
the  inhabitants  was  probably  the  defence  of
the  walls.  These  had  been  rebuilt  on  the
ancient  foundations, — ^their  circuit  was  not
much  less  than  four  miles, — and  to  man


CH.  xr.  1—36.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


117


them  in  case  of  attack,  a  large  population
was  necessary.  From  a  comparison  of  the
numbers  given  in  this  chapter  (vers.  6 — 19)
■with  those  of  1  Chron.  ix.  9—22,  it  may
be  gathered  that  the  result  of  Nehemiah's
arrangements  was  to  give  Jerusalem  a  popu-
lation of  about  20,000  souls.

Having  been  led,  in  speaking  of  this
matter,  to  give  a  sort  of  catalogue  of  the
chief  dwellers  at  Jerusalem  (vers.  4 — 19),  and
another  of  the  country  towns  and  villages
occupied  at  this  time  by  those  Israelites  who
had  returned  from  the  captivity  (vers.  25 —
85),  Kehemiah  is  induced  to  insert,  at  this
point,  certain  other  lists  or  catalogues  which
he  regards  as  worthy  of  being  put  on  record.
These  lists  are  four  in  number,  and  occupy
ch.  xii.  as  far  as  ver.  26.    They  comprise—

1.  A  list  of  the  priestly  and  Levitical  houses
which  returned  with  Zerubbabel  (vers.  1—9) ;

2.  A  list  of  the  high  priests  from  Jeshua  to
Jaddua ;  3.  A  list  of  the  heads  of  the
priestly  courses  in  the  time  of  the  high
priest  Joiakim  ;  and,  4.  A  list  of  the  chief
Levitica.  houses  at  the  same  period  and
afterwards.  Such  lists  possess  at  the  present
day  but  a  very  slight  and  secondary  interest.
Their  formation,  however,  and  safe  preserv-
ation were,  at  the  time,  essential  for  the
continuity  of  the  nation's  history,  and  the
maintenance  of  the  priestly  order  in  purity,
and  without  admixture  of  laic  elements.
On  the  genealogy  of  the  high  priests  more
will  be  said  in  the  special  comment  on  the


Ver.  1. — The  rulers  of  the  people  dwelt
at  Jerusalem.  Jerusalem  was  the  residence
of  all  the  nobles  from  the  first  (see  ch.  ii.
16) ;  no  increase  could  be  made  in  this
element  of  the  population.  Nehemiah  had
to  look  lower,  and  to  obtain  his  new  settlers
from  the  ranks  of  the  "  people."  The  people
....  cast  lots.  No  doubt  under  direction.
The  Jews  had  frequent  recourse  to  the  lot
for  the  determining  of  doubtful  matters,  be-
lieving, as  they  did,  that  "the  whole  dis-
posing thereof  was  of  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xvi.
33).  Divine  sanction  had  been  given,  in
the  course  of  the  Jewish  history,  to  the  use
of  the  lot  for  the  selection  of  persons  (Josh.
vii  16—18  ;  1  Sam.  x.  19—21),  for  the  dis-
tribution of  lands  (Kum.  xxvi  25,  26),  and
for  the  determination  of  the  order  in  which
different  bodies  should  execute  an  office
(1  Chron.  xxiv.  5 ;  xxv.  8).  In  the  demo-
cratic states  of  Greece  it  was  used  widely  to


determine  between  candidates  for  an  office.
One  in  ten.  Ewald  supposes  that  this  was
to  be  the  proportion  between  the  popula-
tion of  Jerusalem  and  the  whole  population
of  the  country,  and  ascribes  the  fixing  of
the  proportion  to  Zerubbabel  ( '  History  of
Israel,'  vol.  v.  p.  159).  But  there  is  no
statement  to  this  effect  in  either  Ezra  or
Nehemiah,  and  the  brief  narrative  of  this
verse  seems  to  imply  the  addition  of  a  tenth
part  of  the  country  population  to  the  pre-
vious population  of  Jerusalem,  rather  than
the  establishment  of  any  definite  proportion
between  the  two.  Nine  parts.  Literalljr,
"nine  hands,"  as  in  Gen.  xliiL  Zi  ;  xlvii
24.

Ver,  2. — The  men  that  willingly  offered
themselves.  Besides  those  on  whom  the  lot
fell,  a  certain  number  volunteered  to  change
their  residence  and  to  transfer  themselves
and  families  from  their  country  homes  to
Jerusalem.  The  people  called  down  bless-
ings upon  them  for  their  patriotism.

ver.  3. — These  are  the  chief  of  the  pro-
vince. A  comparison  is  in  the  writer's  mind
between  the  Jews  of  Palestine  and  those  of
the  great  Persian  capitals,  Babylon  and  Susa,
to  which,  as  a,  Persian  official,  he  himself
properly  belongs.  Compare  ch.  i  3  and
Ezra  ii.  1.  That  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.  I.  e.
"tliat  were  entered  in  Nehemiah's  census
among  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  after
the  transfer  of  population  had  been  made."
The  names  which  follow  appear  in  most
cases  to  be  personal,  but  a  certain  number
of  them  are  names  of  families.  In  the  cities
of  Judah  dwelt  every  one  in  his  possession.
It  follows  that  those  who  removed  from
the  country  districts  to  Jerusalem  quitted
their  "possessions,"  often,  it  may  be,  ex-
changing riches  for  poverty,  a  comfortable
house  for  one  half  in  ruins  (ch.  vii  4),  and
the  life  of  a  small  landed  proprietor  for  that
of  an  artisan  or  hired  labourer.  Hence  the
"blessings"  called  down  by  the  people  on
those  who  volunteered  (ver.  2).  Israel.
Compare  1  Cliron.  ix.  3,  where  we  find  that
among  those  who  had  returned  were  mem-
bers of  the  two  great  Israelitish  tribes,
Manassch  and  Ephraim.  On  the  Nethinims,
and  the  children  of  Solomon's  servants,  see
the  comment  on  Ezra  ii.  43,  55.

Ver.  4. — At  Jerusalem  dwelt  certain  of
the  children  of  Jndah,  and  of  the  children
of  Benjamin.  It  is  not  meant  that  all  the
dwellers  in  Jerusalem  were  of  these  two  tribes,
since  among  them  were  certainly  Levites
(vers.  10  — 19),  Ephraimites,  and  Manas-
sites  (1  Chron.  L  s.  c),  together  with  Ne-
thinims (ver.  21)  who  were  of  no  tribe,  and
probably  some  representatives  of  all  or  most
of  the  other  tribes  (see  the  comment  on  Ezra
ii.  70).  But  the  present  purpose  of  Nehe-
miah  is  to  mention  especially  the  Jewish


118


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


{OH.  XL  1—36


and  Benjamite  chiefs.  Athaiah,  or  Uthai,  as
the  name  is  given  in  1  Chron.  ix.  4.  The
son  of  TTzziah.  The  ancestors  assigned  to
Athaiah  hero  and  in  1  Chron.  ix.  are  wholly
different,  with  the  single  exception  of  Pharez
or  Perez,  the  son  of  Judah.  Both  lists  are
of  course  abbreviations  of  a  far  longer  one,
and  it  has  happened  that  the  two  writers
hare  in  no  case  selected  for  mention  the  same
name.

Ver.  5. — Maaseiah  1»  called  "Asaiah"  in
1  Chron.,  and  designated  simply  as  "the
Shilonite,"  or  descendant  of  Shelah,  the
youngest  son  of  Judah.  Zechariah,  the  son
of  Shlloni  Rather,  "the  Shilonite."  The
word  ben,  "son,"  has  been  intruded  into
the  text  by  a  copyist,  who  thought  that
"  Shiloni"  was  a  personal  name.

Ver.  6. —  Valiant  men.  Or,  "fighting
men  " — ^men  able  to  bear  arms  and  serve  in
the  wars.

Yer.  7. — And  these  are  the  sons  of  Ben-
jamin. A  verse  equivalent  to  1  Chron.  ix.
6  would  seem  to  have  fallen  out  here.  Nehe-
miah  cannot  have  intended  to  leave  out  the
descendants  of  Zerah,  who  formed  more
than  one-half  of  the  Jewish  element  in  the
population  of  Jerusalem,  and  furnished  690
fighting  men.  Salla  the  son  of  Heshullam.
Compare  1  Chron.  ix.  7.  The  other  names
in  the  genealogy  are  different,  the  two  writers
singling  out  for  mention  different  ancestors.
Ver.  8. — Neither  G-abbai  nor  Sallai  is  men-
tioned in  Chronicles,  where  the  Benjamite
chiefs  inferior  to  Shallu  are  Ibneiah,  Elah,
and  Meshullam  (1  Chron.  li.  8).  Nine  hun-
dred and  twenty-eight  Nine  hundred  and
fifty-six,  according  to  Chronicles  (1  Chron.
ix.  9).  Probably  in  one  place  or  the  other
the  figures  have  suffered  corruption.

Ver.  9. — Their  overseer.  Probably  the
commandant  of  the  city  under  Nehemiah.
See  2  Kings  xiv.  19,  where  paMd  has  this
sense.  Judah  .  .  .  was  second.  Next  in
authority  to  JoeL

Ver.  10.— Of  the  priests:  Jedaiah  the  son
of  Joiarib,  Jaohin.  Bather,  "  Of  the  priests,
Jedaiah,  Joiarib,  Jachin."  The  word  ben,
"  son,"  has  once  more  accidentally  crept  in
(comp.  1  Chron.  ix.  10).  The  writer  here
passes  from  personal  to  family  names.  Jeda-
iah and  Joiarib  were  two  of  the  chief  priestly
families,  and  are  usually  mentioned  together
(1  Chron.  xxiv.  7;  Neh.  xii.  6,  19,  &c).
Jachin  was  a  priestly  family  of  much  less
distinction,  descended  probably  from  the
head  of  the  twenty-first  course  in  David's
time  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  17).

Ver.  11. — Seraiah  (called  "Azariah"  in
1  Chron.  ix.  11)  designates  the  high  priestly
family  of  this  time,  as  in  ch.  x.  2  ;  xii.  1,  12.
The  "  Seraiah  "  who  gave  name  to  it  was  pro-
bably the  high  priest  taken  prisoner  by  Nebu-
(sradan,  and  put  to  death  (2  Kings  zxv.  18 —


21).  The  son  of  Hilkiah.  Eeally  the  grand-
son (Ezra  vii  1).  The  son  of  Meshullam.
Or  "  Shallum  "  (ibid.  ver.  2).  The  ruler  of
the  house  of  God.  /.  e.  the  high  priest ;  or,
rather,  the  family  which  furnished  the  high
priests  at  this  time.  The  actual  high  priest
was  Eliashib,  the  son  of  JoiaMm,  and  grand-
son of  Jeshua  (see  ch.  xii.  10  ;  xiii.  4).

Ver.  12.  — Their  brethren  that  did  the
work  of  the  house.  The  priests  of  ordinary
rank,  who — divided  originally  into  twenty-
four,  but  now  apparently  into  twenty-two,
courses  (ch.  xii.  2 — 7) — ^had  the  care  of  the
temple  service  in  turn,  amounted  to  the
large  number  of  (822 -^  242 +  128=)  1192
persons,  of  whom  between  fifty  and  sixty
would  be  employed  in  some  work  connected
with  the  service  at  one  time.  (The  parallel
passage  of  Chronicles  raises  the  total  to
1760.)

Ver.  14.— Their  brethren,  mighty  men  of
valour.  Not  "men  of  great  courage,"  as
Bp.  Patrick  eCT)Iains,  but  "very  able  men
for  the  work  of  the  service  of  the  house  of
God,"  as  our  translators  render  the  parallel
passage  of  Chronicles  (1  Chron.  ix.  13).
Zabdiel,  the  son  of  one  of  the  great  men.
Rather,  as  in  the  margin,  "the  son  of
Haggedolim."

Vers.  15,  16.— Also  of  thelevitei:  Shema-
iah.  Compare  1  Chron.  ix.  14.  Shemaiah
was  a  descendant  of  MerarL  Together  with
Shabbethai  and  Jozabad  (ver.  .16),  he  ha<l
the  superintendence  of  the  outward  bnsiness
of  the  house  of  God;  or,  in  other  words,  nf
its  worldly  affairs  and  money  matters.  As
in  the  Christian  Church  a  special  order  was
appointed  "to  serve  tables"  (Acts  vi  2 — 5),
so  in  the  Jewish  the  secular  business  of  the
temple  was  intrusted  to  a  few  carefully-selected
persons  of  the  inferior  order  of  the  ministry,
who  were  known  to  have  a  special  capacity
for  such  matters  (see  1  Chrixi.  xxvi  29).

Ver.  17.^ — Mattaniah  ....  was  the  prin-
cipal to  begin  the  thanksgiving  in  prayer.
I.e.  the  "leader  of  the  choir,"  or  "pre-
centor." Bakbnkiah  was  second  to  him
among  his  brethren;  i.  e.  was  his  chief
assistant.  Abda  (or  "Obadiah,"  1  Chron.
ix.  16)  held  the  third  place.

Ver.  18. — All  the  Levites  .  .  .  were  two
hundred  fourscore  and  four.  The  small
proportion  borne  by  the  Levites  to  the
priests,  which  has  been  already  noticed  (see
comment  on  Ezra  viii.  15),  is  here  again
apparent.  They  do  not  quite  unount  to
one-third  of  the  priests.

Ver.  19. — The  porters,  Akknb,  Talmon.
On  these  familiar  names,  see  the  comment
upon  Ezra  ii.  42.  An  hundred  and  seventy-
two.  In  1  Chron.  ix.  22  the  number  is  said
to  have  been  212.

Ver.  21.— The  Nethinims  dwelt  in  OphtL
See  above,  ch.  iii.  26.     Ophel,  the  southers


OH.  xr.  1--36.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


Ill


prolongation  of  the  temple  hill,  was  a  sort  of
iuburb  of  Jerusalem,  sometimes  reckoned  as
part  of  the  city,  sometimes  as  distinct  from
it.  It  was  a  convenient  position  for  the
Nethinims,  who  were  employed  in  menial
offices  ahout  the  temple.  Ziha  seems  to
represent  the  leading  Nethhnm  family  (Ezra
ii.  43  ;  Neh.  vii.  46).

Ver.  22. — Properly,  the  whole  of  this  verse
forms  a  single  sentence,  and  should  run  as
follows: — "And  the  overseer  of  the  Levites
in  Jerusalem,  Huzzi,  the  son  of  Bani,  the
son  of  Hashahiah,  the  son  of  Mattaniah,'  the
son  of  Micha,  of  the  sons  of  Asaph  the
singers,  was  over  the  business  of  the  house
of  God."  As  Shabbethai  and  Jozabad  "had
the  oversight  of  the  outward  business  "  (ver.
16),  80  the  internal  business  was  under  the
inperintendence  of  Huzzi,  or  Uzzi.  Uzzi
appears  as  taking  part  in  the  dedication  of
the  wall  (ch.  xii.  42).

Ver.  23. — For  it  was  the  king's  com-
mandment concerning  them.  Artaxerxes,
it  appears,  had  assigned  a  certain  stipend
from  the  royal  revenue  for  the  support  of
guoh  Levites  as  were  singers,  and  this  stipend
had  to  be  paid  to  them  day  by  day.  It
ia  suggested  as  the  grounds  for  this  special
favour — 1.  That  the  Levites  engaged  in  the
choral  service  were  regarded  as  those  especi-
ally who  prayed  "for  the  life  of  the  king
and  of  his  sons"  (Ezra  vi.  10) ;  and,  2.  That
the  singing  Levites  who  returned  from
Babylon,  being  so  few  in  number  (128),  had  to
be  constantly  on  duty  in  the  temple,  and  so
needed  a,  regular  daily  stipend.  The  nexus
of  this  verse  with  the  preceding  one  implies
that  the  payment  in  question  was  an  im-
portant part  of  the  internal  business  of  the
house  committed  to  Uzzi.

Ver.  24. — Pethahiah  .  .  .  of  the  children
of  Zerah.  We  have  here  an  indication  of
the  imperfection  of  the  preceding  catalogue,
which  has  mentioned  no  descendants  of  Zerah
among  the  Jews  dwelling  in  Jerusalem,  but
made  them  "all  sons  of  Perez"  (ver.  6).
As  already  observed,  a  verse  equivalent  to
1  Chron.  vi  9  must  have  fallen  out  between
Vers.  6  and  7  of  this  chapter.  The  exact
office  borne  by  Pethahiah  cannot  be  deter-
mined; but  he  evidently  held  a  confidential
position,  which  made  him  an  intermediary
for  certain  purposes  between  the  Persian  king
and  the  Jewish  people.  Perhaps  he  received
and  forwarded  petitions  and  complaints.

Ver.  25. — And  for  the  villages.  Or,
"And,  as  regards  the  villages."  The  writer
here  at  'last  passes  away  altogether  from
Jerusalem,  and  proceeds  to  speak  of  the
5!ountry  population  of  Judsea.  This  was
chiefly  located  in  villages  or  hamlets,  to  each
of  which  was  attached  a  territory  suitable
for  cultivation.  The  principal  of  these  settle-
ments ar«  now  enumerated,  and  will  be  found


to  comprise  seventeen  places  belonging  to
Judah,  and  fifteen  belonging  to  Benjamin,
Of  these  thirty -two,  a  considerable  propor.
tion  had  subordinate  hamlets  attached?  to
them.  Kirjath-arha,  or  Hebron.  During  the
captivity  the  old  name  had  reasserted  itself
(see  Josh.  xiv.  15).  Dihott  is  not  the  import-
ant Moabite  town  whence  came  the  famous
"Moabite  Stone,"  but  the  city  anciently
called  "Dimonah,"  which  is  coupled  with
"ICabzeel"  and  "Moladah"  in  Josh.  it.
21 — 26.  Jekabzeel  is  no  doubt  the  ancient
"Kabzeel"(Josh.  xv.  21).

Ver.  26.  — Jeshua  is  a  place  not  mentioned
anywhere  but  here.  Moladah  occurs  in
Josh.  XV.  26 ;  Beth-phelet,  no  doubt  the
same  as  Beth-pa]  et,  in  Josh.  xv.  27.

Ver.  27. — Hazar-shaal  and  Beer-shebaare
united  in  Josh.  xv.  28,  and  were  no  doubt
near  together.  Hazar-shual  means  "the
village  of  foxes."

Ver.  28. — Ziklag  is  celebrated  as  the  town
given  to  David  by  Achish  king  of  Gath
(1  Sam.  xxvii.  6),  and  soon  afterwards  taken
by  the  Amalekites  {ibid.  xxx.  i).  Mekouah
is  a  name  which  occurs  only  in  this  place.

Ver.  29.  —  En-rimmon,  "  the  spring  of
Rimmon,"  is  to  be  identified  with  the  "  Ain
and  Rimmon  "  of  Josh.  xv.  32 — two  neigh-
bouring villages,  which  ultimately  grew  into
one.  Zareah  is  no  doubt  the  "  Zoreah  "  of
Josh,  XV.  33,  which  was  in  the  Shephelah,
or  low  coast  tract.  Jarmuth  is  the  town  of
Piram,  who  warred  with  Joshua  (Josh,  x.
3 — 27).  Like  Zareah,  it  lay  in  the  low
coast  tract  {ibid.  xv.  35).

Ver.  30.  — Zanoah  and  Adullam  appear  in
close  connection  with  Jarmuth  in  Josh.  xv.
34,  35.  Zanoah  was  not  a  place  of  any
importance,  but  Adullam,  near  which  was
David's  cave,  is  often  mentioned.  It  had
its  own  king  in  the  time  of  Joshua  (Josh.
liL  15),  was  fortified  by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron,
xi.  7),  and  remained  a  city  of  some  strength
under  the  Maccabees  (2  Mace.  xii.  38).
Lachish  is  a  place  even  more  celebrated  than
Adullam.  Its  king,  Japhia,  warred  with
Joshua  (Josh.  xiL  3 — 16).  It  was  fortified
by  Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  9).  Amaziah
took  refuge  there  when  conspiracy  threatened
him  at  Jerusalem  (2  Kings  xiv.  19) ;  and
Sennacherib  "  besieged  it  with  all  his  power  "
(2  Chron.  xxil  9).  Azekah  is  joined  with
Jarmuth  and  Adullam  in  Josh.  xv.  35.  Like
Adullam  and  Lachish,  it  was  fortified  by
Rehoboam  (2  Chron.  xi.  9).  They  {i.  e.  the
children  of  Judah)  dwelt  from  Beer-sheba
to  the  valley  of  Hinnom.  The  southernmost
and  the  northernmost  parts  of  Judaea  are
here  mentioned.

Ver.  31. — The  children  also  of  Benjamin
from  Geba  dwelt  at  Uichmash.  Rather,
"Also  the  children  of  Benjamin  dwelt  from
Geba  to  Michmash,  and  A^a,  and  Bethel,'


120


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


fOH.  XI.  1—36


tc  Geba  was  reckoned  an  extreme  city  of
Benjamin  towards  the  west,  and  consequently
•ccurs  last  in  the  first  list  of  Joshua  (ch.
xviii.  24).  Its  proximity  to  Michmash  and
Aija  (Aiath)  appears  in  Isa.  x.  28,  29.  All
three  places  were  in  the  near  vicinity  of
Bethel.

Ver.  32.  — Anathoth  was  on  the  road  from
Geba  to  Jerusalem  (Isa.  x.  80),  and  was  a
Levitical  city  (Josh.  xxL  18).  Nob  was  still
nearer  to  the  capital,  which  could  be  seen
from  it  (Isa.  x.  32).  It  was  famous  for  the
massacre  of  the  priests  by  Doeg  (1  Sam.  xxii.
13,  19).  Ananiah  is  mentioned  only  in  this
place.

Ver.  33. — Hazor  occurs  as  a  Benjamite
city  here  only.  Eamah  is  the  famous  town,
now  er-Bdm,  so  often  mentioned  as  a  little
to  the  north  of  Jerusalem  (Josh,  xviii  25  ;
Judges  iv.  5 ;  1  Kings  xv.  17  ;  Isa.  x.  29 ;
Jer.  xxxi.  15).  Gittaim  is  mentioned  as  a
Benjamite  town  in  2  Sam.  iv.  3.

Ver.  34. — Hadid  is  joined  with  Lod  and
Ono  in  Ezra  ii  33  and  Neh.  vii.  37.  It  is
probably  the  modem  Haditheh,  three  miles
east  of  Ludd  or  Lod,  in  the  Shephelah.
Zeboim  is  not  elsewhere  mentioned  as  a  town,


but  we  hear  of  n  "valley  of  Zeboim"  in
1  Sam.  xiii.  18,  \\hich  seems  to  have  lain
east  of  Michmash,  in  the  bleak  coxmtry
towards  the  Jordan.  STeballat  is  not  else-
where mentioned.

Ver.  35. — Lod,  now  Ludd  (called  in  the
Acts  of  the  Apostles  Lydda),  was  at  the
eastern  edge  of  the  Shephelah,  or  low  mari-
time plain,  and  about  nine  miles  to  the  S.  E.
of  Joppa.  Unimportant  during  the  early
times,  it  became  a  place  of  considerable  note
under  the  Maccabees  (1  Mace.  x.  30,  38  ;  xi.
28,  34,  57,  &c.),  and  so  continued  till  the
taking  of  Jerusalem  by  Titus,  soon  after
which  its  name  was  changed  to  Diospolls.
Ono  is  first  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  viiL  12
in  combination  with  Lod,  with  which  it  is
also  joined  in  Ezra  ii.  33  and  Neh.  viL  37.
We  do  not  know  how  it  came  to  be  called
"the  vaUey  of  craftsmen."

Ver.  36.— Of  the  Leviteswere  divisions  in
Jndah  and  Benjamin.  The  exact  sense  is
obscure,  but  we  may  gather  from  the  passage
that  a  certain  number  of  Levites  were  dis-
persed among  the  Benjamite  cities.  They
were  not  now  numerous  enough  to  have  any
cities  to  themselves.


HOMILETICa

Ch.  30. — Tovm  and  country.  Variety  in  wniiy.  Nehemiah  h«d  been  some  time
before  (see  ch.  vii.  4,  5)  impressed  with  the  necessity  of  increasing  the  population  of
Jerusalem,  and  had  taken  preliminary  steps  ;  but  other  more  pressing  matters  had
intervened.  He  now  proceeded  with  his  design.  His  purpose  was,  that  of  the  whole
population  one-tenth  should  inhabit  the  metropolis,  and  he  arranged  that  the
additional  families  to  dwell  there  should  be  determined  by  lot.  First,  however,
opportunity  was  given  for  volunteers  to  offer  themselves,  and  many  appear  to  have
done  so  (ver.  2),  and  gained  for  themselves  the  blessing  of  the  people,  who  would
have  to  supply  a  proportionately  smaller  number  by  the  determination  of  the  lot,
each  one's  chance  of  being  called  upon  to  break  up  his  home  and  remove  to  Jerusa-
lem being  consequently  lessened.  It  is  difficult  to  vmderstand  how  such  an  artificial
increase  of  a  city's  inhabitants  could  be  successfully  and  permanently  accomplished  ;
how,  for  instance,  people  from  the  country,  chosen  promiscuously,  could  accommo-
date themselves  to  life  in  the  city ;  how  suitable  employments  could  be  found  for
them,  and  how  they  could  be  snjiported  during  the  period  u£  transition.  But  this
is  not  a  solitary  instance  of  the  kind  in  ancient  times  (see  note  in  '  Speaker's  Com-
mentary ').  The  necessity  of  increasing  the  population  of  Jerusalem  appears  from
what  is  said  in  ch.  vii.  4,  and  the  building  of  the  wall  would  have  been  of  little
value  otherwise.  As  the  metropolis,  and  as  "  the  holy  city,"  it  was  alike  important
that  it  should  be  well  peopled.  Following  the  brief  notice  in  vers.  1  and  2  of  the
steps  taken  for  this  purpose,  we  have  in  the  rest  of  the  chapter  an  account  of  the
inhabitants,  first  of  the  city,  and  then  of  the  country.  It  sets  forth  the  variety  in
condition,  avocations,  &c.  of  the  people,  who  yet  were  one  both  as  a  civil  and  a
religious  community  ;  and  may  be  employed  as  suggesting  to  us  the  variety  in  unity
of  the  Christian  Church.

I.  There  is  variety.  1.  As  to  locality.  As  here  some  dwelt  within  the  walls  of  Jeru-
salem, near  the  temple,  the  rest  were  scattered  about  the  country ;  so  the  Church  is
scattered  throughout  the  world,  in  every  variety  of  situation,  and  comprises  people  of
almost  all  languages,  &c.  2.  In  occupations  and  functions.  In  Israel,  the  rulers  and
the  ruled,  craftsmen  and  agriculturists  ;  and  about  the  temple  itself,  priests,  Levites,
and  Nethinims;  singers,  gate-keepers,  &c.   So  in  the  Church.    Every  separate  Church,


OH.  XL  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  Ul

which  is  really  such,  has  its  own  special  work ;  and  within  each  Church  every  member
has  his  own  aptitudes  and  functions  (see  Bom.  zii.  4 — 8),  arising  from  the  diversities
of  nature,  education,  grace,  and  oBice.  3.  Of  advantages  and  disadvantages.  For
livelihood,  culture,  religion.  The  city,  the  country  town,  the  village,  the  mansion
and  the  cottage,  all  present  a  mixture  oiE  both.  Nearness  to  the  house  of  prayer  and
religious  instruction  is  one  of  the  greatest  advantages,  and  should  be  more  con-
sidered than  it  often  is  by  those  who  are  choosing  a  residence  ;  but  when  duty  calls
to  a  different  position  God  can  afford  compensations  for  the  loss.  In  like  manner,
of  the  various  forms  of  Church  order  and  life,  no  one  monopolises  all  advantages,  no
one  is  without  some  special  function.  4.  Of  characteristics.  Every  nation,  every
class  in  each,  has  its  own  peculiarities ;  every  kind  of  employment  stamps  those
engaged  in  it  with  some  specialty  of  body  or  mind  ;  yea,  every  individual  differs
from  every  other.  We  need  not,  then,  be  surprised  that  in  religion  there  should  be
so  many  varieties ;  that  even  the  members  of  the  one  Church  of  Christ  should  differ
so  widely.  Differences  in  nature,  education,  social  position,  the  time  and  manner  in
which  the  religious  life  is  awakened,  the  influences  under  which  it  comes,  the  pecu-
liarities of  the  Church,  the  minister,  &c.,  all  have  their  part  in  producing  and  per-
petuating diversities  of  thought,  life,  &c.    But  notwithstanding  so  great  diversity —

II.  There  is  unity.  1.  Of  race.  All  Israelites  were  of  one  family,  descended
from  common  ancestors.  So  all  Christians  have  one  Father,  and  have  been  born
again  by  one  Spirit.  2.  Of  faith  and  life.  The  Jews,  when  worthy  of  the  name,
were  one  in  their  religion,  trusting  and  worshipping  the  same  God,  living  according
to  the  precepts  of  the  same  law.  In  like  manner  all  true  Christians  are  essentially
alike  in  faith  and  character.  The  family  features  may  be  detected,  notwithstanding
their  unlikeness  in  many  respects.  Genuine  Christians  of  very  different  and  possibly
opposing  Churches  are  more  like  each  other,  and  more  really  united,  than  each  is  like,
or  united  to,  the  untrue  members  of  his  own  Church.  3.  Of  relationships.  The
Jews  in  city,  town,  or  village  were  bound  together  by  their  common  relation  to  their
civil  and  religious  rulers,  their  temple  and  their  God,  and  their  mutual  relations  and
dependence  as  parts  of  one  nation.  So  Christians  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus,  having
one  God,  one  Saviour  and  Lord,  living  under  the  same  rule  and  the  same  system  of
laws,  enjoying  the  same  care  and  protection,  forming,  whether  they  will  or  not,  one
body,  the  body  of  Christ,  in  which  every  member  is  joined  to  and  dependent  upan
every  other.  4.  Of  end.  "  This  people  liave  I  formed  for  myself ;  they  shall  show
forth  my  praise."  Such  was  the  Divine  purpose  in  respect  to  Israel;  and  such  it  is
in  respect  to  Christians.  All  are  called  to  accomplish  this  end,  and  in  their  various
ways  they  subserve  it  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  9).

III.  There  are  duties  arising  from  this  variety  in  unity.  1.  Contentment  of
each  with  his  own  position.  Whether  in  the  city  or  the  country,  every  Israelite
niight  feel  himself  one  of  the  Divinely-favoured  people,  a  valuable  member  of  the
community  if  honestly  doing  his  duty,  and  able  to  attain  the  great  ends  of  life.
Similarly,  Christians  may  well  be  content  with  their  various  lots  within  the  Church.
Not,  indeed,  with  a  contentment  that  forbids  inquiry  and  aspiration  after  fuller  light
and  higher  privilege,  or.such  changes  as  may  result  therefrom ;  but  with  a  content-
ment which  will  prevent  repining  and  restlessness,  and  secure  the  fulfflment  of  tl«e
duties  and  the  enjoyment  of  the  advantages  within  reach.  Each  should  love  his
own  branch  of  the  Church,  seek  to  be  a  good  member  of  it,  and  gain  all  the  good  he
can  from  it.  In  respect  to  locality  too,  the  dwellers  in  cities  and  towns  and  those  in
the  country  need  not  envy  each  other.  God  can  be  found  and  salvation  realised
everywhere.  God's  temple  is  wherever  is  the  contrite,  believing,  and  praying  heart ;
and  wherever  two  or  three  meet  in  the  name  of  Christ  (Isa.  Ivii,  15 ;  Matt  xviii,20)),

"  While  place  we  seek,  or  place  we  shnil|
The  soul  finds  happiness  in  none  ;
But  with  my  God  to  guide  my  way,
'Tis  equal  joy  to  go  or  stay.
Could  I  be  cast  where  thou  art  not.
That  were  indeed  a  dreadful  lot ;
But  regions  none  remote  I  call,
Secure  of  finding  God  in  all."


122  THE  BOOK  OJ"  NKHEMlAH.  [ch.  xi.  1—36.

2.  Mutual  esteem  and  affection.  Christians  should  recognise  tliat  they  belong  to
one  great  society,  of  which  every  true  Christian  is  a  member ;  and  learn  to  detect  the
essential  features  of  a  Christian,  and  honour  all  who  possess  them,  whatever  their
subordinate  peculiarities.  He  is  a  poor  Christian  who  cannot  say  with  St.  Paul,
"  Grace  be  with  all  them  that  love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity."  3.  Mutual
helpfulness.  The  country  is  as  essential  to  the  town  as  the  town  to  the  country.
"The  king  himself  is  served  by  the  field."  The  peasant  can  even  teach  the  citizen
much  of  which  he  is  ignorant.  So  Christians  (individuals  and  Churches)  can  and
ought  to  be  helpers  of  each  others'  Itnowledge  and  faith,  holiness  and  joy  ;  and  none
should  be  above  receiving  the  assistance  which  others  can  render.  4.  United  action.
As  the  people  of  Israel,  from  town  and  country  alike,  united  to  build  the  wall  of
Jerusalem,  and  repel  the  common  enemies,  so  should  Christians  of  every  name  be
ready  to  unite  in  all  ways  possible  and  expedient,  in  order  to  promote  the  common
good,  to  defend  and  propagate  the  common  faith,  and  subdue  all  that  is  opposed  to
it ;  and  thus  to  increase  the  one  glorious  kingdom  to  which  they  all  belong,  and
magnify  him  whom  they  all  alike  adore  and  love.  5.  Willingness  of  individuals  to
undertake  more  than  their  obvious  share*  in  labours  or  sacrifices  for  the  common
good.  Like  those  who  "willingly  offered  themselves  to  dwell  at  Jerusalem"
(ver.  2).  6.  Finally,  let  us  each  take  heed  that  he  really  is  one  of  "the  Israel  of
God,"  to  whichever  tribe  or  section  he  may  belong,  and  wherever  his  lot  may  be  cast.

Ver.  2. —  Volunteers.  "And  the  people  blessed  all  the  men  that  willingly  offered
themselves,"  &c.  A  large  part  of  the  work  done  for  the  good  of  the  community  is
done  by  volunteers — men  and  women  who  "willingly  offer  themselves"  to  do.what
in  the  abstract  has  no  more  claim  on  them  than  on  others ;  and  do  it  gratuitously.
This  is  especially  seen  in  the  various  departments  of  service  in  connection  with
religion  and  charity.  Church  officers,  Sunday-school  teachers,  visitors  of  the  poor,
&c.     Amount  and  value  of  their  labours.     Imagine  them  to  cease  I    Notice —

I.  Whence  voluntary  devotement  to  paeticdlar  Christian  services  springs.
It  may,  doubtless,  arise  in  some  cases  from  unworthy  motives ;  but  we  speak  of  true
Christian  willingness  as  directed  towards  this  or  that  branch  of  service.  1.  Earnest
piety  and  benevolence  in  general  (see  on  cli.  iii.  20).  Without  which  no  service  is  truly
Christian.  2.  Felt  aptitude  and  ability  for  the  work  chosen.  Well  is  it  when  this
feeling  is  not  a  delusion,  and  the  willing  are  really  the  able ;  well  also  when  the  able
are  the  willing,  and  so  the  work  is  not  left  to  pious  incompetence.  3.  Special  inclina-
tion for  it.  Which  may  arise  from  the  congenial  nature  of  the  woik,  or  the  associations
to  which  it  introduces,  or  the  special  opportunities  it  is  believed  to  afford  for  getting
as  well  as  doing  good.

II.  The  reward  of  those  who  display  it.  1.  The  commendation  of  others.
"  The  people  blessed,"  &c.  The  expectation  of  this  should  not  be  a  principal  motive,
if  only  to  prevent  disappointment.  For  though  a  measure  of  it  is  usual,  it  is  not
always  bestowed ;  and  the  opposite  treatment  is  possible.  Some  who  w^ill  do  nothing
themselves  occupy  themselves  in  reflections  on  those  who  are  employed  in  good
works.  Others,  however,  will  commend  ;  some  from  hearty  appreciation — the  appre-
ciation of  gratitude  from  those  who  receive  benefit,  of  sympathy  from  those  of  like
mind,  who  are  themselves  at  work,  or  'who  would,  but  cannot,  devote  themselves  to
such  service,  and  rejoice  that  others  both  can  and  will.  Commendations  of  less
value  will  perhaps  come  from  another  quarter,  i.  e.  from  some  who  are  too  selfish  or
indolent  to  do  their  part,  but  feel  more  at  ease  in  their  negligence  from  knowing  that
others  are  generous  and  active.  To  praise  them  is  felt  as  all  but  equivalent  to  co-
operating with  them,  and  it  is  a  great  deal  cheaper.  If  commendation  from  others
is  altogether  wanting,  there  will  be — 2.  The  pleasure  of  doing  good.  That  satisfac-
tion which  springs  from  a  sense  of  doing  our  duty,  that  delight  which  is  inseparable
from  the  exercise  of  benevolent  affections,  and  that  which  arises  from  the  perception
of  good  done.  3.  Persona!  benefit.  Growth  in  goodness  and  nobleness.  Increased
likeness  to  Christ  and  to  God.     4.  The  Divine  commendation  and  recompense.

Ver.  16. — Church  officers.     "  The  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of  the  hou8«
of  God."   What  this  business  was  in  and  about  the  temple.     What  it  is  in  Christian


CH.  XL  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAS.  1S9

Churches:  care  of  the  buildings,  manfigement  of  the  finances,  &c.  The  "over-
sight "  is  now  exercised  by  church-wardens,  deacons,  treasurers,  &c.,  according  to
the  customs  of  each  Church.

I.  The  position  which  this  "  otttwabd  business  "  occupies.  1.  It  is  subordinate
to  the  spiritual.  For  the  sake  of  the  latter  it  exists,  and  in  order  to  its  promotion
should  always  be  managed.  2.  It  is  essential  to  the  spiritual.  As  in  this  world  tha
body  to  the  action  of  the  soul,  or  food  and  raiment  to  piety  and  virtue.  Preachers
must  be  fed  and  clothed  and  housed ;  congregations  cannot  meet  at  stated  times
without  buildings,  nor  in  comfort  unless  the  buildings  are  cared  for  and  money  spent
on  them.  Neglect  of  the  outward  will  tell  unfavourably  on  spiritual  life  and  growth.
Due  care  for  it  is  promotive  of  these,  as  it  enables  ministers  to  preach,  and  congre-
gations to  hear  and  worship,  with  undisturbed  minds.  Very  useful  and  honourable,
then,  is  their  office  who  have  "  the  oversight  of  the  outward  business  of  the  house  of
God."

II.  The  qualities  required  for  the  due  discharge  of  its  duties.  Besides
the  uprightness  required  in  every  kind  of  business.  1.  Devoted  love  for  the  house
of  God.  Awakening  the  desire  to  do  all  that  is  possible  to  secure  the  due  order  and
the  efEectiveness  of  its  services,  and  producing  the  conviction  that  it  is  an  honour  to
be  employed  even  in  its  humblest  ministrations  (see  Ps.  Ixxxiv.  10).  Such  love
will  make  the  officers  of  a  Church  examples  to  others  (as  they  should  be)  of
generosity  and  activity.  2.  Sympathy  with,  and  kindly  regard  for,  those  engaged
in  spiritual  ministrations.  Arising  from  a  high  esteem  of  their  work  as  well  as  their
character,  and  impelling  to  every  efEort  to  facilitate  their  labours,  and  secure  them
such  honourable  and  sufficient  maintenance  as  will  fiee  them  from  all  anxiety  about
worldly  matters,  and  enable  them  to  give  themselves  with  undivided  heart  to  their
work.  Inducing  also  care  to  maintain  a  good  understanding  between  the  pastor  and
the  flock,  and  preserve  the  fdrmer  from  annoyance  and  needless  interruption.  3.
Diligence  and  iidelity  in  their  work.  The  contrast  between  the  style  in  which  men
holding  office  in  the  Church  transact  their  own  business,  and  that  in  which  they
transact  the  business  of  God's  bouse,  is  often  very  striking  and  discreditable.  4.
The  capacity  for  leading  and  stimulating  their  fellow-v/orshippers.  There  is  often
in  a  congregation  much  latent  ability,  and  willingness  too,  to  serve  the  Church  by
gift  or  labour,  which  need  only  to  be  called  forth.  One  man  with  the  power  to  call
them  forth  may  totally  change  for  the  better  the  condition  of  afEairs.  5.  Withal,
indisposition  to  magnify  their  office  unduly,  or  go  beyond  its  bounds  (see  Eom.  xii.
3  seq.).  Finally,  ministers  and  congregations  enjoying  the  services  of  such  officers
have  much  reason  for  thankfulness  and  praise.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 36. — The  true  centralisation.  We  separate  the  nation  from  the  world
not  to  surround  it  with  a  false  patriotism  which  means  self-interest,  but  that  in
the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  purpose  and  law  we  may  be  the  greater  blessing  to
mankind.

I.  The  true  centre  of  the  life  of  the  community  is  the  religious  centre.  Jeru-
salem as  the  sacred  city.  The  secular  and  religious  are  not  opposed.  The  man  of
God  is  the  true  man.  There  is  no  true  strength  and  prosperity  where  there  is  an
inversion  of  the  Divine  order.  Put  the  centre  where  it  ought  to  be.  There  have
been  men  who  have  sanctified  the  earthly  life  in  its  highest  forms  by  their  recognition
of  the  supreme  claim  of  religion.

II.  Willingness  is  the  only  sure  foundation  on  which  the  Church's  glory  can  rest.
We  may  appeal  to  Divine  direction  in  the  selection  of  our  spiritual  leaders  j  but  it  is
those  who  willingly  offer  themselves  who  should  be  called  to  occupv  the  foremost
place?  at  Jerusalem.

Ill  While  there  is  a  boundless  variety  in  human  capability,  there  is  a  possibility
of  distribution  which  shall  find  room  for  all.  The  highest  wealth  and  faculty
should  be  gathered  to  the  centre.  The  Church  of  God  should  present  to  the
world  the  most  conspicuous  examples  of  sanctified  genius  and  faithfully -used
opportunity. — B.


124  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  xi.  1—36.

_Vers.  1,  2. — Duty :  its  peril,  its  excellency,  and  its  reward.  We  learn  from  Neh.
vii.  4  that  "the  city  was  large  and  great,  but  the  people  were  few  therein."  Less
than  50.000  inhabitants  were  scattered  over  Judsea ;  but  these  would  not  have  been
too  many  to  have  occupied  Jerusalem  itself.  It  was  a  matter  of  the  first  importance
that  the  metropolis  should  be  well  supplied  with  those  who  would  worship  in  her
courts,  and  with  those  who  would  guard  her  walls.  It  was  therefore  the  aim  of
Neliemiah  and  other  patriotic  men  to  promote  a  migration  from  the  outljring  towns
and  villages  to  Jerusalem.  "  The  rulers  dwelt  there,"  and  they  were  anxious  that
many  more  should  come  in  to  swell  the  population.  This  ingathering  supplies  us
with  three  lessons.

I.  That  the  fcaoi  of  privilege  is  the  post  of  duty  and  of  danger.  Jerusalem
was  _"  the  holy  city  "  (ver.  1).  It  was  "  the  city  which  God  had  chosen ; "  the  place
of  bis  special  manifestation  ;  the  spot  where,  as  nowhere  else,  he  could  be  approached
and  worshipped.  Thither  all  who  feared  his  name  and  sought  his  favour  came  with
their  offerings ;  there  they  presented  the  best  they  could  biing  on  his  altar,  and
bowed  before  his  face.  But  this  "  holy  city,"  where  the  holy  people  might  be  well
pleased  and  be  rightly  proud  to  dwell,  was  (1)  the  place  where  special  duty  awaited
the  inhabitants.  "  The  houses  were  not  builded  "  (ch.  vii.  4) ;  the  ground  was  waste ;
ruins  were  everywhere  about;  there  was  hard  work  to  be  done  from  centre  to
circumference.  Moreover,  the  walls  had  to  be  guarded ;  probably  night  and  day
there  was  vigilant  watching  to  be  observed,  that  there  might  be  no  possible  surprise.
It  was  also  (2)  the  post  of  special  danger.  Other  places  would  be  too  insignificant
to  be  attacked.  If  the  enemy  struck  at  all,  Jerusalem  would  be  his  mark.  So  is  it
ever.  The  great  city  haa  many  special  privileges,  but  it  has  many  peculiar  perils,  and
some  duties  which  are  all  its  own.  They  who  minister  unto  the  Lord  find  even  in
their  holy  office  obligations  which  impose  the  most  serious  responsibilities,  and  subtle
spiritual  dangers  which  call  for  unusual  vigilance  an^  prayer.  It  is  well,  indeed,  to
belong  to  those  to  whom  God  is  near,  with  whom  he  dwells;  but  it  is  necessary  to
remember  that  side  by  side  with  special  privilege  there  is  always  found  (a)  some
special  obligations,  and  (6)  some  peculiar  perils.

II.  That  duty  mat  be  done  with  various  degrees  of  worthiness  and  accept-
ABLENESS.  There  were  two  ways  by  which  Jerusalem  was  replenished.  They  "  cast
lots  to  bring  one  of  ten  to  dwell"  there  (ver.  1);  others  "willingly  offered  them-
selves "  (ver.  2) — they  volunteered  without  being  drawn.  Looking  at  this  procedure
as  a  matter  of  morals,  we  should  certainly  estimate  the  action  of  the  latter  more  highly
than  that  of  the  former.  These  did  well,  but  those  did  better.  It  was  a  right  and  an
acceptable  thing  for  men  with  their  wives  and  families  to  leave  their  homes  where  they
were  doing  well,  and  where  they  preferred  to  stay,  in  order  to  act  up  to  their  agreement
with  their  fellows ;  it  was  a  worthier  and  a  more  acceptable  thing  for  others  not  to
wait  for  this  moral  compulsion,  but  to  offer  themselves,  and  go  of  their  own  accord
from  the  village  where  they  were  prosperous,  comfortable,  and  out  of  the  reach  of
attack,  to  live  in  the  city  where  hardship  and  danger  might  look  them  in  the  face.
With  us,  as  with  them,  duty  is  done  with  different  degrees  of  Divine  approval.
Secular  duty,  that  of  the  business  or  the  home,  may  be  done  faithfully  but  unre-
ligiously,  or  it  may  be  done  conscientiously  because  religiously,  all  being  done  not
as  unto  man  only  or  chiefly,  but  "  unto  the  Lord  "  (Eph.  vi.  7).  Sacred  duty  may
be  done  as  a  matter  of  obligation  only,  or  it  may  be  discharged  with  willingness,
even  with  an  eager  delight,  because  the  purest  and  highest  aims  are  kept  well  in
view  of  the  soul.  The  same  acts,  outwardly  measured,  are  of  very  different
weight  in  worthiness,  tried  in  the  balances  of  God.  And  sometimes  of  men,"for  it  is
true —

III.  That  disinterested  deeds  will  often  draw  down  the  benediction  or  cub
KIND.  "  And  the  people  blessed  all  the  men  that  willingly  offered  themselves,"  &c.
(ver.  2).  The  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  evidentlj  discriminated  between  those  wha
were  actuated  by  the  more,  and  those  governed  by  the  less,  generous  inducements ;
and  to  the  former  they  accorded  hearty  thanks — they  "  blessed  them."  Concerning
popular  appreciation,  it  is  well  to  learn  from  the  experience  of  the  past,  or  we  shall
suffer  injury  and  loss.  We  must  (1)  neither  reckon  upon  it  as  certain,  nor  (2)  de-
spise it  as  worthless.    We  should  (a)  pitch  our  life  so  high  that,  if  needful,  we  ou


m.  XI.  1—36.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  124

do  without  it,  "  seeking  the  honour  that  cometh  from  Qod  only,"  and  satisfied  with
that

"  Men  heed  thee  not,  men  praise  thee  not ;
The  Master  praises  ; — what  are  men  I "

And  yet  we  should  (6)  so  live  that  we  may  fairly  hope  to  earn  the  benediction  of  our
kind.  While  some  skilful,  selfish  men  have  reaped  the  honours  due  only  to  disin-
terestedness, more  often  selfishness  shows  its  cloven  foot,  and  is  contemned.  And
while  some  generous  souls  have  Kved  and  died  unappreciated,  more  often  kind-heart*
edness  and  self-forgetting  love  win  an  answering  afiection,  and  draw  down  the
blessing  of  those  who  are  enriched.  For  good  as  well  as  evil,  "  with  what  measure
ye  mete,"  &o.  (Matt.  vii.  1).  "  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you ;  good  measure,"
&c.  (Luke  vi.  38).  Live  a  life  Hke  that  of  Job,  and  you  will  be  able  to  say  as  he
said,  "  When  the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me ;  and  when  the  eye  saw  me,  it
gave  witness  to  me  "  (Job  xxix.  11). — 0.

Vers.  3 — 36. — Three  elements  in  the  Church  of  Christ.  In  the  first  verse  of  this
chapter  Jerusalem  is  called  "  the  holy  city ; "  as  such  it  was  the  type  of  the  Church
of  Christ.  In  three  respects  it  bore  to  the  Christian  Church  a  real  and  close  resem-
blance. 1.  It  was  a  separated  city;  separated  and  fenced  from  surrounding  idols-
tries  and  immoralities.  2.  It  was  a  distinguished  city ;  distinguished  by  (1)  the
manifested  presence  of  God,  and  by  (2)  the  biowledge  of  his  holy  will.  3.  It  was  a
commissioned  city ;  charged  to  hold  and  preserve  a  certain  deposit  of  sacred  truth
against  all  the  world.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  a  body  (1)  separated  from  sorround-
ing  irreligion,  error,  and  folly ;  (2)  distinguished  by  the  presence  of  the  indwelling
Spirit  of  God,  and  the  graces  he  communicates ;  (3)  commissioned  to  cany  the
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  to  the  utmost  ends  of  the  earth.  There  are  to  b«  m  Ihe
Church  what  there  were  in  the  city,  three  things,  viz. —

I.  The  element  op  obdeb.  There  were  dwelling  in  Jerusalem  "  the  rulers  of  the
people  "  (ver.  1).  Concerning  these  rulers,  we  are  told  who  was  "  overseer  "  c£  iha
"sons  of  Benjamin"  (ver.  9);  who  was  "overseer"  of  the  priests  (ver.  14);  who
also  of  the  Levites  (ver.  22);  we  are  told  who  was  precentor,  "the  principal  to
begin  the  thanksgiving  in  prayer"  (ver.  17)  ;  who  had  "the  oversight  of  ttie  out-
ward business  of  the  house  of  God"  (ver.  16),  and  who  of  the  internal  business
(ver.  22).  Everything  was  obviously  ordered  most  carefully,  and  every  one  had  his
post  at  which  to  rule  or  serve.  The  "  order ''  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  something
which  has  givto  rise  to  most  serious  differences  and  disputes — alas  I  to  much  bitter-
ness and  bloodshed.  There  are  advocates  of  (1)  one  universal  visible  Church,  (2)
national  Churches,  (3)  large  closely-confederated  Christian  communities,  (4)  separate
societies  united  only  by  occasional  non-legislative  councils  or  unions.  But  whatever
the  form  which  the  Christian  Church  may  take,  whatever  its  method  of  organisation,
order  should  always  be  conspicuously  present.  "  God  is  not  the  author  of  confusion,
but  of  peace,  as  in  all  Churches  of  the  saints  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  33).  Everything  is  to  be
done  "  in  order  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40).  There  are  two  complementary  duties  a  Christian
man  may  set  before  him ;  one, — the  bringing  about,  in  an  orderly  way,  that  form  of
Church  organisation  which,  after  diligent  study  and  patient  observance,  he  considers
to  be  after  the  will  of  Christ ;  the  other, — the  taking  his  place  in  that  particular  Church
of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  filling  it  faithfully  and  peacefully.  He  who,  in  the
name  of  order,  brings  about  contention  brings  down  on  himself  the  condenmation  of
his  Master  (1  Cor.  xi.  16).

II.  The  element  of  vakibtt.  Beside  the  governor  were  "  rulers  of  the  people  "
(ver.  1)  generally ;  and,  particularly,-  priests  (ver.  10),  and  Levites  (ver.  16),  and
porters  (ver.  19),  and  singers  (ver.  22);  and,  still  more  particularly,  (1)  those  who
were  engaged  in  the  "  outward  business  of  the  house  of  God  "  (ver.  16),  and  (2)
those  who  were  occupied  with  the  internal  arrangements  (ver.  22).  All  these
varifus  classes  had  their  work  to  do ;  not  one  was  redundant.  Some  were  much
higher  than  others,  and  did  a  work  of  a  more  valuable  and  a  higher  kind,  but  every
one  was  needed  in  his  place,  and  the  security  of  Jerusalem,  as  well  as  the  worship  of
Qod,  would  have  been  incomplete  if  all  had  not  done  their  work  at  the  appointed


m


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[cfi.  xli.  1—26


time  and  place.  In  the  Christian  Church  are  many  services  to  be  rendered,- and
many  orders  of  servants.  Some  are  higher,  others  lower.  But  from  the  man  in-
spired of  God  to  tench  and  kindle  thousands  of  human  souls,  to  "  the  doorkeeper  ol
the  house,"  every  one  has  his  work  to  do  for  Christ  and  for  man.  One  workman
needs  the  other,  and  the  world  needs  them  all ;  and  the  eye  cannot  say  to  the  foot,
"  I  have  no  need  of  thee,"  &c.  If  we  "magnify  our  own  office"  that  we  may  be
found  faithful  therein,  let  us  not  disparage  that  of  others,  lest  we  be  counted  self-
important  by  our  brethren,  and  injurious  by  our  Lord.

III.  The  element  of  unsuspected  strength.  To  the  eye  of  flesh  Jerusalem
seemed  weak  enough  at  this  time.  If  we  include  "  the  residue  of  Israel  "  that  were
"  in  the  cities  of  Judah  "  (ver.  20),  and  those  in  the  "  villages  with  their  fields  "  (ver.
25),  all  in  the  outlying  provinces'  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  they  make  but  a  very
feeble  band  compared  with  other  places  then  or  with  other  communities  now.  How
easily  might  they  have  been  crushed  and  extirpated  by  the  Persian  power,  so  far  as
human  calculations  go.  Yet  they  were  the  Church  of  God  on  earth,  the  custodians
of  his  holy  oracles,  the  chosen  company  from  which  should  come  forth  the  Divine
Redeemer,  and  from  .which  should  go  forth  the  Divine  mission  that  is  to  transform
the  world.  The  Church  of  Christ  may  still  seem  small  as  compared  with  the  "  un-
possessed land  "  of  heathendom ;  individual  Churches  may  seem  weak  in  the  midst
of  an  all-surrounding  and  overtowering  iniquity  ;  but  "  God  is  in  the  midst  of  her  ;  "
his  "  right  hand  "  is  on  her  side.  There  is  an  unsuspected  strength  in  the  truth  she
holds,  in  the  weapons  she  wields,  in  the  cause  of  which  she  is  the  champion.  In
ways  and  by  means  quite  unsuspected  by  her  enemies,  and  equally  unexpected  by
herself,  God  will  make  his  Church  his  agent  for  the  redemption  of  the  world.— C.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIl.


List  or  the  Levitical  and  priestly

FAMILIES  WHICH  BETTIRNED  FROM  BABYLON

WITH .  Zf-kcbbabel  (ch  xli.  1 — 9).  This
list  receives  elucidation  and,  to  some  extent,
correction  from  two  others  : — 1.  That  of  the
priestly  families  whose  seals  were  set  to  the
covenant  (ch.  x.  2—8) ;  and,  2.  That  of  the
heads  of  the  priestly  courses  under  the  high
priest  Joiakim  (ch.  xli.  12—21).  The  num-
ber of  the  names  in  each  of  the  three  lists  is
almost  exactly  the  same  (twenty -two  or
twenty-one) ;  the  names  are  for  the  most  part
the  same  ;  and  they  are  given  nearly  in  the
same  order.  That  they  are  the  names  of
families  appears  most  dfstinctly  from  the
thkd  list  (ch.  xiL  12—21).

Ver.  1.— Zernbbabel,  the  son  of  Sbealtiel.
See  the  comment  on  Ezra  iiL  2.  Jeshua.
The  high  priest  of  Zerubbahel's  time.  Seraiah.
Compare  ch.  xi.  11  with  the  comment  on
that  place.  The  original  Seraiah  was  the
high  priest  murdered  by  Nebuchadnezzar
(2  Kings  XXV.  18 — 21).  Jeremiah  and  Ezra,
who  gave  name  to  the  second  and  third
course,  must  not  be  regarded  as  the  prophet
sr  the  scribe  so  named,  but  as  persons  of
whom  nothing  more  is  known  to  us.

?«r.  a.— Uallsoh   ia  caUed    "lleUcu"


below,  in  ver.  14  ;  but  the  reading  of  "  Mal-
luch "  is  confinned  by  ch.  x.  4.  Hattush.
It  is  curious  that  Hattush  is  omitted  from
the  third  list  {infra,  vers.  12 — 21).  He
appears,  however,  in  the  first  (ch.  x.  4),  as
well  as  here.

Ver.  3. — Shechaniah.  Rather,  "Sheba-
niah,"  as  the  name  is  given  in  ch.  x.  4  and
xii.  14.  Behum.  Rather,  "  Harim,"  which
is  found  in  ver.  .15,  and  also  in  ch.  x.  5.
Compare,  moreover,  Ezra  ii.  39 ;  Neh.  vli.
42.  Meremoth  is  probably  correct,  though
altered  to  Meraioth  in  ver.  15,  since  we  find
Meremoth  in  ch.  x.  5.

Ver.  4. — Iddo  is  probably  correct,  rather
than  "  Obadiah,"  which  we  find  after  Mere-
moth in  ch.  X.  5,  since  "Iddo"  recurs  in
ver.  16.  Ginnetho.  Rather,  "Ginnethon"
(see  ch.  x.  6  ;  xii.  16).  Abijah.  This  wouW
seem  to  be  the  course  to  which  Zacharias,
the  father  of  John  the  Baptist,  belonged
(Luke  i.  5).

Ver.  6. — Miamin  is  confirmed  by  ch.  x.
7,  and  is  therefore  to  he  preferred  to  the
"Miniamin"  of  ver.  17.  Maadiah,  "Moa-
diah"  (ver.  17),  and  "Maaziah"  (ch.  x.  8)
are  not  so  much  different  names  as  different
ways  of  spelling  the  same  name.  The  same
may  be  said  of  Bilgah  and  "Bilgai"  (ch.
X.  8).

Ver.  6. — And  Joiarib.  The  introduction
of  the  conjunction  "and"  here,  and  here
only,  in  this  list  separotei  off  very  markedly
the  last  bIz  names  from  the  first  sixteen.    A


3&.  XII.  1—26.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


187


similar  division  is  made  in  ver.  19.  The
reason  for  the  division  seems  to  be  that  these
last  six  courses,  though  including  some  of
the  very  highest  i^riestly  families,  as  those
of  Joiarih  and  Jedaiah  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  7 ;
Ezra  ii.  86  ;  Neh.  vii.  39  ;  xi.  10),  for  some
reason  or  other,  did  not  seal  to  the  covenant,
whereas  the  other  sixteen  courses  did  so.
Jedaiah.  The  double  occurrence  of  this  name
(in  vers.  6  and  7)  would  naturally  raise  a
suspicion  of  corruption  ;  but  the  two  Jeda-
iahs  are  confirmed  by  vers.  19,  21.

Ver.  7. — These  were  the  chief,  &c.  It
may  be  suspected  that  this  is  properly  the
heading  of  another  list,  parallel  to  that  in
vers.  12 — 21,  which  gave  the  names  of  the
actual  heads  of  the  courses  in  Jeshua's  time.

Ver,  8. — Moreover  the  Levites:  Jeshua,
Binnui,  Kadmiel,  &c.  Here  again  families
are  probably  intended,  as  in  Ezra  ii.  40  ;  iiL

9  ;  Neh.  ix.  4,  5,  &c. ,  though  it  is  possible
that  the  founders  of  the  families  actually
returned  with  Zerubbabel.  Jeshua,  Binnui,
and  Kadmiel  appear  as  the  leading  Levitical
families  at  the  sealing  of  the  covenant  (ch.
x.  8).  On  Jlattaniah  see  the  comment  upon
eh.  xi  17.

Ver.  9.  —  Bakbukiah  and  Unni.  Bak-
Dukiah'a  position  with  respect  to  Mattaniah
has  been  already  mentioned  (ch.  xi.  17).
Ii  Unni "  appears,  in  this  place  only,  as  a
ievite  of  Zerubbabel's  time.  Were  over
against  them  in  the  watches.  /.  e.  "min-
istered in  their  courses,  as  the  others  did,
and  kept  their  stations  over  again.st  them  in
their  turns  of  attendance,  which  are  called
their  '  watches '  or  wards  "  (Bp.  Patrick).

List  of  tub  high  pkibsts  from  Jeshua

10  Jaddua  (ch.  xiL  10,  11).  That  this  is
the  line  of  descent  in  the  high  priestly
family  of  the  time  sufSciently  appears  both
from  the  names  themselves,  and  from  the
position  assigned  to  those  who  bore  them
in  vers.  22,  23,  26.  Whether  all  of  them
actually  exercised  the  high  priest's  office  is
left  uncertain  in  Scripture,  but  satisfactorily
established  by  Josephus.  The  six  names
cover  a  space  of  at  least  205  years— from  the
conquest  of  Babylon  by  Cyrus,  b.o.  538,  to
the  submission  of  Jerusalem  to  Alexander
the  Great,  B.O.  333,  which  gives  very  long
generations,  but  still  such  as  are  historic-
ally possible.  Jeshua  was  certainly  high
priest  from  b.o.  638  to  b.o.  516.  He  may
have  been  succeeded  by  his  son,  Joiakim,
about  B.O.  490.  Joiakim  had  certainly  been
succeeded  by  his  son,  Eliashib,  before  B.o.
444  (Neh.  iii.  1) ;  and  Eliashib  was  probably
TOcceeded  by  Joiada  about  b.o.  420.  Joiada's


high  priesthood  may  be  assigned  to  the
period  between  B.o.  420  and  380  ;  Jonathan's
to  that  between  B.O.  880  and  350.  Jaddua
might  then  hold  the  dignity  from  B.O.  350
to  330,  or  later,  and  so  be  brought  into  con-
tact with  Alexander  the  Great.  It  is  ques-
tioned whether  in  that  case  Nehemiah  can
have  vfritten  the  present  passage,  and  certain
that  he  cannot  have  done  so  unless  he  Uved
to  be  at  least  131  years  of  age.  As  this  ia
exceedingly  improbable,  it  is  t)est  to  sup-
pose, either  that  the  whole  list  was  placed
here  by  Malachi,  or  at  any  rate  that  that
prophet  added  the  clause,  "and  Jonathan
begat  Jaddua."

Ver.  10. — Jeshua.  The  "Jeshua"  of  ver.
1,  not  of  ver.  8— the  high  priest  of  Zerub-
babel's time  (Ezra  iii  2,  8  ;  iv.  3  ;  v.  2,  &c.).
Begat  Joiakim.  The  high  priesthood  of
Joiakim  faUs  into  the  interval  between  the
first  part  (chs.  i — vii)  and  the  second  part
(chs.  vii — X.)  of  Ezra.  He  is  only  men-
tioned in  this  chapter  (vers.  12,  26).  Eliashib
is  first  mentioned  in  Ezra  x.  6,  but  he  does
not  appear  as  high  priest  until  after  Nehe-
miah  reaches  Jerusalem  (Neh.  iii  1).  On
his  close  connection  with  Tobiah  see  ch.
xiii  4,  5,  28.  Joiada  is  called  Judas  by
Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  xi  7,  §  1).  His
term  of  oifice  lasted,  according  to  Syncellus
and  the  Paschal  Chronicle,  thirty-six  years.

Ver.  11. — Jonathan,  or  "Johanan,"  as
the  name  is  given  in  vers.  22,  23,  became
high  priest  about  B.O.  380,  according  to
Syncellus  and  the  Pas;)hal  Chronicle,  and
held  the  office  for  thirty- two  years.  Josephus,
who  calls  him  "Jannseus"  (=:John),  says
that  he  murdered  his  own  brother,  Jeshua,
in  the  temple,  because  he  was  endeavouring
to  supplant  him  in  the  high  priesthood
through  the  influence  of  the  Persians.
Jaddua  is  mentioned  as  high  priest  at  the
time  of  Alexander's  entrance  into  Jerusalem
by  Josephus  ('Ant.  Jud.,'  xi  8,  §  6)  and
Eusebius  ('Chron.  Can.,' ii  p.  346).  The
story  of  Alexander's  having  previously  seen
him  in  a  dream  is  not  generally  credited.
He  is  said  to  been  high  priest  for  twenty
years,  and  to  have  outlived  Alexander.

List  of  the  heads  of  the  pkibstlt

COURSES  in  the  TIME  OF  THE  HIGH  PRIEST

Joiakim  (ch.  xii  12 — 21).  Joiakim  most
have  been  contemporary  with  Xerxes,  and
consequently  have  been  high  priest  at  the
time  when  the  very  existence  of  the  Jewish
people  was  threatened  by  Haman.  It  ia
curious  that  we  have  no  record  of  his  high
priesthood,   not    of  the    condition  of   tbe


128


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[oh.  xn.  1—26.


Palestinian  Jews  at  the  time,  beyond  the
■light  hints  famished  by  this  chapter.  These
hints  seem  to  imply  that  nnder  him  special
attention  was  paid  to  the  formation  of  lists,
especially  of  the  chief  priests  and  Levites,
and  that  the  temple  serrice  was  celebrated
with  great  exactness  and  regularity  (vers.
24 — 26).  The  present  list  is  particularly
valuable,  as  enabling  us  to  check  that  with
which  the  chapter  opens,  and  as  establishing
the  family  character  of  the  names  whereof
that  list  is  made  u^

Yer.  12. — Of  Seraiah,  Ueraiah.  It  will
be  observed  that  the  family  names  of  the
priestly  courses  follow  the  order  of  the  same
names  in  vers.  1 — 1,  and  exactly  accord  with
them,  excepting  in  minute  differences  of
spelling,  and  in  one  omission — that  of  the
name  of  "  Hattush."  It  might  be  supposed
that  the  family  of  Hattush  had  died  out ;
but  this  is  contradicted  by  its  reappearance
among  the  signatures  to  the  covenant  (ch.
X.  4) ;  the  omission  here  would  therefore
appear  to  be  accidentaL

Ver.  17. —Of  Miniamin.  Rather,  "of
Miamin"  (see  ver.  5).  The  name  of  the
head  of  the  course  in  Joiakim's  time  has,  by
Ibe  carelessness  of  a  copyist,  fallen  out.

Ver.  19. — And  of  Joiarib.  The  conjunction
' '  and  "  occurring  here,  exactly  as  it  does  in
ver.  6,  once  only  in  the  whole  list,  and
before  the  same  name,  shows  that  the  two
documents  (ch.  xiL  1 — 7,  12 — 21)  are  from
the  same  hand.  That  the  hand  is  that
of  Nehemiah,  or  a  contemporary,  seems  to
follow  from  the  fact  that  no  reason  can  be
assigned  for  the  division,  or  for  the  low
place  in  the  lists  of  the  names  Joiarib  and
Jedaiah,  except  the  failure  of  these  families
to  set  their  seals  to  the  covenant  (see  the
coitment  on  ver.  6).

Parenthetic  statement  of  the  time
down  to  which  exact  lists  of  the  lead-
ING PKIESTS   AND  LEVITES  WEKE  KEPT   (ch.

xiL  22,  23).  These  verses  appear  to  consti-
tute a  late  insertion.  They  interrupt  the
list  of  high  church  officers  in  the  time  of
Joiakim,  which  is  commenced  in  ver.  12  and
not  concluded  till  ver.  26.  By  their  men-
tion of  Jaddua  as  high  priest,  and  of  "  Darius
the  Persian"  as  contemporary  king,  they
betray  a  writer  who  lived  at  least  as  late  as
B.O.  838,  or  nearly  a  century  after  the  time
of  Nehemiah's  religious  reforms.  The  facts
put  on  record  by  this  writer  are  not  of  very
much  importance.  They  seem  to  be  simply
these ; — 1.   That  the  practice  of  accurately


recording  the  heads  of  the  priestly  and
Levitical  courses,  which  Nehemiah  has  noted
as  belonging  to  the  days  of  Joiakim,  wai
continued  under  his  successors,  Eliashib,
Joiada,  Johanan,  and  Jaddua,  down  (at  any
rate)  to  the  accession  of  Darius  Codomannus ;
and,  2.  That  in  the  case  of  the  Levites  the  lists
were  inserted  into  the  book  of  the  chronicles
— not  our  "  Book,"  but  that  larger  one,  of
which  ours  is  in  the  main  an  abbreviation —
down  to  the  time  of  Johanan,  the  son  (or,
rather,  grandson)  of  Eliashib.  It  has  been
supposed  that  the  writer  originally  accom-
panied these  statements  with  lists  that  have
been  lost,  but  this  does  not  appear  to  be
probable.

Ver.  22. — In  the  days  of  Eliashib,  Toiada,
and  Johanan,  and  Jaddua.  See  comment
on  vers.  10,  11.  In  the  reign  of  Darius.
I  Rather,  "to  the  reign."  The  "Darius"
intended  is  beyond  all  doubt  Codomannus,
the  adversary  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who
was  contemporary  with  Jaddua.  The  lists
went  on  under  the  four  high  priests  down
to  the  time  when  Darius  Codomannus  was
king  of  Persia.  It  is  not  said  that  they
then  ceased.  The  Persian.  Some  suppose
an  antithesis  here  between  this  Darius  ana
"Darius  the  Mede"  of  Daniel  (v.  31 ;  iL
1).  But  this  is  unlikely,  since  there  was
nothing  to  recall  that  unimportant  person-
age to  the  thoughts  of  the  writer.  Others,
with  better  reason,  suggest  a  tacit  allusion
to  the  transfer  of  empire  from  Persia  to
Macedon,  and  think  the  date  of  the  passage
must  be  subsequent  to  B.O.  331,  when  the
kingdom  passed  away  from  Persia.

Ver.  23.— Even  until  the  days  of  Johanan.
Why  the  practice  of  inserting  the  names  in
the  book  of  the  chronicles  ceased  at  this  date
it  is  impossible  to  say,  unless  it  was  that  the
chronicles  themselves  ceased  to  be  compiled.
There  certainly  appears  to  be  a  long  gap  in
the  authentic  Jewish  annals  between  the
close  of  the  Old  Testament  canon  and  the
composition  of  the  First  Book  of  the  Macca-
bees. Johanan,  the  son  of  Eliashib.  The
"  grandson"  really,  as  appears  by  vers.  10, 11.

List  of  the  chief  Levitical  families
IN  the  time  of  Joiakim  and  later  (ch.
xii.  24—26).  That  family,  rather  than  per-
sonal, names  are  here  intended  is  sufficiently
shown  in  the  final  summary  of  ver.  26,  since
the  same  individuals  cannot  have  flourished
nnder  Joiakim  (b.o.  490 — 460)  and  also  nndef
Nehemiah  (b.c.  444  —  430).  The  actual
names — Jeshua,  Kadmiel,  Hashabiah,  Shers-
blah,  &c. — are  ill  fonnd  as  family  name&


CH.  XII.  1—26.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


129


Ver.  24. — Hashabiah.  See  above,  ch.  ix.
6 ;  z.  11.  Sherebiah.  Compare  ch.  ix.  4,
6  ;  X.  12 ;  xii.  8.  Jeshua,  the  son  of  Kad-
mieL  For  ben,  "son,"  we  should  probably
read  "Bani,"  a  common  Levitical  name  (ch.
ix.  4,  5 ;  z.  13),  in  which  case  the-  passage
would  run  as  follows : — "  And  the  chief  of
the  Levites  were  Hashabiah,  Sherebiah,
Jeshua,  Bani,  Kadmiel,  with  their  brethren,"
&c.  To  praise  and  to  give  thanks,  accord-
ing to  the  commandment  of  David.  Com-
pare 1  Chron.  xv.  16  ;  xxiii.  5  ;  xxv.  3,  &c.
Man  of  God  is  an  epithet  not  often  applied
to  David.  It  occurs,  however,  again  in  ver.
36,  and  also  in  2  Chron.  viii   11.    Ward


over  against  ward.     Antiphonically^divi-
sion  over  against  division.

Ver.  25. — Meshullam  and  Obadiah  are
new  as  Levitioal  names  ;  but  the  remaining
names  of  the  passage  are  well  known.  Talmon
and  Akkub  are  among  the  porters  of  David's
time  (1  Chron.  ix.  17),  and  are  mentioned  in
Ezra  ii.  42;  Neh.  vii.  46  ;  xi.  19.  Bakbukiah
and  Mattaniah  occur  inch.  xi.  17  and  xii.  8,
9  ;  but  as  families  of  singers,  rather  than  ol
porters,  in  those  places.  Keeping  the  ward  at
the  thresholds  of  the  gates.  Rather,  as  in  the
margin,  "  at  the  treasuries."  It  is  thought
that  the  chambers  above  the  gateways  may
have  been  used  aa  storehouses  or  treasurieg.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 26. — Ministers  in  GocFs  temple.  These  lists,  once  so  important,  are  to
UB  little  more  than  fragmentary  relics  of  a  vanished  system.  They  remind  us  how
all  that  is  external  decays  and  passes  away.  They  may,  however,  also  suggest  to
us  truths  which  abide  and  retain  their  worth  throughout  all  ages.

I.  The  varieties  of  ministry  in  the  house  of  God.  Here,  high  priests,  priests,
Levites  ;  chiefs  and  subordinates ;  singers  and  musicians ;  gate-keepers  and  guards
of  treasure-houses.  In  the  Christian  Church,  pastors,  preachers,  evangelists,  deacons,
teachers  of  the  young,  &c.  In  the  Church,  in  the  wider  sense,  all  are  to  minister
in  some  way ;  secular  relations  and  employments  are  to  be  deemed  sacred ;  "  Holi-
ness to  the  Lord  "  stamped  on  everything  (see  Zeoh.  xiv.  20).  In  all,  God  may
be  served  more  really  than  by  the  high  priest  of  the  old  covenant,  if  he  were  con-
tent with  only  outward  ministration.  And  each,  performing  his  appointed  ministry
faithfully,  is  acceptable  to  God.

"  All  works  are  good,  and  each  is  best
As  most  it  pleases  thee ;
Each  worker  pleases  when  the  rest

He  serves  in  charity  ;
And  neither  man  nor  work  nnblest
WUt  thou  permit  to  be."

n.  The  bight  of  ministry.     In  the  case  of  the  ministers  of  the  temple  this  wag

hereditary.  Hence  the  importance  of  the  genealogies.  Under  the  gospel,  as  the
service  is  spiritual,  tlie  ministers  must  be  spiritual  also.  No  ordination  or  appoint-
ment can  make  an  unregenerate  man  a  true  minister  of  Christ,  though  it  may  give
him  authority  to  take  part  in  the  external  services  of  the  Church  which  appoints
him.  Such  a  man  may,  indeed,  do  good ;  but  so  does  the  devil,  through  the  over-
ruling power  and  grace  of  God.  In  like  manner,  all  who  would  employ  themselves
in  Spiritual  ministration  of  any  kind,  in  the  Church  or  in  private  life,  should  seek
first  to  have  the  Spirit  in  their  own  hearts ;  and  all  who  have  the  Spirit  are  priests
of  God  for  some  ser^-ice.

III.  The  siioet  duration  of  each  minister's  work  on  earth.  If  no  other  cause
bring  it  to  an  end,  death  will.  A  motive  to  diligence  and  fidelity.  "  Work  while  it
is  day."  A  motive  also  for  care  to  obtain,  and  to  exercise  in  the  earthly  ministry,
those  spiritual  qualities  which  insure  an  eternal  sacred  service  in  the  heavenly
temple.

IV.  The  succession  of  ministers.  If  "  one  generation  passeth  away,"  "  another
generation  cometh."  The  Jewish  priesthood  was  perpetuated  by  the  natural  pro-
cesses. More  worthy  of  note  and  of  thanksgiving  is  the  unbroken  succession  of
godly  men  from  age  to  age  in  such  a  vi'orld  as  this,  and  of  men  qualified  and  willing
to  undertake  the  more  difficult  and  arduous  ministries.     The  One  ever-living  Head  of

ilEHSMIAB.  K


130  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  xii.  1— 2«.

the  Church,  the  One  ever-abiding  Comforter,  assure  us  that  this  will  ever  be  the
case.  Still  "  the  labourers  are  few,"  and  constant  prayer  should  be  presented  to  "  the
Lord  of  the  harvest,  that  he  will  send  forth  labourers  into  his  harvest"

V.  The  dncertainty  op  fame.  Many  of  the  most  excellent-live  and  die  unnoticed,
and  their  names  are  found  in  no  record ;  and  many  of  the  recorded  names  are  not  of
the  most  worthy — they  may  be  in  the  register  for  quite  other  and  inferior  reasons.
Besides,  the  recorded  names  soon  become  little  more  than  names ;  and  when  it  is
otherwise,  those  who  once  owned  them  are  not  benefited  by  the  distinction.  The
honour  which  comes  from  men  cannot  then  be  the  chief  reward  of  good  service.
Let  us  not  seek  it,  but  seek  to  act  our  part  well,  looking  for  the  unfailing  rewards
which  God  bestows.

VI.  The  great  inferiority  of  the  ministries  of  the  temple  in  comparison  with
THOSE  OF  the  CHRISTIAN  Church.  "  The  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  greater
than  "  the  greatest  prophet ;  but  prophets  were  superior  to  priests,  and  the  humblest
Christian  is,  therefore,  superior  to  the  greatest  priest  of  the  Old  Testament,  as  he  is,
indeed,  to  the  greatest  mere  official  in  the  Christian  Church.  He  is  a  priest  of  a
higher  order;  has  greater  privileges,  approaches  nearer  to  God,  can  offer  really
"  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus  Christ,"  and  has  the  true  quali-
fication for  spiritual  service  to  his  brethren.  For  he  has  that  "unction  from  the
Holy  One,"  without  which,  whatever  external  office  is  filled,  no  spiritual  functions
can  be  exercised.  But  high  above  all  others  is  the  one  great  High  Priest  of  our
religion.  All,  and  surpassingly  more  than  all,  that  the  whole  order  of  priests  of  the
law  were  in  the  national,  external  sphere,  Christ  is  in  the  spiritual  and  eternal.  All
that  they  and  their  ministrations  represented  as  types,  he  has  become  and  accom-
plished. What  they  could  not  effect  by  the  whole  of  their  sacrifices  from  age  to
age  he  effected  by  the  one  offering  of  himself.  In  his  qualifications  for  priest-
hood, combining  sinless  holiness  and  tenderest  sympathy  with  sinners ;  in  his  near-
ness to  God ;  in  the  eflBcacy  of  his  priestly  acts,  he  stands  alone.  He  offered  once
for  all  the  only  atoning  sacrifice ;  and  by  fulfilling  all  that  was  typified  by  the
old  sacrifices  and  priesthood  he  abolished  them.

Vers.  9,  24. — Sacred  singing.  Its  place  in  public  worship  at  the  tabernacle  and
the  temple,  from  David  onward,  if  not  earlier.  The  careful  arrangements  made  for
conducting  it.  Its  place  in  the  Christian  Church,  in  which  it  was  prominent  from
the  first.     Pliny's  testimony.

I.  Its  DESIGN.  Not  the  glorification  of  poets,  organists,  or  choirs,  or  the  musical
entertainment  of  the  people ;  but — 1.  The  united  praise  of  God.  Of  the  Father,  the
Bon,  and  the  Holy  Ghost.  This  chiefly,  not  this  only,  or  many  of  our  best  hymns
would  have  to  be  condemned.  2.  The  benefit  of  the  congregation.  Of  the  Chris-
tians worshipping,  and  of  others  present.  Promoting  devout  feelings,  and  impress-
ing great  truths  on  the  heart.  In  Ephes.  v.  19 ;  Col.  iii.  16,  a  distinctly  didactic
purpose  seems,  notwithstanding  adverse  criticism,  to  be  recognised.

II.  The  QUALIFICATIONS  it  requires.  Besides  the  physical  and  the  musical,  and  far
above  them  in  nature  and  importance.  1.  Understanding  of  what  is  sung  (1  Cor.
xiv.  16).  2.  Faith.  In  the  object  of  worship,  the  truths  uttered,  the  Mediator
(Heb.  xi.  6 ;  xiii.  16).  3.  Devout  feelings.  Reverence,  humility,  gratitude,  love,
joy  in  God.  4.  Unity  with  fellow-worshippers  (Rom.  xv.  5,  6).  Mutual  harmony  is
essential  to  harmonious  praise.  Anger,  envy,  alienation,  hinder  united  worship,  spoil
the  best  singing.

III.  The  DUTY  OF  THOSE  WHO  PROVIDE  FOR  OR  CONDUCT  IT.  Such  as  (ver.  12)  are
"  over  the  thanksgiving "  are  to  regard  themselves  not  as  performers  exhibiting
their  own  skill,  but  as  ministers  of  Christ  and  the  congregation,  to  worship  with
tlieir  brethren,  and  aid  them  in  worshipping  God.  The  composition  and  choice  of
hymns  and  tunes,  and  the  style  of  playing  and  singing,  are  all  to  be  subordinate  to
this  end.  If  this  seem  to  require  of  composers,  organists,  and  choirs  some  sacrifice
of  credit,  it  confers  on  them  a  far  higher  dignity  than  they  could  otherwise  reach,
and  secures  them  a  richer  recompense  now  and  hereafter.

IV.  The  DUTY  of  congregations  in  respect  to  it.  1.  To  take  part  in  the  wor-
■Lip.     In  heart,  if  not  with  voice.    2.  To  unite,  if  capable,  in  the  singing  itself.


OH.  XII,  1—26.]  THE  BC'OK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  181


The  singing  at  the  temple  appears  to  have  been  chiefly  choral ;  that  of  the  Christian
Cliurfh  should  be  congregational.  All  are  as  Levites,  "to  praise  and  to  give
thanks,"  unless  physically  incapacitated.  The  benefits  of  the  service  depend  much
on  the  union  of  the  many  in  it.  3.  To  qualify  themselves,  therefore,  as  far  as  pos-
sible for  the  exercise.  That  "with  one  mouth"  (Rom.  xv.  G),  as  well  as  "one
mind,"  all  may  "glorify  God."  The  subject  requires  more  thought  and  care  by
ministers  and  congregations  than  it  sometimes  receives.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Vers.  1 — 26,  44 — 47. — Ministers  of  the  Lord.  Twenty-six  verses  of  this  chapter
are  given  to  the  record  of  the  names  of  priests  and  Levites.  That  fact  itself  is  sug-
gestive. It  is  indicative  of  the  high  place  which  the  ministers  of  God  held  in  the
national  estimation.  We  meet  in  these  chronicles  with  the  names  of  few  men  of
comparative  wealth,  or  rank,  or  soldierly  ability ;  but  the  names  of  the  ministers  of
religion  are  recorded,  and  are  thus  immortalised.     Concerning  these  we  may  learn

I._  Their  relative  value  in  the  state.  "Judah  rejoiced  in  the  priests  and
Levites  that  waited" — stood  at  their  posts  (ver.  44).  The  worth  of  the  "non-pro-
ductive classes  "  of  the  community,  however  high  their  social  positioUj  has  been  said
to  be  less  than  that  of  the  man  who  "  makes  two  blades  of  grass  to  grow  where  only
one  grew  before."  But  the  worth  of  this  last  is  surely  less  by  far  than  that  of  him
who  makes  a  true  thought  to  live  and  grow  in  the  mind  where  one  false  fancy  throve
before,  who  plants  right  principles  in  the  soul,  who  is  the  means  of  cultivating  fruits
of  righteousness  in  the  hearts  and  lives  of  men.  A  number  of  men  scattered  all  over
the  land  who  live  to  circulate  that  sacred  truth  which  leads  men  into  and  along  the
tvay  of  wisdom,  and  to  draw  the  hearts  of  men  into  fellowship  with  a  holy  God,
must  be  doing  a  work  of  truest  patriotism,  second  to  none  that  can  be  mentioned.
Well  might  "  Judah  rejoice  in  the  priests  and  Levites  that  stood  at  their  posts  "  (or
that  waited),  and  treasure  their  names  in  her  archives.  Well  may  England  rejoice
in  her  ministers  of  Christ  who  stand  at  their  posts  and  do  the  work  he  has  placed
in  their  hands.

II.  The  principle  of  their  appointment  (ver.  10).  .We  are  naturally  struck  with
the  expression  (ver.  10),  "  And  Jeshua  begat  Joiakim,  Joiakim  also  begat  Eliashib,"
&c.  It  brings  before  us — as  indeed  all  these  family  names  do — the  hereditary  prin-
ciple adopted  by  God  in  the  appointment  of  his  ministers.  The  priestly  and  the
Levitical  office  went  from  father  to  son.  In  that  age,  and  under  the  system  of
religion  appointed  of  God.  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  was  the  best  possible  prin-
ciple. We  have  sad  and  striking  instances,  indeed,  of  its  failure  to  secure  purity
and  integrity.  The  cases  of  Eli  and  Samuel,  whose  sons  "  walked  not  in  their  fathers'
ways,"  immediately  suggest  themselves.  Yet  there  was  an  unquestionable  spiritual
force  in  this  family  arrangement.  The  sons  and  grandsons  who  looked  back  to  their
fathers,  to  their  ancestors,  as  men  that  stood  before  God  in  his  near  presence,  as  men
that  taught  Israel  the  sustaining,  reviving,  saving  truths  of  religion,  would  gain  a
powerful  incentive  from  the  thought ;  and  as  they  looked  forward  to  their  sons  and
their  grandsons,  to  a  remote  posterity  discharging  the  same  sacred  offices,  a  holy  antici-
pation would  join  with  a  holy  pride  to  keep  them  loyal  to  their  faith  and  to  their
functions.  With  the  Christian  ministry  the  hereditary  principle  is  in  the  background  ;
it  is  a  secondary,  not  primary,  consideration.  The  first  thing  is  fitness  for  the  work,
and  the  conviction  that  a  man  is  personally  called  thereto  by  God's  own  Spirit.
"  Aptness  to  teach  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  2)  and  to  serve  in  the  various  ofBces  of  the  ministry
of  Christ,  with  that  earnest  desire  to  "do  good  and  to  communicate  "  which  argues  a
heaven-born  inspiration,  must  be  the  decisive  thing.  Nevertheless,  there  is  room  for
the  influence  of  the  family  principle  here.  Many  of  the  very  best  ministers  of  Christ
are  sons  and  grandsons  of  those  who  thus  served  their  God  and  their  generation  before
them  ;  and  these  have  been  worthier  and  abler  servants  of  their  age  because  they
have  drawn  inspiration  from  their  fathers'  lives  and  labours.  In  this  our  time  there
is  muih  of  holy  influence  and  power  to  gain  from  those  who  have  gone  before
U,  aiiJ  much   to  qive  to  those  who  shall  come  after  us.     We  should  aim  to  (1)

k2


132


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[oh.  XII.  27 — 47


be  worthy  of  our  ancestors,  and  to  (2)  snpply  an  incentive  and  example  to  om
posterity.

III.  Their  kbcompensb  (vers.  44—47).  So  much  did  "  Jadah  rejoice  for  (in)  her
priests  and  Levites  "  (ver.  44),  that  men  had  to  be  appointed  "over  the  chambers  for
the  treasures,"  first-fruits,  tithes,  and  free-will  offerings  which  the  people  freely
brought  to  them.  All  those  who  held  any  sacred  ofQce — including  those  of  the
Levites  who  were  singers  and  porters,  and  "  who  kept  the  ward,"  t.  e.  did  their  work
(ver.  46) — -"received  their  recompense,  and  the  people  "  sanctified  "  (set  apart)  "  holy
things"  (their  offerings  to  the  Lord)  to  the  Levites,  and  these  gave  their  tenth  to  the
"  children  of  Aaron  "  (ver.  47).  The  Christian  minister  has  his  recompense,  which  is
threefold.  1.  It  is  present  and  temporal.  "  Sowing  spiritual  things,"  he  expects
to  "  reap  carnal  things  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  11).  He  that  is  "  taught  in  the  word  is  to  com-
municate unto  him  that  teacheth  in  all  good  things"  (Gal.  vi.  6).  2.  It  is  present
and  ^iritual.  In  the  approval  of  Christ  his  observant  Lord ;  in  the  gratitude  and
affection  of  those  whom  he  serves ;  in  the  excellency  and  success  of  his  work — intrin-
sically the  highest  and  best  of  all  works  ;  and  in  the  opportunities  it  provides  for  his
own  spiritual  culture.  3.  It  is  future.  The  smile  of  the  Master  in  the  day  when
"  every  man  has  praise  of  God ; "  the  greeting  again  of  those  rescued  and  strength-
ened on  earth  ;  the  "rule  over  many  cities  "  to  be  enjoyed  by  those  who  wisely  employ
their  talents  here. — C


PART    IV.


DlDICATinN  OF  THB  WALL  OF  JERUSALEM   UNDER  NeHEMIAH  AND  EzRA,  WITH  NkH»-

hiah'b  Arrangement  of  the  Temple  Officers,  and  his  Efforts  fob  thk
Bbfobm  of  Belioion  (CH.  XII.  27 — 47,  and  ch.  xiu.).


EXPOSITION.


Dedioatiok  of  ths  wail  (ch.  xii.  27 —
48).  It  is  supposed  by  some  that  the  author
has  here  departed  from  the  chronological
order,  and  gone  back  to  a  date  not  much
subsequent  to  the  completion  of  the  wall  in
September,  B.O.  444,  since  the  dedication  of
a  work  under  ordinary  circumstances  follows
closely  upon  its  accomplishment.  But  no
reason  has  been  shown  for  the  actual  place
held  by  the  narrative  in  the  Book  upon  this
supposition,  nor  is  it  easy  to  imagine  tl^at
the  author  would  have  separated  the  dedi-
cation of  the  wall  from  its  completion  by  five
chapters  and  a  half,  unless  they  had  been
separated  in  fact  by  an  interval  of  some
duration.  The  interval  seems,  by  the  notes
of  time  contained  in  chs.  xii.,  xiiL,  to  have
been  one  of  nearly  thirteen  years.  Nehe-
miah's  religious  reforms  were  certainly  sub-
sequent to  the  visit  that  he  paid  to  the
Persian  court  in  B.C.  432  (ch.  xiii.  6).  These
reforms  grew  out  of  a  reading  of  the  law
which  took  place  at  the  time  when  Nehe-


miah  appointed  the  temple  officers  (ch.  xiii
1),  and  that  appointment  followed  closely
on  the  dedication  (ch.  xii  44).  We  may
account  for  the  long  delay  by  supposing  that
Nehemiah  was  afraid  of  offending  Artaxerxea
if  he  ventured  on  ■>  ceremony,  to  which  the
superstition  of  the  surrounding  heathen  may
have  attached  extreme  importance,  without
his  express  permission,  and  that  to  obtain
this  permission  his  personal  influence  wai
necessary.

The  dedication  of  a  city  wall  was,  so  far  as
we  know,  a  new  thing  in  Israel ;  but  it  had
been  customary  from  a  remote  time  to  de-
dicate houses  (Deut  xx.  5) ;  and  natural
piety  extended  this  practice  to  aggregations
of  houses,  and  to  the  limit  or  fence  by  which
they  were  practically  made  one.  The  priestly
order  had  shown  its  sense  of  the  fitness  of
such  a  consecration  when  they  raised  theii
portion  of  the  wall,  and  had  at  once  "  sancti-
fied it"  (oh.  iii.  1).  Nehemiah  now,  by  th«
ceremony  which  he  planned  and  carried  out,


OH.  XII.  27—47,1


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


133


plaued  the  whole  circuit  of  the  wall  under
the  Divine  protection,  confessing  in  this
Dolenin  act  the  intrinsic  worthlessness  of
mere  walls  and  bulwarks,  unless  God  lends
them  strength  and  makes  them  a  protection
■gainst  enemies.

Ver.  27. — And  at  the  dedication. .  .  .  they
■ought  the  levites.  The  nexus  of  this  pas-
sage seems  to  be  with  ch.  xi.  36 ;  and  we
may  suppose  that  originally  it  followed  im-
mediately on  ch.  xi. — the  lists  (ch.  xii.  1 —
26)  being  a  later  insertion.  The  author,
having  (in  ch.  xL  36)  told  us  of  the  wide
dispersion  of  the  Levites,  now  notes  that
they  were  summoned  from  all  the  places
where  they  dwelt,  and  brought  (one  and  all)
to  Jerusalem  for  the  solemnity  of  the  dedi-
cation. To  keep  the  dedication  with  glad-
ness, both  with  thanksgiving  and  with
singing,  &o.  Solomon's  dedication  of  the
temple  was  the  pattern  followed.  As  he  had
made  the  service  altogether  one  of  praise  and
thanksgiving  (2  Chron.  v.  13),  and  had  em-
ployed in  it  cymbals,  truiLpets,  fsalteries,
and  harps  (i6iS.  ver.  12),  so  Kehemiah  on
the  present  occasion.

Ver.  28. — The  sons  of  the  singers.  I.  e.
the  Levites  who  belonged  to  the  class  of
singers  (1  Chron.  xv.  16 — 22 ;  Neh.  vii.  44,
&c.).  The  plain  country  round  about  Jeru-
salem. Dean  Stanley  understands  by  this
"the  Jordan  valley"  ('Lectures  on  the
Jewish  Church,'  Third  Series,  p.  129) ;  but
that  is  a  district  too  remote  to  be  intended
by  the  words  "round  about  Jerusalem."  The
valleys  of  Hinnom  and  Jehoshaphat  better
suit  the  description.  The  villages  of  Neto-
phathL  Rather,  "of  the  Netophathites"
(see  1  Chron.  ix.  16),  or  people  of  Netophah,
which  was  a  country  town  not  far  from
Bethlehem.

Ver.  29.  —  From  the  house  of  Gilgal.
Rather,  "  from  Beth-Gilgal,"  which  was  the
name  now  borne  by  the  Gilgal  due  north  of
Jerusalem.  Out  of  the  fields  of  Geha.  See
above,  ch.  xL  31.  And  Azmaveth,  Com-
pare Ezra  ii.  24 ;  Neh.  vii  28.  Azmaveth
was  a  Benjamite  town,  not  far  from  Ana-
thoth.  The  singers  had  built  themselves
villages  round  Jerusalem.  Such  of  the
singers  as  were  not  located  in  Jerusalem
itself  fixed  their  dwellings  in  the  immediate
neighbourhood,  in  order  the  more  readily  to
attend  the  temple  service.

Ver.  30. — The  priests  and  the  levites
purified  themselves.  On  this  occasion  there
18  no  preference  of  the  Levites  over  the
priests,  as  in  2  Chron.  xxix.  34  and  Ezra  vi
20.  Both  classes  were,  it  would  seem,  equally
lealous,  and  equally  forward  to  purify  them-
(elves.  And  the  gates  and  wall.  Inanimate
things  might  contract  legal  defilement  (Dent.


xxiii.  14 ;  Levit.  siv.  84 — 53).  In  case
either  the  wall  or  the  gates  should  be  in  any
Buch  way  unclean,  they  were  made  to  undergo
a  legal  purification  before  the  ceremony  of
the  dedication  began.

Ver.  31. — I  brought  up  the  princes  of
Judah  upon  the  wall,  and  appointed  two
great  companies.  Nehemiah  caused  all  the
chiefs  of  the  nation,  both  lay  and  clerical,
tomount  upon  the  wall,  and  there  marshalled
them  into  two  companies,  composed  of  clergy
and  laity  intermixed,  one  of  which  he  placed
under  the  direction  of  Ezra  (ver.  36),  while
of  the  other  he  took  the  command  himself
(ver.  38).  The  place  of  assemblage  must  have
been  some  portion  of  the  western  wall,  pro-
bably the  central  portion,  near  the  modem
Jaffa  gate.  From  this  Ezra's  company  pro-
ceeded southward,  and  tlien  eastward,  along
the  southern  wall,  while  Nehemiah's  marched
northward,  and  then  eastward,  along  the
northern  wall,  both  processions  meeting  mid-
way in  the  eastern  wall,  between  the  "  water  "
and  the  "  prison  "  gates.  Toward  the  dung
gate.  On  the  position  of  this  gate,  see  the
comment  on  ch.  ii  13.

Ver.  32. — After  them.  After  the  singers,
who  in  each  procession  took  the  lead.
Hoshaiah  is  perhaps  the  "Hoshea"  of  ch.
X.  23,  ^¥ho  "sealed  to"  the  covenant.  Half
the  princes  of  Judah.  The  other  half  were
with  Nehemiah  in  the  other  "company"
(ver.  40).

Vers.  33,  34. — Azariah,  Ezra,  and  Meshul-
1am.  Next  to  the  "princes"  came  two
priestly  families — those  of  Azariah  (or  Ezra)
and  Jleshullam  (eh.  x.  2,  7) ;  then  Judah
and  Benjamin,  or  certain  lay  people  of  those
tribes ;  after  them  two  other  priestly  families
— those  of  Shemaiah  and  Jeremiah  (ch.  x.
2,  8;  xii.  1,  6).

Ver.  35. — Certain  of  the  priests'  sons  with
trumpets.  Compare  ver.  41.  A  body  of
priests,  who  blew  tnmipets,  accompanied
each  procession,  following  closely  upon  the
"  princes,"  and  followed  by  a  body  of  Levites.
Namely,  Zeehariah.  There  is  nothing  cor-
responding to  "namely"  in  the  original;
and  it  is  clear  that  Zeehariah  was  not  a
"priest's  son,"  but  a  Levite,  since  he  was
descended  from  Asaph.  Probably  a  vau
conjunctive  has  fallen  out  before  his  name.

Ver.  36.  —  The  musical  instruments  of
David.  Cymbals,  psalteries,  and  harps.  See
above,  ver.  27,  and  comp.  1  Chron.  xv.  1(3,
19 — 21.  The  jews  had  become  acquainted
with  a  great  variety  of  musical  instruments
during  the  captivity  (Dan.  iii.  7  ;  Ps.  cl  4,
5),  but  rigidly  excluded  all  except  the  old
instruments  from  the  service  of  religioii
Ezra  the  scribe  before  them.  As  their
leader.  It  is  interesting  to  find  no  jealousy
separating  Ezra  from  the  governor  who  had
superseded  him.     As  the  two  conjointly  had


t34


THE  BOOK  OF  NEIIEMIAII.


[CH.  XII.  27—47.


addressed  the  people  on  a  fonner  occasion
(oh.  viu.  9),  so  now  they  conjointly  con-
ducted the  ceremony  of  the  dedication.

Ver.  37.  —  At  the  fountain  gate.  See
above,  oh.  a.  14  and  iii.  15.  Which  was
over  against  them.  There  is  no  "which
was  "  in  the  original ;  and  it  was  clearly  not
the  gate,  but  the  steps,  that  were  "over
against  them."  They  came  to  the  fountain
gate  in  the  course  of  their  perambulation  of
the  wall,  and  there  saw,  "  opposite  to  them,"
the  steps  that  led  up  to  the  city  of  David.
By  these  they  ascended  the  eastern  hill,
and  mounting  upon  the  wall  once  more,  fol-
lowed its  course  until  they  reached  the
"water  gate,"  which  overlooked  the  Kidron
valley  (ch.  iii.  26),  where  they  stopped.
Above  the  house  of  David.  See  the  com-
ment on  ch.  iii.  25.

Vers.  38,  39. — And  the  other  company.
Kehemiah  now  proceeds  to  trace  the  course
of  the  other  choir  or  procession — the  one
which  he  himself  accompanied.  Starting
from  the  same  part  of  the  western  wall  as
the  other,  its  course  was  northward  to  the
K.W.  angle  of  the  city  wall,  after  which  it
was  eastward  to  the  "  sheep  gate,"  and  then
southward  to  the  "prison  gate."  In  this
jjart  of  his  description  Nehemiah  traces  the
same  portion  of  the  wall  as  that  which  had
engaged  his  attention  in  ch.  iii.  1 — 11,  and
mentions  almost  exactly  the  same  features,
but  in  the  reverse  order.  For  the  tower  of
the  furnaces  see  ch.  m.  11  ;  for  the  broad
wall,  ver.  8  ;  for  the  old  gate,  ver.  6  ;  for
the  fish  gate,  ver.  3  ;  for  the  tower  of  Han-
aneel,  the  tower  of  Ueah,  and  the  sheep
gate,  ver.  1.  The  gate  of  Ephraim  is  not
mentioned  in  ch.  iii.  It  must  have  been  in
the  north  wall,  a  little  to  the  west  of  the
"old  gate."  The  prison  gate,  also  omitted
in  ch.  iii.,  was  probably  in  the  east  wall,  a
little  north  of  the  "  water  gate."

Ver.  40. — So  stood  the  two  companies.
Having  performed  their  respective  portions
of  the  perambulation,  and  reached  the  central
portion  of  the  eastern  wall,  opposite  the
temple  area,  the  two  companies  came  to  a
stand,  one  over  against  the  other,  not  in  the
house  of  God,  but  by  it,  or  near  it,  which  is
a  meaning  that  the  preposition  3  often  has.
The  half  of  the  rulers.     Compare  ver.  32.

Ver.  41. — And  the  priests,  Eliakim,  &c.
These  names  are  probably  personal.  With  a
single  exception,  they  are  absent  from  the
lists  of  priestly  families  (ch.  x.  2 — 8  ;  xii.
12—21).

Ver.  42. — And  Haaseiah,  &0.  It  may  be
guspected  that  these  are  Levitical  names,  and
correspond  to  the  nine  Levites  mentioned  as
accompanying  Ezra  in  vers.  35,  36.  The
chief  difference  seems  to  have  been  that
Ezra's  Levites  played  on  instruments,  while
ITehemiah's  were  "singers."


Ver.  43.  —  Also  that  day  they  offered
great  sacrifices.  David  had  inaugurated
the  "  tabernacle  "  which  he  made  for  the  ark
of  the  covenant  at  Jerusalem  with  sacrifice
(2  Sam.  vi  17),  and  had  consecrated  the
threshing-floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite  in
the  same  way  {ibid.  xxiv.  25).  Solomon,  at
his  dedication  of  the  temple,  had  sacrificed
sheep  and  oxen  "that  could  not  be  num-
bered for  multitude"  (1  Kings  viil  5).
Zerabbabel  had  followed  this  example  at  the
dedication  of  the  second  temple  (Ezra  vL
17) ;  and  we  may  presume  that  it  was  with
victims  that  Eliashib  and  his  brethren  the
priests  had  "  sanctified  "  their  portion  of  the
wall  soon  after  they  completed  it  (Neh.  iii.
1).  Nehemiah  now  completed  the  dedication
of  the  entire  circuit  of  the  walls  by  sacrifices
on  a  large  scale.  0od  had  made  them  re-'
joice  with  great  joy.  It  is  characteristic  of
Nehemiah  to  ascribe  the  universal  joy,  which
another  might  well  have  claimed  as  his  own
work,  to  the  Divine  mercy  and  forethought,
which  had  brought  the  matter  of  the  wall  to
a  prosperous  and  happy  issue.  The  wives
also  and  the  children  rejoiced.  It  is  seldom
that  the  Jewish  women  are  mentioned  as
taking  that  prominent  position  in  joy,  which
naturally  belonged  to  them  in  sorrow  (Judges
xi.  40  ;  Jer.  xzxi.  15  ;  xlix.  3  ;  Joeli  8,  &c.).
There  is,  however,  one  remarkable  example
of  the  kind,  besides  the  present  one^the
rejoicing  of  the  women  after  the  passage
through  the  Red  Sea,  under  the  leadership  of
lliriam  (Exod.  xv.  20).  The  joy  of  Jeru-
salem was  heard  even  afar  oS.  See  Ezra
iii.  13,  and  comp.  1  Kings  L  40 ;  2  Kings
xi.  13.

Nehemiah's  arkangements  fob  the
temple  service,  and  appointment  of
OFFICERS  (ch.  xiL  44 — 47).  The  good  reso-
lutions of  the  people  at  the  time  of  the
renewal  of  the  covenant  (ch.  x.  28 — 39)
would  have  borne,  comparatively  little  fruit
had  they  not  been  seconded  and  rendered
effective  by  formal  action  on  the  part  of  the
civil  authority.  The  people,  in  the  first
flush  of  their  zeal,  had  bound  themselves  to
undertake  the  conveyance  of  the  tithes,  first-
fruits,  and  free-will  offerings  from  the  country
districts  to  Jerusalem,  and  the  deposition  of
them  in  the  temple  treasuries  (ch.  x.  37 — 89).
But  in  practice  this  was  found  too  great  a
burthen  (ch.  xiii.  10).  Nehemiah  therefore
appointed  special  ofidoers  to  collect  the  tithes
and  other  dues  throughout  the  entire  terri-
tory, and  to  bring  them  to  Jerusalem,  and
lay  them  up  in  the  proper  chambers  (ch.  liL
44).    Over  the  chambers  he  appointea  tre*-


OB.  xn.  27 — 47.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH,


186


inreTS,  whose  duty  it  was,  not  only  to  collect
the  ecclesiastical  dues,  but  also  to  distribute
the  proceeds  among  the  individuals  entitled
to  share  in  them  (ch.  xiii.  13).  Having  in
this  way  provided  for  the  sustenance  of  the
clerical  body,  he  was  able  to  insist  on  their
regular  performance  of  all  their  duties  ;  and
the  success  of  his  arrangements  was  such,  that
under  him  the  temple  service  was  restored,  not
merely  to  the  condition  established  by  Zerub-
babel  (ch.  xii  47),  but  to  one  not  markedly
dififerent  from  that  which  had  been  attained
in  the  time  of  David  and  Asaph  {ibid.  ver.
46).  The  priests,  Levites,  singers,  and  porters
respectively  performed  their  duties  to  his
satisfaction,  purifying  themselves,  and  taking
the  service  in  their  turns,  "  according  to  the
commandment  of  David  and  Solomon  "  (ibid.
ver.  45).

Ver.  44.— At  that  time.  Literally,  "On
that  day ; "  but  a  certain  latitude  must  be
allowed  to  the  expression.  The  chambers
for  the  treasures.  On  these  adjuncts  of  the
temple,  see  the  comment  on  ch.  x.  37.  The
"  treasures "  themselves  consisted  chiefly  of
tithes  (including  corn,  wine,  and  oU),  first-
fruits,  and  free-will  offerings.  They  also
included  frankincense  (ch.  xiiL  5),  and  pro-
bably other  spices.  The  portions  of  the
law.  I.  e.  the  proportion  of  the  produce  re-
quired by  the  law  to  be  set  apart  for  sacred
uses.  These  were  to  be  gathered  by  the
officers  out  of  tlie  fields  of  the  cities,  that  is,
out  of  the  portions  of  cultivable  soil  attached
to  each  provincial  town  (ch.  xi  25).  For
Judah  rejoiced.  The  general  satisfaction  of
the  people  with  their  spiritual  guides  led
them  to  increase  their  contributions  beyond


the  requirements  of  the  law ;  whence  there
was  at  this  time  special  need  of  treasurers
and  treasuries — abundant  occupation  for  the
one,  and  abundant  material  requiring  to  be
stored  in  the  other.

Ver.  45. — This  verse  is  wrongly  translated
in  the  A.  V.  It  should  be  rendered,  as  in
the  Vulgate  and  the  Septuagint — "  And  they
{i.  e.  the  priests  and  Levites)  maintained  the
ward  of  their  God,  and  the  ward  of  the  puri-
fication, and  the  singers,  and  the  porters
(i.  e.  the  institutions  of  singers  and  porters),
according  to  the  ordinance  of  David  and  of
Solomon  his  son."  Maintaining  the  ward  of
their  God  is  serving  regularly  in  the  temple
at  the  times  appointed ;  maintaining  the
ward  of  the  purification  is  observing  the
rules  for  the  purifying  of  the  holy  things
which  had  been  laid  down  by  David  (1  Chron.
xxiii.  28).

Ver.  46. — For  in  the  days  of  David.  Thi.s
verse  is  exegetical  of  the  clause  in  ver.  46,
"according  to  the  commandment  of  David."
The  \iTiter  justifies  his  reference  to  that
"  commandment "  by  reminding  his  readers
that  the  whole  musical  service — the  singers
themselves,  and  their  "chiefs,"  together
with  the  "songs  of  praise  "  and  the  "thanks-
giving songs" — had  descended  to  the  Jews
of  his  day  from  David  and  Asaph.

Ver.  47. — In  the  days  of  Zerubbahel,  and
in  the  days  of  Nehemiah.  /.  c  "In  the
days  of  Nehemiah,  no  less  than  in  those  of
Zerubbahel. "  Gave  the  portions.  Paid  their
tithes,  and  other  dues,  regularly,  so  that  the
portions  were  forthcoming.  Every  day  his
portion.  Compare  ch.  xi.  23.  They  sancti-
fied holy  things  unto  the  Levites.  They,
i.  e.  the  people,  "set  apart"  for  the  Levites
all  that  the  law  required ;  and  the  Levites
set  apart  for  the  priests  their  due  share —
"  the  tithe  of  the  tithe  "  (Num.  xviii.  26).


-    HOMILETICS.

Vers.  27 — 43. — The  dedication  of  the  wall.  As  soon  as  possible  after  the  com-
pletion of  the  wall,  a  joyful  celebration  of  the  event  was  made,  in  which  all  the
people  participated.  As  Jerusalem  was  "the  holy  city,"  this  took  the  form  of  a
"dedication."

I.  The  solemnities  with  which  the  dedication  was  made.  1.  The  preparations.
The  gathering  of  the  Levites,  especially  the  singers  and  musicians,  who  were  to  take
a  leading  part  in  the  ceremonies  (vers.  27 — 29).  2.  The  purifications  (ver.  30).
The  priests  and  Levites  first  purified  themselves,  and  then  the  people,  the  gates,  and
the  wall.  By  what  rites  is  not  recorded.  3.  The  processions  (vers.  31 — 42).  Two
processions  were  formed,  Ezra  accompanying  one,  and  Nehemiah  the  other.  One
company  marched  on  the  wall  to  the  right,  the  other  to  the  left,  both  to  the  sound
of  trumpets,  singing,  and  instruments  of  music  ;  and  meeting  over  against  the
temple,  they  united  their  praises.  4.  The  universal  rejoicing  (ver.  43).  Many
sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  were  offered,  of  which  the  people,  men,  women,  and  children
alike,  partook  with  many  and  loud  expressions  of  joy.

II.  The  significance  of  these  solemnities.  They  were — 1.  An  expression  of
udent  gratitude  to  God.    He  "had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  joy,"  and  it  was


13«  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  |_ch.  xn.  27—47

meet  and  right  that  they  should  praise  him  for— (1)  The  wall  itself,  so  strong  a  defenc*
against  their  enemies ;  within  which  the  citizens,  with  the  temple  and  religious  ser-
vices, would  be  secure.  (2)  The  wonderful  way  in  which  they  had  been  led  and
prospered  in  the  work.  (3)  The  conquest  effected  over  great  obstacles,  and  powerful,
cunning,  and  resolute  opponents.  (4)  The  rapidity  with  which  the  work  had  been
done.  2.  A  consecration  to  God's  service  of  the  wall  and  all  it  was  to  guard.  3.  A
committal  of  all  to  his  care  and  protection.  As  conscious  that  without  him  strong
walls  are  vain.  They  may  well  have  remembered — it  is  not  unlikely  that  they  sang —
the  song  in  Isa.  xxvi.  1,  or  the  promise  given  in  Zech.  ii.  6.

Lessons : — 1.  For  success  in  every  good  work  praise  should  be  offered  to  God.  Th«
joy  it  awakens  should  be  directed  heavenwards  in  thanksgiving.  For  however  active
we  and  others  may  have  been,  it  is  to  God  the  good  issue  is  to  be  ascribed.  The
power  and  the  will  to  work,  the  favouring  circumstances,  the  assistance  of  others,
&c.,  all  are  fi'om  him.  2.  AH  should  join  in  thanksgiving  for  mercies  common  to
all.  For  signal  national  blessings,  national  thanksgiving  should  be  rendered.  3.
The  best  expression  of  gratitude  for  Divine  gifts  is  to  dedicate  them  to  the  Divine
service.  All  that  we  are  and  have  should  be  thus  devoted  to  God.  4.  Purity  is
necessary  for,  and  may  be  secured  by,  those  who  engage  in  religious  services  (Prov.
XV.  8;  Isa.  i.  15,  16 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  8;  Heb.  x.  22).  The  last-quoted  passage,  with  the
previous  verses,  shows  how  the  needful  purification  is  to  be  obtained.  Not  from
merely  human  priests,  but  from  the  great  High  Priest,  who  needed  not,  like  the  priests
mentioned  in  ver.  30,  to  purify  himself  before  purifying  others  (see  Heb.  vii.  26,
27).     6.  Children  should  be  associated  with  their  parents  in  the  worship  of  God.

Vers.  44 — 47. — Joy  of  the  Church  in  her  ministers.  In  these  verses  an  account  is
given  of  the  measures  taken  for  the  full  and  regular  supply  of  the  wants  of  the
priests  and  Levites,  and  the  readiness  with  which  the  people  did  their  part,  because
"  Judah  rejoiced  for  the  priests  and  Levites  that  stood  [before  God]  ;  and  they  [the
priests  and  Levites]  kept  the  charge  of  their  God,  and  the  charge  of  the  purification  ;
and  the  institutions  of  the  singers  and  the  porters,  according  to  the  commandment
of  David,"  &c.  (vers.  44,  45).

L  Whencb  jot  in  ministees  arises.  1.  On  the  part  of  ministers,  from  consistent
lives  and  diligent  attention  to  their  duties.  Israel  felt  satisfaction  with  the  priests,
&c.  because  they  did  their  work  well  (vers.  44,  45),  and  because  they  were  upright
(ver.  47).  As  the  people  consecrated  of  their  substance  to  the  Levites,  so  did  the
Levites  to  the  priests,  according  to  the  law.  If  ministers  are  negligent,  and  show  no
interest  in  their  work,  or  if  their  conduct  be  inconsistent,  they  need  not  be  surprised
that  the  people  become  indifferent  to  them  and  their  ministrations.  But  consistent,
earnest,  faithful,  loving,  diligent  ministers  go  the  way  to  secure  the  affections  of
their  congregations  and  give  them  pleasure.  2.  On  the  part  of  the  people,  the  ability
to  appreciate  good  ministers.  The  best  ministers  fail  to  give  satisfaction  to  many.
They  cannot  appreciate  them,  owing  to  want  of  piety,  the  absence  of  earnest  desire
for  instruction  and  salvation,  love  of  novelties,  "  itching  ears,"  a  censorious  spirit,
self-conceit,  carnality  of  mind,  &c.  Some  may  hate  them  because  of  their  faithful
reproofs  of  their  beloved  sins.  Thus  the  very  excellences  of  a  minister  may  prevent
joy  in  him  in  some  quarters.  But  where  a  true-hearted  minister  has  the  happiness
to  labour  amongst  an  earnest,  godly  people,  he  will  be  their  joy,  as  they  will  be  his.

II.  How  JOY  IN  MINISTERS  SHOULD  BE  EXPRESSED.  Not  by  mere  words,  not  merely
by  praise  to  God  for  them  and  prayer  on  their  behalf,  but  (as  in  the  case  of  Israel
and  the  ministers  of  the  temple)  by  making  suitable  provision  for  their  sustenance.
This  is  according  to  the  law  of  Christ  no  less  than  that  of  Moses  (1  Cor.  ix.  13,  14 ;
Gal.  vi.  6 ;  1  Tim.  v.  17,  18),  and  will  be  cheerfully  done  by  such  as  rightly  rejoice
in  their  ministers.  Such  provision  should  be,  as  in  the  text,  (1)  liberal,  (2)  systematic
and  regular.

III.  The  importance  of  such  jot  so  expressed.  1.  To  the  happiness  and  vigorous
labours  of  ministers  themselves.  If  good  ministers  make  satisfied  and  generous
congregations,  they  are  also  to  a  great  extent  made  by  them.  The  influence  is  re-
ciprocal. The  mental  and  spiritual  powers  of  a  minister  cannot  develop  and  exercise
themselves  to  the  full  in  an  atmosphere  of  coldness,  suspicion,  dissatisfaction,  oi


OH.  XII.  27—47.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  IW

illiberality ;  his  physical  and  mental  energies  will  alike  be  impaired  if  he  is  scantily
furnished  with  material  supplies.  2.  To  the  spiritual  profit  of  hearers  and  their
families.  The  teaching  of  a  pastor  in  whom  lively  interest  is  felt,  and  to  whom
generosity  is  shown,  will  be  listened  to  with  the  attention  and  confidence  needful  for
profit.  Children  will  be  taught  to  respect  and  love  him,  and  so  will  be  likely  to
accept  him  as  their  g^ide  and  friend.  But  an  opposite  state  of  things  will  produce
opposite  results.  Even  satisfaction  which  expresses  itself  in  words  only,  where
deeds  are  needful  and  possible,  will  tend  to  give  an  unreality  to  the  whole  religions
life,  and  prevent  any  real  and  lasting  good.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 47. — J<yy  of  Jerusalem.  "  That  day  they  offered  great  sacrifices,  and
rejoiced :  for  God  had  made  them  rejoice  with  great  joy :  the  wives  also  and  the
children  rejoiced :  so  that  the  joy  of  Jerusalem  was  heard  even  afar  o£E "  (ver.  43).

I.  The  constituents  of  true  joy.  These  are — 1.  Thankfulness  and  praise  in
the  remembrance  of  the  past  and  in  confident  anticipation  of  the  future.  The  people
recounted  the  mercies  of  the  Lord.  Their  dedication  of  the  completed  walls  repre-
sented their  preparation  by  the  grace  of  God  for  his  worship  and  service ;  their
defence  against  assaults  from  without ;  their  unity  and  order  as  a  people.  So  ought
all  rejoicing  to  be  well  founded  on  the  faith  which  has  full  possession  of  our  hearts,
and  the  consecrated  religious  life  which  maintains  that  faith  in  practice.  2.  Purifi-
cation. We  should  keep  our  religious  joy  separate  from  the  joy  of  this  world,  which
is  deceit  and  corruption.  Our  rejoicing  must  be  "  in  the  Lord."  Nor  should  we
forget  that  the  pleasantness  of  God's  house  should  be  tlie  chief  support  of  a  cheerful
spirit.  "  They  offered  great  sacrifices  and  rejoiced."  The  giving  out  of  the  heart  in
religious  worship  uplifts  the  whole  strain  of  the  life.  A  great  expenditure  of  feeling
in  the  pleasures  of  this  world  is  exhausting  to  the  nature,  but  religious  emotion  both
purifies  and  exalts.  3.  Fellowship.  All  rejoiced  together — high  and  low,  rich  and
poor,  the  strong  men,  the  wives  and  children.  The  true  joy  is  not  solitary  and  -
selfish,  but  reveals  the  unity  of  kindred  minds  and  sympathising  hearts.  Family
life  is  elevated  by  the  cultivation  of  the  spirit  of  social  worship  and  praise,  both  in
the  larger  circle  of  the  congregation  and  in  the  smaller  of  the  household.  All  joys
brighten  in  the  atmosphere  of  religious  joy.  Salt  of  faith  should  be  mixed  with
the  various  elements  of  earthly  life  to  keep  them  from  corruption.

II.  A  few  hints  to  be  gathered  on  the  method  of  praise.  1.  The  gifts  of  nature
should  be  sanctified  and  dedicated  to  religion.  Possibility  of  a  much  higher  develop-
ment of  the  capacity  of  the  Christian  community.  Musical  ability  a  great  respons-
ibility. Importance  of  lifting  up  the  expression  of  religious  joy  to  a  much  higher
stage,  not  by  the  increase  of  the  sensuous  element  and  mere  ritualism,  but  by  the
thoughtful  adaptation  of  the  talents  and  acquirements  of  God's  people  to  give  a  pure
and  beautiful  form  to  the  spirit  of  praise.  2.  The  element  of  worship  must  always
be  supreme.  They  offered  sacrifices  and  rejoiced.  Music  must  not  usurp  the  place  of
higher  things.  Mere  enjoyment  must  never  be  the  motive.  Nor  is  praise  the  only
attitude  of  the  believer's  life.  He  appears  in  the  temple  as  liimself  a  sacrifice — ^body,
soul,  and  spirit — unto  God.  3.  We  must  depend  more  or  less  upon  the  separation  oj
individuals  to  be  the  leaders  and  helpers  in  giving  expression  to  praise.  Their
support  should  be  generous;  their  sanctification  should  be  real.  As  much  as  possible
the  people  of  God  should  be  independent  of  alliance  with  those  whose  dedication  is
not  spiritual,  but  a  mere  secular  engagement.  4.  There  was  a  recognition  at  Jeru-
salem of  the  labours  and  aims  of  holy  men  of  former  times.  We  should  listen  for
the  voice  of  the  universal  Church  in  our  praise  ;  then  while  it  leads  our  chanting  it
exalts  our  ideal,  and  gives  a  wise  variety  to  the  form  of  our  worship,  keeping  up  the
vitality  and  cheerfulness. — B.

Vers.  27 — 43. — A  joyous  dedication.  Knowing  all  that  we  do  know  of  God'a
•ncient  people,  of  the  devoutness  of  their  spirit,  and  their  disposition  to  connect
closely  the  human  and  the  Divine,  we  should  expect  that  the  building  of  the  wall
round  the  sacred  city  would  be  followed  by  some  religious  service.    The  versea  of


138  THE  BOOS  Of  NfiHEMlAH.  [oh.  xii.  27—4?.

the  text  give  a  graphic  description  of  this  interesting  scene.  The  Levitcs  who  had
been  dispersed  through  the  province  were  "sought  out  of  all  their  places"  (ver.  27),
»nd  the  "  sons  of  the  singers  tjatliered  themselves  together  "  (ver.  28)  from  "  the
villages  round  about  Jerusalem  "  (ver.  29).  It  was  a  day  of  sacred  joy,  when  glad-
ness in  the  Lord  rose  to  enthusiasm,  and  could  only  be  poured  forth  in  song  and
shouting.  First,  however,  came  the  solemn  ceremony  of  purification  (ver.  30),  th«
sprinkling  of  "water  of  separation" — a  "purification  for  sin  "  (Num.  xix,  9 — 13).
This  was  sprinkled  on  the  (1)  priests  and  Levites  themselves,  (2)  on  the  people,  and
(3)  on  the  wall :  everything  was  to  be  "  clean  "  and  "holy  unto  the  Lord."  Then
came  the  twofold  procession  (vers.  31 — 40).  In  two  divisions,  starting  from  the  same
point,  and  going  in  opposite  directions,  they  traversed  the  walls,  Nehemiah  heading
one  half  of  the  princes  of  the  people,  and  Ezra  the  other  half ;  in  both  cases  pre-
ceded by  the  "  thanksgiving  companies  "  (ver.  31),  which  played  and  sang  as  they
marched.  They  met  near  the  entrance  to  the  temple  (ver.  40),  and  there  joined  in
the  utterance  of  public  praise,  singing  "  loud  thanksgivings  to  their  God  "  (ver.  42).
Then  came  "  great  sacrifices  "  (ver.  43)  otTored  on  the  brazen  altar  by  the  priests,  the
people,  during  the  procession  and  after  the  sacrifices,  rending  the  air  with  shouts  of
great  joy,  women  and  children  joining  in  the  general  gladness,  "so  that  the  joy  of
Jerusalem  was  heard  even  afar  off"  (ver.  43).  The  whole  scene  suggests  thoughts
to  us  of —

I.  OcB  PDRIFICATION  OF  OURSELVES.  If  we  ask,  What  is  there  in  Christianity  that
answers  to  the  purification  of  themselves  and  of  the  people  by  the  priests  under
Judaism  ?  (ver.  30),  we  answer  that  there  are  two  ways  in  which  we  are  now  made
clean.  1.  "  By  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ "  we  are  "  cleansed  from
all  iniquity."  We  are  "justified  by  his  blood  "  (Rom.  v.  9).  Applying  to  our  own
souls'  need  the  propitiatory  work  of  our  Redeemer,  we  ourselves  are  "  made  whole  "
in  the  sight  of  God  ;  "we  are  washed,  ...  we  are  justified  in  the  name  of  the  Lord
Jesus"  (1  Cor.  vi.  11).  2.  By  deliberate  separation  of  ourselves  to  the  service  of
God.  Not  the  withdrawal  of  ourselves  from  the  relationships  in  which  we  are  called
to  stand  or  from  the  active  duties  which  await  our  energy  and  skill,  but  the  separa-
tion of  our  souls  from  the  evil  which  is  in  the  wjrld,  and  a  full  dedication  of  our
powers  and  our  lives  to  the  service  of  our  Saviour.     Thus  are  we  purified.

II.  The  acceptableness  of  our  work.  The  wall  which  had  been  built  was
purified  as  well  as  the  builders  (ver.  30).  Our  work  which  we  have  wrought  for  God
and  man  needs  to  be  made  clean,  pure,  acceptable.  It  is  thus  rendered— 1.  Througli
the  work  of  the  Divine  Mediator.  We  ask  acceptance  of  all  we  have  done  for  Jesns'
sake.  2.  By  the  spirit  of  consecration  we  show  in  its  execution.  (1)  By  entering
upon  it  with  a  pure  desire  to  honour  Christ  and  bless  our  brethren.  (2)  By  doing  it  in
a  spirit  of  thorough  loyalty  to  him  and  sympathy  with  them.'  (3)  By  ascribing  its
success,  when  completed,  to  his  gracious  guidance  and  help.

III.  Our  joy.  The  joy  of  the  Jews  on  this  occasion  was  (1)  occasioned  by  a
sense  of  deliverance  and  security;  was  (2)  sanctified  by  gratitude  and  devotion:
they  "  gave  thanks  in  the  house  of  God  "  (ver.  40),  and  "  ofiEered  great  sacrifices  "
(ver.  43)  ;  and  it  was  (3)  general  and  contagious :  it  extended  to  all  classes  and  ages,
and  went  far  and  wide  beyond  the  city  walls— it  was  "heard  afar  ofE "  (ver.  43).
Such  should  be  the  characteristics,of  our  Christian  joy ;  it  also  should— (1)  Be  kindled
in  the  heart  by  our  deep  sense  of  redemption  and  security  through  Jesus  Christ  our
Saviour.  (2)  Be  sanctified  by  much  thanksgiving  and  devotion.  Gladness  is  never
so  pure  and  safe  as  when  it  takes  the  form  of  gratitude,  and  goes  into  the  house  o£
God  to  worship  there.  (3)  Extend  to  all  those  hdow  UB— the  children,  the  servants,
&c.;  and  all  around  us— be  felt  "  afar  off."- C.

EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  XIII.

Nbhemiaii's  efforts  Foa  tiib  reform
0»  religion  (^h.  xiii.  1 — 31).    After  having


exercised  the  office  of  governor  for  twelve
years,  from  B.C.  444  to  B.C.  432,  Nehemiah
had  had  occasion  to  visit  the  Persian  court,
either  to  consult  Artaxerxes  personally  oa


o«.  Mil.  1 — ai.]


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


1S9


certain  matters  connected  with  his  province,
or  for  some  other  reason  unknown  to  us.
During  his  ahsence  various  evil  practices,  to
which  some  reference  has  heen  already  made
in  connection  with  the  renewal  of  the  cove-
nant (ch.  X.  30 — 39),  acquired  so  much
strength,  and  came  to  such  a  bead,  that,  on
Nehemiah'a  return  to  Jerusalem  at  the
expiration  of  a  year  (ver.  6),  he  felt  it
necessary  to  take  active  steps  to  put  an  end
to  them.  In  the  first  place,  intermarriages
between  the  Jews  and  the  neighbouring
heathen,  like  those  which  Ezra  had  dis-
golved  twenty-five  years  previously  (Ezra  x.
16 — 44),  had  again  occurred,  and  a  new
generation  was  growing  up  which  could  not
speak  its  own  language  correctly  (ver.  24).
The  family  of  the  high  priest,  Eliashib,
shared  in  this  trespass.  He  himself  was
allied  by  marriage  to  the  Ammonite  chief,
Tobiah  (ver.  4),  and  one  of  his  grandsons
had  taken  to  wife  a  daughter  of  Sanhallat,
the  Samaritan  (ver.  28).  Secondly,  through
the  growing  influence  of  the  heathen,  and
their  intermixture  with  the  Jews  in  Judsea
and  Jerusalem,  the  strict  observance  of  the
sabbath  had  fallen  into  disrepute.  Trade
was  carried  on  upon  the  sabbath  in  Jeru-
salein  itself;  in  the  country  wine-presses
were  at  work,  and  farming  operatiors  con-
tinued, without  the  observance  of  any  day
of  rest  (vers.  15,  16).  Further,  the  pay-
ment of  the  tithes  was  very  irregular  ;  and
the  Levites,  who  ought  to  have  found  their
daily  food  provided  for  them  in  the  temple,
not  receiving  their  "portions"  there,  were
forced  to  absent  themselves  from  the  daily
service,  and  to  support  themselves  by  culti-
vating their  own  plots  of  ground  (vers.  10,
11).  Finally,  the  temple  had  ceased  to  be
regarded  as  sacred  to  the  Almighty ;  a  por-
tion of  it  had  been  converted  into  a  dwell-
ing-house by  the  order  of  the  high  priest
himself  (ver.  5),  an  i  the  Ammonite,  Tobiah,
had  been  allowed  to  take  possession  of  it.
Kehemiah  tells  us  in  this  chapter  the  mode
wherein  he  dealt  with  these  various  evils,
treating  of  the  mixed  marriages  in  vers.  1 — 3
»nd  23—28 ;  of  the  profanation  of  the  sab-
bath in  vers.  15—22  ;  of  the  non-payment  of
the  tithes  in  vers.  10—13 ;  and  of  the  de-
secration of  the  temple  in  vers.  4—9.  The
chapter  is  remarkable  for  the  number  of
" inteijeotional  prayers"  which  it  contains


(vers.  14,  22,  29,  31),  and  for  the  plainnesl
and  roughness  of  the  language  (see  especially
vers.  9,  17,  21,  25,  28).  The  authorship  ol
Nehemiah  is  universally  admitted.

Ver.    1. — On  that  day.    See  ch.  xii  44.

The  phrase  seems  to  mean,  in  Nehemiah,
"  About  that  time."  They  read  in  the  book
of  Moses.  It  is  uncertain  whether  this  was
a  casual  reading,  like  that  of  Ezra's,  recorded
in  ch.  viii.  1 — S,  or  whether  it  was  the  pre-
scribed reading  (Deut.  xxxL  11)  at  the  time
of  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  Therein  wai
found  written.  See  Deut.  xxiii.  3 — 6.  It
seems  to  be  implied  that  the  nation  at  large
had  no  knowledge  of  the  law,  except  that
which  they  derived  from  the  occasional  public
reading  of  the  Pentateuch,  or  portions  of  it.
Copies  of  the  law  were  extremely  scarce ;  and
even  if  an  ordinary  Jew  possessed  one,  he
would  not  have  been  able  to  understand  it
(comp.  above,  ch.  viii  8).

Ver.  2  follows  closely  Deut.  zxiiL  4,  5,
merely  substituting  the  third  for  the  second
person,  and  abbreviating  a  little.  On  the
turning  of  Balaam's  proposed  curse  into  a
blessing  see  Num.  xxiv.  10.

Ver.  3. — ^They  separated  from  Israel  all
the  mixed  multitude.  Some  lengthy  process,
like  that  pursued  by  Ezra  (Ezra  x.  10 — 19),
is  probably  glanced  at  in  these  words,  and
again  in  the  opening  words  of  ver.  30 — ■
"  Thus  cleansed  I  them  from  aU  strangers."
The  rebukes  of  Nehemiah  (vers.  25 — 27)  did
not  suffice  to  produce  a  voluntary  putting
away  of  the  foreign  wives.  Judicial  pro-
ceedings had  to  be  taken,  and  the  "mixed
multitude  "  separated  off  by  authority.

Ver.  4. — Eliashib  the  priest.  It  is  (^nes-
tioned  whether  the  high  priest  of  eh.  lii.  1
is  meant,  and  noted  that  the  expression  used
— "the  priest"— does  not  always  designate
"  the  high  priest "  (see  ver.  13) ;  but  the  iaj-
portant  charge  said  to  have  been  assigned  to
him,  the  alliance  with  so  great  a  man  as
Tobiah,  and  the  important  step  taken,  the
assignment  to  a  heathen  of  a  residence  with-
in the  temple  precincts,  imply  a  man  of  high
authority,  and  suit  better  with  the  high
priest  than  with  any  one  of  lower  rank.
Moreover,  the  fact  that  Eliashib's  leanings
were  towards  the  enemies  of  ITehemiah  ac-
counts for  his  disappearance  from  the  history
from  ch.  iiL  1  to  ch.  xiii.  4.  Having  the
oversight  Literally,  "being  get  over" —
perhaps  by  Nehemiah,  who  seems  to  have
claimed  the  appointment  to  all  offices  about
the  temple  which  were  not  purely  spirituaL
(see  ch.  xii.  44  ;  xiiL  13).  Of  the  cham-
ber. The  word  "chamber"  {lishkah)  ia
here  used  in  a  collective  sense  of  the  entire
building  containing  the  many  "chambere"
or  "  treasuries "  of  ch.  xii  44 ;  xiii.  9,
12,  13.    Was  allied  unto  lobialL    KarSb,


140


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[CH.  XUI.  1— jtl.


the  word  translated  "  al'iod,"  means  "a
relation,"  either  by  blood  or  marriagn.  In
the  present  case  the  relationship  must  have
been  by  means  of  a  mairiage.

Ver.  5. — He  had  prepared  for  him  a  great
chamber.  He  (]51iashib)  had  prepared  (or
made)  for  him  (Tobiah)  a  great  chamber —
probably  by  throwing  into  one  several  of  the
old  store-chambers.  The  meat  offerings.
The  minchAxh  consisted  of  fine  flour  seasoned
with  salt,  and  mixed  with  oil  and  frankin-
cense. It  was  made  into  a  sort  of  cake,  but
without  leaven,  and  formed  part  of  the  daily
morning  and  evening  sacrifice,  the  Sabbath
offerings,  and  most  others.  The  frankin-
cense. Frankincense  was  a  necessary  in-
gredient in  the  incense  which  was  offered
twice  a  day  on  the  "altar  of  incense"  in
the  holy  place  (Exod.  xxx.  34).  As  a  rare
foreign  product,  it  had  necessarily  to  be  kept
in  store.  The  vessels.  Sacred  vessels,
basins,  and  the  like,  not  needed  except  on
occasion  of  great  gatherings.  The  offerings
of  the  priests.  The  portion  of  the  offerings
which  belonged  to  the  priests — "the  tithe
of  the  tithes."

Ver.  6. — In  all  this  time.  Literally,
''  during  all  this  " — while  all  this  was  being
done.  The  reference  seems  to  be  solely  to
the  affair  of  Eliashib  and  Tobiah.  Arta-
xerxes,  king  of  Babylon.  The  title  "  king
of  Babylon,"  which  was  certainly  borne  by
Cyrus,  Cambyses,  and  Darius  Hystaspis,
may  have  continued  in  use  down  to  the  time
of  Nehemiah,  or  even  later.  If  he  visited
Artaxerxes  at  Babylon,  the  court  happening
to  be  there  at  the  time,  he  would  naturally
think  and  speak  of  him  as  "  king  of  Baby-
lon." After  certain  days.  Literally,  "at
the  end  of  days,"  which  is  thought  to  mean
"at  the  expiration  of  a  year."  I  obtained
leave  of  the  king.  Gesenius  and  Professor
Lee  render,  "I  asked  leave  of  the  king  ;"
Houbigant,  Rambach,  and  others,  "  I  was
asked  for  from  the  Mng,"  t.  e.  "the  Jews
asked  to  have  me  sent  hack  to  govern
them.''

Yer.  7  — A  chamber  in  the  courts  of  the
house  of  God.  It  would  seem  by  this  ex-
pression that  the  chamber  made  over  to
Tobiah  was  not  part  of  the  main  building  of
the  temple,  but  a  portion  of  some  detached
building  belonging  to  the  "courts."  This,
no  doubt,  made  the  desecration  less  flagrant,
but  was  far  from  justifying  it.

Ver.  8. — Therefore  cast  I  forth  all  the
household  staS.  Tobiah  had  furnished  his
"  chamber "  as  a  dwelling-house,  filling  it
with  "household  stuff"  of  various  kinds.
Nehemiah,  of  his  own  authority,  had  the
whole  of  it  turned  out  of  doors.

Ver.  9. — I  commanded,  and  they  cleansed
the  chambers.  Regarding  the  sacred  place
as  polluted  by  its  conversion  to  secular  uses,


Kuhemiah  had  it  purified,  and  so  reconse-
crated. He  then  ordered  the  restoration  to
their  former  place  of  the  various  stores  which
had  been  removed  to  make  room  for  Tobiah'g
furniture.

Ver.  10. — I  perceived  that  the  portions  of
the  Levites  had  not  been  given  them  :  for  the
Levites  ....  were  fled.  What  Nehemiah  saw
was  that  the  Levites  were  absent,  and  "the
house  of  God  forsaken "  (ver.  11),  On  in-
quii-y,  he  found  that  the  reason  of  their
absence  was  the  non-payment  of  the  tithes.
That  did  the  work.  /.  e.  whose  business  it
was  to  do  the  work  of  the  house,  or,  in  other
words,  conduct  Divine  service.  Every  one
to  his  field.  Every  Levite  had  a  plot  of
ground,  which  he  cultivated  when  not  en-
gaged in  the  work  of  the  temple  (see  Knm.
XXXV.  2 ;  Josh.  xxL  3).

Ver.  11.  —  Then  contended  I  with  the
rulers.  While  the  guilt  of  profaning  the
temple  lay  especially  with  the  priestly  class,
that  of  withholding  the  tithes  was  mainly
chargeable  on  the  "rulers,"  or  "nobles.
These  persons,  as  wealthy  landowners,  had
of  course  a  pecuniary  interest  in  keeping
back  the  tithe.  When  they  felt  the  contrd
of  a  strong  hand  they  made  the  payments
regularly  enough  (ch.  xii.  47  ;  xiiL  12) ;  but
no  sooner  was  this  control  removed  by  Nehe-
miah's  departure  than  they  relapsed  into  the
covetous  habits  in  which  they  had  indulged
before  he  was  made  governor  (ch.  x.  37).
The  Church  in  all  ages  has  suffered  wrong
from  the  cupidity  of  wealthy  men  among  ita
members.  Why  is  the  house  of  God  for-
saken? Why,  contrarily  to  the  distinct
pledge  given  at  the  time  of  the  renewal  of
the  covenant  (ch.  x.  39),  have  yon  suffered
the  house  of  God  to  become  a  solitude,
driving  the  Levites  away  from  it  by  depriving
them  of  their  legal  sustenance  ?  I  gathered
them  together.  Nehemiah  brought  the
Levites  back  to  the  temple  from  their  country
residences,  and  re-established  them  in  their
proper  officea.

Ver.  13. — And  I  made  treasnrera.  It
was  perhaps  now  for  the  first  time  that
special  treasurers  were  provided  to  have  the
charge  of  the  temple  store-chambers,  these
having  hitherto  been  under  the  superintend-
ence of  the  high  priest  (ver.  4).  The  ap-
pointment mentioned  in  ch.  xii.  44  is  pro-
bably the  same  with  this ;  and  the  entire
duty  of  the  treasurers  is  to  be  learnt  by
combining  that  passage  with  the  present.
They  were  to  be  both  the  collectors  and  the
dispensers  of  the  tithes.  Of  the  four  trea-
surers, one  was  a  priest,  one  a  Levite,  one  ■
layman  of  rank  (see  ch.  x.  22),  and  one  a
professional  scribe.  This  last,  Zadok,  il
perhaps  to  be  identified  with  the  "Zidkijah"
of  ch.  X.  1,  who  appears  to  have  been  Nehe»
miah's  private  secretary  (see  the  commeut


OH.  xni.  1 — 31.]


THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.


141


cul  loe.).  TTnto  their  brethren.  /.  <.  to  the
priests  and  Levites,  brethren  of  Shelemiah
knd  Fedaiah.

Yer.  14. — Remember  me,  0  my  Ood,  Or,
"Think  upon  me,  my  God,"  as  the  same
words  are  translated  in  ch.  y.  19.  Wipe  not
ont  my  good  deeds.  I.  e.  "Blot  not  my
good  deeds  out  of  thy  remembrance  " — ^forget
them  not,  let  them  be  remembered  in  my
favour.  For  the  offices  thereof.  Bather,  as
in  the  margin,  "  for  the  observances  thereof"
— i.  e.  for  flie  maintenance  of  the  rites,  cere-
monies, usages,  &c.  of  the  temple,  which  I
have  done  my  best  to  continue  on  the  ancient
footing.

Ver.  16. — In  those  days.  A  note  of  time
even  vaguer  than  that  of  ch.  xii.  44  and  ch.
xiiL  1,  but  pointing  certainly  to  a  date  later
than  Nehemiah's  return  from  the  Persian
court.  Saw  I  some  treading  wine-presses
on  the  sabbath.  On  the  treading  of  grapes
in  the  wine-press,  as  the  first  step  towards
the  production  of  wine,  see  Job  xxiv.  11  ;
Isa.  Ixiii.  2,  3,  &c.  The  performance  of  this
work  on  the  sabbath  was  a  flagrant  breach
of  the  fourth  commandment.  Bringing
in  sheaves  and  lading  asses.  Scarcely
"sheaves"  in  our  sense  of  the  word,  since
com  was  not  stored  in  sheaves.  Rather,
"bringing  grain  and  loading  it  upon  asses."
As  also.  Rather,  "and  even."^  It  might
be  pleaded  that  the  transport  of  grain  was  a
necessity ;  but  there  could  be  no  absolute
need  of  a  supply  of  wine,  grapes,  or  figs.  I
testified  against  them  in  the  day  in  which
they  sold  victuals.  Rather,  "I  testified
against  them  in  respect  of  the  day  on  which
they  sold  provisions."

Ver.  16. — There  dwelt  men  of  Tyre  also
therein.  It  was  not  against  the  law  that
foreigners  should  dwell  in  Jerusalem.  Arau-
nab  the  Jebuaite  lived  there  in  the  time  of
David,  and  Ebed-melech  the  Ethiopian  in
the  time  of  Zedekiah  (Jer.  xxxviii.  7).  Nehe-
miah  does  not  object  to  the  Tyrians  for  being
dwellers  in  Jerusalem,  but  for  offering  their
wares  for  sale  there  on  the  sabbath,  and  in-
ducing the  Jews  to  buy  of  them.  Which
brought  fish.  Fish  was  always  a  favourite
article  of  food  with  the  Israelites  (Levit.  xi
9  ;  Kum.  xi  6 ;  Deut.  xiv.  9  ;  Isa.  xix.  10  ;
Matt.  xiv.  7  ;  xv.  34  ;  Luke  xxiv.  42,  &o.).
They  derived  it  chiefly  from  the  Sea  of
Galilee  and  the  Mediterranean.

Yer.  17. — Then  I  contended  with  the
nobles.  In  the  desecration  of  the  sabbath,
as  in  the  non-payment  of  tithes,  the  nobles
were  the  chief  offenders,  being  at  once  luxuri-
ous and  latitudinarian.  They  desired  the
freshest  food  for  their  feasts,  and  encourt^d
both  foreigners  and  natives  to  break  the  law
for  the  gratification  of  their  carnal  appetites,

Yer.  18.  —  Did  not  your  fitthers  thus  t
Xb»  desecration  of  the  sabbath  is  among  the


sins  most  strongly  denounced  by  Jeremiah
(ch.  iviL  21 — 27)  and  Ezekiel  (ch.  ix.  13 ;
zxii  8,  28,  &c.).  And  did  not  our  Ood
bring  all  this  evil  upon  ns  and  npon  this
cityl  God  had  said  by  Jeremiah,  "If  ye
will  not  hearken  unto  me  to  hallow  the
sabbath  day,  and  not  to  bear  a  burden,  even
entering  in  at  the  gates  of  Jerusalem  on  the
sabbath  day  ;  then  will  I  kindle  a  fire  in  the
gates  thereof,  and  it  shall  devour  the  palaces
of  Jerusalem,  and  it  shall  not  be  quenched  "
(Jer.  xviL  27).  The  burning  of  the  city  by
ITebuzaradan  was  the  performance  of  this
threat

Yer.  19. — ^When  the  gates  of  Jernsalem
began  to  be  dark  before  the  sabbath.  The
Jews  have  always  reckoned  their  days  from
sunset  to  sunset,  grounding  their  practice  on
the  account  of  the  Creation  given  in  the  first
chapter  of  Genesis,  where  "  the  evening  and
the  morning "  are  said  to  constitute  each  oi
the  six  days.  There  was  also  a  special  com-
mand that  the  "sabbath"  of  the  great  day
of  atonement  should  be  kept  "from. even  to
even  "  (Levit,  xxiiL  32).  I  commanded  that
the  gates  should  be  shut  The  gates  would
as  a  matter  of  course  have  been  shut  at  sun-
set. Kehemiah  required  that  the  closing
should  take  place  some  half-hour  earlier,
when  the  shadows  were  lengthening,  and  the
day  was  drawing  towards  a  close.  He  re-
garded it  as  a  sort  of  desecration  of  the
sabbath  to  carry  on  secular  work  to  the  last
allowable  moment.  Some  of  my  servants.
Compare  ch.  iv.  16 ;  v.  16.  That  there
should  be  no  burthen  brought  in.  Foot
passengers  were  no  doubt  allowed  to  enter
and  leave  the  city  on  the  sabbath,  Nehe-
miah's  servants  being  set  to  see  that  nnder
no  pretence  should  merchandise  be  allowed
to  enter.

Yer.  20. — The  merchants  ....  lodged
without  The  merchants  could  not  leave
their  wares  unguarded  ;  and  the  wares  not
being  admitted  into  the  town,  they  were
obliged  to  camp  out  Thus  a  crowd  was
collected  about  the  gates,  and  a  disturbance
and  excitement  caused,  which  was  unsnit-
able  for  the  sabbath.  To  prevent  this,  Nehe-
miah  threatened  to  arrest  the  merchants,
whereupon  the  practice  was  given  up  (yer
21).

Yer.  22. — ^And  I  commanded  the  Levites
.  .  .  that  they  should  come  and  keep  the
gates.  Assigning  the  duty  to  his  servants
was  probably  a  temporary  arrangement  The
permanent  charge  was  committed  to  the
Levites,  who  had  been  intrusted  with  the
duty  when  the  gates  were  first  set  np  (ch.
vii  1).  They  were  to  "cleanse,"  or  pnnfy,
themselves,  because  the  charge  was  con-
sidered a  sacred  one.  Semember  me,  0  nty
God,  concerning  this  also.  Compare  yer,
14.    And  spare  me.     It  is  worthy  of  notica


143


THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.


[cu.  xiu.  1 — 81


that  Nchemiah  does  not  regard  his  good
deeds  as  sufficient  for  his  justification,  but
throws  himself  unreservedly  on  God's  mercy.

Ver.  23.— In  those  days.  I.e.  "About
this  same  time."  Compare  ver.  15.  Saw  I
Jews.  Rather,  "looked  I  after  the  Jews."
There  is  a  reference  to  the  first  three  verses
of  the  present  chapter,  which  had  introduced
the  subject  of  the  mixed  marriages.  Nehe-
miah  Avishes  to  put  on  record  the  part  which
he  had  taken  in  the  matter,  and  begins  by
observing  that  it  had  not  escaped  him — he
had  had  his  eye  on  the  transgressors,  and
had  noted  their  misconduct,  and  the  evils
whereto  it  led.  Wives  of  Ashdod.  Philis-
tine wives,  of  a  race  always  hostile  to  Israel,
and  natives  of  a  city  which  had  recently
taken  part  with  Nehemiah's  bitter  enemies
(ch.  iv.  7).  Of  Ammon  and  of  Moab.  Com-
pare Ezra  ix.  1,  and  Neh.  xiii.  1.

Ver.  24. — ^Their  children  spake  half  in  the
speech  of  Ashdod.  Some  understand  the
writer  to  mean  that  half  of  the  children  in  a
family  spoke  the  tongue  of  the  father,  and
half  that  of  the  mother.  But  many  of  the
best  Hebraists  prefer  the  sense  expressed  by
our  translators,  viz.,  that  all  the  children
spoke  a  jargon  half  Ashdodite  and  half
Aramaic  The  Philistine  language  is  said
to  have  resembled  the  Egyptian  (Hieronym.,
'  Comment,  in  Esaiam,'  xix.  18).

Ver.  25. — I  contender)  with  them,  and
cursed  them.  Or,  "reviled  them,"  as  Gesenius
and  Professor  Lee  explain.  And  smote  cer-
tain of  them.  /.  e.  "  had  some  of  them
beaten. "  Some  understand  by  this  that  the
offenders  underwent  the  bastinado  by  sen-
tence of  a  court  (Deut.  xxv.  2) ;  others  think
Nehemiah  had  them  struck  informally  by
his  attendants.  This  latter  explanation  is
supported  by  the  following  clause,  since
"plucking  out  the  hair"  was  never  a  legal
punishment.  Hade  them  swear  by  God.
Literally,  "  swore  them  by  God,"  i.  e.  dic-
tated the  words,  and  made  them  repeat  the
formula  and  accept  the  oath.  Saying,  Ye
shall  not  give.  Literally,  "If  ye  shall  give,"
&c.  Nehemiah  made  them  swear  that  if
they  should  intermarry  with  the  heathen
the  curse  of  God  should  fall  upon  them.

Ver.  26. — Did  not  Solomon  .  .  .  sin  by
these  things  I  The  example  adduced  was
more  apt  than  any  other  to  move  Jews.
Israelites  might  have  felt  more  deeply  the
case  of  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxi  25).  Solomon's
sin  in  "  going  after  strange  wives,"  and  its
punishment,  are  set  forth  very  fully  in  1
Kings  zi  1 — 10.  Among  many  nations
there  was  no  king  like  him.  The  reference
is  not  so  much  to  particular  texts  (e.  g.  1  Kings
iii.  13  ;  2  Chron.  i.  12)  as  to  the  general
description  of  Solomon,  his  glory,  and  his
greatnesi (1  Kings  ir. — r. ;  2  Chron.  i. — ix.),


which  set  him  above  all  other  earthly
monarchs.  Who  was  beloved  of  his  God.
See  2  Sam.  xii.  24.  And  God  made  him
king  over  all  Israel.     See  1  Kings  iv.  1,

Ver.  27. — Shall  we  then  hearken  nnto
you  ?  Shall  we  give  way  to  you,  and  adopt
the  practice  which  you  recommend,  thus
transgressing  against  God,  and  provoking
him  to  destroy  us  ?  Surely  not  Solomon's
example  is  enough  to  deter  us.

Ver.  28. — One  of  the  sons  of  Joiada,  the
son  of  Eliashib.  See  ch.  xii  10.  Eliashib
seems  to  have  been  still  living,  though  one  of
his  grandsons  was  of  age  to  contract  a  mar-
riage. Was  son-in-law  to  Sanballat,  the
Eoronite.  Had  therefore  married  one  of  his
daughters,  while  Eliashib  himself  was  con-
nected by  marriage  with  Tobiah.  The
defection  of  the  high  priestly  family  from
those  principles  which  Ezra  and  Kehemiah
regarded  as  vital  is  only  too  apparent.  I
chased  him  from  me.  I.e.  I  forced  him  to
quit  the  country  and  become  an  exile.  We
may  suppose  that  he  refused  to  repudiate  hia
foreign  wife,  and  preferred  to  take  refuge
with  Sanballat  in  Samaria.

Ver.  29. — They  have  defiled  the  priest-
hood, and  the  covenant  of  the  priesthood,
and  of  the  Zevites.  We  look  in  vain  for
any  distinct  "  covenant  "  which  the  priest-
ly order  broke  by  allying  itself  with  the
heathen,  or  indeed  for  any  special  law  for-
bidding the  priests  to  take  heathen  wives,
which  was  not  equally  binding  upon  laymen.
But  Nehemiah  feels  that  every  sm  is  worse
in  a  priest  than  in  one  who  is  not  a  priest ;
that  a  priest  who  contracts  a  pollution  "pol-
lutes the  priesthood  ;  "  and  that  there  is  a
tacit  covenant  by  which  priests  and  Levites
bind  themselves  to  holiness  of  life  more
absolutely  and  definitely  than  others.

Ver.  30. — Thus  cleansed  I  them.  Bather,
"And  I  cleansed  them."  The  process  of
cleansing  touched  on  in  this  verse,  and  also
in  ver.  3,  is  not  described.  It  probably
resembled  the  process  adopted  by  Ezra  (Ezra
X.  5 — 17).  And  appointed  the  wards.  /.  e.
"assigned  their  offices  to  the  various  priesta
and  Levites"  (see  ch.  xi  11—24  ;  xii  44  ;
xiii  13).

Ver.  31. — And  for  the  wood  offering.  /.*
"  I  appointed  persons  to  look  after  the  col-
lection of  the  wood  offering  (ch.  x.  34)  and
of  the  first-fruits  "  {ibid.  vers.  35—37).  At
appointed  times.  Compare  the  expression
in  ch.  X.  34:  "At  times  appointed  year  by
year."  Bemember  me,  0  my  God,  for  gooi
A  characteristic  termination  of  a  book  where-
of one  of  the  main  features  has  been  a  con-
stant carrying  to  God  of  all  the  author*!
cares,  troubles,  and  difficulties  (see  ch  i  *—
11 ;  ii  4,  20 ;  iv.  4,  9,  20  ;  t.  16, 19  ;  H,
9,  14 ;  xiii  14,  22,  St).


«.  xin.  1—51.]  THE  BOOK  Of  NEHEMIAH.  143


HOMILETICa

Vsre.  1 — 3. — Separation  from  Israel  of  foreigners.  In  the  public  reading  of  the
law,  the  command  was  met  with  to  keep  the  Ammonite  and  the  Moabite  out  of  the
congregation  of  God  for  ever.  Upon  this,  interpreting  the  precept  apparently  as
applicable  to  all  strangers,  the  people  separated  from  them  "  the  mixed  multitude  "
(for  the  phrase  see  Exod.  xii.  38).  To  what  extent  these  had  been  united  with
Israel  before,  and  how  far  the  separation  was  carried,  does  not  appear.  The  law
(Deut.  xxiii.  3)  seems  clearly  to  mean  that  even  if  an  Ammonite  or  Moabite  became
converted  from  heathenism  to  the  faith  of  the  Israelites,  neither  he  nor  his  descendants,
to  the  tenth  generation,  should  be  allowed  to  unite  in  their  worship,  or  be  capable  of
naturalisation.  Was  this  law  rigidly  carried  out  in  the  case  of  proselytes  from  the
heathen  ?  But  if  "  the  mixed  multitude  "  had  not  been  fellow-worshippers,  from  what
were  they  now  excluded  ?  Were  they  expelled  from  the  city  ?  Without  attempting
an  answer  to  such  questions,  we  may  take  the  passage  as  suggesting  the  duty  of  the
Christian  Church  to  keep  itself  pure  from  alien  elements.  This  duty  is  clearly  set  forth
in  not  a  few  passages  in  the  New  Testament,  which,  when  they  are  read  in  public  in
some  Churches,  must  surely  be  at  times  felt  as  protesting  against  the  existing  state  of
things.

I.  Whom  Christians  abb  to  exclude  from  their  fellowship.  None  are  to  be
separated,  as.under  the  law,  on  account  of  nationality.  "  There  is  neither  Jew  nor
Greek,"  &c.  (Gal.  iii.  28).  None  because  of  the  faults  of  their  parents,  still  less  of
their  remote  ancestors.  But — 1.  Total  unbelievers  in  Christianity.  This  is  implied
in  Matt,  xviii.  17,  and  clearly  included  in  the  prohibition  in  2  Cor.  vi.  14 — 17.  But
it  needs  no  express  precept ;  it  is  evident  from  the  nature  of  the  case  that  a  Christian
Church  must  be  composed  of  professed  Christians.  2.  Rejecters  of  essential  truths.
Especially  the  teachers  of  serious  error  (see  1  Tim.  i.  20  ;  2  John  10  ;  Rev.  ii.  14,  15).

3.  The  immoral  (see  1  Cor.  v.).  4.  Impenitent  offenders  against  a  fellaw-member  of
the  Church  (see  Matt,  xviii.  15 — 17).  5.  Disturbers  of  the  peace  and  unity  of  the
Church  (Rom.  xvi.  17).

II.  To  WHAT  extent  THE  SEPARATION  IS  TO  BE  MADE.  1.  From  Church  communion.
2.  From  the  intimacies  of  private  life.  The  main  ends  of  the  separation  cannot  ba
secured  if  those  who  are  excluded  from  Church  ordinances  are  freely  admitted  to
friendship  and  family  life.  "With  such  an  one  no  not  to  eat,"  is  the  language  of
St.  Paul  as  to  certain  classes  of  offenders  (1  Cor.  v.  11).  Avoidance  of  private
friendship  is  even  enjoined  towards  some  who  are  yet  to  be  regarded  as  brethren
(2  Thess.  iii.  6,  14,  15).

III.  Why  it  is  to  be  made.  It  is  required  by — 1.  The  laws  of  Christ.  2.  The  idea
and  design  of  the  Church.  As  a  community  consecrated  to  God ;  baptized  into  the
name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost ;  instituted  to  witness  for  truth
and  holiness,  to  maintain  the  worship  of  God,  to  promote  his  kingdom,  which  is
righteousness  ;  constituted  the  visible  body  of  Christ,  to  speak  his  words,  do  his  work,
for  conversion  of  sinners  and  spiritual  improvement  and  comfort  of  saints.  Christian
communion  is  impaired,  the  power  of  Cliriatian  ministry  and  ordinaiiues  lessened,

'  when  the  Church  is  itself  palpably  "  a  mixed  multitude  "  of  believers  and  unbelievers,
righteous  and  unrighteous.     3.  The  safety  of  individual  and  family  Christian  life.

4.  The  benefit  of  the  separated  themselves.  Th  it  unbelievers  miy  be  impressed  with
the  reality  and  importance  of  Christian  faith  and  holiness,  and  their  own  lack  of  them.
If  treated  as  Christians,  they  will  come  to  regard  themselves  as  Christians,  much  to
their  own  injury.  So  in  the  case  of  such  as  are  guilty  of  immorality  ;  their  expulsion
from  fellowship  is  to  be  with  a  view  to  their  repentance  and  restoration  (see  3  Cor.
u.  6— 8).

In  conclusion — 1.  The  exercise  of  such  discipline  doubtless  requires  much  wisdom
and  charity.  It  is  vain  to  hope  for,  it  is  wrong  to  attempt,  a  perfect  separation  between
the  true  and  the  false,  the  wheat  and  the  tares.  It  is  possible  to  be  too  rigid ;  it  is
more  easy  to  err  on  the  side  of  laxity.  There  is  danger  on  one  side  of  Pharisaism
and  narrow  bigotry ;  on  the  other,  of  growing  indifference  to  truth  and  righteousness,
the  welfar*  of  souls  and  the  glo^  of  Christ    Christian  intelligence,  piety,  and  lov«


144  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  xiii.  1—31.

— rither,  the  Spirit  of  Christ — in  the  Church  can  alone  preserve  from  these  opposite
evils,  and  guide  in  a  course  harmonising  at  once  with  the  purity  and  the  charity
which  are  united  in  the  gospel,  and  ought  never  to  be  dissevered  in  the  practice  of
Christians.  But,  in  the  face  of  the  teaching  and  injunctions  of  the  New  Testament,
it  can  nevei  be  right  to  seek  to  escape  diflSculty  by  abandoning  Church  discipline
altogether.  2.  The  narrative  shows  the  value  of  the  written  word,  and  the  importance
of  the  reading  of  it.  It  preserves  the  truth  during  periods  of  neglect  and  disobedience ;
and  when  studied  afresh  brings  it  to  light  again,  for  conviction  and  reformation.

3.  The  Divine  law,  though  neglected  and  disobeyed,  is  not  thereby  abolished.  It
endures  as  a  witness  against  those  who  disobey,  and  the  standard  by  which  they  will
be  judged^

Ver.  2; — Foes  turned  into  friends.  "Our  God  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing."
Balaam,  who  was  hired  to  curse  Israel,  and  desired  to  do  so,  was  compelled  to  bless
them.  A  unique  instance ;  but  suggesting  the  general  truth  that  God  makes  the
efforts  of  men  to  injure  his  people  a  means  of  doing  them  good,  and  of  doing  good
to  others  through  them,  which  is  also  a  mode  of  blessing  them.  How  does  he  effect
this?

I.  By  his  overruling  providence.  The  case  of  Joseph  is  a  notable  instance
(see  Gen.  xlv.  6^8  ;  1.  20).  The  enmity  and  cruelty  of  his  brothers,  the  anger  of
Potiphar's  wife,  issuing  in  his  own  exaltation,  the  preservation  of  his  family,  and
their  settlement  in  Egypt.

II.  By  THE  POWER  OF  HIS  SPIRIT.  1.  On  those  desiring  to  injure  good  men.
Sometimes  turning  their  hearts  to  friendship.  Paul  going  to  Damascus  to  persecute
the  Christians,  but  arriving  to  co-operate  with  them.  2.  On  those  whose  injury  is
Bought.  Turning  the  enmity  of  men,  and  even  of  Satan,  into  means  of  grace  to  his
people ;  promoting  in  them — (1)  Compassion  and  good-will  towards  their  enemies.  So
that  they  bless  those  who  curse,  pray  for  them,  forgive  them.  (2)  Trust  in  God,  and
experience  of  his  supporting  grace.  (3)  Patience  and  resignation.  (4)  Power  to
overcome  temptation.  (5)  Christian  character  in  general.  And,  as  the  result  of  all —
(6)  Power  to  do  good.  3.  On  the  hearts  of  others.  The  example  and  the  utterances
of  Christians  thus  exercised  and  thus  blessed  being  made  more  influential  (1)  to
encourage  and  strengthen  their  fellow-Christians  and  (2)  to  promote  the  salvation
of  sinners.  Illustrations  abound  in  Scripture,  biographies  of  Christians,  and  ordinary
Christian  life.  David  was  fitted  for  the  throne  by  the  discipline  which  the  enmity  of
Saul  afforded ;  and  by  the  experience  of  varied  trials  was  so  enriched  in  spiritual
life  as  to  be  able  to  write  psalms  meeting  the  wants  of  godly  men  throughout  the
ages.  We  owe  the  sublime  death  of  Stephen  to  the  rage  of  his  malignant  foes.  If
St.  Paul  had  not  been  persecuted  he  would  not  have  been  so  great  in  goodness,  or
effected  so  much  good  in  life,  or  written  epistles  so  full  of  inspiring  thoughts  and
powerful  consolations  for  the  benefit  of  the  Church  for  ever.  St.  John,  banished  to
Patmos,  sees  heavenly  visions,  hears  heavenly  voices,  and  writes  the  Book  of  Revel-
ation. And  "  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,"  how  much  they  owed,  how  much  we  owe
through  them,  to  their  persecutions.  But  the  grand  instance  is  that  of  the  Lord
himself,  made  "  perfect  through  sufferings,"  and  becoming  thereby  the  Saviour  of  the
world,  the  sympathising  Friend  and  Consoler  of  his  suffering  people,  the  perfect
example  of  meekness,  resignation,  and  forgiveness  of  enemies.  Note,  however,  in
conclusion,  that  in  the  case  of  impenitent  sinners  blessings  from  God  and  man  are
turned  into  curses.  What  are  meant  for  good — the  gifts  of  Providence,  enjoymenta,
Bufferings,  the  gospel  and  the  grace  of  God — all  become  evil.

Vers.  4 — 9. — An  intruder  ejected.  In  these  verses  we  have  an  account  of  a  g^oas
mbuse  of  authority  by  the  high  priest,  and  how  it  was  corrected  by  Nehemiah.

I.  The  offence.  Turning  rooms  in  the  courts  of  the  temple,  intended  and  used
OS  store-rooms  for  tithes  and  offerings,  &c.,  into  a  residence  for  Tobiah  on  his  visits  to
Jerusalem.  In  ver.  5  we  read  of  "a  great  chamber;  "in  ver.  9  of  "chambers."
Perhaps  several  rooms  were  thrown  into  one ;  or  the  word  in  ver.  5  may  be,  as  in  ver.

4,  collective.  1.  The  perversion  was  itself  disgraceful.  It  may  have  occasioned  the
neglect  recorded  in  ver.  10.    2.  The  person  for  whom  it  was  committed  was  not  only


TH.  XIII.  1—31  J  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH,  146

an  alien,  but  an  enemy.  3.  The  person  who  committed  it  was  the  appointed  guardian
of  the  rooms.  As  high  priest,  he  should  have  heen  too  jealous  of  the  sanctity  of  the
temple ;  as  "  having  the  oversight  of  the  chamber  of  the  house  of  God,"  he  should
have  been  too  faithful  to  his  duty ;  as  head  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  too  concerned
for  their  rights  and  welfare,  to  be  willing  to  permit,  much  less  to  perpetrate,  such  an
abuse.

II.  How  THE  OFFENCE  CAME  TO  BE  PERMITTED.  1.  Nehemiah  was  absent,  la  his
absence  afEairs  fell  rapidly  into  disorder  again.  A  painful  illustration  of  the  super-
ficiality of  reforms  wrought  hastily  under  the  influence  of  powerful  leaders.  2.
Tobiah  was  a  great  man.  3.  He  was  a  relative  of  Eliashib.  4.  Eliashib  was
unworthy  of  his  ofBce.  He  was  more  concerned  to  stand  well  with  Tobiah  than  to
do  his  duty  to  God  and  his  brethren.  Probably  he  was  disaffected  towards  NehemiaL
and  his  reforms,  and  thought  that  now  he  was  gone  he  could  do  as  he  pleased.

III.  How  THE  OFFENCE  WAS  coERECTED.  Nehemiah,  returning  to  Jerusalem,  and
being  informed  of  what  had  been  done,  was  very  indignant,  and  at  once  took  measures
to  put  an  end  to  the  scandal.  Under  his  direction — 1.  Tobiah's  furniture  was  sum-
marily ejected.  2.  The  rooms  were  purified  from  the  ceremonial  uncleanness  they
had  contracted.  3.  They  were  restored  to  their  proper  use.  The  narrative  suggests
— (1)  The  evil  influence  sometimes  exercised  in  the  Church  by  rank  and  wealth,  or
relationship  to  those  in  ofiice.  These  sometimes  go  further  than  character  and  ability
(which  should  be  mainly  regarded)  to  secure  for  their  possessors  positions  of  authority
and  power  in  the  Church.  And  those  who  should  protest  silently  acquiesce  in  the
abuse,  or  basely  connive  at  it,  that  they  may  live  in  friendship  with  the  unholy
intruders  into  God's  temple,  and  promote  their  own  worldly  ends.  (2)  The  feelings
vhich  such  abuses  will  awaken  in  good  men.  (3)  The  duty  of  those  who  have  the
)Ower  to  correct  them.

Vers.  10 — 14. — Suspended  ministrationt  restored.  Nehemiah,  on  his  return,  soon
liscovers  another  serious  evil  which  his  absence  had  occasioned  ;  and,  with  his  usual
promptness,  ability,  and  energy,  corrects  it.

I.  The  serious  irregularity  which  had  arisen.  The  services  of  the  temple,  if
lot  discontinued,  had  been  deprived  of  much  of  their  dignity  and  impressiveness
'ly  the  withdrawal  of  the  Levites,  including  the  singers,  &om  their  duties.  Their
appointed  daily  allowances  (ch.  xii.  47)  had  been  withheld,  and  they  had  retired  to
iheir  Selds  to  obtain  a  livelihood  by  other  employments.

II.  Its  causes.  1.  Nehemiah's  absence.  His  presence  and  authority  were  as  yet
necessary  to  keep  all  classes  to  their  duty.  The  reformation  he  had  efEected  was  not
sustained  by  any  vital  change  in  the  hearts  of  rulers  or  people.  Their  resolutions,
so  solemnly  made  under  excitement  (ch.  x.),  were  superficial  and  short-lived.  2.
The  indifference  and  negligence  of  the  rulers  (ver.  11),  who  should  have  taken  care
that  the  regulations  were  observed.  3.  The  unfitness  for  his  ofiice  of  the  high  priest.
He  ought  to  have  deemed  as  his  own  the  interests  of  the  inferior  ministers  of  the
sanctuary.  But  his  misconduct,  as  related  in  vers.  4,  5 — whether  the  lack  of  offerings
gave  opportunity  for  it,  or  was  occasioned  by  it — shows  how  little  likely  he  was  to
concern  himself  about  them,  so  long  as  his  own  position  and  gains  were  not  affected.
4.  The  covetousness  of  the  people.  They  are  reproved  by  Malachi  about  this  time
for  robbing  God  by  withholding  the  tithes  and  offerings  (Mai.  iii.  8).  Had  they
furnished  the  means,  the  treasurers  would  hardly  have  failed  to  supply  the  Levites  ;
or  if  these  had  proved  unfaithful  (as  seems  hinted  in  ver.  13),  the  people  could  surely
have  secured  the  substitution  of  others.  6.  Probably  the  worldliness  of  the  Levites
themselves.  If  their  hearts  had  been  in  their  work  it  is  likely  they  would  have  found
means  of  continuing  in  it.  A  general  declension  had  evidently  taken  place,  and  the
various  classes  would  act  and  react  on  each  other  to  increase  the  degeneracy  of  all.

III.  Its  correction.  Nehemiah — 1.  Remonstrated  with  the  rulers.  2.  Gathered
and  reinstated  the  Levites.  3.  Restored  the  general  payment  of  tithes  and  offerings.
4.  Appointed  as  treasurers  men  pi  good  repute,  to  receive  the  contributions  of  the
people,  and  thence  "distribute  unto  their  brethren."

IV.  Nehemiah's  prayer  thereupon.  Is  expressive  of — 1.  Satisfaction  with  his
work.    Could  think  of  it  before  God  as  an  evidence  of  M»  lore  for  God's  house.    3,

nehemiah.  I>


146  .  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  xiii.  1—31

Confident  expectation  of  Divine  recognition,  acceptance,  and  recompense  of  his  work.
He  could  expect  little  of  these  from  the  men  whose  disorders  he  had  corrected.
Enough  if  God  approved.  3.  Humility.  "  Wipe  not  out,'' &c.,  as  he  felt  might  justly
be  done.  Comp.  ver.  22 :  "  Spare  me  according  to  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy."  To
interpret  these  appeals  to  God  as  "prayer  for  posthumous  fame  "  (Stanley,  '  Jewish
Church,'  iii.  p.  135)  is  surely  to  miss  their  meaning.

In  conclusion,  notice — 1.  The  duty  of  zealously  maintaining  the  puhlic  worship  of
God.  All  combining  according  to  their  ability.  Some  ministering,  others  contributing
money  or  money's  worth  ;  some  faithfully  using  their  talent  for  management,  others
exercising  their  authority  to  correct  abuses  and  reprove  negligence.  Those  who  love
God's  house  will  deem  such  services  a  privilege  and  honour.  Those  who  withhold .
support  deserve  reproof,  and  have  no  right  to  complain  of  defective  ministrations.
"  A  scandalous  maintenance  makes  a  scandalous  ministry."  2.  The  Divine  recog-
nition and  reward  of  practical  love  to  the  house  of  God.  3.  The  worth  to  a  Church
of  able,  devoted,  and  noble-minded  leaders.

Ver.  11. — Forsaking  the  liouse  of  God.  "Why  is  the  house  of  God  forsaken?''
The  question  addressed  by  Nehemiah  to  the  rulers  may  well  have  had  respect  at  once
to  their  own  neglect,  the  withholding  of  contributions  by  the  people,  and  the  conse-
quent abandonment  of  the  temple  by  the  Levites.  We  may  apply  it  to  the  neglect
to  attend  and  support  public  worship  by  a  large  proportion  of  the  population  of  our
country.     It  is —

I.  A  QUESTION  FOB  MINISTERS.  They  have  the  greatest  power  to  attract  to,  or  repel
from,  the  house  of  God.  Let  them  ask  whether  the  house  of  God  may  not  be  forsaken
on  account  of  defects  in — 1.  Their  preaching.  Let  them  consider  whetheritis  what
it  ought  to  be  in — (1)  Substance.  Consisting  of  the  presentation  of  the  great  truths
of  the  gospel  in  their  varied  application  to  the  spiritual  needs  of  men.  (2)  Intelli-
gence. Addressing  itself  to  the  understanding  as  well  as  to  the  feelings.  Not  mere
dogmatic  utterance,  unaccompanied  by  reasons.  (3)  Intelligibility.  Not  obscure
through  the  efEort  to  seem  intellectual  or  original.  (4)  Adaptation.  Suited  to  the
mental  condition  of  the  hearers  and  those  who  might  become  hearers.  (5)  Fervour.
Arising  from  sincere  love  to  Christ  and  men,  and  desire  to  do  good.  2.  Their  con-
duct Inconsistencies  of  character,  indolence,  self-indulgence,  unapproachableness,
priestly  pretensions,  airs  of  infallible  authority,  mercenariness,  all  tend  to  alienate
the  people  from  the  sanctuary.  Neglect  of  pastoral  visitation,  whether  through  in-
difference, or  indolence,  or  preference  for  other  pursuits,  or  being  too  much  occupied
with  the  business  of  religion,  may  have  a  like  effect.  Or  people  may  feel  no  interest
in  ministers  and  their  teaching  because  ministers  show  no  interest  in  their  general
well-being.

II.  A  QUESTION  FOB  CONGREGATIONS.  Defects  in  those  who  do  attend  Divine  service
may  have  much  to  do  with  the  absence  of  others.  Let  them  consider  whether  they
are  wanting  in — 1.  Due  support  and  encouragement  of  their  ministers.  Pecuniary
support ;  sympathy  and  co-operation  in  efforts  for  the  good  of  those  without ;
encouragement  of  a  style  of  preaching  adapted  to  interest  them ;  avoidance  of  unne-
cessary demands  on  the  time  and  strength  of  their  pastors.  A  minister's  power  of
usefulness  depends  largely  on  the  temper  and  conduct  towards  him  of  his  congrega-
tion. 2.  Care  to  make  the  Services  attriictive.  By  due  attention  to  the  building,  the
singing,  &c.  3.  Provision  of  sufficient  and  suitable  accommodation.  4.  Efforts  to
induce  the  neglecters  of  public  worship  to  attend.  6.  Hearty  welcome  of  those  who  are
induced  to  attend.  6.  A  hf  e  fitted  to  recommend  religion.  In  their  general  conduct.
In  their  famffies.  In  their  relations  to  those  around,  as  merchants,  tradesmen,
employers  of  labour,  &c.     In  the  Church  :  unity,  peace,  earnestness.

III.  A  QUESTION  FOE  THOSE  WHO  NEGLECT  PUBLIC  WORSHIP.  1.  Partially,  Why  not
regular  and  constant  in  attendance  ?  If  attendance  be  a  duty  at  all,  it  must  be  a  duty
to  be  regular.  If  occasional  attendance  be  good,  constant  would  be  better.  Irregu-
larity reveals  want  of  religious  principle  in  the  matter,  and  that  no  spiritual  profit  has
yet  been  received  by  attendance.  It  discourages  ministers  and  congregations,  hinders
the  salvation  of  those  >!vho  are  guilty  of  it,  injures  their  families,  and  sets  an  evil
•zample.     2.  Wholly.  Why  do  you  forsake  the  house  of  God  ?     Is  it  that  you  feel


OH,  XIII.  1—81.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  147

no  interest  in  what  is  said  and  done  there  ?  This  reveals  a  state  of  heart  deplorable
and  perilous  ;  alienation  from  God,  indifference  to  your  highest  welfare,  unfitness  for
heaven.  Is  it  that  you  prefer  the  society  and  habits  of  the  ungodlyj  or  fear  their
ridicule  ?  But  will  you  sacrifice  your  souls  to  them  ?  Can  you  think  with  pleasure
of  sharing  their  future  lot  ?  Is  it  that,  wearied  with  the  toils  of  the  week,  you  think
yourself  entitled  to  spend  the  Lord's  day  in  idle  repose  ?  Its  hours  are  sufScient  for
both  rest  and  public  worship,  and  the  engagements  of  God's  house  are  themselves
restful.  Is  it  that  you  dislike  some  who  attend  Divine  worship,  or  think  theiri  to  be
hypocrites  ?  But,  supposing  you  to  be  right  in  your  judgment,  you  ought  not  to
condemn  and  separate  from  all  on  account  of  the  faults  of  a  few ;  and  their  wrong
conduct  in  one  direction  is  no  excuse  for  your  going  wrong  in  another ;  and  if  sincere
in  worship,  you  will  be  blessed,  whatever  becomes  of  them.  Do  you  say  that  you
can  read  your  Bible  and  worship  God  at  home  ?  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  you  do  ;  but
if  it  were  to  good  purpose,  you  would  surely  value  the  exercises  of  public  worship,
and  the  opportunities  and  helps  which  it  affords.  Do  consider  anew  the  reasons  for
not  forsaking  God's  house.  (1)  The  claims  and  commands  of  God.  (2)  The  needs
and  worth  of  your  souls.  (3)  The  good  of  j'our  families.  (4)  Tlie  good  of  society,
BO  largely  promoted  by  public  worship  and  instruction.  (5)  The  account  you  must
give  hereafter  to  God,  and  the  awful  issues  in  eternity  of  a  godless  life.

Vers.  15—22. — Sahhath-hreahing  suppressed.  A  promise  to  observe  the  sabbath
was  one  of  the  articles  of  the  solemn  covenant  recorded  in  ch.  x.  Wq  read  here
how  it  was  violated  by  some  of  the  people,  and  how  Nehemiah  put  a  stop  to  their
practices.

I.  The  pbofanation  of  the  sabbath  which  pbevailed.  1.  Among  country  Jews
(ver.  15).  Nehemiah,  visiting  the  country,  saw  the. people  labouring  as  on  other
days,  and  bringing  their  produce  to  Jerusalem  for  sale.  That  they  actually  sold  it
on  the  sabbath  does  not  appear.  The  concluding  sentence  of  ver.  15  seems  to  imply
that  they  did  not  (see  Bertheau  in  loc).  But  they  disobeyed  the  law  by  working
themselves,  and  compelling  their  beasts  of  burden  to  work.  2.  Among  residents  at
Jerusalem.  Tynans  dwelt  there  who  traded  in  fish  and  other  articles,  and  they
carried  on  their  business  on  the  sabbath  as  on  other  days,  the  Jews  encouraging  the
forbidden  traffic  by  their  purchases.  Both  violated  the  law;  for  the  foreigner  living
amongst  the  Israelites  was  expressly  named  in  it  (Exod.  xx.  10).

II.  The  measures  by  which  Nehemiah  put  an  end  to  it.  1.  He  rebuked
offenders.  He  visited  the  market  when  the  country  people  were  selling  their
produce,  and  rebuked  them  (ver.  15).  He  remonstrated  with  the  nobles,  who  ought
to  have  prevented  the  profanation  (vers.  17,  18),  charging  them  with  doing  what
was  done  through  their  connivance,  reminding  them  of  the  evil  which  such  sins  had
brought  heretofore  on  the  nation,  and  warning  them  that  renewed  transgression  was
likely  to  bring  down  fresh  punishment.  He  probably  had  Jer.  xvii.  21 — 27  in  his
mind.  2.  He  had  the  gates  kept  closed  during  the  whole  of  the  sabbath,  placing
some  of  his  own  servants  as  guards.  Not  to  prevent  all  ingress  and  egress,  but
"  that  there  should  no  burden  be  brought  in  on  the  sabbath  day  "  (ver.  19).  3.  He
threatened  with  punishment  the  dealers  who  persisted  in  lodging  near  the  wall
during  the  sabbath,  and  thus  brought  the  practice  to  an  end.  While  it  lasted  the
Jews  would  be  tempted  to  make  purchases  on  the  sabbath ;  and  if  not,  yet  the  thing
was  unseemly.  4.  He  appointed  Levites  as  permanent  guards  of  the  gates  on  the
sabbath,  bidding  them  purify  themselves  as  for  a  holy  service  before  taking  their
posts.

III.  His  satisfaction  with  his  wokk.  Addressing  himself  to  God  as  on  former
occasions  (see  on  ver.  14,  and  ch.  v.  19),  praying  as  before  that  he  would  remember
him  and  his  work ;  but  more  humbly  than  before  appealing  to  the  Divine  mercy.
In  conclusion — 1.  To  promote  the  due  observance  of  the  sabbath  is  a  work  both  of
piety,  benevolence,  and  patriotism.  2.  Those  who  have  the  right  and  the  power  to
suppress  evil  practices,  yet  permit  them,  are  partakers  of  their  guilt  (ver.  17).
3.  The  punishment  of  others  for  sins  should  deter  us  from  committing  them  (ver,
18).  If,  instead  of  this,  we  follow  the  example  of  sinners,  we  must  share  theij
doom.


148  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  xni.  1—31.

Vers.  23 — 29.  — Forbidden,  marriages.  This  chapter  might  have  been  written  to
bring  into  pointed  contrast  the  promises  of  the  people  (ch.  z.)  and  their  subsequent
practice.  In  nearly  every  particular  the  covenant  so  solemnly  made  was  broken.
We  have  recorded  in  this  paragraph—

I.  A  GBEAT  EVIL.  1.  Marriages  with  foreign  women.  It  is  probable  that  ths
Jews  referred  to  here  lived  near  the  territories  occupied  by  the  peoples  from  whom
they  took  wives.  Marriage  with  such  was  expressly  forbidden  by  the  law  (Exod.
zzxiv.  16 ;  Deut.  vii.  3,  4),  and  tended  to  destroy  the  distinctive  character  of  the
people  as  "holy  to  the  Ijord,"  and  to  frustrate  the  purposes  of  their  national  calling.
Borne  of  the  marriages  in  this  case  were  specially  criminal,  since  Jewish  wives  had
been  divorced  that  heathens  might  take  their  place  (Mai.  ii.  11 — 16).  2.  The  effect
of  these  upon  the  children.  They  learned  the  language  o£  their  respective  mothers,
and  were  ignorant  of  the  Jewish  tongue.  Or  the  meaning  may  be  that  they  spoke  a
corrupt  dialect  compounded  of  the  languages  of  father  and  mother.

II.  The  coubsb  taken  by  Nehemiah  to  suppress  it.  1.  He  rebuked  the  offenders,
pronouncing  a  curse  upon  them.  2.  He  administered  to  them  an  oath  not  to  con-
tinue the  forbidden  practice.  3.  He  reasoned  with  them.  (1)  As  to  the  sinfulness
of  tlie  practice  (ver.  27).  (2)  As  to  the  peril  of  it  (ver.  26).  This  he  showed  by
the  example  of  Solomon,  who,  although  so  great  and  so  beloved  of  God,  was  led
into  idolatry  by  his  foreign  wives.  Enlightenment  and  conviction  on  these  points
would  be  more  effectual  in  putting  a  stop  to  the  practice  than  chastisement,  or  even
the  oath  furced  on  them.

III.  Nbremiah's  special  treatment  of  an  offindino  priest  (vers.  28,  29).
Although  he  was  grandson  to  the  high  priest,  yet  because  he  had  married  a  daughter
of  Sanballat,  who  was  not  only  a  foreigner,  but  a  bitter  enemy  of  Israel — 1.  He
banished  him  from  his  presence,  perhaps  from  Jerusalem,  or  even  the  Jewish  com-
munity. 2.  He  appealed  to  God  to  punish  him  and  his  supporters  or  companions
in  sin.  The  tone  of  this  appeal  seems  to  favour  the  view  that,  owing  to  ms  high
connections,  or  perhaps  because  the  civil  governor  did  not  think  it  expedient  to  inter-
fere with  the  internal  discipline  of  the  priesthood,  Nehemiah  felt  he  could  only
forbid  the  offender's  presence  near  himself,  leaving  his  due  punishment,  and  that  of
his  favourers,  to  God.  That  they  merited  severer  punishment  than  others  who  had
similarly  broken  the  law,  Nehemiah  intimates  when  he  says,  "  They  have  defiled  the
priesthood,"  &c.

Lessons : — 1.  The  evil  of  marriages  between  such  as  are  and  such  as  art  not  God's
people.  (1)  They  are  contrary  to  the  Christian  law  (1  Cor.  vii.  39 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  14).
(2)  They  are  incompatible  with  the  closest  union  and  communion.  Difference  in
some  respects  may  promote  union ;  but  serious  difference  on  a  matter  so  vital  and
all-pervading  as  religion  must  constantly  hinder  fellowship  of  heart  and  unity  of
purpose.  (3)  They  are  dangerous  to  the  soul  (ver.  26).  The  influence  of  wedded
life  in  making  the  two  like  each  other  will  more  probably  operate  to  injure  piety  in
the  one  than  to  implant  it  in  the  other.  The  words  of  Tennyson  are  Ukely  in  tlJa
■ense  to  be  fulfilled  in  whichever  of  the  parties  is  the  better  at  first  i—

"  Thou  shalt  lower  to  his  level  day  by  day,
'What  is  fine  within  thee  gromng  coarse  to  sympathise  vith  eky.
As  the  husband  is,  the  wife  is :  thou  art  mated  witii  a  clown.
And  the  grossness  of  his  nature  will  have  weight  to  drag  thee  down."

(4)  They  prevent  consistent  family  government.  (6)  They  operate  to  the  seriouB
injury  of  the  children  (ver.  24),  and  thus  frustrate  one  Divinely-ordained  end  of
matrimony  (see  Mai.  ii.  15).  (6)  On  these  and  other  accoimts  they  prevent  the
highest  and  purest  happiness  of  married  life.  2.  The  use  to  be  made  of  the  falls  of
others  (ver.  26).  Some  quote  the  sins  of  such  men  as  David,  Solomon,  Peter,  &c.
as  excusing  or  palliating  their  own.  The  very  opposite  is  lie  fact.  With  such
beacons  our  guilt  is  increased,  if  we  fall  in  like  manner.  8.  The  greater  guilt  of
some  men's  sins  (ver.  29).  Professed  special  consecration  to  God  increases  guilt.
Sins  in  ministers  of  religion  are  not  only  more  injurious  to  others,  but  more  wicked
in  Uiemselves.     4.  The  certainty  of  the  Divine  punishment  of  linneis,  thouj^h  the/


OB.  xin.  i— 31.]  i-HB  BOOK  OF  NEHEMlifi.  149

escape  the  human  (ver.  29).  5.  The  worth  of  those  who  are  zealous  in  opposing
and  suppressing  sin.  They  are  among  the  best  of  patriots  and  philanthropists.  For
the  perils  of  states,  and  the  miseries  of  men  in  general,  arise  mainly  from  sin.
How  surpassingly  worthy  then  of  all  praise  and  love  is  the  Son  of  God,  who  "was
manifested  to  take  away  our  sina"  and  "destroy  the  works  of  the  devil"  (1  John
iii.  fi,  8).

Vers.  30,  31. — N'ehemiah :  his  character  and  voorks.  In  these  words  Nehemiah
briefly  recalls  the  services  he  had  recently  rendered  to  the  community,  concluding
with  one  more  prayer  that  God  would  remember  him.  We  may  suitably  conclude
with  a  more  general  survey  of  his  character  and  works. .

I.  His  ceaeacteb.  His  natural  abilities  were  of  a  superior  order :  his  sagacity,
forethought,  power  of  organisation  and  management,  warmth  of  feeling,  power  to
inspire  and  rule  others,  calm  consideration  in  laying  his  plans,  vigour  and  aetermin7
ation  in  executing  them,  &c.  But  in  a  homily  we  think  rather  of  the  moral  and
spiritual.  The  narrative  presents  him  to  us  as  eminent  for — 1.  Piety.  This  was  at
the  basis  of  his  character,  and  guided  and  animated  his  whole  life.  It  appears  in  his —
(1)  Habitual  prayerfulness.  From  first  to  last  this  is  conspicuous  (ch.  i.  4 ;  ii.  4 ;
iv.  4,  9;  V.  19;  vi.  9,  14;  xiii.  14,  22,  29,  31).  "In  everything  by  prayer  and
supplication  "  he  made  his  requests  "  known  unto  God  "  (Phil.  iv.  6).  (2)  Practical
fear  of  God  (ch.  v.  15).  (3)  Love  for  God's  house  and  its  services  (ch.  xiii.  14,
and  elsewhere).  (4)  Reverence  for  his  law,  and  desire  to  bring  all  into  harmony  with
it.  (5)  Confidence  in  God  (ch.  ii.  20 ;  iv.  14,  20) — a  confidence,  however,  which  did
not  produce  negligence  in  counsel  or  action,  but  stimulated  to  both.  (6)  Recognition
of  God's  hand  in  all  his  successes  (ch.  ii.  8,  12,  18;  iv.  15 ;  vi.  16).  Appointed  the
praise  of  God  as  the  principal  part  of  the  dedication  of  the  wall  (ch.  xii.  27,  seq.).
2.  Patriotism.  An  ardent  longing  for  the  welfare  of  Israel,  and  willingness  to  do
and  endure  anything  for  its  promotion  (ch.  ii.  10).  In  the  case  of  an  Israelite,  piety
and  patriotism  could  unite  in  a  degree  difficult  to  maintain  in  the  case  of  others ;  the
nation  being,  as  no  other,  God's  people,  owing  to  him  its  existence,  laws,  &c.,  and  set
apart  by  him  as  his  special  organ  and  for  his  special  praise.  3.  Disinterestedness.
Seeking  no  personal  end,  receiving  no  salary  as  governor,  but  gladly  devoting  his
own  fortune  to  the  service  of  the  people  (ch.  v.  10,  14 — 18).  4.  Impartiality.
Rebuking  wealthy  men,  rulers  and  priests,  as  freely  as  the  common  people ;  enforcing
the  rights  of  the  latter  as  zealously  as  those  of  the  former  (ch.  v.  7 — 13 ;  xiii.  11).
5.  Courage.  In  facing  difficulties  and  opposition,  and  correcting  offenders  in  high
places  (ch.  iv.  9,  tea.;  vi.  11 ;  xiii.  8, 28).  6.  Perseverance.  In  prosecuting  his  work,
and  beginning  agam  when  it  was  partially  undone  through  his  absence.

U.  The  services  he  bendebed  to  his  people.  1.  The  strengthening  of  Jerusalem.
He  saw  this  to  be  the  great  necessity  which  must  be  supplied,  if  anything  else  were
to  be  done  efEectually  and  permanently  for  the  good  of  the  nation.  To  this  end  he —
(1)  Had  the  encircling  wall  thoroughly  repaired  and  its  gates  restored.  Thus  turning
Jenisalem  into  a  strong  fortress,  and  making  it  possible  for  the  people  to  develop
into  a  nation  again.  (2)  Organised  its  forces  for  defence.  (3)  Increased  its  popula-
tion. 2.  Reformation  of  religion  and  morals.  He  sought  to  reconstitute  the  nation
on  the  basis  of  the  Divine  law.  He  believed  that  "  righteousness  exaltetb  a  nation,
but  sin  is  a  reproach  to  any  people"  (Prov.  xiv.  34).  He  therefor6^(l)  Suppressed
extortion  and  oppression  (ch.  v.).  (2)  Separated  ttie  people  from  heathen  alliancea
and  friendships  (ver.  30,  and  elsewhere).  (3)  Promoted  the  instruction  of  the  people
in  God's  word  (ch.  viii.,  &c.).  (4)  Resuscitated  the  great  religious  festivals.  (5)  Led
the  people  to  confession  of  sin  and  renewal  of  their  covenant  with  God  (chs.  ix.,  x.).
(6^  Reorganised  the  services  of  the  temple.  (7)  Revived  the  payment  of  tithes  and
other  offerings  for  the  support  of  its  ministers.  (8)  Maintained  its  sanctity  (ch.  xiii.
8,  9).  (9)  Enforced  the  law  for  the  observance  of  the  sabbath  (vers.  13—22).
Altogether  a  remarkable  man,  raised  up  by  God  at  a  critical  period  to  do  a  great
work  for  Israel,  and,  through  that  nation,  for  mankind.  Let  us — (1)  Glorify  God  in
him.  (2)  Imitate  him  so  far  as  our  abilities  and  opportunities  allow,  and  so  far  ai
is  consistent  with  the  more  spiritual  system  under  which  God  has  placed  us.  (3)  Pray
God  to  raise  up  many  such  men  for  his  service  at  home  and  abroad.


1«0  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  [ch.  xiii.  1—31.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS,

Vers.  1 — 31. — The  hlesdng  of  God  on  an  active  life  fovMded  upon  hiinord.  I.
The  trttb  religious  ebfoemation,  both  negative  and  positive.  1.  Abuses  must
be  vigorously  attacked  and  cleansed  away.  The  house  of  God  has  to  be  purified  ol
strangers.  The  neglect  of  discipline  a  terrible  evil.  Unfaithful  ministers  the  cnne
of  the  Church.  The  "  mixed  multitude  "  is  no  strength  to  Jerusalem,  but  weakness.
The  observance  of  the  sabbath.  To  the  Jew  a  typical  comrSandment,  which  repre-
sented obedience  altogether.  While  days  cannot  possess  the  same  place  under  the
new  dispensation,  there  is  guardianship  of  the  day  of  rest  which  is  absolutely  neces-
sary for  the  life  of  religion.  In  all  active  efforts  of  reformation  personal  caprice  and
mere  self-assertion  must  be  renounced.  The  open  Bible  must  be  the  strong  basis  of
operations,  the  unfailing  armoury  from  which  the  weapons  are  taken.  On  that  simply
dependent,  the  true  reformer  can  be  bold,  energetic,  uncompromising,  intolerant  of
evil,  driving  out  the  violators  of  God's  law  and  defilers  of  his  temple.  We  have  a
great  example  of  consuming  zeal  in  the  Lord  himself.  2.  All  really  religions  reform-
ation will  be  constructive  as  well  as  destructive.  The  evil  driven  away  will  come
back  finding  ' '  the  house  empty  and  garnished  "  unless  it  be  possessed  by  the  spirit  of
active  obedience.  The  only  principle  upon  which  we  can  keep  out  abuse  is  that  of
the  right  use  of  the  things  before  abused.  This  applies  to  the  service  of  God's  house,
to  the  observance  of  the  sabbath,  and  to  the  purity  of  communion  among  God's  people.
Nehemiah  re-established  the  true  order  of  religious  life.  The  safety  of  the  Church
lies  in  its  activity  and  development  according  to  the  word  of  God.  All  living  growth
is  defence  against  attack  and  decay.

II.  The  teub  memorial  before  God  and  man.  "  Remember  me,  Lord,  forgood."
1.  We  should  cast  ourselves  on  the  faithfulness  of  Gtid.  Men  forget  one  another.
God  rewards  his  servants.  2.  To  hold  a  place  among  the  honoured  names  of  God's
word,  to  be  in  the  line  of  the  great  succession,  is  more  than  all  that  this  world  can
offer  us.  3.  God's  blessing  descends  to  future  generations.  We  build  a  monument
in  the  characters  and  lives  of  those  we  leave  behind  us. — B.

Vers.  1 — ^9. — Beading,  obeying,  suffering,  &c.  These  verses  record  two  cleansings
— ^the  one  of  the  congregation,  and  the  other  of  the  sanctuary  of  the  Lord  ;  the  one
by  the  people,  and  the  other  by  a  single  servant  of  Jehovah.  Taking  them  together,
we  learn —

I.  That  the  Bible  bhoitld  be  read  with  a  special  view  to  its  bearing  on  our
OWN  lives  (ver.  1).  "  On  that  day  they  read  in  the  book  of  Moses,  ....  and  therein
was  found  written  that  the  Ammonite  and  the  Moabite  should  not  come  into  the  con-
gregation of  God  for  ever ; "  .  .  .  and  "  when  they  had  heard  the  law  they  separated,"
&c.  (vers.  1,  3).  The  Israelites  listened  not  only  to  understand  and  admire  and  be
moved  vrith  ]oy  and  gladness,  but  to  learn  what  tliey  should  do,  that  they  might  con-
form more  perfectly  to  the  will  of  God.  We  may  read  our  Bible  from  (1)  the
antiquarian  point  of  view,  or  (2)  the  poetical,  or  (3)  the  professional,  or  (4)  per-
functorily, as  a  part  of  the  day's  routine ;  but  we  shall  not  have  treated  it_  as  it
deserves  to  be  treated,  as  its  Divine  Author  would  have  us  use  it,  as  our  own  spiritual
necessities  demand  that  it  should  be  approached,  unless  we  come  to  it  in  the  spirit  of
those  old  words,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  We  must  study  it
devoutly,  to  learn  what  there  is  in  us  to  be  uprooted,  ahovi  us  to  be  avoided,  albsemt
from  us  to  be  implanted  and  cultivated.

II.  Thai  plain  duty,  however  painful,  must  be  done  forthwith  (vers.  3, 7, 8,  9).
It  is  very  soon  told  that  "  it  came  to  pass  when  they  had  heard  the  law  that  they
separated  from  Israel  all  the  mixed  multitude."  But  the  act  of  separation,  of  expul-
sion, must  have  been  an  exceedingly  painful  one.  The  "  mixed  multitude  "  must  have
been  closely  allied  to  and  inwoven  with  "  the  congregation,"  and  there  must  have
heen  great  rents  and  gaps  made  in  families  and  connections  and  friendships  for  this
excommunication  to  be  thoroughly  carried  out.  When,  too,  Nehemiah  returned  from
Babylon,  and  found  the  house  of  the  Lord  used  for  an  enemy's  storehouse,  it  must
have  "  grieved  him  sore  "  (ver.  8),  not  only  to  find  this  fact  in  existence,  but  also  to


OH.  xm  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  161

have  to  put  himself  into  direct  antagonism  with  the  high  priest,  and  to  reflect  so  sternly
on  his  conduct  as  he  did  (vers.  8,  9).  So  Paul  must  have  been  troubled  to  withstand
Peter  to  the  face  (Gal.  ii.  11),  and  we  know  how  "  out  of  much  afBiction  and  anguish
of  heart "  he  wrote  "  with  many  tears  "  a  letter  of  reproach  to  the  Church  at  Corinth
(2  Cor.  ii.  4).  We  are  told  that  we  are  to  deal  tenderly  and  graciously  with  ofEend-
ers ;  those  who  are  spiritual  restoring  such  "  in  the  spirit  of  meekness  (GaL  vi.  1);
but  when  the  integrity,  the  purity,  the  reputation  of  the  family,  the  Church,  the  society
absolutely  demand  severe  measures,  we  must  take  them.  We  should  in  such  cases
act,  (1)  where  possible,  after  remonstrance  and  giving  opportunity  for  repentance ;
(2)  with  all  possible  regard  to  wounded  feelings ;  (3)  with  manifest  attention  to  the
directions  of  Scripture ;  (4)  thoroughly  and  speedily,  lest  slackness  or  delay  should
do  as  much  harm  as  entire  unfaithfulness.

III.  That  sin  has  far-heaching  conseqitenoes  in  its  tbain.  There  was  written
in  the  law  "  that  the  Ammonite  and  the  Moabite  should  not  come  into  the  congregation
of  God  for  ever,"  &c.  (vers.  1,  2).  Thereis  nothing  so  cruel  in  the  end  as  undue  leniency
in  the  presence  of  sin ;  there  is  nothing  so  kind  and  wise,  all  things  considered,  as
the  manifestation  of  "  righteous  indignation  "  against  iniquity.  God  s  revealed  anger
at  the  transgressions  of  his  people  was  one  side  of  his  mercy — the  less  pleasant  to
our  view,  but  not  the  less  necessary  for  our  redemption.  Hence,  among  other  things,
his  severity  and  apparent  harshness.  Hence  such  an  act  of  judgment  as  this  against
the  Ammonite.  An  act  of  inhospitality,  and  then  of  seductive  treachery,  done  a
thousand  years  before,  leading  to  exclusion  from  privilege  now  1  What  a  long  train
of  consequences  has  sin  1  How  far  in  its  injurious  results  may  one  guilty  action
reach  I

"  Oh,  mortal  man,  beware
Lest  one  wrong  act  should  bring  an  age  of  care  t "

IV.  That  individual  men  have  a  great  and  grave  poweb  fob  good  ahd  evil
(vers.  4,  6,  8,  9).  One  man,  the  high  priest,  had  very  gravely  compromised  the  people
by  admitting  Tobiah,  the  enemy,  to  a  chamber  of  the  house  of  the  Lord,  It  is  impos-
sible to  say  how  much  evil  might  not  have  arisen  from  this  foolish  step  had  not
Nehemiah  come  in  time  to  take  effective  action  against  it.  But  it  is  not  every
Eliashib  who  has  a  Nehemiah  to  correct  his  follies  and  save  his  country  from  their
consequences.  One  man  in  high  ofSce,  or  with  great  faculties,  or  with  peculiar  charms,
may  commit  a  large  body  of  people  to  folly  and  sin,  and  may  bring  down  on  their
head  saddest  visitations.  On  the  other  hand,  one  wise  and  strong  man,  acting  ener-
getically, may  do  as  Nehemiah  did — "  oast  forth  "  the  evil  (ver.  8),  and  ■'  cleanse  the
chambers,"  and  restore  sacred  places  to  a  sacred  use  (ver.  9).  Exalted  station  is
much  coveted  by  men,  but  it  has  grave  responsibilities  attached  to  it  by  God,  We
may  be  well  content  to  be  without  its  burden  of  obligation  ;  or  if,  in  God's  provi-
dence, that  should  rest  on  us,  it  becomes  our  duty  prayerfully  and  earnestly  to  rise
to  the  height  of  our  opportunity,  and  dedicate  it  to  the  service  of  our  God  and  our
race. — C.

..^

Vers.  10 — 14. — Practical  Christian  wisdom.  Nehemiah  must  have  been  shocked
indeed  to  find  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem  (ver.  7)  what  a  sad  relapse  had  taken  place
during  his  absence  from  the  city.  Most  painful  of  all  must  it  have  been  to  him  to
find  that  the  service  of  Jehovah  in  his  own  house  had  been  so  scandalously  neglected.
He  found  not  only  that  chambers  of  the  temple  were  in  the  occupation  of  the  enemy
of  the  people  of  God  (ver.  7),  but  that,  the  Levites  being  scattered  abroad,  because
their  portion  had  been  withheld  (ver.  10),  the  house  of  God  was  forsaken  (ver  11).
We  gather  from  the  whole  incident  recorded  in  vers.  10 — 14 —

I.  That  matebial  supplies  and  spiritual  prosperity  are  importantly  connectkb
(ver.  10).  "  The  portions  of  the  Levites  had  not  been  given  them,"  and,  consequently,
they  had  "  fled  every  one  to  his  field  "  (ver.  10).  It  may  be  open  to  question  whether
these  Levites — singers  and  other  officials — had  shown  as  much  disinterestedness  and
devotion  as  could  have  been  wished.  It  might  be  argued  that  as  servants  of  God
they  might  have  stood  at  their  posts  and  starved  rather  than  desert  the  field  of  sacred
duty.    Perhaps  if  they  had  been  some  degrees  more  heroic  than  they  were  they  would


lU  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHfiMlAH.  [ch.  xiii.  1— SI.

have  risked  and  suffered  all  privations  rather  than  forsake  their  work.  But  however
this  may  have  been,  it  is  certain  that  the  people  had  no  right  whatever  to  reckon  on
such  heroism ;  they  ought  to  have  acted  on  the  supposition  that  these  were  men  o^
average  piety,  and  that  men  of  ordinary  goodness  wiU  not  continue  to  serve  if  they
are  not  sustained  in  their  service.  The  human  nature  which  there  is  in  every  good
man — and  which  will  certainly  be  shown  in  every  class  and  order  of  good  men — is  a
factor  which  must  not  be  disregarded.  It  is  a  feature  that  must  be  taken  into
account ;  a  want  that  must  be  provided  for.  If  it  be  left  out  of  account,  then,  what-
ever the  system  or  society  may  be,  there  will  be  f  oimd,  as  here,  negligence,  desertion,
duty  undone,  God's  house  forsaken,  a  fleeing  from  the  temple  to  the  field.  Material
resources  have  their  place  in  the  prosperity  of  the  best  of  causes.

II.  That  good  men  as  well  as  good  methods  abb  necessaet  foe  lasting  sdccess.
Judging  from  the  four  concluding  verses  of  the  preceding  chapter  (xii.  44 — 47),  we
gather  that  a  very  satisfactory  system  for  receiving  and  storing  the  offerings,  and  also
for  distributing  them,  had  been  devised  and  brought  into  action.  Yet,  in  Nehemiah's
absence,  it  failed  to  effect  its  purpose.  When  he  returned  and  witnessed  the  failure,
he  immediately  (1)  set  to  work  to  reorganise:  he  "set  in  their  place  "  (ver.  11)  the
Levites,  who,  at  his  instance,  returned  to  Jerusalem,  and  he  "  made  treasurers  ovei
the  treasuries  "  (ver.  12)  ;  but  besides  this,  he  (2)  appointed  "  faithful  men  "  (ver.  12),
on  whom  reliance  could  be  placed,  to  do  the  work  they  undertook,  infusing  his  own
spirit  into  all  the  oflScers.  He  impressed  on  them  all  his  own  fervent  and  faithful
genius.  How  long  things  went  well  we  know  not,  but  Nehemiah  did  the  best  he
could  do  to  provide  for  permanent  prosperity :  he  associated  good  men  with  a  good
method.  We  should  trust  neither  to  one  nor  to  the  other.  Again  and  again  organ-
isations have  broken  down  in  the  Church  (whether  tithe-taking,  money -getting  insti-
tutions, or  others)  because,  though  the  machinery  was  excellent,  there  was  no  steam  to
work  the  wheels  ;  again  and  again  there  has  been  an  excellent  spirit,  but  all  has  failed
for  want  of  a  wise  method.  We  must  (a)  use  our  best  judgment  to  perfect  our
system,  and  (b)  pray  for,  and  look  out  for,  the  wise  and  earnest-minded  men  to
work  it.

III.  That  individual  fidelitt  will  sitrelt  meet  with  its  appkopriatb  becom-
PENSE  (vers.  13, 14).  1.  Usually  from  man.  "  I  made  treasurers . . .  Shelemiah,"  &c.:  . . .
"  for  they  were  counted  faithful."  Integrity,  diligence,  conscientiousness  will  generally
be  seen  of  man  and  receive  its  reward.  It  may  indeed  pass  unnoticed,  but  as  a  rule
it  is  recognised  and  rewarded.  Be  faithful,  and  you  will  be  "  counted  faithful,"
S.  Certainly  from  God.  "  Remember  me,  O  my  God,  concerning  this,  and  wipe  not
out  my  good  deeds,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  There  are  many  motives,  all  good,  but  some  higher
than  others,  which  should  prompt  us  to  diligent  and  faithful  labour  for  our  Lord
and  our  race.  We  may  work  in  the  vineyard  of  the  Great  Husbandman  because
(1)  he  calls  us,  and  it  is  our  bounden  duty  to  respond ;  or  because  (2)  our  zeal  is
called  forth  by  the  apparent  and  urgent  necessity  for  our  help ;  or  because  (3)  we
delight  in  holy  activity,  and  are  never  so  happy  as  when  the  weapon  of  usefiilness  is
in  our  hand  ;  or  we  may  do  so  because  (4)  we  have  "  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the
reward  " — we  crave  the  "  well  done  "  of  Christ ;  we  would  like  to  have  "  the  prophet's
reward ;  "  we  would  "  shine  as  the  stars  for  ever  ; "  we  would  "  be  remembered  by
our  God  for  good  ; "  we  would  that  he  should  "  not  wipe  out  our  good  deeds  "  (ver.  14),
but  record  them  in  his  "  book  of  remembrance ; "  and,  not  being  "  unrighteous  to  forget
our  work  and  labour  of  love  "  (Heb.  vi.  10),  reward  every  one.  according  to  his  work.
The  truest  humility  (Luke  xvii.  10)  may  characterise  the  same  disciple  that  has  the
most  earnest  aspiration  to  receive  his  Master's  commendation,  and  to  have  "  rule  given
him  over  many  things."  We  may  turn  this  prayer  into  a  prediction.  God  will  re-
member us,  and  will  suffer  nothing  to  blot  out  our  pure  endeavours  from  his  book.
We  shall  surely  meet  them  again.  Our  "  works  follow  us,"  and  will  find  us  in  hii
presence. — C,

Vers.  16—22. — The  sahhath  day.  Among  other  deplorable  departures  from  tht
law  of  the  word,  Nehemiah  found  on  his  return  to  Jerusalem  that  his  countrymen
had  fallen  into  flagrant  disregard  of  the  sabbath.  It  was  a  most  serious  defection,
demanding  a  most  vigorous  reform.    We  look  at  what  he  found  and  what  he  wrought.


OH.  XIII.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  IM

L  A  SEBI0U8  DELINQUENOT.  The  law  of  the  sabbath  (Exod.  xx.  8 — 11 ;  xxxi.  13 —
17 ;  Num.  xv.  32 — 36)  was  openly  defied.  Husbandmen  were  treading  their  wine-
presses and  were  bringing  com  into  the  city,  and  were  lading  asses  on  that  day  of
sacred  rest  (ver.  16) ;  all  kinds  of  fruit  were  also  carried  in  and  sold  (ver.  15).
Tynan  traders  were  allowed  to  bring  in  and  sell  their  fish  and  "  all  manner  of
ware  "  (ver.  16).  The  sacred  character  of  the  day  was  set  at  naught,  and  was  fast
disappearing  Persian  rulers,  Samaritan  neighbours,  Phoenician  traders,  had  prevailed
over  Jewish  principles,  and  the  sabbath  was  most  seriously  threatened.  There
needed —

II.  A  viaoROUS  REFORM.  Nehemiah  set  himself  to  change  the  whole  aspect  of
affairs.  He(l)  remonstrated  energetically — he  "contended  with  the  nobles  of  Judah"
fver.  17),  charging  them  with  bringing  this  about — "  What  evil  thing  is  this  that  ye
do  ?  " — ^by  their  guilty  connivance,  and  prophetically  threatening  them  with  the  wrath
of  God  for  their  sin  (ver.  18) ;  (2)  caused  the  gates  to  be  shut  some  time  before,  and  to
remain  shut  till  some  time  after,  the  commencement  and  conclusion  of  the  sacred  day
(ver.  19)  :  he  set  his  own  servants  (some  of  his  own  retinue),  on  whom  he  could  most
reckon,  to  see  that  this  order  was  impartially  carried  out ;  (3)  not  only  obliged  those
who  came  to  sell  to  remain  outside  all  the  day,  but  threatened  to  apprehend  them  if
they  did  this  again  (vers.  20,  21)  ;  and  (4)  enlisted  the  sympathy  and  aid  of  the
Levites,  that,  when  he  was  recalled  and  his  own  servants  were  withdrawn,  they  might
maintain  what  he  now  instituted.  These  energetic  measures  succeeded  ;  they  had  an
immediate  effect  (ver.  21),  and  they  appear  to  have  had  a  pennanent  influence,  as,
from  this  time,  we  have  reason  to  think  that  the  Jews  became  scrupulous,  even  to  a
fault,  on  this  question  of  sabbath  observance.  Nehemiah's  reform  was  admirable  and
effective  because — (a)  It  was  bold  and  impartial.  He  confronted  and  reproached  the
nobles  as  well  as  the  traders  and  salesmen.  (6)  It  was  energetic  and  full  of  action.
He  used  magisterial  rights;  not  exceeding  his  authority,  but  using  it,  and  acting
in  harmony  with  the  powers  of  his  commission  and  the  law  of  God.  (c)  It
was  anticipative  of  future  wants.  He  prepared  for  a  time  when  he  would  not
be  there,  and  when  other  men  like-minded  would  be  prepared  to  continue  his  work
(ver.  22).

Concerning  the  observance  of  the  sabbath  or  the  Lord's  day  by  ourselves,  we  may
remark  that  it  is —

I.  Obviodsly  the  will  of  God  that  we  should  keep  it.  We  know  that — 1.  It
was  sanctified  from  the  very  beginning  of  our  race  (Gen.  ii.  2,  3).  2.  It  was  included
in  the  religious  and  moral  statutes  given  by  God  to  Moses,  as  if  it  belonged  to  that
which  is  permanent  and  perpetual  (Exod.  xx.).  3.  It  was  insisted  upon  by  the  pro-
phetic voice,  and  declared  to  be  decisive  of  national  prosperity  or  decline  (Jer.
zrii.  19 — 27 ;  Isa.  Iviii.  13, 14)— the  prophets  being  the  upholders  of  the  moral  in
preference  to  the  formal  and  ceremonial.  4.  It  was  declared  by  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  to  be  "  made  for  man  "  (Mark  ii.  27).  6.  It  was  continued  in  the  shape  of  the
Lord's  day  after  the  resurrection  (Acts  xx.  7 ;  1  Cor.  zvi.  2 ;  Bev.  i.  10) ;  these
incidental  notices  pointing  to  a  general  apostolical  observance.

II.  Manifestly  requisite  fob  bodily  and  spiritual  welfabb.  1.  Bodily;  for
man  and  beast  live  longer  and  work  better  with  than  without  it.  2.  Spiritual ;  for
without  the  spiritual  refreshment  and  revival  of  sabbath  services,  more  especially  in
these  days  of  absorbing  work  and  care,  the  light  of  life  would  bum  even  more  dim  and
faint,  until  it  went  out  into  darkness.  All  those  who  hate  (spiritual)  death  may  well
love  and  guard  and  use  it  well.  Our  duty  in  regard  to  it  is — (1)  To  avail  ourselves  of
the  bodily  rest  it  brings,  and  to  see  that  others  have  the  same  advantage — our  children
resting  from  their  lessons,  servants  (domestic  and  public)  resting  from  their  .toil.
(2)  To  make  it  a  day  of  special  spiritual  privilege,  including  (a)  worship — drawing
nigh  to  God  ;  (6)  instruction — enlightenment,  edification,  the  "  beholding  the  beauty
of  the  Lord  and  inquiring  in  his  temple ; "  and  (c)  inspiration — afresh  determina-
tion, invigorated  resolution  that  as  for  us  and  our  household  we  will  serve  the  Lord
Christ— C.

Vers.  23 — 31. — Unholy  alliances  (a  lesson  for  the  young).  Beside  the  forsaking
<ff  the  bouse  of  the  Lord  conse(}uent  on  the  neglect  to  pay  tithes,  and  the  disreeaiq


164  THE  BOOK  OF  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  xin.  1—81.

of  the  sabbatb,  Nehemiah  had  to  lament  another  grave  evil  which  had  grown  up
during  his  absence  in  Persia.    In  these  verses  we  have —

I.  A  CASE  or  ALASMINQ  DEFECTION.  "  In  those  days  "  of  his  return  some  of  the
Jews  had  married  "  wives  of  Ashdod,  of  Ammon,  and  of  Moab  "  (ver.  23).  Ezra  had
encountered  the  same  evil,  and  vehemently  and  vigorously  resisted  it  (Ezra  ix.,  x.).
But  it  had  broken  out  again,  to  the  sorrow  and  dismay  of  the  faithful  leader  and
"  governor."  It  was  an  alarming  defection  because  (1)  it  was  an  act  of  downright
disobedience.  God  had  said  by  Moses,  "  Thou  shalt  not  make  marriages  with  them
(foreigners) ;  thy  daughter  thou  shalt  not  give  unto  his  son,  nor  his  daughter  shalt
thou  take  unto  thy  son  "  (Deut.  vii.  3  and  ver.  25).  The  Divine  law  was  therefore
deliberately  and  openly  defied.  What  but  the  Divine  anger  could  they  expect  to
reap  ?  More  especially  when  so  prominent  a  man  as  a  grandson  of  the  high  priest
had  wrought  this  sin  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  people,  thereby  "  defiling  the  priesthood  "
(ver.  29).  And  because  (2)  it  was  surely  conducting  to  fatal  consequences.  The
great,  the  main  mission  of  the  Jewish  nation  was  to  be  a  sanctified  or  separate  people
unto  the  Lord,  to  preserve  his  name  and  truth  intact  j  but  the  result  of  these  marriages
was  a  mongrel  race,  speaking  a  corrupt  language :  "  their  children  spake  half  in  the
speech  of  Ashdod  (Philistia),  and  could  not  speak  in  the  Jews'  language  "  (ver.  24),
Not  pnly  would  their  national  language  be  corrupted,  but  their  national  morals  and
religion  too :  they  were  on  that  downward  course  which  led  Solomon  himself,  "  beloved
of  God  "  as  he  was  (ver.  26),  to  sin  and  sorrow.  The  purity  of  their  faith  and  the
integrity  of  their  national  morality  were  seriously  at  stake.

II.  Ah  instance  of  vigoegus  coeeection.  Nehemiah  (1)  contended  with  the
delinquents  (ver.  25).  He  expostulated  and  reasoned  with  them  (vers.  26, 27)  ;  he
also  (2)  solemnly  invoked  condemnation  and  sufEering  on  them  in  the  event  of
impenitence  :  he  "  cursed  them  "  (ver.  25) ;  he  even  (3)  caused  some  of  them  to  be
punished  with  bodily  chastisement :  he  "  smote  certain  of  them  "  (ver.  25)  ;  he  (4)
summarily  dismissed  the  high  priest's  grandson  :  "  I  chased  him  from  me  "  (ver.  28) ;
he  (5)  caused  them  to  put  away  the  strange  wives  and  to  take  an  oath  not  to  con-
tinue the  offence  (vers.  26,  30).  Nehemiah  felt  that  the  danger  was  so  deadly  that
not  only  energy  and  vigour,  but  even  vehemence  and  passion,  were  justified  in  putting
it  away.  It  wrought  in  him  "  indignation,  .  .  .  vehement  desire,  .  .  .  zeal,  .  .  .
revenge,"  that  his  countrymen  might  "  be  clear  in  this  matter  '  (2  Cor.  vii.  11).

Here  is  a  very  serious  lesson  for  the  young.  They  who  are  members  of  the  Church
of  Christ  find  themselves,  like  these  Jews  at  Jerusalem,  under  a  temptation  to  an  un-
holy alliance.  The  Church  and  the  world  are  very  closely  intermingled,  locally.  They
meet  in  the  same  street,  in  the  same  shop,  under  the  same  roof.  They  who  would  not
choose  to  associate  intimately  with  those  that  are  servants  of  sin  and  sources  of  evil,
come  involuntarily  into  contact  with  companions  who  are  devoid  of  Christian  principle,
but  who  are  by  no  means  wanting  in  other  attractions.  It  may  be  personal  beauty,
or  charm  of  disposition,  or  fascination  of  manner,  or  wealth,  or  some  other  worldly
advantages  which  appeal  to  tastes  and  ambitions  that  are  not  of  the  highest  order
Here  is  temptation  to  intimate  friendship  or  even  to  lifelong  alliance.  But  let  the
young  remember  what  is  (1)  the  will  of  Christ  concerning  them.  Is  there  not  an
application  we  should  make  to  ourselves  in  the  injunction  of  the  apostle,  "  Be  ye  not
unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers  "  ?  (2  Cor.  vi.  14).  And  is  there  not  an
inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  same  writer  to  our  conduct  when  he  speaks  of  marrying
"  in  the  Lord"  ?  (1  Cor.  vii.  39).  It  is  surely  not  his  will  that  one  who  has  taken  Ms
vows  upon  him  should  enter  into  closest  and  even  lifelong  intimacy  with  another
who  has  no  interest  in  his  truth,  no  love  for  himself.  Let  them  also  remember  what
are  (2)  the  inevitable  consequences.  The  result  to  themselves  must  be  spiritual  decline.
So  was  it  with  Solomon,  leading  him  to  the  verge  of  utter  ruin,  if  not  over  the  edge,
and  into  the  gulf  of  it ;  so  has  it  been  with  many  thousands  of  the  children  of  men.
The  result  to  others  is  moral  and  spiritual  deterioration.  The  children  "  speak  half
in  the  speech  of  Ashdod  "  (ver.  24) :  they  inevitably  catch  something  of  the  tone  and
strain  of  both  parents.  Their  spirit  and  their  language,  themselves  and  their  life,
will  not  attain  to  perfect  purity;  they  will  bear  about  with  tlicm  the  mark  of  worldli-
ness.  The  consequences  of  such  union  are  evil,  and  they  are  irreparable.  The  choice
of  our  intimate  friends  and  of  aui°  one  lifelong  companion  is  much  too  lightly


OH.  xni.  1—31.]  THE  BOOK  OP  NBHBMIAH.  168

regarded.  On  our  wisdom  or  folly  here  hangs  our  weal  or  our  woe  for  life,  and  the
future  of  others  too,  even  of  those  in  whom  we  shall  be  most  deeply  interested.  If
there  be  one  step  which,  more  than  any  other,  should  be  taken  with  profound  and
protracted  care,  with  devout  and  religious  thoughtful ness,  it  is  this  step  of  choosing
our  friends,  most  particularly  the  fnend  of  the  heart  and  for  the  life.  If  we  let
humour  speak  on  this  subject,  as  we  commonly  do,  it  should  only  be  on  sufferance.
We  should  make  it  speedily  retire,  that  sound  sense,  and  solemn  consideration,  and
religious  duty  may  utter  their  voice,  and  be  obeyed. — 0.

Ver.  31  (see  also  v.  19 ;  xiii.  14,  22). — T?ie  appeal  to  God.  During  the  latter  part
of  this  book  these  words  recur  like  the  refrain  of  a  psalm.  They  are  an  appeal  to
God — an  appeal  to  Otodfrom  man.  There  is  somethmg  plaintive  as  well  as  suppli-
catory in  their  tone.     We  look  at —

I.  ThB  BnUAN  NEOLIGBNCS  OF  WHICH  THET  ARE  SUGGESTIVE.  What  I  exclaims  an
earnest  but  inexperienced  voice ;  is  it  meant  that  Nehemiah,  the  patriot  prophet,  who
ventured  bo  much  in  Persia  for  the  people  of  God  at  Jerusalem  ;  who,  in  the  teeth  of
such  dangers  and  difiScuIties,  threw  a  wall  of  protection  round  Jerusalem,  and  made
her  safe  and  strong  for  centuries  ;  who  virtually  repeopled  and  largely  rebuilt  her ;
who  reinstituted  her  sacred  feasts,  and  re-established  her  temple  worship  in  its  regu-
larity ;  who  redeemed  her  children  from  bondage ;  who  purified  her  domestic  life  ;
who  put  down  her  sabbath  desecration ;  who  refused  to  receive  fee  or  payment  for
his  services,  all  the  while  showing  a  princely  hospitality, — is  it  meant  that  he  had  to
appeal  to  God  from  the  indifference,  the  negligence  of  man  ?  Only  too  possible,  is
the  reply.  Do  we  not  remember  that  the  ancestors  of  these  Jews  wearied  of  the
faithful  Samuel,  and  preferred  the  weak  and  vacillating  Saul ;  that  Greece  had  her
Socrates  and  Aristides,  and  Borne  her  Coriolanus,  and  Spain  her  Columbus,  and  Eng-
land her  William  Tyndale  ?  Nay  I  can  we  forget  that  once  a  greater  than  Nehemiah
was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men"  ?  5iswas  despised,  and  men  esteemed  him  not.
Nehemiah,  to  be  the  builder  and  restorer  he  was,  had  to  be  an  ardent  and  energetic
reformer,  ».«.  he  had  to  come  into  sharp  collision  with  the  views  and  (what  was  more)
the  interests  of  his  contemporaries,  and  to  challenge  and  even  denounce  their  doings.
These  words, "  Bemember  me,  my  God,"  follow  his  record  of  the  vigorous  part  he  took
in  the  matters  of  (1)  usury  (ch.  v.)  ;  (2)  the  non-payment  of  tithes  (vers.  10 — 14) ;  (3)
sabbath  desecration  (vers.  15 — 22) ;  (4)  the  work  of  cleansing  (ver.  30).  They  speak
of  coldness,  of  suspicion,  of  disregard,  of  backbiting,  on  the  part  of  some,  if  not  many,
of  those  he  sought  to  serve.  The  strain  is  this :  This  people  are  overlooking  my
work  for  them,  forgetting  the  sacrifices  I  have  made,  not  sparing  me  their  reproaches.
Bemember  THOU  me,  0  God,  for  good ;  wipe  not  thou  out  my  good  deeds,  spare  thou
me  in  the  greatness  of  thy  mercy. ,  We  must  not  enter  the  field  of  Christian  work
only,  or  chiefly,  for  what  man  will  give  us  as  the  reward  of  our  labour.  If  we  do,
we  may  be  miserably  disappointed  ;  we  may  reap  more  tares  than  wheat  in  the
harvest-time  ;  we  may  find  more  thistles  on  the  ground  than  fruits  on  the  tree  ;  we
may  be  like  the  Master,  who  had  the  crown  of  thorns  pressed  on  his  bleeding  brow
instead  of  the  crown  of  honour  laid  lovingly  on  his  head.  It  is  not  for  us  to  "  covet
earnestly  "  the  smile  or  praise  or  recompense  of  man.  Doubtless  it  ought  to  be  given
in  response  to  faithful  work ;  it  is  better  both  for  him  that  gives,  as  well  as  for  him
that  receives,  that  it  should  be  given  ;  but  as  those  that  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
as  those  that  follow  the  Son  of  man,  we  must  be  prepared  to  do  without  these  things.
And  we  can  afEord  to  do  so,  if  needful,  for  there  remains —

II.  The  Divinb  faithfulness  on  which  these  words  are  based.  "  Think  upon
me,  my  God,  for  good,  according  to  all  that  I  have  done  "  (ver.  19).  But  dare  we
ask  God  to  think  on  us  according  to  what  we  have  done  ?  For  him  to  deal  with  ug
after  our  actions  and  to  reward  us  according  to  our  doings,  is  not  this  for  him  to  deal
with  us  after  our  sins  and  reward  us  according  to  our  iniquities  ?  Dare  we,  sinners,
make  our  appeal  to  the  God  of  righteousness  ?  Must  we  not  address  ourselves  to  him
us  the  God  of  mercy,  who  does  pass  by,  blot  out,  "  remember  no  more  "  the  things  we
had  thought  and  said  and  done  ?  Truly  ;  yet  this  doctrine  of  grace  and  the  doctrine
that  God  will  reward  those  who  try  to  please  and  honour  him  stand  well  together.
So  Nehemiah  felt ;  for  while  asking  God  to  remember  him  for  "  this  also  "  (this  good


IK  THE  BOOK  OP  NEHEMIAH.  [oh.  xra.  1— SI.

deed),  he  asks  him  to  "  spare  him  according  to  the  greatness  of  his  mercy  "  (ver.  22).
So  Paul  felt ;  for  while  speaking  of  those  who  "  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing
■eek  for  glory,  honour,  and  immortality,"  &o.  (Bom.  ii.  7),  he  speaks  of  "  counting
all  things  but  dung  to  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  him,  not  having  his  own  righteous-
ness "  (Phil.  iii.  8,  9).  The  full  truth  on  this  subject  is  that  (1)  God's  general
acceptance  or  condemnation  of  us  at  the  last  will  turn  on  our  acceptance  or  rejection
of  Jesus  Christ  in  this  life,  but  that  (2)  the  character  of  his  approval  and  the  measure
of  his  award  will  depend  on  the  kind  of  Christian  life  we  shall  have  lived.  There
will  be  an  acceptance  which  will  simply  be  a  not  being  condemned,  a  "  being  saved
as  by  fire,"  and  there  will  be  a  cordial,  hearty,  emphatic  "Well  done."  There  will
be,  for  some,  fewer  cities  and  narrower  spheres ;  for  others,  more  cities  and  broader
spheres  over  which  to  rule.  Many  Christians  live  in  practical  forgetf ulness  of  this,
and  make  no  effort  to  win  a  cordial  approval  and  a  large  reward.  Hence  their
Christian  life  is  (a)  indulgent,  (6)  negligent,  (c)  idle  and  unfruitful.  Others,  happily,
are  wiser  than  they.  To  such  we  say,  Be  faithful  in  every  good  word  and  work,  like
Nehemiah,  and  you  may  make  a  confident  appeal  to  God  for  recognition,  remembrance,
recompense.  Do  not  look  anxiously  about  you  for  man's  smile,  but  do  look  earnestly
tUfove  you  for  Christ's  approval,  and  beyond  you  for  his  reward.  Do  not  think  it
wrong  to  gain  incentive  and  inspiration  from  the  hope  of  recompense  because  that
may  not  be  the  very  highest  motive.  It  is  not  wrong  to  do  so ;  it  w  wrong  not  to  do
so ;  for  Christ  calls  you  so  to  do.  He  calls  you  to  put  out  all  your  talents,  not  only
because  you  ought  to  put  them  out,  but  because,  thus  doing,  you  will  be  blessed  here-
after ;  to  run  your  race  with  patience  (perseverance),  not  only  because  you  ought  to
do  this,  but  also  that  you  may  win  the  prize.  So  bear  your  witness  bravely,  live  your
life  holily  and  blamelessly,  do  your  work  diligently  and  in  the  spirit  of  full  con-
lecration ;  be  not  dismayed,  deterred,  or  even  checked  by  tho  absence  of  man's
appreciation;  walk  with  elastic  step,  with  psalms  of  hope  upon  your  lip,  the  path
of  holy  usefulness,  because  the  Lord  your  Saviour  toill  "  remember  you  for  good  ; ''
because  he  will  not  "  wipe  out "  your  efforts,  but  write  them  in  a  book  of  remem-
brance which  no  hand  may  touch  to  blot  or  to  erase  :  because  he  will  give  you  a  larg*
nward,  "  abundance  "  o£  eternal  joy,  in  the  day  of  Lis  appearing. — (X


HOMII  ETICAL  INDEX


ID


THE   BOOK   OF   IfEHEMIAn.


CHAPTER  I.
mna

A.  Godly  Patriot's  Sorrow    ._

Love  end  Obedience  ,_

A  Godly  Patriot's  Prayer     .„

A  Powerful  Plea  with  God  .^

Delight  in  fearing  God

Piety  in  a  Palace  ...

Prosperity  and  Adversity    ._

God  imd  His  People  .«

Piety  and  Prayer  ...  .^

A  Prayer :  its  Characteristics

CHAPTER  II.
Prayer  Answered  ...
Sorrow  and  its  Consoler
Sadness,  when  and  how  far  Justifiable
Eljacniatory  Prayer
Success  ascribed  to  God
Sadness  ...
Gaining  the  Cause  ...  ...

Preparation  for  a  Great  Work  ...

Seeking  the  Welfare  of  the  Church  ...
God-given  Thoughts  and  Impulses    ...
Mutual  Encouragement
Assurance  of  Divine  Co-operation
Ungodly  Jealousy ...  ...  ...

True  Work  Divinely  Succeeded

Wise  Procedure  in  Presence  of  a  Great

Work  ...
The  Way  to  View  and  Repair  Ruined

Fortunes  .
Religion  and  Ridicule


CHAPTER  IlL

FAOC

THEUK

VAai

8

An  Honourable  Record        ...

^

80

4

Indifference  in  High  Places

r«

81

4

Family  Zeal  in  Good  Work ...

82

6

Earnest  Work

S3

6

Doing  Good  near  Home

.^

S3

6

The  Church  Engaged  in  a  Work  ol

6

Moral  Repair     ...

...

34

7

Doing  God's  Work              _

^

84

8
8

Church  Work        ...            ...

CHAPTER  IV

"•

86

11

Ridicule  of  a  Good  Work    ».

_

88

12

Despising  the  Godly            _

.».

89

19

A  Mind  to  Work  ...            _

^

40

13

Derision  and  Devotion        „.

,,

40

14

Armed  Opposition

,.,

43

15

Prayer  and  Watchfulness    ...

^..

43

16

Courage  in  the  Christian  War

...

43

19

Armed  Workers    ...

.^

44

20

Building  in  Readiness  to  Fight

...

44

21

God  Fighting  for  His  People

...

45

22

The  Wisdom  of  the  Christian  Work-

22

man  in  the  Hour  of  Peril

...

46

23

The  Work  and  Warfare  of  the  Church

46

24

CHAPTER  V.

24

Extortion  Rebuked              m.

J.

60

Human  Equality  ...            «,

_

61

25

Righteous  Anger  ...           ..

M.

62

36

Self-Consultation  ...           .«

*••

9*

INDEX.


Avoidance  of  Beproach       ...  ...  &3

Promise-Keeping  ...  ...  ...  54

The  Bich  Rebuked  for  taking  Advan-
tage of  the  Poor  ...  ...  S^

Error  and  Return  ...  ...  ...  55

An  Example  of  Successful  Activity  for

God     ...  ...  ...  .~  66

An  Example  of  Disinterestedness     ...  68
The  Practical  Power  of  the  Fear  of

God -  68

Prayer  for  Divine  Remembrance        „,  69

Self-Regard  and  Magnanimity  «.  60

A  Man  of  Public  Spirit      ...  m.  60


CHAPTER  VL

Craft  Detected  and  Baffled  ..

...      64

Hindrances  Repelled           _

«.      65

Prayer  for  Strength             _

—      66

Enemies  Within   ...            ...

..      66

Regard  for  Special  Obligation!

...      67

God's  Work  Recognised

~.      67

The  Christian  Workman     ...

.-      68

"God  with  Us"

...      69

The  Temptations  of  Earnest  Moral  Life

and  Service        ...            ...            ...  70

Trial  and  Victory  ...            ...            ...  70

T'le  Good  Work  Finished  in  Spite  of

Han  by  the  Power  of  God             ...  71

CHAPTER  VII.

Provision  for  Safety  and   Kumerical

Increase             ...           ...           ...  73

Uncommon  Excellence        ...           —  78

Moral  Guardianship            «•           _  74
Israel  Within  the  WalU      m.           .74

An  Hononrable  Register     mm           ...  76

A  Good  Collection               .»           —  78

The  True  Method  of  Prosperity        m.  78


CHAPTER  VIIL


^      81


83


BeligiouB  Instmction  ..

Attentive  Hearers  .»

Penitential  Sorrow

A  Christmas  Homily :  the  Joy  of  the
Lord    ...  ...  ...  ...      83

Comfort  for  Penitents         ...  ...      86

The  Word  of  Life ...  ...  ...      86

The  Word  of  God  and  the  Ministry  of
Man    ...  ...  ...  ...      86

The  Word  of  God  in  a  Threefold  Re-
lationship ...  ...  »      87


THEME  rAoa

Penitence  Turned  into  Praise            •»  87

Religious  Emotion              .«           ,„  87

An  Influential  Congregation              ..  80

Keeping  the  Feast                ...            ...  90

Restoration  of  the  Feast  of  Tabcmaclea

in  its  Plenitude               ...            m<  91

CHAPTER  IX

A  Special  Fast  Day— how  Spent       .  96

United  Praise        ...            ...           — .  97

God's  Favour  to  Abraham   >.            m.  98
Faithfulness  of  Heart         _           ..98
Bedemption  &om  Egypt     ^           m.  99
The  Divine  Self-made  Kame              „.  99
Israel  in  the  Desert              ...            ~.  100
The  Holy  Spirit  as  a  Teacher            .-  101
Canaan  Conquered  and  Possessed      ...  102
Israel's  Wickedness  and  God's  Good-
ness    ...            ...            ...            ...  102

The  Divine  Testimony  against  Sin    ...  103
A  Sorrowful  Appeal   to   the   Divine

Compassion       ...           ...            ••.  10^

The   Justice   of  God    is    Punishing

Sinners              ».            —            •"  ^^'^

Confession             ...            ...            •••  ^"^

A  Prayerfiil  Beview  of  Divine  Good-
ness as  Manifested  in  the  Facte  of

Human  Life ~  105

The  Solemn  Fast  of  Assembled  Israel  106

Appeal    ...            ...            ."           •"  107

Adoration  and  Thanksgiving  ...  107
The  Divine  Description  of  a  Sinful

Life     ..            ...            ~           ~  lot

CHAPTEB  i

A  Solemn  Covenant            m,           »  112

Divine  Service      .....«•  113

Cleaving  to  the  House  of  God           m.  114

Entering  into  Covenant  ...  ».  114
Solemn  Engagement  to  Maintain  the

House  of  God    ...            ...           •>  116

CHAPTER  XL

Town  and  Country  _  ■■  120
Volunteers             ..            »            ••122

Church  Officers     ...           m.           ~  122

The  True  Centralisation  »  ~.  133
Duty:  its  Peril,  its  Excellency,  and  iti

Eeward             ...           ...            .~  124

Three    Element!   in   the   Churph   of

Ohriat.«           —           -.     "      -.  121


INDEX.


ill


CHAPTER  XIL

THEHI  rAOI

Ministers  in  God's  Temple  .«           ^  129

Sacred  Singing      ...            .m            •-  130

Ministers  of  the  Lord         .«           ..  131

The  Dedication  of  the  "Wall              ...  135

Joy  of  the  Church  in  her  Ministers  ...  136

Joy  of  Jerusalem  ...           ...           .^  137

A  Joyous  Dedication          ...           «•  137

CHAPTER  Xin.

Separation  from  Israel  of  Foreigners ...  143

Toas  turned  into  Friends    •«           m  m


An  Intruder  Ejected            ...            ...  144

Suspended  Ministrations  Restored     ...  145

Forsaking  the  House  of  God              .«  146

Sabbath-Breaking  Suppressed            .^  147

Forbidden  Marriages            ...            ._  148

Nehemiah :  his  Character  and  Work  149
The  Blessing  of  God  on  an  Active  Life

founded  upon  His  Word  ...           ...  150

Reading,  Obeying,  Suffering,  ke.       ...  150

Practical  Christian  Wisdom               .^  151

The  Sabbath  Day  ...            .„            ».  152

Unholy  Alliances  .»_••.  153

The  Appeal  to  Odd             m,           «  lU


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED  BY  THE


MV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

TICAR  AND  RURAL  DEAN  OF  ST.   PANCRAS,   AND  EXAMINING  CHAILAIN  TO  THE  LORD
BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND   BRISTOL;


AND  BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,

EDITOR  OF  "THE  HOMILETIC  QUARTERLY."


ESTHER.

(ETcposition :
By  rev.  GEORGE  RAWLINSON,  M.A.,

C4JIDEK  PROFESSOR  OF  ANCIENT  HISTORY  IN  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OXFORD;  AND  oABOH  of

CANTERBURY.

f  omiletits :
By  rev.   prof.   J.  R.  THOMSON,   M.A.

ilomilics  bg  Marions  <^ull)ors :

REV.  PROF.  p.  C.  BARKER,  LL.B.,M.A.;  REV.  W.  DINWIDDIE,  LL.B.  i

REV.  PROF.  D.  ROWLANDS,  B.A.;  REV.  W.   CLARKSON,   B.A. ;

REV.   F.   HASTINGS.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  York  and  Toronto.


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHBE.


INTRODUCTION.


$  I.  Subject  of  thb  Book.

The  Book  of  Esther  relates  an  episode  in  Jewish  history  of  Intense  Interest
to  the  entire  nation  at  the  time,  since  it  involved  the  question  of  its  continu-
ance or  destruction,  hut  an  episode  which  stood  quite  separate  and  distinct  from
the  rest  of  Jewish  history,  unconnected  with  anything  that  preceded  or  fol-
lowed, and  which,  but  for  the  institution  of  the  Feast  of  Purim,  might  as  easily
have  been  forgotten  by  the  people  as  escaped  perils  too  often  are  by  individuals.
The  main  scene  of  the  narrative  is  Susa,  the  Persian  capital ;  the  dramatis  per-
soruB  are  either  Persians  or  "  Jews  of  the  Dispersion."  There  is  no  mention,  in
the  whole  Book,  of  Palestine,  or  Jerusalem,  or  the  temple,  or  the  provisions  of  the
law,  nor  any  allusion  to  any  facts  in  previous  Jewish  history,  excepting  two  : — 1.
The  captivity  under  Nebuchadnezzar  (ch.  ii.  6).  2.  The  subsequent  dispersion
of  the  Jews  over  all  the  various  provinces  of  the  Persian  empire  (ch.  iii.  8).
Thus  the  events  related  belong,  primarily,  not  to  the  history  of  the  Palestinian
Jews,  but  to  that  of  the  "  Jews  of  the  Dispersion  ; "  and  it  is  as  indicating  that
those  Jews  were,  no  less  than  their  brethren  in  Palestine,  under  the  Divine  care,
that  the  Book  appealed  to  the  hearts  of  the  Jewish  race  generally,  and  claimed  a
place  in  the  national  collection  of  sacred  writings.  The  events  related  may  be
thus  briefly  summarised  : — At  a  feast  held  in  the  palace  of  Susa  in  the  third
year  of  Ahasuerus,  that  prince,  in  the  wantonness  of  power,  requires  the  presence
of  his  queen,  Vashti,  unveiled  (ch.  L  1 — 11) ;  she  refuses  (ibid.  ver.  12) ;  the  king
is  furious,  and  his  obsequious  nobles  counsel  her  divorce,  which  is  forthwith
decreed  and  published  to  the  whole  kingdom  {ihid.  vers.  12 — 22).  Eflforts  are  then
made  to  supply  Vashti's  place ;  virgins  are  collected  from  all  quarters,  and  the
king's  choice  falls  upon  Esther,  a  Jewess,  who  had  been  brought  up  by  her
cousin  Mordecai,  a  eunuch  of  the  court  (ch.  ii.  1 — 20).  Soon  after  this,  two
«f  the  king's  chamberlains  form  n  plot  to  murder  him,  which  is  discovered  by


a  iSTSobucTioN  to


Mordecai,  communicated  to  the  king  by  Esther,  and  frustrated  by  their  execu-
tion (ibid.  vers.  21 — 23).  About  this  time,  Haman,  the  king's  chief  minister,
being  offended  by  the  conduct  of  Mordecai,  who  does  not  pay  him  due  respect,
forms  the  design  of  exterminating  the  Jews,  and  obtains  the  king's  consent  to  a
decree  authorising  their  destruction  on  a  certain  day.  The  day  is  fixed  by
Haman  through  a  casting  of  lots,  and  is  thereby  determined  to  a  date  nearly
twelve  months  in  advance  of  the  time  at  which  the  lots  are  cast  (oh.  iii,).
Mordecai,  informed  of  the  impending  massacre,  requires  Esther  to  intercede  for
her  people ;  and  Esther,  though  aware  that  she  does  so  at  the  peril  of  her  life,
consents  (ch.  iv.).  Her  plan  is  to  bring  the  king  and  Haman  together,  to  de-
nounce him  as  having  sought  her  life,  and  so  to  obtain  his  disgrace.  She
invites  the  two  to  a  banquet ;  but  when  her  opportunity  comes,  shrinks  from
making  the  disclosure  which  she  had  designed,  and  defers  it  to  the  ensuing  day,
for  which  she  appoints  a  second  banquet  (ch.  v.  1 — 8),  Haman  now,  intoxi-
cated with  his  good  fortune,  as  he  deems  it,  resolves  to  anticipate  the  decree,  so
far  as  Mordecai  is  concerned,  and  to  put  him  to  death  at  once.  He  constructs
a  gallows,  or  erects  a  cross,  in  the  court  of  his  own  house  for  this  purpose  (ibid.
vers.  9 — 14),  and  proposes  to  hang  Mordecai  thereon  before  the  second  banquet.
In  the  night,  however,  the  king  has  been  sleepless,  and  having  ordered  his
attendants  to  read  to  him  out  of  the  Book  of  the  Chronicles,  has  been  reminded
of  Mordecai's  discovery  of  the  conspiracy  against  his  life,  and  having  asked
what  reward  he  had  received,  has  been  told  that  "  nothing  had  been  done  for
him"  (ch.  vi.  3).  Upon  this  he  has  Haman  summoned,  and  compels  hijn  to
be  the  instrument  of  doing  Mordecai  the  highest  possible  honour  (ibid.  vers.
4 — 11).  The  banquet  follows ;  Esther  denounces  Haman ;  the  king,  angry,  but
in  doubt,  quits  the  apartment ;  Haman,  eagerly  imploring  Esther's  intercession,
approaches  too  near  her  sacred  person ;  the  king  returns,  and  taxing  him  with
rudeness  towards  the  queen,  orders  him  off  to  instant  execution.  He  is  con-
ducted to  his  own  house,  and  hanged  on  the  cross  on  which  he  had  intended  to
hang  Mordecai  (ch.  viL  1 — 10).  The  king  now  puts  himself  in  the  hands  of
Esther  and  Mordecai,  and  allows  them  to  take  the  necessary  steps  to  frustrate
Haman's  designs  against  the  Jews.  As  the  royal  decree  cannot  be  rescinded,  it
is  determined  to  send  out  another,  allowing  the  Jews  to  defend  themselves  if
attacked  by  their  enemies  (ch.  viii.).  This  is  done,  and  when  the  day  deter-
mined by  the  lot  arrives,  a  struggle  takes  place  j  the  Persian  authorities  are  on
the  side  of  the  Jews,  and  "  help  "  them  (ch.  ix.  3) ;  the  result  is,  that  every-
where the  Jews  are  victorious :  at  Susa  they  kill  500  of  their  enemies,  together
with  the  ten  sons  of  Haman ;  elsewhere  they  kill  75,000  (or,  according  to  the
Septuagint,  15,000).  The  king  then  allows  them  a  second  day,— one  of  venge-
ance, as  it  would  seem,  at  Susa, — ^in  which  they  kill  300  more.  The  bodies  of
Haman's  ten  sons  are  exposed  on  gibbets ;  and  the  Feast  of  Purim  ifl  instituted
and  made  of  perpetual  obligation  (ch.  ix.  5 — 32).    WiUi  a  brief  acconat  of


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  HI

Ahasucrus'  establishing  a  now  arrangement  of  the  tribute,  and  of  Mordecai'a
greatness  and  favour,  both  with  the  king  and  with  his  own  nation,  the  Book
closes  (ch.  z.).

§  2.  Date  of  its  Composition.

In  order  to  determine  (approximately)  the  date  of  the  composition  of
'  Esther,'  it  is  necessary,  in  the  first  place,  to  decide  which  of  the  Persian
kings  is  intended  by  Ahasuerus.  That  no  king  prior  to  Darius  Hystaspis  can
be  meant  seems  to  follow — 1.  From  the  limits  assigned  to  the  empire  in  ch.  i.
1,  since  Darius  first  extended  the  Persian  dominion  over  a  portion  of  India ;
and,  2.  From  the  residence  of  the  court  being  Susa,  which  Darius  first  made
the  capital.  It  has  been  supposed,  chiefly  from  ch.  x.  1  ("And  the  king
Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute  upon  the  land,  and  upon  the  islands  of  the  sea"),  that
Darius  himself  is  intended.  But  neither  the  name  nor  the  character  agree;
nor  was  Darius  in  his  third  year  in  a  position  to  give  a  feast  to  all  the  power
of  Media  and  Persia  at  Susa,  since  he  was  struggling  for  his  crown,  Media  waa
in  revolt,  and  he  was  himself  at  Babylon  ('  Records  of  the  Past,'  vol.  vii.  pp.
95 — 98).  Artaxerxes  Longimanus  has  also  been  suggested,  partly  because  the
name  is  given  as  "Artaxerxes  "  in  the  Septuagint,  and  partly  because  such  was
the  opinion  of  Josephus.  But  here,  again,  both  the  name  and  character  are
adverse ;  nor  could  Haman,  in  Artaxerxes'  fwelfth  year,  have  any  need  of
informing  him  that  there  was  such  a  people  as  the  Jews  with  peculiar  laws
(Esther  iii.  8),  when  Artaxerxes  had  shown  himself  well  acquainted  with  the
Jews  and  with  their  law  in  his  seventh  (Ezra  vii.  12—26).  A  later  monarch
than  Longimanus  has  not  been  suggested,  and  would  be  incompatible  with  the
genealogy  of  Mordecai  (Esther  ii.  5,  6) ;  so  tliat  the  mere  process  of  eliminating
impossible  kings  conducts  us  to  Xerxes,  the  son  of  Darius,  and  father  of  Longi-
manus, as  the  personage  really  meant.  And  here  we  find,  in  the  first  place,
that  the  names  are  identical,  the  Hebrew  Akhnshverosh  corresponding  letter  for
letter  with  the  Persian  Khshayarsha,  which  the  Greeks  turned  into  Xerxes.
Secondly,  the  resemblance  of  character  is  most  striking,  and  is  admitted  on  all
hands.  Thirdly,  the  notes  of  time  exactly  accord  with  the  chronology  of
Xerxes'  reign.  "  In  the  third  year  of  Xerxes'  reign  was  held  an  assembly  at
Susa  to  arrange  the  Grecian  war  (Herod.,  vii.  7).  In  the  third  year  of  Ahasuerus
was  held  a  great  feast  and  assembly  at  Shushan  the  palace  (Esther  i.  3).  In
the  seventh  year  of  his  reign  Xerxes  returned  defeated  from  Greece,  and  consoled
himself  by  the  pleasures  of  the  harem  (Herod.,  ix.  108).  In  the  seventh  year
of  his  reign  '  fair  young  virgins  were  sought '  for  Ahasuerus  (Esther  ii.  2 — 15)."  *
We  may  therefore  confidently  regard  the  Ahasuerus  of  Esther  as  the  well-
kr.own  invader  of  Greece  and  scourger  of  the  Hellespont,  who  has  come  doirn
to  us  in  profane  history  as  "  Xerxes."

•  Bp.  Cotton  in  Dr.  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  toL  i.  p.  84.


INTRODUCTION  TO


With  respect  to  the  time  of  the  composition  of  Esther,  it  is,  in  the  first  place*
clear  that  when  the  author  writes  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus  is  over.  The  opening
passage  distinctly  proves  this.  Now  Xerxes  died  in  b.o.  465,  and  the  question
therefore  is,  How  long  after  this  date  was  the  Book  of  Esther  written  1  The  open-
ing passage  is  thought  hy  some  to  imply  that  the  reign  of  Ahasuerus  was  remote,
and  a  recent  commentator  suggests  B.o.  200  as  the  prohable  time  of  writing,*
but  he  admits  that  a  century  earlier  is  quite  possible.  Other  critics  suggest  as
early  a  date  as  b.o.  450 — 440,  and  the  arguments  which  they  adduce  are
weighty.  The  language  of  the  Book  closely  resembles  that  of  Chronicles,  Ezra,
and  Nehemiah,  which  were  all  written  about  that  time.  The  minute  and  particular
accounts  of  many  matters  which  would  be  known  primarily  only  to  Esther  and
Mordecai,  and  would  certainly  not  have  been  written  in  the  "  book  of  the
chronicles," — as  Mordecai's  genealogy  (ch.  ii,  5),  Esther's  messages  to  Mordecai
and  Mordecai's  to  her  through  Hatach  (ch.  iv.  5 — 16),  the  circumstances  of  the
two  banquets  given  by  Esther  to  Ahasuerus  and  Haman  (ch.  v.  6 — 8 ;  vii.  2 — 8),
&c., — make  it  probable  that  the  writer  was  contemporary  with  the  events  nar-
rated, and  derived  his  information  from  Mordecai  or  Esther,  or  both.  Further,
the  individuals  who  have  been  mentioned  as  the  writers  of  the  Book — Mordecai
himself  and  the  high  priest  Joiakim — lived  about  this  time.  Altogether,  it
seems  most  probable  that  the  work  was  composed  about  the  middle  of  the  fifth
century  B.O.,  or  a  little  later,  when  Xerxes  had  been  dead  about  twenty  years.

§  3.    AUTHOB.

Aben-Esra,  among  Jewish,  and  Clement  of  Alexandria,  among  Christian  com-
mentators, assign  the  Book  of  Esther  to  Mordecai.  The  Eabbi  Azarias  says  that
It  was  written  by  the  high  priest  Joiakim.  Augustine  and  Isidore  make  Ezra
the  author.  In  the  Talmud  it  is  said  that  the  work  was  composed  by  "  the
men  of  the  great  synagogue."  These  conflicting  statements  neutralise  each
other,  and  make  it  clear  that  the  Jewish  Church  had  no  uniform,  or  even  pre-
dominant, tradition  upon  the  point.  It  is  against  Ezra's  authorship  that  the
style  is  very  different  from  his ;  against  Mordecai's,  that  the  first  person  is  never
used,  and  that  Mordecai  is  spoken  of  in  terms  of  such  high  praise.  Joialiim
can  scarcely  be  supposed  sufficiently  familiar  with  Persian  customs  and  localities
to  have  ventured  upon  the  task,  much  less  to  have  produced  a  work  showing
such  perfect  acquaintance  with  the  machinery  of  the  Persian  court,  its  customs,
etiquette,  and  the  like.  What  is  meant  by  attributing  the  composition  to  "  the
men  of  the  great  synagogue"  it  is  hard  to  say;  but  certainly  it  would  be
difficult  to  adduce  a  work  more  distinctly  stamped  with  the  individuality  of  a
single  author  than  the  Book  of  Esther.  The  result  would  seem  to  be  that  the
author  is  really  unknown.     He  must  have  been  a  Jew ;  he  must  have  been

*    Bertheau.     See  his '  Introduction  to  Esther,'  §  4,  in  the  '  Exegetiichei  Handbuch  ma
Alten  Testament,'  vuL  iv   pan  ii.  p.  zbb.


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


long  resident  in  Persia ;  and  he  must  have  had  some  special  facilities  (besides
access  to  the  Persian  archives)  for  obtaining  exact  information  on  the  secret  and
delicate  matters  which  form  an  essential  part  of  his  history.  Probably  lie  was
a  younger  contemporary  of  Mordecai's,  and  an  intimate  acquaintance — one  who
had  -watched  hig  career,'  who  admired  his  talents  and  his  character,  and  was
anxious  to  preserve  them  from  oblivion-  His  work  was  written  primarily  for
the  Jews  of  Persia ;  but  it  naturally  passed  from  them  to  the  other  "  Jews  of  the
Dispersion,"  and  finally  reached  Jerusalem,  where  it  was  adopted  into  the  Canon.

§  4.  Peculiaritie!3.
The  most  notable  and  the  most  noted  peculiarity  of  the  Book  of  Esther
b  the  entire  absence  from  it  of  the  name  of  God.  None  of  the  titles  in  use
among  the  Jews  to  express  the  Supreme  Being — neither  Elohim,  nor  Jehovah,
nor  Shaddai,  nor  Adonai,  nor  even  any  periphrasis  for  the  name — occurs  in  it
from  first  to  last.  The  idea  of  God  is  there ;  but  by  a  reticence,  of  which  we
have  no  other  example  in  Scripture  (for  even  the  shortest  psalm  has  a  mention
of  God  at  least  once),  the  Divine  name  is  kept  back,  unuttered  by  the  speakers,
unwritten  by  the  author,  merged  in  the  profoundest  silence,  totally  absent  from
the  whole  ten  chapters.  It  has  been  suggested  that  this  absence  arose  from  that
increasing  scruple  against  using  the  Divine  name  which  characterised  the  period
between  Malachi  and-  John  the  Baptist,  which  led  to  the  substitution  of
"Adonai"  for  "Jehovah"  in  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  and  to  the  absolute
prohibition  of  the  pronunciation  of  the  "  Tetragrammaton  "  by  any  one  but  the
high  priest,  or  by  him  excepting  in  a  whisper.*  But  the  date  of  '  Esther '  is  too
early  for  this  explanation  to  merit  acceptance.  Bather  we  must  attribute  the
reticence  either  to  an  "instinctive  adoption  of  the  fashion  of  the  Persian  court,"  f
or  to  a  shrinking  from  irreverence  on  the  part  of  the  writer,  who  may  have
viewed  it  as  irreverent  to  introduce  the  name  of  God  without  necessity  into  a
history  which  was  addressed  as  much  to  Persians  as  to  Jews,  and  was  not  so
much  intended  for  sacred  history  as  for  secular.  "  N'eo  Deus  intersit,  nisi  dignirs
rindice  nodus  inciderit "  is  a  wholesome  rule ;  and  as  the  deliverance  of  the
Jews  from  Haman's  machinations  was  brought  about  by  secondary  causes  with-
out overt  Divine  interference,  there  was  no  necessity  to  bring  the  First  Cause
upon  the  scene  at  all.  Whether  the  "  Book  "  was  to  be  accepted  into  the
Canon,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  the  Divine  name,  was  a  point  which  the
Jewish  Church  no  doubt  seriously  considered,  and  which  we  may  believe  to
have  been  determined,  under  Divine  guidance,  by  Malachi.  The  Book  was
received,  and  we-can  see  that  it  was  well  that  it  was  received.  "  It  is  expedient
for  us  that  there  should  be  one  Book  which  omits  the  name  of  God  altogether,
to  prevent  us  from  attaching  to  the  mere  name  a  reverence  which  belongs  only
to  the  reality.  J     It  is  well  that  God  should  have  vindicated  as  hia  owi,  a

•  Stanley,  '  Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Chnrch,'  Third  Series,  p.  179,
t  Hid.  p.  J80.  X  Hid.


INTRODUCTION  TO


mere  piece  of  honest,  plain,  straightforward,  secular  history,  written  by  a  God-
fearing person,  and  the  chief  actors  in  which  were  God-fearing  persons,  that  so
we  may  feel  that  history  itself  is  God's,  and  a  true  record  of  it  a  godly  work — a
work  which  he  will  accept  and  approve,  whether  or  no  he  be  explicitly  referred
to  in  it,  whether  or  no  it  be  made  a  vehicle  of  direct  religious  instruction,
whether  or  no  the  characters  held  up  for  approval  have  the  sacred  name  upon
their  lips,  if  only  they  have  it  in  their  hearts.  For,  be  it  remarked,  not  merely
is  the  name  of  God  absent  from  '  Esther,'  but  direct  religious  teaching  is  also
wholly  absent  from  it.  Even  prayer  is  not  mentioned ;  Mordecai  and  Esther
fast  (ch.  iv.  1,  16),  but  it  is  not  said  that  they  pray.  They  exhibit  a  genuine
patriotism,  a  lofty  unselfishness,  a  readiness  to  dare  all  for  the  right ;  but  the
source  of  their  moral  strength  is  not  made  apparent.  When  Mordecai  says  to
Esther,  "  If  thou  boldest  thy  peace,  then  shall  there  enlargement  and  deliver-
ance arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place ;  but  thou  and  thy  father's  house  shall
be  destroyed :  and  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for
such  a  time  as  this  ? "  he  approaches  close  to  the  doctrines  of  God's  special
providence  in  the  apparent  accidents  of  life,  of  the  special  promises  of  con-
tinuance made  to  the  Jewish  people,  and  of  the  visitation  of  sin  not  only  upon
the  sinner,  but  upon  the  family  of  the  sinner — he  does  not,  however,  enunciate
any  one  of  them.  When  -Esther  consents  to  risk  her  life,  with  the  touching
words,  "If  I  perish,  I  perish"  (ch.  iv.  16);  and  again  when  she  says,  "  Itow
can  1  endure  to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  upon  my  people  I  or  how  can  I
endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my  kindred  1 "  (ch.  viii.  6),  she  speaks  as  only
a  religiously-minded  person  would  be  likely  to  speak;  but  she  withholds  all
mention  of  the  motives  which  actuate  her,  and  leaves  them  to  be  conjectured.
The  absence  of  any  mention  of  Palestine,  or  Jerusalern,  or  the  .temple,  or  the
law,*  is  also  a  noticeable  feature  of  the  Book,  though  one  of  far  less  difficulty
and  far  less  practical  moment  than  the  peculiarity  which  we  have  been  consider-
ing. The  writer  belongs  to  the  Jews  of  the  Dispersion — his  special  interest  is
with  them ;  and  though  warmly  attached  to  his  nation,  he  is  devoid  of  that
affection  for  localities  which  characterised  the  Jews  generally.  He  is,  moreover,
so  far  cosmopolitan  as  to  shrink  from  utterances  which  would  stamp  him  as  a
provincial,  and  be  either  unintelligible  to  the  Persians,  for  whom  he  certainly
writes  almost  as  much  as  for  the  Jews,  or  even  displeasing;  to  them.  The  fiicts
of  his  narrative  do  not  call  for  any  mention  of  peculiar  Jewish  institutions
(excepting  that  of  the  Feast  of  Purim),  and  he  is  thus  able  to  avoid  obtruding
on  his  Persian  readers  peculiarities  with  which  they  would  have  no  sympathy,
'  or  practices  to  which  they  would  have  felt  objection.  There  is  nothing  that
can  well  be  called  peculiar  in  the  style  of  '  Esther,'  or  in  the  form  of  the  nar-
rative.    Both  are  characterised  by  simplicity.    The  narrative  is  vwy  inartificial,

*  Except  the  remark  of  Haman,  that  the  Jews  have  "  lauit  diverse  trora  all  other  people  "
(ch.  iii.  8).


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  tB

following  a  strictly  chronological  order,  eschewing  digressions,  and  of  a  single
uniform  tenor.  The  style  has  heen  called  "  remarkably  chaste  and  simple."  •
It  is  certainly  simple,  presenting  few  difficulties  of  construction,  and  scarcely
any  ambiguities ;  but  its  purity  may  be  questioned,  at  any  rate,  so  far  as  the
vocabulary  is  concerned,  since  that  is  largely  impregnated  with  a  Persian  element,
and  contains  also  terms  which  belong  properly  to  the  later  Hebrew,  or  Aramaic.
The  tone  of  the  narrative  is  generally  grave  and  dignified ;  in  places  it  is  even
pathetic  ;  but  for  the  most  part  it  interests  more  than  it  excites  us.  Character
is  well  portrayed ;  the  descriptions  are  graphic,  and  occasionally  very  elaborate.
Altogether,  the  work  is  one  of  considerable  literary  merit,  and,  as  a  picture  of
court  life  in  Persia  under  the  Achsemenian  dynasty,  is  of  the  highest  historical
value,  being  quite  without  a  parallel

§  6.  Historical  Truth  of  the  Narrativh.

It  has  been  said  that  the  narrative  of  Esther  "  consists  of  a  long  string  of
historical  difficulties  and  improbabilities,  and  contains  a  number  of  errors  in
regard  to  Persian  customs."!  Oo^  foreign  critic  calls  it  "a  poem,"  and  seems
to  regard  it  as  based  on  a  very  slight  foundation  of  fact.  J  Another  reserves  his
opinion  on  the  subject  of  its  authenticity,  and  "waits  to  see  whether  any
documents  are  hereafter  discovered  which  will  confirm  and  elucidate  this  isolated
court  story,  with  all  its  various  details,  and,  if  so,  to  what  extent."  §  The  Jews,
however,  have  always  regarded  it  as  a  true  history,  uniting  it  with  Daniel,  Ezra,
and  Nehemiah ;  and  even  holding  it  in  peculiar  esteem,  as  "  more  precious  than
Prophets,  or  Proverbs,  or  Psalms,"  ||  and  as  doomed  to  "  outlast  all  the  Hebrew
Scriptures  except  the  Pentateuch."  H  Nor  does  there  seem  to  be  any  real
ground  for  calling  the  historical  character  of  the  Book  in  question.  The  supposed
"  mistakes "  with  respect  to  Persian  customs  are  wholly  unproved;  the  "his-
torical difficulties  and  improbabilities "  disappear  upon  examination,  or  even
transform  themselves  into  historical  coincidences,  when  the  idiosyncrasy  of
Xerxes  is  taken  into  account.  The  latest  critic  is  struck,  not  with  "  difficulties  "
or  with  "mistakes  "  in  the  narrative,  but  with  the  fact  that  the  whole  of  it  is
"  thoroughly  characteristic,"  all  the  various  scenes  being  "  full  of  the  local  genius
of  the  empire,  as  we  know  it  alike  through  the  accounts  of  the  earliest  Greek
travellers  and  the  latest  English  investigators."  **  The  accord  acknowledged  in
this  sentence  is  indeed  most  striking ;  the  suitability  of  all  the  main  facts  related
to  the  personal  character  of  Xerxes  cannot  be  disputed ;  the  notes  of  time  fit  in
with  what  we  know  of  his  reign  exactly ;  it  is  quite  inconceivable  that  a  poet,

•  Bp.  A.  Hervey  in  Dr.  Smith's  '  Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  ToL  i.  p.  68JL

t  De  'Wette,  '  Einleitung  in  d.  Alt.  Test.,'  §  198,  a.

J  Niebnhr,  '  Vortrage  fiber  alte  Geschichte,'  vol.  i  pp.  168,  159.

§  'Ewald,  '  Hi=!tovy  nf  Israel,'  vol.  v.  iip.  230,  231,  E.  Tr.

II  Stanley,  '  Lecuiies  cm  the  Juwish  Church,'  'Ihird  Series,  p.  179.

f  CarpzoT,  '  Introductio,'  c.  u.  {  6.  ♦*  Stanley,  pp.  173,  1Mb


INTRODUCTION  TO


or  a  romancer,  writing  150  or  200  years  after  the  events  (which  is  the  hypo-
thesis of  modern  sceptical  critics),  should  have  been  at  once  so  full,  so  graphic,
and  so  correct.  We  are,  therefore,  thrown  back  upon  the  opposite  theory,  that
the  writer  was  a  contemporary,  that  he  was  familiar  with  the  Persian  court  undei
Xerxes,  and  that  the  harmony  observable  between  his  narrative  and  all  that  we
otherwise  know  of  the  time  is  to  be  referred  to  the  unity  and  congruity  of
truth.  Tji  aKrjdii  iravra  avvfSci  ra  VTrdpxo''Ta,  ry  Si  ij/evStl  rn^v  Sia<piiii'ci  TaKtideg.
A  historical  romancer  necessarily  involves  himself  in  discrepancies  and  contra-
dictions ;  the  truthful  narrator  has  nothing  of  this  kind  to  fear,  since  with
every  statement  that  is  true  all  the  facts  of  the  case  must  harmoniBe.


Literature  of  Esthbb.


There  are  extant  three  Targums,  or  Jewish  comments,  upon  Esther,  bnt  they  are
neither  ancient  nor  of  much  value.  Carpzov,  in  1721,  wrote  an  interesting  '  Intro-
duction '  to  it.  Fritzsche,  early  in  the  present  century,  devoted  an  entire  work  to
the  subject,  which  be  entitled  'Zasatze  zum  Buobe  Esther;'  and  Baumgarten  fol-
lowed his  example  in  1839,  when  he  published  his  tractate  '  De  fide  Libri  Estlierse.'
Recently  Bertheau  has  contributed  a  comment  on  Esther  to  the  '  Exegetisches  Hand-
bucb  zum  Alten  Testament,'  published  at  Leipsio  by  S.  Ilirzel.  Though  far  from
faultless,  it  is  upon  the  whole  the  best  special  work  on  the  subject.  Two  important
articles  on  'Esther 'and  'the  Book  of  Esther'  were  contributed  to  Dr.  Smith's
•Dictionary  of  the  Bible,'  in  1860,  by  the  preseiit  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells.

Arrangement  of  the  Book  in  Sections.

The  Book  of  Esther  is  a  continuous  narrative,  with  no  marked  divisions,  and  la
somewhat  difficult  to  divide  even  into  sections.  The  following  arrangement,  which
is  nearly  that  of  Bertheau,  will  be  followed  in  the  present  comment.

Section  1  (oh.  i.).  The  great  feast  of  King  Ahasuerus  at  Susa,  with  the  disgrace
of  Vashti.

Section  2  (oh.  ii.  1 — 18).  The  quest  for  maidens,  and  the  choice  of  Esther  to  be
queen  in  Vasliti's  place.

Section  3  (ch.  ii.  19 — 23).     Mordecai's  discovery  of  a  plot  against  Ahasuerus'  life.

Section  4  (ch.  iii.  1 — 6).  Mordecai,  by  want  of  respect,  ofEends  Haman,  Ahasuerus'
chief  minister.     Haman,  in  revenge,  resolves  to  destroy  the  nation  of  the  Jews.

Section  5  (ch.  iii.  7).  Haman  casts  lots  to  obtain  a  lucky  day  for  his  enterprise :
the  lot  falls  on  a  day  in  the  month  Adar,  the  last  in  the  year.

Section  6  (ch.  iii.  8 — 15).  Haman  persuades  Ahasuerus  to  publish  a  decree  com-
manding the  destruction  of  all  the  Jews  in  his  kingdom  on  the  ensuing  18th  of  Adar.

Section  7  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3).  Grief  of  Mordecai  and  general  mourning  of  the  Jews  on
receiving  the  intelligence.

Section  8  (ch.  iv.  4 — 17).  Grief  of  Esther ;  her  communications  with  Mordecai ;
she  consents  to  risk  making,  uninvited,  an  appeal  to  the  king.

Section  9  (ch.  v.  1 — 8).  Ahasuerus  receiving  Esther  favourably,  she  invites  him
and  Haman  to  a  banquet,  at  which,  being  permitted  to  make  a  request,  she  contents
herself  with  inviting  them  both  to  another  banquet.

Hection  10  (ch.  v.  9 — 14).  Haman,  exulting  at  these  signs  of  royal  favour,  is  the
more  exasperated  by  Mordecai's  contempt.  At  the  bidding  of  his  wife  he  resolves
to  impale  Mordecai,  and  causej  a  lofty  cross  to  be  erected  for  the  purpose.

Section  11  (ch.  vi.  1 — 11).     Ahasuerus,  being  wakeful  during  the  night,  baa  th«


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


book  of  the  clirotiioles  read  to  him,  and  finds  that  MorJscai  lias  received  no  reward.
He  makes  Haman  suggest  tho  fitting  reward  for  one  whom  the  king  delights  to
honour,  and  then  deputes  him  to  confer  it  on  Mordecai.

Section  12  (oh.  vi.  12 — 14).  Despondency  of  Haman,  his  wife,  and  friends,  at
this  turn  in  his  fortunes.

Section  13  (ch.  vii.).  At  the  second  banquet,  Esther  denounces  Haman,  and  the
king  condemns  him  to  be  impaled  on  the  cross  prepared  for  Mordecai.

Section  14  (ch.  viii.  1,  2).  Haman's  house  given  to  Esther,  and  the  royal  signet
made  over  to  Mordecai.

Section  15  (ch.  viii.  3 — 14).  At  Esther's  request,  Ahasuerus  sanctions  the  issue  of
a  second  decree,  permitting  the  Jews  to  resist  all  who  attack  them,  to  kill  them  in
their  own  defence,  and  to  take  possession  of  their  goods.

Section  16  (ch.  viii.  15 — 17).     Mordecai's  honour  and  the  Jews'  joy.

Section  17  (ch.  ii.  1 — 16).  Result  of  the  second  edict.  The  Jews  resist  their
enemies,  and  effect  a  great  slaughter  of  them,  but  do  not  lay  hand  upon  their  goods.

Section  18  (ch.  ix.  17 — 32).  Festival  held  by  the  Jews,  and  institution  of  the
Feast  of  Purim.

Section  19  (ch.  x.).    Conclusion.     Greatness  of  Ahasuerua  and  of  Mordecai.


THB


BOOK  OP  ESTHEE.


1 1.  The  Obbat  Fiasi  or  Kino  AHAsnEBUS  at  Suia,  and  tu  Disobaoi  or  Yasbtl


EXPOSITION


OHAFTEB  L


Thb  obeat  feast  (ch.  L  1—9).  King
Ahasuerus  (Xerxes)  in  the  third  year  of  his
reign,  which  was  B.C.  484 — 483,  entertained
at  a  great  feast  in  the  royal  palace  of  Susa  all
his  princes  and  his  servants,  "  the  power  of
Persia  and  Media,"  together  with  all  the
nobles  and  princes  of  the  provinces  (vera.  2,
3).  The  hospitality  was  extended  over  a
Bpar«  of  180  days  (ver.  4).  At  the  end
of  this  time  there  was  a  further  enter-
tainment for  seven  days,  on  even  a  more
profuse  scale,  all  the  male  inhabitants  of
Susa  being  feasted  in  the  palace  gardens
(vera.  6 — 8),  while  the  queen  received  the
women  and  made  them  a  feast  in  her  own
private  apartments.  The  special  occasion  of
the  entertainment  seems  to  have  been  the
summons  to  Susa  of  all  the  chief  men  of  the
kingdom,  and  particularly  of  the  satraps,  or
"  princes  of  provinces,"  to  advise  upon  the
projected  expedition  against  Greece,  which
Herodotus  mentions  in  his  seventh  book
(ch.  viiL).  Banquets  on  an  enormous  scale
were  not  uncommon  in  Persia ;  and  the
profoseaess  and  vainglory  of  Xerxes  would
naturally  lead  him  to  go  to  so  extreme  in
this,  as  in  other  matters.

Ver.   1.  —  In    the   dftyi   of   Ahasnerus.
Ahssuenta,  in  the  original  Akhashverosh,
corresponds  to  Khahayariha  (the  Persian
ISTHU.


name  from  which  th«  Greeks  formed  theii
Xerxes)  almost  as  doaely  as  possible.  The
prosthelic  a  was  a  necessity  of  Hebrew  arti-
culation. The  only  unnecessary  change  was
the  substitution  of  v  for  y  (vau  for  yod)  in
the  penultimate  syllable.  But  this  inter-
change is  very  common  in  Hebrew.  This  is
Ahasuerus  which  reigned,  &c.  The  writer
is  evidently  acquainted  with  more  than  a
single  Ahasuerus.  Ezra  had  mentioned  one
(iv.  6),  and  Daniel  another  (ix.  1).  If  he
knew  their  works,  he  would  necessarily  know
of  these  two.  Or  he  may  have  known  of
them  independently.  The  Ahasuerus  of  his
narrative  being  ditferent  from  either,  he
proceeds  to  distinguish  him  (1)  from  the
Ahasuerus  of  Daniel,  as  a  "king,"  and  (2)
from  the  Ahasuerus  of  Ezra  by  the  extent  ol
his  dominion.  Cambyses  (see  comment  on
Ezra  iv.  6)  had  not  ruled  over  India.  India
is  expressed  by  Hoddu,  which  seems  formed
from  the  Persian  Hiduth  ('Nakhsh-i-Bus-
tam  InscT.,'  par.  3,  1.  25),  by  the  omissioo
of  the  nominativ^  ending,  and  a  slight
modification  of  the  vocalisation.  The  San-
scrit and  the  Zend,  like  the  Greek,  retained
the  n,  which  is  really  an  essential  part  of  the
native  word.  Ethiopia  is  expressed,  as  uaiul,
by  Cvsh.  The  two  countries  are  well  choaen
as  the  extreme  termini  of  the  Persian  empire.
An  hundred  and  twenty-seven  provineei.
The  Hebrew  medinah,  "  province,*  does  not
correspond  to  the  Persian  satrapy,  but  ia
applied  to  every  tract  which  had  ita  own
governor.  There  were  originally  no  mora
than  twenty  satrapies  (Herod.,  iii.  89 — 94),
but  there  was  certainly  a  very  much  larger
number   of   govenuuenta.      Judaea   waa   a


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHKB


[OH.  I.  1—9.


medinah  (Ezra  ii.  1 ;  Neh.  xi  3),  though
only  a  small  part  of  the  satrapy  of  Syria.

Ver.  2. — The  throne  of  his  kingdom,  which
waa  in  Shashan.  Though  the  Persian  court
resided  a  part  of  the  year  at  Ecbatana,  and
occasionally  visited  Peraepolis  and  Babylon
(Xen.,  'Cyrop.,'  viii  6,  §  2 ;  'Anab.,'  iiL
5,  §  15),  yet  Susa  was  decidedly  the  ordinary
seat  of  government,  and  ranked  as  the  capital
of  the  empire  (see  Herod.,  iiL  49  ;  ^schyL ,
'Pers.,'  11.  122,  123;  Ctes.,  'Exe.  Pers.,'
passim,  &c.).  "  Shushan  the  palace"  is
distinguished  from  Shushan  the  city  (ch.  ix.
12 — 15),  the  one  occupying  a  lofty  but  arti-
ficial eminence  towards  the  west,  while  the
other  lay  at  the  base  of  this  mound,  stretch-
ing out  a  considerable  distance  towards  the
east.

Ver.  3. — ^In  the  third  year  of  his  reign.
In  B.O.  483,  probably  in  the  early  spring,
when  the  court,  having  spent  the  winter  at
Babylon  (Xenophon),  returned  to  Susa  to
enjoy  the  most  charming  season  of  the  year.
He  made  a  feast  unto  all  his  princes  and
tiis  servants.  Persian  kings,  according  to
Ctealas  and  Duris,  ordinarily  entertained  at
their  table  15,000  persons  1  This  is  of  course
an  exaggeration  ;  but  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  their  hospitality  was  on  a  scale  unex-
ampled in  modem  times.  The  vast  pillared
halls  of  the  Persepolitan  and  Susan  palaces
could  accommodate  many  hundreds,  if  not
thousands.  The  power  of  Persia  and  ffledis.
The  empire  of  the  Achsemenian  kings  was
Perso-Medic  rather  than  simply  Persian.  The
Medes  were  not  only  the  most  favoured  of
the  conquered  nations,  but  were  really  placed
nearly  on  a  par  with  their  conquerors.  Many
of  the  highest  ofiices  were  conferred  on  them,
and  they  formed  no  doubt  a  considerable
section  of  the  courtiers.  The  nobles.  Liter-
ally, "the  first  men,"  ha-partemim.  The
word  used  is  a  Persian  term  Hebraised.  It
occurs  only  in  this  place.  And  princes  of
the  provinces.  /.  e.  satraps.  The  presence
of  such  persons  at  the  great  gathering  at  Susa
preparatory  to  the  Grecian  war  is  witnessed
to  by  Herodotus  (viL  19).

Ver.  4.  —  When  he  showed  the  riches.
Ostentation  was  a  main  feature  in  the  cha-
racter of  Xerxes.  The  huge  army  with  which
he  invaded  Greece  was  more  for  display  than
for  service.  Vain  parade  is  apparent  at
every  step  of  his  expedition  (Herod.,  vii.  31,
40,  41,  44,  59,  &c.).  He  now  exhibits
"the  riches  of  his  kingdom"  to  his  nobles
and  chief  officers,  showing  them  doubtless  all
the  splendours  of  the  palace,  the  walls  draped
with  gold  ( JSaohyl. , '  Pers. ,'  1. 1 61 ),  the  marble
pillars  and  rich  hangings,  the  golden  plane
tree  and  the  golden  vine  (Herod.,  vii.  27),
and  perhaps  the  ingots  of  gold  wherewith
Darius  hadflUed  the  treasury  {ibid.  iiL  96).
411  hundred  and  fouiioore  days.     We  need


not  suppose  that  the  same  persons  were  enter-
tained during  the  whole  of  this  period.  All
the  provincial  governors  could  not  quit  their
provinces  at  the  same  time,  nor  could  any  of
them  remain  away  very  long-  There  was  no
doubt  a  succession  of  guests  during  the  six
months  that  the  entertainment  lasted.

Ver.  5.— A  feast  nnto  all  the  people  that
were  found  in  Susa.  The  males  only  are
intended,  as  appears  from  ver.  9.  So  Cyrus
on  one  occasion  feasted  "  the  entire  Persian
army,"  slaughtering  for  them  all  his  father's
flocks,  sheep,  goats,  and  oxen  (Herod,,  i,  126).
In  the  court  of  the  garden.  The  "  court  of
the  garden "  is  probably  the  entire  space
surrounding  the  central  hall  of  thirty-aii
pillars  at  Susa,  including  the  three  detached
porticoes  of  twelve  pillars  each,  described  by
Mr.  Loftus  in  his  'Chaldsea  and  Susiana'
(pp.  365 — 372).  This  is  a  space  nearly  350
feet  long  by  250  wide,  with  a  square  of  146
feet  taken  out  of  it  for  the  central  building.
The  area  exceeds  60,000  square  feet.

•Ver.  6. — Where  were  white,  green,  and
bine  hangings.  There  is  nothing  in  the
original  corresponding  to  "green."  The
"  hangings,"  or  rather  awning,  was  of  white
cotton  {karphas)  and  violet.  Mr.  Loftus
supposes  that  it  was  carried  across  from  the
central  pillared  hall  to  the  detached  porti-
coes, thus  shading  the  guests  from  the  in-
tense heat  of  the  sun  ('Chaldsea  and  Susiana,'
p.  375).  Fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen
and  purple.  Very  strong  cords  would  be
needed  to  support  the  awning  if  it  waa
carried  across  as  above  suggested,  over  a
space  of  nearly  sixty  feet.  To  rings  of  silver.
The  exact  use  of  the  rings  is  doubtfuL
Perhaps  they  were  inserted  into  the  stone
work  in  order  that  the  cords  might  be  made
fast  to  them.  Pillars  of  marble.  The
pillars  at  Susa  are  not  of  marble,  but  of  a
dark-blue  limestone.  Perhaps  the  Hebrew
shhh  designated  this  stone  rather  than
marble.  The  beds  were  of  gold  and  silver.
The  couches  on  which  the  guests  reclined
are  intended  (comp.  ch.  vii.  8).  These  were
either  covered  with  gold  and  silver  cloth,  or
had  their  actual  framework  of  the  precious
metals,  like  those  which  Xerxes  took  with
him  into  Greece  (see  Herod.,  ix.  82).  Upon
a  pavement  of  red,  and  bine,  and  white,
and  black  marble.  The  four  words  which
follow  "pavement"  are  not  adjectives  de-
noting colours,  but  the  names  of  four  differ-
ent materials.  One  is  shSsh,  the  material  of
the  pillars,  which  accords  with  the  fact  that
such  pavement  slabs  as  have  been  found  at
Susa  are,  like  the  columns,  of  a  blue  lime-
stone. 'The  other  materials  are  unknown  to
us,  and  we  cannot  say  what  the  exact  coloan
were  ;  but  no  doubt  the  general  result  was  a
mosaie  pavement  of  four  different  hues.

Ver.  7. — Xhey  gave  them  drink  la  tmmU


CH.  I.  1—9.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


of  gold.  Drinking- vessels  of  gold  were
found  In  considerable  numbers  in  the  Persian
camp  near  Plataea  (Herod.,  ix.  80)  when  the
Greeks  took  it.  They  had  been  the  property
of  Persian  nobles.  The  king  would  naturally
possess  in  great  abundance  whatever  luxury
was  affected  by  the  upper  class  of  his  subjects.
The  vessels  being  diverse  one  from  another.
This  is  a  minute  point,  which  must  have
come  from  an  eye-witness,  or  from  one  who
had  received  the  account  of  the  banquet
from  an  eye-witness.  It  was  perhaps  unusual.
At  least,  in  the  grand  banquet  represented
by  Sargon  on  the  walls  of  his  palace  at
Khorsabad,  it  is  observable  that  all  the  guests
hold  in  their  hands  goblets  which  are  exactly
alike  (see  'Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  ii.  p.
214).  Boyal  wine.  Literally,  "  wine  of  the
kingdom" — ^wine,  i.  «.,from  the  royal  cellar,
and  therefore  good  wine,  but  not  necessarily
the  "wine  of  Helbon,"  which  was  the  only
wine  that  the  king  himself  drank  (Athen. ,
'  Deipnosoph,"  iv.  p.  145,  A).

Ver.  8. — lie  drinking  was  according  to
the  law.  Rather,  "according  to  edict" —
the  edict  being  the  express  order  given  by
the  king  to  all  the  officers  of  his  household.
It  is  implied  that  the  usual  custom  was
different — that  the  foolish  practice  prevailed


of  compelling  men  to  drink.  That  the
Persians  were  hard  drinkers,  and  frequently
drank  to  excess,  is  stated  by  Herodotus  (l
133)  and  Xenophon  ('Cyrop.,'  viii.  8,  §  11).
Ver.  9. — Vashti,  the  queen.  The  only
wife  of  Xerxes  known  to  the  Greeks  was
Amestris,  the  daughter  of  Otanes,  one  of  the
seven  conspirators  (Herod.,  vii.  61).  Xerxes
probably  took  her  to  wife  as  soon  as  he  was
of  marriageable  age,  and  before  he  ascended
the  throne  had  a  son  by  her,  who  in  his
seventh  year  was  grown  up  {ibid.  ix.  108).
It  would  seem  to  be  certain  that  if  Ahasuerus
is  Xerxes,  Vashti  must  be  Amestris.  The
names  themselves  are  not  very  remote,  since
m  wiU  readily  interchange  with  v;  but
Vashti  might  possibly  represent  not  the
real  name  of  the  queen,  but  a  favourite
epithet,  such  as  vahisia,  "sweetest."  Uada
a  feast  for  tho  women.  Men  and  women
did  not  take  their  meals  together  in  Persia
unless  in  the  privacy  of  domestic  life  (Brisson,
'De  Regn.  Pers.,'  ii.  pp.  273—276).  If  the
women,  therefore,  were  to  partake  in  a  fes-
tivity, it  was  necessary  that  they  should  be
entertained  separately.  In  the  royal  house.
In  the  gynseceum  or  harem,  which  was  pro-
bably on  the  southern  side  of  the  great
pillared  hall  at  Susa  (Fergusson).


H0MILETIC8.

The  Book  o/Hsther.  There  is  a  striking  contrast  between  the  Books  of  Buth  and
BsTHEB.  The  earlier  book  is  an  idyll ;  the  later  a  chronicle.  The  earlier  relates
to  lowly  persons  and  to  rural  life ;  the  later  to  kings  and  queens,  and  to  a  great
Oriental  metropolis.  The  earlier  is  the  story  of  a  family,  and  its  interest  is  domestic ;
the  later  is  a  chapter  from  the  history  of  a  people,  and  deals  with  the  intrigues  of  a
court  and  the  policy  of  a  state.  The  religious  character  and  aim  of  this  book  may
be  presented  in  four  observations.

I.  God's  name  is  absent  from  the  wholb  book,  but  God  himself  is  in  bvert
CHAPTEB.  There  is  no  other  book  except  Canticles  in  the  sacred  volume  in  which  the
Divine  Being  is  neither  mentioned  nor  obviously  referred  to.  Yet  no  disbeliever  in
God  could  have  written  it ;  and  no  believer  in  God  can  read  it  without  finding  his
faith  strengthened  thereby.     Befer  especially  to  ch.  iv.  14.

II.  A  NATIONAL  festival  IS  HISTOBIOALLT  ACCOUNTED  FOR.      The  feast   of  Purim

was  held  in  high  honour,  and  observed  with  great  regularity  and  solemnity  and
rejoicing,  among  the  Jews.  "  The  temple  may  fail,  but  the  Purim  never,"  was  one
of  their  proverbs.  This  Book  of  Esther  was  written  to  explain  the  origin  of  this
national  festival.

III.  A  VALUABLE  UORAL  LESSON  PERVADES  THE  WHOLE  NABRATIVB.       Not    Only  is

the  great  general  truth,  that  earthly  greatness  and  prosperity  are  mutable  and
transitory,  brought  effectively  before  us,  but  we  learn  that  God  humbles  the  proud,
and  exalts  the  lowly  who  trust  in  him  (vide  1  Sam.  ii.  1 — 10).

II.  The  pbovidence  of  God  is  strikingly  and  memorably  displayed.  We  are
brought  into  contact  with  the  righteousness  and  the  rule  of  the  Most  High.  A  great
deliverance  is  wrought ;  and  whilst  the  means  are  human,  the  deliverance  itself  is
Divine.  God  appears  as  "  mighty  to  save. "  The  book  is,  accordingly,  ono  peouliarlj
suitable  to  those  in  distress,  perplexity,  and  trouble.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  respormbiKty  of  rule.  The  Ahasuerus  of  this  book  was  probably
the  Xerxes  so  well  known  to  students  of  ancient  history.     The  name,  the  period,

b2


«  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHEB.  [oh.  1. 1—9.

the  extent  of  dominion,  the  character,  all  correspond  with  this  hypotheais.    Ob<
serve —

I.  Ths  sxtekt  of  the  kino's  bwat.  The  Persian  was  one  of  the  great  empires  of
the  world.  The  monarch  ruled  from  India  to  Ethiopia.  The  provinces  of  hii
dominion  were  in  numher  127.  Two  or  three  centuries  ago,  commentators  com-
pared this  Persian  empire  with  the  dominion  of  "the  Great  Turk."  It  may  now
be  best  compared  with  the  imperial  dominion  of  the  Queen  of  Great  Britain.  It
is  a  vast  responsibility  to  reign  over  such  an  empire.

II.  The  absolute,  despotic  nature  of  the  king's  poweb.  The  narrative  exhibits
an  Oriental  despot  exercising  unlimited,  unchecked  authority.  "  Whom  he  would  he
slew,  and  whom  he  would  he  kept  alive."  Individuals,  cities,  peoples  lay  at  the
mercy  of  his  caprice.  His  power  for  good  or  for  evil  was  immense.  Happily  there
is  no  parallel  to  this  absolute  sway  amongst  ourselves,  although  there  are  even
now  potentates  whose  empire  is  described  as  "  absolute  monarchy  limited  by  fear
of  assassination."  History  proves  that  human  nature  is  such  that  it  is  unwise  and
unsafe  to  intrust  it  with  absolute  power.

III.  The  king's  ttnkeasonable,  capbicious,  and  cbitel  chabacteb.  What  we  read
in  this  book  concerning  Ahasuerus  agrees  with  what  we  know  of  Xerxes.  The  man
who  led  two  millions  of  soldiers  against  the  Greeks,  who  scourged  the  sea,  and  pat
to  death  the  engineers  of  his  bridge  because  their  work  was  injured  by  a  storm,  was
the  same  man  who  insulted  his  queen  for  her  modesty,  and  who  ,was  ready  to  massacre
»  people  in  order  to  gratify  a  favourite.

IV.  Even  such  poweb  was  conteolled  and  overruled  bt  the  wise  providence
OF  God.  The  Lord  reigneth,  and  the  hearts  of  kings  are  in  his  hand.  The  Persian
monarch  was  not  altogether  the  tool  of  the  wicked,  for  God  turned  the  counsels  of
his  enemies  to  nought.

V.  All  power  is  derived  from  God,  and  all  who  are  intrusted  with  it  are
AOOOUNTABLE  TO  GoD.  Civil  authority  has  its  origin  in  Divine  appointment:  "the
powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God."  Nevertheless,  power  is  not  given  to  be  used
as  it  was  used  by  Ahasuerus,  for  the  gratification  of  sinful  passions.  It  is  given  to
be  employed  for  the  public  good.  It  is  well  that  even  rulers  should  be  accountable
to  their  fellow-men ;  it  cannot  be  otherwise  than  that  they  should  be  accountable  to
God      "  Be  wise,  therefore,  ye  kings  I     Be  instructed,  ye  rulers  of  the  earth  I  "

Vers.  8 — 7. — A  royal  banquet-  In  this  description  of  a  sumptuous  Oriental  feast,
notice — 1.  The  guests.  These  were,  in  the  first  instance,  the  nobles  and  princes  of
the  provinces,  who  were  assembled  for  purposes  of  state  policy ;  and  afterwards  the
people  of  the  metropolis,  who  were  lavishly  regaled  from  the  royal  table.  2.  The
splendour  and  costliness  of  the  entertainment.  The  great  lords  were  shown  by
Ahasuerus  the  riches  of  his  kingdom,  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty.  The
multitude  were  entertained  in  the  palace  garden,  where  gorgeous  awnings  were  slung
from  marble  pillars.  The  guests  reclined  on  couches  of  gold  and  silver,  placed  on
marble  pavements.  They  were  served  with  delicious  viands  and  costly  wines  from
the  cellar  of  the  king.  3.  The  protraction  of  the  feast.  The  people  were  feasted
for  a  week.  The  princes  were  detained  for  six  months  upon  business  of  state.
Probably  preparations  were  then  made  for  the  expedition  into  Greece,  which  is  so
famous  in  history,  and  which  came  to  so  ignominioui  a  close.  Consider  two  great
moral  lessons  underlying  this  picture  of  magnificence.

I.  Lavish  festivities  mat  gild  the  chains  of  arbitrary  power.  The  multitude
often  appear  to  care  more  for  display  than  for  justice  on  the  part  of  their  rulers.  If
the  Boman  populace  under  the  empire  were  supplied  with  food  and  shows,  they
were  content.  In  our  own  times  we  have  seen  the  people  of  a  great  city  kept  quiet
by  lavish  expenditure  on  the  part  of  a  despot.

II.  Reoal  hospitality  may  mask  the  designs  of  wicked  ambition.  Xerxes  had
■  purpose  in  bringing  his  lords  and  satraps  to  Susa ;  he  was  contemplating  a  militaiv
expedition,  in  which  myriads  should  be  slain,  and  the  complete  success  of  which
eould  only  issue  in  his  own  aggrandisement  and  glory.  Let  the  people  beware  of
the  selfish  and  sanguinary  schemes  of  the  great  oi!  thu  world.  Justice  and  p«M)«
■n  preferabU  to  despotism  and  bloodshed.


CH.  I.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  •

III.  Great  entertainments  may  be  an  occasion  fob  forgetting,  rather  than
FOR  remembering,  God,  the  Giver  of  all.  When  we  Bit  at  Heaven's  table  we  should
give  Heaven  thanks.  Some  of  the  great  banquets  mentioned  in  the  Scriptures  were
occasions  for  ostentation  and  for  carousing,  and  this  seems  to  be  no  exception.  Tlie
bounties  of  Divine  Providence  should  be  partaken  with  gratitude  ftnd  devout  acknow-
ledgments. "  Whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever  we  do,  let  us  do  all  to  the  glory
of  God."

Ver.  8. — Temperance.  At  the  feast  of  Ahasuerus  the  provision  of  luxuries  was
profuse.  The  wine  was  choice,  costly,  and  rare  ;  and  was  served  in  cups  of  gold  of
various  form  and  pattern  and  ornament.  But  it  was  the  king's  command  that  no
guest  should  be  compelled  to  drink  more  than  he  needed  or  wished.  A  wise  ordinance  j
and  one  which  shames  many  of  the  customs  and  requirements  of  hospitality,  both
ancient  and  modern.     Observe —

I.  The  temptations  to  iNXEMrERANCE.  These  were  manifold,  and  all  of  them
may  not  concur  in  ordinary  experience.  For  example,  there  was — 1.  Appetite.  If
there  were  no  natural  instincts  of  hunger  and  thirst  there  would  be  no  gluttony  and
no  drunkenness.  It  does  not  follow  that  natural  appetite  is  bad.  The  evil  lies  in
over-indulgence,  in  permitting  bodily  desire  to  overmaster  the  reasonable  nature,
8.  Opportunity.  Some  persons  are  sober  simply  because  and  when  they  have  no
means  of  procuring  drink.  There  is  little  virtue  in  such  sobriety,  which  only  awaits
the  opportunity  of  abjuring  itself.  The  Persians  in  the  palace  at  Susa  had  wine  in
abundance  set  before  them.  As  a  nation  they  were  proverbially  luxurious  {PersicoB
odi,  puer,  apparatus  !).  Those  of  the  guests  who  were  temperate  were  not  so  because
they  had  no  option.  3.  Example.  It  could  scarcely  happen  that  in  so  vast  an
assemblage  there  were  none  intemperate.  Whilst  the  society  of  the  abstemious  is  a
check  and  preservative,  that  of  the  self-indulgent  is  an  incentive  to  sin.  "  Evil
communications  corrupt  good  manners."  The  Persians,  who  in  the  earlj'  period  of
their  history  had  been  a  sober  people,  had,  with  the  advance  of  luxury,  lost  their
reputation  for  temperance.  It  is  said  that  the  king  had,  once  a  year,  an  obligation
to  be  drunk,  on  the  occasion  of  the  annual  sacrifice  to  the  sun.  We  read  tl:at  the
heart  of  Ahasuerus  was  merry  with  wine ;  and  with  such  an  example  before  them,
It  would  have  been  strange  if  the  subjects  universally  maintained  sobriety.

II.  The  absence  of  one  great  temptation — social  pressure  and  compulsion.  1.
Remark  the  wisdom  of  the  royal  ordinance.  The  king,  in  the  exercise,  in  this  case,
of  an  enlightened  discretion,  forbade  the  too  frequent  practice  of  urging  the  guests
on  to  intoxication.  Even  if  his  example  told  against  the  regulation,  the  regulation
in  itself  was  good.  2.  Remark  the  consequent  action  of  the  officers  in  charge  of  the
banquet.  The  Greeks  at  tlieir  feasts  had  a  symposiarch ;  the  Latins  an  arbiter
bihertdi ;  the  Jews  a  master  of  the  feast.  Much  rested  with  these  officials  with
regard  to  the  proceedings  on  such  occasions.  On  this  occasion  they  exercised  their
functions  in  accordance  wifli  directions  received  from  the  throne.  3.  Remark  the
consequent  liberty  of  the  guests.  These  were  to  act  every  man  according  to  his
pleasure.  None  did  compel.  Those  who  were  disposed  to  sobriety  were  not  urged
to  depart  fi'om  their  usual  practices,  to  violate  tlieir  convictions  of  what  was  right.
The  custom  of  constraining  men  to  drink  more  than  is  good  for  them  is  filthy  and
disgraceful.  Banishrd  fi-om  decent  societj',  it  still  lingers  among  some  dissolute
associations  of  liandicraftsmen.  It  sliould  be  discountenanced  and  resisted  ;  and,  in
the  present  state  of  public  opinion,  in  a  free  country,  it 'will  not  endure  the  light  of
day.  Let  it  be  remembered,  "  VVine  is  a  mocker,  strong  drink  is  rag^g;  and
whosoever  is  deceived  thereby  is  not  wise."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa

Ver.  4. — Amlition.  The  context  displays  the  miserable  weakness  of  a  mighty  king.
Placed  in  a  position  of  immense  responsibility,  he  might  well  have  been  overwhelmed
with  anxiety  lest  his  conduct  should  prove  detrimental  to  the  nnillions  under  his
role.    But  no  considerations  of  this  nature  seem  to  have  exercised  i  is  mind  ;  on  the


I  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [en.  i.  1-9

contrary,  he  was' animated  only  with  the  vairglorious  wish  of  exhibiting  to  the  world
"  the  riches  of  his  glorious  kingdom,  and  tlie  lionour  of  his  excellent  majesty."  And
he  could  think  of  no  better  way  of  gratifying  this  wish  than  by  making  an  extrava-
gant feast.  Doubtless  there  was  poverty,  and  wretchedness,  and  sufEering  enough
in  his  vast  dominions,  and  to  have  used  his  abundant  resources  to  alleviate  these
evils  would  have  reflected  immortal  glory  upon  his  name ;  but  he  preferred  to
squander  his  substance  in  riotous  revelry,  a  proceeding  which  must  soon  have  neces-
sitated the  levying  of  fresh  imposts,  in  order  to  replenish  his  impoverished  exchequer.
A  right  feeling  may  have  a  wrong  development.  The  desire  of  excelling  is  truly
laudable ;  but  when  it  is  alloyed  with  unworthy  motives  it  becomes  most  despicable.
Let  us  notice,  in  the  first  place,  wrong  ambition,  of  which  we  have  an  instance  in  the
text ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  right-  ambition,  of  which  the  former  is  but  .a  per-
version.

I.  Wrong  ambition.  The  most  common  forms  of  this  are — 1.  An  immoderate
love  of  fame.  We  have  instances  of  this  in  every  walk  of  life;  some  of  the  most
brilliant  characters  in  history  have  been  victims  of  it.  There  have  been  authors  who
prostrated  their  divine  gifts  to  gain  the  admiration  of  the  world.  There  have  been
orators  whose  chief  aim  was  to  secure  the  applause  of  the.  multitude.  And  there  are
men  now  who  will  face  danger,  endure  hardship,  sacrifice  property,  for  the  sake  of
world-wide  renown — or  even  a  paltry  distinction  in  the  narrow  sphere  in  which  they
move.  2.  An  immoderate  love  of  power.  Men  hasten  to  be  rich  not  because  of  the
inherent  value  of  riches  themselves,  but  because  rather  of  the  power  which  riches
enable  them  to  command  ;  for  at  the  word  of  the  rich  luxury,  gratification,  service
spring  up  as  if  at  the  touch  of  a  magic  wand.  The  thirst  for  power  is  insatiable.
The  amount  enjoyed,  however  great,  only  begets  a  craving  for  more.  It  has  led  to
the  most  sanguinary  wars  that  have  defiled  the  earth  in  ancient  and  modern  times.
Alexander,  Caisar,  Buonaparte,  whom  Christian  enlightenment  has  taught  us  to  regard
with  horror,  are  but  types  of  all  conquerors,  however  exalted  their  professed  aims.
3.  An  immoderate  love  of  display.  This  is  the  most  contemptible  form  of  all,  and
to  this  King  Ahasuerus  became  a  willing  victim.  Think  of  the  sumptuousness  of  this
feast,  the  number  of  the  guests,  the  magnificence  of  the  palace,  the  costliness  of  tlip
furniture,  the  gorgeousness  of  the  drapery,  by  which  he  sought  to  impress  the  world
with  the  "honour  of  his  excellent  majesty  "  on  this  occasion.  The  morbid  desir
among  the  well-to-do  classes  of  outsliining  each  other  in  the  grandeur  of  their  man-
sions, and  the  splendour  of  their  entertainments,  is  a  standing  reproach  upon  modern
civilisation.  In  spite  of  the  gigantic  frauds  and  disastrous  bankruptcies — the  natural
results  of  this  spirit — which  occasionally  startle  society,  the  evil  seems  as  flagrant  as
ever.

II.  Eight  ambition.  It  does  not  follow  that  a  feeling  is  essentially  wrong  because  it
is  sometimes  allowed  to  flow  in  wrong  directions.  Thus  ambition,  however  uncomely
in  certain  connections,  may  be  in  itself  healthy,  and  conducive  to  our  highest  wel-
fare. Ambition,  then,  is  commendable  when  it  is — 1.  A  desire  to  cultivate  tlie  powers,
vtith  which  we  are  endowed-  These  powers  are  various :  physical,  mental,  spiritual.
A  man  cannot  lay  claim  to  the  highest  virtue  simply  because  he  strives  to  have
strong  nerves  and  well-developed  muscles  ;  still  perfect  manhood  is  not  independent
of  these  things.  The  struggle  for  intellectual  distinction  is  certainly  more  dignified,
and  has  a  more  ennobling  influence  upon  those  who  are  engaged  in  it.  The  chief
glory  of  man,  however,  is  his  spiritual  nature,  his  ability  to  hold  communion  with  the
unseen ;  hence  spiritual  pursuits  are  the  most  exalted.  However  strong  man  may
be  physically,  or  great  intellectually,  if  his  spiritual  powers  be  dwarfed,  he  comes
miserably  short  of  the  true  ideal.  2.  A  desire  to  malce  the  most  of  our  outward  cir-
cumstances. No  man's  circumstances  have  been  so  adverse  as  to  make  all  excellenc*
unattainable  to  him.  The  most  barren  and  desolate  life  has  some  spots  which,  b^
cultivation,  may  yield  glorious  results.  In  the  majority  of  cases  unfruitfulness  is
due  to  culpable  negligence  rather  than  external  diSiculties.  Just  think  of  the  numer-
ous instances  in  which  formidable  disadvantages  have  been  conquered.  Poor  boys
have  worked  their  way  up  into  the  presence  of  kings,  blind  men  have  mastered  the
intricacies  of  optics,  the  children  of  profane  parents  have  been  renowned  for  their
saintliness.     All  honour  to  those  who  have  wrestled  with  fortune  and  defied  he:


OH.  I.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


opposition  I  The  circumstances  of  most  men,  however,  are  more  or  less  favourable
to  their  advancement,  and  to  make  the  most  of  them  is  not  only  allowable,  but  a
positive  duty.  3.  A  desire  to  benefit  the  world.  The  best  ambition  is  that  which
IB  furthest  removed  from  self.  The  men  who  will  be  held  in  everlasting  remem-
brance are  those  who  have  contributed  their  quota  to  the  progress  of  their  kind.
When  the  names  of  the  most  potent  warriors  shall  have  perished,  the  names  of
philosophers  like  Newton,  inventors  like  Stephenson,  and  reformers  like  Luther,
shall  live  in  the  afEections  of  a  grateful  world.  But  usefulness  does  not  depend
upon  eminence ;  every  man  in  his  own  sphere  may  do  something  for  the  common
good. — B.

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  great /eatt.  One  peculiarity  of  this  Book  of  Esther  is  that  the  name
of  God  nowhere  occurs  in  it ;  yet  the  reader  discerns  the  finger  of  God  throughout.
Its  story  is  an  illustration  of  the  Divine  providence.  A  complicated  chain  of  events  and
actions  is  so  governed  as  to  work  out  the  deliverance  of  the  exiled  Jews  from  a  plot
which  aimed  at  their  destruction ;  and  this  without  any  miracle  or  mention  of  Divine
interposition.  1.  A  fact  disclosed.  That  the  Jews  while  in  exile,  under  judgment,
and  without  vision,  were  remembered  and  cared  for  by  God.  Outcast,  they  were
not  cast  ofE,  they  were  still  the  children  of  promise ;  God  was  still  faithful  to  them.
2,  From  this  fact  an  inference  may  be  drawn.  There  is  a  Divine  providence  in  the
world ;  no  supernatural  exercises  of  power  are  needed  to  enable  God  to  efEect  his  will ;
all  laws  and  things  are  his  creatures,  and  therefore  under  his  control ;  human  dramas
and  tragedies  take  place  every  day  in  which  acutest  plans  are  foiled,  and,  by  seemingly
natural  processes,  truth  and  right  vindicated.  Our  introduction  to  this  king  is  in
connection  with  a  great  feast.  Its  barbaric  magnificence — prodigality  and  waste.
All  the  princes  and  governors  were  invited — not  together,  but  in  companies,  so  that  the
revelry  continued  for  the  long  period  of  six  months  (a  hundred  and  fourscore  days).
What  its  motive  ?  If  we  take  the  king  to  have  been  Xerxes,  it  inay  have  preceded
his  expedition  into  Greece,  as  a  boastful  anticipation  of  triumph,  or  as  a  means  of
uniting  in  the  monarch's  resolve  all  the  governing  forces  of  the  empire.  But  our
story  says  nothing  of  any  special  purpose ;  that  was  beside  the  object  for  which  it  was
written.  The  feast  itself  was  described  only  because,  in  connection  with  it,  a  thing
occurred  which  had  a  direct  influence  on  the  subsequent  rescue  of  the  Jews  from  a
conspiracy  against  their  life.  The  lines  are  in  God's  hands.  He  sees  the  end  from
the  beginning.  Every  point  in  the  narrative  is  necessary  to  the  great  issue,  and  to  the
general  and  abiding  lesson.  Yet  enough  is  said  to  indicate  that,  io  far  as  the  king  was
concerned,  the  chief  motive  was  vanity — a  childish  love  of  display,  a  vainglorious
desire  to  witness  the  efEect  of  the  splendours  of  his  person  and  palace  on  the  mag-
nates of  his  empire.  During  all  the  days  of  the  feast  "  he  showed  the  riches  of  his
glorious  lungdom,  and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty."  His  mind  was  puffed
up  by  the  conceit  of  his  high-mightiness ;  he  thirsted  for  the  admiring  homage  of  the
world — not  an  homage  attracted  by  mental  greatness  or  moral  worth,  by  elevation  of
character  or  heroism  of  conduct,  but  that  low  and  degrading  homage  which  fawns
and  flatters  in  presence  of  the  vulgar  ostentations  of  material  pomp  and  power.
This  king  of  Persia  was  no  Solomon,  who  could  draw  to  his  capital  princes  from  all
quarters  by  a  wisdom  and  worth  which  were  not  overshadowed  even  by  an  unrivalled
material  splendour.     Let  us  learn —

L  That  personal  vanity  is  not  only  foolish  and  contemptible  in  itself,  but
AN  INLET  ALSO  OF  MUCH  HUMILIATION  AND  BIN  (see  Prov.  xxix.  23 ;  Matt,  xxiii.  12 ;
James  iv.  6).

II.  That  homage  to  kiches  and  the  luxuries  they  purchase  is  unworthy  of  a
HUMAN  soul.  Not  confimed  to  any  condition,  place,  or  age.  As  readily  exacted  and
given  now  as  at  any  time.  Wealth  too  often  goes  before  worth.  The  material
receives  more  respect  than  the  moral  or  spiritual.  The  unspoken  language  is  com-
mon— ^better  be  rich  than  good  ;  better  be  surrounded  with  the  showy  emblems  of
worldly  prosperity  than  have  our  character  and  homes  adorned  with  the  Christian
virtues  of  truth,  uprightness,  and  charity.  The  power  to  form  right  estimates  as
between  the  seen  and  the  unseen,  the  material  and  the  spiritual,  much  needed.  How
■oqnii*  anch  a  power  ?    Only  by  looking  and  listening  to  Jesua  ChriBt,  by  haying


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [CH.  1 1— f.


conscience,  mind,  and  heart  enlightened  at  the  feet  of  him  who  said,  "  Leam  of  me.
for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Best  gifts  and  possessions,  and  touest  springs  oi
honour  and  happiness,  in  Jesus.  Study  his  truth,  his  spirit,  his  life,  and  our  idolatries
of  earthly  good  will  shame  us,  and  make  us  wonder  how  men  with  a  Christ  befoie
them  can  sacrifice  the  benefits  of  a  higher  and  nobler  life  for  the  material  and  perish-
ing things  of  the  present  world.  Our  Lord  himself  presents  the  true  teat  in  Matt.
zvi.  26.

III.  That  hem  abe  besponbible  fob  the  use  thet  make  of  thbib  wealth.  Hos-
pitality is  a  Christian  virtue ;  but  it  is  often  sadly  abused — a  feeder  of  vanity  and
an  incentive  to  sin.  While  showing  a  liberal  and  kindly  spirit,  it  should  avoid  all
extravagance.  How  much  of  the  money  that  is  spent  on  rich,  showy,  and  self-glori-
fying banquets  might  be  put  to  better  use  I  A  deep  spirit  underlies  the  words  of  our
Lord  in  Luke  ziv.  12 — 14.

IV.  That  much  foweb  in  oke  hakd  is  a  DANOERons  thino.  Nothing  tries  a  man
more  than  a  flood  of  prosperity.  Ahasuerus  was  to  be  pitied,  and  the  empire  which
he  governed  still  more.  Few  heads  or  hearts  can  stand  strong  and  erect  under  the
burden  of  anything  approaching  an  absolute  authority.  How  terribly  is  this  taught
by  history  I  It  is  well  for  the  happiness  of  nations  that  improved  ideas  of  govern-
ment are  now  the  rule.  But  the  individual  man,  whatever  be  his  rank,  is  to  be  put
on  his  guard  against  the  intoxications  of  what  may  seem  to  him  good  fortune,  and
against  the  temptation  to  abuse  whatever  power  he  possesses.  Many  who  have
acted  worthily  in  adversity  have  been  carried  ofE  their  feet  by  a  tide  of  prosperity.

V.  That  aovEENMENTS  or  empires  are  stable  or  the  reverse  accobdino  to  the
PBINCIFLES  AND  LAWS  THAT  GOVERN  THEM.  It  is  hardly  Credible  that  the  miserable
nation  whose  Shah  we  have  seen  could  ever  have  occupied  a  position  like  that
described  in  our  narrative.  How  great  the  contrast  beween  then  and  now  I  Not
alone,  however ;  other  and  greater  empires  have  gone  the  same  way.  In  all  edifices
the  foundation  is  the  main  thing.  No  empire,  however  strong,  can  last  unless
founded  on  Divine  truth  and  righteousness.  "  Blessed  is  the  nation  whose  God  is
the  Lord."  As  with  nations,  so  with  men.  A  living  trust  in  God,  a  true  fellowship
with  God's  Son,  is  the  only  safeguard  that  will  give  victory  to  a  human  life  over  all
the  evils  that  assail  it,  and  enable  it  to  enter  at  last  into  full  possession  of  the  life
everlasting. — D.

Ver.  4. — The  sated  sovereign.  It  is  believed  that  the  festivities  mentioned  in  this
chapter  were  held  prior  to  the  invasion  of  Greece  by  Ahasuerus ;  that  it  was  a  time
of  consultation  before  that  disastrous  event.

I.  Self-complacency  and  sinful  induloenck.  It  is  not  aiways  the  difScultiea  we
encounter  which  are  severest  tests  of  character;  smooth  prosperity  is  at  times  a
fiercer  crucible.  Ahasuerus  may  hold  his  own  against  his  enemies ;  will  he  be  able
to  gain  victories  over  himself  ?  From  all  we  can  leam  of  him,  from  the  sacred  book,
and  from  contemporary  history,  he  appears  to  have  manifested  much  pride,  vain-
glory, self-indulgence,  and  extravagance.  "  He  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorious
kingdom  and  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty  many  days,  even  an  hundred  and
fourscore  days"  (ch.  i.  4^.  For  the  space  of  six  months  he  spread  before  the
numerous  guests  every  delicacy  his  kingdom  could  produce.  It  would  have  seemed
probable  that  at  the  end  of  that  time  the  king  would  have  been  wearied  both  with
the  excesses  in  which  he  must  have  indulged,  and  the  adulation  he  must  have  re-
ceived. If  he  became  weary,  he  evidently  resolved  to  overcome  the  fatigue,  and  to
bear  with  the  festivities  other  seven  days,  during  which  not  only  all  officials,  but
all  the  people  of  the  capital  were  to  be  invited.  Oriental  ideas  of  festivity  and  of
pomp  are  to  this  day  very  extravagant.  Illustrations  of  this  might  have  been  seen
at  the  Durbar  held  on  the  occasion  of  the  proclamation  of  our  Queen  as  Empress
of  India,  or  at  the  opening  of  the  Suez  Canal.  The  writer,  having  been  present  at  the
latter  event,  was  staggered  at  the  lavish  expenditure  in  festivities,  and  at  the
number  of  guests,  from  all  countries,  who,  like  himself,  were  feasted  at  the  ^edive's
cost,  not  one  day  only,  but  as  long  as  they  cared  to  remain.  The  feast  of  the  Persian
king  was. most  luxurious.  The  palace  was  not  large  enough  to  contain  the  guests.
They  overflowed  to  the  coort^yanl,  which  had  been  fitted  up  for  tlieir  reception.   11m


am.  I.  1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  t

■walla  had  been  hung  with  rich  stufEs,  and  with  a  canopy  of  white,  green,  and  blue,
fastened  with  cords  of  fine  linen  and  purple  to  "silver  rings  and  pillars  of  marble."
The  couches  on  which  they  reclined  were  covered  with  cloth  of  gold,  interwoven
with  "  gold  and  silver."  Crowds  trod  the  tesselated  pavement,  or  lounged  on  silken
divans,  quaffing  wines  and  sherbet  from  the  silver  cups  of  diverse  pattern  and  rich
chasing,  or  inhaling  the  scent  of  the  roses,  so  dear  to  the  heart  of  a  Persian.  Endless
was  the  service  of  viands,  fruits,  and  wines.  None,  however,  "did  compel"  in
drinking.  The  arbitw  hihendi,  chosen  by  lot  to  preside,  usually  compelled  the
guests  to  drink  as  much  as  he  drank  ;  but  this  custom  was  by  command  of  the  king
set  aside.  He  provided  that  by  temperance  the  feast  should  be  prolonged,  and  that
by  refraining  from  taking  too  great  a  quantity  at  one  time  they  might  be  able  to
continue  the  longer  at  their  cups.

II.  Indifference  to  the  Waste  op  wealth.  Some  defend  luxury  and  waste  on
the  ground  that  it  is  good  for  a  country  and  for  commerce.  They  say  that  it  is  the
duty  of  the  rich  to  be  extravagant  for  the  sake  of  the  poor.  The  notiqp  is  widely
spread,  and  there  are  numbers  who  "  better  the  instruction."  It  is  quite  right  that
wealth  should  in  some  way  be  distributed,  and  that  possessors  of  wealth  should  sur-
round themselves  with  those  things  which  cultivate  their  better  natures,  and  lead  to
a  higher  appreciation  of  the  beautiful ;  but  it  is  not  right  to  squander  wealth  in  that
which  merely  ministers  to  pomp  and  pride.  For  each  one  living  in  luxury  and  pride,
many  have  to  toil  the  harder.  For  all  the  extravagance  practised  greater  exactions
have  by  the  poor  to  be  endured.-  Think  of  how  hard  must  have  been  the  lot  of  the
poor  labourers  on  the  plains  of  Persia,  from  whom  was  wrung  the  money  which  paid
for  those  spilendid  festivities  of  the  king.  Possibly  also  the  money  was  extorted  in
harsh  ways,  practised  usually  by  the  farmers  of  taxes.  Think  of  the  bitterness  of
the  many,  as  contrasted  with  the  brightness  of  the  few.  What  were  the  mass  the
better,  that  a  few  tickled  their  palates,  lolled  in  luxury,  or  flaunted  in  pride  ?  The
object  of  the  whole  waste  was  to  flatter  the  vanity  of  the  king.  He  ought  to  have
been  more  thoughtful  for  the  interests  of  his  subjects  than  to  permit  or  foster  such
waste.  By  moderating  pomp,  and  lessening  the  expenses  of  government,  he  might
have  lessened  the  burdens  on  his  poor  subjects  and  slaves  ;  but  security  of  position
only  leads  to  an  indifference  to  the  waste  of  wealth.

III.  An  abuse  op  absolute  powee.  We  see  this  in  the  ready  consent  given  to
the  slaughter  of  thousands  of  defenceless,  captive,  and  inoffensive  people.  He  gave
this  consent  simply  to  please  an  inhuman  courtier.  This  is  perhaps  only  one  among
many  harsh  decrees  of  which  we  are  ignorant,  but  it  is  sufBcient  to  indicate  the
abuse  of  absolute  power.  It  is  easy  to  condemn  this  act  of  Ahasuerus,  but  it  is  pos-
sible that  many  of  us  are  guilty  of  something  akin  to  it  in  spirit.  There  is  power
which  comes  to  a  man  by  custom,  or  acquisition,  or  accumulation,  or  marriage,  or  by
law.  A  man  may  withhold  wages  on  slight  excuse,  extract  excessive  work ;  it
married,  may  make  his  wife  miserable  by  his  tyranny,  or  his  children  fearful  by  out-
bursts of  passion  or  cruelty.  In  many  a  home  there  is  more  absolutism  and  imperi-
ousness  than  was  ever  manifested  by  a  modern  Czar  of  Russia  or  ancient  king  of
Persia.  Few  are  unselfish  ebough  to  wield  absolute  power ;  and  many,  like  Ahasue-
rus, forget  that  there  is  an  equality  of  obligations  on  the  part  of  the  ruler  and
the  ruled,  superiors  and  inferiors.  The  life  of  Ahasuerus  teaches  us  that  neither
possessions  nor  position,  pomp  nor  power,  pride  nor  pelf,  can  satisfy  a  human  soul.
God  has  not  intended  they  should.  He  has  reserved  to  himself  the  power  to  make
us  really  happy.  Ahasuerus,  with  all  his  magnificence,  was  doubtless  a  dissatisfied
man.  The  determination  to  prolong  the  feast  is  rather  an  indication  of  satiety  than
of  satisfaction.  The  past  had  not  fully  answered  his  expectations.  He  knew  not
him  whose  service  is  perfect  freedom,  and  the  knowledge  of  whose  love  once
possessed  becomes  the  most  cherished  possession.  He  knew  not  clearly  of  that
loftiness  of  character  which  is  a  crown  that  never  fades,  and  of  that  hope  in  the
future  where  treasure  never  corrupts.  He  could  not  say,  in  prospect  of  meeting  his
God,  "  I  shall  be  satisfied  when  I  awake  with  thy  likeness." — H.

Vers.  6—7. — Vanity.  A  special  banquet  wound  up  the  protracted  festivities.  01
this  banquet  note — 1.  It  was  given  to  the  inhabitants  of  Shiuhan,  both  great  and


10  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oH.  1. 1— ».

small,  and  it  lasted  seven  days.  Tbe  close  of  the  six  months'  feasting  with  the  nohles
and  govfirnors,  at  which  imperial  affairs  were  prohably  discussed,  was  to  be  celebrated
by  a  grea*  flourish  of  kingly  magnificence.  The  banquet  to  the  capital  was  evidently
the  climax  and  crown  of  the  rejoicings.  2.  Special  arrangements  had  to  be  made
for  the  accommodation  of  so  vast  a  crowd.  These  arrangements  were  on  a  most
extravagant  scale.  We  are  dazzled  by  columns  of  marble,  variously-coloured  hang-
ings, couches  and  vessels  of  gold,  and  wine  usually  reserved  for  the  king's  use.
Everything  was  done  "  according  to  the  state  of  the  king."  From  these  things  we
may  learn —

I.  That  VANITY  WHBN  INDULGED  GHOWS  QuicKLT.  Nothing  wiM  Satisfy  it.  It  ever
cries  for  more.  The  sight  of  the  king's  "  excellent  majesty  "  by  the  governors  of  127
provinces  was  something  to  remember,  but  it  was  not  enough ;  a  whole  city  must  be
gathered  to  view  and  to  be  impressed  by  the  royal  grandeurs.

U.  That  vanity,  as  it  grows,  gets  wonderfully  blind.  It  loses  all  perception  of
its  own  folly,  and  it  commits  its  folhes  as  if  others  also  were  equally  bbnd.  It  thus
virtually  loses  the  end  on  which  its  greed  fastens.  There  are  always  eyes  about  it
keen  enough  to  penetrate  its  illusions,  and  hearts  that  form,  if  they  do  not  express,  a
true  judgment.

Ill  That  vanity  is  costly.  No  expenditure  was  too  great  for  the  king  to  lavish
in  indulging.and  feeding  his  weakness.  No  thought  of  the  sin  of  such  waste  entered
hia  mind.  No  fear  of  possible  straits  in  the  future  stayed  his  hand.  It  is  likely
that  ha  possessed  far  more  than  suflScient  treasure  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  festivaL
But  suppose  it  were  so,  that  would  not  diminish  the  sin  of  perverting  to  vain  uses
a  wealth  which,  if  wisely  applied,  might  have  been  helpful  to  beneficent  ends.
Money  is  a  great  power  in  the  world  either  for  good  or  for  evil,  and  men  are
responsible  to  God  for  the  use  they  make  of  it.  Think  of  the  good  that  may  be
done  by  it: — 1.  In  assisting  the  poor.  2.  In  encouraging  sound  institutions  of
an  educational  and  benevolent  character.  3.  In  supporting  Christian  Churches
with  their  attendant  machineries.  4.  In  contributing  to  gospel  missions  among  the
heathen.

IV.  That  vanity  is  burdensohi.  The  physical  and  mental  toil  of  the  king  must
have  been  very  trying  during  the  long  feast  and  its  closing  banquet.  Yet  what  will
not  vanity  endure  to  attain  its  object  ?  In  this  it  is  like  every  other  ungovemed  lust —
greed  of  gain,  fleshly  appetite,  worldly  ambition.  If  not  under  the  grace  of  God,
men  will  submit  to  greater  hardships  and  burdens  in  pursuit  of  things  that  are  sinful
and  disappointing  than  in  the  pursuit  of  what  is  necessary  to  true  honour  and
happiness.  1.  If  the  main  burden  of  this  great  festival  did  not  fall  on  the  king,
then  it  would  fall  on  the  king's  servants.  These  would  have  a  hard  time  of  it.  They
would  be  held  responsible  for  every  failing  or  mishap.  Despotic  lords  have  little
consideration  for  their  servants,  and  despotic  mistresses  too.  Vanity  is  another  name
for  self-love,  which  always  makes  those  who  are  in  bondage  to  it  indifferent  to  the
claims  of  inferiors.  2.  Apart  from  the  king  and  his  servants,  a  heavy  burden  would
fall  on  the  empire.  Not  immediately,  perhaps,  but  soon.  The  attack  of  Greece
involved  the  loss  of  myriads  of  lives  and  untold  treasure.  Families  everywhere
were  plunged  into  mourning  and  desolation.  The  provinces  were  impoverished ;  and
as  the  king's  exchequer  had  to  be  supplied,  the  people  were  ground  down  by  heavy
imposts.  Vanity,  when  inordinately  indulged,  and  especially  by  persons  in  power,
becomes  burdensome  in  numerous  ways  to  many.

V.  That  vanity,  apart  from  its  consequences,  is  A  bin  against  conscience  and
against  God  ;  or,  in  other  words,  a  violation  of  natural  and  revealed  law.  1.
Against  conscience,  or  the  law  of  nature.  The  moral  sentiment  of  all  ages,  and  the
common  verdict  of  living  men,  condemn  a  vain-glorying  or  self -conceited  spirit  as
opposed  to  a  just  estimate  of  self.  Even  the  vain  are  quick  to  discover  and  condemn
vanity  in  others.  Humility  is  taught  by  the  law  of  the  natural  conscience  to  be  the
proper  habit  of  man  in  all  circumstances.  2.  Against  God,  or  the  law  of  God's
word.  Tlie  upliftings  of  the  heart  undfer  vanity  are  at  variance  with  that  Divine
revelation  of  righteousness  and  love  by  which  all  men  are  condemned  as  sinners,  and
made  dependent  on  the  mercy  that  is  offered  in  Christ.  All  self-glorying  maniiesti
ignorance  or  f orgetfulness  of  the  true  relation  which  the  gospel  reveals  as  subsisting


OH.  L 1—9.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  11

between  man,  the  transgressor,  and  God,  the  Redeemer.  The  faith  which  submits  all
to  God  in  Christ  is  an  emptying  of  self,  and  a  putting  on  of  the  "  Holy  and  Just  One,"
who  was  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  God  is  therefore  dishonoured,  his  truth  re-
sisted, and  his  mercy  despised,  when  men  who  confess  his  name  become  "  high-
minded  "  or  "  pufied  up  "  iu  self-conceit.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,"  said
Paul,  "save  in  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ."  Humility  before  God  and  men  is  Christ-
like, and  the  rightful  clothing  of  the  followers  of  the  Lamb. — D.

Vor.  8. — The  law  of  temperance.  The  entertainment  of  such  large  and  promis-
cuous companies  as  those  which  were  gathered  for  seven  days  in  the  court  of  the
palace  garden  at  Shuslmn  was  not  an  easy  matter.  To  secure  order,  and  propriety
of  conduct,  and  the  general  comfort,  required  muc'i  forethought  and  care.  As  an
example  of  the  measures  adopted,  a  certain  law  of  the  feast  is  mentioned  as  having
been  laid  down  by  the  king  for  the  occasion.

I.  The  law.  It  was  laid  on  the  officers  not  to  compel  or  urge  any  of  the  guests
to  take  wine.    All  were  to  be  left  free  to  drink  or  not  drink  as  they  pleased.

II.  The  authority.  It  was  at  the  express  command  of  the  king  that  the  law
was  put  in  force  on  this  occasion.  We  learn  from  this  (1)  that  the  royal  command
waa  needed,  and  (2)  that  the  king,  thoughtless  as  he  was  in  many  tilings,  exerted  a
direct  influence  on  the  orderly  arrangement  and  conduct  of  the  banquet.  The  great
lose  no  dignity  by  attending  personally  to  little  duties.  What  seems  little  may  con-
tain the  seeds  of,  or  have  a  close  connection  with,  great  issues.

III.  The  motives.  These  are  not  stated.  But  the  fact  that  the  king  issued  a
special  command  to  enforce  a  law  that  was  contrary  to  the  usual  practice  may  be
taken  as  proof  that  he  had  special  reasons  for  making  known  his  will.  The  follow-
ing are  suggested : — 1.  Self-dignity.  Any  excess  on  the  part  of  the  citizens  would
have  been  unbecoming  in  his  presence,  and  might  have  led  to  the  serious  humiliation
of  his  imperial  majesty.  2.  Policy.  It  would  have  been  an  awkward  thing  if  the
close  of  the  prolonged  and  so  far  triumphant  festival  had  been  signalised  by  a
popular  riot,  whether  good-humoured  or  the  reverse.  The  noise  of  it  would  have
spread  throughout  the  empire,  and  its  real  character  might  have  been  lost  in  the
misrepresentations  of  rumour  and  report.  And  such  a  result  was  not  improbable,
supposing  that  the  servants  and  the  mixed  multitude  had  been  left  guideless  as  to
their  obligations  in  presence  of  the  king  and  his  boundless  hospitality.  3.  Sympathy.
There  would  be  many  in  such  assemblies  as  now  filled  the  king's  tables  who  were
unaccustomed  to  the  use  of  wine,  and  more  perhaps  whose  "  small  "  condition  would
only  enable  them  to  use  it  sparingly.  Young  men  also  would  be  present  to  whom
the  indulgences  of  the  older  society  about  them  would  be  yet  strange.  It  would  have
been,  therefore,  a  hardship  and  a  wrong,  as  well  as  a  danger,  if  the  city  guests  had
been  allowed  to  act  on  the  natural  belief  that  at  the  king's  table  they  were  expected
to  take  wine  whenever  it  was  presented.  Whatever  the  motive  or  motives  of  the
king,  it  goes  to  his  credit  that  when  the  young  and  old,  the  small  and  great,  were  his
guests,  he  enforced  a  law  that  favoured  temperance.  Temperance  is  not  always
studied,  either  on  great  festive  occasions,  or  in  social  gatherings  of  a  more  private
kind.      Thus  this  old  Persian  law  becomes  our  teacher —

1.  As  to  the  relative  duties  of  host  and  guest.  In  coimtries  where  social  life  is
highly  developed,  and  where  the  men  and  women  of  different  families  mix  much  in
free  and  lively  intercourse,  these  duties  are  of  great  importance.  (1)  The  host,  (a)
He  should  be  kindly  considerate  of  all  whom  he  invites  to  share  the  hospitalities  of
his  house — avoiding  all  tyrannical  rules  that  make  no  allowance  for  difierences  of
age,  habit,  and  taste.  (&)  He  should  invite  none  whose  manners  are  ofEensive  to  the
temperate,  or  whose  example  and  influence  would  place  an  undue  constraint  on  the
consciences  of  others,  (c)  He  should  be  careful  to  put  no  temptations  to  excess
before  the  weak,  and  to  give  no  countenance  to  what  may  favour  intemperate  habits.
(2)  The  guest.  While  showing  a  full  appreciation  of  the  good  intent  of  his  host,  and
a  suitable  amiability  to  his  fellow-guests,  he  should  claim  and  exercise  the  right  to
guide  himself  in  the  matters  of  eating  and  drinking  by  the  dictates  of  the  Christian
conscience.  Whether  he  abstain  from  wine  or  not,  a  regard  for  himself,  for  his  host,
and  for  his  companions  should  bind  him  to  be  temperate  in  all  things.    2.  As  to  tht


12  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [en.  I.  T— ».

iutjf  of  all  mm  to  the  law  of  moderation.  Not  long  ago,  to  abBtain  or  even  to  be
temperate  at  Bocial  meetings  was  considered  the  mark  of  a  sour  and  nngenerous
nature.  But  since  then  a  great  improvement  in  manners  has  taken  place.  Little
courage  is  now  required  to  abstain  altogether  from  wine.  It  is  said  that  Queen
Victoria  sets  a  good  example  in  tins  respect.  To  the  expressed  desire  of  a  sovereign
the  authority  of  a  command  is  attached,  and  to  refuse  wine  when  presented  at  a
sovereign's  table  is  regarded  as  an  act  of  disobedience.  But  our  queen  has  abolished
this  law  at  her  own  table,  and  substituted  the  law  of  Ahasuenis  at  his  great  banquet —
that  all  guests  shall  be  free  to  take  or  refuse  wine — that  none  shall  compeL  The
change  for  the  better  in  social  customs  is  a  matter  for  tliankfulness,  but  there  is  still
much  room  for  amendment.  Let  us  remember  that  to  indulge  in  excess  is — (1)  A
sin  against  society.  (2)  A  sin  against  one's  self,  (a)  It  injures  the  body.  (6)  It
weakens  the  mind,  (c)  It  enervates  the  will,  (rf)  It  deadens  the  conscience,  (e)  It
impoverishes  and  embitters  the  life.  (/)  It  destroys  the  soul.  (3)  A  sin  against
God.  (a)  It  is  a  transgression  of  his  law.  (Jb)  It  is  a  despising  of  his  love,  (c)  It
is  opposed  to  the  spirit  and  example  of  his  Son.  (d)  It  is  a  braving  of  his  judgment.
Christian  men  and  women  should  live  under  the  power  of  the  Christian  law,  and
strive  in  all  things  to  be  "  living  epistles  "  of  the  Master  whom  they  serve.  All  such
will  give  earnest  heed  to  the  injunction  of  Paul,  "  Let  your  moderation  be  known
among  all  men ;  the  Lord  is  at  hand." — D.

Ver.  9. — The  position  of  women.  A  noticeable  feature  of  the  king's  banquet  was
that  even  the  women  were  not  excluded  from  participation  in  the  festivities.  In  the
eourt  of  the  garden  the  Idng  entertained  only  men.  But  inside  the  palace  Queen
Vashti  made  a  feast  for  the  women.

I.  A  PICTDBE  OF  QUEENLY  DUTY.  As  queen,  Vashti  entered  into  the  king's  mind,
and  gave  his  projects  such  support  as  she  could  in  her  own  circle  of  duty  and
influence.

II.  A  PICTDBE  OF  WIFELY  DUTY.  As  wife,  Vashti  was  mistress  of  the  female
|)ortion  of  the  king's  household.  She  took  charge  of  the  women,  and  ruled  them  to
the  advantage  and  comfort  of  her  husband.

III.  A  PICTDBE  OF  Oriental  custom  with  bespect  to  women.  The  two  sexes  are
rigidly  separated  in  public  and  social  life.  Women  rarely  travel  beyond  the  narrow
limits  of  the  house  or  the  apartments  assigned  to  them.  They  live  together  in
mysterious  seclusion,  and  are  carefully  guarded  against  intercourse  with  the  outside
world.

IV.  The  influence  of  woman.  1.  On  the  field  of  governmental  policies  and
national  events.  It  has  often  been  dominant,  even  though  unseen,  both  in  civilised
and  in  uncivilised  countries.  A  beautiful  and  clever  woman  may  easily  make  a
weak  prince  her  slave,  and  through  him  affect  the  current  of  history  either  for  good
or  evil.  There  are  not  a  few  instances  of  the  exercise  of  the  feminine  power  in  the
region  of  politics  both  in  sacred  and  secular  history,  both  in  ancient  and  modern
times.  2.  On  the  field  of  domestic,  social,  and  religious  life.  (1)  Mothers.  To  a
large  extent  mothers  give  the  mould  of  thought  and  character  to  each  generation.
The  early  years,  the  formative  periods,  of  men  and  women  alike,  are  in  their  hands.
The  early  home,  whatever  its.cliaracter,  is  never  forgotten.  (2)  Wives.  The  power
of  a  trusted  and  loved  wife  over  her  husband  cannot  be  estimated.  It  will,  as  a  rule,
work  its  way  gradually  and  surely,  either  to  his  well-being  or  to  his  detriment  The
effect  of  so  close,  and  tender,  and  constant  a  conipaiu'onship  will  inevitably  show
itself,  somehow,  in  his  character,  his  happiness,  and  his  work.  The  spirit  that
rules  his  wife  will  come  in  some  real  measure  to  rule  him  ;  it  will  strengthen
or  weaken  his  character,  biighten  or  darken  his  homo,  benefit  or  blast  his  life.  Is
there  anything  more  beautiful,  and  strong,  and  good  in  human  society  than  the
influence  of  the  modest,  loving,  virtuous,  and  Cliristiai\  wife  ?  (3)  Women  generally.
In  societies  which  allow  free  intercourse  in  the  family  and  world  between  men  and
women  of  all  ages,  feminine  influence  touches  hinnan  life  at  every  point.  When  it
is  pure  it  is  always  purifying.  When  it  is  impure  it  has  a  terrible  power  to  corrupt.
Interco^irse  with  a  high-minded  and  good-hearted  Christian  woman  is  a  lift  heaven-
vnrrl.     Willing  intercourse  with  an  unprincipled  or  unsexed  woman  id  a  plungs


3B.  I.  1— G.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  IS

hellward.     In  all  circles,  and  in  all  directions,  the  iiifluence  of  women  powerfallj'
tells.     It  is  at  once  the  best  and  the  worst  element  in  all  grades  of  society.

V.  The  importance  of  a  full  recognition  of  the  just  claims  of  women.  The
efEect  of  secluding  women,  and  treating  them  as  the  chattels  and  toys  of  men,  has
been  to  degrade  them,  and  to  deprive  society  of  their  proper  influence.  It  is  undoubt-
edly true  that  the  position  assigned  to  women  in  Eastern  nations  has  been  one  of  the
chief  causes  of  their  decay,  and  is  now  one  of  the  chief  obstacles  to  all  civilising  or
Christianising  movements.

VI.  The  benign  power  of  Christianity  in  relation  to  women.  Wherever  the
gospel  of  JesuB  is  allowed  to  govern  families  or  communities,  the  gentler  sex  is
raised  by  it  into  its  true  relative  position.  We  think  of  the  holy  women  to  whom
Jesus  gave  such  a  mingled  respect  and  affection,  and  of  those  who  were  associated
with  the  apostlei  in  their  work,  and  of  whom  such  honourable  mention  is  made.
The  Christian  religion  ever  brings  with  it  the  emancipation  of  women  from  the
thraldom  of  man's  tyrannical  lust,  and  secures  to  them  their  rightful  share  of  work
and  influence.  It  makes  them  mistress  in  their  own  sphere.  It  clothes  them  with  a
new  responsibility  and  power,  and,  by  surrounding  them  with  high  duties  and
ministries,  draws  into  beneficent  activity  the  best  qualities  of  their  nature.  Nations
that  degrade  their  women  are  doomed ;  nations  that  cherish  a  Christian  respect  for
them  have  a  spring  of  life  that  will  make  them  strong  and  enduring.  The  greatest  '
trial  of  gospel  missionaries  arises  from  the  utter  ignorance  of  heathen  women  and
the  difficulty  of  reaching  them  with  the  Divine  truth  they  teach. — D.

Vers.  1 — 9. — The  royal  feast.  We  have  in  the  opening  chapter  of  this  B  ook  ol
Esther  the  description  of  a  royal  feast ;  it  may  remind  us  of  two  other  feasts  to  which
we  of  this  land  and  age,  and  they  of  every  clime  and  century,  are  invited  guests.

I.  The  feast  of  the  king  of  Persia.  "  It  came  to  pass  in  the  days  of  Ahasu-
erus"  (ver.  1),  . .  .  "in  the  third  year  of  his  reign,  he  made  a  feast  unto  all  his
princes  and  his  servants  "  (ver.  3).  A  "  great  monarch  "  was  this  king,  ruling
"  from  India  to  Ethiopia, over  a  hundred  and  seven  and  twenty  provinces"  (ver.  1).
His  palace  at  Susa  (Shushan,  ver.  2),  surrounded  with  beautiful  gardens,  was
a  place  where  labour  and  art  had  furnished  everything  that  could  minister  to
bodily  gratification.  Here  he  entertained  "the  power  of  Persia  and  Media"  (ver.  3)
for  180  d^ys  (ver.  4),  the  guests  probably  coming  and  going,  for  all  the  satraps
could  hardly  have  been  absent  from  their  provinces  at  the  same  time.  Then,  after
these  days  were  expired  (ver.  5),  the  king  gave  a  banquet  of  a  more  indiscriminate
kind — "  a  feast  unto  all  the  people  that  were  present  in  Shushan  the  palace,  both
unto  great  and  small "  (ver.  5).  Every  possible  preparation  was  made  for  the
guests,  a  beautiful  "  awning  of  fine  white  cotton  and  violet "  (ver.  6 ;  '  Speaker's
Com.')  being  spread,  the  couches  being  of  gold  and  silver,  and  placed  on  pave-
ment of  variously-coloured  stones  (ver.  6)  ;  wine  from  the  king's  own  cellar  being
served  in  golden  goblets,  with  liberty  for  the  guests  to  drink  as  they  pleased  (vers.
7,  8).  It  was  a  feast — 1.  In  which  regal  bounty  was  lavishly  poured  forth  ;  no  pains
or  expenses  were  spared,  as  these  particulars  show,  to  make  the  guests  joyous.  2.
In  which  there  was  more  of  selfish  ostentation  than  genuine  kindness.  The  spirit
of  it  is  seen  in  the  fact  that  by  so  doing  "  he  showed  the  riches  of  his  glorious  king-
dom, and  the  honour  of  his  excellent  majesty  "  (ver.  4).  3.  In  which  there  was  more
of  short-lived  gratification  than  lasting  joy.  There  was,"no  doubt,  much  exhilaration
expressing  itself  in  revelry ;  and  revelry  soon  ended,  as  it  always  must,  in  satiety  and
Buffering.     We  are  reminded,  partly  by  contrast,  of —

II.  The  feast  of  the  Lord  of  nature.  God,  our  King,  who  is  in  deed  and  truth
the  "  King  of  kings,"  and  not  in  name  only,  like  these  Persian  monarchs,  spreads  a
regal  feast  for  his  subjects.  It  is  one  that  (1)  lasts  all  the  year  through :  not  for
even  "  a  hundred  and  eighty  days,"  but  "  daily  he  loadeth  us  with  benefits  "  (Ps.
Ixviii.  19)  ;  (2)  extends  to  all  his  creatures:  there  is  "food  for  man  and  beast."  In
this  Divine  provision  is  (3)  every  needful  thing  for  the  senses :  "  food  for  all  flesh"
(Ps.  cxxxvi.  25),  beauty  for  the  eye,  odours  for  the  smell,  delicacies  for  the  palate,
melodies  for  the  ear;  (4)  truth  and  fact  for  the  mind:  "Wisdom  hath  builded  her
house,"  Ac.  (Prov.  ix.)  ;  (5)  love  for  the  heart  of  man:  the  lor^  of  kindred  and  ol


14  THE  BOOK  OF  E8THKB.  [oa.  l  1—9.

friends,  the  feast  of  pure  affection.  Of  this  feast  of  the  Lord  of  nature  we  may  say
that,  like  that  in  the  text,  it  is  one  of  regal  bounty  ;  it  is  the  constant  and  lavish
kindness  of  a  Bang ;  that,  unlike  that  in  the  text,  there  is  more  of  kindness  than
ostentation  in  it — a  "hiding  of  power"  (Hab.  iii.  4)  rather  than  a  display  ;  and  that
it  is  one  in  which  those  who  wisely  accept  the  King's  invitation  may  find  a  continual
and  life-long  enjoyment.  They  who  eat  and  drink  at  his  table,  as  he  invites  them  to
do,  go  not  through  an  exciting  intoxication  followed  by  a  remorseful  misery  and
ennui,  bnt  find  in  the  gifts  of  his  hand  a  perennial  spring  of  pure  and  lasting
pleasure.

III.  The  feast  of  the  Pbince  of  peacb.  Jesus  Christ,  the  "  King's  Son,"  has  made
for  us  a  spiritual  feast  (Matt.  xxii.  1 — 14)  :  "  royal  wine  in  abundance  "  (ver.  7)  ;
"  bread  enough  and  to  spare  "  at  his  princely  table  for  all  thirsting  and  hungering
souls  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  John  vi.  36).  In  this  gospel  feast  there  is  (1)  no  ostentation,  but
marvellous  love ;  the  marked  absence  of  all  stately  pomp  and  material  splendour
(Isa.  liii.),  but  the  presence  of  all  generosity  and  self-sacrificing  goodness.  (2)  Pro-
vision, without  distinction  of  rank  (contrast  vers.  3, 4, 5)  or  sex  (contrast  ver.  9),  for
all  subjects,  in  whatever  part  of  his  kingdom  they  dwell  (contrast  ver.  6) ;  and  (3)
provision  which  lasts  not  for  a  number  of  days  (contrast  vers.  4,  5),  but  so  long  as  the
heart  hungers  for  the  bread  of  life,  as  the  soul  thirsts  for  the  waters  of  salvation. — C.

Vers.  3, 4. — TAe  hospitality  of  vainglory.  The  reign  of  Ahasuerus,  or  Xerxes,
had  now  reached  its  third  year.  His  sway  was  very  wide,  and  other  history  lends
valuable  confirmation  of  the  contents  of  the  former  of  these  verses.  Herodotus,
far  enough  removed  in  his  general  tone  from  a  Scripture  historian,  fixes  this  year
as  the  year  in  which  Xerxes  summoned  the  rulers  of  his  provinces  to  Susa,  or
Shushan,  preparatory  to  his  expedition  against  Greece.  Although  no  mention  is
made  here  of  this  circumstance  as  the  occasion  of  the  feast,  or  as  connected  with
it,  yet  the  two  intimations  are  not  inconsistent  with  one  another,  and  in  fact  are  well
fitted  to  one  another.  Each  historian  keeps  the  object  of  his  own  work  in  view.
The  thing  which  had  no  significance  with  Herodotus  would  be  the  consideration  of
primary  significance  in  our  present  history  ;  and  we  get  as  the  result  a  consent  of
two  widely  differing  authorities  to  testify  to  the  fact  of  special  doings  in  Shushan
this  year.  The  passage  offers  us  a  typical  instance  of  a  feast  such  as  to  answer
correctly  to  the  motto,  "  Self  first,  hospitality  second."  This  is  evidently  the  cha-
racter of  it.  Yet  let  us  take  into  account  what  may  be  said  for  it.  1.  It  was
confessedly  an  Eastern  feast,  and  as  such  it  would  have  beeu  considered  essen-
tially wanting  if  it  had  been  wanting  in  the  matter  of  display.  2.  It  was  not  a
feast  given  by  one  of  those  people  who  had  "  received  the  oracles ; "  who  had
been  long  time  under  a  course  of  higher  instruction  ;  who  had  heard,  learned,
pondered  "  the  Proverbs  of  Solomon,"  or  "  the  words  of  the  Preacher,  son  of  David,
king  of  Jerusalem."  Much  less  was  it  possible  in  the  nature  of  things  to  have  been
the  feast  of  one,  who  had  had  the  opportunity  of  knowing  the  doctrine  of  Christ  in
such  a  matter.  3.  Yet  nevertheless  it  answered  in  one  respect  to  one  of  the  pre-
scriptions of  Jesus  Christ  himself ;  for  it  was  a  feast  which  could  not  be  returned  to
its  giver — not  in  kind,  at  all  events.  The  feast  of  a  great  king,  who  drew  on  enormous
wealth, — "made  to"  a  whole  multitude  of  princes,  subordinate  to  him,  and  pro-
longed over  months, — this  could  not  be  returned  to  him.  4.  It  was  a  feast  of
unstinted  plenty — the  thought  of  a  nature  that  had  some  sort  of  largeness  about  it,
and  the  distributing  of  a  hand  that  dropt  more  than  the  uncared-for  crumbs  of  its
own  table.     On  the  other  hand —

I.  It  ls_  incontestable  that  this  feast  visits  upon  its  giveb  the  condemna-
tion OF  VAINOLORIOUS  DISPLAY  AS  REGARDS  HIS  "  KINGDOM,"  AND  SELF-SEEKINQ  DIS-
PLAY AS  REGARDS  HIS  OWN  "  EXCELLENT  MAJESTY."  The  greater  the  scale  on  which
it  was  made,  the  more  profuse  its  abundance,  the  longer  its  continuance,  so  much  tje
more  impressive  and  convincing  evidence  does  it  furnish  of  vanity  insatiable,  of
selfishness  deep-seated,  of  the  presence  of  the  hand  of  one  who  not  only  sought  the
praise  of  men  rather  than  that  of  God,  but  who  sought  to  influence  even  those  men
by  the  lower  kinds  of  appeal — those  of  sense  and  the  eye,  rather  than  by  »ny  of  a
higher  kind.


OH.  I.  1—9.]


THS  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


U


II.  There  was  beyond  doubt  a  distinctly  and  decidedly  utilitarian  desigh
ABOUT  the  feast.  Though  it  could  not  be  returned  in  kind,  it  could  be  recompensed.
At  recompense  it  aimed,  and  without  the  prospect  of  such  recompense  it  would  never
have  been  "made."  It  was  pre-eminently  a  banquet  of  policy,  unwarmed  by  one
simple  genuine  feeling  of  the  heart,  unhonoured  by  any  noble  object  for  its  motive,
fragrant  with  no  philanthropic  beneficence.  It  was  simply  a  device  of  an  inferior
type,^r«i,  for  flashing  to  all  the  extremities  of  the  kingdom  the  envious  tidings  of
the  central  wealth,  luxury,  splendour,  and  power,  and  thereby  riveting  the  tyrannous
hold  and  the  ghastly  fascination  of  an  Eastern  arbitrary  despot ;  and,  seccmdly,  for
ingratiating  that  central  authority  with  the  numerous  helpless,  subordinate  powers
who  were  to  send  contingents  and  contributions  to  a  disastrous  expedition  into
Greece.  It  was  very  different  from  an  English  banquet  in  celebration  of  some
accomplished  fact,  or  in  honour  of  some  worthy  hero  or  distinguished  benefactor  of
Oie  people,  though  oftentimes  it  ia  not  very  much  that  can  be  justly  said  in  com-
mendation of  even  these.

III.  The  giving  itself — what  was  it  ?  It  happens  to  be  well  termed  "making"
a  feast,  in  the  undesigned  idiom  of  the  language.  Did  it  cost  much  to  make  ?  It
cost  lavish  silver  and  gold  very  likely  ;  but  whence  were  these  drawn  ?  Were  they
not  already  drawn  from  those  for  whom  the  feast  was  "  made  "  ?  and  probably  abso-
lutely wrung  by  these  again  from  the  oppressed  subjects  of  their  grinding  rule.  Did
it  cost  Ahasuerus  himself  much  ?  Did  it  cost  him  anything  at  all  ?  Was  it  drawn
from  the  honourably-earned  and  diligently-acquired  results  of  his  own  past  labour  ?
No;  it  speaks  plenty  without  bounty,  liberality  witliout  generosity,  profuse  bestow-
ment  the  fruit  of  no  kindliness  of  soul,  a  lavish  hand  moving  to  the  dictate  of  a
selfish  heart.

Conclusion. — 1.  These  are  just  some  of  the  hard  facts  of  human  nature,  tried  in
such  a  position  as  that  of  this  king.  2.  There  is  a  great  deal  to  eaeplain  and  aecoumt
for  such  exhibitions  of  human  nature  in  Ahasuerus,  to  be  found  in  his  time  of  day,
in  his  antecedents,  &c.,  but  these  things  do  not  justify  them.  They  do  impressively
help  illustrate  to  what  human  nature's  time  of  day  and  antecedents  bring  us.  3.  We
could  plead  no  extenuations  whatever  if  oiu:  own  Conduct  or  our  own  principles
were  detected  sinking  to  the  level  of  those  before  us,  and  all  the  less  for  toe  beacon
of  this  very  history. — B.


EXPOSITION.


The  disoraoe  op  Yasbti  (ch.  L  10 — 22).
On  the  seventh  day  of  the  feast  "to  all  in
Shushan  "  (ver.  5),  the  king  having  excited
himself  with  drink,  took  it  into  his  head  to
send  a  message  to  Yashti,  lequiritag  her  to
make  her  appearance  in  the  banquet  of  the
men,  since  he  desired  to  exhibit  her  beauty
to  the  assembled  guests,  as  "  she  was  fair  to
look  on"  (ver.  11).  His  design  must  have
been  to  present  her  unveiled  to  the  coarse
admiration  of  a  multitude  of  semi-dnmken
revellers,  in  order  that  they  might  envy
him  the  possession  of  so  lovely  a  wife.  Such
a  prbceeding  was  a  gross  breach  of  Persian
etiquette,  and  a  cruel  outrage  upon  one
whom  he  above  all  men  was  bound  to  pro-
tect Vashti,  therefore,  declined  to  obey  (ver.
12).  Preferring  the  risk  of  death  to  dis-
honour, she  braved  the  anger  of  her  despotic
lord,  and  sent  him  back  a  meiaage  by  his


chamberlains  that  she  would  not  come.  W*
can  weU  understand  that  to  an  absolute
monarch  such  a  rebuff,  in  the  face  of  his
whole  court  and  of  some  hundreds  or  thou-
sands of  assembled  guests,  must  have  been
exasperating  in  the  extreme.  At  the  moment
when  he  had  thought  to  glorify  himself  by  a
notable  display  of  his  omnipotence,  he  waa
foiled,  defeated,  made  a  laughing-stock  to
all  Susa.  "Therefore  was  the  king  very
wroth,  and  his  anger  burned  in  him."  It  is
to  his  credit  that,  being  thus  fiercely  en-
raged, he  did  not  proceed  to  violence,  but  so
far  restrained  himself  as  to  refer  the  matter
to  the  judgment  of  others,  and  ask  the
"seven  princes"  the  question,  "What  is  to
be  done  according  to  law  nnto  qneen  Vashti,
for  not  performing  the  commandment  of  tha
king ! "  (ver.  15).  The  advic*  of  the  princes,
ottered  by  one  of  their  body  (toil  1ft— SOJ^


1«5


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[oh.  I.  10—22


and  assented  to  by  the  remainder  (ver.  21),
was,  that  Yaahti  should  be  degraded  from
the  position  of  queen,  and  her  place  given
to  another.  This  sentence  was  supported
by  specious  arguments  based  upon  expedi-
ency, and  ignoring  entirely  the  outrageous
character  of  the  king's  command,  which  was
of  course  the  real,  and  sole,  justification  of
Yashti's  disobedience.  It  was  treated  as  a
simple  question  of  the  wife's  duty  to  obey
her  husband,  and  the  husband's  right  to
enforce  submission.  Ahasuems,  as  might
be  expected,  received  the  decision  of  his
obsequious  counsellors  with  great  satisfac-
tion, and  forthwith  sent  letters  into  all  the
provinces  of  his  vast  empire,  announcing
what  had  been  done,  and  requiring  wives
everywhere  to  submit  themselves  unreserv-
edly to  the  absolute  rule  of  their  lord  (ver.
22).

Ver.  10. — When  the  heart  of  the  king
was  merry  with  wine.  We  are  told  that
once  a  year,  at  the  feast  of  Mithra,  the  king
of  Persia  was  bound  to  intoxicate  himself
(Duns,  Fr.  13).  At  other  times  he  did  as
he  pleased,  but  probably  generally  drank  till
reason  was  somewhat  obscured.  Uehuman,
&c.  Persian  etymologies  have  been  given  for
most  of  these  names,  but  they  are  all  more
or  less  uncertain  ;  and  as  eunuchs  were  often
foreigners,  mutilated  for  the  Persian  market
(Herod. ,  iii.  93  ;  viii.  105),  who  bore  foreign
names,  like  the  Hermotimus  of  Herodotus
(viii  104 — 106),  it  is  quite  possible  that
Persian  etymologies  may  here  be  out  of
place.  Bigtha,  however,  if  it  be  regarded  as
a  shortened  form  of  Bigthan  (ch.  ii.  21)  or
Bigthana  (ch.  vi ),  would  seem  to  be  Persian,
being  equivalent  to  Bagaddva  (:=  Theodoms),
"  the  gift  of  God."  Chamberlains.  Really,
as  in  the  margin,  "eunuchs.".  The  influ-
ence of  eunuchs  at  the  Persian  court  was
great  from  the  time  of  Xerxes.  Ctesias
makes  them  of  importance  even  from  the
time  of  Cyrus  ('  Exc  Pnrs.,'  §§5,  9).

Ver.  11. — Vashti  ....  with  the  crown
royal.  We  have  no  representation  of  a
Persian  queen  among  the  sculptures ;  but
Mousa,  a  Parthian  queen,  appears  on  a  coin
of  her  son  Phraataces  ('  Sixth  Oriental
Monarchy,'  p.  220),  crowned  with  a  very
elaborate  tiara.  It  consists  of  a  tall  stiff
cap,  not  unlike  the  cidaria  of  a  Persian  king,
but  is  apparently  set  with  large  jewels.
Vashti's  "  crown  royal"  was  probably  not
very  dissimilar.  To  show  the  princes  and
the  people  her  beanty.  More  than  one  Ori-
•ntal  monarch  is  reported  to  have  desired  to
have  his  own  opinion  of  his  wife's  beauty


confirmed  by  the  judgment  of  others.  Can-
daules,  king  of  Lydia,  is  said  to  have  lost
his  crown  and  his  life  through  imprudently
indulging  this  desire  (Herod. ,  i.  8 — 12).  So
public  an  exposure,  however,  as  that  de-
signed by  Ahasuerus  is  not  recorded  of  any
other  monarch,  and  would  scarcely  hav«
been  attempted  by  any  one  less  extravagant
in  his  conduct  than  Xerxes.

Ver.  12.— But  the  queen  Tashti  refused.
Vashti's  refusal  was  morally  quite  justifiable.
Neither  a  husband's  nor  a  king's  authority
extends  to  the  wanton  requirement  of  acts
that,  if  done,  would  disgrace  the  doer  for  life.
Had  Vashti  complied,  she  would  have  lost
the  respect  not  only  of  the  Persian  nation,
but  of  the  king  himself  Therefore  was  the
king  very  wroth.  Had  Ahasuerus  really
loved  his  wife,  or  been  a,  man  of  fair  and
equitable  disposition,  he  would  have  excused
her  refusal,  and  felt  that  he  had  deserved  the
rebuff.  But,  not  really  loving  her,  and
being  of  a  hot  and  ungovernable  temper,  he
was  violently  enraged  with  her,  as  he  always
was  when  anything  fell  out  contrary  to  his
wishes  (see  Herod.,  vii.  11,  35,  39,  &c.).

Ver.  13. — Then  the  king  said  to  the  wise
men.  Angry  as  he  was,  Ahasuerus  had  stUl
some  power  of  self-restraint.  He  was  in  the
presence  of  his  whole  court,  and  of  a  great
assembly  of  the  people.  It  wonld  not  be
seemly  that  he  should  vent  his  passion  in
violent  words,  imprecations,  or  threats.  His
dignity  required  that  he  should  at  any  rate
seem  calm,  and,  instead  of  issuing  any  hasty
order,  should  proceed  deliberately  to  consider
what  were  the  next  steps  to  be  taken.
Xerxes  appears  to  have  been  rather  fondol
asking  advice  (Herod.,  vii.  8,  48,  234  ;  viii
101)  ;  and  he  now,  in  a  sufficiently  dignified
way,  required  the  opinion  of  his  "wise  men  "
on  the  practical  question.  What  was  to  be
done  to  Vashti  ?  (see  ver.  15).  Which  knew
the  times.  /.  e.  persons  who  were  well  ac-
quainted .with  past  times,  and  knew  what
it  was  customary  to  do  on  each  occasion.
For  so  was  the  king's  manner  toward  all
that  knew  law  and  judgment.  Bather,
"  For  so  was  the  business  of  the  king  brought
before  such  as  knew  law  and  judgment."
Each  matter  which  concerned  the  king  was
submitted  to  learned  persons  for  their  opinion
before  any  actual  step  was  taken  (compare
Herod.,  iii  81,  where  Cambyses  asks  the
opinion  of  the  royal  judges  wiji  respect  to
his  proposed  marriage  with  his  siiiter).  •  It  is
not  a  special  practice  of  Ahasuerus,  but  ■
general  usage  oi  the  Persian  monarchy,  which
IS  noticed.

Ver.  14. — And  the  next  unto  him  was
Carshena,  Shethar,  &c.  The  chief  native
advisers  of  Xerxes  in  the  early  part  of  his
reign  appear  to  have  been  Mardonins  (Pers.
"*'"■' "''  and  Artabanus   (Pers.    ArUi'


CH.  I.  10—22.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


17


pdna),  who  was  hia  uncle  (Herod,,  viL
6 — 17).  It  is  po8sib1a  that  Mardonias  may
be  here  represented  by  Uarsena,  and  Arta-
banus  by  Admatba ;  but  the  names  could
only  have  taken  these  shapes  by  a,  large
amount  of  corruption.  The  other  form
have  a  general  Persian  air,  but  do  not  admit
of  even  conjectural  identification.  Thq  seven
princes  of  Persia  and  Uedia.  Ezra  assigns
to  the  Persian  monarch  seven  specia)  coun-
sellors (ch.  vii  14),  and  Herodotus  says  that
there  were  seven  leading  families  in  Persia
whose  heads  were  specially  privileged  (iiL  84).
The  title,  however,  "pnnces  of  Persia  arid
Media,"  is  not  founa  anywhere  but  here.
Which  saw  the  king's  face.  Among  the
privileges  said  by  Herodotus  to  have  been
reserved  to  the  heads  of  the  great  families,
one  of  the  most  valued  was  that  of  free
access  to  the  monarch  at  all  times,  unless  he
were  in  the  seraglio.

Yer.  15. — What  shall  we  do  to  queen
Tashti  according  to  lawl  Literally,  "Ac-
cording to  law,  what  is  there  to  do  to  (|ueen
Vashti?"  Law  is  given  the  prominent
place,  as  though  the  king  would  say.  Let  us
put  aside  feeling,  and  simply  consider  what
the  law  is.  If  a  queen  disobeys  the  king
openly  in  the  face  of  his  court,  what,  accord-
ing to  law,  is  to  be  done  to  her  ?

ver.  16. — And  Uemuoan  answered.  We
gather  from  Memucan's  reply  that  the  Per-
sian law  had  provided  no  penalty  for  the
case  in  hand— had,  in  fact,  not  contemplated
it.  He  first  argues  the  matter  on  general
grounds  of  morality  (ver.  16)  and  expediency
(vera.  17,  18),  and  then  proposes  the  enact-
ment of  a  new  law^-a  privuegium — assign-
ing Vashti  a  special  punishment  for  her
contempt  of  theking's  order.  The  "  decree  "
(ver.  20)  would  not  have  been  necessary  had
there  already  existed  a  law  on  the  point.
Yashti,  the  queen,  hath  not  done  wrong  to
the  king  only.  With  the  servility  to  be  ex-
pected in  an  Oriental  and  a  courtier,  Memucan
throws  himself  wholly  on  the  king's  side—
insinuates  no  word  of  blame  against  his  royal-
master,  on  whom  in  justice  the  whole  blame
Tested ;  but  sets  himself  to  make  the  worst  he
can  of  Vashti's  conduct,  which  (he  says)  was
a  wrong  not  to  Ahasuerus  only,  but  to  the
whole  male  population  of  the  empire,  the
princes  included,  who  must  expect  their
wives  to  throw  off  all  subjection,  in  imitation
of  the  queen's  example,  if  her  conduct  were
allowed  to  go  unpunished.  As  such  a  con-
dition of  things  would  be  intolerable,  the
king  is  urged  to  disgrace  her  publicly.

Ver.  17. — They  shall  despise  their  hus-
bands. Literally,  "their  Urrds,"  but  the
word  is  the  one  ordinarily  used  for  "hus-
band." When  it  shall  be  reported.  Bather,
"  while  they  say,"  or  "  and  shall  say. "  (So
the  Vulgate— "nt  contemnant  et  dicant.")

ISTHKB.


Ver.  18.  —  The  ladies.  Rather,  "  the
princesses."  Translate  the  whole  passage  as
follows : — "  Likewise  shall  the  princesses  of
Persia  and  Media,  which  have  heard  of  the
deed  of  the  queen,  say  this  day  to  all  the
king's  princes."  Not  only  will  the  wives  of
the  common  people  get  hold  of  the  story,
and  quote  Vashti  s  example  as  often  as  they
wish  to  disobey  their  husbands,  but  our  oum
wives  too  will  disobey  us  on  the  same  pre-
text, and  will  begin  forthwith  "  this  day."
Too  much  contempt  and  wrath.  Literally,
"  sufficient ; "  but  the  meaning  is  that  given
by  our  translators — "  quite  enough,"  "  more
than  enough."  Contempt  on  the  part  of
the  wives;  wrath  on  the  part  of  the  hjs-
bands.

Ver.  19. — A  royal  commandment.  Liter-
ally, "a  command  of  the  kingdom" — L  e.
a  public,  not  a  domestic,  order.  Under
ordinary  circumstances  such  a  matter  as  the
disgrace  of  a  favourite  wife  would  have  been
settled  in  the  secrecy  of  the  seraglio,  without
calling  general  attention  to  it.  In  Memu-
can's opinion,  the  publicity  of  Vashti's  dis-
obedience had  made  it  expedient  that  she
should  be  disgraced  publicly.  Let  it  be
written  among  the  laws  of  the  Persians  and
the  Uedes.  A  sentence  upon  an  individual
was  not  a  very  suitable  thing  to  add  to  a
national  code  of  laws ;  but  we  see  from
Daniel  (vi  8,  9)  that  decrees  of  quite  a  tem-
porary character  were  sometimes  attached  to
the  code  for  the  express  purpose  of  rendering
them  unalterable  ;  and  so  it  seems  to  have
been  in  this  instance.  TTnto  another.  Liter-
ally, as  in  the  margin,  "unto  her  companion."
Memucan  assumes  that  one  of  the  existing
inmates  of  the  seraglio  will  be  elevated  into
the  place  vacated  by  Vashti  This  was  the
ordinary  course,  but  on  the  present  occasion
was  not  followed.

Ver.  20.— The  king's  deerae.  Tlie  "com-
mandment" of  the  precijing  verse  is  here
given  the  formal  name  of  piV/ttjram,  "decree,"
which  is  a  Persian  word,  used  also  in  Ezra
(ch.  iv.  17;  V.  7,  11).  For  it  is  great
These  words  seem  at  first  sight  superfluous.
Perhaps  their  force  is  this — Let  a  decree  be
made,  and  then,  great  as  the  empire  is,  the
lesson  will  be  taught  to  all :  otherwise  there
will  be  many  to  whom  it  will  never  penetrate.

Ver.  21. — The  king  did  according  to  the
word  of  Memucan.  This  expression  must
not  be  pressed  too  closely.  It  does  not
imply  more  than  that  Memucan's  advice  was
followed  in  a  general  way — Vashti  disgraced,
and  the  grounds  of  her  disgrace  published
throughout  the  provinces.  We  cannot  be
sure  that  the  decree  was  "written  among
the  laws  of  the  Persians  and  the  Medes."
Even  if  it  was,  it  was  always  possible  for  a
Persian  king  to  give  himself  a  dispensation
£rom  the  law  (see  Herod.,  iii.  68).
0


18


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[cH.  I.  10—22


Ver.  22.— For  he  sent.  Rather,  "and
he  sent."  Besides  publishing  the  decree,
Ahasuerus  sent  letters  prescribing  certain
things,  viz.  : — 1.  That  every  man  should  bear
rule  in  his  own  house ;  and,  2.  That  every
man  should  speak  his  own  language  in  his


fnmily,  niid  not  that  of  his  wife,  if  it  were
different.  This  is  the  plain  meaning  of
the  existing  text,  which  cannot  bear  either
of  the  senses  suggested  in  the  Authorised
YeTsion.


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Qtieen  Vashti.  It  would  seem  that  the  character  of  Vashti  has  been
by  many  writers  darkened  in  order  to  bring  out  the  brightness  of  Esther's  virtues.
But  it  is  not  fair  to  make  one  queen  simply  the  foil  to  the  other.  Haughty,  dig-
obedient,  defiant,  Vashti  may  have  been,  but  she  was  placed  in  no  ordinary  position,
and  treated  in  no  ordinary  manner.

I.  Observe  the  position  of  Vashti.  Her  name  (according  to  some)  indicates  her
beauty,  and  it  is  expressly  said  that  she  was  fair  to  look  upon.  She  was  the  legiti-
mate wife  of  Ahasuerus.  If  he  were  Xerxes,  it  is  possible  she  may  have  been  the
Amestris  of  the  Greek  historians.  She  fulfilled  her  royal  duties.  We  read  of  her  feast-
ing the  ladies,  the  princesses,  in  the  royal  palace ;  within  doors,  and  apart  from  the
men.

II.  Observe  the  insult  okfebed  to  Vashti.  When  his  heart  was  merry  with
wine,  the  king  bade  his  chamberlains  bring  the  queen,  in  her  stately  robes,  and  with
her  royal  crown  upon  her  head,  before  him,  that  he  might  show  her  beauty  to  the
princes  and  to  the  people.  Now  this  was — 1.  A  violation,  of  national  custom.  We
are  told  indeed  that,  when  in  their  cups,  the  Persian  kings  would  dismiss  their  wives
and  send  for  their  concubines  and  singing  girls.  It  was  certainly  a  command  con-
trary to  custom,  however  it  may  have  been  in  accordance  with  the  capricious
character  of  Xerxes.  2.  An  outrage  upon  her  womanly  modesty.  That  a  young
and  beautiful  woman  should  appear  before  a  vast  company  of  boisterous  and  half-
intoxicated  nobles,  and  this  that  they  might  admire  her  loveliness,  was  a  foul  ehame.
3.  A  derogation  from  her  wifely  dignity.  The  king  should  have  honoured  Vashti
as  his  consort,  worthy  of  respectful  treatment ;  for  the  disgrace  of  the  wife  is  the
disgrace  of  the  husband.  Ahasuerus  must  have  been  despised  by  any  sober  and
honourable  noble  who  heard  him  give  this  order.  4.  It  was  a  slur  upon  her  royal
station.  This  station  was  acknowledged  by  her  position  at  the  head  of  the  table,
where  the  banquet  was  given  to  the  chief  ladies  of  the  realm.  If  it  was  fit  that  she
should  preside  as  hostess,  it  was  not  fit  that  she  should  be  brought  forward  for  the
general  gaze  and  admiration,  like  a  courtesan  famous  for  beauty  and  infamous  for
immodesty.

III.  Observe  the  fault  chargeable  upon  Vashti.  This  was  disobedience  and
defiance.  But — 1.  It  was  a  fault  tvith  much  to  extenuate  it.  The  command  was
unreasonable.  Compliance  would  have  done  no  one  concerned  any  good,  and  would
have  outraged  her  own  modesty.  2.  It  was  a  fault  punished  with  disproportionate
teverity.  Certainly  it  was  harsh  and  cruel  to  deprive  Vashti  of  her  position  as  queen
because  of  her  refusal  to  comply  with  the  unreasonable  requirement  of  a  drunken
husband.  Disputes  between  the  nearest  akin  are  often  the  most  keen.  It  was  with
reason  that  the  inspired  apostle  penned  the  admonition— "  Husbands,  love  youi
wives,  and  be  not  hitter  against  them  1 "

Ver.  12.  —  The  kin^s  anger.  Scripture  never  spares  the  g^eat.  Their  follies
and  vices  are  exposed  and  castigated.  The  Old  Testamenthas  some  striking  examples
of  the  sin  of  anger  and  wrath.  Moses  gave  way  to  temptation,  and  sinned  in  his
anger.  Nebuchadnezzar  was  full  of  fury  when  the  Hebrew  youths  would,  not  worship
the  golden  image  he  had  set  up.  Jonah  wag  angry  when  Nineveh  was  spared,  and
when  the  gourd  was  withered.  In  all  these  cases  there  was  no  sufBcient  cause  to
justify  wrath.     So  was  it  with  Ahasuerus.

I.  The  occasion  of  the  king's  anger.  His  own  drunken  and  foolish  wish  was
thwarted,  and  thus  his  pride  was  wounded.  "  It  is  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine,  lest
they  drink  and  forget  the  law."    The  law  tf  Solon  punbhed  a  drunken  magistrata


OH.  1. 10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  19

with  death.  The  wish  of  Ahaauerus  was  tliwarted  by  a  woman,  and  that  woman  his
wife.  He  was  not  accustomed  to  meet  with  opposition  or  resistance  to  his  wili,  and
could  ill  brook  his  consort's  disobedience.  Circumstances  heightened  his  anger.  He
had  boasted  of  his  wife's  beautj  and  complaisance,  and  now,  in  the  presence  of  his
lords,  to  whom  he  had  boasted,  his  vaunt  was  proved  empty  and  yain.

II.  The  unreasonableness  and  foi,i,t  of  the  king's  angeb.  A  monitor  might
have  put  to  him  the  question,  "  Doest  thou  well  to  be  angry  ?  "  If  he  had  not  been
intoxicated  with  pride,  as  well  as  with  wine,  he  would  have  blamed  himself  instead
of  his  spouse,  the  queen.  How  much  indefensible,  unreasonable,  and  ridiculous
anger  there  is  in  human  society  I  How  often  the  wrathful  would  do  well  to  transfer
their  indignation  from  others  to  themselves  I  "  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not ;  let  not
the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath  I  "  In  those  occupying  high  and  prominent  and
influential  positions,  anger  is  very  unseemly.  Here  was  a  man  bearing  nile  over  127
provinces,  and  yet  unable  to  rule  his  own  spirit  I

III.  The  results  op  the  king's  anger.  1.  It  was  tempered  by  counsel.  Ahasuerus
did  Jiot  act  at  once  under  the  impulse  of  his  burning  indignation  and  resentment.
Tliis  was  good.  But  he  should  have  taken  counsel  of  his  own  heart,  and  not  of
flatterers  who  ministered  to  his  passions.  2.  It  led  him  to  part  with  his  wife,  and  to
proclaim  his  own  folly  in  a  public,  imperial  decree.  The  man  who  lashed  the  sea,
who  cruelly  slew  the  eldest  son  of  Pythius,  who  dishonoured  the  corpse  of  the  brave
Leonidas,  was  just  the  man  to  act  as  here  described.  It  is  true  that  the  king's  anger
was  overruled  by  Providence  for  good  ;  but  this  is  no  palliation  of  his  serious  offence.
We  have  in  this  narrative  a  warning  against  yielding  to  the  impulses  of  capricious
anger.  There  is  a  time  to  be  angry ;  but  we  may  well  suspect  ourselves  when  we
are  under  the  influence  of  vehement  feeling  of  this  kind.  "  Watch  and  pray,  that
ye  enter  not  into  temptation  I  "  "  Consider  him  that  endured  such  contradiction  of
sinners  against  himself."  Christ  left  us  "an  example,  who  when  he  was  reviled,
reviled  not  again;  when  he  suffered,  he  threatened  not."  "Blessed  are  the  meek."
"  Forgive  one  another,  even  as  God,  for  Christ's  sake,  hath  forgiven  you  I  "

Ver.  13. — Wise  men.  Wisdom  is  the  skill  which  some  men  possess  of  devismg
means  to'secure  any  end  that  is  aimed  at.  It  is  what  Aristotle  termed  an  intellectual
virtue.  There  is  no  position  in  life  where  wisdom  is  not  useful.  And  in  the  highest
positions,  in  Church  and  in  State,  it  is  a  quality  which  is  justly  held  in  very  high
esteem.  Counsellors  of  kings  and  ministers  of  state  need  a  large  measure  of  prac-
tical wisdom.  The  same  may  be  said  of  pastors  pf  Christian  Churches,  and  of
officers  of  Christian  societies  and  organisations  of  all  kinds.

I.  The  foundation  of  wisdom  is  natural  sagacity.  It  is  sometimes  said  of  men
that  they  are  "  born  fools,"  and  it  is  certain  that  some  are  by  nature  more  endowed
than  others  with  insight  into  character,  and  with  fertility  of  devices  and  resources.
A  cunning  man  is  seldom  wise,  for  he  usually  overreaches  himself,  and  awakens
distrust  in  the  minds  of  his  acquaintances.

II.  Wisdom  is  nurtured  by  the  habit  of  deliberation.  It  Is  proverbial  that
hasty  men  are  unwise ;  they  will  not  allow  themselves  time  to  see  more  than  one  side
of  a  subject.  To  weigh  with  calmness  and  impartiality  the  possible  plans  of  action
i8  conducive  to  a  wise  decision.

III.  Wisdom  is  strengthened  by  knowledge  and  study.  Not  every  well-informed
and  learned  man  is  wise ;  but  few  men  are  wise  whose  knowledge  is  scanty,  and  whose
experience  is  contracted.  Two  kinds  of  knowledge  are  referred  to  in  this  passage.
1.  Historical  knowledge,  or  knowledge  of  the  times.  To  study  the  history  of  nations
and  of  the  affairs  of  state  is  a  good  preparation  for  the  life  of  a  politician,  a  states-
man (vide  some  excellent  remarks  in  Bossuet's  '  Lectures  on  Universal  History,'
addressed  to  the  Dauphin  of  France).  2.  Legal  knowledge.  The  counsellors  of  tlie
king  of  Persia-  are  said  to  have  known  law  and  judgment,  obviously  very  essential
to  men  in  their  position.

IV.  The  possession  of  wisdom  is  a  most  responsible  trust.  Like  other  good
things,  it  may  be  used,  and  it  may  be  abused.  There  is  a  great  danger  lest  the  cown-
■ellors  of  kings  should  give  advice  fitted  to  please  rather  than  to  profit.  It  is  well,
therefore,  that  all  such  should  remember  that  they  are  tliemselves  accountable  to  thb

0  2


20  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  i.  KV— 22

Lord  and  Judge  of  all.     If  wisdom  be  employed  to  secure  merely  selfish  ends,  or  to
flatter  the  ambitious  and  the  vain,  it  will  prove  in  every  way  a  curse.

Lessons: — 1.  Let  the  truly  wise,  who  use  their  wisdom  to  good  purpose,  be  regarded
with  general  honour  and  esteem.  2.  Let  those  who  are  consulted  by  others  because
of  their  repute  for  wisdom  seek  grace  to  give  good  counsel,  as  in  the  sight  of  the
Lord.  3.  Let  the  young  seek  to  acquire  practical  wisdom,  and  let  them  remember
that  "  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom,  and  to  depart  from  evil  is
understanding."

Vers.  13 — 20. — Counsel.  The  king  of  Persia  had  two  bad  counsellors,  wine  and
anger._  It  showed  some  degree  of  common-sense  on  his  part  that,  instead  of  acting
upon  impulse,  he  waited  to  ask  the  advice  of  his  ministers,  those  privileged  and
trusted  men  who  were  nearest  to  the  throne.  If  they  had  advised  him  well  he  might
have  avoided  making  an  exhibition  of  his  own  folly  to  his  people.  But  their  plan
was  to  fall  in  with  the  inclinations  of  their  sovereign.  This,  whilst  we  must  blame
it,  we  cannot  wonder  at ;  for  few  dared  to  oppose  the  vain  and  imperious  monarchs
of  Persia.

I.  Good  counsel  should  be  sincere  and  honest  in  itself.  It  sometimes  happens
that  a  person  called  upon  for  advice  sees  what  it  would  be  right  to  advise,  but  gives
advice  contrary  to  that  which  his  judgment  would  approve.  It  is  better  to  decline
advising  than  to  do  this.

II.  Good  counsel  should  be  disinterested  as  regards  the  oiveb.  If  one
advises  so  as  to  secure  his  own  interest  at  the  expense  of  the  friend  who  trusts  and
consults  him,  he  acts  with  baseness,  and  deserves  contempt.

III.  Good  counsel  should  be  faithful  as  regards  the  ekcbiver.  In  advising
the  great,  counsellors  are  too  often  guided  by  a  desire  to  fall  in  with  their  inclina-
tions, to  flatter  their  pride  and  vanity,  to  minister  to  their  lusts.  Flatterers  are  bad
counsellors,  though  by. their  flattery  they  may  advance  themselves.  Their  motto  is,
Mihi  placet  quicquid  regi  placet  (that  pleases  me  which  pleases  my  lord,  the
king).

IV.  Good  counsel  pnotiLD  be  appropriate  and  timely.  Advice  which  is  not  to
the  point,  or  which  is  given  when  it  is  too  late  for  it  to  be  of  use,  is  vain.  How
many  a  misguided  youth  has  had  reason  to  exclaim,  Why  was  I  not  warned  or
directed  while  warning  and  direction  might  have  been  of  use  ?

Vers.  17,  18. — The  influence  of  example.  Where  can  bo  found  a  more  striking
proof  of  the  general  belief  in  the  force  of  example  than  in  this  passage  ?  The
counsellors  of  the  king  of  Persia  were  not  men  likely  to  be  led  away  by  their  feelings
or  fancies.  Yet  they  supposed  that  the  conduct  of  one  woman  might  influence  the
domestic  demeanour  and  spirit  and  habits  of  the  women  of  an  empire  throughout  its
127  provinces  I  And  they  proposed  to  counteract  the  evil  influence  of  Vashti's
disobedience  by  a  most  unusual  proceeding,  by  a  stringent  law  affecting  every  house-
hold throughout  the  realm  1  The  conduct  of  the  queen  made  the  highest  personages
in  the  land  uneasy,  and  was  thought  capable  of  affecting  the  meanest  and  the  most
distant.

I.  Example  is  always  influential.  This  is  owing  to  a  principle  in  human
nature.  We  are  naturally  social  and  imitative.  The  power  of  example  over  children
is  known  to  all.  But  no  age  is  exempt  from  its  action.  Some  persons  live  with  the
constant  sense  that  their  spirit  and  conduct  will  affect  those  of  others.  But  if  persons
have  no  such  sense,  none  the  less  is  it  true  that  their  influence  "tells."  This  is
the  explanation  of  fashion — in  manner,  in  speech,  in  social  usages,  even  in  beliefs.
None  of  us  can  say  how  much  he  is  what  he  is  through  the  influence  of  others'
example.

II.  Example  is  influential  both  for  good  and  evil.  That  we  should  influence
and  be  influenced  by  example  is  a  Divine  arrangement.  It  works  both  ways ;  and  to
the  action  of  example  the  cause  of  virtue  and  religion  is  immensely  indebted ;  whilst
the  same  j)rinciple  explains  the  prevalence  of  error,  vice,  and  sin.  Let  every  hearer
call  to  mmd  the  influences  to  which  he  has  been  exposed,  and  trace  up  to  them  the
position  he  occupies,  as  well  as  the  character  which  has  been  formed  in  him.     This


CH.  L  10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  21

exercise  will  make  him  tremble  to  think  of  the  responsibility  under  which  he  lies  for
his  own  influence  over  his  fellow-creatures.

III.  The  power  of  example  is  enhanced  by  high  station.  Vashti  was  a  qneen,
and  what  she  did  was  known  to  multitudes,  and  was  influential,  more  or  less,  over  all
who  knew  it.  A  queen  sets  fashions,  gives  social  laws,  even  influences,  to  some
extent,  the  morals  of  the  community.  A  vicious  court  is  a  curse  to  the  land.  For  a
virtuous  and  benevolent  sovereign,  subjects  cannot  be  too  grateful.  Others  in  high
■tation,  alike  in  the  Church  and  in  the  world,  will  afEect  the  habits  of  many  by  their
good  or  evil  example.  Public  persons,  it  has  been  said,  are  the  looking-glasses
before  which  others  dresa  themselves.  It  is  of  highest  importance  that  the  springs
should  be  sweetened,  lest  the  streams  be  poisoned  and  deleterious.

Practical  application : — 1.  Let  us  gratefully  acknowledge  God's  goodness  in  using
the  principle  in  question  for  our  benefit.  Scripture  is  full  of  good  examples.  The
history  of  the  Church  teems  with  such.  The  Christian  society  around  us  contains
many  excellent  and  inspiring  examples  for  our  imitation.  2.  Especially  let  us  be
thankful  for  the  example  of  our  Divine  Saviour.  He  was  not  only  our  Redeemer.
but  our  Exemplar  also.  He  "  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  his  steps.
It  is  the  one  faultless,  peerless  example  to  humanity.  3.  Let  us  be  careful  what
examples  we  study,  and  what  influences  we  place  ourselves  under.  4.  Let  us  be
very  circumspect  in  the  education  of  the  young,  that  we  have  brought  to  bear  upon
their  hearts  such  influences  as  God  may  bless  to  their  salvation.  6.  Let  us  "  watch
and  pray  "  that  our  influences — purposed  and  unconscious  alike — may  be  for  the
highest  good  of  all  with  whom  we  are  associated.

Ver.  22. — Rule  in  the  hoiise.  The  purport  of  the  edict  here  recorded  was  good,
although  there  seems  something  almost  ludicrous  in  the  feelings  and  the  fears  which
prompted  its  framers  and  promulgators.  "  That  every  man  should  bear  rule  in  his
own  house  "  seems  scarcely  a  regulation  to  be  prescribed  by  political  authority.

I.  It  IB  A  PRINCIPLE   FOUNDED  UPON  NATURAL,  DiVINE  AUTHORITY.      It   is  written

upon  the  very  constitution  of  human  nature  that  a  wife  should  be  directed  by  her
husband,  and  children  by  their  father.  If  purpose  is  visible  anywhere,  it  is  in  this
dorriestic  law.

II.  It  is  a  principle  sanctioned  by  Scripture.  From  the  first  it  was  said  to
the  woman,  "Thy  desire  shall  be  to  thy  husband,  and  he  shall  rule  over  thee."  The
apostle  thus  admonishes  the  female  sex:  "Wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  own
husbands,  as  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord."  "  The  husband,"  we  are  told,  "  is  the  head  of  the
wife."

III.  The  bulb  in  question  should  be  commended  by  thoughtful  wisdom  on
THE  part  of  him  WHO  EXERCISES  IT.  If  the  husband  is  a  fool,  it  is  not  easy  for
the  wife  to  submit.  But  if  he  be  a  man  of  knowledge,  experience,  and  self-control,
the  wife  will  usually,  gladly  and  gratefully,  be  guided  by  his  desires  and  requests.

IV.  This  sway  should  be  exercised  with  gentleness  and  forbearance.
Nothing  is  more  hateful  or  contemptible  than  the  rule  of  a  domestic  tyrant,  and  such
a  rule  encourages  either  rebellion  or  deceit.  Children  lose  all  respect  for  an
unreasonable  and  passionate  father.  The  household  with  such  a  head  is  wretched
indeed.  AfEection  and  consideration  should  be  manifest  in  the  demeanour  and
requirements  of  all  in  authority  over  a  family.

V.  Such  a  rule  should  be  acknowledged  with  frank  submission.  Women
•re  very  much  what  men  make  them.  Let  them  be  treated  with  affection  and
courtesy,  and  the  response  will  usually  be  cheerful  compliance.

VI.  Such  a  rule  is  contributive  to  order  and  happiness.  The  family  is  so  far
like  the  state;  tyranny  awakens  resentment  and  provokes  resistance,  whilst  a
righteous  and  considerate  rule  is  acknowledged  with  gratitude,  and  is  productive  of
happiness.  A  home  where  there  is  anarchy  is  a  hell  upon  earth ;  a  home  .where  a
woman  rules  is  a  monstrous  and  loathsome  spectacle.  Darius  and  Xerxes  are  said,
both  of  them,  to  have  been  too  much  governed  by  their  wives.  History  abounds
with  instancps  in  which  the  legitimate  power  of  the  wives  of  kings  has  been  exceeded,
and  in  which  kinds'  mistresses  have  corrupted  courts,  and  to  some  degree  nations
also.


22  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [CH.  L  10— 2i


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  10. — A  drunken  device.  I.  Drunkenness  leads  to  further  folly.  "  When
the  wine  is  in  the  wit  is  out,"  is  always  true.  The  Persian  monarch  yielded  to  the
allurements  of  the  cup,  and  was  betrayed  into  a  stupid  act.  He  desired  to  exhibit
the  beauty  of  his  queen  to  a  raiscelUmeous  crowd.  He  had  already  shown  nearly  qll
he  possessed.  Anything  and  everything  that  could  call  forth  admiration  from  his
numerous  guests  had  been  laid  under  tribute.  The  festivities  are  closing,  and  the
king,  with  muddled  brain,  bethinks  himself  of  one  more  device  for  extorting  more
flattery  and  adulation.  On  his  Sultana  only  the  eyes  of  his  eunuchs  and  himself,  of
mankind,  had  rested.  He  is  proud  of  her  somewhat  after  the  same  manner  in  which
a  man  might  at  this  day  be  proud  of  having  on  his  walls  the  finest  painting,  in  his
cabinet  the  rarest  jewel,  or  in  his  stables  the  swiftest  horse.

II.  Drunkenness  induces  a  violation  of  marital  obligations.  Had  Ahasuerus
loved  Vashti  as  he  ought,  he  would  have  been  considerate  as  to  her  feelings.  What-
ever consideration  he  might  have  had  when  sober,  he  has  none  now.  He  imngines
that  his  drunken  whim  is  to  be  law.     Vashti  then  was  to  him  nothing  more  than  a

.  mere  harem  ornament,  a  slave  for  whom  a  goodly  price  had  been  paid  out  of  his  coffers.
An  indulgence  in  a  like  habit  to  that  of  Ahasuerus  has  led  many  to  act  with  the
same  foolishness,  harshness,  and  injustice.  Known  only  to  themselves  has  been  the
shuddering  dread  of  marty  a  wife  lest  the  knowledge  of  a  husband's  secret  failings
should  be  bruited  abroad.  Known  only  to  themselves  the  many  shifts  to  make  up
for  deficiencies  for  necessary  household  expenditure,  deficiencies  caused  by  a  husband's
folly  and  extravagance.  Known  only  to  themselves,  the  number  of  weary  hours
during  which  they  sit  watching  or  lie  waking,  waiting  for  the  return  of  their  dissolute
lords.  Known  only  to  themselves  also  the  many  insults,  the  ill-usage  to  which  they
are  subjected,  the  inflamed  passions  and  embittered  spirits  they  have  to  withstand.
God  have  mercy  on  the  thousands  of  sad  women  who  have  had  to  taste,  like  Vashti,
the  bitter  results  of  a  husband's  drunken  stupidity  I  God  have  mercy,  for  men  have
httle.

III.  Drunkenness  often  brings  painful  rebuffs.  Impatiently  the  king  awaits  the
arrival  of  Vashti.  Little  dreams  he  of  a  rebuff.  Excited  as  he  is  at  the  close  of  the
festivities,  and  elated,  both  by  the  flatterj'  he  has  received  as  well  as  the  wine  he  has
drunk,  he  is  in  ho  mood  to  brook  any  opposition  to  his  will,  or  even  delay  in  carrying
out  his  drunken  devices.  He  has  sent  the  chamberlains  for  Vashti.  At  length  they
reappear.  The  king  looks  up  from  his  cups.  "  What  I  and  is  not  the  queen
coming?"  He  soon  hears  the  explanation  of  her  absence.  Bowing  low,  and  in  the
hesitating  tones  of  one  who  has  a  disagreeable  task  to  perform,  the  chief  chamberlain
tells  "that  the  queen  refuseth  to  come  at  the  king's  commandment."

IV.  Drunkenness  fosters  unreasoning  passion.  How  in  a  moment  is  overcast  the
face  of  the  king,  hitherto  so  complacent,  the  throne  even  of  dignity  still.  A  lower-
ing, threatening  scowl  sits  on  his  brow.  More  swift  than  any  hurricane  that  ever
swept  over  devoted  and  unsuspecting  voyagers  is  the  storm  of  anger  that  sweeps  over
the  countenance  of  Ahasuerus.  Shall  a  mere  woman  cross  him  ?  Shall  all  his  glory,
power,  majesty  be  by  that  one  woman  checked  ?  "  The  king  was  very  wroth,  and
his  anger  burned  in  him"  (ver.  12).

V.  Drunkenness  always  covers  a  man  with  shamb.  The  king  was  put  to  shame  by
his  own  act  before  others.  Most  annoying  was  the  thought  that  the  refusal  of  the
queen  was  known  to  the  princes  and  noblep.  They  would  say,  "  The  king  cannot
bear  rule  in  his  own  house,  and  how  shall  ht  govern  rightly  the  great  dominion  o£
Persia?"  The  king  could  better  endure  the  obstinate  conduct  of  his  queen  were
it  known  only  to  himself.  To  have  his  domestic  affairs  known  abroad,  the  common
subject  of  conversation  in  every  street,  the  gossip  in  every  bazaar,  and  the  butt  of
ridicule  in  every  harem  of  his  vast  dominion,  this  is  unbearable.  The  king  is  ashamed.
Even  drink  does  not  banish  that  feeling  from  him.

VI.  Drunkenness  constantly  creates  vain  REGRETS.  There  are  regrets  for  fory,  for
expenditure,  and  for  consequences.  Ahasuerus,  when  he  recovered  from  the  effect
of  his  inebriety,  would  begin  to  regret  that  he  had  acted  so  unwisely.    He  knew  be


CK.  I.  10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  28

had  lowered  himself  in  the  eyes  6t  others,  and  he  had  lost  the  one  to  whom  he  waa
attached,  as  far  as  such  a  man  under  such  a  system  cou'd  be  aftached.  The  eviderice
of  his  regret  in  seen  in  the  first  verse  of  the  second  chapter.  Many  have  to  regret
even  worse  consequences.  Soipetimes  under  the  effect  of  drink  men  have  crippled
and  even  killed  children  and  wives.  The  very  gallows  have  shaken  with  the  quiver-
ing regrets  of  those  who  have  had  to  expiate  the  crimes  they  had  committed  under
the  influence  of  drink.  But  the  most  overwiielmiiig  regret  of  all  will  be  that  which
will  take  possession  of  the  soul  when  it  discovers  the  terrible  truthfulness  of  the
words,  "  No  drunkard  shall  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  10). — H.

Ver.  14. — Privileged  persons.  "  Seven  princes  of  Persia  and  Media,  which  saw
the  king's  face,  and  sat  first  in  the  kingdom."  It  has  always  been  the  custom
of  kings  to  surround  themselves  with  those  who  should  be  able  to  help  or  advise,  or
be  the  media  of  transmitting  their  desires  or  decrees  to  the  people.  These  officers
of  state  have  been  called  "  wise  men,"  viziers,  councillors,  ministers.  They  form  the
executive.  In  Persia  there  was  no  electoral  representation,  the  government  was
absolute.  Hence  the  seven  men  whose  names  are  mentioned  were  appointed  by  the
king,  and  his  whim  could  remove  them.  So  long  as  they  were  in  favour  they  were
accounted  privileged  persons.  Two  things  are  told  of  them: — I.  They  had  a
PRIVILEGED  BIGHT.     II.  They  had  a  peominent  position.

I.  It  was  the  custom  of  the  kings  of  Persia  to  seclude  themselves  as  much  as
possible  from  their  subjects.  Only  those  who  were  appointed  to  come  near  might
see  his  face.  This  reserve  was  assumed  in  order  to  foster  reverence  and  awe  of  the
great  king  among  the  people.  When  one  who  had  been  permitted  to  approach,  and
had  gained  the  king's  favour,  lost  it,  the  attendants  immediately  covered  his  face  that
he  might  not  look  on  the  king.  "  As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth,  they
covered  Raman's  face  "  (ch.  vii.  8).  The  seven  wise  men  here  mentioned  were
permitted  to  see  the  king's  face  at  any  time.  The  rulers  of  Persia  assumed  the  title
of  "  king  of  kings."  That  which  was  assumed  by  them  belongs  only  to  God.  Who
can  see  his  face?  He  dwells  in  light  "unapproachable."  When  Jacob  wrestled
with  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  he  carried  a  reminder  thereof  in  the  limp  or  lameness,  the
result. of  the  touch  of  that  supernatural  Being.  When  Moses  desired  to  see  tlie
Divine  glory  he  was  hidden  in  a  cleft  rock ;  when  he  communed  with  God  his  face
glistened  so  that  he  had  to  hide  it  beneath  a  veil.  When  Manoah  offered  a  sacrifice,
and  the  angel  whose  name  was  "  secret "  did  wondrously,  he  feared  he  would  be
slain  because  of  the  visit  from  another  world.  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any
time."  Man  could  not  see  the  unutterable  glory  and  live.  But  there  is  One,  "the
only  begotten  Son,"  who  not  only  saw  his  face,  but  rested  "  in  the  bosom  "  of  the
Divine  Father,  and  "hath  declared  him."  He  gives  to  us  this  privileged  sight  also.
God  was  in  Christ.  The  meaning  of  the  incarnation  was  this,  that  men  looking  at
Christ  looked  on  "God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  Philip  wanted  a  further  view  of  the
Father,  and  Christ  told  him,  "  He  that  hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  Inter-
course was  possible  under  the  old  dispensation ;  sight  was  made  possible  under  the
new.  Faith  in  Christ  sees  God.  "  The  pure  in  heart  see  God  "  not  only  hereafter,
but  here.  This  is  a  high  privilege.  The  Queen  of  Sheba  said  to  Solomon,  "  Happy
are  thy  men,  and  happy  are  these  thy  servants  which  stand  continually  before  thee
and  hear  thy  wisdom."  The  happiness  of  the  true  Christian  is  to  stand  ever  in
the  presence  of  God.  This  privilege  is  the  gift  of  God's  grace.  None  could  admit
to  the  sight  oi  his  mercy  and  glory  unless  he  had  graciously  permitted  it.  The
sight  is  not  for  a  few,  but  for  all  who  will  come  unto  him  through  Christ.

II.  The  PROMINENT  POSITION  occupied  by  the  "  wise  men  "  of  Persia  may  suggest
the  advance  which  comes  through  spiritual  character.  "  To  sit  first "  in  the  kingdom
is  not  to  be  the  one  aim,  but  it  will  be  given  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared —
those  who  are  prepared  for  it.  High  spiritual  qualities  give  pre-eminence.  This
pre-eminence  is  not  to  be  sought  for  itself.  There  must  be  no  ambition,  or  we  are
those  unfitted  for  it.  Spiritual  character  must  be  sought  as  its  own  reward,  and
because  it  pleases  God.  James  and  John  made  a  great  mistake  when  they  asked,
through  their  mother,  Christ  for  a  promise  of  prominent  position.  "  The  last  will  bs
first,  and  first  last  "    Heaven  is  no  place  of  pomp,  but  of  discrimination  of  character.


24  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [oh.  I.  10—22.

Mere  qneslionB  of  precedence,  whether  in  court,  ecclesiastical,  or  municipal  affairs,  are
generiuly  petty,  because  based  on  mere  accident  and  opinion.  In  heaven  character
will  decide  precedence.  Those  nearest  the  throne  will  probably  be  those  who  felt
themselves  the  most  unworthy ;  men  hke  Paul,  who  felt  himself  "  less  than  the  least
of  all  saints.^'  The  great  thing  for  us  is  not  to  seek  pre-eminence,  but  inner  spiritual
power ;  by  simple  faith,  humility,  zeal,  unselfishness,  devoutness,  living  as  in  the
presence  of  God,  and  having  every  thought  and  action  in  harmony  with  God's  will.  As
the  current  of  a  river  sets  to  the  ocean,  so  the  whole  "  set "  of  a  life  may  be  God-ward.
The  seven  men  who  "  sat  first  in  the  kingdom  "  were  in  their  position  that  they  might
advise  the  king.  When  we  are  brought  into  God's  kingdom  it  will  be  to  drink  in  of
his  wisdom.  These  men  also  could  be  easily  removed.  Their  position  depended  on
the  whim  of  the  monarch,  and  therefore  was  insecure.  When  we  are  once  brought
into  God's  kingdom  above  we  shall  be  safe  for  ever.  No  enemy  shall  dislodge,  no
storm  trouble,  no  sin  assail,  but  we  shall  be  safe  for  ever.  We  read  of  Haman  being
"  advanced,"  and  of  the  king  setting  "  his  seat  above  all  the  princes  that  were  with
him  "  (ch.  iii.  1).  This  must  have  been  gall  and  wormwood  to  the  rest  of  the  princes.
No  such  jealousy  will  enter  the  hearts  of  those  who  are  permitted  to  behold  in  heaven
the  King's  face,  and  to  sit  in  his  kingdom. — H.

Vera.  10 — 12.— -A  noble  womanly  refusal.  We  know  from  actnal  history  literally
nothing  of  Vashti,  except  her  name,  and  what  is  written  of  her  in  the  present  con-
nection. But  it  is  evident  that  she  could  not  have  been  merely  one  of  the  inferior
wives  of  the  Eastern  king,  although  this  has  been  suggested.  She  is  not  only
emphatically  called  queen,  but  she  acts  as  the  queen, "  making  a  feast  for  the  women,"
while  Ahasuerus  makes  his  for  the  princes  and  the  general  people ;  and  the  choice  and
the  bearing  of  her  successor,  Esther,  point  the  same  way.  The  name  of  Vashti  appears
to  view  a  moment ;  it  then  utterly  disappears — and  in  disgrace.  Yet  not  in  shame  ;
neither  in  the  shame  of  sin  or  folly,  nor  in  the  shame  even  of  error  of  judgment  and
want  of  true  wisdom.    No;  for  "posterity  approve  her  saying"  and  her  doing.     Our

faze  was  at  first  invited  to  her  as  one  "  very  fair  to  look  upon,''  a  meteor  of  beauty.
0  her  descending  track,  swift  as  it  was,  is  one  of  real  splendour ;  amid  thick  darkness
around  it  marks  a  welcome  line  of  light,  and  leaves  a  glory  on  our  vision  1  This  is
all  the  more  remarkable  to  be  said  of  &  heathen  woman.  Notice  here  a  noble  womanly
refusal,  and  the  womanly  ground  of  it  noble.  We  have  here  the  spectacle  of  a
woman  who  risked,  who  no  doubt  knew  that  she  forfeited,  a  high  position  and  all
splendour  of  earthly  prospects  from  that  time  forward,  because  she  would  not  pre-

i'udice  the  due  of  her  own  womanly  nature  ;  because  she  would  not  be  party  to  robbing
lerself  of  her  feminine  birthright ;  because  she  would  not  be  minished  in  aught  of
her  modesty's  ultimate  and  indefeasible  rights.  When  her  affronted  but  determined
voice  and  verdict  were  heard,  as  she  "  refused  to  come,"  this  was  heard  in  them — ^to
wit,  the  clear  ring  of  true  womanly  instinct  and  of  intelligent  wgmanly  feeling.

I.  This  was  a'  noble  refusal  because  of  what  it  cost.  That  "  cost "  may  be
reckoned  in  several  ways.  For  instance,  there  was  present  (1)  the  cort  of  effort,  and
effort  of  the  most  severely  trying  kind.  There  are  many  who  stand  at  no  cost  except
this.  They  will  be  liberal,  and  even  wasteful  in  expenditure,  t. «.  in  any  other  expendi-
ture than  that  of  effort.  'The  prices  of  ease,  luxury,  they  do  not  object  to,  but  the  price
of  effort  frightens  them  at  once.  There  were  several  dements  also  in  the  effort  made
by  Vashti.  I'here  was  the  effort  of  resisting  a  husband's  familiar  authority.  There
Was  the  effort  of  resisting  an  Eastern  husband's  peremptory  command.  There  was
the  effort  of  breaking  through  the  national  custom  of  centuries  ingrained  in  the  race,
and  which  made  the  wife  a  slave  to  passion  and  despotic  rule.  The  severity  of  such
effort  must  have  been  heightened  by  the  consideration  of  the  struggle  being  with  a
potentate  of  dominion  unparalleled  and  of  notorious  unscrapulousness,  sustained  on
the  part  of  that  woman  single-handed.  We  read  of  those  who  backed  up  the  insult-
ing and  licentious  order  of  the  king,  but  we  do  not  read  of  one  solitary  voice  according
help  and  sympathy  to  the  refusing  queen.  Now  there  are  senses  in  which  effort
compels  our  admiration,  even  when  the  object  of  it  fails  to  command  our  approval.
Great  is  the  inertia  of  human  nature,  held  enmeshed  in  the  toils  of  habit,  of  custom,
of  conventionality,  of  apprehended  consequences,  of  jealous  misconstruction,  of  envious


CH.  1. 10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  25

detraction,  of  artificial  forebodings  that  magnify  themselves  alike  so  monstrously  and
so  successfully.  Correspondingly  noble  and  impressive  was  this  woman's  effort,
whose  "  NO,"  though  she  sank  because  of  it,  crashed  through  all  the  forces  that
environed  her,  and  its  report  resounded  through  a  kingdom.  The  efEort,  then,  the
severity  of  it  in  relation  to  its  kind,  and  the  object  of  it,  do  in  this  case  all  command
our  approval  and  our  strong  admiration.  Then  (2)  the  cost  of  this  refusal  is  to  be
judged  from  the  consequences  which  ensued.  As  against  conscience,  the  right,  and
Divine  law,  consequences  ought  to  decide  nothing,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  not  to  be
put  in  the  balance  to  weigh  down  one  side  or  the  other.  These  all  are  to  be  obeyed
in  and  of  themselves.  So  soon  as  their  voice  is  heard,  understood,  and  not  miscon-
ceived, that  voice  is  to  be  followed,  let  it  lead  whither  it  will.  Their  command  is
sovereign,  and  they  may  be  well  trusted  to  vindicate  it  sooner  or  later.  There  is
indeed  a  sense  in  which  it  is  of  the  highest  importance  to  observe  consequences,  and  to
put  them  into  the  balance,  viz.,  when  we  are  studying  the  entire  structure  of  our  moral
nature.  A  just  observing  of  consequences  therein  is  then  equivalent  to  a  scrutiny  of
tendencies,  and  the  moral  argument  from  tendencies  in  this  sense  is  most  legitimate,
and  should  be  irresistible.  To  them,  when  fairly  tracked  from  beginning  to  end,
reverent  regard  is  due,  and,  once  ascertained,  the  greatest  wefght  should  be  accorded
to  them.  A  partial  and  broken  study  of  consequences  is  what  is  unreliable  and
proportionately  dangerous.  Sidelong  glances  at  immediate,  or  early,  or  merely
present  life  consequences  are  what  betoken  inherent  weakness  or  ignoble  timidity
of  principle.  Yet  while  the  consideration  of  consequences  should  count  nothing
against  the  demands  of  right,  and  the  commands  of  conscience  and  the  Divine  law,
the  kind  of  attention  paid  to  them  measureii  for  us  conveniently  and  justly  the
force  or  weakness  of  principle.  The  temporal  consequences  which  one  foresaw  or
reckoned  upon  (even  if  he  deceived  himself)  will  often  sufSciently  explain  what
buoyed  him  up — it  was  a  vision  of  earthly  grandeur,  wealth,  success,  nothing  higher.
And  the  temporal,  the  threatening,  the  immediately  impending  consequences  which
another  saw,  rather  than  foresaw,  are  the  significant  tell-tale  of  the  high-strung
principle,  the  determined  purpose,  the  noble  force,  which  without  a  rival  reigned
within  him.  The  weight  of  suffering  in  the  hand  is  vastly  greater  than  that  in  some
undefined  distance  of  prospect.  The  storm  of  grief  and  of  sorrow  that  is  now  ready
to  burst  on  the  very  head  looms  terrific.  The  deposing  of  a  queen,  the  divorcing  of
a  wife,  the  disgracing  of  a  woman  in  the  eyes  of  all  men,  and  of  her  own  sex  in
particular,  vain  or  not  vain — ^these  are  consequences  that  overwhelm  I  Beckon  we  so
then  the  cost  of  consequences  to  the  queen,  wife,  woman  who  "  refused  to  come  at
the  king's  commandment."     Was  this  not  a  noble  womanly  refusal?

II.  This  was  a  noble  bbfusai,  because  of  the  ground  of  it.  It  can  perhaps
scarcely  be  said  that  there  were  grounds  for  it.  There  were  a  multitude  of  (what
very  many  would  have  considered)  reasons  why  Vashti  should  not  have  refused  to
come,  and  there  might  truly  have  been  reasons  more  than  one,  had  she  been  differ-
ently situated,  why  she  should  have  done  as  she  actually  did.  Had  she  lived,  for
instance,  at  a  different  time  of  day,  had  she  lived  in  a  different  country,  had  she  be-
longed to  a  different  race,  there  might  have  been  some  variety  of  reasons  why  she
should  have  taken  up  the  position  she  did,  and  adhered  to  it.  But  in  point  of  fact
there  was  probably  great  singleness  of  reason  for  this  her  great  boldness  of  utterance
and  of  action.  Under  certain  circumstances  one  would  have  been  glad  to  suppose
that  other  considerations  also  played  their  part,  and  had  their  influence  in  Vashti's
peremptory  negative  decision.  But  we  should  be  artificial,  ungenuine,  and  guilty  of
an  anachronism  if  we  supposed  these  now.  And  that  we  cannot  bring  these  lesser
lights  to  throw  their  f  iiinter  rays  on  the  scene  leaves  it  in  the  undivided  glory  of
God's  light.  Here  was  his  purity  shedding  its  unflickering  light  on  the  thick  dark-
ness of  that  showy,  sensual  feast.  The  less  we  can  justly  set  Vashti's  refusal  down
to  the  higher  conscious  reflex  acts  of  our  nature,  and  moral  effects  resulting
from  them,  the  more  is  it  attributable  to  the  calm  light  of  that  lamp  which  God  has
hung  in  the  relired  and  sacred  cabinet  of  the  bosom  of  woman,  to  decorate  it,  and  to
bless  with  its  religious  glimmering  through  the  windows  all  that  come  near  enough,
but  not  too  near  I  It  is  the  lamp  of  sweet  purity,  of  nature's  own  modesty,  burn-
ing ever  still  with  shame  I     That  it  is  nature's  modesty  means  that  God's  own  hand


26  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  I.  10—22.

hung  it,  lighted  it.  That  it  was  burning  in  so  unlikely  a  place,  in  such  unfavourable
conditions,  at  such  a  time,  is  all  comfort  and  joy  to  our  faith,  for  it  means  that  God's
hand  had  been  round  it,  and  shielded  it  so  that  it  was  not  pufied  out  by  the  untoward
gusts  around.  And  that  "  frail  woman  " — borne  upon  now  by  every  present-time
influence,  literally  thronged  with  inducements  to  sink  all  shame  for  an  hour  that  she
might  reign  still  for  years,  besieged  with  earthly  motives  to  succumb  and  yield  obe-
dience to  a  coarse  command — did  refuse  to  succumb,  ran  the  gauntlet  of  all  con-
sequences whatsoever,  and,  with  an  aroused  indignation  that  would  sleep  no  more,
flung  back  the  brutal  mandate  in  the  face  of  him  who  sent  it,  is  fitted  to  show  us
how  "  in  weakness  "  certain  "  strength  is  made  perfect,"  and  how  the  things  amazing
and  "  impossible  with  man,  are  possible  with  God ; "  yes,  even  facile  to  his  Spirit's
breath. — B.

Vers.  16 — 22. — The  parody  of  legislature.  If  any  be  tempted  at  first  to  think  of
the  king's  conferences  (as  here  reported)  with  those  whom  we  will  call  his  statesmen
as  though  they  were  scarcely  serious  and  in  earnest, — fortunate  to  be  carried  on  within
the  protection  of  closed  doors  ;  the  monarch,  in  fact,  secretly  smiling  at  his  ministers,
and  they  in  turn  scarc'ely  dissembling  in  his  presence  their  real  convictions  of  hie
impossible  folly  and  of  their  own  obsequious  and  shallow  proposals, — yet  it  would  be
found  impossible  to  sustain  this  supposition.  It  will  not  bear  investigation  !  The
doors  were  but  a  short  while  closed  doors,  and  the  after  proceedings  give  evidence
ample  that  this  was  not  intended  to  be  any  mere  travesty  of  a  privy  council,  however
much  to  our  eye  it  may  resemble  it.  Assuming,  therefore,  what  we  do  not  doubt  will
be  correctly  assumed,  that  the  occasion  was  one  of  widespread  social  bearings,  and
that  the  proceedings  here  narrated  were  of  a  bonAfide  character,  we  have  again  an
impressive  illustration  of  the  fact  that  God's  work  in  the  constitution  of  human  nature,
God's  force  in  human  feeling  and  life,  insists  on  bearing  down  all  artificial  barriers
and  sweeping  away  all  such  obstruction.  It  possesses  such  a  cumulative  character.
In  silence,  in  depth  of  operation,  in  the  multiplication  of  an  exceeding  number  of
persistent  vital  ultimate  facts  in  the  constitution  of  the  human  family,  a  force  is
often  stealthily  generating  and  surely  gaining  headway,  which  at  last  tears  down  all
that  opposed,  and  that  long  seemed  sure  of  its  oppressing  grasp.  The  "  too  much
contempt  and  wrath  "  slowly  "  arise,"  and  are  sure  to  find  opportunity  to  take  their
revenge,  even  on  the  part  of  "  a  feeble  folk  I "  Thus  a  folk  feeble  enough,  when
considered  one  by  one,  will  prove  irresistible  in  combination  I

I.  Notice  how  the  hhman  heart,  human  life  in  its  tenderest  make,  in  its  most

YIELDING    MOOD,    RESENTS   IN   THE    LONG    RDN   ARBITRARY    FORCE.       Even    the    feminine

character  knows  despotism  to  be  an  unnatural  thing,  a  discreditable  violation  of  its
own  rights.  The  less  obtrusive  the  claims  of  that  feminine  character,  the  more  should
they  be  studied  by  anticipation.  Even  that  yielding  disposition  craves  reason  before
force,  right  before  might,  considerateness  before  compulsion.  The  husband,  the
father,  the  social  temper,  the  national  temper,  that  forgets  and  sins  against  this  has
only  to  forget  it  and  sin  against  it  long  enough  to  reap  whirlwind  and  the  most  real  of
ruin.  To  what  a  pass  had  the  treatment  long  meted  out  to  women  of  the  country  and  the
age  in  question  now  come  1  What  a  humiliating  confession  from  head-quarters  when
the  king  himself, "  who  reigned  from  India  unto  Ethiopia,"  and  these  elder  "  seven  wise
men  of  the  east,"  are  found  thrown  into  a  pitiable  panic,  a  paroxysm  of  apprehen-
sion, lest  there  should  happen  a  moral  and  social  insurrection  of  their  women,  "  great
and  small,"  throughout  the  vast  extent  of  the  country  and  its  "  one  hundred  and
tweuty-seven  provinces,"  against,  forsooth,  "their  husbands;"  and  in  the  sense,
forsooth,  of  "  despising  "  them  and  disputing  their  rule  I

II.  Notice  two  political  alternatives.  What  must  be  either  the  degenerate
social  state  of  a  nation,  or  its  ripened  state  in  any  individual  direction  for  some  very
radical  alterative,  when  the  spark  that  is  feared  is  such  a  thing  as  this,  anything
analogous  to  this — the  one  word  "  no  "  of  one  woman  !  The  one  resisting  act  of  a
wife,  who  is  a  queen,  to  the  rude  and  licentious  command  of  her  husband,  who  is  a
king  I  The  country  of  which  this  is  true,  the  constitution  of  which  this  is  true,  in
any  part  of  it,  must  be  dry  indeed  for  a  conflagration  I

III.  Notice  the  indescribable  inanity  or  the  mere  making  and  pboclamatioh


CH.  1.  10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  27

OF  A  DECEEE  ON  A  MORAL  AND  SOCIAL  SUBJECT  WHEN  IT  IS  NOT  BASED  ON  REASON,  ON

NATURAL  RELIGION,  ON  EDUCATION,  to  Say  nothing  of  other  religious  sanction  ;  or  when
the  just  utterances  of  these  authorities  are  rendered  utterly  indistinct,  are  stifled  by
the  improper  conduct  of  one  half  of  the  people,  towards  the  other  half,  who  may  be
aimed  at  by  the  decree.  No  number  of  decrees,  no  severity  of  sanctions  attached  to
them,  could  possibly  bring  all  the  women  of  a  vast  country  to  honour  and  obey  from
the  heart  their  husbands,  while  these  should  continue  to  act  towards  them  in  a
manner  contrary  to  the  Divine  voice  and  to  the  charter  of  creation  !  The  illustra-
tion which  this  history  ofEers  is  patent  and  bold.  The  case  appears  a  violent  one  ;
the  position  one  to  which  modern  days  offer  no  sufficient  parallel.  It  is  a  call  for
unbounded  gratitude  on  the  part  of  England,  if  it  be  so.  But  the  lesson  for  other
lands  is  still  wanted  in  its  most  alphabetic  form  ;  and  who  can  deny  that  all  nations
need  the  delicate  guidance  of  the  same  principle  in  outline,  though  in  a  less  visible,
less  common  form  ?

IV.  Lastly,  when  thb  last  comes  to  the  last,  courtiers  and  the  most  obse-
quious OF  THEM  DO  NOT  THINK  SO  MUCH  OF  THEIR  ROYAL  MASTERS  AS  THEY  DO  OF  THEM-
SELVES AND  THEIR  FELLOWS.  Kingdoms  are  not  made  for  kings,  the  ruled  for  rulers,
but  the  reverse.  And,  probably  without  a  thought  of  it  himself,  Meraucan  in  hia
answer  (ver.  16)  shows  himself  keeping  by  no  means  to  the  view  of  the  position
which  the  king  had  set  forth  and  enlarged  upon  in  his  question.  Supposing  there  to
have  been  (what  there  was  not)  advantage  obtainable  in  the  decree,  the  insult  (so
interpreted)  that  had  been  offered  to  the  king  is  almost  thrust  on  one  side,  while  the
wily  counsellors  seem  forthwith  to  scent  the  opportunity  of  an  advantrige  to  them-
selves and  the  widespread  people  I  So  the  magnified  affronts  of  the  great  are  turned
by  Providence  to  a  very  different  use  from  the  vindication  of  their  individual  pride
or  vanity.

Cnndusion. — While  there  is  perhaps  not  a  little  in  these  verses  which  invites  and
almost  provokes  our  modern  satire,  there  is  certainly  one  great  impression  resulting
Erom  the  whole,  and  deserving  of  the  fullest  attention  and  most  constant  memory
namely,  that  great  moral,  social,  religious  effects  must  not  be  sought  primarily  by
mere  legislative  enactment.  They  must  be  sought  by  a  diligent  use  of  corresponditig
methods,  and  then  even  will  be  found  only  in  God's  blessing  upon  them. — B.

Vers.  10 — 12. — The  tyrant-slave.  Distance  frequently  gives  us  exaggerated  notions
of  greatness,  while  closer  intimacy  would  speedily  dispel  the  illusion.  To  the  best
part  of  the"  known  world  the  name  of  Ahasuerus  was  associated  with  unrestrained
power,  but  this  passage  reveals  his  real  position.  Extremes  meet ;  an  absolute  tyrant
may  be  at  the  same  time  an  absolute  slave.  This  was  precisely  the  case  with
Ahasuerus.     He  was —

I.  An  absolute  tyrant.  He  occupied  a  position  of  unlimited  authority,  and
exercised  his  authority  in  an  arbitrary  manner.  Note — 1.  That  the  possession,  oj
absolute  power  is  in  itself  a  great  wrong.  It  is  a  violation  of  the  inalienable  rights
of  communities  that  any  man  through  the  mere  accident  of  birth — or  even  through
his  own  superior  abilities — should  become  an  irresponsible  ruler  over  them ;  and
history  shows  that  this  violation  has  always  been  fraught  with  disastrous  conse-
quences. (1)  It  subordinates  the  common  weal  to  individual  interest.  The  well-
being  of  society  is  possible  only  on  the  supposition  that  the  good  of  the  greatest
number  should  be  of  the  first  importance,  and  that  individuals  should  be  willing  to
sacrifice  everything  if  necessary  for  its  attainment.  Despots,  however,  proceed  on
the  supposition  that  everything  exists  for  their  private  benefit — extensive  territories,
the  wealth  of  nations,  and  even  the  lives  of  their  subjects.  (2)  It  tends  to  make  the
ruler  himself  capricious.  To  expect  a  man  to  be  moderate,  reasonable,  and  just  at  all
times  in  such  a  position  is  to  make  too  great  a  demand  on  human  nature  ;  the  tempta-
tions to  which  he  is  exposed  are  more  than  an  ordinary  mortal  can  withstand.  (3)  It
tends  to  make  the  people  servile  and  unprincipled.  Where  one  will  is  supreme  there
is  nothing  certain  r  law,  justice,  rectitude  become  meaningless  ;  duty  resolves  itself
fnto  pleasing  the  potentate,  who  holds  the  power  of  life  and  death  in  his  own  hands.
The  natural  outcome  of  this  is  the  spread  of  meanness,  duplicity,  dishonesty  among
all  classes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.     The  apologists  of  despotism  sometimes


28  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  {cb.  i.  10—22.

refer  to  the  position  of  a  father  in  his  family  in  justification  of  the  institution.  But
a  father  is  not  absolute  in  the  widest  sense ;  and  even  if  he  were,  the  danger  insepar-
able from  the  possession  of  so  much  power  is  neutralised  by  the  love  he  bears  for
his  own  flesh  and  blood.  2.  The  use  made  of  absolute  power  in  the  case  before  us.
This  is  a  most  ignoble  passage  in  tlie  life  of  a  king  of  such  high  pretensions.  (1)
He  seemed  to  assume  that  no  consideration  was  due  to  anybody  but  himself.  The
sole  purpose  of  the  prolonged  festivities  was  to  gratify  his  own  vanity.  And  when
he  thought  that  the  presence  of  the  queen  would  add  to  his  own  pleasure,  he  never
paused  to  consider  whether  it  might  not  be  painful  to  the  queen  herself.  Selfishness
makes  men  thoughtless,  unjust,  and  cruel,  even  to  those  who  have  the  strongest
claims  upon  their  tenderness.  (2)  He  commanded  what  was  unlawful  according  to
the  accepted  notions  of  the  time.  Eastern  women  led  a  secluded  life,  and  were  not
permitted  to  expose  their  countenances  to  the  gaze  of  strangers.  Besides,  for  a
modest  woman  to  display  her  charms  in  the  presence  of  drunken  revellers  was  a
degradation  from  which  she  must  have  recoiled  with  unutterable  aversion.  (3)  He
afterwards  punished  as  disobedience  what  was  really  obedience  to  a  higher  law  of
duty.  The  queen  was  deposed  simply  for  daring  to  protect  her  honour.  In  this
respect  she  takes  her  place  among  a  noble  band — ^the  glorious  aimy  of  martyrs,  who,
rather  than  violating  their  consciences  at  the  bidding  of  bloodthirsty  tyrants,  sub-
mitted to  imprisonment,  torture,  and  death.  Wrong  can  never  really  flourish.  It  may
appear  prosperous  to  superficial  observers,  but  a  deeper  knowledge  of  the  state  of
things  must  reveal  the  penalty  which  it  entails.  This  king,  amidst  the  dazzling
'splendours  with  which  he  surrounded  himself,  might  have  imposed  upon  his  fellow-
aaen,  and  made  them  gaze  with  longing  eyes  upon  the  elevated  position  which  he
occupied ;  but  after  all  there  are  unmistakable  indications  here  that  the  absolute
tyrant  was —

II.  An  absolute  slave.  We  find  that — 1.  ffe  was  a  slave  of  his  appetite.  "  The
icing's  heart  was  merry  with  wine  ;  "  he  had  taken  more  drink  than  was  good  for  him,
and  was  beginning  to  feel  the  effects  of  it.  A  sorry  spectacle  I  He  who  ought  to
have  set  a  pattern  of  dignified  demeanour  to  those  beneath  him,  degrading  himself
below  the  level  of  the  brute  creation.  Millions  have  done  and  are  doing  the  same
thing.  Alexander  conquered  the  world,  but  a  lawless  appetite  conquered  Alexander.
2.  He  was  a  slave  of  his  passions.  "  The  king  was  very  wroth,  and  his  anger  burned
within  him."  Accustomed  as  he  was  to  be  implicitly  obeyed,  he  could  not  endure
his  will  to  be  thwarted.  The  demon  within  him  was  roused,  and  he  was,  no  longer
master  of  himself ;  he  must  obey  the  promptings  of  unreasoning  rage,  however  much
he  might  regret  it  in  calmer  moments.  Truly,  "  he  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than
the  mighty,  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city."  3.  He  was  a
slave  of  his  pride.  He  was  induced  to  depose  the  queen  because  he  imagined  that
his  dignity  had  been  compromised.  No  doubt  he  loved  her,  and  it  must  have  cost
hira  a  pang  to  be  separated  from  her,  but  pride  would  not  allow  him  to  revoke  hig
decree.  Like  King  Herod,  who  preferred  to  behead  John  the  Baptist  ratlier  than
confess  that  he  had  made  a  foolish  oath.  He  may  have  called  it  courage  to  himself,
but  it  was  in  reality  the  most  contemptible  cowardice. — R.

Vers.  16 — 18. — Court  injluence.  We  may  admit  the  general  truth  of  a  principle,
and  yet  dony  its  application  to  a  particular  case.  Doubtless  wrong-doing  on  the
part  of  the  queen  might  have  exerted  an  unwholesome  influence  upon  other  women,
out  it  by  no  means  follows  that  her  conduct  in  the  present  instance  was  open  to  this
objection.  On  the  contrary,  might  not  her  bravery  in  maintaining  the  honour  of  hel
sex  in  the  face  of  so  much  danger  strengthen  the  hands  of  others  when  placed  in
similar  difficulties  ?  The  subject  suggested  by  this  passage  is  the  responsibility  of
greatness.     Let  us  inquire —

I.  What  constitutes  greatness.  By  greatness  we  mean,  in  a  general  way,  the
position  of  a  man  who  for  certain  well-defined  reasons  towers  above  the  rest  of  his
fellow-men.  Evidently,  therefore,  it  may  be  of  various  types.  1.  The  greatness  of
position.  Some  are  born  heirs  to  titles  and  kingdoms.  Distinction  is  thrust  upon
them  before  their  wishes  are  consulted.  Their  lives  mingle  with  the  web  of  history
simply  on  account  of  their  birth.     2.  The  greatness  of  wealth     This  diifeiB  from  the


OH,  1. 10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHBB.  29

preceding  in  that  it  is  confined  to  no  favoured  class.  A  man  may  have  a  moat  humble
origin,  and  yet  through  industry  and  perseverance  may  become  a  millionnaire.  3.
The  greatness  of  genius.  This  is  the  gift  of  God.  It  resembles  that  of  position,  in
that  men  are  born  into  it;  but  it  also  resembles  that  of  wealth,  in  that  it  is  fully
enjoyed  only  through  labour.  John  Milton  would  have  been  a  genius  had  he  been
"  mute  and  inglorious ;  "  but  it  was  the  effort  he  put  forth  in  producing  '  Paradise
Lost '  that  made  him  immortal.

II.  What  constitutes  this  kesponsibilitt.  1.  The  fact  that  the  great  are  members
of  society.  No  member  of  society,  however  great  or  however  humble,  can  be  inde-
pendent. His  actions  touch  his  fellows  at  so  many  points  that  they  have  a  right  to
control  his  conduct  to  that  extent.  2.  The  great  determine  their  own  actions.  No
man  is  a  mere  puppet  of  circumstances.  A  high  position  may  involve  conditions
which  hamper  the  will,  but  they  cannot  rob  it  altogether  of  its  freedom.  In  so  far
then  as  actions  are  free  the  agent  is  responsible  for  them.  3.  The  great  exert  an
influence.  This  is  true  of  all,  but  especially  of  the  great.  And  this  was  the  point
on  which  Memucan  so  emphatically  insisted.  (1)  Influence  is  independent  of  our
will.  We  can  shape  our  own  conduct,  but  we  cannot  regulate  its  effects  upon  others.
We  cannot  plead  that  we  never  desired  it,  when  we  are  charged  with  ruining  others
by  our  example,  for  those  who  copy  us  as  a  rule  do  not  ask  our  permission.  Does
the  subject  of  a  deadly  fever  desire  to  spread  infection?  (2)  The  influence  of  the
great  is  powerful  in  proportion  to  their  greatness.  They  are  the  observed  of  all
observers.  They  are  cities  set  on  a  hill  which  cannot  be  hid.  Jeroboam  son  of
Nebat  made  Israel  sin,  and  the  wickedness  of  the  people  for  several  generations  was
attributed  to  the  influence  of  his  example.  (3)  It  is  far  easier  to  influence  for  evil
than  for  good.  The  effect  produced  upon  an  object  is  as  much  due  to  the  object
itself  as  to  the  power  exerted.  A  blow  that  would  leave  iron  uninjured  might  shatter
glass  to  atoms.  The  original  bias  of  the  human  heart  is  toward  evil,  so  that  it  needs
little  help  in  that  direction.  No  great  eloquence  is  required  to  persuade  the  miser  to
hoard  his  money,  or  the  spendthrift  to  squander  his  substance.

This  subject  has  a  practical  application.  What  is  true  of  the  great  with  regard  to
influence  is  true  of  all  to  some  extent.  It  is  true  that  a  taper  is  unspeakably  less
than  the  sun,  but  it  produces  the  same  effect  in  its  own  sphere  as  the  larger  luminary
does  in  his.  1.  Ministers  of  religion  exert  an  influence.  Not  merely  in  the  pulpit,
but  in  their  intercourse  with  the  world.  2.  Parents  exert  an  influence.  Their
actions  will  generally  produce  a  deeper  impression  than  their  words.  3.  Associates
exert  an  influence.  Men  are  constantly  brought  together  in  the  various  pursuits  of
life.  In  the  workshop,  in  the  market-place,  in  the  transactions  of  business,  each
man  is  unconsciously  contributing  his  share  to  the  making  or  the  marring  of  the
characters  of  those  with  whom  he  comes  in  contact. — E.

Vers.  10,  11. — The  fruit  of  excess.  The  king's  inconsistent  excess  betrayed  him
into  an  unworthy  and  foolish  act.  When  heated  with  wine  he  summoned  Queen
Vashti  to  appear  before  him,  crowned,  that  she  might  "  show  the  princes  and  people
her  beauty. "

I.  An  outwabd  eespectfulness  of  mannsr  does  not  make  amends  for  any
DISHONOUEABLB  INTENT.  In  sending  to  Vashti  the  seven  chamberlains  who  waiter!
on  himself,  the  king  showed  some  respect  for  her  dignity.  He  perhaps  hoped  by  this
parade  to  overcome  any  objection  she  might  have  to  obey  his  strange  command.
But  the  quality  of  evil  is  not  affected  by  the  garnishings  with  which  men  clothe  and
try  to  conceal  it.  Sin  is  often  so  disguised  as  to  be  made  attractive  to  the  unwary,
but  it  is  still  sin  ;  and  the  "  pure  in  heart "  who  "  see  God  "  are  not  deceived.

II.  WbONQ-DOING  BREEDS  FEAR  IN  THE  MOST  RECKLESS  MOMENTS  OP  SELF-CONFID-
ENCE. The  emphatic  way  in  which  the  number  and  names  of  the  chamberlains  are
gfiven  seems  to  indicate  that  there  was  some  fear  of  the  queen  in  the  king's  heart.  He
knew  her  character,  and  was  not  unconscious  of  the  insult  implied  in  his  command.
Having,  under  the  excitements  of  wine  and  vanity,  conceived  and  expressed  the  desire
that  her  beauty  should  be  publicly  exhibited,  he  could  not  draw  back,  but  he  thought
to  convey  his  will  to  her  with  such  accompaniments  as  would  either  flatter  or  over-
awe her  into  obedience.     A  dishonest  heart  has  fears  that  are  only  known  to  itself.


30  THE  BOOK  OB*  ESTHER.  [ch.  i.  10—22.

It  is  most  timid  and  craven  wlien-  it  assumes  the  loudest  bravery.  Its  bristling
feathers  of  authority  are  often  the  signs  of  an  inward  distrust.  Conscious  rectitude
of  purpose  and  action  is  the  true  spring  of  courage.  A  heart  that  is  pure  in  its
affections  and  intents  is  bold  and  strong  in  all  circumstances.  It  is  an  evil  conscience
that  "makes  cowards  of  vm  all."  A  good  conscience  will  make  heroes  of  the
humblest.

III.  When  unjust  to  ourselves  we  abb  in  great  danger  of  being  unjust  to
OTHERS.  If  the  king  had  been  himself  true  to  the  law  which  he  had  promulgated,  he
would  never  have  thought  of  subjecting  Vashti  to  a  humiliating  exposure.  When
men  recognise  their  own  obligations  to  righteous  law,  and  submit  themselves  unto
God,  they  are  careful  to  observe  the  duties  they  owe  to  their  fiiends  and  neighbours.
Indifference  to  the  feelings  and  rights  of  others  implies  a  want  of  self-subordination
to  holyand  honourable  rule.  It  is  only  the  unregulated,  whose  mora!  and  spiritual
nature  is  not  braced  by  habitual  subjection  to  principle,  wlio  are  willing  to  trample"
on  the  sensibilities  of  those  over  whom  natural  or  social  ties  give  them  power.

IV.  The  excitements  produced  by  ungoverned  passions  or  iRiiFiciAL  stimu-
lation DO  NOT  EXCUSE  THE  EVILS  OR  CRIMES  TO  WHICH  TffEY  MAY  LEAD.  An  Un-
bridled temper,  a  blinding  lust,  or  vinous  intoxication,  has  often  been  pled  in  miti-
gation of  the  gravest  offences.  But  one  sin  cannot  justify  or  excuse  another  and
consequent  sin.  If  a  man  allows  his  reason  and  conscience  to  be  unseated,  whether  by
anger,  or  lust,  or  strong  drink,  he  is  responsible  for  every  evil  result  tliat  may  follow.
There  is  no  sin  which  does  not  carry  within  it  the  seeds  of  other  sins.  Tliis  is  a
solemn  thought,  and  one  which  should  put  all  men  on  their  guard  against  the  first
beginnings  of  sin. — D.

Ver.  12. — Justifiable  disobedience.  The  commission  of  the  seven  chamberlains  to
the  queen  was  in  vain.  Vashti  refused  to  appear  before  the  king  and  his  guests.
Why  this  disobedience  ?  Several  considerations,  favourable  and  unfavourable,  may
be  suggested.

I.  Considerations  unfavourable  to  Vashti.  1.  She  knew  the  absolute  authority
with  which  the  king  was  invested.  In  tli-is  knowledge  she  had  become  his  wife  and
queen.  Ought  she  not,  therefore,  to  have  obeyed  him,  even  at  personal  sacrifice,  when
he  commanded  her,  with  befitting  circumstance,  to  come  to  him,  that  her  beauty
might  be  seen  and  admired  ?  2.  She  knew  the  importance  of  the  occasion,  and  the
disappointment  and  humiliation  that  would  fall  on  the  king,  her  husband,  if  she
ventured  to  disobey  his  command.  Should  she  not  have  been  willing  to  suffer  pain
herself  in  order  to  save  the  king  from  the  pain  of  a  public  manifestation  of  revolt
against  his  declared  will  ?  Such  self-denial  is  sometimes  good,  and,  whenever  good,
is  praiseworthy.  3.  She  may  have  been  influenced  merely  by  the  wilfulness  of
pride.  All  reflection  on  the  claims  of  duty,  on  the  requirements  of  the  occasion,  and
on  the  effects  of  her  conduct  on  the  king's  dignity  and  peace,  may  have  been  rendered
impossible  by  the  flushings  of  a  resentful  pride.  Nothing  more  easily  drowns  reflec-
tion, nothing  is  more  unreasoning  and  unreasonable,  than  a  haughty  and  self-exalting
disposition.  Pride  is  a  bad  helm  for  the  guidance  of  life.  4.  Whatever  the  queen's
motive,  her  answer  to  the  chamberlains  may  have  been  given  in  an  abrupt  and
defiant  manner.  It  is  a  good  quality,  and  a  proof  either  of  self-discipline  or  of  a
kindly  and  sympathetic  nature,  to  be  able  to  express  even  strong  feelings  in  ways
that  will  not  kindle  wrath  or  breed  discord.  "A  soft  answer  tumeth  away  wrath."
We  must  observe,  however,  that  nothing  is  said  of  the  manner  in  which  the  queen
lesponded  to  the  king's  messengers.     All  we  are  told  is  that  she  refused.

II.  Considerations  favourable  to  Vashti.  1.  The  king's  command  showed  a
want  of  sympathy  with  her  in  her  faithful  diligence  as  entertainer  of  the  women.
Inside  the  palace  she  was  doing  the  work  which  the  king  was  doing  in  the  garden
court.  Why  should  she  be  called  away  from  this  real  and  appropriate  work  to  pose
herself  as  the  central  figure  of  an  idle  and  foolish  pageant?  The  command  was  in-
considerate and  frivolous.  Honest  work,  however  secretly  performed,  is  to  be  pre-
ferred at  all  times  to  showy  ostentations  which  minister  only  to  the  gratification  of
seif.  A  lunnble  mind  and  a  diligent  hand  are  better  in  a  woman  than  the  most
lauded  beauty  that  courts  the  gaze  of  the  world.     2.  The  king's  command  was  t


CH.  1.  10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  31

violation  of  custom.  We  know  the  seclusion  in  which  Eastern  women  then,  as  now,
lived.  It  was  a  shame  to  a  woman  to  appear  unveiled  before  any  man  except  hei
husband.  Vashti  would  be  staggered  when  she  received  the  message  of  the  chamber-
lains. National  or  social  customs  may  be  bad,  but  they  cannot  be  safely  or  wisely
departed  from  except  under  the  force  of  enlightened  and  conscientious  reasons.
Especially  are  they  binding  when  any  breach  of  them  implies  a  conscious  self-
degradation.  3.  The  king's  command  was  the  result  of  partial  drunkenness.
Vashti  could  hardly  fail  to  perceive  its  cause.  She  would  know  that  the  king  could
not  have  issued  it  if  he  had  been  in  possession  of  his  sober  senses.  It  is  said  of  one
that  he  appealed  from  Alexander  drunk  to  Alexander  sober.  So  may  have  been  the
thought  of  Vashti.  Rather  than  subject  herself  to  insult,  she  would  risk  the  imme-
diate displeasure  of  the  king,  in  the  hope  that  when  he  came  to  his  right  mind  he
would  perceive  the  wisdom  and  propriety  of  her  conduct.  4.  The  king's  command
was  an  outrage  on  Vashti,  as  queen,  as  wife,  and  as  woman.  (1)  As  sole  and
acknowledged  queen  of  the  empire,  she  could  not,  without  utter  loss  of  dignity,  stoop
to  expose  herself,  as  a  royal  puppet,  to  the  excited  multitude.  (2)  As  the  true  and
legitimate  wife  of  the  king,  she  could  not,  consistently  with  wifely  honour,  allow  her
beauty  to  be  made  a  public  plaything  and  gazing-stock  at  the  whim  of  a  wine-
flushed  and  self-forgetting  husband.  (3)  As  a  woman  (apart  altogether  from  out-
ward position),  every  true  instinct  would  make  her  shrink  from  exhibiting  herself  as
a  mere  viranton  to  eyes  that  were  inflamed  with  wine.  If  she  had  been  of  a  soft
nature  she  might  have  yielded,  at  the  cost  of  much  suffering.  If  she  had  been  proud
of  her  beauty,  and  shameless,  she  might  have  gladly  obeyed.  But  she  was  neither  so
soft  as  to  submit  to  outrage,  nor  so  unprincipled  as  to  welcome  it.  A  modest  spirit
is  the  most  precious  jewel  which  nature  grants  to  women,  and  when  it  is  sanctified
by  the  fear  of  God  and  the  love  of  Jesus,  its  power  as  an  instrument  of  good  is
wonderfully  increased.  5.  The  king's  command  threatened  the  reputation  of  Vashti.
It  was  given  to  the  chamberlains  in  presence  of  the  princes  and  nobjes,  and  it  was
delivered  to  Vashti  in  presence  of  the  women.  Thus  all  were  informed  of  it,  and  all
understood  its  meaning.  If  Vashti  had  obeyed  it,  she  would  have  lost  caste  in  the
estimation  of  her  own  sex,  and  she  would  have  imperilled,  if  not  sacrificed  altogether,
the  respect  and  reverence  of  the  "  princes  and  people,"  and  even  of  the  king  himself.
The  praise  of  men  may,  and  often  does,  cost  too  much.  It  should  never  be  allowed
to  enter  into  rivalry  with  the  praise  of  God,  or  the  approbation  of  a  good  conscience.
At  the  same  time,  the  esteem  of  the  good — a  high  reputation  for  integrity  of  heart
and  life — is  of  exceeding  price,  and  is  usually  but  the  reflection  of  the  Divine  favour.
All  who  play  fast  and  loose  with  their  reputed  character,  as  honourable  or  godly  men
and  women,  give  evidence  that  they  are  loosely  attached  to  the  sacred  principles  of
truth  and  virtue  (see  1  Pet.  ii.  2).  Vashti  may  be  taken  as  an  example  of  devo-
tion to  just  thought  and  pure  feeling.  At  all  hazards  she  did  what  her  true  mind
and  heart  would  only  allow  her  to  do.  She  risked  much,  and  in  the  event  she  suf-
fered much.  But  we  do  not  pity  her.  Whatever  were  the  motives  that  inspired  her,
our  sympathies  go  with  her  in  her  refusal  to  obey  the  king's  command.  We  give  her
honour  as  a  woman  who,  in  very  trying  circumstances,  was  true  to  herself  and  her
position.  The  one  act  by  which  she  is  known  has  made  her  name  honourable  in  all
time.  Her  firmness  in  a  critical  moment  may  also  be  regarded  as  an  illustration  of
the  Divine  providence.  It  produced  results  which  she  could  not  anticipate.  It
paved  the  way  for  that  great  deliverance  of  the  Jews  from  the  devices  of  the  wicked
of  which  this  book  is  the  record.  Honest  action,  whatever  troubles  it  may  bring,
never  goes  without  its  ultimate  reward.  The  lines  of  self-denjdng  allegiance  to  truth
stretch  far ;  eternity  only  will  realise  their  full  issue. — D.

Ver.  12. — Anger.  Vashti's  disobedience  kindled  in  the  king's  mind  (1)  a  strong
resentment — he  "  was  very  wroth."  (2)  An  abiding  resentment — "  his  anger  burned
in  him. "  Considering  the  man  and  the  circumstances,  this  should  not  surprise  us.  1.
It  was  a  case  of  rebellion.  The  worst  crime  in  the  view  of  a  despot  is  to  dispute  his
will.  Nothing  so  easily  inflames  anger  in  a  man  who  is  used  to  power  and  unused
to  self-control  as  any  want  of  submission  to  his  authority.  2.  The  rebellion  was  in
the  king's  own  household.     It  was  the  queen,  his  wife,  who  ventured  to  disobey  him.


83  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  i.  10— 2Z

Men  naturally  expect  a  special  readiness  of  sympathy  and  co-operation  from  those
who  are  united  to  them  by  blood  or  family  ties.  And  resentment  caused  by  oppo-
sition from  such  relations  as  wife  or  children  often  assumes  a  peculiar  intensity.  But
weak  and  self-willed  minds  are  apt  to  abuse  these  ties  by  exacting  more  than  is  just.
We  should  be  especially  considerate  in  our  demands  on  the  obedience  or  service  of
those  -who  have  the  highest  claims  on  our  respect  and  love.  3.  The  rebellion  was
made  public.  A  private  humiliation  is  much  more  easily  borne  than  one  suffered  in
presence  of  many.  Vashti's  refusal  to  appear  was  announced  before  the  princes  and
the  assembled  citizens.  This  circumstance  would  add  a  sting  to  the  affront,  and
supply  fuel  to  the  flame  of  the  king's  wrath.  One  of  the  penalties  of  wrong-doing  is
that  it  cannot  be  kept  secret.  In  its  effects  at  least  it  is  sure  to  become  known,  and
to  bring  confusion  and  shame  on  the  evil-doer.  4.  The  rebellion  occurred  at  an  un-
fortunate time.  It  was  just  before  the  close  of  the  prolonged  festival  that  the  queen
failed  in  submission  to  her  husband's  command.  So  far  all  had  gone  well.  All  ranks
had  been  obsequious  and  flattering.  Not  a  jarring  note  had  arisen  to  disturb  the
serenity  of  the  vain  king's  heart.  But  now,  when  the  triumph  seemed  complete,  the
glory  of  it  was  utterly  despoiled  by  the  disobedience  of  Vashti.  A  bitter  sense  of
humiliation  and  a  burning  anger  were  the  necessary  results.  5.  The  rebellion  was
produced  by  the  king's  own  act.  He  had  been  guilty  of  a  folly  that  was  full  of  risk.
Theconsciousness  that  he  had  brought  the  dishonour  on  himself  would  be  no  salve
to  his  mind.  It  would  only  aggravate  the  wound  that  had  been  inflicted  on  his  pride,
and  the  helpless  rage  that  unmanned  him.  Sufferings,  however  severe,  that  come  on
us  from  without  are  light  compared  with  those  that  are  hatched  by  our  own  follies
and  misdeeds.  It  has  been  often  observed  that  the  hatred  of  ungodly  men  is  greater
to  those  whom  they  have  injured  than  to  those  from  whom  they  have  received
injury.  According  to  this  law  of  the  natural  heart,  the  anger  of  the  king  against
Vashti,  instead  of  being  allayed  or  softened,  would  be  increased  by  the  knowledge
that  she  had  been  driven  to  rebellion  by  his  own  foolish  conduct.  It  should  be
remarked,  however,  that  though  the  king's  anger  can  be  understood  and  explained,  it
cannot  be  approved.     For —

I.  Anger  is  never  dignified.  It  shows  a  want  of  self-command.  The  king
lost  dignity  when  he  became  "  very  wroth  "  in  presence  of  his  guests.  He  was  no
longer  king,  but  a  suffering  subject  under  the  will  or  caprice  of  Vashti.  Anger
always  makes  a  man  look  inferior  to  the  occasion  that  gives  birth  to  it.

II.  Anger  invariably  adds  to  a  supposed  or  real  humiliation.  If  the  king  had
received  Vashti's  refusal  to  obey  him  with  a  calm  mind  and  a  pleasant  countenance,
as  a  thing  personal  to  himself  and  Vashti,  and  therefore  above  the  observance  of
the  crowd,  the  last  hour  of  the  banquet  might  have  been  in  keeping  with  all  the  other
hours  that  had  preceded  it.  But  his  breaking  into  an  ungovernable  fury  brought  the
festival  to  a  miserable  close.  The  princes  and  people  separated  in  confusion  and
fear.     The  king's  anger  did  not  mend  matters.

III.  Anger  is  always  unjust.  There  can  be  no  true  judgment  when  the  mind  is
perturbed  by  wrathful  feelings.  The  angry  man  is  shut  up  to  one  view  of  the  con-
duct that  has  enraged  him.  He  sees  everything  through  the  mist  of  bis  passion.
The  last  man  to  judge  or  act  truly  is  he  who  has  given  up  the  reins  of  temper,  and
yielded  himself  to  the  power  of  anger.

IV.  Anger  is  always  selfish.  It  is  violently  selfish.  Like  the  king  of  Persia,  it
has  no  consideration  for  the  thoughts,  influences,  or  circumstances  which  have  actuated
those  against  whom  it  is  turned,  or  for  the  initiative  or  contributory  wrong-doing  of
the  heart  in  which  it  bums.  While  it  lasts  it  is  simply  absorbed  by  the  self  that  ii
pained,  and  has  no  regard  for  others.  AH  the  springs  of  charity  are  dried  up  when
anger  rules  a  soul.

V.  Anger  is  a  prolific  cause  op  injustice  and  cruelty.  It  led  Ahasuerus,  as  we
Bhall  see,  to  be  unjust  and  cruel  to  Vashti.  But  to  what  terrible  and  varied  crimes
does  it  give  birth  in  ordinary  life  1  What  a  place  it  occupies  in  our  criminal  records!
How  many  injure  others  and  ruin  themselves  by  giving  "  place  to  wrath  ! "  There  is
much  in  the  every-day  experience  of  the  world  to  warn  men  against  allowing  them-
Belvea  to  yield  to  the  power  of  anger.

VI.  Anoeb  is  a  bin  against  the  Chbibtian  rule  jf  life.    There  is  an  anger


am.  1. 10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  3Si

which  is  Christlike.  "  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not,''  said  Paul.  But  that  is  an  anger,  or
holy  indignation,  against  sin  and  its  temptations.  It  has  reference  to  things  that  are
evil,  and  not  to  persons.  Jesus  himself  hated  sin  and  all  its  works,  but  he  loved
sinners  and  died  for  them.  We  cannot  cherish  at  the  same  time  the  forgiving  spirit
of  Christ  and  the  feeling  of  anger  towards  any  man.  It  was  at  once  a  recognition
of  our  weakness,  and  a  desire  that  we  should  strive  to  overcome  it,  that  led  the
apostle  to  write,  "  Let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath."

Additional  lessons  : — We  have  here  an  instance  of — 1.  A  just  punishment.  The
king's  vanity,  inflamed  by  wine,  brought  upon  him  a  severe  retribution.  Nebuchad-
nezzar's madness,  and  David's  grief  under  the  pestilence,  were  heavy  punishments  of
a  vain  presumption.  But  to  such  a  man  as  Ahasuerus  the  rebellion  of  his  queen,
with  all  its  attendant  circumstances,  was  about  as  weighty  an  infliction  as  was
possible.  It  was  peculiarly  fitting  to  the  case.  2.  A  sandy  foundation.  No  miracle
was  needed  to  bring  down  into  humiliating  collapse  the  edifice  of  vain-glory  which
the  king  had  been  laboriously  rearing  for  himself  throughout  the  festival.  Many  a
showy  fabric  thus  unexpectedly  tumbles  about  the  head  of  its  builder.  A  little  thing
will  destroy  a  false  grandeur,  an  unprincipled  reputation,  or  a  selfish  happiness.  A
building  to  stand  must  have  a  good  foundation.  There  is  only  one  foundation — that
of  God^  truth  and  love  in  Jesus  Christ — on  which  character,  reputation,  life-influence,
happiness,  and  hope  may  safely  build.  .Build  there,  and  when  all  the  storms  of  .lite
have  done  their  worst,  you  and  your  life-work  will  still  abide.  The  kingdom  of
Christ  is  an  everlasting  kingdom.  "  They  that  trust  in  the  Lord  shall  never  be  put
to  shame." — D.

Ver.  13. — Motives  of  td/-restraint.  If  the  anger  which  burned  in  the  king  had
issued  in  a  determination  to  put  the  disobedient  Vashti  to  death,  his  will  would  have
been  obeyed,  and  his  example  would  not  have  been  singular.  History  affords  many
instances  of  the  sacrifice  of  wives  by  despotic  kings  under  the  influence  of  violent
passion.  What  withheld  Ahasuerus  from  this  last  stretch  of  authority  ?  Several
causes  are  suggested.

I.  Affection.  Vashti  had  both  beauty  of  face  and  form,  and  nobility  of  character.
That  the  king  was  fully  sensible  of  the  attractiveness  of  her  presence  is  shown  by
his  request  that  she  should  appear  before  his  guests  at  the  banquet.  In  spite  of  her
disobedience  and  the  anger  it  excited  in  his  mind,  it  is  very  probable  that  a  lingering
affection  curbed  any  desire  he  may  have  had  to  inflict  on  her  an  immediate  and
summary  punishment.  There  are  few  greater  treasures  than  the  power  to  win  such
an  esteem  and  love  from  relatives  and  friends  as  will  not  only  be  a  fruitful  pleasure
in  times  of  peace,  but  exercise  a  restraining  influence  on  tempers  that  have  become
turbulent  and  unruly.  Many  qualities  are  needed  to  give  a  man  or  woman  possession
of  it.     Yet  all,  by  a  godly  self -discipline,  may  acquire  it  in  measure.

II.  Fear.  It  can  hardly  be  doubted  that  Vashti's  nature  was  a  more  powerful
one  than  that  of  the  king.  The  closing  incident  of  the  feast  implies  that  the  king
was  proud  of  his  wife,  and  that  the  queen  had  some  consciousness  of  power  over
her  husband.  From  the  little  that  is  written — little,  but  telling — we  gather  that
Vashti  had  been  accustomed  to  a  strong  personal  ascendancy  in  her  intercourse  with
the  king.  And  now,  when  anger  burned  in  his  heart  against  Vashti,  the  weak  and
self-indulgent  king  hesitated,  and  wavered,  and  sought  the  advice  of  others.  He  was
still  under  the  influence  of  a  nature  superior  to  his  own.  It  is  well  to  consider  that
there  are  forces  in  the  world  higher  and  mightier  than  the  material.  The  grace  and
strength  of  character  possessed  by  a  single  woman  may  be  stronger  than  the  wrathful
will  of  a  monarch  who  commands  legions,  and  whose  nod  millions  are  ready  to  obey.

III.  Law.  The  unalterable  character  given  to  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians
displayed,  though  in  an  unwise  and  awkward  way,  a  more  than  usual  respect  for  the
claims  of  public  law.  King  Ahasuerus  inherited  a  sort  of  reverence  for  the  fixed
code  of  the  empire,  and  it  was  "  his  manner,"  or  habit,  to  consult  legal  experts  in  all
matters  of  difficulty.  This  habitual  regard  for  law  asserted  itself  in  his  treatment  of
Vashti's  rebellion,  and  assisted  in  preventing  his  wrath  from  wreaking  itself  at  once
in  violent  action.  The  king's  recognition  of  the  claims  of  law  is  commendable.
Notice — 1.  That  law  is  the  authoritative  teaching  of  experience.    It  is  the  accumii<

KBTHBB.  0


34  THE  BOOK  Of  ESTHER  [ch.  i.  10—22

lated  and  embodied  wisdom  of  a  nation.  As  civlliiation  advances  in  communities,
their  laws  become  at  the  same  time  more  just  and  more  humane,  and  they  acquire
inherent  force  in  proportion  as  they  reflect  the  principles  of  truth  and  right.  Bad
laws  imply  a  low  moral  and  social  condition,  and  can  only  secure  obedience  through
tho  fear  excited  by  cruel  penalties.  Good  laws  carry  with  them  an  authority  of  their
owR  which  has  greater  power  for  good  than  the  heaviest  penal  sanctions.  2.  That
law  is  a  guide  and  teacher  of  the  ignorant.  There  are  multitudes  in  every  country
to  whom  it  bsoomes  the  chief  practical  educator  as  to  what  is  right  between  man  and
man.  The  more  deeply  grounded  it  is  in  truth,  the  higher  it  will  be  in  influence.
The  restraints  which  it  imposes,  the  awards  which  it  metes  out,  lead  men  to  reflect
on  the  principles  and  ends  which  underlie  it.  If  it  be  based  on  Christian  ideas  of
justice,  those  ideas  will  emerge  in  the  thoughts  and  mould  the  character  of  the  people
who  are  governed  by  it.  Law  is  a  great  educator.  3.  That  law  is  a  restraint  on  the
evil-disposed.  Even  criminals  who  set  law  at  defiance  have  their  power  much
crippled  by  its  just  punishments.  But  very  many  who  in  heart  rebel  against  it  are
only  kept  orderly  and  reputable  in  their  outward  conduct  by  fear  of  its  rightful
authority.  Thus  society  is  guarded  by  it  against  an  anarchy  and  confusion  of
wickedness  which  would  make  life  unsafe  and  intolerable.  On  the  ground  of  social
order  we  should  cherish  and  encourage  respect  for  law.  4.  That  law  is  a  protection
to  the  innocent,  the  weak,  and  the  right-minded.  It  throws  a  benign  shield  over  the
young  and  tender,  and  it  affords  an  open  and  safe  field  for  upright  living,  and  for
the  efforts  of  holy  Christian  beneficence.  Without  law  there  could  be  no  freedom
for  the  righteous  and  law-loving.  A  lawless  liberty  is  the  direst  of  oppressions.  As
the  voice  of  government,  law,  in  the  words  of  Peter  (1  Pet.  ii.  14)  is  "  for  the  praise
of  them  that  do  well."

From  these  reflections  on  law  we  learn — 1.  Tho  duty  of  all  citizens.  (1)  To  obey
honestly  and  heartily  the  law  under  which  they  live.  A  solemn  responsibility  rests
on  them  to  give  all  honour  to  constituted  authority.  (2)  To  use  through  legitimate
means  what  power  they  possess  to  bring  the  law  of  their  country  into  harmony  with
perfect  justice  and  freedom.  Christians  are  not  released  by  their  religion  from  civil
obligations.  On  the  contrary,  the  faith  and  life  of  Christ  only  Banotifies,  and  makes
more  binding  on  the  conscience,  the  claims  of  natural,  social,  and  political  ties.
We  learn — 2.  The  immense  value  of  the  Christian  revelation  of  righteous  law.  That
law  affects  all  the  affairs  and  interests — the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest — of  human
life.  Nothing  lies  beyond  its  sovereign  reach.  It  affects — (1)  Nations.  The  more
fully  and  regally  it  is  admitted  into  the  governments,  and  laws,  and  customs  of
corporate  societies,  the  higher  is  the  level  which  such  societies  attain  with  respect  to
all  the  elements  that  constitute  true  prosperity  and  happiness.  (2)  Persons.  What-
ever be  the  outward  conditions  unaer  which  men  live,  their  personal  submission  to
the  Christian  law  of  life  is  an  inestimable  blessing  both  to  themselves  and  to  others.
The  Divine  law  which  they  recognise  in  faith  and  conduct  makes  them  superior  to
all  that  is  false  and  injurious  in  existing  human  laws  ;  and  their  example  of  purity,
humility,  integrity,  charity,  and  godly  fear  tells  on  many  hearts  that  may  be  watching
it  in  silence.  We  should  be  unfeignedly  and  deeply  thankful  for  Christ's  law ;  for
hjs  revelation  of  the  mind  of  God  in  perfect  holiness  and  perfect  love ;  and  we  should
strive  earnestly  to  commend  it  to  others,  and  to  infuse  it  into  the  law  and  life  of  the
nation  to  which  we  belong.  "  Oh,  how  love  I  thy  law  1 "  should  be  the  life-note  of
individual  men  and  women.  "  Great  peace  have  they  which  love  thy  law,"  should
express  their  inward  comfort,  and  the  incentive  of  their  active  labour  for  God  and
good. — D.

Vers.  13,  14. — Counsellors.  I.  Eespect  fob  counsel  and  conNSELLOES.  This
implies — 1.  A  proper  humility.  Some  men  are  too  proud  to  seek  advice  from  others ;
they  resent  it  as  an  impertinence  when  it  is  offered.  Others  place  so  much  confidence
in  their  own  judgment  that  they-f  ail  to  see  the  need  of  extraneous  help.  But  the  facta
of  life,  as  well  as  the  verdicts  of  conscience  and  religion,  condemn  both  pride  and  self'
confidence  as  foolish  and  hurtful.  How  often  are  they  brought  low  in  presence  of
their  own  acts  I  2.  A  proper  sense  of  responsibility.  We  cannot  estimate  what  may
be  the  effect  of  any  particiular  act.     The  well-being  of  others  as  well  as  ourselves


3H.  I.  10—22.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  36

may  be  deeply  concerned  in  conduct  which  we  treat  lightly,  and  therefore  heedlessly
pursue.  A  thoughtful  consideration  of  our  responsibility  to  God  and  our  neighbour
for  our  actions  and  their  results  would  make  us  welcome  the  light  of  a  kindly  counsel,
by  whomsoever  given.  Especially  should  those  who  occupy  positions  of  great
influence  seek  and  value  the  aid  of  good  counsellors.

II.  Qualifications  of  counsellors.  Few  possess  the  peculiar  gifts  and  acquire-
ments needed  to  give  them  the  character  of  good  and  trustworthy  advisers.  Such  a
character  demands  a  combination  of  high  qualities.  This  is  true  in  connection  not
only  with  matters  of  grave  importance,  but  with  the  affairs  of  ordinary  life.  In  our
passage  we  have  certain  qualifications  indicated — 1.  Wisdom,  or  knowledge.  The
men  whom  the  king  consulted  on  the  case  of  Vashti  are  called  "  wise  men  who  knew
the  times."  They  were  learned  in  the  wisdom  of  their  day,  and  had  studied  the  laws
of  the  empire  and  the  principles  on  which  they  were  grounded.  A  special  knowledge
is  required  to  grapple  with,  and  throw  light  on,  matters  that  are  involved,  perplexing,
and  attended  by  heavy  risks.  In  presence  of  such  matters  ignorance  is  helpless  or
presuming,  while  imperfect  knowledge  is  sure  to  mislead.  Only  a  wisdom  which  is
familiar  with  facts  and  principles  can  be  trusted  in  cases  where  the  counsellor  is
required.  2.  Experience.  A  -theoretical  knowledge  may  be  good  and  necessary,  but
it  is  not  sufficient  to  guide  in  practical  matters.  Men  may  learn  much  from  books
and  abstract  meditation,  but  unless  they  are  accustomed  to  apply  what  they  have
learned,  or  to  study  its  applications,  in  the  events  of  every-day  life,  their  counsel  in
cases  of  difficulty  will  be  of  little  value.  The  men  whom  it  was  "  the  king's  manner  "
to  consult  were  skilled  both  in  "law"  and  in  "judgment."  Their  knowledge wiis  not
only  ideal  or  speculative,  but  practical  and  experimental.  They  had  trained  them-
selves to  apply  law  in  giving  judgment.  They  had  learned  to  discriminate,  to  weigh
evidence,  and  to  pronounce  verdicts  in  the  light  of  existing  laws.  Experience  is  the
greatest  of  teachers,  and  those  who  have  benefited  most  by  its  lessors  are  most
capable  of  discharging  the  duty  of  counsellors.  As  in  law,  so  also  in  all  other  human
interests.  In  commerce,  the  best  adviser  will  be  the  man  who  has  passed  through,  in
an  honourable  and  successful  way,  all  the  vicissitudes  of  a  commercial  life.  The
same  is  true  with  respect  to  religious  needs  and  anxieties.  The  true  counsellor  to  the
distressed  soul  will  be  the  Christian  who  has  himself  experienced  the  struggles  with
sin,  the  renewing  grace  of  God,  and  the  redeeming  love  of  Jesus  Christ.  3.  Reputa-
tion and  standing.  It  is  said  that  the  king's  advisers  were  "  next  "  to  himself  ;  that
they  "saw  the  king's  face,"  and  that  they  "  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom."  Their
wisdom  had  made  them  eminent,  and  the  effect  of  their  counsel  would  be  in  propor-
tion to  their  eminence.  They  had  much  to  gain  or  lose  by  the  answer  they  might
give  to  the  king's  proposition.  Their  reputation  and  standing  were  at  stake.  It  is
easy  for  men  of  small  character  and  influence  to  offer  flippant  or  heedless  advice.
But  those  whose  acknowledged  wisdom  has  raised  them  to  a  position  which  gives
power  to  their  judgments  are  usually  careful  as  to  the  opinions  they  express.  At  any
rate  they  stand  out  before  others  as  possessing  a  special  claim  on  the  confidence  of
those  who  require  the  guidance  of  enlightened  counsel.  From  this  consideration  let
us  learn — (1)  The  value  of  a  good  social  reputation.  It  should  be  cherished  as  a
treasure  beyond  price.  (2)  The  influence  of  a  good  social  reputation.  It  is  incal-
culable. It  tells  on  many.  It  works  unseen.  It  goes  far  beyond  the  visible  sphere
of  its  action.  (3)  The  burden  of  a  good  social  reputation.  It  is  weighty.  A  great
responsibility  attaches  to  it.

III.  A  Divine  Counsellob  is  made  known.  Christ  never  fails  those  who  trust
and  follow  him.  Among  his  recorded  names  are  "the  Wisdom,"  "the  Word,"  and
"  the  Counsellor."  He  is  interested  in  all  that  interests  man  for  time  and  eternity.
His  voice  may  be  heard  in  connection  with  all  duties,  all  positions,  all  events — a  voice
of  truth,  righteousness,  and  love.  If  we  listen  to  him  we  shall  neither  live  nor  die
in  vain. — D.

Vers.  15,  16. — Counsel.  The  proverb  says,  "  Where  no  counsel  is,  the  people  fall  ;
but  in  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety  "  (Prov.  xi.  14).  "The  truth  of  this
proverb  is  conditioned  by  one  of  two  things.  It  assumes  that  the  counsellors  are — 1.
All  wise  and  true.     But  this  cannot  be  said  of  any  human  assembly,  or  parliament,  oi

d2


S«  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  i.  10-22.

senate,  or  cabinet.  If  any  body  of  counsellors  could  layjuet  claim  to  it,  then  the  safety
of  a  perfect  wisdom  and  truth  would  be  the  necessary  result.  Nothing  could  resist  its
power.-.  This  condition,  however,  being  impossible,  we  must  resort  to  the  alternative
assumption,  viz.,  that  the  counsellors  are — 2.  All  free.  In  this  case  the  conflict  of
opinion  and  aim  must  ultimately  bring  to  the  light  what  is  just  and  good  It  is  the
principle  of  free  discussion  that  governs  the  proceedings  of  our  modem  parliaments.
Prejudice- and  corrupt  motive  may  find  a  place  in  the  doings  of  such  parliaments,  but
through  the  controversies  which  arise  truth  gradually  emerges  into  power,  and  sooner
or  kter  shapes  itself  into  irreversible  laws.  Circumstances,  however,  may  elicit
advice  which  is  opposed  to  the  better  knowledge  or  free'  judgment  of  those  who  give
it.  A  despotic  king,  or  an  infatuated  people,  may  destroy  counsel,  or  force  it  away
from  the_  lines  of  truth.  "  What  to  do  with  Vashti  ?  "  was  the  proposition  of  the
king  to  his  wise  men.     From  the  advice  which  was  given  and  accepted  we  learn —

I.  Some  of  the  marks  of  good  counsel.  1.  It  does  not  flatter.  The  words  of
Memuoan  were  framed  to  please  the  king.  They  were  very  artful  in  their  flattery.
Vashti's  sin  against  the  king  was  expanded  into  a  sin  against  all  the  husbands  in  the
empire.  Her  punishment  would  confer  a  benefit  on  both  "  princes  and  people  "  in  all
the  provinces.  A  soothing  and  solace  to  the  king's  wounded  vanity  I  The  desire  to
please  and  the  desire  to  be  pleased  are  both  enemies  to  good  counsel.  2.  It  is  above
fear.  As  the  fear  of  disgrace  or  suffering  is  the  greatest  trial  to  honesty  of  counsel,
so  the  conquering  of  such  a  fear,  in  circumstances  that  seemed  to  justify  it,  is  its
greatest  triumph.  Here  Memucan  and  his  companions  failed.  They  knew  the  anger
that  burned  in  the  king's  heart,  and  their  advice  showed  an  anxiety  to  avert  the  effects
of  that  anger  from  themselves.  They  valued  their  heads  more  than  their  virtue.
Under  fear,  wisdom  was  willing  to  assume  the  guise  of  cunning.  To  get  good
counsel  it  is  better  to  win  confidence  than  to  inspire  fear.  Fear  is  always  false ;  love
only  is  true.  3.  It  is  unselfish.  Whenever  counsel  is  given,  whether  with  or  without
asking,  it  should  be  entirely  in  the  interest  of  those  to  whom  it  is  given.  Any
underlying  element  of  selfish  thought  is  weakening,  if  not  vitiating.  It  is  clear  that
Memucan  and  his  fellow  wisdom-mongers  had  much  regard  to  their  own  position  in
the  advice  which  they  gave.  4.  It  is  just.  It  takes  into  view  the  interests  of  those
whose  character  or  position  may  be  affected  by  it.  Unfair  or  one-sided  judgments
are  opposed  to  it.  In  Vashti's  case  the  counsel  given  assumed  that  she  had  been
guilty  of  conduct  that  deserved  the  severest  punishment,  without  so  much  as  noticing
the  circumstances  which  led  to  it  and  which  may  have  justified  or  palliated  it.  It
was  assumed  that  the  queen  had  been  disobedient,  had  set  a  bad  example,  and  had
injured  not  only  the  king,  but  the  whole  empire.  Nothing  was  said  of  the  folly  of
the  king's  command.  Nothing  was  allowed  for  the  womanly  feelings  that  were  out-
raged by  it.  Injuslice  in  counsel  deprives  it  of  the  quality  of  goodness  or  true
wisdom.  5.  It  is  reasonable.  Any  counsel  which  violates  common  sense,  or  bears  a
ludicrous  aspect,  is  unworthy  to  be  given  or  followed.  Such  counsel  can  only  be
offered  to  men  who  are  known  to  lack  a  reasonable  mind,  or  come  from  men  who  are
swayed  rather  by  policy  than  by  principle.  The  advice  given  about  Vashti  is  so
foolish  in  its  form  as  to  suggest  that  the  "  wise  men  "  were  befooling  their  king.

II.  How  DIFFICULT  IT  IS  FOE  THE  GREAT  TO  GET  GOOD  COUNSEL  I      To  secure  that

advice  shall  be  founded  on  truth,  they  must — 1.  Be  known  to  desire  the  truth.  For
the  most  part,  a  man  possessing  pow-er  will  only  receive  counsel  that  is  fashioned  to
suit  his  character  and  wishes.  If  he  loves  and  seeks  the  truth,  those  who  advise  him
will  speak  the  truth.  A  wise  and  truthful  counsel  will  grow  up  around  him.  But  if
he  lives  falsely  and  hates  to  be  disturbed  in  his  false  living,  the  counsel  that  is  given
him  will  be  after  his  liking.  2.  Be  able  to  discern  the  truth.  Good  instincts  ■will
not  protect  a  weak  man  from  the  impositions  of  plausible  cunning.  A  desire  to  learn
and  to  do  what  is  right  may  be  defeated  by  a  want  of  capacity  to  distinguish  between
competing  counsels.  This  power  of  discernment,  witii  respect  to  the  quality  of
advice,  greatly  varies  in  men.  Some  possess  it  as  a  natural  gift ;  some  only  acquire
it  after  long  experience ;  many  never  get  hold  of  it ;  all  have  need  to  ciutivate  it
with  earnest  care.  It  is  a  great  power  in  the  practical  conduct  of  life.  3.  Be  resolute
to  learn  the  truth.  For  kings  and  other  great  people  to  get  good  counsel,  it  must  be
known  that  they  will  only  listen  to  counsel  that  is  good.    A  desire  for  the  truth,  and


OH.  L 10- -22.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  37

a  capacity  to  discern  it,  may  be  accompanied  by  an  uttei  want  of  active  and  deter-
mined will.  Then  counsel  will  become  uncertain ;  honest  thoughts  will  grow  timorous
in  expression  ;  dishonest  thoughts  will  grow  bold.  An  irresolute  will  favours  the
solicitude  of  bad  guides.  As  there  is  a  Divine  Counsellor,  so  there  is  a  Divine  counsel
— the  word  of  the  living  God — ^holy,wise,  true,  just,  loving,  and  safe.  All  who  take
and  follow  that  counsel  are  made  "  wise  unto  salvation,"  and  are  "  well  instructed  "
in  the  things  that  are  "unto  holiness,"  and  that  "belong  to  peace." — ^D.

Vers.  17,  18. — Example.  These  verses  speak  of  the  force  of  example,  and
suggest  some  thoughts  respecting  it.

I.  The  influence  of  bxamplb  is  peculiarly  subtle  and  deep.  This  arises
from  the  fact  that  it  is  not  an  abstract,  but  a  living  thing.  It  is  the  embodiment  of
principles,  good  or  bad,  in  an  active  human  life.  It  touches  and  lays  hold  of,  more  or
less,  the  actuating  spirit  of  those  who  come  within  its  circle.  Fine  professions  go
for  little  when  personal  character  and  conduct  belie  them.  Nor  has  precept  much
power  when  not  conjoined  with  a  harmonious  example.  "  Example  is  better  than
precept,"  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  action  of  soul  on  soul,  and  will  therefore  tell  on
those  w^ho  see  it,  when  precept  will  only  fall  heedlessly  on  the  ear.

II.  The  influence  of  example  travels  far  and  wide.  It  is  seen  and  felt
Deyond  the  knowledge  or  the  immediate  circle  of  the  man  who  gives  it.  Men  are
observed  and  their  actions  weighed  when  they  do  not  suspect  it.  When  one  life  is
impressed  by  the  example  of  another,  the  impression  does  not  stop  there,  but  is
conveyed  to  other  lives,  and  is  thus  extended  indefinitely.  This  is  true  of  negative
as  well  as  of  positive  qualities,  and  of  ordinary  conduct  as  well  as  of  particular  acts.

III.  The  influence  op  example  is  continuous.  Special  conduct  on  special
occasions  is  but  a  vivid  expression  of  the  spirit  that  animates  the  daily  life.  A
man's  example  continues  with  his  hfe,  and  being  continuous,  its  influence  is  accumu-
lative. Even  after  his  death  it  may  long  continue  to  exert  power,  either  through  the
written,  record,  or  through  descendants  whose  character  has  been  affected  by  it.

IV.  The  influence  of  example  is  increased  by  high  position.  The  higher  a
man  stands  in  social  rank,  the  more  widely  will  he  be  observed,  and  the  more  readily
imitated.  There  is  an  instinctive  reverence  for  rank  in  the  human  heart  which
should  make  royal,  noble,  or  wealthy  persons  very  careful  as  to  the  example  they  set
But  all  positions  are  relative.  Thus  a  parent  is  as  great  in  the  eye  of  a  child  as  a
monarch  is  in  view  of  the  subject.  The  Christian  minister  in  relation  to  his  flock ;
the  teacher  to  his  pupil ;  the  master  to  his  servant ;  the  cultivated  to  the  ignorant —
all  these  also  occupy  a  position  of  eminence,  and  their  example  exerts  a  corresponding
influence.

V.  The  influence  and  true  quality  of  example  abb  not  always  to  be  judqed
BY  PREVAILING  HABITS  OR  POPULAR  NOTIONS.  It  may  run  Counter  to  these  and  be
condemned  by  them,  and  yet  be  good.  Passing  fashions  of  thought  and  life  afford
no  fixed  standard  of  example.  Vashti's  disobedience  was  accounted  bad  as  an
example  because  it  was  a  violation  of  the  custom  which  laid  on  wives  a  slavish
submission  to  their  husbands.  But  judged  by  a  higher  law  than  that  of  custom,  her
example  was  good  both  to  the  king  and  to  his  subjects.  Whatever  conduct  recog-
nises the  claims  of  truth,  conscience,  purity,  and  modest  self-respect  must  be  allowed
Lo  be  good ;  whatever  conduct  tramples  on  or  is  indifferent  to  such  things  must  be
adjudged  evil.

VI.  The   INFLUENCE    and   true  QUALITY  OF  EXAMPLE   CANNOT   BE    FAIRLY  JUDGED

BY  THOSE  WHOM  IT  HAS  AFFRONTED  and  filled  with  malice  or  wrath  How  could  the
king  in  his  burning  anger,  or  his  advisers  under  the  flame  of  that  anger,  do  justice  to
the  conduct  of  Vashti  ?     Wrath  is  a  bad  judge.

VII.  T?B  INFLUENCE  AND  TRUE  QUALITY  OF  EXAMPLE  ARE  OFTEN  MORE  JUSTLY
ESTIMATED   IN   AFTER   TIMES   THAN   AT   THE   TIME   IN  WHICH   THE   EXAMPLE  WAS  OIVEN.

As  between  the  king  and  Vashti  judgment  now  would  go  against  the  king.    Many
a  character  and  many  an  action,  when  time  has  scattered  the  mists  of  passion,  have
appeared  in  a  new  light,  and  received  a  tardy  justice  by  the  reversal  of  contempo-
rary veriicts.
V*II.  The  only  perfect  example  known  amongst  men  is  that  of  Jesub,  thi


38


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  I.  10—22.


Son  of  God.  The  more  fully  we  regulate  our  conduct  by  the  spirit  of  his  life,  the
more  influential  for  good  will  be  our  own  life-example  (see  Matt.  xvL  24 ;  John
xiii.  Ih ;  1  Pet.  ii.  21).— D.

Ver.  19. — Penalties.  In  connection  with  the  penalty  imposed  on  Vashti  tbfl
following  remarks  may  be  made: —

I.  Penalties  abb  intended  to  enforce  laws,  or,  in  other  words,  to  deter  men
fiorti  crime.  With  many  law  would  have  little  power  apart  from  the  penalties
attached  to  the  transgression  of  it.  Tliose  who  are  not  governed  by  virtue,  or  the
love  of  God  and  truth,  may  be  commanded  by  fear.

II.  Penalties  ought  to  be  equitable.  As  the  servants  of  justice,  they  should
have  some  real  proportion  to  the  trespass  committed.  Even  supposing  Vashti  to
have  failed  in  temper  or  in  wisdom,  her  punishment  was  out  of  all  proportion  to  her
fault — most  cruel  and  unjust.  Excessive  penalties  are  themselves  an  injustice,  and,
as  all  experience  testifies,  rather  encourage  than  repress  crime.

III.  Penalties,  while  being  adequate  to  the  offence,  should  contemplate  the
impeovement  of  the  offender.  The  king's  decree  against  Vashti  gave  no  room
for  explanation,  repentance,  or  amendment.  When  penalties  do  nothing  more  than
inflict  pain  and  privation,  they  are  likely  to  harden  transgressors  in  evil,  and  thus  to
prepare  new  and  weightier  scourges  for  the  society  which  they  are  designed  to
protect.

IV.  Penalties  should  never  be  the  instruments  of  vengeance  ob  wrath.
They  should  be  the  award  of  impartial  and  unimpassioned  justice.  Of  the  pimisb-
ment  of  Vashti  a  burning  arger  was  the  spring.

V.  Penalties  should  never  be  inflicted  except  when  guilt  has  been  cleap.ly
proved.  In  the  action  of  our  law  courts  the  maxim  is  recognised  that  it  is  better  to
let  the  guilty  escape  than  to  allow  punishment  to  fall  on  the  innocent.  The  benefit
of  any  doubt  is  given  to  the  accused.

VI.  Penalties  furnish  a  motive  fob  the  avoidance  of  crime  only  to  the
BViL-DisrosED.  The  good  honour  and  love  the  principles  on  which  just  laws  arc
founded,  and  freely  live  by  them.  If  all  men  were  governed  by  a  pure  conscience
and  the  love  of  God  there  would  be  no  need  for  penal  codes.

VII.  Penalties  are  attached  to  Divine  as  well  as  to  human  legislation.
No  law  of  God  can  be  broken  with  impunity.  In  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  mercy
and  justice  meet,  and  through  that  sacrifice  an  infinitermercy  is  justly  offered  to  al
men.  As  to  the  future  punishment  of  the  impenitent  we  can  say  little,  because  little
is  revealed ;  that  we  must  leave  trustfully  with  him  whose  judgments  are  truth  and
whose  ways  are  righteous.  It  should  be  the  prayerful  aim  of  all  Christians  so  to
enter  into  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  as  to  be  raised  above  the  fear  of  the  law.  "  Fear
hath  torment ; "  "  but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear  "  (1  John  iv.  18). — D.


EXPOSITION.    §2.


CHAPTER  II.


The  quest  for  maidens,  and  the
CHOICE  of  Esthkr  to  be  queen  in  Vashti's
PLACE  (eh.  ii.  1 — 18).  Vashti  having  ceased  to
be  queen,  Ahasuerus  appears  to  have  been  in
no  haste  to  assign  her  dignity  to  any  one  else.
Probably  tliere  was  no  one  among  his  other
(secondary)  wives  of  whom  he  was  specially
fond,  or  who  seemed  to  him  pre-eminent
above  the  rest.  And  he  may  even  have
begun  to  relent  in  Vashti's  favour  (as  seems
to  be  somewhat  obscurely  intimated  in  ver.
1),  and  to  wish  to  take  her  back.     Under


these  circumstances  the  officers  of  his  court
would  become  alarmed.  Vashti's  disgrace
had  been  their  doing,  and  her  return  to
power  would  be  likely  to  be  followed  by  their
own  dismissal,  or  even  by  their  execution.
They  therefore  came  to  Ahasuerus  with  a
fresh  piece  of  advice :  "Let  there  be  fair
young  virgins  sought  for  the  king ;  let
officers  be  appointed  in  every  province  to
select  fitting  damsels,  and  send  them  up  to
the  court,  for  the  king  to  choose  a  wife  from
among  them."  So  sensual  a  monarch  as
Xerxes  (Herod.,  ii.  108)  would  be  strongly
tempted  by  such  a  proposal  (vera.   8,  8).


OH.  U.  1—18.]


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


39


Ahasuerus  embraced  it  at  once  (ver.  4),  and
orders  were  given  accordingly.  The  quest
began,  and  among  other  maidens  selected  by
the  officials  as  wcrthy  of  the  royal  consider-
ation, there  happened  to  be  a  young  Jewess,
named  Hadassah,  the  cousin  and  adopted
daughter  of  a  Jew  called  Mordecai,  a  eunuch
attached  to  the  court,  who  had  a  house  in
Susa.  Hadassah  was  beautiful  both  in  form
and  face  (ver.  7),  and  having  been  selected
by  those  whose  business  it  was  to  make  the
choice,  was  conducted  to  the  palace,  and
placed  under  the  care  of  Hegai,  the  eunuch
who  had  the  charge  of  the  virgins  on  their
arrival  (ver.  8).  Hadassah,  who  on  becom-
ing an  inmate  of  the  palace  received  the
Persian  name  of  Esther  (=  Stella),  attracted
at  once  the  special  regard  of  Hegai,  who
granted  her  various  favours  (ver.  9),  and  after
she  had  been  "purified"  for  a  year  (ver.  12),
sent  hsrin  her  turn  to  appear  before  the  king
(ver.  16).  The  result  was  such  as  Hegai  had
perhaps  anticipated.  Ahasuerus,  preferring
her  to  all  his  wives  and  to  all  the  other
virgins,  instantly  made  her  his  queen,  placed
the  crown  royal  upon  her  head,  and  cele-
brated the  joyful  occasion  by  a  grand  feast,
and  a  general  remission  of  taxation  for  a
specified  period  (vers.  17,  18).  Thus  the
humble  Jewish  maiden,  the  orphan  depend-
ent for  her  living  on  a  cousin's  charity,  be-
came the  first  woman  in  all  Persia  —  the
wife  of  the  greatest  of  living  monarchs — the
queen  of  an  empire  which  comprised  more
than  half  of  the  known  world.

Ver.  1. — After  these  things.  Probably
not  very  long  after.  Between  the  great
assemVily  held  in  Susa  in  Xerxes'  third  year,
B.C.  483,  and  his  departure  for  Greece,  B.c.
481,  was  a  period  of  about  two  years,  or  a
little  more.  The  application  of  the  officers
must  have  been  made  to  him,  and  the  direc-
tions to  seek  for  virgins  given,  during  this
space.  Ahasuerus  ....  remembered  Vashti.
With  favour  probably,  or  at  any  rate  with
regi-et  and  relenting.  His  anger  was  ap-
peased, and  balancing  what  she  had  done  in
one  scale,  and  in  the  other  what  had  been
decreed  against  her,  he  may  have  begun  to
question  whether  her  punishment  had  not
been  too  severe.

Ver.  2. — The  king's  servants  that  minis-
tered unto  him.  /.  e.  the  great  officers  of
the  court,  eunuchs  and  others,  who  had
been  more  or  less  concerned  in  the  dis-
grace of  Vashti.     Fair  young  virgins.    Or,


"young  virgins  fair  to  look  on"  (see  ch.  i.

Ver.  3. — The  house  of  the  women.  In  an
Oriental  palace  the  women's  apartments  are
always  distinct  from  those  of  the  men,  and
are  usually  placed  in  a  separate  building,
which  the  Greeks  called  the  gynseceum,  and
the  Jews  "the  house  of  the  women."  At
Susa  this  was  a  large  edifice,  and  comprised
several  subdivisions  (see  ver.  14).  Hege,
the  king's  chamberlain.  Literally,  "the
king's  eunuch,"  i.e.  one  of  the  royal  eunuchs
(see  ch.  i.  10).  Keeper  of  the  women.  Strictly
speaking,  Hege  seems  to  have  been  keeper  of
the  virgins  only  (see  ver.  14) ;  but  he  may
have  exercised  a  certain  superintendence
over  the  entire  gynseceum.  Their  things
for  purification.  See  ver.  12.  Such  a
divinity  lodged  in  the  Persian  _  king  that
even  pure  maidens  had  to  be  purified  before
approaching  him  !  It  would  have  been  well
if  the  divinity  had  been  himself  less  im-
pure.

Ver.  5. — Now  in  Shushan  .  .  .  there  was
a  certain  Jew.  Hitherto  the  narrative  has
been  a  mere  story  of  the  Persian  court.  Now
at  last  a  Jew  is  brought  on  the  scene,  very
abruptly ;  and  the  history  is  to  a  certain
extent  attached  to  the  other  sacred  books,
and  assigned  its  place,  by  the  genealogy  which
follows.  Whose  name  was  Mordecai.  The
name  Mordecai  must  almost  certainly  be
connected  with  that  of  Marduk,  orMerodach,
the  Babylonian  and  Assyrian  god.  But  it
may  have  beei^  given  to  his  son  by  a  Baby-
lonian Jew  without  any  thought  of  its  de-
rivation or  meaning,  perhaps  out  of  compli-
ment to  a  Babylonian  friend  or  master.
Another  Mordecai,  also  a  Jew,  is  mentioned
by  Ezra  (ii.  2)  and  Nehemiah  (vii  7).

Ver.  6. — Who  had  been  carried  away.
The  word  "who"  may  have  either  Kish  or
Mordecai  for  its  antecedent.  It  is  simplest,
however,  mxd  most  grammatieal  (see  '  Dic-
tionary of  the  Bible,'  voL  iL  p.  419),  to
refer  it  to  Kish.  Chronological  considerations
also  lead  to  the  same  result ;  and  indeed,  if
we  suppose  Mordecai  to  be  intended,  we
must  give  up  the  identification  of  Ahasuerus
with  Xerxes.  The  captivity  which  had  been
carried  away  with  Jeeoniah.  There  were  at
least  three  captivities  of  Judah — ^the  first
when  Daniel  was  carried  away,  in  the  third
year  of  Jehoiakim  (Dan.  i.  1),  which  was
B.  o.  605 ;  the  second  that  here  referred  to,
when  Jehoiachin,  or  Jeeoniah,  was  made
prisoner,  eight  years  later,  or  B.O.  697  J  and
the  third  when  Zedekiah  was  taken  and
Jerusalem  burnt,  in  B.c.  686.  Kish  belonged
to  the  second  captivity.  Whom  Nebuchad-
nezzar .  .  .  carried  away.  See  2  Kings
xxiv.  15  ;  2  Chron.  xxxvi.  10  ;  Jer,  xxiv.  1.

Ver.  7. — He  brought  up  Hadassah,  that
is,  Esth&r.   "  Hadassah"  Has  been  compared


40


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  11.  1—18.


with  "Atossa,"  and  "Esther"  with  "Ames-
tria  ; "  but  there  is  probably  no  mora  ground
for  the  one  identification  than  the  other.
Mordecai's  cousin  received  originally  the
Hebrew  name  of  "Hadasaah,"  a  derivative
of  hadas,  "myrtle"  (compare  "Susannah"
from  shushan,  "lily");  but  was  subse-
quently called  by  the  Persians  "Esther,"
which  may  either  be  Ishtar,  "  Venus,"  or
an  equivalent  of  the  Zend  ftare,  Mod.  Fers.
titareh,  Greek  aarrip,  EngL  "  star,"  &c  His
nncle's  daughter.  Therefore  his  own  first
cousin,  but  probably  much  younger  than
himself.  Whom  Uordecai  .  .  .  took  for  his
own  daughter.  Not  perhaps  by  a  formal
adoption,  but  by  taking  her  to  live  with
him,  and  treating  her  as  if  she  had  been  his
own  child.  Tills  fact  is  related  to  account
for  the  terms  of  familiarity  between  the  two,
which  form  an  essential  part  of  the  later
narrative.  It  introduces  Mordecai  to  the
reader  under  a  favourable  aspect,  as  kindly
and  benevolent.

Ver.  8. — His  decree.  Literallyj  "his  law"
— the  same  word  as  that  which  occurs  in  the
phrase  "  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,
which  altereth  not"  (Dan.  vl  8,  12,  &c.).
Hegai.  The  "Hege"  of  ver.  3.  Slight
differences  in  the  mode  of  spelling  names
were  common  at  thia  period.  Esther  was
brought.  Some  have  rendered,  "  was  forci-
bly brought ; "  and  in  the  second  Targum  on
Esther  there  is  a  stoiy  that  Mordecai  con-
cealed her  to  prevent  her  from  becoming  an
inmate  of  the  royal  harem,  and  that  the
king's  authority  was  invoked  to  force  him  to
give  her  up;  but  the  Hebrew  word  translated
"  was  brought "  does  not  contain  any  idea  of
violeilce ;  and  the  Persian  Jews  probably  saw
no  disgrace,  but  rather  honour,  in  one  of
their  nation  becoming  even  a  secondary  wife
to  the  great  king.

Yer.  9. — The  maiden  pleased  him.  Liter-
ally, "was  good  in  his  eyes,"  the  same
expression  as  that  which  occurs  in  ch.  i  21.
And  she  obtained  kindness  of  him.  This  is
B  phrase  peculiar  to  the  Book  of  Esther,  and
%  mDurite  one  with  the  author  (see  vers,  15,
17 ;  and  ch.  v.  2).  It  is  better  translated
"she  obtained  favour"  (as  in  all  the  other
places  where  it  occurs)  than  "  she  obtained
kindness,"  though  the  latter  translation  is
more  literal  Her  things  for  purification.
See  ver.  12.  With  such  things  as  belonged
to  her.  Literally,  as  in  the  margin,  "with
her  portions  " — by  which  is  probably  meant
her  daily  allowance  of  food.  And  seven
maidens.  Eather,  "and  her  seven  maidens."
It  is  implied  that  each  virgin  had  seven
female  attendants  assigned  to  her.  Ueet  to
be  given  her.  It  was  in  this  point  that  the
"favour"  or  "kindness"  of  Hegai  was
■hown.  He  selected  for  her  use  the  most
niitable  of  the  attendants.


Ver.  10. — Esther  had  not  showed  hef
people.  To  have  confessed  that  she  was  a
Jewess  would  probably  have  roused  a  preju-
dice against  her,  or  at  any  rate  have  pre-
vented her  from  being  received  with  special
favour.  Mordecai,  knowing  this,  had  in-
structed her  to  say  nothing  to  Hegai  on  the
subject,  and  no  one  else,  it  would  seem,  had
enlightened  him.

Ver.  11.  —  Uordecai  walked  every  day
before  the  court  of  the  women's  house.
Mordecai  seems  to  have  been  one  of  the
porters  at  the  main  entrance  to  the.  palace,
and  his  proper  place  was  at  the  gateway.
He  contrived,  however,  during  some  part  of
each  day  to  visit  the  court  in  front  of  the
seraglio,  in  order  to  see  Esther,  or  at  any
rate  obtain  intelligence  concerning  her.

Ver.  12.  —  After  she  had  been  twelve
months,  according  to  the  manner  of  the
women.  Bather,  "After  she  had  been  (in
the  palace),  according  to  the  law  prescribed
to  the  women,  twelve  months."  A  year's
purification  was  considered  necessaiy  before
any  maiden  could  approach  the  king  (see  the
comment  on  ver.  S).  Six  months  with  oil
of  myrrh.  Myrrh  was  highly  esteemed,  both
for  its  scent  and  for  its  punfying  power,  by
the  ancients.  In  Egypt  it  was  employed
largely  in  the  reparation  of  miunmiea
(Herod.,  ii.  86).  The  Jews  were  directed  to
make  it  one  of  the  chief  ingredients  in  their
"holy  anointing  oil"  (Ezod.  xxx.  23—25).
Dresses  and  beds  were  scented  with  it  (Pa
zlv.  8  ;  Prov.  vii.  17).  And  six  months
with  sweet  odours.  The  word  translated
"sweet  odours"  seems  to  mean
generally  (comp.  Cant.  iv.  16).

Ver.  13. — ^Ihen  thus  came  every  maiden,
ftc.  Bather,  "  And  when  each  maiden  came
thus  purified  to  the  king,  whatever  she  asked
was  given  her,"  &c.  The  whole  verse  is  one
sentence.  The  meaning  is,  that  on  quitting
the  house  of  the  women  for  the  king's  apart-
ments, each  maiden  was  entitled  to  demand
anything  that  she  Uked  in  the  way  of  dress
or  ornament,  and  it  had  to  be  given  her.

Ver.  14. — On  the  morrow.  Literally,  "  in
the  morning."  The  second  house  of  the
women.  The  gynseceum  comprised  at  least
three  distinct  houses : — 1.  A  residence  for  the
queen,  corresponding  to  that  which  Solomon
built  for  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  (1  Kings
viL  8) ;  2.  A  house  for  the  secondary  wives,
or  concubines ;  and,  3.  A  house  for  the  vir-
gins. On  returning  from  her  first  visit  to
the  king's  chamber,  a  woman  ordinarily  be-
came an  inmate  of  the  "second  house."
This  "  second  house  "  was  under  the  care  of
a  eunuch  called  Sha'ashgaz.

Ver.  15.— Abihail,  the  nnele  of  MordecaL
Literally,  "the  paternal  uncle,"  or  "father'i
brother.  The  genealogy  may  be  thus  ex-
hibited : —


OB.  u.  1—18.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


41


KUh
Shimei


I

Jair

Mordeoal


lijia


Abdiall


Esther

Who  had  taken  her  for  his  daughter  (see
the  comment  on  ver.  7).  She  required
nothing,  &c  Esther  would  not  trust  to  the
extraneous  and  adventitious  beau^  of  dress
or  ornaments,  or  at  any  rate  would  give  her-
self no  trouble  about  such  things.  If  she
succeeded,  it  should  be  without  effort.  Hegai
might  dress  her  as  he  pleased.  She  left  all
to  him.  Esther  obtained  favour,  &&  Either
this  is  intended  as  a  general  assertion — "  No
one  could  ever  see  Esther  without  admiring
her  and  feeling  favourably  disposed  towards
her," — or  it  has  special  reference  to  the  par-
ticular occasion — "  No  one  who  saw  Esther
on  this  evening  but  admired  her  and  fult
well  disposed  towards  her. "

Ver.  16.  —The  tenth  month,  which  is  the
mcnth  Tebeth.  This  is  the  only  mention  of
the  month  Tebeth  in  Scripture.  It  followed
Chisleu,  and  corresponded  to  the  end  of
December  and  the  earlier  part  of  January.
The  word  seems  to  have  come  in  from  Egypt,
where  the  corresponding  month  was  called
Tobi,  or  Tubi.     la  the  lOTenth  year  of  his


reign.  Four  years  after  the  disgrace  of
Vashti,  probably  in  January,  B.C.  479.
Xerxes  had  recently  returned  from  the
Grecian  expedition  defeated  and  disgraced.
He  was  glad  to  dismiss  warlike  matters  from
his  thoughts,  and  to  console  himself  for  his
failure  by  the  pleasures  of  tlio  seraglio.

Ver.  17. — Above  all  the  women.  I.e.
"  above  all  his  former  secondary  wives,  as
well  as  above  all  the  virgins."  The  royal
crown.    See  the  comment  on  ch.  i.  11.

Ver.  18. — Then  the  king  made  a  great
feast.  As  Persian  kings  were  in  the  habit
of  doing  on  every  joyful  occasion.  Even
Esther's  feast.  It  seems  to  be  meant  that
the  feast  was  one  which  continued  to  be
spoken  about,  and  which  was  commonly
known  under  this  title.  And  he  made  a
release  to  the  provinces.  As  the  Pseudo-
Smcniis  had  done  when  he  usurped  the
tliroiie  (Herod.,  iii.  67).  A  "release"  was
an  exemption  from  taxation,  or  from  military
service,  or  from  both,  for  a  specified  period.
And  gave  gifts,  according  to  the  state  of  the
king.  Literally,  that  is,  "  in  right  royal
fashion "  (see  ch.  i.  7).  The  practice  of
making  presents,  so  common  in  the  East  at
all  times,  was  much  in  vogue  among  the
Persians,  and  was  practised  especially  by  the
monarclis  (Herod.,  i.  136  ;  iii.  135  ;  viL  26  ;
Xen.,  'Cvrop.,'  viii.  2,  i  7,  e<  leq.  ;  '  Anab.,'
L  9,  §  22,  &c).


HOMILETICS.

V*ni.  1 — 4. — EvU  eountel  ovemtled.  When  a  king  takes  counsel  of  flatterers  and
favourites,  it  bodes  no  good  either  to  himself  or  to  his  people.  Such  parasites  think
only  how  they  may  make  their  masters'  vices  the  stepping-stones  to  their  own  pre-
ferment and  power.  And  a  king  encompassed  with  adulation,  and  encouraged  to
gratify  liis  own  passions,  is  not  likely  to  rule  over  his  subjects  with  justice  or  with
wisdom.  The  ministers  of  Ahasuerus,  in  advising  him  to  have  his  provinces  ran-
sacked for  beautiful  girls,  to  be  brought  to  him  -for  his  approval,  that  from  among
the  multitude  ho  might  select  a  consort  to  succeed  the  disobedient  Vashti,  were
animated  by  a  desire  to  please  the  voluptuous  monarch,  and  so  to  strengthen  their
own  position  and  influence.  Yet  even  counsel  so  nefarious  was  overruled  by  Divine
providence  for  good.

I.  This  advice  was  in  itself  bad.  Oriental  despots  were  encouraged  to  lead  a
life  of  self-indulgence.  Yet  the  counsel  given  to  Ahasuerus  passed  all  bounds  of
decency.  1.  It  was  bad  for  the  king,  who  was  thereby  led  to  think  of  his  own  sensual
gratification,  rather  than  of  the  cares  of  state  which  properly  devolved  upon  him.
2.  It  was  bad  for  the  young  women  themselves,  all  whose  thoughts  were  engrossed
by  their  desire  and  plans  to  please  the  monarch,  and  who  were  encouraged  toj-egard
themselves  in  no  higher  light  than  as  instruments  of  royal  pleasure.  3.  It  was  bad
for  the  population  generally  ;  for  the  families  from  amongst  whom  the  maidens  were
taken  to  supply  the  harem  of  the  king,  and  for  the  young  men  who  were  deprived  of
wives  whose  beauty  and  amiability  might  assist  them  in  living  a  virtuous  and  honour-
able life.

II.  This  adviob  was  nbvbbtheless  overruled  for  good.  How  apparent  is  this
principle  to  every  thorough  student  of  history,  to  every  careful  observer  of  life  1
How  confirmatory  of  our  belief  in  a  general  and  particular  Providence !  1.  The
policy  in  question  was  directly  overruled  for  the  advancement  of  Esther.    A  virtrous,


42  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oH.  n.  1— la

benevolent,  and  deserving  girl  was  raised  from  an  obscure  position  to  one  of  eminence
and  influence.  2.  And  Qiis  policy  was  indirectly  overruled  for  the  deliverance  of
a  nation.  Vashti  was  deposed  ;  Esther  was  raised  to  power ;  Mordecai  was  enabled
to  communicate  with  the  throne ;  Haman  was  defeated  and  disgraced  ;  Israel  was
delivered  from  the  enemy.     Such  were  the  links  in  this  chain  of  Providence.

Lessons : — 1.  We  have  no  right  to  give  evil  counsel  in  the  hope  that  good  may
issue  from  it,  to  "do  evil  that  good  may  come."  2.  We  must  not  be  discouraged
when  tyrants  and  flatterers  seem  to  have  their  own  way.  The  Lord  reigneth.  He
has  a  thousand  ways  of  fulfilling  his  own  purposes.  He  bringeth  the  counsel  of
men  to  nought  3.  We  must  at  all  times  trust  and  hope  in  the  Lord.  He  bringeth
forth  their  righteousness  as  the  light,  and  their  judgment  as  the  noon-day.  Our
extremity  is  his  opportunity.  They  that  trust  in  him  shall  never  be  moved.  4.  For
we  cannot  forget  that  the  evil  counsel  of  Caiaphas,  the  greed  or  ambition  of  Judas,
the  weakness  of  Filate,  the  fury  of  the  Jews,  were  all  overruled  for  the  salvation  of
mankind  1

Vers.  5,  6. — A  captive  Hehrea.  Among  "  the  children  of  the  captivity  "  were
some  remarkable  instances  of  high  character,  beautiful  patriotism,  sincere  and  con-
spicuous piety.  Ezra,  Nehemiah,  and  Daniel  come  before  the  mind  of  the  student  of
the  later  books  of  the  Old  Testament  as  persons  who  would  have  been  an  honour  to
any  nation,  any  age,  any  condition  of  life.  Mordecai  may  claim  to  rank  with,  or  only
just  below,  these  noble  men.  His  career  furnishes  us  with  several  striking  illustra-
tions of  the  wisdom  and  efficiency  of  the  plans  of  Divine  providence.

I.  We  see,  in  Mordecai's  life,  how  Pkovidencb  prepares  beforehand  fob  thb
BVENTS  OF  AFTER  YEARS.  Both  in  his  rearing  and  nurturing  his  young  cousin  Esther,
and  in  his  preserving  the  king's  life  by  discovering  the  plot  of  the  eunuchs,  Mordecai
wag  unconsciously  preparing  himself  for  the  great  service  which  was  his  chief  claim
to  be  held  in  remembrance  and  honour.  How  often  do  we  observe  the  same  fact —
the  unconscious  education  of  his  people  by  the  Lord  for  the  future  work  to  which  he
destines  them  I

II.  We  see,  in  Mordecai's  life,  how  Pbovidbnce  can  raise  the  lowliest  to  thb
LOFTIEST  POSiTioF.  He  was  a  Jew,  a  captive  exile,  a  eunuch  probably,  a  servant  in
some  lowly  capacity  in  the  palace.  Yet  he  came  to  be  acknowledged  as  "  th&  man
whom  the  king  delighted  to  honour."  He  came  to  be  in  the  king's  favour,  "  was
great  in  the  king's  house,  and  his  fame  went  out  throughout  all  the  provinces :  for
this  man  Mordecai  waxed  greater  and  greater,"  and  became  "  next  unto  king  Ahasu-
erus."    God,  in  his  wisdom,  often  "  exalteth  them  of  low  degree."

III.  We  see,  in  Mordecai's  life,  how  Providence  can  use  the  unlikeliebt  inbtbu-
MENT  to  do  qeeat  SERVICE.  Everything  we  know  about  this  man  leads  us  to  the  belief,
that  in  selecting  him  for  the  work  God  chose  to  do  by  human  means,  Divine  wisdom
evinced  independence  of  and  superiority  to  the  standards  and  the  expectations  of
men.  Our  confidence  should  be  shaken  in  the  plans  of  men,  should  be  strengthened
in  Ihe  wisdom  of  God.  And  we  should  beware  of  scorning  any  child  of  God,  and
of  counting  the  lowly  as  unworthy  of  confidence  and  esteem.  "  Promotion  cometh
neither  from  the  east,  nor  from  the  west,  nor  from  the  south.  But  God  is  the  Judge ;
he  putteth  down  one,  and  setteth  up  another."

Ver.  7. — Esther.  The  Jewess  after  whom  this  sacred  book  is  called  has  been  always
regarded  by  her  nation  with  afEectionate  gratitude,  on  account  of  the  service  she
rendered  to  Israel  during  the  captivity.  And  there  are  some  features  of  her  cha-
racter which  claim  our  notice  and  admiration,  and  which  explain  the  position  she
holds  in  the  heart  of  the  Hebrew  people.     We  recognise  in  Esther —

I.  Filial  affection  and  bevebence.  An  orphan,  she  was  adopted  by  her  cousin
and  senior,  Mordecai,  who  "  took  her  for  his  own  daughter,"  and  "  brought  her  up."
Accordingly,  she  treated  Mordecai  as  her  father.  His  will  was  law  to  her.  She
sought  and  obeyed  his  advice.  Even  when  upon  the  throne  she  did  not  lose  her
reverence  for  the  guardian  of  her  youth.

II.  A  PRUDENT  and  amiable  DEMEANOUR.  When  in  a  strange  place,  and  in  un-
familiar society,  and  in  a  difficult  position,  Esther  commended  herself  to  the  favour


CH.  II.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  48

of  those  with  whom  soe  was  brought  into  contact.     Simple,  unexacting,  compliant,
she  won  all  hearts.

III.  Wifely  affection  and  devotion.  Esther  rapidly  gained  influence  over  the
King,  who  raised  her  to  share  his  throne.  She  evidently  gained  her  position  and
influence  not  by  haughtiness  and  arrogance,  but  by  amiability  and  affection,  by
humility  and  grace.

IV.  Sincere  patriotism.  "  How,"  said  she  to  the  king,  "  can  I  endure  to  see  the
evil  that  shall  come  unto  my  people  ?  or  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of
my  kindred?  "  Though  raised  to  be  a  queen,  she  did  not  forget  the  people  amongst
whom  her  earliest  years  had  been  passed^  and  in  whose  religion  she  had  been
trained.

V.  Wisdom  and  boldness  of  policy.  Esther,  as  the  queen  of  an  arbitrary  and
capricious  monarch,  was  placed  in  a  position  of  immense  difficulty.  She  conducted
herself  with  wonderful  discretion.  Especially  she  knew  when  to  act  with  a  firm
though  modest  boldness.  Her  whole  conduct,  with  regard  to  Haman  and  with  regard
to  Ahasuerus,  was  marked  by  sagacity,  patience,  and  a  wise  audacity.  And  it  resulted
in  a  conspicuous  and  happy  success.  The  poor  orphan  captive  came  to  a  throne,
and  thence  wrote  with  all  authority  to  conflrna  decrees,  delivered  a  nation  from
impending  peril,  and  instituted  a  festival  which  has  lasted  through  centuries  of
human  history.

Ver.  7. — Adoption.  Esther  was  early  left  fatherless  and  motherless,  and  in  her
orphanage  found  a  friend  and  benefactor  in  Mordeoai,  her  cousin,  and  evidently  her
senior  by  many  years.  He  adopted  her,  and  treated  her  as  his  own  child.  Under
his  roof  and  protection  she  lived,  until,  for  her  beauty,  she  was  selected  for  the
household  of  the  king.  This  is  but  one  of  many  illustrations  of  the  practice  of  adop-
tion issuing  in  signal  advantages  to  both  parties.

I.  Observe  the  advantages  Esther  secured  through  Mordecai's  adoption  of  her
as  his  own  daughter.  Her  wants  were  supplied ;  a  home  was  provided  for  her,  a
suitable  education  was  given  her,  and  her  character  was  trained  to  habits  of  obedience
and  piety.  She  was  protected  from  the  temptations  which  might  otherwise  have
assaiieil  a  beautiful  orphan  girl.  And  in  due  time  her  station  and  her  work  in  life
were  pointed  out  by  Divine  providence.

II.  Observe  the  blessings  which  accrued  to  Mordbcai  himself  through  his
adoption  of  Esther.  His  home  was  brightened  by  the  presence  of  a  bright  and
lovely  daughter  ;  his  heart  was  gladdened  by  her  filial  afEeotion  and  gratitude  ;  his
solicitude  and  care  were  rewarded  by  her  attention  to  his  wishes  and  compliance  with
his  admonitions.  And,  more  than  all,  the  time  came  when  his  adopted  daughter  was
the  agent  in  saving  his  life  and  the  life  of  the  community  and  people  to  which  they
both  belonged.  Never  could  he  regret  having  received  Esther  .as  his  own  child.
Ever  must  he  have  looked  back  upon  his  adoption  of  her  as  one  of  the  wisest  acts  of
his  life  ;  as  one  which  God  manifestly  smiled  upon  and  blessed.

III.  Consider  the  light  which  adoption  casts  upon  the  belation  between
God,  the  Divine  Father,  and  the  children  of  his  spiritual  family.  It  is  to
Divine,  adopting  love  that  we  owe  our  position  of  privilege,  happiness,  and  hope.
"  What  manner  of  love  hath  the  Father  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  should  be  called
the  children  of  God  ?  "  Happy  we  if  we  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby
we  cry,  Abba,  Father !  What  obligations  to  gratitude  and  affectionate  obedience  are
connected  with  the  pity  of  God  and  the  grace  of  Christ,  through  which  we  have  been
received  into  the  heavenly  family !

Practical  lessons: — 1.  There  may  be  those,  people  of  good  means,  and  childless
especially,  who  may  do  wisely,  who  may  exercise  true  benevolence,  by  adopting  an
orphan  child,  and  receiving  such  a  destitute  one  into  their  home.  How  much  better
this  than  subscribing  to  an  orphan  asylum,  excellent  and  useful  though  that  may  be.
2.  Adopted  children  are  laid  under  a  stringent  obligation  to  recompense  the  kindness
shown  them  by  their  benefactors,  by  their  obedience,  devotion,  and  anxiety  to  serve
and  please.  Scarcely  inferior  to  the  claim  parents  have  upon  their  own  offspring  it
that  they  have  upon  the  children  they  have  adopted  as  their  own.  3.  Great  is  the
mercy  of  God,  who  invites  us,  "  by  nature  children  of  wrath,"  into  his  spiritual  family.


44  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  ii.  1—18

There  can  be  no  question  more  momentous  for  each  hearer  of  the  gospel  than  this  :
"  Am  I  a  child  of  God  through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  "

Ver.  10. — Reserve  and  reticence.  Both  when  residing  in  the  king's  house,  under
the  custody  of  Hegai,  the  keeper  of  the  women,  and  afterwards,  when  promoted  to
be  queen,  Esther  concealed  her  family  and  her  nationality.  This  is  expressly  men-
tioned in  verses  10  and  20,  and  stress  is  evidently  laid  upon  her  acting  thus.  A
general  practical  lesson  may  be  drawn  from  this  part  of  Esther's  conduct.

I.  There  abe  occasions  fob  reserve  and  reticence  with  regard  to  oneself.
Such  concealment  is  especially  repugnant  to  our  frank  and  open  English  habits.
Yet  there  may  be  reasons  and  justification  for  it.  1.  Filial  obedience  may  require
such  reticence.  Esther  was  charged  to  act  as  she  did  ;  and,  even  when  raised  to  the
throne,  she  "  did  the  commandment  of  Mordecai,  like  as  when  she  was  brought  up
with  him."  Her  guardian's  care  of  her  entitled  him  to  use  some  authority,  which
her  just  gratitude  disposed  her  to  acknowledge.  2.  Prudence  may  make  such  re-
ticence expedient.  It  was  probably  for  Esther's  advantage  that  her  nationality
should  remain  a  secret  in  her  own  bosom.  Had  it  been  known  that  she  was  a
Jewess,  an  exile,  she  might  have  had  to  endure  some  suffering,  and  disfavour,  and
contempt.  There  was  no  sufficient  reason  for  disclosing  her  kindred  and  people  ;  no
one  had  a  right  to  interrogate  her  thereupon  ;  and  she  was  not  guilty  of  falsehood,
or  of  deceit,  in  acting  as  she  did.

II.  There  are  occasions  when  reserve  and  reticence  must  be  thrown  asidb.
The  wise  man  tells  us,  "  There  is  a  time  to  keep  silence,  and  a  time  to  speak."  Th«
time  came  when  Esther  spoke  out,  and  declared  herself  one  of  the  exiled  and  con-
temned race,  against  which  the  haughty  minister  of  state  was  maliciously  plotting.
Until  then  there  was  no  obligation  for  her  to  reveal  herself ;  after  that  moment
silence  would  have  been  guilty.  Christ  himself  remained  silent  amidst  the  accusa-
tions and  calumnies  of  the  false  witnesses  ;  but  when  adjured  by  the  high  priest,  he
acknowledged  himself  to  be  the  Messiah,  and  the  Son  of  God.  There  is  scope  for
great  discretion  and  prudence  in  the  conduct  of  those  who  mix  much  with  the  world,
and  especially  of  those  who  are  connected  with  courts  and  governments.  The
Christian  will  often  stand  in  need  of  that  guidance,  which  can  be  obtained  only  by
consulting  the  oracles  of  God,  and  by  seeking  the  teaching  of  the  Spirit  of  all  wisdom
and  grace.

VoT.  11. —  Watchful  solicitude.  It  is  observable  that  Mordecai  did  not  remit  his
attention  and  care  when  his  adopted  daughter  was  taken  into  the  royal  palace.  He
still  made  it  his  daily  business  to  ascertain  her  happiness  and  her  prospects.  Re-
mark—

I.  That  the  young  and  inexperienced  need  to  be  watched  with  a  zealous  and
affectionate  care.  No  person  with  any  experience  of  human  life  can  be  ignorant
of  this  necessity.  How  many  young  people  have  we  known  who  have  been  ruined
for  want  of  vigilance,  kindly  interest,  and  wise  counsels  I  It  is  cruelty  to  leave  the
fatherless  and  motherless  beauty  to  the  tender  mercies  of  strangers — perhaps  of  the
wicked.

II.  Such  vigilance  and  solicitude  will  have  an  excellent  effect  upon  those
who  are  its  objects.  It  is  a  protection  to  a  young  person  to  know  that  she  is  not
forgotten  by  affectionate  and  anxious  relatives.  One  who  is  abandoned  by  her
kindred  is  very  likely  to  be  abandoned  by  all  that  is  good.  We  are,  all  of  us,  the
•tronger  for  the  sympathy  and  interest  of  those  who  love  us.

III.  Watchful  care  may  be  the  means  of  defeating  evil  designs.  It  does  not
seem  that,  in  Esther's  case,  there  was  any  special  reason  of  this  kind  for  her  guardian's
vigilance.  But  in  sinful  society  it  may  often  happen  that  the  protection  of  honour-
able and  Christian  friends  may  be  the  means  of  preserving  the  young  in  the  paths
of  virtue  and  religion.  "  We  are  members  one  of  another ; "  and  none  should  be
unconcerned  at  his  neighbour's  danger,  or  unwilling  to  put  forth  an  effort  for  his
neighbour's  safety  and  welfare.

Practical  lessons: — 1.  Are  there  none  over  whom  we  may  watch,  for  their  social
happiness  and  for  their  spiritual  good?    2.  Are  there  not  young  people  who  aw


RH.  a.  lr-18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEK.  48

indifferent  and  ungrateful  for  the  service  of  friendly  regard  and  kindly  watchful-
ness ?  This  is  a  sin,  indeed,  of  which  they  cannot  too  soon  repent.  By  the  prayers
offered  for  you,  and  the  tender  watchfulness  of  which  you  are  the  objects,  I  entreat
you  to  follow  the  ways  of  wisdom,  which  are  ways  of  pleasantness  and  peace.

Ver.  15. — Favour  with  men.  We  read  of  Esther  that  "the  maiden  pleased''  the
custodian,  and  that  "  she  obtained  kindness  of  him  ;  "  that  she  "  obtained  favour  in
the  sight  of  all  them  that  looked  upon  her  ;  "  that  she  "  obtained  grace  and  favour  in
the  sight  of  the  king  more  than  all  the  virgins."  Thus  she  obtained  the  influence
which  she  used  to  so  good  and  benevolent  purpose  in  after  years.

I.  There  are  certain  qualities  by  which  the  favodb  of  cub  pbllow-beings  is
GAINED.  Natural  endowments  are  the  easiest  passport  to  general  favour.  A  hand-
some presence,  beautiful  features,  a  winning  voice,  natural  and  graceful  manners,
all  have  great  immediate  influence  with  society  generally.  Genius  and  heroism,
learning  and  accomplishments,  birth  and  station,  all  these  contribute  to  popularity.
It  seems  a  very  easy  thing  for  some  persons  to  become  general  favourites ;  yet
many  of  the  qualities  which  secure  favour  are  the  result  of  painstaking  and  study.
In  the  case  of  Esther,  her  extreme  beauty,  and  the  simplicity  and  humility  of  her
demeanour,  and  the  modesty  and  integrity  of  her  character,  all  contributed  to  make
her  the  favourite  of  the  king,  and  the  court,  and  the  people.

II.  General  favour  secures  remarkable  influence.  Men  will  listen  to  the
counsels  or  the  requests  of  those  who  enjoy  their  affection  and  esteem.  In  all
stations  of  life  there  are  those  who,  being  in  favour,  are  therefore  in  power.  Esther
used  the  influence — which  another  in  her  position  might  have  employed  for  selfish
ends — for  the  public  good.  But  had  she  not  won  esteem  and  confidence  she  would
have  been  without  the  power  to  do  the  great  service  she  rendered.

III.  Those  who  enjoy  favour  with  men  are  responsible  for  its  wise  employ-
ment. How  often  have  kings'  favourites  used  their  influence  for  sordid  and  vile
purposes  1  And  how  often  is  popularity  prostituted  to  base  ends  I  Like  other
"  talents,"  the  favour  a  Christian  enjoys  should  be  used  for  the  promotion  of  the
cause  of  righteousness  and  human  happiness.  For  the  employment  of  this,  as  of
other  sources  of  influence,  men  must  give  at  last  an  account  to  God.

Practical  lessons  : — 1.  The  young  should  cultivate  qualities  and  habits  which  may
give  them  favour  with  men.  There  is  a  foolish  notion  that  moroseness  is  usually
associated  with  independence  and  integrity.  But  we  have  the  Scriptural  admoni-
tion. Be  courteous.  And  we  read  that  the  Lord  Jesus  "grew  in  favour  with  God
and  men."  2.  Those  who  enjoy  favour  should  endeavour,  with  watchfulness  and
prayer,  to  use  the  gift  for  the  good  of  their  fellow-men  and  the  glory  of  God.

Ver.  17. — Esther  made  queen.  History  records  many  strange  vicissitudes  of
fortune.  The  beggar  is  raised  from  the  dunghill  to  the  palace ;  the  wealthy  is
brought  to  poverty ;  those  once  flattered  and  caressed  are  forgotten  or  despised.  In
Scripture  history  the  Arab  sheik  becomes  the  father  of  nations ;  the  boy  sold  into
bondage  becomes  the  prime  minister  of  the  greatest  of  states ;  the  deserted  babe
becomes  the  mighty  leader  of  a  people  ;  the  shepherd  lad  becomes  the  renowned  king
of  Israel.  And  Esther,  the  poor  orphan,  adopted  by  the  despised  Mordecai,  becomes
the  successor  to  Vashti,  and  the  queen  of  Ahasuerus,  king  of  Persia.

I.  We  have  in  Esther's  exaltation  an  instance  of  the  uncertainty  and  mutabilitt
OF  human  life.  Here  how  true  it  is  that  "  nothing  continueth  in  one  stay  I "  As
the  ancients  figuratively  expressed  it,  "  Fortune  is  ever  turning  her  wheel."  We
know  that  the  hand  of  a  wise  and  overruling  Providence  is  manifest  to  the  eye  of
faith  in  all  the  changes  which  occur  in  human  life.  We  should  learn  not  to  think
too  much  of  circumstances,  but  to  seek  in  every  State  to  be  content,  and  to  be  ready
to  profit  spiritually  by  all  events,  and  to  turn  every  position  in  which  we  are  placed
into  an  opportunity  for  serving  and  glorifying  God.

II.  Elevation  to  a  high  position  is  an  effective  test  of  characteb.  There  are
some  weak  and  worthless  natures  which  cannot  endure  when  put  thus  to  the  proof.
8uch  persons  when  raised  to  a  lofty  station  forget,  despise,  or  disown  former  friends.
Other  and  nobler  natures  are  benefited  by  promotion.    Suv^h  persons  retain  kindly


46  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  ii,  1—18.

recollection  of  former  associates,  carry  with  them  into  new  positions  the  ancient
sympathies,  even  enlarged  and  refined,  and,  above  all,  retain  the  sweet  grace  of
humility.  Esther  forgot  not  the  friend  of  her  youth,  forgot  not  the  people  from
whom  she  had  received  her  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  And  she  demeaned  herself
with  the  exquisite  grace  of  lowliness  when  exalted  to  a  throne.

III.  Exaltation  may  bring  with  it  OPPORTUNITIES  OF  ENLARGED  USEFULNESS.  Every
station  in  life  affords  scope  for  serving  our  fellow-men.  But  a  station  of  eminence
and  authority  has  pre-eminent  advantages  of  this  kind.  Noble  natures  value  rank
chiefly  for  this  reason,  that  it  imparts  facilities  to  public  services.  To  Esther  there
came  one  great  and  signal  opportunity  of  serving  her  kindred  and  nation,  an  oppor-
tunity for  which  she  was  indebted  to  her  position  as  consort  of  the  king  of  Persia.
And  she  did  not  neglect  to  avail  herself  of  the  opportunity  thus  placed  within  her
reach.

I V.  Elevation  to  power  may  LEAD  TO  THE  enjoyment  of  wide-speead  gratitudb
AND  AFifEOTioN.  Esther  used  her  position  in  such  a  way  that  she  has  been  held  by
the  nation  she  rescued  from  ruin  in  lasting  and  grateful  remembrance.  Those  whc
employ  power  for  self-aggrandisement  will,  by  just  minds,  be  contemned ;  but  al.
who  toil  "  not  for  their  own,  but  for  their  people's  good,"  will  have  their  record  in
the  grateful  hearts  alike  of  contemporaries  and  of  posterity.

Ver.  18. — Release  and  gifts.  Esther's  marriage  was  celebrated  in  a  manner
intended  and  fitted  to  impress  the  nation  with  a  sense  of  the  favour  and  honour  with
which  she  was  regarded  by  the  "  great  king."  There  was  a  great  feast  at  Susa,  that
the  metropolis  might  have  an  opportunity  of  honouring  the  new  queen.  And
throughout  the  kingdom  there  took  place,  according  to  the  command  of  Ahasuerus,
such  celebrations  and  observances  as  were  in  accordance  with  Oriental  customs.
Particularly  are  mentioned  the  releases  or  remissions — it  may  be  presumed  from  taxa-
tion or  military  service ;  and  the  gifts — probably  of  robes,  and  in  some  cases  of  jewels.
We  may  regard  these  tokens  of  kingly  favour  as  emblematic  of  the  blessings  pro-
vided by  Divine  mercy  in  the  gospel  of  Christ  for  the  sinful  and  needy  children  of
men.

I.  The  heavenly  King  favours  us,  sinners  and  spiritual  bondsmen,  with  eelbask
AND  REMISSION.  1.  From  the  service  of  Satan.  2.  From  the  thraldom  and  punish-
ment of  sin.     3.  By  the  redemption  of  his  Son,  Jesus  Christ.

II.  The  heavenly  King  bestows  upon  us,  his  subjects,  NUMEROUS  and  priceless
GIFTS.  1.  As  the  condition  and  means  of  all  other  benefactions  regard  him  who  is
"the  unspeakable  Gift."  2.  The  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  gift  of  eternal
life.  4.  Remember  that  all  the  bounties  of  Divine  providence  come  to  us  as  proofs
of  the  Father's  love,  and  through  the  mediation  of  Christ.

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Spiritual  liberty  is  provided  and  ofEered  ;  the  prison  doors
are  opened.  Go  ye  free.  2.  Spiritual  bounty  is  at  your  disposal ;  "  all  things  are
yours."    Take  and  rejoice  in  the  manifold  gifts  of  God.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Ver.  1. — Memor^s  visitation.  The  interval  here  indicated  cannot  be  measured
exactly.  It  is  not  important,  or  probiibly  it  would  have  been  stated.  But  some
things  respecting  it  are  worthy  of  note :  that  time  is  measurable  by  what  we  do  in
it,  and  by  how  the  individual  character  grows  in  it.  It  is  measurable  in  sadder  ways
— by  all  the  heap  and  accumulation  of  the  undone  lying  at  our  leet.  And  once  more,
tmong  many  other  ways,  we  are  reminded  here  how  it  is  measurable  by  the  duration
or  the  cooling  down  of  temper,  of  "  wrath."  Though  the  fiercest  passion  and  the
hottest  wrath  burn  out  the  quickest  and  cool  down  the  most  rapidly,  it  is  not  tobe
forgotten  that  their  offects  are  not  similarly  disposed  of  or  reversed.  Far  otherwise.
The  fire  burns  out  rapidly  because  it  has  finally  consumed  its  fuel,  and  the  hot  wrath
cools  down  quickly  because  it  has  devoured  its  prey.  These  results  are  irreparable,
though  the  loss  they  speak,  the  guilt  they  fix,  the  crime  they  mark,  men  gladly  turn
•way  from — results  indeed  often  incalculable.    This  passage  calls  attention  to  th«


Ok.  II.  1—18 J  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  i\

subject  of  memory's  visitations.  We  may  make  a  distinction  between  memory's
visits  and  its  visitation.  The  former  often  sweet  and  often  welcome,  even  when
most  touched  with  the  spirit  of  sadness ;  but  the  latter  heralding  for  the  most  part
reproof,  remorse,  and  the  retributive.     Let  us  observe —

I.  How  MEMORY  MAY  BB  HELD  IN  ABEYANCE  ;   BATHER,  UNDER  CERTAIN  TREATMENT,

HOLDS  ITSELF  IN  ABEYANCE.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  neither  holds  itself  in
abeyance,  owing  to  any  unconscious  affronts  we  offer  it,  nor  is  held  in  abeyance  by
any  distinct  and  defined  efforts  of  our  own.  For  is  it  not  a  thing  worthy  to  be
observed,  as  one  of  the  evidences  of  a  wise  and  merciful  Creator,  that  memory  itself
does  not  insist  on  an  equable  exertion  of  all  its  power.  Wide  as  its  jurisdiction,  it  is
abundantly  evident  that  it  is  not  all  equally  travelled.  Its  hemispherical  chart  shows
only  some  strongly-marked  places ;  multitudinous  as  the  names  engraved  on  its
latitude  and  longitude, — ^yes,  even  innumerable, — they  were,  as  regards  the  enormons
majority  of  them,  but  very  faintly  graved,  and  they  become  soon  enough  illegible,
indiscernible.  The  few  things  which  we  judge  most  important  to  be  remembered,
we  charge  ourselves  with  special  pains  and  by  special  methods  to  remember.  If
memory  were  obliged  to  retain  all  that  it  had  ever  taken  cognisance  of,  it  is  evident
that  it  would  choke  up  all  other  present  exercise  of  our  faculties,  and  would  impe-
riously stop  the  working  of  the  mental  machinery.  It  would  bring  all  to  a  dead-
lock. On  the  other  hand,  and  to  our  present  point,  there  are  things  which,  instead  of
needing  our  study  and  effort  and  rational  methods  in  order  to  charge  memory  to
retain  them,  will  need  some  soporific  treatment  i£  memory  is  to  be  disarmed.  All
our  grand  mistakes,  all  our  vivid  joys,  all  our  vivid  sorrows,  all  our  vivid  warnings,
all  our  vivid  experiences,  of  almost  every  kind — the  startled  moment,  the  hair-
breadth escape,  the  pang  of  irretrievable  failure,  the  moment  of  supreme  success, —
all  these  and  their  likes  write  themselves  with  ink  that  suffers  no  absolute  effacing,
even  for  the  present  life ;  and  though  it  does  suffer  itself  to  be  dimmed,  obscured,
and  over-written,  so  as  a  while  to  be  illegible,  this  is  gained  only  by  methods  intrin-
sically undesirable,  very  unsafe,  very  forced.  These  works  of  memory  are  of
nature's  own  quickening,  and  to  try  to  stifle  their  due  utterance  is  of  the  nature  of  a
premeditated  offence  against  nature.  It  is,  with  rare  exceptions,  at  an  indefensible
risk  that  we  consciously  dare  this,  or  by  any  species  of  recklessness  court  it.  Of  the
devices  of  Satan  in  this  sort  let  us  not  be  ignorant,  that  we  may  be  the  rather  fore-
armed. Some  of  the  methods  of  dimming  memories  that  should  not  be  dimmed  are
illustrated  forcibly  in  the  history  of  Ahasuerus'  present  conduct ;  as,  for  instance — 1.
The  blinding  force  of  the  storm  of  "  wrath,"  of  hate,  of  intemperateness,  of  lust.  2.
The  stupefying  force  of  sensuality,  of  bodily  indulgence,  and  excess  of  luxuriousness.
3.  All  headstrong  recklessness — the  defiant  disposition  that  "  neither  fears  God  nor
regards  man."  4.  The  enfeebled  conscience,  and,  of  necessity,  much  more  the  tem-
porarily paralysed  conscience.  5.  The  imperious  yoke  of  self-seeking  in  all  we  think,
and  of  supposed  self-interest.  6.  A  heart  already  callous,  hardened  by  habit,  familiar-
ised with  sin.  These  and  other  causes  frighten  away  the  most  useful  messages  of
memory,  weaken  her  wings,  and  she  is  not  to  be  depended  upon  to  alight  with  the
needed  whispers  of  either  warning  or  encouragement.  It  is  one  of  the  worst  of  signs,
one  of  the  most  ominous  warnings  of  approaching  spiritual  disaster,  when  memory
in  certain  directions  abnegates  her  rights  ;  offended  and  grieved,  holds  herself  in
the  background  ;  or,  rudely  repelled,  seems  awhile  to  acc^t  the  law  of  banishment
pronounced  against  her.

II.  How  AT    AN    UNSUSPECTED   MOMENT    MEMORY    RE-ENTERS    THE    SCENE,  WITHOUT

DEROGATION  OF  ITS  RIGHTS,  AND  WITH  ADDED  EFFECT.  It  was  SO  to  a  remarkable
degree  now.  The  "  wrath,"  with  some  concomitant  auxiliaries,  which  had  held
memory  awhile  at  bay,  was  subsided,  and  memory  with  silent  majesty  walks  in.  Its
figure  is  not  dim,  its  utterance  is  not  indistinct,  its  indictment  is  not  vague.  No  ;  the
trial  must  be  called  on,  the  debt  must  be  demanded,  and  interest  must  be  added  to
debt.  With  what  skilful  brevity,  of  amazing  power  to  suggest,  the  position  is  put
.  before  us.  "  Ahasuerus  remembered  Vashti,  and  what  she  had  done,  and  what  was
decreed  against  her."  The  arbitrary,  licentious  man  could  depose  the  woman  who
resolved  to  maintain  her  own  and  her  sex's  rightful  dignity  and  modesty,  but  ha
could  not  depose  his  own  memory.    iShe  was  a  mistress  still,  and  one  who  stuck


48  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [CH.  ii.  1—18

closer  than  an  ill-treated,  dishonoured  wife.  Affection  helps  memory  ;  he  sees  with
his  inner  eye  the  woman  he  had  loved  so  well  once  to  prefer  her  to  all,  and  to  make
her  wife  and  queen.  Conscience  perhaps  in  some  part  helped  memory,  as  memory
certainly  was  paving  the  way  for  the  future  work  of  conscience.  The  figure  of
Vashti  was  before  his  inner  eye,  but  she  herself  was  not.  The  law  of  Mede  and
Persian  stood  in  the  way,  crumpled  up  the  law  of  right,  stifled  the  dictate  of  afEection,
and  smothered  the  muffled,  incoherent  accents  of  conscience.  The  hall  of  trial  is  in
his  own  disordered  breast,  but  the  essentials  of  the  trial  are  present  there  nevertheless.
He  remembered  Vashti,  and  "what  she  had  done  " — nothing  worthy  of  divorce,  of
punishment.  All  the  reflection  was  upon  himself,  fell  back  with  a  heavy  thrust  on
himself.  He  remembered  Vashti,  "  and  what  was  decreed  against  her  "  — an  iniquitous
decree,  a  decree  not  merely  injurious  to  her,  but  also  to  himself  and  his  reputation
henceforward  down  through  all  the  world's  time.  This  is  what  memory's  visitation
was  now  for  Ahasuerus,  and  memory  left  him  in  the  most  appalling  condition  in
which  a  human  heart  can  be  ever  left — left  him  drifting  into  a  woeful  blank.  He
missed  Vashti.  He  could  not  replace  her.  He  has  decreed  for  himself  a  void  which
cannot  be  filled,  even  though  a  better  object  be  offered  for  the  void.  Memory  leaves
him  again  aiy WIe  when  it  has  forced  this  conviction  on  the  unwilling  victim,  that  he
has  stricken  himself  sore,  and  that  on  himself  his  "  decree  "  has  recoiled. — B.

Ver.  4. — The  verdict  of  pleasure  an  utarustworthy  basis  qfaetion.  If  wisdom  and
goodness  sometimes  make  all  profit  they  can  by  embracing  opportunity,  much  more
often  do  policy  and  evil.  For  the  "  children  of  this  world  are  wiser  in  their  genera-
tion than  the  children  of  light."  They  most  studiously  adapt  means  to  end ;  they
most  patiently  bide  their  time ;  they  most  imerringly,  in  this  disordered  scene,  this
dislocated  system,  see  and  snatch  the  opportunity.  Let  us  observe  here  the  appeal
made  to  the  King  Ahasuerus —

I.  In  the  light  of  the  oppoBTtrNB  TIME  AT  WHICH  IT  WAS  MADE.  Meaning  much
there  was  in  that  time.  The  moment  makes  often  the  difference.  Now  the  moment
and  the  man  met.  A  cheerless  blank  before  the  king.  An  aching  void  within  him,
as  though  emptiness  were  the  most  veritable  existence.  We  do  not  indeed  read  that
of  this  inner  vacancy  the  king  said  a  word  or  uttered  a  complaint ;  he  would  not
make  so  humiliating  a  confession.  But  whether  he  did  so  or  not,  it  was  no  doubt
seen,  and  he  was  seen  through  by  the  minions  of  his  retinue  and  his  court.  His  own
"  wrath,"  and,  as  we  have  reason  to  know,  matters  of  state  and  matters  of  war,  had
helped  him  tide  over  several  months ;  but  un-ease  at  heart  can  be  no  longer  endured,
and  is  bound  to  betray  him.  Neither  momentary  diversion  of  heart  nor  months'
diversion  of  mind  destroys  facts,  nor  turns  back  dissatisfaction's  natural  tide.  The
most  they  do  is  to  arrest  awhile,  certain  to  aggravate  after  a  while.

II.  In   the   LIGHT    OF  THE    SPECIAL  INNER  PEEPABATION   FOE   IT    WHICH   THE  WHOLE

HBKBTOFOKB  couBSE  OF  HIS  LIFE  HAD  MADE.  That  antecedent  course  of  life  might
have  been  judged  to  be  a  deliberately-constituted  preparation  for  such  a  moment  as
the  present.  No  outward  opportunity  for  good  or  evil,  no  outward  invitation  of  gain
or  loss,  is  comparable  for  effect  with  that  opportuneness  which  is,  which  is  made,
which  grows  within.  There  is  no  such  ripeness  of  time  as  that  which  comes  of
ripeness  of  disposition.  If  the  spark  also  is  to  have  its  fair  chance,  it  must  fall  on
touch-paper,  dry  wood,  gunpowder.  If  an  ill-starred  suggestion,  or  the  happiest,
holiest  impulse,  is  to  have  each  its  own  due  course,  the  one  and  the  other  must  fall,
though  in  time's  briefest  instant,  upon  the  material  of  a  character  that  has  been  con-
sciously or  unconsciously  fitting  and  maturing  a  long  time  for  each  respectively.  An
instant's  mere  hint,  whether  of  good  or  bad,  wiU  not  mean  much,  except  it  come
upon  the  product  of  months'  or  years'  education ;  but  if  it  light  upon  this,  it  may.

III.  In    THE    UNJUSTIFIABLY    BEADY    AND    HASTY    ACCEPTANCE    OF    IT.      'There   was

apparently  no  consideration  of  the  proposal  contained  in  it.  There  was  certainly  no
careful  exercise  of  the  judgment  upon  it.  No  counsellors  are  called  in  as  before.
The  seven  "  wise  men  which  saw  the  king's  face,  and  sat  the  first  in  the  kingdom,"
are  not  called  in  to  consult.  Nay,  not  so  much  as  an  hour's  time  is  reserved  before
an  answer.  It  seems  plainly  that  all  was  considered  safe,  and  he  acted  on  a
momentary  impulse,  thinking  only  of  self -gratification.     "The  thing  pleased  th»


CH.  u.  1— 18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  49

king ;  and  he  did  so.''  Self -pleasure  is  made  the  basis  of  conduct.  The  thing  that
pleases  is  the  right.  The  thing  that  pleases  is  to  be  done.  Poor  learner,  Ahasuerus  I
He  has  already  forgotten  what  he  was  remembering,  regretting,  only  yesterday — the
hasty  thing  "  which  was  decreed  against  Vashti."  And  that  also  was  at  the  suggestion
of  others — ratified  at  his  own  pleasure. — B.

Ver.  11. — A  relatives  tolicitvde.  "Mordecai  walked  every  day  before  the  court.'"
Esthf r  was  cousin-german  to  Mordecai,  being  the  daughter  of  his  father's  brollier.
Her  relationship  was  not,  therefore,  very  close,  yet  we  see  what  great  interest  Mordecai
took  in  her.     The  text  teaches  us —

I.  How  God  eaisbs  up  friends  fob  the  appabentlt  friendless.  Esther's  parer.ts
were  possibly  very  troubled,  when  passing  from  this  world,  as  to  what  would  becoine
of  their  daughter.  God,  however,  found  her  a  protector  in  Mordecai.  God  ap-
pointed her  path  in  life.  Her  parents  little  expected  that  she  would  become  the
queen  of  Persia,  and  deliverer  of  her  people.

II.  How  ANXIOUS  ARE  RELATIVES  AND  PARENTS  WHEN  THEIR  CHILDREN  ABE  ENTERING

ON  NEW  POSITIONS.  Esther's  was  not  only  new,  but  dangerous.  She  might  have
become  vain  and  degraded  in  mind,  like  many  with  whom  she  had  to  associate.
"  Mordecai  walked,"  &c.  He  wished  to  know  how  Esther  succeeded.  How  our
heavenly  Father  walks  "  eveiy  day "  by  our  side,  watching  what  will  become  of
nsl— H.

Ver.  15. — Simple  taste*.  "She  required  nothing  but  what  Hegai,  the  king's
chamberlain,  the  Keeper  of  the  women,  appointed."  Esther's  habits  and  tastes  were
simple ;  she  cared  not  for  the  various  arts  supposed  to  lend  attraction ;  she  was
content  with  a  moderate  toilet,  and. believed  more  in  the  charm  of  purity,  modesty,
simplicity,  and  piety  than  in  artificial  methods.     She  was  right.

I.  Simple  tastes  are  less  costly.

II.  Simple  tastes  indicate  a  pure  mind.

III.  Simple  tastes  ABB  the  most  attractive.  Behold  in  s  queen  who  now  lives
and  reigns  over  the  British  Empire— an  empire  wider  by  far  than  that  of  Persia — the
power  of  simple  tastes  and  habits.  It  is  this  that  makes  the  perusal  of  the  '  Memorial
of  the  Prince  Consort,'  and  '  Leaves  from  the  Highland  Diary,'  so  delightful.  It  is
this  that  has  given  her  Majesty  such  a  hold  on  the  affections  of  her  subjects,  and  to
monarchical  rule  a  longer  lease  than  it  promised  to  have.  Piety  and  purity  have
power  not  only  in  the  palace  at  Shushan  and  the  castle  at  Windsor,  but  in  the
lowliest  cottage  of  the  realm. — H.

Ver.  17. — An  unexpected  coronation.  "  He  set  the  royal  crown  on  her  head."  This
crown  was  a  crowning  event.  It  was  the  signal  event  of  a  long  and  hitherto  obscurely-
connected  series ;  it  was  the  one  effect  of  a  series  of  causes  and  effects.  Up  to  this
point  there  was  no  one  of  all  the  foregoing  to  compare  with  it  for  significance.  It  will
be  well  to  pause  awhile  in  the  presence  of  this  coronation  scene.  There  have  indeed
been  occasions  of  coronation  which  have  attracted  little  notice  or  interest.  There  have
beensome  supremely  sad,  although  perhaps  they  have  not  seemed  so  to  the  eye,  and  at
the  time.  But  this  coronation  scene  may  be  found  able  to  yield  much  more  for  thought
and  profit  than  most.  For  undoubtedly  it  has  aspects,  some  unhappy  in  their  surround-
ings, others  most  happy  in  their  substance,  which  strikingly  difference  it  from  very
many  others.  1.  It  was  not  a  crown  won  by  effort,  either  noble  or  ignoble.  It  was
not  one  of  those  crowns  which  had  been  lifted  to  the  brow,  amid  the  enthusiastic
plaudits  of  multitudes,  as  the  result  of  atlilete's  training,  poet's  inspiration,  or  the
force  of  genius.  The  statesman's  anxious  toil,  the  philanthropist's  oft-self-sacrificing
ministry  of  mercy,  the  warrior's  sword — these  h'ad  not  carved  the  way  to  a  throne.
It  was  not  an  occasion  of  coronation  of  this  sort.     In  fact,  nothing  that  had  been

specially  done,  and  nothing  that  had  been  specially  suffered,  showed  the  way  to  it

no  keen  strain  of  effort,  no  severe  tension  of  patience.  Neither  these  things,  nor
anything  falling  more  within  feminine  range,  and  answering  to  them,  heralded  the
gift  of  this  crown.  2.  It  was  not  a  crown  conferred  amid  surroundings  of  the  most
august  kind,  or  associations  at  all  elevating.    3.  It  was  not  a  crown  given  hv  hands

BSrSER.  I


so  THE  BOOK  Of  ESTHER.  [ch.  it  1—18.

pure,  honest,  or  merciful.  4.  It  certainly  was  not  a  crown  of  imperishable  material,
of  ancestral  renown,  or  that  could  be  reckoned  upon  to  ait  easy,  or  remain  long  on
the  head  that  now  was  to  wear  it.

But  amid  much  to  detract  from  it,  there  are  some  things  to  be  remembered  highly
to  the  advantage  of  this  crown.  1.  The  crown  was  one  that  was  not  sought  with
ambitious  self-seeking.  2.  It  was  one  that  did  not  come  of  mere  hereditary  succes-
sion. 3.  It  was  one — ^very  rare  indeed  in  this  respect — ^to  the  attainment  of  which
wora^ quahties  did  undoubtedly  largely  contribute.  It  was  the  more  remarkable
because  those  moral  qualities  had  to  make  their  way,  and  assert  their  influence,  in
the  most  unfavourable  atmosphere,  and  the  most  unlikely  circumstances.  Had
Esther  ingratiated  herself  ?  But  it  was  not  the  result  of  wiliness.  Had  she  ingra-
tiated herself?  But  it  was  not  among  the  like-minded  and  the  pure  of  heart.  Had
she  ingratiated  herself?  It  was  actually,  considering  her  distinguishing  qualities,
with  the  worst  kind  of  character  of  all  for  her  to  go  near — ^the  official  character
Yet  bribery  had  not  done  it,  meretricious  ways  had  not  done  it,  insincerity  had  not
done  it,  immorality  had  not  done  it.  The  force  of  simplicity,  of  contentment,  of
modesty,  of  refusal  of  superfluous  ornament — positively  these  thingp  had  done  it  I
It  is  evident  that  she  was  a  pattern  of  goodness,  after  a  sort  not  so  commonly
recognisable,  with  those  who  surrounded  her,  and  with  such  as  they,  but  which,
streaming  gently  forth,  rnade  its  radiance  seea,  felt,  admired  by  some  of  the  most
unlikely.  Esther's  docile  obedience  to  her  guardian  while  she  lived  under  his  roof,
her  continued  obedience  to  him  after  she  had  left  it,  her  fidelity  to  the  faith  and  hope
of  her  people,  her  uncomplaining  acceptance  of  a  position  decidedly  humiliating  to
one  of  her  race,  in  consideration  of  the  captive  adversity  of  her  people,  and  still  more
of  those  objects  which  her  coUsin  apparently,  but  which  God  really,  would  work  for
them  by  her — these  things  all  bear  witness  to  the  deep  heart  of  goodness  that  dwelt
in  her.  Yet,  granting  all  this,  was  it  not  a  strange  thing  that  she  should  so  make
her  way,  and  ''  walk  the  queen,"  that  they  were  all  ready  to  designate  her  such,  and
that  he,  with  whom  the  choice  and  decision  lay,  at  once  did  so?  Many  a  desirable
crown  has  been  won  by  methods  most  undesirable.  This  was  an  undesirable  crown,
won  by  methods  full  of  real  honour  and  grace.  4.  It  was  a  crown  which  God
designed  for  the  head  which  it  now  reached.  This  is  the  best  thing  of  all  to  be  said
about  it.  But  for  this,  it  would  have  nothing  really  to  favour  it ;  with  this,  it  may
claim  all  the  rest  as  well.  The  providence  of  God  raised  the  crown,  after  first  rais-
ing the  head  of  the  humble  and  meek  to  receive  it.  His  providence  had  other  ends
in  view,  great  and  good  and  kind,  for  his  people.  And  by  the  vicarious  humiliation
of  this  maiden  he  wrought  great  miracles  and  wonders.  For  her  the  outer  ornament
of  such  a  crown,  in  alliance  with  such  circumstances,  could  have  had  small  attractions
indeed.  But  viewed  in  this  other  aspect,  the  crown  had  in  the  highest  sense  the
qualities  of  the  "unfading,"  the  "imperishable."  And  for  the  patient  head  that
now  wore  it,  it  was  the  earnest  of  another  of  immortal  "  honour  and  glory." — B.

Vers.  1 — 4. —  Vain  regrets.    We  observe  here —

I.  An  abiding  memobt.  The  past  cannot  be  wholly  shut  out  from  the  present.
The  power  of  memory  cleaves  to  the  soul.  The  king  "  remembered  Vashti."  Time,
which  had  appeased  his  wrath,  had  not  destroyed  the  queen's  image,  or  cast  into
oblivion  the  facta  connected  with  her  disgrace.  The  persons  and  things  of  the  past
continue  to  live  in  memory  either  to  sweeten  or  embitter  the  life.  We  should  lay  up
nothing  in  this  storehouse  but  what  will  bear  pleasant  review.

II.  An  unavailing  regret.  The  narrative  seems  to  indicate  that  as  the  king's
anger  against  Vashti  died  out,  his  love  for  her  returned.  But,  with  other  memories,
that  of  the  irrevocable  decree  came  into  his  mind.  Whatever  his  regrets,  they  were
in  vain.  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that  sins  and  wrongs  once  done  cannot  be  undone.
Even  though  bad  decrees  may  be  reversed,  the  evils  they  have  wrought  remain.  How
many  through  the  follies  of  the  present  heap  up  regrets  for  the  future  1

III.  A  strange  device.  Of  the  plan  suggested  by  the  courtiers,  it  may  be  said —
1.  That  it  was  significant  of  the  king's  state  of  mind.  It  showed  a  perception  of  the
feelings  that  troubled  him.  Such  an  appeal  to  his  sensual  nature  could  only  be
intended  to  drown  a  reviving  affection  and  troublesome  regrets.   2.  That  it  was  lelfish


CH.  II.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEfi.  61

and  cunning.  The  restoration  of  Vasliti  would  have  been  dargpioiis  to  those  who
counselled  her  disgrace.  The  possibility  of  a  change  in  the  king's  mind  was  antici-
pated in  the  decree  that  could  not  be  altered.  Yet  such  a  king,  under  the  prompting
of  passion,  might  break  through  any  legal  fiction,  and  therefore  it  was  resolved  to
wean  him  from  thoughts  of  Vashti  by  the  prospect  of  an  unlimited  variety  of  sensual
indulgence.  3.  That  it  was  heartlessly  wicked.  No  thought  or  pity  was  expended
on  the  many  fair  young  maidens  who  were  to  be  brought  from  their  homes  and  sacri-
ficed to  the  lust  of  the  king.  The  king  and  his  courtiers  would  probably  regard  the
transaction  as  bestowing  a  special  honour  on  its  victims.  "  The  tender  mercies  of
the  wicked  are  cruel."  4.  That  it  was,  nevertheless,  not  out  of  harmony  with  preva-
lent ideas  and  customs.  Few  would  be  shocked  by  it  in  all  the  vast  empire.  Whilst
we  hold  the  truth  to  be  one  in  all  circumstances,  our  judgment  of  conduct  (like
Christ's — Matt.  xi.  21)  should  allow  for  difiEerences  of  time  and  place.  5.  That  it
marks  a  distinction  between  heathenism  and  Christianity.  Under  Christian  rule  such  a
device  would  be  impossible.  The  mere  idea  of  it  excites  a  shuddering  horror  in  the
Christian  heart  All  heathenisms  ai-e  hopelessly  corrupt.  They  contain  the  seeds  of
fheir  own  decay.  It  is  at  once  a  blessed  and  a  responsible  thing  to  live  in  a  country
whose  institutions,  laws,  and  general  life  are  governed  by  the  Christian  truth  and  spirit.

IV.  An  incdrablb  follt.  "And  the  thing  pleased  the  king;  and  he  did  so."
The  novelty  of  it  arrested  him ;  the  pleasure  which  it  promised  charmed  him ;  all
memories  and  regrets  were  speedily  sv/allowed  up  in  the  anticipated  delights  of  a  new
self-indulgence.  There  is  a  folly  which  no  lessons  will  teach  wisdom,  which  no  ex-
periences will  long  influence  for  good.  Sin  hardens  the  heart.  A  yielding  to  carnal
fusts  destroys  the  power  of  the  soul  to  follow  the  lights  and  monitions  that  would
deliver  it.  Occasional  fears  and  perplexities  may  arise,  but  "  the  dog  returns  to  its
vomit."

V.  A  SDGGESTION  OF  BETTER  THINGS.  The  pleasurss  of  sin  may  be  fascinatingly
great  to  the  ungodly  who  have  not  tested  their  fruits.  But  however  alluring,  experi-
ence proves  them  to  be  short-lived,  degrading  to  our  nature,  and  laden  with  an  ever-
growing and  corroding  bitterness.  •  They  are  not  to  be  compared  with  the  higher
delights  that  spring  from  a  virtuous  and  self-denying  life,  a  conscious  fellowship
with  Jesus  Christ,  a  trustful  obedience  to  the  heavenly  Father's  will,  a  possession  of
the  hope  that  is  full  of  immortality  (see  Gal.  v.  19—26). — D.

Vers.  6 — ^20. — Esth&r.  The  strange  plan  adopted  for  the  providing  of  a  new  queen
in  the  room  of  Vashti  resulted  in  a  good  choice.  We  need  not  assume  that  Esther  was
a  willing  candidate  for  royal  honours.  The  account  we  have  favours  the  belief  that
she  passively  yielded  to  a  power  which  she  could  not  resist.  Among  the  attractive
qualities  she  possessed,  we  may  notice —

I.  Bbaoty.  She  had  a  fair  form  and  a  good  countenance.  Physical  beauty  is  not
to  be  despised.  It  is  one  of  God's  gifts,  and  has  much  power  in  the  world.  Yet  it
exposes  the  soul  to  special  danger.  When  not  sanctified  and  guarded  by  the  grace
of  God,  it  becomes  a  ready  minister  to  vanity  and  varied  sin.  Moreover,  it  is  frail
and  precarious.  A  temporary  illness  will  destroy  the  brightest  beauty.  A  few  years
will  wrinkle  the  face  of  youth,  and  give  a  tottering  gait  to  the  most  graceful  form.

II.  MoDESTT.  Esther's  beauty  did  not  make  her  vain  and  foolish.  She  avoided  all
arts  to  adorn  it  and  increase  its  effects  on  others.  Modesty  is  a  lovely  grace  which
adds  a  new  charm  to  the  highest  physical  beauty.  It  conciliates  and  wins  by  its  own
gentle  force.  An  immodest  assertion  of  one's  self  in  any  circumstances  indicates
either  a  want  of  moral  sensitiveness,  or  a  want  of  intellectual  sight.  A  pure  heart,
a  true  self-knowledge,  and  the  fear  of  God,  are  all  and  always  modest.

III.  DiscBBTiON.  In  her  new  and  trying  position  Esther  never  failed  in  prudence.
This  was  the  result  not  of  skilful  planning,  but  of  a  good  training,  and  of  a  modesty
which  quickly  saw  what  was  becoming.  She  made  no  effort  to  please  (ver.  15).  The
very  simplicity  and  artlessness  of  her  conduct  won  her  the  favour  of  the  king's
servants,  and  finally  drew  to  her  the  preference  of  the  king  himself.  Truth  and
wisdom  are  one.  There  is  no  brighter  jewel  in  womanly  character  than  the  discretion
which  reflects  a  simple  and  true  heart  (Prov.xi.  22).  _

IV.  DmiFULNESS.    One  of  the  most  attractive  qualities  of  Esther  was  her  daughter-

K  «


52  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  [OH.  ii.  1—18

like  fidelity  to  her  foster-father  Mordecai,  both  before  and  after  her  election  to  the
throne.  She  admired,  loved,  and  trusted  him,  and  submitted  as  a  child  to  his  guidance.
Young  people  dislike  restraint,  and  long  for  the  freedom  of  independence  before  they
are  ready  to  bear  the  responsibility  of  it.  They  often  fret  under  the  wise  and
affectionate  safeguards  which  their  parents  impose.  Yet  in  after  life  most  men  and
women  are  willing  to  confess  that  they  were  very  ignorant  in  youth,  and  that  it
would  have  been  well  for  them  if  they  had  understood  better,  and  followed  more
fully,  the  parental  admonitions  which  seemed  so  irksome.

V.  Integrity.  Esther  bore  well  the  sudden  flush  of  prosperity  which  came  upon
her.  This  is  first  and  best  seen  in  her  unchanging  regard  for  the  man  who  had  been
the  guardian  of  her  orphaned  childhood  and  youth.  Her  elevation  to  Vashti's  place
made  no  change  in  her  reverent  affection  for  Mordecai.  We  read  that  she  "  did
the  commandments  of  Mordecai  like  as  when  she  was  brought  up  with  him  "  (ver.  20).
A  very  beautiful  and  instructive  example  I  Changes  in  condition  often  work  sad
changes  in  heart  and  conduct.  Many  grow  false  to  themselves  and  their  past,  and
to  those  who  formed  the  chief  good  of  their  past,  when  some  tide  of  prosperity  raises
them  into  a  higher  social  circle,  and  creates  new  ties  which  can  have  no  sympathy
or  connection  with  the  old  ones.  Nothing  is  more  despicable  than  that  pride  of
worldly  advancement  which  forgets  or  looks  coldly  on  early  friends  whose  humble
fidelities  of  affection  may  have  laid  the  foundation  of  future  success.

The  character  and  conduct  of  the  Jewish  maiden  teach  us — 1.  A  higher  beauty
than  the  physical.  In  all  precious  qualities  beauty  of  mind  and  heart  far  transcends
the  most  brilliant  beauty  of  face  or  form.  The  "  beauties  of  holiness  "  are  the  best
adornments  of  man  or  woman.  "  Strength  and  beauty  are  in  his  sanctuary "  (Ps.
xcvi.  6).  "  Zion  is  the  perfection  of  beauty  "  (Ps.  1.  2).  The  prayer  of  the  Church
is,  "Let  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God  be  upon  us"  (Ps.  xc.  17).  2.  A  better
possession  than  worldly  rank.  The  treasure  of  a  good  understanding  in  the  fear  of
the  Lord  is  of  more  value  than  any  grandeur  of  outward  circumstance.  A  soul  that  is
humble,  patient,  trustful,  loving,  holy,  Christlike,  has  riches  that  all  the  gold  of  Ophir
or  the  diamonds  of  Golconda  could  not  buy,  and  is  elevated  higher  than  if  it  were  to
occupy  the  greatest  earthly  throne  (Eecles.  vii.  12;  Matt.  vi.  19 — 21 ;  John  vi.  27).
3.  The  importance  of  early  training.  Youth  is  the  seed-time.  Seeds  are  then  sown
which,  in  the  after  life,  will  surely  bring  forth  fruit  either  good  or  evil.  Well-
meaning  parents  may  be  sometimes  unwise,  and  well-trained  children  may  sometimes
go  astray  ;  but  the  rule  is — "  Train  up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,  and  when  he
is  old  he  will  not  depart  from  it."  Esther  may  be  taken  as  an  illustration  of  the
powerlessness  of  worldly  influences  to  change  the  feelings  of  the  heart,  or  the  judg-
ments of  the  mind,  or  the  government  of  the  life,  in  the  case  of  one  who  in  early
youth  has  been  trained,  under  loving  care,  in  the  principles  and  practices  of  a  holy
religious  life.  4.  The  truth  of  the  saying,  "  Man  proposes,  but  God  disposes."  In
all  the  incidents  connected  with  Esther's  election  to  be  queen  we  see  the  guidance  of
an  invisible  hand.  The  narrative  is  brief,  simple,  and  artless ;  but  on  that  very
account  it  impresses  us  all  the  more  with  the  conviction  of  a  Divine  purpose  and
•     '•   ?.-D.


Vers.  5 — 20. — Mordecai.  Mordecai  possessed  a  lofty  nature,  and  was  destined
to  do  great  things ;  but  our  notice  of  him  here  is  restricted  to  his  relation  to  Esther
up  to  the  time  when  she  was  made  queen.     He  presents  to  our  view —

I.  A  FINE  NATURAL  DISPOSITION.  When  his  cousin  Esther  lost  her  parents  he
"  took  her  for  his  own  daughter."  His  heart  and  home  were  at  once  opened  to  the
little  orphaned  girl.  The  natures  of  men  vary  greatly.  Some  are  born  tender,  some
hard;  but  all  may  do  much  to  cultivate  the  softer  affections  of  sympathy  and
love.  The  ties  of  kindred  and  friendship  afford  many  opportunities  for  their
exercise.

II.  A  RECOONITION  OF  THE  DiviNB  LAW.  Mordecai's  adoption  of  Esther  was  in
accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  Mosaic  legislation.  As  a  good  Jew,  he  could
scarcely  have  done  otherwise.  This,  however,  does  not  detract  from  the  pure
benevolence  of  his  conduct.  The  good  actions  of  religious  people  are  often  regarded
as  mechanical  and  constrained,  as  springing  rather  from  a  slavish  fear  of  autJ»^^


CH.  II.  1—18.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  SB

than  from  a  willing  and  loving  heart.  On  this  point  observe — 1.  That  natural  light
and  strength  are  insufficient.  All  history  and  experience  teach  that  when  left  to
himself  man  becomes  hard-hearted  and  cruel  in  his  self-regard.  2.  That  a  Divine
revelation  of  truth  vvith  respect  to  relative  and  other  duties  is  an  unspeakable  benefit.
It  is  a  clear  light  amidst  the  dark  confusions  of  sin.  3.  That  good  natural  dis-
positions are  purified  and  strengthened  by  a  reverence  for  Divine  truth.  Mordeoai,
apart  from  religious  influence,  might  have  charged  himself  with  the  care  of  his
orphaned  relative ;  but,  if  so,  his  sense  of  obligation  to  Jehovah's  law  would  deepen
hip  compassionate  interest,  and  give  a  sacredness  to  the  adopted  duties  of  fatherhood.
The  religion  of  God  adds  power  and  freedom  to  the  exercise  of  all  affections  that  are
unselfish  and  good.

III.  A  FAITHFUL  DISCHARGE  OF  ACCEPTED  DUTY.  It  was  no  grudged  place  that
Mordecai  gave  to  his  cousin  in  his  family.  He  did  not  put  her  there,  and  then  allow
her  to  grow  up  neglected.  There  is  much  significance  in  the  words  "  he  brought  her
up."  They  imply,  as  the  result  shows,  that  he  bestowed  loving  attentions  on  her;
that  he  trained  her  carefully,  tenderly,  and  religiously.  It  is  not  enough  to  acknow-
ledge duty ;  the  important  thing  is  to  discharge  it.  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy
are  ye  if  ye  do  them  "  (John  xiii.  17).

IV.  A  HELPER  IN  TIME  OF  NEED.  Before  Esther  was  removed  from  her  adopted
home,  Mordecai  had  time  to  speak  to  her  words  of  comfort  and  instruction.  One
piece  of  advice  he  gave  her  was  that  she  should  keep  secret  her  lineage  or  nationality
(ver.  10).  It  was  meant  to  protecf  her  from  needless  humiliations  and  troubles,-
and  perhaps  to  remove  a  hindrance  to  her  reaching  the  dignity  of  wifehood  and
queenhood.  From  tliis  fact  we  gather  that  the  fatherly  Mordecai  spent  the  moments
that  preceded  the  parting  in  administering  solace  and  courage  and  wise  counsel  to
the  trembling  maiden.  A  true  love  never  fails,  and  it  shines  brightest  in  the  sympa-
thies and  succours  which  suffering  claims.

V.  A  CONTINUING  CARE.  Mordecai  did  not  cease  to  watch  over  the  charge  whom
God  had  entrusted  to  him  when  she  was  removed  into  another  sphere.  Separation
did  not  diminish  his  love  or  relax  his  care.  He  had  evidently  an  appointment
which  allowed  him  to  be  near  her;  for  we  read  in  ver.  11  that  he  "walked  every
day  before  the  court  of  the  women's  house,  to  know  how  Esther  did,  and  what
should  become  of  her."  Some  parents  think  that  when  they  get  their  children  off
their  hands,  as  it  is  called,  they  have  met  every  obligation  of  duty.  Mordecai
thought  and  acted  differently,  and  in  this  he  was  a  type  of  Christ,  who,  having  loved
us  from  the  first,  loved  us  to  the  last ;  who,  when  we  were  led  captive  by  sin,  still
loved  and  cared  for  us,  and  became  himself  our  ransom  ;  who,  now  that  he  is  ascended
above  all  heavens,  is  still  ever  near  to  guide  us  by  his  word  and  Spirit  in  the  way  that
leads  to  a  crown  and  throne  immortal.  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  unto  the  end
of  the  world  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  20).

Concluding  lessons: — 1.  As  followers  of  God  and  his  Christ,  we  should  consider
the  orphaned  and  needy  (Ps.  Ixviii.  6 ;  James  i.  27).  2.  God  blesses  those  who,
like  himself,  are  compassionate  and  merciful.  ■  Mordeoai  was  amply  rewarded  for  all
his  faithful  and  loving  care  of  the  orphan  child,  in  the  beautiful,  inodest,  wise,  win-
ning, courageous,  and  pious  woman  who  became  the  queen  of  Persia  and  the  saviour
of  Israel  (Matt.  x.  42).— D.

Vers.  6-^16. — The  pagan  harem  and  the  Christian  home.  Every  one  is  inclined  to
feel  kindly  toward  tlie  orphan  Esther,  who,  at  her  own  great  risk,  rendered  such  signal
service  to  her  race.  But  her  introduction  to  us  as  one  of  the  candidates  for  royal
favour,  among  several  other  women  of  the  harem,  is  far  from  pleasing.  Under  the
teaching  and  influence  of  Christian  truth  we  have  formed  habits  and  acquired
instincts  and  sensibilities  which  are  so  far  removed  from  those  of  Eastern  lands,  that
it  is  difficult  to  read,  without  a  strong  prejudice,  even  this  purely-written  page.  We
have  suggested  to  us —

I.   A  STRIKING   CONTRAST   BETWEEN  A   PAGAN   HAREM   AND   A   CHRISTIAN   HOME.       We

have  the  virgins  "  requisitioned  "  from  all  the  provinces  (ver.  8),  the  fairest  and  finest
being  taken  from  their  parents  and  friends;  a  large  part  of  the  palace  specially
assigned  them  before  admission  to  the  king's  chamber  (ver.  8),  and  another  devoted


M  THB  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  u.  1— la

to  them  afterwards,  when  they  had  become  his  concubines  (ver.  14)  ;  the  extcnsire
and  protracted  preparation,  or  "  purification,"  including  everything  that  could  con-
duce to  bodily  comeliness  and  sensuous  gratification,  and  extending  over  an  entire
year  (ver.  12) ;  the  introduction  to  the  royal  presence  after  a  choice  made  by  the
maiden  herself  of  whatever  she  thought  would  adorn  her  person  (vers.  13,  14).  In
all  this  we  have  an  extravagant  and  evil  provision  for  one  man's  satisfaction.  Well
had  Samuel  warned  his  countrymen  (1  Sam.  viii.)  against  the  monarchy  of  those
times  and  lands.  It  meant  the  elevation  of  a  single  individual  to  a  post  of  such
dignity  and  power  that  the  people  were  much  at  his  mercy  and  held  their  life,  pro-
perty, and  honour  at  the  caprice  of  one  erring  and  passionate  mortal.  How  excellent
and  how  pleasing  to  be  led  away  in  our  thought  by  the  suggestion  of  contrast  from
the  heathen  harem  to  the  Christian  home.  This  is  based  on  mutual  spiritual  attach-
ment. It  is  spiritual ;  im  the  love  which  precedes  and  justifies  a  union  of  man  and
wife  is  not  an  ignoble  passion  nursed  by  such  sensuous  attractions  as  the  king's
chamberlain  spent  his  ingenuity  in  perfecting ;  it  is  a  beautiful  combination  of  esteem
and  afEection ;  the  pure  admiration  which  is  felt  for  the  beauty  of  virtue,  for  spiritual
graces,  as  well  as  for  fineness  of  form  and  sweetness  of  face.  It  is  mutual.  No
union  is  sacred,  in  Christian  morality,  if  the  love  of  the  one  is  not  returned  by  the
affection  of  the  other.  And,  therefore,  it  is  lading  ;  not  lingering  for  a  few  weeks
or  months  at  most,  but  extending  through  the  whole  life,  and  becoming  more  real
as  the  years  go  by.  Begun  in  youth,  it  glows  in  prime,  and  shines  with  serene  and  '
steady  light  through  declining  years.  Let  us  mark  here  a  proof  of  the  excellency  oj
our  holy  faith.  One  of  the  very  worst  consequences  of  the  reign  of  sin  in  this  world
is  the  degradation  of  woman.  Meant  to  be  man's  helpmeet  and  companion  as  he
walks  the  path  of  life,  she  became,  under  its  dominion,  the  mere  victim  of  his  ignoble
passion.  But  what  has  the  Christian  faith  done  for  woman,  and  through  her  for
society?  It  has  introduced  such  purity  and  elevation  of  spirit,  that  it  is  painful  even
to  read  a  page  like  this ;  so  that  it  has  become  a  "shame  to  us  even  to  speak"  of  the
things  heathenism  does  without  any  shame  at  all.  What  a  contrast  between  the
Christian  home,  at  this  day,  and  the  home  of  the  Mahommedan  and  the  heathen  I  II
is  the  handiwork  of  Jesus  Christ.

II.  An  instbuctivb  instancb  or  God's  way  of  woeking  (vers.  16,  17).  It  is
true  that  (vers.  6,  7)  Mordecai  was  a  kindly  and  generous  man,  treating  his  uncle's
daughter,  Esther,  as  his  own  child  ;  it  is  true  that  the  "  fair  and  beautiful "  Esther
was  modest,  and  cared  not  to  deck  and  trim  herself  with  ornaments,  that  "she

required  nothing  but  what  Hegai,  the  king's  chamberlain appointed  "  (ver.  15)

But  we  should  not  have  supposed  that  God  would  condescend  to  use  such  a  heathei
custom  as  this  to  place  one  of  his  people  on  the  Persian  throne,  and,  by  such  means
to  provide  for  the  rescue  of  the  Jewish  race.    Yet  he  did.    He  thus  brought  it  about
in  his  providence,  that  one  who  feared  him  and  was  disposed  to  serve  his  clioseii
people  "  obtained  grace  and  favour  in  the  sight"  of  the  king  (ver.  17),  and  had  "  the
royal  crown  set  upon  her  head."    He  who  "  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  ''
can  make  other  passions  of  men  to  serve  him.     We  must  not  be  hasty  in  concluding
that  God  is  not  working  in  some  sphere,  or  by  some  instrument,  because  it  may  seem
to  us  unlikely.     God  not  only  rules,  but  overrules.     And  when  we  can  take  no  part
in  institutions,  or  are  obliged  to  refuse  to  enter  circles,  or  can  have  no  fellowshiji
with  men,  because  to  do  so  would  compromise  our  principles,  we  may  stand  by  and
pray  that  the  overruling  hand  of  Heaven  will  compel  even  those  things,  orthose  men,
to  subserve  his  cause  and  the  welfare  of  the  world.

III.  A  HOPEFUL  FACT  FOB  THE  FUTUBE  OF  THE  ■woELD.  As  heathenism  and
Maliommedanism  perish — and  both  are  "marked  to  fall" — such  a  system  as  that
described  in  this  chapter  becomes  impossible.  In  place  of  it  is  the  purifying  influence
of  the  Christian  home.  What  flowers  and  fruits  of  virtue,  wisdom,  kindness,  dili-
gence, purity,  bloom  and  ripen  there.  The  future  of  the  world  is  in  the  Christian
parent's  hand.  Let  the  fathers  and  the  mothers  of  Christendom  do  their  duty  in  (1)
teaching  the  truth  of  Christ,  and  in  (2)  training  their  sons  and  daughters  in  all
Christian  virtues,  and  then  there  will  go  forth  an  influence  for  good  which  will
permeate  and  regenerate  the  world. — '^


OH.  11.  19—23.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHKB.


M


EXPOSITION.    {  3.


Mobdxoai'b"  dibootsbt  ov  a  plot
XOAINST  Aeasverub'  lifb  (ch.  IL  19 — 23).
Some  time  after  Esther  had  been  made
queen,  there  was  a  second  collection  of  tIt-
gins  at  Susa  (rer.  19),  under  circumstances
which  are  not  related,  and  which  were
probably  of  small  importance,  jit  this  time
(yer.  21)  Mordecai,  still  serving  in  his
humble  office  at  the  palace  gate,  from  which
he  had  not  been  advanced,  since  Esther  had
told  no  one  that  he  was  her  relation  (ver.
20),  happened  to  detect  a  conspiracy  against
the  king's  life,  which  had  been  formed  by
two  of  the  palace  eunuchs,  Bigthan  and
Teresh,  whom  Ahasueros  had  somehow  of-
fended (ver.  21).  Being  still  in  the  habit  of
holding  communication  with  Esther,  Mor-
decai was  able  to  make  her  acquainted  with
the  facts,  of  which  she  then  informed  the
king,  telling  him  how  she  had  obtained  her
knowledge  (ver.  22).  There  was  nothing
surprising  or  suspicious  in  a  eunuch  of  the
palace  having  had  speech  with  the  queen,
especially  when  he  had  intelligence  of  such
importance  to  impart  to  her.  On  inquiry,
the  king  found  that  Mordecai's  information
was  correct ;  the  conspiracy  was  laid  bare,
and  the  conspirators  put  to  death  (ver.  23) —
the  facts  being,  as  was  sure  to  be  the  case,
entered  in  the  court  chroniele,  a  daily  record
of  the  life  of  the  court,  and  of  the  circum-
stances that  befell  the  king.  It  was  to  have
been  expected  that  Mordecai  would  have
been  rewarded  for  his  zeal ;  but  somehow  or
other  it  happened  that  his  services  were
overlooked — ^he  was  neither  promoted  from
his  humble  office,  nor  did  he  receive  any
gift  (ch.  vi  3).  Thb  was  quite  contrary  to
ordinary  •  Persian  practice  ;  but  the  court
generally  may  have  disliked  Mordecai  be-
cause he  was  a  Jew.

Ver.  19.— When  the  virgins  were  gathered
together.  Rather,  "  When  virgins.  There
is  no  article.  The  fact  seems  to  be  mentioned
simply  as  furnishing  a  date,  and  we  must
suppose  both  that  there  was  a  second  gather-
ing, and  that  the  time  when  it  happened  was
generally  known  to  the  Jews  and  Persians.
Then  Mordecai  sat,  &c.  The  three  verses,
19,  20,  21,  hang  together,  and  form  a  single
sentence  :  "  When  virgins  were  gathered  to-
gether a  second  time,   and  Mordecai  was


sitting  in  the  king's  gate— now  Esther  had
not  showed  her  kindred  or  her  people,  as
Mordecai  had  charged  her ;  for  Esther  did
the  command  of  Mordecai  like  as  when  she
was  brought  up  with  him — in  those  days,
while  Mordecai  sat  in  the  king's  gate,  Big-
than and  Teresh,  two  of  the  king's  eunuchs,
being  of  the  number  of  them  which  kept  the
threshold,  were  wroth,"  &o.

Ver.  20. — Esther  had  not  yet  showed,  fee.
This  is  inserted  to  account  for  the  humble
position  still  occupied  by  Mordecai.  In  the
East  a  person's  relations  usually  rise  with
him ;  and  the  reader  would  naturally  ex-
pect that  when  Esther  was  once  queen,
Mordecai  would  have  become  rich  and  great
Esther's  silence  accounts  for  Mordecai's  low
estate  ;  Mordecai's  command  (see  ver.  10)
accounts  for  Esther's  silence.  For  Esther  did
the  commandment  of  MordecaL  The  royal
dignity  did  not  change  Esther's  heart.  She
was  still  the  dutiful  child  she  had  been  so
many  years.  Mordecai  had  forbidden  her  to
tell  her  kindred  ;  he  had  not  removed  hia
prohibition,  so  she  had  kept  silence.

Ver.  21.— In  those  days.  Or,  "  at  that
time"  —.i.  e,  at  the  time  when  the  second
gathering  of  the  virgins  took  place  (see  ver.
19).  Two  of  the  king's  chamberlains.
Rather,  "eunuchs."  Bigthan,  or  Bigthana
(ch.  vi.  2),  is  probably  the  same  name  as  the
Bigtha  of  ch.  i.  10,  and  possibly  the  same
personage.  Teresh  is  not  mentioned  else-
where. Of  those  which  kept  the  door.  Two
of  the  eunuchs  who  guarded  the  entrance  to
the  king's  sleeping  apartment.  This  was
a  position  of  the  highest  possible  trust,
and  gave  conspirators  a  terrible  advantage.
Xerxes  actually  lost  his  life  through  a  con-
spiracy formed  by  Artabanus,  the  captain  of
his  guard,  with  Aspamitras,  a  eunuch  and
chamberlain  (Ctes.,  '  Exc.  Pers.,'  §  29).

Ver.  22. — And  the  thing  was  known  unto
Mordecai.  Josephus  says  that  a  certain
Pharnabazus,  a  slave  of  one  of  the  conspira-
tors, betrayed  them  to  Mordecai  ('  Ant
Jud.,'  xiv.  6,  §  4).  One  of  the  Targums  on
Esther  attributes  his  discovery  of  the  plot  to
his  knowledge  of  languages.  But  it  is  pro-
bable that  these  are  mere  guesses.  And
Esther  certified  the  king  thereof.  The
original  is  simpler,  "And  Esther  told  it
to  the  king."  In  Mordecai's  name.  Mor-
decai's name  thus  came  first  before  the  king.
Esther  mentioned  him  as  her  informant,  but
did  not  say  that  he  was  related  to  her  (comp.
ch.  viii.  1).

Ver.  23. — It  was  fbund  out.  The  sudsb-
quent  history  shows  that  Mordecai's  inform-
ation was  found  to  be  correct,  since  lie  was
ultimately  adjudged  to  have   deserved   the


66


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[oh.  n.  19—23.


Ugheiit  powible  tewud  (eh.  vL  0—10).  The
two  congpiraton  wen  condemned  to  death
and  hanged  on  a  tree,  t.  «.  cmcified  or
impaled,  as  traitors  and  rebels  commonly
were  in  Persia  (see  Herod.,  iii  159  ;  iy.  43 ;
'  Behist  Inscr.,'  coL  ii.  pars.  13,  14 ;  coL
iiL  par.  8).  And  it  was  written  in  the
book  of  the  chronicles.  Historiographers
were  attached  to  the  Persian  court,  and
attended  the  monarch  wherever  he  ,went.
We  find  them  noting  down  facts  for  Xerxes
<tt  Doriscns  (Herod.,  vii  100),  and  sgain  at
Salamis  (■ffnd.  viiL  90).    They  kept  a  record


someUiing  like  the  acta  diuma  of  the  early
Boman  empire  (Tacit,  'Ann.,'  ziii.  31),  and
specially  noted  whatever  concerned  the  king.
Ctesias  pretended  to  have  drawn  his  Persian
history  from  these  "  chronicles  "  (op.  Died.
Sic.,  li  32),  and  Herodotus  seems  to  have
obtained  access  to  some  of  thgm  (see  the
writer's  'Herodotus,'  Introduction,  ch.  ii.
p.  66).  Before  the  king.  /.  e.  "in  the
king's-presence."  This  was  not  always  the
case ;  but  when  the  matter  was  very  im-
portant the  king  exercised  a  anpervision
over  what  was  written.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  20. — Filial  ohedimee.  Esther  was  an  adopted  child.  Her  debt  to  Mordecai
was  very  great,  for  nurture,  care,  training,  and  affection.  And  she  was  not  forgetful
of  her  obligation  ;  she  gladly  repaid  the  solicitude  of  her  cousin  by  her  gratitude,
reverential  regard,  and  filial  obedience.  The  habit  of  obedience  continued  in  after
life.  As  far  as  was  consistent  with  the  higher  relation  of  married  life,  she  main-
tained her  grateful  and  afEectionate  subjection  to  her  kinsman.  If  this  was  right  and
just,  how  evidently  is  it  a  duty  for  children  carefully  to  display  and  exercise  the
virtue  of  filial  obedience.

I.  Thb  habit  of  filial  obedience  should  be  formed  early.  It  is  of  very
little  use  for  a  parent  to  begin  to  exercise  authority,  to  require  obedience,  in  after
life.  If  the  child  has  not  from  its  infancy  been  accustomed  to  obey,  it  is  highly
improbable  that  the  habit  will  be  formed  in  youth.

"  'Tis  education  forms  the  youthful  mind ;
Just  as  the  twig  is  bent,  the  tree's  inclined."

There  !■  reason  to  fear  that  in  our  days  more  children  are  ruined  by  indnlgence  than
by  harshness ;  multitudes  by  the  foolish  alternation  of  the  two  opposite  and  equally
pernicious  modes  of  treatment.  If  early  formed,  the  habit  of  obedience  will  "grow
with  the  child's  growth,  and  strengthen  with  his  strength."

II.  The  demands  upon  filial  ddtt  should  be  reasonable.  There  was  occasion
for  the  admonition,  "  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  ohildrrn  to  wrath."  Capricious  and
arbitrary  requirements  are  destructive  of  all  respect,  anJ  will  only  secure  compliance
whilst  there  is  no  power  to  withhold  it.  Little  children  cannot  always  understand
the  reason  for  parental  injunctions  and  prohibitions.  But  it  is  wise,  as  children  grow
up,  to  show  them  the  justice  and  expediency  of  household  regulations,  &o.  Tyranny
on  the  part  of  the  parent  is  likely  to  awaken  resentment  or  to  foster  deceit  on  the
part  of  the  chill.

III.  Affection  and  gratitude  will  make  obedience  east  and  delightful.
There  may  be  a  stage  in  a  child's  education  when  compulsion  is  necessary  and  proper  ;
but,  generally  speaking,  the  appeal  must  be  that  of  love  to  love.  A  parent's  will  i^
a  child's  law  where  the  parent  is  wise  and  the  child  is  grateful  and  affectionate.

IV.  The  keveeence  and  obedience  of  children  should,  within  limits,  be
CONTINUED  IN  MATURER  LIFE.  A  wife's  obligations  are  primarily  towards  her
husband.  Still  there  is  force  in  the  English  proverb,  "  A  daughter's  a  daughter  all
her  life."  Still  she  will  not  forget  her  father's  house,  her  mother's  love.  God's
blessing  ever  rests  upon  this  beautiful  virtue  of  filial  love  and  obedience.  This  was
expressed  in  the  commandment  with  promise,  "  Honour  thy  father,"  Ac.

Vers.  21 — 23. — A  plot  in  the  palace.  All  arbitrary  governments  are  liable  to  con-
spiracies ;  all  arbitrary,  absolute  monarchs  to  assassination.  Especially  has  this  been
the  case  in  all  ages  with  Oriental  despotisms.  We  know  from  history  that  it  was  so
in  Persia ;  and  in  fact  this  very  Ahasuorus,  if  he  was  the  Xerxes  of  history,  fell  after-
wards a  victim  to  a  foul  conspiracy.     It  was  not  always  a  political  motive  that


CH.  II.  19—23.  THE  BOOK  OF  B8THBB.  41

prompted  such  plots  ;  the  motive  was  oftentimes  personal — ^it  might  be  ambition,  or
covetousness,  or  envy,  or  malice,  or  revenge.

I.  We  have  here  the  record  of  A  conspiracy  hatched.  The  conspirators  were
chamberlains,  ofScers  of  the  royal  household,  probably  under  an  obligation  to  the
king  for  favour  shown.  What  passion  influenced  them,  what  aim  they  sought,  we
do  not  know.  But  their  plot  was  hateful  and  iniquitous,  and  in  any  case  inexcus-
able and  indefensible.  Happy  is  the  nation  which  is  under  constitutional  govermuent,
and  in  which  there  is  no  temptation  to  secret  plots.

II.  We  have  here  the  record  of  A  conspibacy  detected.  It  was  discovered
by  an  alien,  and  a  person  in  a  lowly,  even  obscure,  station.  How  Mordecai
detected  the  plot  we  are  not  told ;  but  he  had  the  opportunity,  through  his
adopted  daughter,  of  communicating  with  the  court,  and  thus  frustrating  the
abominable  designs  of  the  conspirators.  Thus  Esther's  influence  would  naturally
be  increased.

III.  We  have  the  record  of  A  conspiracy  punished.  The  avenging  was  swift  and
stem.  The  punishment  was  probably  cruel — by  crucifixion  or  impalement.  A  quaint
writer  has  said,  "  Traitors,  like  bells,  are  never  well  tuned  till  well  hanged  1 "  No
state  can  tolerate  secret  plots  against  the  life  of  those  in  authority.  Yet  such  plots
have  often  originated  in  the  sense  of  wrong,  in  the  crushing  feeling  of  helplessness,
in  the  frenzy  of  despair.     "  Oppression  makes  wise  men  mad."

IV.  We  have  here  A  conspiracy  recorded.  The  narrative  was  inserted  in  the
chronicles  of  the  kingdom  for  subsequent  reference.  Thus  it  served  as  a  memento
to  the  king,  as  a  memorial  of  Mordecai  and  his  services,  as  a  warning  to  conspirators,
as  an  encouragement  to  loyalty.

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Evil  purposes  are  often  defeated,  and  their  abettors  punished.
"  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out  I  "  2.  Mean  agents  may  aid  in  great  enterprises.
How  often  has  an  obscure  subject  secured  the  safety  of  the  sovereign  or  the  state  I
3.  The  providence  of  God  may  overrule  men's  crimes,  and  make  them  ih«  occasions
nt  great  and  signal  blessings  1

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8

Ver.  20, — WorleUy  policy.  A  superficial  view  might  lead  to  an  unqualified  adndration
of  Esther  and  Mordecai,  the  principal  characters  in  the  scene  before  us.  And  not  with-
out reason,  for  they  exemplify  in  their  conduct  some  of  the  nobler  qualities  of  human
nature.  With  regard  to  Esther,  note — 1,  Thai  she  remembered  in  her  prosp&rity  the
associations  of  the  past.  This  did  credit  both  to  her  head  and  to  her  heart ;  it  evinced
her  sound  sense  as  well  as  her  humble-mindedness.  It  is  pitiable  to  witness  sometimes
the  way  in  which  those  who  have  risen  in  the  world  forget  their  lowly  origin ;  tiiey
look  down  with  contempt  upon  those  who  are  still  in  the  position  which  they  them-
selves once  occupied ;  and  nothing  woimds  their  pride  more  keenly  than  the  slightest
allusion  to  the  home  of  their  childhood.  But  such  a  miserable  display  of  weakness
only  degrades  them  in  the  estimation  of  all  right-minded  men,  Esther  was  very
different  from  this.  Amidst  the  splendours  of  the  royal  palace  she  could  not  forget
her  former  obscure  lot.  And  this  must  have  been  an  ennobling  power  in  her  soul,
elevating  her  above  the  corrupt  influences  of  a  profligate  court.  2.  That  she  showed
gratitude  to  the  man  who  had  befriended  her  in  adversity.  She  had  been  left  a  help-
less orphan  j  and  must  have  been  thrown  upon  the  mercy  of  a  heartless  world,  had  it
not  been  for  the  timely  succour  of  her  generous  kinsman.  But  there  are  natures
upon  whom  such  services  make  no  lasting  impression.  They  are  altogether  absorbed
in  self.  Affluence,  luxury,  ease,  harden  their  hearts,  and  make  them  utterly  insensible
even  to  the  claims  of  gratitude.  But  Mordecai's  kindness  to  Esther  embraced  her
•ntire  being ;  it  pervaded  all  the  motives  which  fashioned  her  life.  Whenever  she
ikesitated  how  to  act,  she  would  put  to  herself  the  question,  "  What  would  Mordecai
advise  ?  "  and  upon  the  answer  would  depend  her  course  of  conduct.  And  this  is  the
highest  style  of  afieotion,  which  issues  in  obedience,  self-remmciation,  submission  to
another's  will.  With  regard  to  Mordecai,  note — 3.  That  he  had  made  the  greatem
taerifice  for  the  sake  <^  another.     He  must  have  loved  Esther  deeply,  tenderly.


68  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [cH.  n.  19—23.

devotedly.  And  no  wonder.  Her  beautiful  form,  and  still  more  beautiful  soul,
could  not  have  developed  themselves  beneath  his  eye  without  stealing  away  his
heart.  But  when  the  grand  prospect  of  her  being  raised  to  the  throne  presented
itself,  he  hesitated  not  to  give  her  up.  So  far  we  are  constrained  to  admire.  But
deeper  reflection  makes  us  pause.  In  this  most  important  juncture  they  seem  to
have  been  too  completely  actuated  by  mere  policy.  That  success  crowned  their
efforts  is  no  excuse  for  their  conduct.  On  the  same  ground  you  might  justify  some
of  the  most  hideous  stratagems  ever  devised  by  depraved  ingenuity.  Never  let
the  dazzling  glare  of  the  prosperity  sometimes  attendant  upon  false  moves  make  us
blind  to  the  beauty  of  eternal  principles.  Nor  can  they  be  excused  on  the  ground
that  they  were  carrying  out  the  designs  of  Providence.  For  in  the  same  manner  you
might  justify  the  conduct  of  Joseph's  brethren  in  selling  their  brother,  and  even  the
conduct  of  the  Jews  in  crucifying  the  Saviour.  What  is  policy  ?  It  is  the  substi-
tution of  the  expedient  for  the  right.  It  is  the  spirit  which  constantly  asks,  What
will  best  promote  our  own  interests  ?  instead  of  asking,  What  will  best  satisfy  the
immutable  claims  of  justice,  truth,  and  honour?    Observe —

I.  That  policy  has  a  worldly  aim.  What  is  worldliness  ?  An  inordinate  love
of  the  present,  the  sensual,  the  temporal,  with  corresponding  neglect  of  the  future,
the  spiritual,  the  eternal.  Any  line  of  conduct  that  is  prompted  by  this  temper  of
the  heart  must  be  accounted  worldly.  Esther  had  set  her  mind  upon  the  crown,  and
Mordecai  supported  her  ambitious  views.  From  a  heathen  standpoint  it  was  a
glorious  prize,  but  to  a  Jew  it  was  a  forbidden  acquisition.  Probably  they  contrived
to  conceal  from  themselves  their  real  aim  by  investing  it  with  fictitious  attributes.
1.  Esther  might  have  desired  to  elevate  the  religious  tone  of  the  court  by  gradually
making  known  the  God  of  Israel.  2.  Mordecai  might  have  hoped  to  serve  his  nation
by  placing  at  the  seat  of  power  one  who  would  be  willing  to  help  them  in  time  of
need.  But  wrong  can  never  be  right.  We  may  glorify  it  with  fine  names,  forgetting
that  a  change  of  name  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  change  of  nature.  Let  us  con-
sider how  policy  afEects  men's  conduct  in  politics,  in  religion,  and  in  private  life.
(1)  In  politics.  Wars  are  sometimes  undertaken,  with  the  professed  aim  of  extending
to  benighted  races  the  blessings  of  civilisation  and  Christianity,  whose  real  object  may
be  to  flatter  national  vanity,  and  satisfy  the  greed  of  rulers.  Thus  base  acts  acquire
a  dignity  from  the  halo  cast  around  them  by  high-sounding  names.  (2)  In  religion.
Men  will  contend  for  the  success  of  a  religious  party,  with  whose  prosperity  their
own  honour  is  bound  up,  under  the  mistaken  notion  that  they  are  fighting  the  battles
of  religion  itself.  Like  the  idol-makers  who  defended  the  faith  of  their  ancestors  by
crying  out,  "  Great  is  the  Diana  of  the  Ephesians,"  while  they  thought  of  nothing  so
much  as  the  gains  of  their  own  craft.  (3)  In  private  life.  Think  of  illegitimate
trades.  They  are  engaged  in  simply  because  they  happen  to  be  lucrative.  A  man
opens  a  gin  palace,  and  finds  that  his  coffers  are  rapidly  filling  with  gold.  To  allay
any  qualms  of  conscience  which  may  occasionally  disturb  his  peace,  he  pictures  to
himself  the  vast  power  for  good  which  an  accumulated  fortune  may  place  at  his
command  ;  but  in  his  heart  of  hearts  he  really  worships  wealth.

II.  Policy  stoops  to  questionable  means.  Granted  that  the  crown  which  Esther
sought  to  secure  was  a  lawful  object  of  an  Israelite's  desire,  how  did  she  endeavour
to  accomplish  her  purpose  ?  1.  By  contracting  an  alliance  with  a  heathen  monarch,
which  the  Jews,  as  God's  chosen  people,  were  expressly  forbidden  to  do.  2.  By
becoming  that  monarch's  concubine  before  she  became-  his  wife.  The  loose  notions
in  reference  to  this  amidst  which  she  had  been  educated  may  explain  her  conduct,
but  cannot  justify  it.  It  may  also  be  urged  that  she  had  no  option  in  the  matter,  that
the  monarch's  will  would  brook  no  opposition,  that  disobedience  might  bring  death.
The  only  reply  is  that  death  is  better  than  dishonour.  3.  By  having  recourse  to
duplicity.  She  never  made  known  her  people,  for  fear  it  might  interfere  with  her
chance  of  promotion.  In  all  this  it  is  evident  that  Esther — and  Mordecai,  her  adviser,
too — had  thought  more  of  what  was  expedient  than  what  was  right.  Note — (1)  Thai
the  conduct  of  good  people,  even  in  the  most  important  transactions,  are  not  always  to
be  imitated.  Not  only  in  small  matters,  but  also  in  great  matters,  are  they  liable  to
err.  Precedent  is  a  poor  standard  to  appeal  to,  for  it  may  mislead  us  when  the  most
momentous  principles  are  at  stake.     (2)  That  true  heroism  consists  in  doing  right,


OH.  n.  19— 2S.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


irrespective  vt  t^  consequences.  This  heroism  has  its  type  in  Daniel  rather  than  in
Esther ;  in  Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  rather  than  in  Mordecai.  If  yoa  want
to  see  the  highest  heroism,  you  need  not  gaze  upon  the  battle-field,  where  men,  through
the  maddening  excitement  of  the  conflict,  defy  death  at  the  cannon's  mouth,  for
there  it  cannot  be  found.  Rather  let  your  wondering  eyes  be  directed  to  the  martyr
dying  at  the  stake,  to  the  pioneer  of  truth  braving  the  scorn  of  the  world,  to  the
patient  worker  for  the  common  good  who  toils  in  obscurity,  and  seelcs  no  higher
reward  than  the  approval  of  his  own  conscience. — R.

Vers.  21 — 23. — Gcmspiracy  andftdelity.  I.  The  iNSEcnBiTY  of  ant  position  that
IS  NOT  WELL  FonNDED.  The  throne  of  a  despot  is  like  a  house  built  on  the  sand,  or
like  a  city  under  which  smoulder  volcanic  fires.  There  is  no  darker  page  in  history
than  that  which  records  the  doings  and  sufferings  of  despotic  rulers.  It  is  in  the
nature  of  an  autocratic  rule,  which  subjects  the  liberty  of  multitudes  to  the  will  of
one  man,  to  breed  discontents  and  plottings.  When  ti'uth  and  justice  are  outraged,
time  only  is  required  to  vindicate  and  avenge  them.  The  first  and  third  Napoleons
may  be  taken  as  illustrations  in  modem  times.  Tlie  present  Czar  of  Russia  is  a  just
and  merciful  man,  but,  occupying  a  false  position,  ruling  a  vast  empire  not  through
free  institutions,  but  by  personal  will,  his  reign  is  troubled  by  the  dark  conspiracies
which  now  create  such  fear  and  horror.  The  government  of  that  country  alone  is
secure  where  law  and  liberty  go  hand  in  hand  together ;  where  reverence  for  the
throne  is  maintained  by  a  strict  regard  for  the  rights  of  the  people,  and  where  the
national  constitution  and  the  national  life  are  based  on  principles  that  lie  deep  in  the
word  of  God.

II.  The  inseoteitt  of  life  generally.  The  king  of  Persia's  life  hung  by  a  very
slender  thread  when  Vie  two  traitors  were  conspiring.  One  blow,  and  all  his  grandeur
would  have  faded  under  the  dark  shadows  of  death.  But  all  life  is  insecure.  Deatlj
has  a  myriad  forms.  None  are  free  from  it.  A  cold,  a  slip  of  the  foot,  a  breath  of
unseen  vapour  may  put  out  the  living  spark,  and  quench  every  earthly  hope.  A
thought  so  solemn  should  lead  all  to  take  earnest  care  that  their  life-building  is  wdl
founded — built  into  that  foundation  of  Christian  truth  and  grace  which  cannot  be
moved.  Christ  in  the  heart  conquers  the  fear  of  death,  and  turns  the  "  last  enemy  "
into  a  friend  (John  xi.  25,  26).

III.  The  virtue  of  fidelity.  We  cannot  tell  how  Mordecai  discovered  the
design  of  the  conspirators.  He  may  have  been  asked  to  join  them,  or  he  may
have  heard  or  seen  enough  to  awaken  suspicion  and  make  him  watchful.  In  any
case,  he  was  faithful  to  his  trust,  he  was  loyal  to  the  king  whom  he  served.  In  all
the  relationships  of  life  there  are  attached  responsibilities  and  duties  to  which  we
are  bound  before  God  and  man  to  be  faithful.  Fidelity  is  due,  for  example,  to  our
sovereign,  our  government,  our  country ;  to  our  parents,  our  masters,  our  associates  ;
to  our  Church,  our  brethren  in  the  faith,  our  God  and  Saviour.  Treachery  is  a  vile
sin  against  God  and  man,  and  a  grievous  enemy  to  the  heart  that  cherishes  it.

IV.  Fidelity  has  a  good  ally  in  wisdom.  It  is  a  delicate  and  dangerous  matter
to  interfere  with  the  dark  plottings  of  unscrupulous  men.  One  needs  to  be  sure  of
his  ground  before  he  charges  others  with  unfaithfulness  of  any  kind.  But  Mordecai
was  as  prudent  as  he  was  loyal ;  a  man  of  experience,  of  resource,  and  of  self-
reliance.  He  first  made  himself  sure  of  the  facts,,  and  then  by  means  of  Esther
secured  that  the  plot  should  be  quietly  divulged,  and  that  the  two  traitors  should  be
seized  before  they  had  time  to  conceal  evidence,  or  concoct  a  defence  which  might
deceive  the  king,  and  cover  with  shame  their  bold  accuser.  Charges  against'  the
virtue  of  men  should  never  be  lightly  made.  A  rash  and  impulsive  fidelity  may
do  more  harm  than  good.  A  wise  head  works  well  with  a  true  heart.  It  is  note-
worthy that  Esther  showed  at  once  her  confidence  in  Mordecai's  prudence,  and  her
desire  to  gain  for  him  the  credit  of  his  fideUty,  in  her  "  certifying  the  king  (of  the
plot)  in  Mordecai's  name."

V.  Fidelity  brings  openings  fob  good  service  in  all  ranks  or  positions.
Mordecai  was  a  humble  man,  yet,  being  faithful  to  present  duty,  a  time  came  when  he
could  do,  and  therefore  did,  important  service.  It  is  wrong  and  foolish  to  despise
any  position,  however  lowly.     A  young  man  may  at  first  occupy  a  post  that  is  not


60  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [ch.  ii.  1»— 23.

encouraging  either  in  its  duties  or  in  its  rewards,  but  persevering  fidelity  will  in  due
time  make  its  mark  and  attract  attention  and  respect ;  and  when  that  occurs  the  way
to  success  lies  open.  So  also  in  the  field  of  Christian  labour.  The  service  of  Christ
is  confined  to  no  station.  Loyalty  to  the  Saviour's  truth  and  name  is  all  that  is
required  to  make  any  man  fruitful  in  good  works.  The  very  lowliest  may  be,  in  his
own  circle  of  influence,  as  a  light  shining  in  the  darkness,  as  a  Ijving  epistle  of
Christ,  known  and  read  of  men.  There  are  endless  ways  of  serving  Christ.  Oppor-
tunities are  never  wanting  to  the  faithful.  God  never  fails  to  use  and  honour  those
who  Uve  in  the  truth  of  his  word.

VI.  The  want  of  pidelitt  is  a  highway  to  disgrace  and  buin.  The  plotters
against  the  king  of  Persia  were  no  doubt  very  secret  and  very  clever;  yet  they  were
found  out  and  doomed  to  death.  Such  crimes  oftener  fail  than  succeed.  It  is  one
of  the  striking  features  of  historical  crime  that  it  has  so  generally  failed,  and  thai
the  projectors  of  it  have  so  uniformly  met  with  just  retribution.  In  almost  everj
criminal  plan  there  is  some  weak  point  or  person ;  some  oversight,  or  over-confidence,
or  miscalculation,  or  unexpected  contingency.  Eighteousness  is  the  real  law  of
God's  universe,  and  when  violated  it  always,  in  some  time  and  way,  exacts  a  just
penalty.  Nor  are  the  issues  of  evil  confined  to  the  present  life.  "  We  must  all
appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."

VII.  Fidelity  has  a  sure  reward.  1.  It  is  always  its  own  reward.  The  con-
sciousness of  having  resisted  and  overcome  evil,  of  having  been  faithful  to  duty  at
all  risks,  is  better  to  the  heart  than  any  gain  of  gold.  2.  Though  not  always  recog-
nised at  once,  it  is  sure  in  time  to  be  duly  seen  and  honoured.  In  the  long  run
even  the  world  seems  to  get  light,  and  to  do  justice,  with  regard  to  noble  acts  which
at  the  time  of  their  performance  were  allowed  to  pass  unheeded.  Mordecai's  loyalty
and  its  result  were  recorded  in  the  king's  chronicle  only  to  be  forgotten.  Yet  a  time
came  when  the  record  met  the  king's  eye,  and  touched  his  heart,  and  brought  a
power  to  the  faithful  Jew  which  enabled  him  to  foil  the  project  of  the  would-be
destroyer  of  his  race.  3.  Man  may  forget,  but  God  remembers.  It  was  in  the  line
of  God's  providence  that  the  fidelity  which  saved  the  king's  life  should  be  brought
into  prominence,  and  receive  its  reward,  at  the  proper  time.  Whether  our  faithful-
ness to  duty  be  recognised  or  overlooked  by  men,  it  should  be  enough  for  us  that
God  knows  it,  and  records  it  in  his  book  of  remembrance — to  be  brought  to  light  in
his  own  great  day.

VIII.  Fidelity  to  God  embraces  and  sanctifies  the  duties  op  every  sphere.
To  be  true  to  God  is  to  be  true  to  men.  Every  sin  against  man  is  a  sin  against  God.
Every  failure  of  duty  to  those  above  or  about  us  in  the  world  is  a  breach  of  fidelity
to  God's  holy  and  gracious  will.  Treachery  on  earth  is  viewed  as  treachery  in
heaven.  A  solemn  fact  I  The  more  fully  we  submit  to  God,  the  more  heartily  we
love  and  follow  Jesus,  the  better  shall  we  be  and  do  as  parents  and  children,  as
masters  and  servants,  as  rulers  and  ruled,  as  friends  and  fellow-workei-s,  and  as
members  of  a  Christian  Church.     Loyalty  to  God  means  a  true  and  holy  life. — D.

Ver.  23. — Convicted  consjnrators.  "  And  when  inquisition  was  made  of  the  matter,
it  was  found  out."  Two  men,  Bigtban  and  Teresh,  had  a  grievance.  The  king's
favouritism  may  have  pained  them,  or  their  own  ambition  galled  them.  Absolute
systems  of  government,  like  that  in  Persia,  generally  foster  conspiracies.  Kings
have  always  been  "  fair  marks  for  traitors."  Queens  also  have  shared  this  danger.
Our  Queen  Elizabeth  said, "  In  trust  I  found  treason ; ''  and,  "  I  marvel  not  so  much  that
I  am,  as  that  I  am  not."  Bigthan  and  Teresh,  owing  to  their  position  as  chamberlains,
had  every  opportunity  of  poisoning  the  king  when  awake,  or  assassinating  him  when
asleep.  They  had  a  plan,  and  were  as  careful  to  keep  it  to  themselves  as  possible ;
but  it  became  known,  and  "inquisition  was  made  of  the  matter,"  &c.

I.  The  most  carbfdlly-concealed  plans  are  liable  to  be  marred  by  un-
THOHGHT-OF  INSTRUMENTALITY.  It  is  right  to  plan  for  success  in  our  lawful  under-
takings. We  should  have  no  plans  but  such  as  those  on  which  we  can  ask  God's
blessing.  To  plot  against  the  welfare  of  others  is  always  dangerous.  Plotters  are
ever  likely  to  "hoist  with  their  own  petard."  Accident  may  mar  our  plottings.  A
word  dropped,  or  a  look  passed,  may  betray.     There  is  generally  some  Mordecai  who


CH.  11.  19—23.]


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


61


carries  the  whisper  to  an  Esther,  and  an  Esther  who  carries  it  to  the  one  most
interested.  Sometimes  God  directly  thwarts  wicked  planning.  Pharaoh  said,  "I
will  pursue,''  &c.,  but  God  "  blew  with  his  wind. "  "  They  sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty
waters."

II.  Unwortht  planninqs  are  often  subject  to  the  keenest  seaechinos.  The
king  made  thorough  investigation  into  the  matter..  He  did  not  condemn  on  mere
hearsay  or  suspicion.  Many,  in  the  anxiety  to  protect  self,  are  seized  with  prejudice
which  hinders  just  deliberation.  A  watch  was  set.  Manners,  companions,  places  of
resort  were  marked.     Inquisition  was  made.

III.  All  wbong-doing  will  sooneb  or  later  be  discovered.  "  The  thing  was
found  out."  Bigthan  and  Teresh  learned  their  folly  when  suffering  impalement,  the
usual  punishment  of  traitors  in  Persia.  They  might  not  have  been  discovered.
Wickedness  is  sometimes  successful  in  this  world,  and  evades  justice.  That  which
may  escape  detection  by  men  cannot  pass  the  eye  of  God.  Ahasuerus  little  knew
what  was  in  the  hearts  of  those  men,  but  God  knew.  Bigthan  and  Teresh  would
have  served  Ahasuerus  as  Ehud  did  Eglon,  or  Joab,  Abner.  Learn — 1.  That  there  will
be  inquiry  into  our  lives,  our  acts  and  motives.  2.  That  none  will  be  exempt  from
the  searching.  3.  That  we  should  take  warnings  given  in  kindness.  Suppose
Ahasuerus  had  paid  no  heed  to  Mordecai's  warning;  he  would  have  lost  crown,
throne,  and  life. — H.

Ver.  23. — -Written,  hut  not  remembered.  "  It  was  written  in  the  book  of  the
chronicles  before  the  king."  The  king  had  been  delivered  from  danger,  but  he
■eems  to  have  overlooked  the  deliverer.  Ahasuerus  had  at  least  one  faithful  subject,
Mordecai.  This  man  had  proved  his  loyalty  by  his  acts,  while  Bigthan  and  Teresh
paid  the  penalty  of  disloyalty  by  being  hung.  Criminals  and  the  righteous  were  alike
spoken  of,  in  the  chronicles  of  the  king.

I.  Man,  bven  when  he  promises  to  remember  benefits,  is  likely  to  forqet.
Ahasuerus  commanded  Mordecai's  act  to  be  recorded.  He  intended  to  reward  him.
Mordecai  doubtless  expected  some  recognition  of  his  services,  but  he  was  for  a  long
time  disappointed.  It  is  a  "  black  blot "  on  the  name  of  Ahasuerus  that  he  forgot  his
indebtedness.

II.  God  never  forgets  man's  good  acts  or  even  kindlt  thoughts.  All  are
written  in  his  book  of  remembrance  (Mai.  iii.  16).  He,  the  King  of  kings,  gives
reward  beyond  our  deserts.  We  should  remember  how  much  we  owe  to  Christ,  who
is  the  good  Mordecai  who  warns  and  saves  us.  We  should  write  it  in  om-  memories
that  we  owe  everything  to  him  for  his  grace  and  forbearance.  Not  until  we  reach
the  other  world,  and  look  over  life's  history,  shall  we  know  how  much  we  owe  to
him.— H.


EXPOSITION.    §  4.


CHAPTER  III.


Mordecai,  by  want  of  bespbot,  of-
fends Ham  AN,  Ahasuerus'  chief  min-
ister. Haman,  in  revenob,  resolves
TO  destroy  the  entire  nation  of  the
Jews  (ch.  iiL  1 — 6).  A  break,  probably  of
gome  years,  separates  ch.  ii  from  eh.  iii.  In
the  interval  a  new  and  important  event  has
occurred — a  new  character  has  made  ap-
pearance upon  the  scene.  Haman,  the  son  of
Hammedatha,  an  Agagite  (whatever  that  may
mean),  has  risen  high  in  the  favour  of  Ahasu-
erus, and  been  assigned  by  him  the  second
place  in  the  kingdom.  It  has  been  granted
him  to  sit  upon  a  throne ;  and  his  throne


has  been  set  above  those  of  all  the  other
"  princes  "  (ver.  1).  He  has  in  fact  become
"grand  vizier,"  or  chief  minister.  In  the
East  men  are  so  servile  that  a  new  favourite
commonly  receives  the  profoundest  homage
and  reverence  from  all  classes,  and  royal
orders  to  bow  down  to  such  an  one  are
superfluous.  But  on  the  occasion  of  Haman's
elevation,  for  some  reason  that  is  not  stated,
a  special  command  to  bow  down  before  him
was  issued  by  Ahasneros  (ver.  2).  All  obeyed
as  a  matter  of  course,  excepting  one  man.
This  was  Mordecai  the  Jew.  Whether  there
was  anything  extreme  and  unusual  in  the
degree  of  honour  required  to  be  paid  to  the
new  favourite,  or  whether  Mordecai  regarded


62


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.


[CH.  111.  1—6.


the  usual  Oriental  prostration  as  unlawful,
wo  cannot  say  for  certain ;  but  at  any  rate
he  would  not  do  as  his  fellows  did,  not  even
when  they  remonstrated  with  him  and  taxed
him  with  disobedience  to  the  royal  order
(ver.  3).  In  the  course  of  their  remon-
strances— ^probably  in  order  to  account  for  his
reluctance — Mordecai  stated  himself  to  be  a
Jew  (ver.  4).  It  would  seem  to  have  been
after  this  that  Haman's  attention  was  first
called  by  the  other  porters  to  Mordecai's
want  of  respect — these  persons  being  desirous
of  knowing  whether  his  excuse  would  be
allowed  and  the  obeisance  in  his  case  dis-
pensed with.  Haman  was  violently  enraged
(ver.  5) ;  but  instead  of  taking  proceedings
against  the  individual,  he  resolved  to  go  to
the  root  of  the  matter,  and,  if  Mordecai
wonld  not  bow  down  to  him  because  he  was
a  Jew,  then  there  should  be  no  more  Jews —
he  would  have  them  exterminated  (ver.  6).
It  did  not  occur  to  him  that  this  would  be  a
matter  of  much  difficulty,  so  confident  was  he
of  his  own  influence  over  Ahasuerus,  and  so
certain  that  he  would  feel  no  insuperable  re-
pugnance to  the  measure.  The  event  justi-
fied his  calculations,  as  appears  from  the
latter  part  of  the  chapter  (vers.  10 — 15).

Ver.  1. — After  these  things.  Probably
some  years  after  —  about  B.c.  476  or  475.
Haman,  the  son  of  Hammedatha.  ' '  Haman  "
is  perhaps  Umanish,  the  Persian  equivalent
of  the  Greek  Eumenes.  "Hammedatha"
has  been  explained  as  "given  by  the  moon''
{Mahadata),  the  initial  h  being  regarded  as
the  Hebrew  article.  But  this  mixture  of
languages  is  not  probable.  The  Agagite.
The  Septuagint  has  Bouyaiof, "  the  Bugaean."
Both  terms  are  equally  inexplicable,  with  our
present  knowledge ;  but  most  probably  the
term  used  was  a  local  one,  marking  the  place
of  Haman's  birth  or  bringing  up.  A  refer-
ence to  descent  from  the  Ainalekite  king  Agag
(Joseph.,  'Ant.  Jud.,'  xi  6,  §  5)  is  scarcely
possible.

Ver.  2. — ^AU  the  king's  servants.  Liter-
ally, "the  king's  slaves" — the  lower  officers
of  the  court,  porters  and  others,  of  about  the
same  rank  as  MordecaL  Bowed  and  refer-
enced Haman.  /.  e.  prostrated  themselves
before  him  in  the  usual  Oriental  fashion.  For
the  king  had  so  commanded.  No  reason  is
assigned  for  this  order,  which  was  certainly
unusual,  since  the  prostration  of  an  inferior
before  a  superior  was  a  general  rule  (Herod.,
L  134).  Perhaps  Haman  had  been  elevated
from  a  very  low  position,  and  the  king
therefore  thought  a  special  order  requisite.


Mordecai  bowed  not.  Greeks  occasionally
refused  to  prostrate  themselves  before  the
Great  King  himself,  saying  that  it  was  not
their  custom  to  worship  men  (Herod.,  vii.
136;  Pint.,  'Vit  Artax.,'  §  22;  Arrian.,
'Exp.  Alex.,'  iv.  10—12,  &c.).  Mordecai
seems  to  have  had  the  same  feeling.  Pros-
tration was,  he  thought,  an  act  of  worship,
and  it  was  not  proper  to  worship  any  one
excepting  God  (see  Rev.  xxii.  9).

Vers.  3,  4. — The  king's  servants,  which
■were  in  the  gate  with  j.'ordecai,  were  the
first  to  observe  his  disrespect,  and  at  once
took  up  the  matter.  Why  were  they  to
bow  down,  and  Mordecai  not  ?  Was  he  any
better  or  any  grander  than  they?  What
right  had  he  to  transgress  the  king's  com-
mandment ?  When  they  urged  him  on  the
point  day  after  day,  Mordecai  seems  at  last
to  have  explained  to  them  what  his  objection
was,  and  to  have  said  that,  as  a  Jew,  he  was
precluded  from  prostrating  himself  before  a
man.  Having  heard  tliis,  they  told  Haman,
being  curious  to  see  whether  Mordecai's
matters  (or,  rather,  "words")  would  stand,
i.  e.  whether  his  excuse  would  be  allowed,  as
was  that  of  the  Spartan  ambassadors  who
declined  to  bow  down  before  Artaxerxes
Longimanus  (Herod. ,  1.  s.  c. ).

Ver.  5. — When  Haman  saw.  Apparently
Mordecai's  disrespect  had  not  been  observed
by  Haman  untu  the  "king's  servants"
called  his  attention  to  it.  Then,  natoraUy
enough,  he  was  greatly  offended,  and  felt
exceedingly  angry  at  what  seemed  to  him  a
gross  impertinence.  Mordecai's  excuse  did
not  pacify  him — ^perhaps  seemed  to  him  to
make  the  matter  worse,  since,  if  allowed,  it
would  justify  all  the  Jews  in  the  empire  in.
withholding  from  him  the  respect  that  he
considered  his  due.

Ver.  6.— He  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands
on  Mordecai  alone.  If  Haman  had  simply
said  to  Ahasuerus,  "  There  is  one  of  your
menials  who  persistently  disobeys  a  royal
edict,  and  at  the  same  time  insults  me,"
Ahasuerus  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  have
told  him  to  put  the  menial  to  death.  But
the  revengeful  temper  of  the  man  was  such
that  this  seemed  to  him  insufficient.  Mor-
decai had  insulted  him  as  a  Jew,  and  the
Jews  should  pay  the  penalty.  Mordecai
should  be  punished  not  only  in  person,  but
in  his  kindred,  if  he  had  any,  and  in  his
nation.  The  nation  itself  was  contumacious
and  troublesome  (ver.  8) ;  it  would  be  well
to  get  rid  of  it.  And  it  would  be  a  grand
thing  to  wipe  out  an  insult  offered  by  an
individual  in  the  blood  of  a  whole  people.
Haman  therefore  sought  to  destroy  all  ths
Jews  that  were  throughout  the  whole  king-
dom of  Ahasuerus.  Massacres  on  a  large
scale — not  unknown  in  the  West,  witness
St.  Bartholomew's — are  of  frequent  occurrence


OH.  III.  1—6.]


THE  BOOK  OP  BSTHEB.


«8


in  the  East,  where  human  life  is  not  held  in
much  regard,  and  the  caprices  of  absolute
monarohs  determine  the  course  of  history.
There  had  been  a  general  massacre  of  the
Magi  upon  the  accession  of  Darius  Hystaspis,


the  father  of  Xerxes  (Herod.,  iiL  79),  and
one  of  Scythians  about  a,  century  before
{ibid.  i.  106).  These  were  examples  which
might  occur  to  Haman.  A  later  one  is  the
Boman  massacre  of  Mithridatea  in  B.O.  88.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  1. — The  wicked  exalted.  The  temporary  favourite  of  Ahasuerus  wag  un-
worthy of  the  position  to  which  he  was  raised,  and  the  power  with  which  he  was
intrusted.  History  has  preserved  the  record  of  no  meaner,  baser  character  than
Haman.  He  was  a  man  servile  and  cruel,  who  used  his  power  for  disgraceful  pur-
poses. His  conduct  towards  all  with  whom  he  was  connected  was  alike  despicable.
His  history  and  fate  may  be  taken  by  the  moralist  as  a  type  of  the  exaltation  and
fall  of  the  wicked.

I.  The  arts  by  which  the  wicked  rise.  The  Dasest  selfishness  takes  the  guise
and  garb  of  loyalty.  Flattery  is  the  surest  road  to  a  monarch's  favour.  Corruption,
unscrupulousness,  desertion  of  friends,  betrayal  of  associates,  slander  of  rivals,  these
are  the  means  by  which  many  have  risen  to  share  the  favour  of  a  king,  to  preside
over  the  movements  of  a  court,  to  control  the  affairs  of  a  nation.  Here  observe  the
too  common  weakness  of  kings  and  those  born  to  greatness.

II.  The  temporary  prosperity  which  the  wicked  enjoy.  Once  in  favour  and  in
power,  the  world  seems  at  their  feet.  They  have  influence  with  the  sovereign ;  they
are  encompassed  with  the  adulation  of  courtiers ;  they  exercise  power,  even  arbitrary
and  unjust,  over  fellow-subjects ;  they  are  lifted  up  with  pride.

III.  The  certainty  of  the  fall  op  the  wicked.  From  liow  great.an  elevation,
and  into  what  an  abyss  of  misery  and  ruin,  did  Haman  fall  I  The  greater  the  height,
the  more  calamitous  and  awful  the  headlong  plunge.  Sin  rages  and  beats  upon  the
shore.  But  above  its  hoarse  roaring  rises  the  voice  of  the  All-wise  and  Almighty
Disposer  of  events — "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  come,  and  no  further,  and  here  shall  thy
proud  waves  be  stayed  I  "

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Be  not  envious  at  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked.  The  Psalmist
seems  to  have  been  tempted  to  this  childish  and  ignoble  failing.  He  saw  the  wicked
in  great  power,  spreading  himself  like  the  green  bay  tree ;  but  when  he  went  into
the  sanctuary  of  God,  then  understood  he  his  end.  2.  Be  not  dismayed  at  the
spectacle  of  power  in  wicked  hands.  It  cannot  be  for  long.  A  righteous  Providence
will  bring  the  devices  of  the  wicked  to  nought.  The  greatest  man  is  not  omnipotent.
"The  Lord  reigneth."  He  bringeth  down  the  lofty  from  their  seat,  and  exalteth
those  of  low  degree  I

Vers.  1 — 6. — Foolish  pride  and  wild  resentment.  The  lesson  of  this  portion  of
the  narrative  is  one  concerning  human  sin.  In  some  places  Scripture  seems  to  depict
the  character  and  the  conduct  of  sinners  in  such  a  way  as  to  impress  the  mind  of
the  reader  with  what  is  called  "  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin."  And  what  more
natural  and  appropriate  than  such  representations  of  human  iniquity  in  a  book  which
brings  to  us  the  remedy  for  the  disease,  and  the  liberation  from  the  bondage,  which
afilict  mankind  ?  In  the  temper  and  conduct  of  Haman  we  recognise  the  fruits  of
man's  sinful  nature.

I.  Beraark  Haman's  sinful  pride.  It  arose  from  his  favour  with  the  king,  and
from  his  position  in  the  state,  and  was  no  doubt  encouraged  by  the  homage  that  was
paid  him  by  the  courtiers  and  the  people.  His  pride  was  hurt  and  mortified  at  the
refusal  of  Mordecai  to  render  him  the  honour  he  was  accustomed  to  receive  from  all
around.  And  the  hurt  was  aggravated  by  the  fact  that  the  servants  of  the  king
observed  the  Jew's  conduct,  and  reported  to  Haman  his  marked  discourtesy  and
insult.  What  made  the  matter  worse  was  the  obscure  position  and  despised  nationality
of  the  single  person  who  did  him  no  reverence.

II.  Remark  Haman's  resentment.  His  pride  was  the  occasion  of  his  anget  ;  his
anger  stirred  up  purposes  of  revenge;  his  revenge  took  a  wild,  inhuman  form.
Mordecai  had  transgressed  the  king's  command,  and  his  conduct  had  been  noticed  by


64  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [oh.  in.  1— «.


the  king's  servants.     And  it  was  this  which  gave  a  colourable  pretext  for  the
favourite's  wrathful  counsels  and  plans  of  destruction.

III.  Remark  the  utter  dispboportion  between  Mobdecai's  offence  and  Haman's
PBorosED  REVENGE.  A  trivial  slight  was  so  laid  to  heart  that  it  aroused  a  ferocious
spirit,  for  the  satisfaction  of  which  no  shedding  of  blood,  no  desolation  of  cities,  could
suffice.  _  The  great  lesson  to  be  learned  from  this  frightful  picture  of  human
depravity  is  the  extent  to  which  sin  will  lead  the  victim.  If  so  hateful  a  vice  as
pride  be  encouraged,  if  so  mean  a  purpose  as  one  of  revenge  be  fostered,  to  what
frightful  crimes  may  the  wretched  sinner  be  led  I  There  is  one  preventive  and  pre
MTvative :  "  Let  that  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus  1 "

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

_  Vers.  1,  2. — Danger  of  quick  success.  I.  A  sudden  advancement.  In  a  short
time  Haman  was  placed  above  all  the  princes.  The  officials  of  the  court  were
commanded  to  give  him  reverence  and  worship.  There  seemed  to  be  nothing  which
the  infatuated  king  was  able  to  refuse  him.  A  quick  rise  to  power,  and  one  that
would  be  envied  by  many  I  In  most  hearts  there  is  a  strong  craving  for  rapid
success.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  sudden  or  easy  success  is  a  benefit.
For  observe — 1.  Prosperity  is  better  borne  and  enjoyed  when  it  is  the  result  of
long  and  steady  efEort.  It  is  a  sweeter  and  more  honourable  possession  when  it
comes  as  the  reward  of  conscientious  toil.  2.  The  selE-denying  labour  which,  as
a  rule,  is  necessary  to  prosperity  is  itself  an  incalculable  benefit.  It  brings  into
healthy  exercise  the  physical  and  mental  endowments.  It  develops  many  manly
qualities.        •

II.  An  inobdinate  ceavino  fob  quick  advancement  has  a  bad  effect  on  th«
HIAET.  Some  who  never  realise  their  desire  continue  to  cherish  it  even  against  hope
until  the  end.  This  is  a  cruel  thirst,  which  dries  up  all  the  springs  of  happiness  and
kindly  good  in  the  soul.  It  is  an  idolatry  which  hardens,  withers,  embitters,  and
which  robs  life  of  all  that  would  make  it  noble  and  good  and  happy.  Haste  not  to
be  rich.  Haste  not  after  any  of  the  world's  prizes.  We  should  strive  to  preserve  a
worthy  independence  of  mind  and  heart  in  connection  with  whatever  end  we  may  be
working  to  achieve.

III.  Sudden  peospebities  are  often  badly  oe  doubtfully  gained.  The  rise  of
Haman  was  not  the  result  of  admirable  personal  qualities,  or  of  important  services
rendered  to  the  state.  From  what  is  recorded  of  him  we  are  entitled  to  infer  that  the
arts  by  which  he  won  the  king's  favour  were  degrading  both  to  himself  and  to  the
king.  An  atmosphere  of  suspicion  gathers  round  all  sudden  and  abnormal  successes.
They  are  not  the  rule  amongst  men  who  follow  legitimate  courses.  It  is  a  terrible
folly  to  stake  our  all  on  anything  the  world  can  give.  Ko  wealth,  or  rank,  or  fame
can  compare  with  the  treasure  of  God's  friendship  and  love  (Isa.  zxxiii.  6  ;  Matt.
vi  19— 21).— D.

Vers.  2 — 5.  —  Contratts.  Haman  was  not  allowed  to  enjoy  his  high  and  ill-
gottep  position  without  trouble.  Almost  at  the  outset  it  brought  him  an  annoyance
which  led  to  tragical  results.  In  connection  with  this  check  to  the  triumph  of  his
course,  notice —

I.  That  a  eeal  and  maeked  contrast  exists  between  thosk  who  "feae  god"
AND  THOSE  WHO  "LOVE  THE  PRAISE  OF  MEN."  The  servants  who  "sat  in  the  king's
gate  "  readily  obeyed  the  command  that  they  should  do  homage  to  the  favourite — all
except  one.  Mordecai  stood  erect,  with  no  fear  or  reverence  in  his  look  or  attitude,
when  Haman  passed  in  and  out  of  the  palace.  It  was  a  sight  worth  seeing,  that  of
this  man,  too  noble  to  bend  to  the  world's  idol,  before  which  all  others  stooped  in
slavish  adulation.  Between  Mordecai  and  his  companions  in  ofiSce  there  was  an
evident  gulf.

II.  That  conduct  which  conteasts  with  theib  own  often  excites  an  inquieino
CTJEioHTY  IN  THE  WORLDLY.  His  fellow-servants  at  once  noticed  Mordecai's  singu-
larity.   They  daily  questioned  and  expostulated  with  him.  but  "  he  hearkened  not


OH.  III.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  65

unto  them."  In  silence  he  listened,  and  still  disobeyed  the  king's  command.  Sineera
inquiry  is  to  be  encouraged,  and  kindly  met ;  but  a  prying  curiosity  into  the  affairs  of
others  is  unmanly,  and  to  be  reprobated.  "  Busy-bodies  "  in  the  Church  were  duly
noted  by  Sts.  Paul  and  Peter  (2  Thess.  iii.  11 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  16).

III.  That  contkasts  of  behaviour  which  seem  to  bebukb  easily  abousk  thb
SPIRIT  OF  MALEVOLENCE.  Overcome  by  the  importunity  of  his  companions,  or  per-
ceiving that  his  continued  silence  was  regarded  by  them  as  an  indication  of  his
being  afraid  to  speak  out,  Mordecai  at  length  declared  that  he  was  a  Jew,  and  gave
that  as  a  reason  why  he  could  not  abase  himself,  as  they  did,  before  Haman.  This
announcement  awakened  in  their  minds  a  deeper  and  more  evil  curiosity.  Their
pride  was  wounded  by  the  Jew's  implied  claim  of  superiority.  How  would  it  go
with  him  if  Haman  were  told  of  his  obstinacy  and  its  reason?  So  they  told  Haman.
It  was  mean  and  wicked  ;  but  they  were  hurt,  and  they  no  doubt  expected  that  the
all-powerful  favourite  would  soon  compel  the  Jew  to  a  behaviour  in  harmony  with
their  own.  Small  minds,  that  bend  before  every  breeze  of  authority  or  fashion,
readily  become  ungenerous,  and  conceive  malice  towards  those  who  are  stronger  than
themselves  in  principle  or  self-respect  (1  Pet.  ii.  1 — 3).

IV.  That  it  takes  little  to  mar  the  enjoyment  of  a  false  greatness.  The
sight  of  Mordecai  standing  upright  amongst  the  prostrate  attendants  of  the  palace
filled  Haman  with  a  fierce  and  vindictive  wrath.  True  greatness  is  magnanimous.
It  is  above  resenting  littl?  affronts,  or  jealously  exacting  the  signs  of  outward
respect.  It  does  not  rest  on  the  humiliation  of  others.  But  Haman's  glory  was
tarnished,  and  his  happiness  soured,  by  the  stubbornness  of  one  man  who  occupied  a
lowly  position  Compared  with  that  of  the  favourite.  Mordecai  was  the  fly  in  the
ointment  of  his  pride.

V.  That  a  false  greatness  contains  within  itself  the  causes  of  trouble  and
DANGER.  It  is  necessarily  suspicious  and  exacting.  Doubt  and  fear  are  ever  spring-
ing up  in  its  path.  It  imagines  affronts  when  none  are  intended,  and  magnifies
small  annoyances  into  hostile  designs.  It  is  thus  often  driven  into  passions  and
crimes  which  endanger  its  existence.  All  evil  ambitions  possess  in  the  heart  of  them
the  seeds  of  their  own  punishment.  God  vindicates  himself  in  the  natural  working
of  human  vanities.

Lessons : — 1.  Hate  every  false  way,  however  alluring.  Beware  of  its  deceitful
promises.  2.  Cultivate  a  generous  spirit.  Show  respect  to  rights  of  others.  Avoid
humiliating  those  who  are  dependent  on  you,  or  below  you  in  social  rank.  8.  Make
God  your  law-giver  and  guide,  and  Jesus  your  example  and  trust — D.

Vers.  4,  5. — A  loyal  disobedience.  Mordecai's  conduct  was  indeed  striking.  All
the  circumstances  added  to  its  impressiveness.  The  influences  that  ruled  him  inust
have  been  powerful.  Why  did  he  refuse  to  give  homage  to  Haman  ?  Why  was  he
willing  to  disobey  the  king's  command  ?

I.  Was  his  disobedience  to  the  royal  will  the  result  of  a  disloyal  spirit  ?
That  could  not  be  ;  for  he  had  recently  given  a  most  signal  proof  of  his  loyalty  in
discovering  the  plot  of  the  conspirators  against  the  king's  life.  He  was  true  to  the
king  even  when  he  disobeyed  him.

II.  Was  his  disobedience  the  result  of  a  virtuous  dislike  of  thb  wicked
favourite  ?  Any  amount  of  aversion  for  so  worthless  a  creature  would  have  been
justified.  But  such  an  antipathy  would  hardly  account  for  his  disregard  of  the
king's  command.  Here  duty  would  have  stepped  in  and  saved  at  once  his  conscience
and  his  self-respect.  It  must  be  remembered  that  he  braved  the  king  as  well  •■
Haman.

III.  Was  his  disobedience  to  the  kino  a  result  and  bxpbession  of  his
OBEDIENCB  TO  THB  KiNQ  OF  KINGS  ?  We  now  get  near  to  the  springs  of  his  singular
conduct.  Nothing  but  this  loyalty  to  the  God  of  Israel  will  account  for  his  calm
and  persistent  daring.  The  unworthy  character  and  the  false  eminence  of  Haman
would  no  doubt  have  their  effect  on  his  mind.  But  it  is  only  by  considering  the
religious  faith  and  principle  of  Mordecai  that  we  can  reach  the  true  motive  that
actuated  him.  And  here  let  us  learn  some  things  from  the  example  of  the  heroic
Jew.    1.  A  wise  concessioa    So  long  as  we  can  work  honourably  witli  tliose  wh«

BBTHBB.  Jf


66  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [ch.  hi.  1—6.

differ  from  ub  in  faith  and  opinion  we  should  gladly  co-operate  with  them.  ReligioiM
differences  should  not  interfere  with  civil  duties  or  national  obligations.  It  is  laid  on
both  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  be  loyal  to  the  throne  or  government  under  which  they
hve.  A  wise  conduct  is  especially  required  in  the  followers  of  God  whose  lot  is  cajt
in  heathen  lands.  While  true  to  their  faith  in  all  things,  they  should  avoid  an  incon-
siderate and  irritating  obtrusiveness.  Their  aim  should  be  to  win  by  a  holy  guile,
t.  e.  by  "  the  meekness  of  wisdom  "  (James  iii.  13),  rather  than  to  repel  by  a  crude  and
unsympathetic  assumption  of  superior  light.  There  are  such  things  as  casting  pearls
before  swine,  and  swine  turning  and  rending  the  foolish  spendthrift.  2.  A  good
confession.  Whenever  a  time  comes  when  silence  as  to  our  faith  would  be  a  sin,  we
should  speak,  and  speak  plainly.  There  should  be  no  hesitation  in  naming  God,  or
in  witnessing  for  Christ,  when  occasion  demands  a  clear  testimony.  When  Mordecai
saw  that  his  silence  was  misinterpreted  he  declared  his  Jewish  origin  and  faith.  He
was  an  Israelite  and  a  worshipper  of  the  Jehovah  of  Israel,  and  as  such  he  could  not
give  worship  to  any  creature  of  God,  even  though  it  should  he  a  Haman.  There  is
a  time  to  be  silent,  and  there  is  a  time  to  speak.  3.  An  enduring  steadfastness.  It
is  often  easier  to  begin  than  to  continue  a  faithful  witnessing  for  God.  Some  who
readily  acknowledge  the  truth  begin  to  waver  and  lose  steadfastness  in  presence  of
diflSculty  or  danger.  They  cannot  endure.  But  Mordecai,  having  once  taken  his
stand  on  religious  principle,  remained  firm  against  all  temptations.  He  reminds  us
of  the  words  of  Luther  in  presence  of  Charles  V.:  "Here  I  stand;  I  cannot  do
otherwise;  God  help  me.  Amen"  (Matt.  xxiv.  13;  James  i.  12).  4.  A  noble
courage.  It  was  not  without  sober  calculation  that  Mordecai  refused  homage  to
Haman.  He  knew  how  much  he  risked.  He  had  "  the  courage  of  his  convictions."
He  was  (1)  willing  to  stand  alone  amongst  his  companions  in  service.  He  could
bear  their  sneers  and  threats.  A  hard  thing  in  any  position  I  He  (2)  faced  the
probable  anger  of  the  king,  to  whom  he  had  proved  himself  loyal.  He  (3)  braved  the
malignant  wrath  of  the  favourite,  from  whom  he  could  expect  no  mercy.  He  (4)  put
in  peril  the  happiness  and  future  guidance  of  his  beloved  Esther.  He  (5)  laid  his
own  life  on  the  altar  of  righteousness.  He  (6)  sacrificed  every  earthly  interest  to
his  allegiance  to  God.  We  think  of  Paul's  heroism  of  faith  (Phil.  iii.  8).  Then  we
think  of  the  words  of  Paul's  Master  (Matt.  xix.  29). — D.

Ver.  4.  —  Profession  and  practice.  The  favourites  of  fortune  are  generally
remarkable  for  their  pride.  Especially  is  this  the  case  with  those  whom  despots
delight  to  honour.  Forgetting  the  worthlessness  of  the  preference  to  which  they
owe  their  promotion — being  sometimes  nothing  more  than  a  passing  whim — ^they
rashly  lay  claim  to  universal  homage.  Haman  is  therefore  the  representative  of  a
numerous  class,  which  is  not  likely  soon  to  become  extinct.  Mordecai  in  this
instance  resolves  upon  a  manly  course.  He  will  not  join  the  multitude  in  feeding
the  'anity  of  an  inflated  upstart.  Neither  threatening  nor  persuasion  is  able  to
over  •  me  his  steadfastness.  What  could  have  been  Mordecai's  reason  for  his
present  conduct?  We  may  well  imagine  that  he  had  more  reasons  than  one,  and
that  the  combined  force  of  several  had  influenced  his  decision.  1.  Haman  pos-
sessed a  despicable  character.  Mordecai  could  not  have  bowed  to  him  without
doing  violence  to  his  own  nature.  He  knew  the  man — ^his  insolent  bearing,  his
mean  spirit,  his  cruel  disposition — and  he  recoiled  from  him  with  unconquerable
loathing.  And  he  was  right.  There  are  men  whom  to  admire  is  a  degradation,  whom
to  serve  involves  the  ruin  of  our  manhood.  They  may  possess  brilliant  parts,  they
may  occupy  high  positions,  they  may  enjoy  popular  favour ;  but  in  a  moral  point  of
view  they  are  the  pests  of  society.  2.  Haman  claimed  Divine  honours.  The  court
ofScials  prostrated  themselves  in  the  dust  at  his  feet,  and  he  regarded  such  obeisance
as  his  due.  How  could  Mordecai,  a  worshipper  of  the  Most  High,  unite  in  such  an
extravagant  demonstration  of  servility,  even  though  the  object  of  it  had  been  the
worthiest  instead  of  the  basest  of  mankind  ?  To  him  it  was  a  matter  of  conscience,
and  he  calmly  awaited  the  consequences.  We  have  here  a  striking  exemplification
of  PBOFESSION  AND  PRACTICK  in  perfect  harmony.  Mordecai  declared  himself  to  be
■  Jew,  and  conducted  himself  as  a  Jew  might  be  expected  to  do.     Note —

I.  Mordecai's  bold  profbssion.    "  For  he  had  told  them  that  he  was  i  Jew."    Thii


cfi.  in.  1—6.]  THE  BOOS  OF  ESTHEk  t1

was  a  brave  thing  to  do ;  for  the  Jews  were  a  conquered  race.  But  it  was  the  right
thing  to  do ;  for  to  deny  his  people  would  have  been  .the  height  of  cowardice.  What
does  profession  involve  at  the  present  day  ?  Is  it  simply  a  tacit  avowal  that  we  are
Christians  ?  Surely  most  people  will  go  that  length.  It  must,  therefore,  imply  some-
thing more  than  that,  if  it  is  to  serve  as  a  distinction  amongst  us.  It  means,  in  fact,
an  open  confession  of  our  attachment  to  Christ,  by  identifying  ourselves,  in  some
way  or  other,  with  his  Church.  To  the  true  Christian  profession  is  a  necessity.  1.
It  is  a  duty  which  he  owes  to  himself.  Secret  disoipleship  may  be  possible  under  very
exceptional  circumstances  ;  but  it  must  be  most  disadvantageous  for  the  development
of  spiritual  power.  A  plant  may  grow  in  the  dark,  but  it  cannot  attain  its  full  pro-
portions, or  put  on  its  robe  of  beauty,  without  the  light  of  day.  The  surest  way  to
overcome  temptation  is  to  declare  your  principles.  By  the  very  act  you  will  add  to-
your  own  strength  and  weaken  the  power  of  the  tempter.  It  was  the  attempt  to
disguise  himself  that  led  Peter  to  his  fall.  2.  It  is  a  duty  which  Ite  owes  to  the  world.
He  has  found  peace  himself,  and  will  he  hide  its  source  from  the  troubled  hearts
among  whom  he  lives?  The  Divine  light  has  been  kindled  within  him,  and  will  h«
place  himself  under  a  bushel  ?  The  misery,  the  darkness,  the  sinfulness  of  the  world
constitute  the  world's  claim  upon  his  services,  nor  can  he  -ender  the  highest  services
except  as  a  professed  servant  of  Christ.  3.  It  is  a  duty  which  he  owes  to  God.  God
requires  it.  No  shame,  or  suffering,  or  loss  should,  therefore,  make  us  hesitate  in
reference  to  this  matter.  Our  Lord  declared  that  whosoever  was  ashamed  of  him  in
his  humiliation  he  would  be  ashamed  to  own  when  he  came  in  his  glory.

II.  MoRDECAl's  CONSISTENT  CONDUCT.  The  king's  Servants  endeavoured  to  persuade
him  to  change  his  attitude,  but  he  would  not.  "  He  hearkened  not  unto  them."  He
was  a  witness-bearer,  a  martyr,  and  possessed  a  martyr's  courage.  Having  professed
himself  to  be  a  Jew,  he  would  make  good  his  profession  by  adhering  to  the  right.
Profession  alone  is  worse  than  worthless.  It  injures  the  professor  himself,  and  the
cause  with  which  he  claims  connection.  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead.''  1.  To  act
is  admittedly  more  difficult  than  to  profess.  Had  Mordecai  merely  professed  himself
a  Jew,  while  he  behaved  like  a  Gentile,  he  would  probably  have  experienced  no  difiS-
oulty.  Haman  would  have  been  satisfied  with  his  homage,  and  his  comrades  would
have  commended  his  prudence.  To  say,  "  Lord,  Lord,"  is  one  thing ;  but  to  do
"  the  will  of  the  Father"  is  another.  'There  is  no  grandeur  in  magnificent  words,
except  when  they  are  backed  up  by  noble  deeds.  Heroism  consists  not  so  much  in
declaring  war  as  in  fighting  the  enemy.  2.  Men,  learn  more  easily  by  example  than
by  precept.  Hence  the  immense  importance  of  consistent  conduct,  when  we  consider
its  influence  upon  others.  If  Christianity  had  never  succeeded  to  produce  Christiana
— if  it  had  set  up  a  high  ideal  which  no  one  ever  attempted  to  approach — it  would
have  remained  to  this  day  a  dead  form ;  and  no  amount  of  learning,  or  reasoning,  or
eloquence  could  have  persuaded  the  world  to  accept  it.  Men  may  argue  against
creeds,  but  the  holy  lives  which  those  creeds  help  to  fashion  are  unassailable. — B.

Ver.  2. — The  jjerfection  of  steadfastness.  "  But  Mordecai  bowed  not,  nor  did  him
reverence."  This  book  of  Esther  abounds  in  revelation  of  human  nature.  It  has
been  much  remarked  upon  as  not  containing  the  name  of  God.  Furthermore,  it
has  nothing  of  strict  doctrine  in  its  technical  and  theological  sense.  Neither  does
it  lay  itself  out  to  exhibit  the  great  spiritual  facts  which  arrest  the  attention  of
the  Bible  reader  in  other  portions  of  it.  It  does  not  refer  with  any  explicitness
to  the  unseen,  to  the  great  future,  to  the  "that  day"  of  the  epistles.  On  the
other  hand,  it  is  wonderful  in  the  various  exposition  it  offers  of  human  nature.
To  history,  indeed,  its  matter  is  confined.  But  that  history  seems  to  pursue  its
object  with  undeviating  exactitude  of  aim.  Through  impartiality  of  selection  and
fidelity  of  description  it  advances,  awarding  its  present  verdicts  to  those  on  the
left  hand,  or  to  those  on  the  right.  We  have  already  considered  the  illustration  it
offers  of  a  noble  refusal  on  the  part  of  a  woman,  on  an  occasion  when  to  refuse
-  was  both  undoubtedly  right  and  undoubtedly  the  cause  of  much  suffering  and  loss.
We  have  here  an  illustration  of  the  noble  refusal  of  a  man,  right  agamst  the
enormous  force  of  the  current  of  the  whole  world  around  him.  Consistently  with
hia  race,  his  education,  his  religion,  it  is  not  merely,  as  in  the  case  just  alluded  to,  in

f2


68  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHEB.  Ian.  in.  1—6.

the  dictates  of  nature,  but  in  the  whispered  monitions  of  religion  as  well,  in  the
principle  of  "enduring  as  seeing  the  invisible,"  that  the  basis  of  the  refusal  in
question  is  found  and  justified.  Notice  this  refusal  in  some  of  the  more  prominent
features  it  presents —

I.  It  is  a  refusal  which  comkb  from  the  deeper  recesses  of  oub  nature.
It  comes  down  from  its  higher  haunts,  from  its  more  sacred  retreats.    To  refuse  at
the  price  of  suffering,  loss,  possibly  death,  because  of  the  blush  that  would  mantle
in  the  cheek  if  you  did  not  refuse,  is  to  obey  worthily  God-given  nature.     All  honour
to  Vashti  that  she  did  so  I    But  to  refuse  at  the  imminent  price  of  martyrdom  for  self,
and  for  the  all  you  hold  dearest  to  the  heart,  and  for  your  people  scattered  over  a  hun-
dred lands,  just  because  of  a  recovered  snatch  of  Sinai's  second  commandment,  is  the
achievement  of  a  much  higher  reach.     Obedience  to  the  dictate  of  what  we  generally
call  nature  is  not  to  be  disparaged.    It  reflects  the  intention  of  the  Creator,  and  "  repeats
his  praise."     But  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,  it  may  be  considered  to  have  something
more  of  instinct  about  it.     Mere  physical  temperament  will  in  part  account  for  it.
But  when  the  obedience  is  attributable  to  the  new-learnt  lessons  of  the  word  of  God,
then,  though  it  is  not  a  nobler  parentage  that  accounts  for  it,  it  owns  to  a  directer
descent  from  the  one  Parent  of  all  good,  and  this  sheds  fresh  lustre  upon  it.     Inno-
cent nature  in  Eden,  the  broken  snatches  of  Divine  communication  to  our  first  parents
in  Eden,  the  patriarchal  gains  in  similar  methods  of  Divine  revelation,  then  the  ten
commandments,  the  prophets,  the  beatitudes,  the  new  commandment,  all  in  develop-
ing order,  challenge  our  lower  life  to  regulate  and  improve  itself  by  higher  principles.
"  Thou  hast  magnified  thy  word,"  said  the  Psalmist,  "  above  all  thy  name "  (Ps.
cxxxviii.  2).     The  word  of  God  unfolds  duty,  opportunity,  responsibility  in  an  ever-
increasing  ratio,  and  on  an  ever -ascending  scale.     And  it  ascertains  the  law  whicli
distinguishes  the  praise  of  the  obedience,  amid  possibly  great  sacrifice,  of  nature,  from
the  obedience  paid,  often  amid  the  greatest  possible  sacrifice,  to  the  inner,  living
Word.     Mordecai  was  a  worthy  successor,  by  some  fifty  years,  of  Daniel  and  his
three  companions  with  their  food  (Dan.  i.  8 — 17)  ;  of  those  same  three  companions
in  the  matter  of  the  golden  image  at  Dura  (Dan.  iii.  8 — 28)  ;  and  again,  in  particular,
of  Daniel  and  his  prayers  (Dan.  vi.  4 — 24).     "  These  all  obtained  their  good  report
through  faith  " — the  faith  that  saw,  heard,  obeyed,  what  was  a  blank  to  mere  nature,
inaudible  and  invisible  to  mere  sense.

II.  It  was  a  refusal  intensified  in  effort  by  anxiety  as  to  what  it  hioht
ENTAIL  UPON  EsTHER.  It  risked  the  premature  betrayal  of  the  nationality  of  Esther
as  well  as  of  Mordecai  himself,  and  thereby  the  spoiling  of  what  it  is  probable
Mordecai  already  had  in  his  mind,  viz.,  that  Esther  might  prove  a  great  benefactor
of  her  people  generally.

III.  It  was  a  refusal  faithfully  adhered  to  when  dangers  grew  thicker.
Mordecai  did  not  yield  and  cringe  to  Haman  when  the  original  inner  reason  of  his
refusing  to  do  so  had  now  become  immensely  added  to  by  Haman's  enormous  revenge.
Outer  policy  might  have  advocated  yielding  at  that  very  moment.  The  dictate  of
that  poUcy  would  have  been  felt  a  temptation,  resisted  by  few  indeed.  Very  painful
thoughts  might  also  have  attacked  the  steadfastness  of  Mordecai,  as  to  what  t'le
recriminations  of  his  people  might  be — that  by  his  one  display  of  feeling  against
Haman  so  many  were  involved  in  a  common  destruction.  They  might  have  said,
"  Why  should  he  endanger  the  welfare  of  his  people  ?  "  All  the  more  would  they
have  said  this  if  at  all  envious  because  of  the  relation  in  which  he  stood  to  the  new-
made  queen,  Esther.  But  "none  of  these  things  moved  him."  He  was  inflexible
at  the  right  time.

IV.  It  was  a  refusal  which  opened  a  period  of  dreadful  suspense.  There
are  many  sacrifices,  great  in  themselves,  but  easier  to  make  because  a  moment  will
make  the  resolution,  another  moment  will  execute  the  resolution,  and  a  third  moment
will  be  quite  sufficient  to  acquaint  one  with  the  result  of  it.  The  discipline  of  sus-
pense, however,  with  many  natures  is  nothing  less  than  torture.  And  now  Mordecai's
refusal  inaugurated  the  strain  of  days,  weeks,  and  months  of  anguished  conflict  of
feeling,  of  strenuous  planning,  and  alternative  purposings,  the  end  of  which  he  could
not  foresee,  but  the  likeliest  end  for  himself  "  hanging  on  a  tree  "  (ch.  ii.  23) ;  toj
his  nation,  destruction.


OH.  III.  1—6.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHES.  69

V.  It  was  a  refusal  which  threw  down  its  roots  deep  into  the  soil  of  trust
AND  FAITH.  Mordecai  descried  one  possible  way  out  of  hia  own  and  his  people's
'  fearful  peril.  It  was  a  narrow,  uncertain,  and  dimly-lighted  track.  It  was  enough.
He  strove  for  it.  He  prayed  for  it.  Faith  and  hope  appropriated  it.  He  will  not
relax  an  effort,  nor  will  he  permit  Esther  to  be  remiss.  This  was  the  best  thing  about
Mordeoai's  refusal,  that  it  was  willing  to  abide  by  the  alternatives,  the  worst  con-
ceivable extremities,  or  God's  own  deliverance.  He  had  trust,  and  hia  trust  was
rewarded.  The  position  then  shows  one  man,  deserted  of  earthly  help,  standing
immovable  in  the  same  place,  in  the  same  posture,  against  a  fierce  current,  midway
in  which  he  stood,  for  conscience'  and  honour's  sake.  And  the  issue  shown  was  this,
that  to  himself  and  to  thousands  upon  thousands  with  him  were  brought  salvation
and  great  honour. — B.

Ver.  6. — Tlie  intempercdeness  of  contempt.  "  And  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands
on  Mordecai  alone."  The  projected  deed  of  Haman,  if  it  had  been  carried  to
completion,  would  not  have  been  entirely  without  precedent  and  parallels  more
or  less  nearly  resembling  it.  Herodotus,  in  the  first  book  of  his  history,  tells  us  of
a  massacre  of  the  Scythians,  actually  carried  into  execution,  and  which  preceded
by  about  a  hundred  years  that  now  proposed  by  Haman.  When  Darius  Hystaspia
ascended  the  throne,  some  forty  years  before  the  present  date,  a  cruel  slaughter
of  the  Magi  was  ordered,  and  that  slaughter  was  for  a  long  period  commemorated
once  a  year.  Five  centuries  onward  bring  us  to  that  most  memorable  date  of  all,
when,  in  one  of  the  most  heartless  of  massacres,  Herod,  king  of  Judaea,  schemed
to  nip  in  the  tender  bud  the  career  of  the  King  of  all  the  world,  and  to  stifle
in  the  thought  the  work  of  the  Saviour  of  all  men  1  And  one  can  scarcely  fail
to  associate  with  the  present  purpose  of  Haman  the  transactions  of  Black  Bar-
tholomew day  (August  24,  J672),  when,  through  the  widespread  and  fair  provinces
of  France,  thousands  upon  thousands  of  Protestants  were  slaughtered  I  Deterrent
though  the  subject  of  analysis  is,  let  .us  consider  that  which  is  offered  us  in  this
passage.

I.  It  IS  AN  UNDISPUTED  CASE  OF  A  MAN  ANGRY.  But  there  is  probably  a  place  for
almost  every  kind,  for  almost  every  degree,  of  anger.  "  A  fool's  wrath  is  presently
known,"  and  a  good  man's  wrath  should  be  presently  known.  Anger  and  sin  often  go
together,  but  by  no  means  always  ;  the  criterion  this — whether  the  anger  is  fed,  has
tlie  poisonous  force  of  rankling  thought,  of  gloomy  brooding  in  it;  whether  the  sun
is  permitted  to  go  down  upon  it,  or  it  bidden  to  go  down  upon  the  down-going  of  the
sun.  If  we  stop  here,  our  analysis  conducts  us  no  way,  and  is  not  sufficient  to  deter-
mine anything  of  value  for  us.

II.  It  is  an  UNDISPUTED  CASE  OF  RESENTMENT.  But  resentment  is  a  natural  and
valuable  principle.  Analogies  come  in  and  conspire  to  speak  in  its  defence  and
praise.  Physically  it  is  sometimes  equivalent  to  a  vital  principle.  But  the  physical
value  of  it  is  the  merest  shadow  of  the  amount  and  value  of  its  spiritual  use.  With
all  the  fullest  force  of  which  it  is  capable  it  may  advantageously  come,  and  welcome
— in  order  to  fling  oif  some  kind  of  assault,  some  sorts  of  arrows,  some  species  of
trmptings.  It  is  the  prime  glory  of  resentment  in  matters  spiritual  to  be  as  like  as
possible  to  the  red-hot  iron  when  the  drop  of  water  falls  upon  it.

III.  It  IS  AN  UNnisruTED  case  of  revenge.  This  passes  us  at  once  over  the
border  fine.  We  are  no  longer  on  safe  ground,  nor  even  on  debateable  ground.  We
are  trespassing  on  the  property  of  One  who  gives  us  here  no  right  of  ownership,  but
who  is  as  liberal  as  lie  is  powerful,  as  wise  as  ho  is  wealthy,  as  considerate  as  he  is
just.  It  is  he  who,  if  he  ever  spoke  with  an  impressive  emphasis  in  his  tone,  has  so
uttered  this  one  sentence :  "  Vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  Punish-
ment, indeed,  is  not  revenge  ;  but  how  often  does  the  most  undisguised  revenge  dare
to  take  the  name  and  try  to  wear  the  look  of  the  most  impartial,  temperate,  judicial
punishment  I  Perhaps  Ilaman  would  scarcely  feel  it  necessary  to  attempt  to  put  this
race  on  it,  or  to  defend  himself  from  an  imputation  to  which  he  would  attach  neither
guilt  nor  shame,  provided  that  danger  was  not  in  the  way.  Yet  it  is  manifest  that
Hanr.an  did  put  a  very  false  face  on  what  was  the  simple  outcome  of  his  own  revenge-
Eul  spirit  when  he  was  seeking  the  requisite  powers  &om  Eang  Ahasuerus  (ch.  iv.  8)


70  tHE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  hi.  1—6.

IV.  It  IS  AN  UNDISPUTED  CASE  OP  THAT  PARTICULAR  KIND  OP  ANNOYANCE   PALLED

AFffKONT.  No  appreciable  harm  had  been  done  to  the  person,  or  to  the  business,  or  to
the  place,  or  to  the  prospects  of  Haraan.  Nor  had  he  been  injured  in  the  least  degree
in  the  person  of  his  wife,  or  of  his  family,  or  of  any  one  dear  to  him.  But  affront
had  been  offered  him,  or  he  supposed  such  was  intended.  That  is,  harm,  though  light
and  fanciful  as  any  butterfly,  had  alighted  upon  the  finery  of  his  dignity,  his  vanity,
his  pride.  The  abrasion  of  the  polish  of  self  was  indeed  so  slight,  so  marvellously
inconspicuous,  that  he  himself  did  not  at  all  know  it  till  those  envious  mischief-
makers,  the  "  king's  servants,"  told  him  (ch.  iii.  4),  in  order,  forsooth,  "  to  see
whether  Mordecai's  account  of  the  reason  "  of  this  infinitesimal  deduction  from  the
incense  due  to  Haman  (to  whom  indeed  he  owed  none  at  all)  would  hold  him
absolved.  An  angry  man,  a  revengeful  man,  a  madman,  a  "  bear  robbed  of  her
whelps  "  (Prov.  xvii.  12),  "the  lion  out  of  the  forest"  (Jer.  v.  6),  are  surely  all
safe  company  to  meet  compared  with  the  vain  man  affronted.  And  this  was  the  lot
of  Mordecai  now.

V.  It  is  an  INDISPUTABLE  CASE  OF  THE  INSATIABLENESS  OF  CERTAIN  COMBINATIONS
OF  SINFUL  ELEMENTS  IN  A  CHARACTER.  There  is  no  bottom  to  pride,  there  is  no
height  to  haughtiness,  there  is  no  measure  to  swelling  vanity,  there  is  no  temperate-
nesa  to  contempt,  there  is  not  "  the  bit  or  rein  "  that  can  be  reckoned  safe  to  hold  in
the  uncertain,  nettled  temper  of  scorn  and  disdain.  Approach  anyone  of  these  with
but  the  appearance  of  affront,  thougn  the  reality  may  be  your  own  principle  and
religion  unfeigned,  and  there  is  no  longer  room  for  either  explanation  or  even  expia-
tion. Revenge  alone  can  meet  the  case.  W^e  have  need  to  fear  the  first  symptoms
of  such  dispositions.  They  belong  to  the  godless  heart.  They  spread  pestilence.
They  make  the  lives  that  own  to  them  resemble  volcanoes,  which  ever  and  anon
throw  up  and  spread  all  around  the  torrents  of  their  destroying  lava.  Those  who
answer  to  this  type  so  mournfully  exhibited  by  Haman,  miserable  and  uncertain  them-
selves, are  they  who  make  misery  all  around.  They  "  think  scorn  "  to  be  patient ;
they  "  think  scorn  "  to  give  to  others  the  liberty  they  demand  for  themselves  ;  they
"think  scorn"  to  ask  or  accept  an  explanation;  they  "think  scorn"  to  credit  any
man's  religion  and  conscience,  except  their  own  travesty  of  the  genuine  and  true ;
they  "  think  scorn  "  to  show  any  kindness,  or  to  make  only  a  little  misery.  The  heart
of  goodness,  of  justice,  of  mercy,  nay,  even  the  heart  of  reason,  is  cankered  from
within  them.  Tliey  must  destroy  all  who  in  the  slightest  degree,  real  or  apprehended,
stand  in  their  light,  if  only  they  can  see  their  way  to  do  it  without  present  injury  to
themselves.  Anil  among  all  the  worst  foes  a  man  can  have,  none  can  exceed  this
disposition,  if  it  dwell  in  his  heart. — B.

Ver.  6. — Bevenge.  I.  The  wkath  of  the  wicked  is  revengeful.  The  feeling  is
natural  that  prompts  to  retaliation.  All  human  history  is  blurred  by  its  activity.  A
Haman  could  not  be  offended  without  seeking  to  do  the  offender  hurt.  In  the
light  of  Christian  truth  it  is  mean  and  contemptible,  but  it  is  natural,  and  therefore
almost  universal.

II.  The  SPIRIT  of  revenge  is  necessarily  unjust.  It  does  not  measure  the  evil
it  contemplates  by  the  injury  that  has  excited  it;  its  fierce  tide  flows  over,  and
drowns  every  thought  of  balanced  equity ;  it  throws  a^vay  the  scales,  and  only
wields  the  sword.

III.  The  spirit  of  revenge  is  necessarily  unmerciful.  Every  feeling  of  pity
ii  quenched  in  its  fire.  Its  savage  aim  is  to  cause  what  suffering  it  can.  The  ex-
termination of  a  whole  people  could  only  satisfy  the  vengeful  lust  of  Haman.

IV.  The  spirit  of  revenge,  when  once  kindled,  easily  finds  fuel  to  feed
it.  While  blind  to  all  considerations  that  should  moderate  or  slay  it,  it  is  sharp-
sighted  with  respect  to  everything  that  is  fitted  to  stimulate  it.  It  was  bad  enough
that  Mordecai  refused  to  do  homage  to  Haman  ;  but  when  the  favourite  learned  the
real  ground  of  his  refusal,  then  a  fiercer  fire  entered  into  his  souL  All  the  anti-
pathies of  race  were  stirred  into  flame.  Henceforth  "  he  thought  scorn  to  lay  hands
on  Mordecai  alone  ; "  Mordecai's  people  shall  suffer  with  himself.

V.  The  spirit  of  revenge  is  encouuged  by  the  possession  of  power.  A
ooDBoioua  inabiUty  to  give  it  exercise  has  often  a  sobering  effect ;  but  the  p  swei  to


)H.  ni.  1—6.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


71


gratify  it  only  increases  its  resolution  in  evil  minds.  Haman's  pride  was  inflated  by
the  favour  of  the  king.  He  could  brook  no  slight.  The  might  of  the  empire  was  in
his  hand,  and  that  might  should  be  exerted  to  its  fullest  extent  to  avenge  the  affront
of  the  audacious  Jew.  His  sense  of  power  quickened  his  desire,  and  enlarged  his
project  of  revenge.

VI.  The  spirit  of  revenge  exhibits  itself  in  all  periods,  and  in  all
GRAPES  OF  SOCIETY.  Appalling  as  Haman's  plan  of  vengeance  was,  it  is  not
Bolitary.  Under  some  of  the  Roman  Caesars  the  Christians  were  treated  as  Haman
intended  to  treat  the  Jews.  Later  on,  and  under  a  so-called  Christian  authority,
whole  communities  were  sacrificed  to  a  vengeance  which  could  not  tolerate  any
sign  of  independent  belief  or  action,  such  as  the  Waldenses,  the  Albigenses,  and
the  Protestants  in  France.  Our  criminal  records  in  the  present  day  also  illustrate
the  lengths  to  which  an  uncontrolled  passion  for  revenge  is  willing  to  go.  Yet  the
widest  field  on  which  this  spirit  produces  suffering  and  misery  is  not  public.  Many
families  live  on,  in  unknown  but  utter  wretchedness,  under  the  stupid  fury  of  revenge-
ful feeling  excited  by  real  or  imaginary  wrongs.  Even  in  circles  wliere  everything
like  passion  is  avoided,  men  and  women  often  cherish  supposed  slights  and  fancied
insults.  Reputations  are  often  very  calmly  destroyed.  The  influence  of  good  people
is  often  neutralised,  if  not  turned  into  evil,  by  the  quiet  maliciousness  of  enemies  in
the  guise  of  friends.  The  spirit  of  revenge  works  in  a  myriad  ways,  and  on  every
existing  field  of  human  life.

VII.  The  spirit  of  revenqb  in  man  is  not  qodlt,  but  demoniacal.  Wherever
seen,  or  however  clothed,  it  is  hateful  to  God,  hateful  to  Christ,  hateful  to  every  true
man.  It  is  our  part  not  to  "  return  evil  for  evil,"  but  to  "  overcome  evil  with  good  "
(Rom.  xii.  21).  The  prerogative  of  judging  and  punishing  belongs  not  to  uf,  but  to
God.  "  Vengeance -is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord"  (Rom.  xii.  19,  20).  The
Christian  law  is  not  "  hate,"  but  "  love  your  enemies  "  (Matt.  v.  44 — 48).  This  law
was  Divinely  illustrated  when  Jesus  on  the  cross  prayed  for  the  forgiveness  of  those
who  had  in  their  mad  fury  of  revenge  inflicted  on  him  such  shame  and  pain:
"  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  (Luke  xxiii.  34). — D.


EXPOSITION.    §6.


Haman  oasts  lots  to  obtain  a  ltjckt
bat  foe   his  enterprise,  and  obtains

A  DAT  IN  THE  MONTH  AdAE,  THE  LAST
MONTH  OF  THE  YEAR  (ch.  iii.  7).  HaTJng
determined  on  a  general  massacre  of  the
Jews  on  a  given  day,  as  the  best  mode  of
ridding  the  empire  of  them,  Haman  thought
it  of  supreme  importance  to  select  for  the
massacre  a  propitious  and  fortunate  day.
Lucky  and  unlucky  days  are  recognised
generally  throughout  the  East ;  and  it  is  a
wide-spread  practice,  when  any  affair  of  con-
sequence is  taken  in  hand,  to  obtain  a
determination  of  the  time  for  commencing
it,  or  carrying  it  into  effect,  by  calling  in
the  arbitrement  of  Chance.  Haman  had
recourse  to  "the  lot,"  and  by  means  of  it
obtained,  as  the  right  day  for  his  purpose,
the  13th  of  Adar,  which  was  more  than  ten
months  distant.  The  long  delay  was  no
doubt  nnpalateable,  but  he  thought  himself
bound  to  submit  to  it,  and  took  his  further
measmes  accordingly.


Ver.  7. — In  the  first  month,  the  month
Nisau.  See  the  comment  on  Neh.  ii.  1.
This  name  was  first  given  to  the  month  by
the  Jews  after  the  return  from  the  captivity.
It  was  the  Babylonian  name  of  the  first
month  of  the  year,  and  superseded  the  old
Jewish  name,  Abib.  The  twelfth  year  oi
.  .  .  Ahasuerus — b.c.  474,  if  Ahasuerus  be
Xerxes.  They  cast  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot.
The  superstitious  use  of  lots  has  always
been  prevalent  in  the  East,  and  continues  to
the  present  day.  Lots  were  drawn,  or  thrown,
in  various  ways :  sometimes  by  means  of  dice,
sometimes  by  slips  of  wood,  or  strips  of  parch-
ment or  paper,  and  also  in  other  manners.
Even  the  Jews  supposed  a  special  Providence
to  preside  over  the  casting  of  lots  (Prov.-xvi
33),  and  thought  that  matters  decided  in  this
way  were  decided  by  God,  Haman  appears
to  have  cast  lots,  first,  as  to  the  day  of  the
month  which  he  should  fix  for  the  massacre,
and  secondly  as  to  the  month  in  which  it
should  take  place.  Apparently  the  lot  fell
out  for  the  thirteenth  day  (ver.  13),  and
for  the  twelfth  month,  the  last  month  in
the  year.  The  word  "  Pur"  is  not  Hebrew  ;
it  is  supposed  to  he  Old  Persian,  and  to  be


72


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[oh.  m.  7—16,


connected  with  Mod.  Pers.  pdreh,  Lat.  pars,
Greek  (ispoj,  /loTpa.  To  the  twelfth  month,
that  is,  the  month  Adar.  Adar  is,  like
Nisan,  a  Babylonian  word,  perhaps  connected
with  edder,  "splendour."  The  month  so
named  corresponded  nearly  with  March,
when  the  sun  begins  to  have  great  power  in
Western  Asia.

$  6.  Haman  persuades  Ahasttertts  to
publish  a  degree  oomuandinq  the  de-
strtrotion  of  all  the  jews  in  his  kino-
dom  on  the  bnsuino  thirteenth  dat  ott
Adar  (ch.  iii.  8  —15).  Having  formed  his  own
resolve,  it  remained  for  Haman  to  bring  his
proposal  before  Ahasuoms  in  such  a  shape
as  should  secure  his  acquiescence  in  it.  For
this  purpose  he  thought  it  best,  first,  to
raise  a  prejudice  against  the  Jews  by  repre-
senting them  as  bad  subjects,  causing  trouble
through  the  peculiarity  of  their  own  laws,
and  still  more  through  their  unwillingness
to  render  obedience  to  the  Persian  laws  (ver.
8).  In  support  of  this  last  statement  he
would  no  doubt,  if  questioned,  have  adduced
the  conduct  of  Mordecai,  who  persisted  in
"transgressing  the  king's  commandment,"
and  gave  as  his  only  reason  that  he  was  a
Jew,  and  therefore  could  not  obey  it  (ver.  4).
As,  however,  he  doubted  the  eflFect  of  this
reasoning  on  his  royal  master,  he  held  in
reserve  an  argument  of  another  kind,  an
•ppeal  to  the  king's  cupidity,  which  con-
■titnted  his  main  reliance.  If  the  king  gave
his  consent  to  the  destruction  of  the  Jewish
nation,  Haman  nndertook  to  pay  into  the
royal  treasuries,  out  of  his  private  means,  a
mm  which  cannot  be  estimated  at  much  less
than  two  millions  and  a  quarter  of  pounds
sterling,  and  which  may  have  amounted  to  a
much  higher  figure  (ver.  9).  The  effecl  of
this  argument  upon  Ahasuerus  was  decisive  ;
he  at  once  took  his  signet-ring  from  his
finger,  and  made  it  over  to  his  minister  (ver.
10),  thus  enabling  him  to  promulgate  any
decree  that  he  pleased,  and  he  openly  de-
clared that  he  gave  ovei  the  Jewish  nation,
their  lives  and  properties,  into  Haman's
hands  (ver.  11).  Haman  "struck  while  the
iron  was  hot."  The  king's  scribes  were  put
in  requisition  —  a  decree  was  composed,
numerous  copies  of  it  made,  the  royal  seal
•fflzed  to  each  (ver.  12),  and  a  copy  de-
spatched forthwith  to  each  governor  of  a
proving  by  the  royal   post,   ordering  the


complete  destruction  of  the  Jews  within  hii
province,  young  and  old,  men,  women,  and
children,  on  the  thirteenth  day  of  the  month
Adar,  and  the  confiscation  of  their  property
(ver.  13).  The  posts  started  off  with  aU
speed,  "being  hastened  by  the  king's  com-
mandment "  (ver.  15) ;  and  the  two  men
who  had  plotted  a  nation's  extermination,  as
if  they  had'  done  a  good  da/s  work,  and
deserved  refreshment,  "  sat  down  to  drink. "
But  the  Persians  generally  were  less  satisfied
with  the  decree  than  their  monarch  and  hia
minister ;  it  surprised  and  startled  them  ;
"the  city  Shushan  was  pei'plexed."

Yer.  8. — There  is  a  certain  people  scattered
abroad  and  dispersed-  It  is  not  always
borne  in  mind  how  large  a  part  of  the  Jewish
nation  remained  in  the  lands  to  which  they
had  been  carried  away  captive,  after  the
permission  had  been  given  to  return.  Jose-
phus  notes  that  the  richer  and  more  influ-
ential of  the  Babylonian  Jews  were  very
little  inclined  to  quit  Babylon  ('Ant.  Jud.,'
yd.  1).  There  was  evidently  a  large  Jewish
colony  at  Susa  {infra,  ch.  ix  12 — 16).  The
Book  of  Tobit  shows  that  Israelites,  scarcely
to  be  distinguished  from  Jews,  were  settled
in  Bhages  and  Ecbatana,  The  present  pas-
sage is  important  as  showing  the  early  wide
dispersion  of  the  Jewish  people.  Their  laws
are  diverse.  A  true  charge,  but  a  weak
argument  for  their  destruction,  more  especi-
ally as  the  Persians  allowed  all  the  conquered
nations  to  retain  their  own  laws  and  usages.
Neither  keep  they  the  king's  laws.  Im-
portant, if  true.  But  it  was  not  true  in  any
broad  and  general  sense.  There  might  be
an  occasional  royal  edict  which  a  Jew  could
not  obey ;  but  the  laws  of  the  Modes  and
Persians  were  in  the  main  righteons  laws,
and  the  Jews  readily  observed  them.  They
were  faithful  and  loyal  subjects  of  the
Achsemenian  monarchs  from  lirst  to  last  —
from  Cyrus  to  Darius  Codomaimus,  For  the
king's  profit.  Bather,  as  in  the  margin,
"meet"  or  "fitting  for  the  king."  To  suffer
them.     Or,  "  to  let  them  alone."

Yer.  9.— If  it  please  the  king,  let  it  h«
written  that  they  may  he  destroyed,  and  I
will  pay,  &a  This  startling  proposition,  to
which  the  king  might  well  have  demurred,
for  even  Xerxes  could  scarcely  have  regardea
such  a  massacre  as  a  light  matter,  is  followed
immediately,  and  before  the  king  has  time  to
reflect,  by  the  tempting  offer  of  such  a  bribe
as  even  a  king  could  not  view  with  indiffer-
ence. Xerxes  had  once,  if  we  may  trust
Herodotus,  declined  to  accept  from  a  subject
a  gift  of  money  equal  to  lujout  four  and  a
half  million  of  pounds  sterling  (Herod,,  vii.
28) ;  but  this  was  early  in  liia  reign,  when


OH.  III.  T—IS.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTJBB.


73


his  treasury  wm  foil,  and  he  had  not  ex-
hausted his  resonrces  by  the  Greek  war.
Now,  in  liis  comparative  poverty,  a  gift  of
from  two  to  tliree  millions  had  attractions
for  him  which  proved  irresistible.  To  the
hands  of  those  that  have  the  charge  of  the
hnsiness.  Not  tiie  business  of  the  slaughter,
but  the  business  of  receiving  money  for  the
king,  i.  e.  the  roy  J  treasurers.  To  bring  it.
I.  e.  "for  them  to  bring  it,"  or  pay  it,
"  into  the  royal  treasuries."  On  the  multi-
plicity of  the  royal  treasuries  see  the  com-
ment on  Ezra  vii  20.

Yer.  10. — The  king  took  his  ring  from
hli  hand.  Sather,  "took  his  signet  from
his  hand."  This  may  have  been  a  ring,  for
signet-rings  were  known  to  the  Persians,  but
is  perhaps  more  likely  to  have  been  a  cylin-
der, like  that  of  Darius,  his  father,  which  is
now  in  the  British  Museum  ('  Ancient
Monarchies,'  vol.  iv.  p.  182).  And  gave  it
onto  Haman.  Thus  giving  him  the  power  of
making  whatsoever  edicts  he  pleased,  since
nothing  was  rec^uisite  to  give  authority  to  an
edict  but  the  impression  of  the  royal  seal
(see  Herod.,  iiL  128).  For  similar  acts  of
confidence  see  Oen.  xlL  42;  Esther  viiL  2.
The  7ews' enemy.     Rather,  "persecutor."

Ver.  11. — ^The  silver  is  given  thee,  the
people  all*  "St^.  "the  silver  which  thou  hast
givvc  ma  is  gtvez  buk  to  thee,"  for  the
10,000  talents  had  not  kmn  given,  but  only
offered.  Rather,  "  the  silru  :f  the  people  is
given  thee,  together  with  the  c«:ple  them-
selves, to  do  with  both  as  it  pleu^  thee."
Confiscation  always  accompanies  executisit  in
the  East,  and  the  goods  of  those  who  are  put
to  death  naturally  escheat  to  the  crown,
which  either  seizes  them  or  makes  a  grant
of  them.  Compare  ch.  viiL  11,  where  the
property  of  those  of  the  Jews'  enemies  who
should  suffer  death  u  granted  to  those  who
should  slay  them.

Ver.  12.— Then  were  the  king's  scribes
oalled.  " Scribes"  (in  the  plural)  are  spoken
of  as  attending  on  Xerxes  throughout  the
Grecian  expedition  (Herod.,  vii  100  ;  viii.
90).  Such  persons  were  always  near  at  hand
in  the  palace,  ready  to  draw  up  edicts.  On
the  thirteenth  day  of  the  first  month.  It
is  conjectured  that  Haman  cast  his  lots  on
the  first  day  of  the  year  (Berthean),  as  an
auspicious  time  for  taking  anything  in  hand,
and  having  obtained  a  thirteenth  day  for  the
massacre,  adopted  the  same  number  as  pro-
bably auspicious  for  the  necessary  appeal  to
the  king.  Having  gained  the  kings  con-
sent, he  sent  at  once  for  the  scribes.  The
king's  lieutenants.  Literally,  "the  king's
»atraps."  The  actual  Persian  word  is  used,
slightly  Hebraised.  And  to  the  governors.
The  word  used  has  been  compared  with
pasha  (Stanley),  and  again  with  beg  or  bey,
but  is  piobably  distinct   from   either.      It


:es  a  provincial  goremor  of  the
second  rank— one  who  would  have  been
called  by  the  Greeks  uiroirarpoffijc.  The
number  of  these  subordinate  officials  was
probably  much  greater  than  that  of  the
satraps.  And  to  the  rulers  of  every  pejple.
I.  e.  the  native  authorities — ^the  head  men
of  the  conquered  peoples,  to  whom  the  Per-
sian system  allowed'  a  considerable  share  of
power.  In  the  name  of  king  Ahasnerns  was
it  written.  All  edicts  were  in  the  king's
name,  even  when  a  subject  had  been  allowed
to  issue  them.  See  the  story  of  Bagseus  in
Herodotus  (iiL  128),  where  the  edicts,  of
which  he  alone  was  the  author,  have  the
form  of  orders  from  the  king.  And  sealed
with  the  king's  ring.  O'  "signet"  (see
note  on  ver.  10).

Ver.  18.— And  the  letters  were  sent  by
posts.  The  Persian  system  of  posts  is  thus
described  by  Xenophon,  who  attributes  its
introduction  to  Cyrus  : — "  Stables  for  horses
are  erected  along  the  various  lines  of  route,
at  such  a  distance  one  from  another  as  a
horse  can  accomplish  in  a  day.  All  the
stables  are  provided  with  a  number  of  horses
and  grooms.  There  is  a  post-master  to  pre-
side over  each,  who  receives  the  despatches
along  with  the  tired  men  and  horses,  and
sends  them  on  by  fresh  horses  and  fresh
riders.  Sometimes  there  is  no  stoppage  in
the  conveyance  even  at  night ;  since  a  night
courier  takes  up  the  work  of  the  day  courier,
and  continues  it.  It  has  been  said  that
these  posts  outstrip  the  flight  of  birds,  which
it  not  altogether  true  ;  but  beyond  a  doubt  it
is  the  most  rapid  of  all  methods  of  convey-
ance by  land  '*  ('  Cyrop.,'  viii  6,  §  17).  To
destroy,  to  kill,  and  to  cause  to  perish.  The
writer  quotes  from  the  edict,  which  appears
to  have  had  as  many  surplus  words  as  a
modem  English  law  paper.  Young  and  old,
little  children  and  women.  "To  take  the
father's  life  and  spare  the  child's"  was
thought  to  be  an  act  of  folly  in  ancient
times.  Wives  and  children  of  criminals  were,
as  a  matter  of  course,  put  to  death  with  them.
This  was  anciently  even  the  Jewish  practice
(Josh.  vii.  24,  25  ;  2  Kings  ix.  26 ;  xiv.  6),
and  was  quite  an  established  usage  in  Persia**
(Herod.,  iiL  119).  The  thirteenth  day.  The
Septuagint  has  "  the  fourteenth  day"  in  its
professed  copy  of  the  decree,  but  confirms  the
Hebrew  text  here  by  making  the  thirteenth
the  actual  day  of  the  struggle  (ch.  ix.  1).
.The  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  are  the  days
now  kept  by  the  Jews ;  but  it  is  suspected
that  an  alteration  has  been  made  in  order
to  assimilate  the  Purim  to  the  passover
feast,  which  began  on  the  14th  of  Nisan.

Ver.  14. — ^The  exact  import  of  this  verse
is  uncertain.  Some  suppose  it  to  be  a  mere
heading  to  a  copy  of  the  decree,  which  was
originally  inserted  in  the  text  between  verses


74


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.


[oh.  m.  7—16.


14  and  16.  In  this  case  the  translation
■hould  be  —  "A  copy  of  the  writing  for
giving  conunandment  to  every  province,  pub-
lished  to  all  peoples,  that  they  should  be
ready  against  that  day. "

Yer.  16.  —  The  posts  went  out,  being
hastened.  Though  there  was  ample  time,
since  the  remotest  part  of  the  empire  could
be  reached  in  a  month,  or  two  at  the  most,
yet  the  posts  were  "hastened,"  Haman  be-
ing impatient,  lest  the  king  should  change
his  mind,  and  decline  to  publish  the  edict
The  king  may  himself  also  have  wished  to
have  the  matter  settled  past  recalL  The
king  sat  down  with  Haman  to  drink.  This
touch  seems  intended  to  mark  their  hardness
of  heart     As  Nero  "  fiddled  while  Borne


was  burning,"  so  these  two,  having  assigned
a  nation  to  destruction,  proceeded  to  enjoy
themselves  at  "a  banquet  of  wine."  But
the  city  of  Susa  was  perplexed.  The  Jews
had  enemies  in  Susa  (ch.  iz,  12 — 15) ;  but
the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  being  Persians,
and  so  Zoroastrians,  would  be  likely  to
sympathise  with  them.  There  might  also  be
a  widespread  feeling  among  persons  of  other
nationalities  that  the  precedent  now  set  was
a  dangerous  one.  Generally  the  people  of
the  capital  approved  and  applauded  what-
ever the  great  king  did.  Now  they  mis-
doubted the  justice,  and  perhaps  even  the
Srudence,  of  what  was  resolved  upon.  Th«
ecree  threw  them  into  perplexify.


H0MILETIC8.

Ver.  8. — A  people  scattered  and  apart.  This  very  remarkable  language  shows  ai
that  the  Jews  have  been  one  and  the  same  people  for  thousands  of  years.  Thia
description  of  the  Jews  is  from  the  lips  of  an  enemy  ;  still,  except  in  the  last  clause,
it  is  ]ust  and  true.  In  their  captivity  in  the  East,  in  their  dispersion,  in  their
present  condition  throughout  Christendom,  the  Jews  are  a  people  by  themselves,
scattered  and  apart.

I.  The  fact  op  Israel's  isolation.  The  descendants  of  Jacob  are  like  no  other
people,  and  wherever  their  lot  is  cast,  they  do  not  intermingle  with  the  population.

1.  They  are  distinguished  by  their  peculiar  physiognomy.  2.  By  their  horaeless-
ness  and  dispersion.  3.  By  the  national  customs  and  observances  practised  among
them.

II.  The  tbeatmbnt  of  which  this  isolation  is  the  occasion.  1.  They  have
been  looked  upon  as  opposed  to  the  interests  and  welfare  of  states.  How  often  have
ministers  of  state  and  prelates  of  the  Church  aroused  the  hatred  of  princes  against
the  Hebrew  race.  "  It  is  not  for  the  king's  profit  to  suffer  them !  "  2.  They  have  con-
sequently met  with  scorn,  oppression,  and  persecution.  What  a  disgraceful  history
is  that  of  the  Jews  scattered  throughout  Christendom  1  That  the  nation  has  survived
such  persecutions  is  a  proof  of  the  inherent  vitality  of  the  race,  and  a  proof  of  the
superintending  providence  of  the  God  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.

III.  The  tkub  explanation  and  purpose  of  this  isolation.  It  is  an  evidence  of
a  special  purpose  of  God.  It  is  a  fulfilment  of  prophecy.  It  is  a  witness  to  the
truth  of  Christianity.     1.  We  should  regard  the  Jewish  people  with  deep  interest.

2.  We  should  use  all  feasible  means  to  bring  the  Jews  to  the  Messiah.  "  He  that
■cattereth  will  gather  them."

Ver.  9. — The  price  of  blood.  Never  was  a  more  nefarious  bargain  proposed  than
•this.  That  Haman  not  only  plotted  to  destroy  the  Jews,  but  even  offered  to  buy
their  lives,  this  is  indeed  a  proof  of  the  cruelty  and  baseness  of  his  nature.

I.  Cruelty  appeals  to  avarice.  Favourites  always  amass  money ;  often  by  the
most  unscrupulous  means.  Tyrants  always  want  money  to  spend  on  their  pleasures
and  their  ostentation.  Haman  offers  to  Ahasuerus  a  large  sum  to  secure  lus  assent
to  the  destruction  of  the  Jews.

II.  A  MEAN  PBIOB  is  offered  FOB  A  NATION'S  DESTBUOTioN.  The  blood  of  one  man
were  purchased  cheaply  at  such  a  price ;  what  shall  we  say  of  the  purchase  of  a
nation  ?

III.  We  are  reminded  of  the  pbick  which  was  paid  to  the  bbtbateb  of  the  Son
OF  MAN,  "  The  price  of  him  that  was  valued  "  was  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  Fitly
was  the  money  employed  to  buy  "  the  field  of  blood."

IV.  Contrast  the  price  of  destruction  with  the  price  of  salvation.  When
Christ  purchased  his  people  he  paid  a  ransom  the  precjousness  of  which  is  npt  to  be


OH.  III.  7—16.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  78

computed  in  terms  of  earthly  treasure.    "  Ye  were  redeemed  not  with  corruptible
things,  as  silver  and  gold,  but  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."

Vers.  10,  11. — Pouier  in  bad  hands.  How  all  the  links  in  the  chain  of  evO  counsel
were  fastened  together  I  The  tyrannical  king  was  willing  enough,  in  order  to  please
a  favourite,  to  decree  the  slaughter  of  a  whole  people  scattered  through  his  dominions.
The  cruel  minister  of  state  was  willing  enough  to  take  the  king's  signet,  and  to  issue
the  decree  of  extermination.  The  scribes  were  willing  enough  to  write  the  missives
of  destruction.  The  lieutenants,  governors,  and  rulers  were  willing  enough  to  receive
and  to  issue  orders  for  the  slaughter  of  the  exiles.  And,  when  the  time  came,  the
soldiers  and  other  officers  of  injustice  would  be  willing  enough  to  "  destroy,  to  kill,
and  to  cause  to  perish,  all  Jews  "  upon  whom  they  could  lay  their  hands.

I.  The  counsellor  op  state  abuses  his  influence.  It  is  a  responsible  thing  to
be  the  adviser  of  a  throne ;  for  such  counsel,  as  may  in  such  circumstances  be  given,
may  mould  a  nation's  character  and  determine  its  destinies.  It  is  prostitution  of
such  power  to  use  it  for  selfish,  far  more  for  malicious,  ends.

II.  The  boverbion  delegates  his  foweb  with  indiffebence.  It  does  not  follow
that  because  bad  counsel  is  given,  it  must  be  followed.  But  this  is  likely  enough  to
be  the  case  when  a  monarch  is  careless,  voluptuous,  capricious,  and  arbitrary.  Such
was  the  character  of  Xerxes.  How  natural  from  his  lips  the  language,  "  The  silver
is  given  to  thee,  the  people  also,  to  do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee.''
Scarcely  less  culpable  was  the  king  than  his  counsellor.

III.  All  meK's  evil  designs  mat  be  fbustrated  by  the  pbovidencb  of  God.  If
the  prime  minister  and  the  despotic  king  of  Persia  could  not,  with  all  their  power,
destroy  the  Jews,  who — what — could  do  so  ?

Practicallessons : — 1.  Rejoice  in  the  blessings  of  constitutional  government.  In
our  country,  happily,  such  a  proceeding  as  this  is  impossible.  2.  Sympathise  with
the  cause  of  liberty,  as  opposed  to  tyranny,  throughout  the  world.  What  vast
populations  are  at  the  present  day  subject  to  the  unjust  authority,  exaQtions,  and
oppressions  of  tyrannical  governors.  May  the  Lord  deliver  them  from  the  yoke  I  3.
Pray  for  the  frustration  of  cruel  and  tyrannical  counsels.  In  many  places  Christians
have  been,  and  are,  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake.  Let  our  prayer  be,  God
deliver  them  from  the  hands  of  those  that  hate  and  oppress  them.

Vers.  12 — 15. — Heartless  counsels  of  destruction.  History  records  many  massacres,
and  the  record  is  among  the  saddest  and  most  sickening  chapters  of  human  annals.
Most  of  these  massacres  have  arisen  from  political  fears  and  jealousies,  or  from
religfious  hatred  and  bigotry.  The  proposed  massacre  of  the  Jews  throughout  the
Persian  empire  took  its  origin  from  personal  pique  and  pride — a  motive  even  more
contemptible  than  the  others.  Happily,  the  proposal  and  purpose  of  Haman  were
defeated.  Still  it  may  be  well  to  regard  the  nefarious  proposal  of  the  king's
favourite  and  counsellor  as  an  illustration  of  the  possible  wickedness  of  the  human
heui

L  The  extent  of  the  contemplated  massacre.  The  Jews  were  scattered  through-
out all  the  provinces  of  the  empire ;  and  to  all  the  provinces  the  letters  com-
manding to  slay  them  were  transmitted  by  the  posts,  hastened  by  the  king's
commandment.

II.  The  universality  of  the  contemplated  massacre.  "  Both  young  and  old,  little
children  and  women,"  were  to  be  slain.

III.  The  SIMULTANEOUSNESS  of  the  contemplated  massacre.  The  bloody  work  was
to  be  done  in  one  day — the  thirteenth  day  of  the  twelfth  month.

IV.  The  QBEED  accompanying  the  massacre.  The  spoil  of  them  was  to  be  taken
for  a  prey.  The  king  had  given  to  Haman  beforehand  the  silver  for  himself.
Admire  the  wisdom  and  mercy  of  God  which  discomfited  these  evil  plans,  and
brought  their  authors  to  confusion.

Ver.  15. — Festivity  within;  perplexity  without.  The  contrast  here  is  striking  in
Itself,  and  all  the  more  so  from  the  brevity  and  simplicity  of  the  language  in  which
it  is  depicted.


78  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  [ch.  iil  7—15.

I.  Remark  the  mirth  and  feasting  within  the  palace.  "  The  king  and  Haman
sat  down  to  drink.''  This  shows  their  indifference  to  liuman  suffering.'  Nero
fiddled,  it  is  said,  while  Borne  was  burning.  Herod  feasted  when  he  had  cast  the
Baptist  into  prison.  Paris  and  Borne  were  mad  with  mirth  when  the  massacre  of  St.
Bartholomew's  day  had  rid  them  of  the  leading  Protestants  of  France.  The  wicked
feast,  undisturbed  by  the  cries  and  lamentations  of  their  victims.  Yet  it  is  possible
that  the  king  and  Haman  feasted  and  drank  to  drown  the  voice  of  conscience.  They
both  knew  the  deed  they  authorised  was  foul ;  it  would  not  bear  thinking  upon.
How  often  have  sinners  striven  to  silence  the  voice  of  the  monitor,  the  accuser
within ;  to  overbear  that  voice  with  the  shout,  the  laugh,  the  song  of  folly  and  of
riot  I

II.  Bemare  the  distress  and  perplexity  which  prevailed  in  the  city  Sh0SHAN.
The  Jews  themselves  were  naturally  enough  distressed  at  the  prospect  before  tliein.
Even  those  who  believed  that  deliverance  would  come  from  some  source  knew  not
where  to  look  for  it.  The  alternative  before  them  seemed  to  be  flight  and  homeless-
ness,  or  massacre.  There  were  many  citizens  who  sympathised  with  the  Jews  in
their  trouble.  "  Susa  was  now  the  capital  of  Persia,  and  the  main  residence  of  the
Persians  of  high  rank.  These,  being  attached  to  the  religion  of  Zoroaster,  would
naturally  sympathise  with  the  Jews,  and  be  disturbed  at  their  threatened  destruc-
tion." All  thoughtful,  prudent  subjects  would  be  perplexed  at  such  conduct  upon
the  part  of  their  ruler.  The  land  may  well  mourn  whose  princes  slay,  instead  of
protecting  and  pasturing,  the  flock.  It  is  better  to  be  perplexed  under  the  infliction
of  wrong  than  to  feast  and  rejoice  over  the  miseries  and  injustice  others  may  endure.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS

Vers.  7 — 15. — Superstition  and  cynicism.  Haman  now  proceeds  to  carry  out  the
terrible  plan  of  revenge  on  which  he  had  resolved.  Some  important  steps  had  to  be
taken  before  he  could  reach  his  end.  These  seem  to  us  strange  and  incongruous.
We  may  learn  from  them —

I.  That  the  freedom  which  "neither  fears  God  nor  regards  man"  may  be
A  slave  to  superstition.  Haman  was  a  fatalist.  He  consulted  Pur,  or  the  lot,  as
to  the  day  which  would  be, favourable  for  his  intended  slaughter.  Though  it  was
only  on  the  twelfth  month  that  a  propitious  day  was  announced,  yet  he  submitted
to  the  long  delay  thus  imposed.  Fear  of  the  fates  curbed  his  impatience,  even  though
it  was  spurred  by  an  intense  wrath.  The  first  Napoleon,  while  willing  to  sacrifice
millions  of  human  lives  at  the  shrine  of  a  reckless  ambition,  was  a  victim,  like
Haman,  to  fatalistic  ideas.  Those  who  throw  aside  the  restraints  of  virtue  and
religion  come  into  other  and  more  oppressive  captivities.

II.  That  snPERSTiTions  fears  mislead  those  who  are  guided  by  them.  The
ten  or  eleven  months  which  Pur  placed  between  the  conceiving  and  executing  of
Haman's  vengeance  were  the  means  of  wrecking  it.  They  gave  time  to  Mordecai
and  Esther  to  counterplot,  and  to  work  the  wicked  favourite's  downfall.  But
Haman  was  so  confident  in  his  power  over  the  king,  and  in  the  pronounced  favour  of
destiny,  that  he  submitted  to  the  delay.  All  false  gods,  all  idols  of  man's  fashioning,
only  get  possession  of  the  soul  to  deceive  and  destroy  it.

III.  That  a  wicked  purpose  is  not  scrupulous  as  to  the  means  it  adopts.
In  illustration  of  this  observe — 1.  Haman's  lying  report  to  the  king  concerning  the
Jews  (ver.  8).  There  was  some  plausibility  in  the  report,  yet  it  was  essentially  a  lie.
It  was  so  framed  as  to  make  the  weak  king  falsely  believe  that  it  was  not  to  his
profit  that  the  Jews  should  exist  in  his  empire.  It  was  true  that  the  Israelites  had
their  own  law,  and  honoured  it ;  but  their  loyalty  to  Moses,  and  the  God  of  Moses,  did
not  prevent  them  from  being  good  citizens  in  the  countries  in  which  their  scattered
tribes  had  found  a  home.  It  is  easy  to  clothe  falsehood  in  the  garb  of  truth.  2.
Haman's  offer  of  a  bribe  to  the  king.  It  was  an  immense  sum,  over  two  millions
sterling  of  our  money.  Whence  was  it  to  be  drawn?  Not  from  Haman's  own
treasures,  but  from  the  devoted  Jews.  They  were  rich,  and  after  being  killed
all  their  wealth  was  granted  to  Haman  to  be  his  own.     In  connection  with  this


CH.  111.  7-15.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  77

proposal  there  was  evidently  no  consciousness  of  offering  insult  on  the  one  side,  or
of  receiving  insult  on  the  other.  Bribery  was  as  common  in  the  East  then  as  it  is
now.  Would  that  we  could  describe  it  as  a  sin  confined  to  the  Bast.  It  enters  so
largely  into  the  commercial  and  political  life  even  of  such  a  country  as  our  own,
that  many  touch  and  are  tainted  by  it  without  suspecting  the  wrong  they  have
received  and  done.  The  sensitiveness  created  by  a  living  fellowship  with  Christ  is
required  to  deliver  us  wholly  from  its  multiform  and  insidious  temptations  (see  Isa.
xxxiii.  15,  16).

IV.  That  thb  thotjohtI/Ess  and  self-indulgent  become  an  easy  pebt  to  the
TEMPTATIONS  OF  THB  WICKED.  The  king  of  Persia  fell  at  once  into  the  trap  of
Haman.  He  accepted  his  report  without  investigation,  and  delivered  over  to  his  will
the  Jews  and  their  possessions.  His  proclamation,  ordering  the  destruction  of  all  the
men,  women,  and  children  belonging  to  the  Jewish  race,  was  soon  on  its  way  to  the
authorities  of  every  province  in  the  empire.

V.  That  thoughtlessness,  ob  a  foolish  confidence,  does  not  relieve  men  of
RESPONSIBILITY  FOE  THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  THEIR  ACTIONS.  There  is,  perhaps,  more
misery  caused  in  the  world  by  want  of  thought  than  by  evil  intention.  We  are
bound  to  consider  the  quality  and  issues  of  our  conduct,  and  to  examine  carefully  the
counsel  of  others  before  committing  ourselves  to  it.  It  will  not  diminish  our  respons-
ibility to  say  that  we  acted  without  thought,  or  from  an  inconsiderate  trust  in
designing  men.  The  royal  seal  appropriated  to  the  king  the  terrible  iniquity  of
Haman.

VI.  That  Bvn.  can  make  merry  in  pessbnce  of  the  misery  it  creates.  Nero,
after  he  had  set  fire  to  Rome,  fiddled  as  he  sat  and  looked  at  the  blaze.  So,  while
Shushan  was  agitated  by  fear,  the  king  and  his  favourite  "  sat  down  to  drink."  The
contrast  here  is  most  striking ;  it  was  evidently  designed  to  impress  the  imagination
and  heart.  We  think  of  the  tearfulness  that  entered  into  every  household  of  the
city ;  and  then  we  turn  to  the  two  revellers,  who,  having  issued  the  terrible  edict,
betook  themselves  to  the  wine-cup,  that  they  might  drown  thought  and  care.
Human  nature  may  become  so  wanton  in  its  allegiance  to  evil  as  to  laugh  at  the
suffering  it  works.

VII.  That  communities  of  people  arb  often  better  than  their  rulers.  The
citizens  of  Shushan  had  sympathy  with  the  innocent  multitudes  whose  blood  was  to
be  so  needlessly  shed.  They  knew  their  peaceful  virtues.  They  were  imited  with
them  in  many  interests.  They  grew  afraid  of  a  licentious  power  which  could  with-
out reason  decree  the  massacre  of  an  unoffending  race.  It  is  rather  in  the  commoic
heart  of  a  people  than  in  the  will  of  selfish  potentates  that  we  look  for  a  recognition
of  what  is  sound  and  good  in  feeling  or  action. — D.

Ver.  8. — The  true  Church  described  hy  untruthful  lips.  Infant  lips  sometimes
iitter,greatest  truths.  Shallowest  brain  sometimes  originates  most  politic  scheming.
Swine  root  out  and  tread  underfoot  pearls  of  unpriced  value.  Bad  men  often
preach  good  doctrine.  Now  "the  Jews'  enemy"  (ver.  10)  volunteers  the  highest
description,  the  most  complimentary  characterisation,  of  the  Jew.  And  this  passage
proffers  for  notice  a  contrast  not  only  full  as  remarkable  in  the  depth  of  it  as
any  of  these,  but  far  more  remarkable  when  its  subject  matter  is  also  taken  into
iiccount.  It  might  be  stated  thus :  A  people's  religion  rightly  described,  wrongly
roNSTRUBD,  by  one  who  was  "none  of  them,"  and  who  had  none  of  it.  The  case
\i  that  of  a  man  bearing  witness  against  a  people  and  their  religion ;  he  is  at  the
same  time  a  willing  and  an  unwilling  witness ;  his  words  are  true ;  the  meaning  he
wishes  to  be  drawn  out  of  them  is  untrue.  His  indictment  is  verbally  correct;
Hie  charge  he  launches  out  by  means  of  it  has  no  foundation  of  fact.  His  descrip-
tion is  good  for  what  it  says,  bad  for  what  it  means.  And  by  chance  it  happeni
to  be  so  good  for  what  it  says  that  it  tempts  the  thoughtful  reader  to  pause,  to
ask  whether  he  cannot  learn  a  lesson  of  value  from  it.  Haman  dares  a  description
«f  the  nominal  people  of  God  ;  is  he  not  in  truth  unconsciously  throwing  off  a  telling
description  of  the  real  people  of  God,  of  God's  real  Church  in  the  world?  Tor
this  plain,  brief  description  of  the  people  to  whom  Mordeoai  belonged,  which
Haman  now  offers  to  the  credulity  of  Ahasuerus,  happens  to  seize  three  leading


78  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [cH.  in  7—15.

facts  distinctive  of  the  Church  of  God.  Nor  is  it  altogether  to  be  assigned  to  the
reahn  of  chance.  The  fact  was  that,  shaded  though  their  race  was  now,  dimmed
though  their  glorious  history,  the  people  of  Mordecai  were  the  separate  people
of  God,  and  that  Hainan  had  noticed  and  scrutinised  their  essential  peculiarities.
These  peculiarities,  false  as  is  the  gloss  he  puts  uppn  them,  he  has  in  some  degree
correctly  caught.  These  are  the  shadows  of  answering  realities  in  the  economy  of
the  Church,  the  kingdom  of  God.     They  remind  us  of —

I.  The  foothold  the  kingdom  of  God  has  in  the  world.  For  whatever  may  be
its  exact  position  at  any  given  hour  of  the  world's  clock — 1,  Its  genius  is  towards
vihwuity.  "  There  is  a  certain  people  ....  in  all  the  provinces  of  thy  kingdom."
2.  Its  genius  is  towards  being  "  scattered  abroad,"  "  dispersed,"  intermingled  "among
the  people."  Once  for  a  short  time,  and  for  the  special  need  of  preparatory  educa-
tion, it  is  true  that  God's  elect  people  were  locally  as  well  as  morally  separate  from
others,  i.  e.  when  they  sojourned  in  the  wilderness.  But  this  was  only  a  phase,  and
a  transient  one,  of  their  national  existence.  Again,  for  a  longer  time,  and  with  fonder
prospect,  they  dwelt  in  comparative  seclusion  in  their  own  land.  But  this  also  was
quite  as  transient  a  phase  of  their  national  life,  taking  into  consideration  the  settle-
ment there.  What  a  business  it  was  I  And  the  true  place  of  the  people  of  God  is'not
merely  to  find  a  settlement  and  found  a  colony  everywhere,  but  to  mix  among  men,
and  to  seek  health  of  every  sort  in  work  and  fidelity,  rather  than  in  retirement
and  the  infolding  of  self.  And  this  actual  contact  with  all  the  varieties  of  human
character,  position,  life,  is  in  order  to  two  ends :  first,  for  the  proof  and  the  growth  of
individual  goodness  ;  secondly,  for  the  gradual  leavening  with  a  little  leaven  of  the
whole  lump.  3.  Its  genius  is  towards  working  its  way  among  men,  day  and  night,
and  growing  into  their  afEectiou  and  confidence,  rather  than  summoning  them  to
capitulate  either  to  fear  or  to  admiration.

II.  The  outside  appeal  which  the  subjects  of  the  kingdom  of  God  eveb  claim
AND  EVEB  HOLD  IN  RESERVE.  Their  Special  laws  are,  and  are  to  be,  "  diverse  from  all
people  "  who  are  not  of  themselves.  And  when  these  dash  with  any  other,  they  are
not  to  "  keep  the  king's  laws,"  but  to  keep  their  own  distinguishing  and  esoteric  laws
(Acts  iv.  19  ;  v.  29).  To  know  well,  to  do  well,  these  "  diverse  laws  "  is  the  sus-
tained aspiration  of  the  Church  of  God.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  unity  in  variety,
and  there  is,  and  is  to  be,  on  the  part  of  the  Church  of  God,  the  close  vmion  of  all  its
own  members,  by  one  common  fellowship,  by  obedience  to  one  common  code  of  laws,
by  acknowledgment  of  one  standard  Bible  authority,  amid  all  their  intermixture,  in
every  conceivable  relationship,  with  all  the  rest  of  the  world  and  "  the  kingdoms  of
the  world."  The  genuine,  hearty,  living  obedience  of,  a  thousand,  of  a  hundred
persons  to  "  laws  diverse  from  all  people  "  is  an  enormously  strong  link  of  connection
among  themselves,  and  an  enormously  significant  testimony  to  the  outside  world  of
something  special  at  work.  If  we  as  Christian  people  rose  to  this  conception,  to
the  eager  veneration  of  it,  to  the  hearty  practice  of  it,  what  a  witness  ours  would
be  I  Meantime  Haman's  allegation  against  the  "  certain  people  scattered  abroad  " —
that  while  their  own  laws  were  "  diverse  from  all  people,"  they  did  "  not  keep  the
king's  laws  " — was  untrue.  Mordecai  had  indeed  withheld  obedience  to  the  law
which  "the  king  had  commanded"  (ver.  2),  that  "  all  the  king's  servants  in  the  king's
gate  should  bow  and  reverence  Haman,"  and  his  non-obedience  was  no  doubt  covered,
by  his  fealty  to  the  "  diverse  laws ; "  but  this  was  by  no  means  enough  to  cover  a
charge  against  all  the  Jews,  or  even  against  Mordecai  in  his  general  conduct  and
life.  The  kingdom  of  God  then  does  glory  to  follow  the  lead  and  command  of
"  laws  diverse  from  all  people,"  to  claim  the  ultimate  appeal  as  lying  always  to  these ;
and  in  any  conceivable  case  of  option  to  decide  in  one  moment  for  obedience  to
God  rather  than  to  men.

III.  The  foreseen  debtiht  of  the  Church  of  God.  Haman's  apprehension  was
perhaps  jiot  very  genuine,  and  any  way  was  premature/but  his  instinct  in  the  real
matter  at  issue  was  only  too  unerring  and  correct.  The  Church  of  God — "that
certain  people  scattered  abroad  among  the  people,"  with  their  diverse  laws,  and  their
first  heed  given  to  them, — ^beyond  a  doubt  has  its  eye  on  all  other  kingdoms,  is  mat
what  those  other  kingdoms  would  now  think  "  for  their  profit,"  is  destined  to  absorb
them,  gives  evidence  of  that  destiny  as  a  very  intention  in  those  same  manifestations


OH.  III.  t— 16.]  Tkk  Book  OF  E^TilEB.  '^9

of  its  genius,  and  in  its  appeal  to  the  unseen,  and  in  its  first  obedience  thereto.  Oh
for  the  time  when  the  chorus  shall  indeed  open,  "  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  are
become  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ,  and  he  shall  reign  for  ever  and
ever."— B.

Ver.  7. — Consulting  omeni.  "They  cast  Pur,  that  is,  the  lot,  before  Haman  from
day  to  day."  "Pur  is  an  old  P^rsia^j  word  said  to  signify  "part"  or  "lot."
Haman  resorted  to  the  practice  of  casting  a  lot  to  find  out  what  he  believed  would
be  a  lucky  day  for  his  design.  He  had  a  blind  faith  in  the  imseen,  and  in  the  over-
ruling of  supernatural  powers.  He  inquired  of  his  idols,  and  acted  according  to
received  superstitions.  His  object  was  an  evil  one,  but  he  supposed  that  his  god
would  be  on  his  side.

I.  Wb  must  learn  to  submit  to  the  overbcling  of  Pbovidence.  Haman  was
consistent  with  his  superstition.  We  are  ofttimes  inconsistent  in  our  acts.  We
profess  to  believe  that  God  will  overrule  all  for  the  best,  and  then  we  become  doubtful
and  fretful  because  things  turn  not  out  as  we  expected.

II.  Wb  must  imitate  the  persistent  waiting  of  Haman.  He  must  have  found
it  wearying  work  to  inquire  so  frequently,  casting  lots  for  one  day  after  another,
and  having  no  favourable  reply.  The  lot  was  cast  for  all  the  days  of  eleven
months  ere  he  had  a  period  fixed  which  promised  to  be  fortunate  for  him.  He  that
helieveth  shall  not  make  haste.

III.  We  should  seek  not  lucky  periods,  but  fitting  opportunities  of  service.
There  are  many  foolish  ideas  as  to  periods,  as  those  among  sailors  about  Friday,  and
s  II  iiig  on  that  day.

IV.  That  WHICH  appears  most  promising  fob  the  plotter  mat  be  the  worst.
The  delay  had  given  Mordecai  and  Esther  time  to  act.  God's  hand  may  have  been
in  this.  "  The  lot  was  cast  into  the  lap,  but  the  whole  disposal  was  of  the  Lord  "
(Prov.  xvi.  33).  Haman  was  misled  by  his  inquiries,  but  God's  people  saved  by
Haman's  delay  through  his  superstition.  Providence  never  misleads  men ;  it  leads
to  the  best  issues. — H.

Ver.  H. — A  greedy  grand  vizier.  "The  silver  is  given  to  thee,  the  people  also,  to
do  with  them  as  it  seemeth  good  to  thee."  One  man  alone  was  instrumental  in
placing  the  Jews  in  danger  of  complete  extermination.  This  happened  during  the
period  of  their  subjection.  To  supply  the  record  of  their  wondrous  deliverance
the  Book  of  Esther,  primarily,  was  written.  The  man  who  wrought  this  danger
was  Haman,  the  grand  vizier  to  the  king  of  Persia.  He  was  second  only  to  the
king.  Through  flattering  he  had  attained  the  coveted  position.  He  was  an  astute
politician,  and  apparently  as  unscrupulous  as  he  was  cunning.  The  king  heaped
riches  upon  his  favourite.  He  would  have  Haman's  means  adequate  to  his  position.
Many  houses  and  much  land  confiscated,  often  on  the  slightest  excuse,  would  be
handed  over  to  him.  The  post  of  grand  vizier  would  afford  ample  opportunities
of  self-enrichment.  We  read  of  the  conspiracy  of  Bigthan  and  Teresh  against
the  king,_  and  of  its  discovery.  To  whom  would  fall  the  large  possessions  of  these
hitherto  influential  men  ?  What  more  probable  than  that  the  next  favourite  should
receive  a  great  share  of  their  forfeited  property  ?

I. .  It  is  to  the  material  rewards  of  office  that  such  mih  as  Haman  tdbn  an
EAGER  ETE.  He  Well  understood  the  ways  of  court,  so  as  to  secure  the  tangible  results
of  favouritism.  Conceptions  of  higher  honour  expand  in  proportion  to  elevation.
A  thought  enters  his  mind  to  which  if  he  gave  utterance  his  immediate  deposition
and  death  would  ensue.  This  thought  will  leak  out  by  and  by.  It  only  needs  a
fitting  opportunity.  Nay,  it  will  seize  and  make  an  opportunity  out  of  the  flimsiest
pretext.  Meanwhile  he  is  as  contented  as  an  ambitious  man  ever  can  be.  Under  an
outward  calm  he  is  hiding  a  flame  of  impatient  expectancy.  See  him  going  forth
from  Shushan  the  palace.  The  gates  are  scarcely  high  enough  for  the  proud-hearted
man.  Mark  that  smile  on  his  countenance.  Haman  is  "exceedingly  glad  of  heart."
Some  further  honour  has  been  put  upon  him,  and  he  goes  to  his  home  to  reveal  it
to  his  friends.  Why,  may  not  a  man  of  his  calibre  be  proud  ?  Can  his  honour
«ver  be  eclipsed?    Can  his  glory  ever  be  overshadowed?    Can  his  name,  handed


80  THE  BOOK  OF  ESniKK.  [CH.  in.  7—15.

down  by  his  many  children,  ever  die  ?  Who  can  siipplant  him  in  the  king's
favour,  seeing  that  he  knowB  so  well  the  arts  of  courtiers,  and  exercises  his  ofGce
apparently  only  with  respect  to  the  pleasure  of  the  king  ?  Do  not  all  the  rest  of
the  courtiers  and  place-seekers  look  to  him  for  advancement  ?  Is  not  his  favour,  in
turn,  the  sun  that  " gilds  the  noble  troops  waiting  upon  his  smile "  ?  "If  ever  man
may  flatter  himself  in  the  greatness  and  security  of  his  glory,"  thinks  Haman,
"  surely  I  may  do  so."  Ah,  Haman  I  thy  pride,  is  dangerous ;  it  is  like  a  high-heeled
shoe,  fitting  thee  only  for  a  fall.  Take  care,  the  least  stone  may  cause  thee  to
stumble.  Be  not  over-sure  of  thy  position.  Pitfalls  are  around.  Ambition  and
pride  are  like  heavy,  widely-spread  canvas  on  a  sliip,  and  need  much  ballast.  Qreat
is  thy  risk.  Thou  art  like  one  standing  on  the  narrow  apex  of  a  mountain.  One
false  step  will  set  thee  rolling  to  the  very  abyss.

II.  WOHLDLT  POSSESSIONS  OE  POSITIONS  CAN  NEVER  GIVE  FULL  SATISFACTION.     If  they

xould,  the  result  would  have  been  injurious  to  man's  moral  nature.  No  thought  of
higher  things  entering  man's  mind,  he  would  soon  be  degraded  to  the  level  of  the
brute  creation.  True  pleasure  arises  from  the  attainment  of  some  possession  or
object,  but  not  full  satisfaction.  It  is  pleasant  to  have  wealth  wherewith  to  gratify
desire,  to  be  able  to  confer  benefits  on  others ;  but  if  we  make  these  things  the  one
aim  in  life  we  are  sure  to  reap  but  little  joy.  The  drawbacks  and  counter-balancings
are  g^eat.  Much  wealth,  much  furniture,  many  servants,  a  large  house,  and  great
popularity  are  only  extra  anxieties.  The  pleasure  soon  passes,  the  possession  soon
palls.  Still,  a  man  without  any  passion  or  aim  is  simply  like  "  a  speaking  stone."
Yet  as  a  horse,  too  restive  and  fiery,  puts  his  rider  in  danger,  so  do  our  passions.
Ambition  in  moderation  is  an  advantage,  and  few  men  become  very  useful  who  have
none  ;  but  if  we  give  the  reins  to  our  ambition  we  may  be  sure  that  such  a  fiery
charger  will  dash  away  over  rocks  or  into  floods  to  our  great  hazard.  A  man  when
at  sea,  cares  neither  for  calm  nor  for  a  hurricane,  but  he  enjoys  a  .stiff  breeze  which  helps
tlie  vessel  along  and  braces  his  nerves.  We  suggest,  therefore,  not  the  banishment  of
all  ambition,  but  its  moderation ;  not  the  despising  of  all  possessions,  but  that  we
sliould  not  be  disappointed  if  we  do  not  receive  so  much  joy  therefrom  as  we  ex-
pected. Nay,  we  may  thank  God  that  we  cannot  live  on  stones,  nor  satisfy  our
hunger  with  husks  ;  that  in  us  has  been  cultivated  the  longing  for  those  things  which
really  a&ord  satisfaction,  viz.,  righteousness,  peace,  faith,  and  love. — H.

Ver.  15. — Swift  couriers.  "  And  the  posts  went  out,  being  hastened  by  the  king's
commandment.'  The  Persians  had  good  arrangements  for  interchange  of  thought
and  desires.  A  nation's  civilisation  may  be  gauged  by  its  facilities  for  intercom-
munication. Roads,  canals,  and  railways,  penny  posts,  and  electric  telegraphs  are
the  present  means  of  communication  in  this  country.  The  ancient  Bomans  sought
to  facilitate  interchange.  They  were  great  road  builders.  The  English  have  more
than  any  nation  helped  to  cover  the  world  with  a  net-work  of  railways.  Their
couriers  are  in  every  land

I.  Pbeachees  should  be  dilioent,  as  hastened  by  the  Kino's  commandment.
They  carry  good  news  to  souls.  They  are  to  do  what  their  hands  find  to  do  with  all
their  might.     If  Christ  was  "  straitened,"  they  should  be.

II.  PbEACHEBS  ABE  TO  BE  FAITHFUL,  WHETHER  THEIR  MESSAGE  BE  A  "  SAVOUR  OF  LIFB

UNTO  LIFE  OR  OF  DEATH  UNTO  DEATH."  The  courierp  of  Ahasuerus  faithfully  delivered
the  despatches  they  carried.  In  the  eighth  chapter  (ver.  14)  we  see  how  extra
means  and  greater  pressure  were  used  to  overtake  wrong. — H.

Ver.  16. — lAfe  contrasts.  "  And  the  king  and  Haman  sat  down  to  drink  ;  but  the
city  Shushan  was  perplexed."  Here  is  indeed  a  pair  of  pictures  to  look  at — the
subjects  very  different.  They  are  not  a  pair  of  pastoral  scenes,  nor  of  family
groups  related,  nor  are  they  of  sympathetic  historical  sort.  But  a  pair  they  certainly
are ;  as  such  they  are  hung,  and  they  bear  out  the  position,  for  one  strictly  and
iirectly  rises  out  of  the  other.  The  one  shows  two  figures,  as  of  men,  sitting  in  a
palace  drinking.  If  we  are  to  judge  anything  from  their  attitude  and  their  occu-
pation, their  minds  are  perfectly  at  ease,  and  they  are  happy.  The  figures  are  life-
size,  and  lifelike.    The  countenances,  however,  scarcely  improve  by  dwelling  upoa


:h.  III.  7— 16.  J  TUB  BOOK  OF  ESTUEK.  «


Vnry  quickly  the  too  plainly-marked  impress  of  the  Eastern  aristocrat's  effeminacy,
and  excessive  luxuriousnesa,  and  unrecking  pride  of  heart  dispel  the  faintest  sugges-
tion that  their  apparent  ease  and  happiness  have  any  of  the  higher  elements  in  th  tm.
We  recognise  in  the  men  types  of  self-indulgence,  even  if  it  should  prove  nothing
worse.  The  other  picture  shows  a  city  in  miniature,  in  broken,  disconnected
sections,  interiors  and  exteriors  together.  The  eye  that  is  sweeping  it  turns  it  into
a  moving  panorama.  Whatever  it  is  that  is  seen,  an  oppressive,  ominous  stillness
seems  to  brood  over  it.  An  unnatural  stoppage  of  ordinary  business  is  apparent.
The  market,  the  bazaars,  thp  exchange,  the  heathen  temple,  the  Jews'  meeting-place,
and  in  fact  every  place  wliere  men  do  congregate,  seems  in  a  certain  manner  stricken
with  consternation.  The  faces  and  the  gestures  of  the  people  agree  therewith.
These,  at  all  events,  betokeii  anything  but  peace  and  content  and  happiness.  Tliey
give  the  impression  of  a  "  perplexity  "  rapidly  inducing  stupor,  and  a  stupor  ominous
of  paralysis  itself.  One  malignant  thought  of  Haman  was  answerable  for  all  this.
He  had  of  late  been  obeying  with  completest  self-surrender  his  worse  genius ;  that
was  about  the  only  self-surrender  he  practised  or  knew.  His  one  malignant  thought,
the  thought  of  "  scorn,"  had  rapidly  ripened  into  determination,  shaped  into  place  and
method,  been  clothed  in  the  dress  of  consummate  policy,  and  sealed  with  the  signel
of  royal  ring  (ver.  10).  That  thought,  so  wrought  up,  was  now  sent  forth,  "  hastened
by  the  king's  commandment,"  to  a  thousand  cities  and  comers  of  the  whole  realm.
Its  publication  made  in  Shushan  the  palace,  and  to  the  same  hour  "  the  king  and
Haman  sat  down  to  drink ;  but  the  city  Shushan  was  perplexed."     We  have  here —

I.  Some  utteely  conclusivb  pacts  of  human  life.  1.  A  leading  instance  of  the
glaring  disproportions  of  human  fortune  and  circumstance.  In  closest  juxtaposition
are  found,  on  the  one  hand,  two  men,  sated  with  ease  and  all  they  can  ask.  On  the
other,  a  city,  a  whole  city,  throbbing  with  all  the  most  various  life,  but — condensed
into  this  brief  description — "  perplexed. "  These  are,  as  matter  of  fact,  the  two  experi-
ences of  human  life  found  in  the  same  place,  on  the  same  day,  at  the  same  hour;  and
they  are  the  result  of  what  we  should  be  generally  content  to  call  human  fortune.
Is  it  such  contrarieties  as  these,  that  can  subsist  side  by  side ;  and  is  it  not  the
irresistible  conclusion  that  either  human  life  is  the  sport  of  the  arbitrary  and  the
mockery  of  the  malign ;  or  that  human  fortune  is  but  an  earthly  phrase  for  a  Pro-
vidence, at  present  most  inscrutable,  but  with  which  all  is  to  be  trustfully  left,  for
that  it  will  ere  long  give  account  and  require  account?  Once  satisfied  of  this,  a
heathen  poet  has  taught  us  the  words,  Permitte  ccetera  Deo.  2.  A  leading  instance
of  the  disproportion  of  human  rights  and  powers.  One  might  almost  be  tempted  to
call  it  a  violent  instance  of  an  intolerable  anomaly.  But  in  various  ways,  in  more
subdued  form,  by  removes  far  more  numerous,  and  the  contrasts  accordingly  far  less
striking,  we  can  see  this  violent  case  to  be  but  a  plain  case  of  what  permeates  the
structure  of  human  society.  Yet  ponder  the  facts  here.  There  are  thousands  upon
thousands  whose  life,  humanly  speaking,  is  not  in  their  own  hands  ;  and  there  are
two  in  whose  hands  those  lives  are  I  This  disproportion  must  dwarf  every  other.
Compared  with  it,  that  of  possession,  of  education,  of  brain, of  opportunity,  of  genius,
of  position  and  birth  rmist  seem  small  matters.  For  life  holds  all  the  rest.  Like  a
vessel,  for  the  time  it  contains  all.  The  aggregate  of  humanity  is  the  history  to  a
tremendous  extent  of  an  aggregate  of  vicariousness.  The  tangle  human  fingers
cannot  undo.  Out  of  the  labyrinth  human  wisdom  cannot  guide  itself.  One  hand
alone  holds  the  thread,  one  eye  alone  commands  the  bird's-eye  position  and  view.
But  in  all  we  must  remember  these  two  conclusions ;  ftrnt,  that  the  vicariousness
counts  sometimes  for  unmeasured  help,  and  advantage,  and  love ;  secondly,  that  it
were  better  far  to  be  of  the  "  perplexed  city  "  and  the  jeopardised  Jews  than  to  be
either  of  those  two  men  "  who  sat  down  to  drink  "  after  what  they  had  done.  Who
would  buy  their  position  to  pay  the  price  of  their  responsibility  ?  Who  would  accept
all  their  possessions  at  the  risk  of  using  them  as  they  did  ?

II.  Some  UTTEBLY  CONDEMNING  FACTS  OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  1.  A  leading  instance  of
the  attitude  in  which  a  bad  conscience  will  suffer  a  man  to  place  himself  ;  the  exact
opposite  of  that  for  which  conscience  was  given,  the  exact  opposite  of  that  which  a
good  conscience  would  tolerate.  The  very  function  of  conscience  may  be  impaired,
may  be  a  while  ruined.  See  its  glory  departed  now.   Haman  now  is  a  leading  instance

ISTHSB.  0


82


THft  BOOK  OP  fiSTflfctt.


[oh.  III.  t — lb.


of  the  satisfaction  which  a  bad  conscience  shall  have  become  able  to  yield,  of  tha
content  a  bad  conscience  will  in  the  possibility  of  things  provide.  He  has  actually
filled  up  the  measure  of  his  iniquities  (as  appears  very  plainly),  and,  worse  by  fat
than  Judas,  whose  conscience  sent  him  to  hang  himself,  he  "  sita  down  to  drink  "
with  his  king  I  2.  A  leading  instance  of  the  destruction  of  the  tenderest  relie  of
perfect  human  nature.  For  in  the  last  analysis  we  must  read  here,  the  extinction  oj
sympathy  I  It  is  true  there  may  have  been  left  with  the  man  who  could  do  what
Haman  did  sympathy  with  evil,  and  yet  rather  with  the  evil ;  sympathy  with  the
gratuitous  causing  of  woe  and  the  causers  of  woe.  But  this  is  not  what  we  dignify
with  the  name  sympathy.  This  sweet  word,  standing  for  a  sweeter  tnmg,  has  not  two
faces.  Its  face  is  one,  and  is  aye  turned  to  the  light,  to  love,  to  the  good.  'Tis  a
damning  fact  indeed  among  the  possibilities  and  the  crises  of  human  nature,  and  of
the  "  deceitful  and  desperately  wicked  "  human  heart,  when  sympatny  haunts  it  no
more,  has  forsaken  it  as  its  habitat,  hovers  over  it  no  longer,  fans  the  air  for  it  with
its  beneficent  pinion  for  the  last,  last  time  I  Oh  for  the  Stygian  murkiness,  the
sepulchral  hollowness,  the  pestilent  contagion  that  succeeds,  and  is  tbenceforward
the  lot  of  that  heart  I  The  point  of  supreme  selfishness  is  reached  when  all  sympatny
has  died  away.  For  those  whose  terrible  woe  himself  had  caused,  it  is  Haman  wno
has  less  than  the  least  pity,  and  no  fellow-feeling  with  them  whatever  1  The  lowest
point  of  loss  which  our  nature  can  touch  here  is  surely  when  it  has  lost  the  calm
energy  of  sympathy — to  show  it  or  to  feel  it.  The  proportion  in  which  any  one  con-
sciously, and  as  the  highest  achievement  of  his  base  skill  and  prostituted  opportunity,
either  causes  unnecessary  woe  or  leaves  it  unpitied,  unhelped,  measures  too  faith-
fully the  wounds  and  cruel  injuries  he  has  already  inflicted  on  the  tenderest  of  pre-
sences within  him,  the  best  friend  to  himself  as  well  as  to  others.  The  wounds  of
sympathy  are  at  any  time  of  the  deadly  kind,  and  it  only  needs  that  they  be  one  too
many,  when  at  last  she  will  breathe  out  her  long-suffering,  stricken  spirit  I  For  him
who  is  so  forsaken  it  may  well  be  that  "  he  sits  down  to  drink."  For  the  knell  is
already  heard,  and  "  to-morrow  he  dies." — B.


EXPOSITION.    $7.


OHAPTEE  IV.


MoimNiNa  OF  Mordeoax,  and  of  the
Jews  qenerally,  on  HEAsiNa  of  the
DEGREE  (ch.  iv.  1 — 3).  Haman  had  no
doubt  kept  his  Intentions  secret  until  the
king's  consent  to  them  was  not  oidy  granted,
but  placed  beyond  his  power  to  recall.  The
Jews  first  heard  of  the  terrible  blow  impend-
ing over  them  by  the  publication  of  the  edict.
Then  they  became  acquainted  with  it  quickly
enough.  The  edict  was  for  a  while  the  talk
of  the  town.  Placarded  openly  in  some  con-
spicuous and  frequented  place,  every  loiterer
read  it,  every  gossip  spoke  of  it,  every  one
whom  it  thrsatened  could  with  his  own  eyes
see  its  eza:t  terms.  Mordecai  soon  "per-
ceived all  that  was  done "  (ver.  1) — ^perused
the  edict,  understood  whence  it  had  origin-
ated, was  fully  aware  that  he  himself  and  his
whole  nation  stood  in  the  most  awful  peril.
His  first  impulse  was  to  rend  his  garments
and  put  on  sackcloth  and  ashes ;  after  which


he  quitted  the  environs  of  tiie  palace,  and
"went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city,"
where  he  gave  free  vent  to  his  grief  and
alarm,  "  crying  with  a  loud  and  bitter  cry."
The  signs  of  monming  were  not  permitted
within  the  walls  of  the  royal  residence,  and
Mordecai  could  come  no  nearer  than  the
space  before  the  gate,  where  he  proba  >ly  sat
down  in  the  dust  "astonied  "  (see  Ezra  iz.  4).
Nor  was  he  long  alone  in  his  sorrow.  In
every  province — and  therefore  at  Susa,  no
less  than  elsewhere — ' '  there  was  great  mourn-
ing among  the  Jews,  and  fasting,  and  weep-
ing, and  wailing"  (ver.  3).  The  proscribed
race  made  bitter  lamentation — "  lay  in  sack-
cloth and  ashes,"  humbled  itself  before
Ood,  and  waited.  As  yet  no  thought  of
escape  seems  to  have  oocniied  to  any,  no
resolution  to  have  been  taken.  Even  Mor-
decai's  thoughtful  brain  was  paralysed,  and,
like  the  rest,  he  gave  himself  up  to  grieC

Yer.  1. — Uordecai  rent  his  clothei.  Com-
pare Ezra  iz.  3,  6  with  the  comment     Tba


CH.  IV.  1 — 17.]


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


meEining  of  the  act  was  well  imderstood  by
the  Persians.  Fat  on  sackcloth  with  ashes.
So  Daniel  (Dan.  ix.  3),  and  the  king  of
Nineveh  (Jonah  iil  6).  Either  act  by  itself
was  a  sign  of  deep  grief ;  both  combined
betokened  the  deepest  grief  possible.  And
went  out  into  the  midst  of  the  city.  The
palace  was  not  to  be  saddened  by  private
griefs  (see  the  next  verse).  Mordecai,  there-
fore, having  assumed  the  outward  signs  of  ex-
treme sorrow,  quitted  the  palace,  and  entered
the  streets  of  the  town.  There,  overcome  by
his  feelings,  he  vented  them,  as  Asiatics  are
wont  to  do,  in  loud  and  piercing  cries  (comp.
Neh.  V.  1).

Ver.  2. — And  came  even  before  the  king's
gate.  After  some  aimless  wandering  Mor-
decai returned  toward  the  palace,  either  as
his  proper  place,  or  with  some  incipient
notion  of  obtaining  Esther's  help.  He  was
not  allowed,  however,  to  pass  the  outer  gate
on  account  of  his  garb  of  woe,  and  so  remained
outside  (see  ver.  6).

Ver.  3. — And  in  every  province.  As  fast
as  the  news  spread,  as  province  after  pro-
vince received  the  decree,  the  Jews  sponta-
neously did  as  Mordecai  had  done — every-
where there  was  great  sorrow,  shown  com-
monly by  fasting,  weeping,  and  wailing,
while  in  numerous  instances  the  mourners
oven  went  the  length  of  putting  on  sack-
cloth and  ashes.  Thus  an  ever-increasing
cloud  of  grief  overshadowed  the  land.

S  8.  Grief  of  Esther.   Her  coumunioa*

TIONS  WITH  MORDEOAI.  SHE  CONSENTS  TO
BISK  MAKINO  AN  APPEAL  TO  THE  KING  (ch.

iv.  4 — 17).  Esther,  in  the  seclusion  of  the
harem,  knew  nothing  of  what  the  king  and
Haman  had  determined  on.  'No  one  in  the
palace  suspected  how  vitally  she  was  concerned
in  the  matter,  since  none  knew  that  she  was
a  Jewess,  and  state  affairs  are  not  commonly
discussed  between  an  Oriental  monarch  and
a  young  wife.  It  was  known,  however,  that
she  took  an  interest  in  Mordecai ;  and  when
that  official  was  seen  outside  the  palace  gate
.  in  his  mourning  garb,  it  was  reported  to  the
queen.  Not  being  aware  why  he  grieved,
but  thinking  that  perhaps  it  was  some  light
matter  which  he  took  too  much  to  heart,  she
sent  him  a  change  of  raiment,  and  requested
him  to  put  off  his  sackcloth.  But  Mordecai,
without  assigning  any  reason,  refused  (ver.  4),
Esther  upon  this  caused  inquiry  to  be  made
of  Mordecai  concerning  the  reason  of  his
mourning,  and  in  this  way  became  acquainted
with  what  had  happened  {rem.  6 — 9).  At
the  lame  time  ihe  fonnd  herself  called  on


by  Mordecai  to  incur  a  great  danger,  since  he
requested  her  to  go  at  once  to  the  king,  and
to  intercede  with  him  for  her  people  (ver.  8).
In  reply,  the  queen  pointed  out  the  extreme
risk  which  she  would  mn  in  entering  the
royal  presence  uninvited,  and  the  little  chance
that  there  was  of  her  receiving  a  summons,
since  she  had  not  had  one  for  thirty  days
(ver.  11).  Mordecai,  however,  was  inexor-
able. He  reminded  Esther  that  she  herself
was  threatened  by  the  decree,  and  was  not
more  likely  to  escape  than  any  other  Jew
or  Jewess ;  declared  his  belief  that,  if  she
withheld  her  aid,  deliverance  would  arise
from  some  other  quarter;  warned  her  thttt
neglect  of  duty  was  apt  to  provoke  •
heavy  retribution,  and  suggested  that  she
might  have  been  raised  to  her  queenly  dig-
nity for  the  express  purpose  of  her  being
thus  able  to  save  her  nation  (vers.  13,  14).
The  dutiful  daughter,  the  true  Jewess,  could
resist  no  longer ;  she  only  asked  that  Mor-
decai and  the  other  Jews  in  Susa  would  fast
for  her  three  days,  while  she  and  her  maidens
also  fasted,  and  then  she  would  take  her  life
in  her  hand,  and  enter  the  royal  presence
uninvited,  though  it  was  contrary  to  the
law ;  the  risk  should  be  run,  and  then,  as
she  said  with  a  simple  pathos  never  excelled,
"if  I  perish,  I  perish"  (ver.  16).  Satis-
fied with  this  reply,  Mordecai  "went  his
way,"  and  held  the  three  days'  fast  which
Esther  had  requested  (ver.  17).

Ver.  4. — ^Esther's  maids  and  her  chamber-
lains. A  queen  consort  at  an  Oriental  court
is  sure  to  have,  besides  her  train  of  maids,  a
numerous  body  of  eunuchs,  who  are  at  her
entire  disposal,  and  are  especially  employed
in  going  her  errands  and  maintaining  her
communications  with  the  outer  world.  Told
her.  Esther's  interest  in  Mordecai  would
be  known  to  the  maids  and  eunuchs  by
Mordecai's  inquiries  about  her  (ch.  i.  11)
and  communications  with  her  (ibid.  ver.  22).

Ver.  5. — To  know  what  it  was,  and  why
it  was.  I.  e.  "to  know  what  the  mourning
garb  exactly  meant,  and  for  what  reason  he
had  assumed  it."

Ver.  6.— The  street  of  the  citj.  Bather,
"  the  square."

Ver.  7. — The  sum  of  money.  Mordecai
evidently  considered  that  the  money  was  an
important  item  in  the  transaction,  and  had
mainly  influenced  Ahasuems.  This  would
not  have  been  the  case  if  Ahasuerus  had  at
once  given  it  back  (see  the  comment  on  oh.
iiL»).

•  2


B4


.HE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


[CH.  IV,  1— 17.


Ver.  8. — Also  he  gave  him  the  copy.  In
the  original  it  is  "a  copy."  Mordecai  had
had  a  copy  made  for  the  purpose  of  handing
it  to  Esther.  To  make  request  to  him  for
her  people.  If  this  was  the  phrase  used  by
Mordecai  to  Hatach,  Esther's  nationality
must  now  have  ceased  to  be  a  secret,  at  any
rate  so  far  as  her  immediate  attendants  were
concerned.  Probably  Mordecai  felt  that  the
truth  must  now  be  declared.  It  was  only  as
the  compatriots  of  the  queen  that  he  could
expect  to  get  the  Jews  spared,

Ver.  11. — All  the  king's  servants  seems
to  mean  here  "all  the  court,"  "all  those  in
the  immediate  service  of  the  king."  The
inner  court  The  palace  had,  as  it  would
seem,  only  two  courts,  the  "outward  court"
of  ch.  vi  i,  and  the  "inner  court"  of  the
present  passage.  There  is  one  law  of  his  to
put  him  to  death.  Bather,  "there  is  one
law  for  him."  Whoever  he  be,  there  is  one
and  the  same  law  regarding  him — he  must
suffer  death.  Herodotus  excepts  six  persons
from  the  operation  of  this  law  (iii.-84,  118),
but  in  making  the  exception  shows  the
general  rule  to  have  been  such  as  here  repre-
sented. Except  such  to  whom  the  king
shall  hold  out  the  golden  sceptre.  No
other  writer  tells  us  of  this  custom,  but  it
is  in  perfect  harmony  with  Oriental  habits
and  modes  of  thought.  Some  have  objected
that  the  king  would  not  always  have  a  golden
sceptre  by  him  ;  but  the  Persepolitan  sculp-
tures unuormly  represent  him  with  a  long
tapering  staff  in  his  hand,  which  is  probably
the  "  sceptre  "  (sharbith)  of  Esther.  I  have
not  been  called  to  come  in  unto  the  king
these  thirty  days,  The  king's  passion  had
cooled,  and  Esther  now,  like  his  other  wives,
waited  her  occasional  summons  to  his  pre-
sence. She  had  not  been  called  for  a  whole
month,  and  did  not  know  when  a  summons
riiight  come.  It  would  not  do  to  trust  to  so
mere  a  chance  ;  and  therefore,  if  she  was  to
interpose  on  behalf  of  her  nation,  she  must
intrude  on  the  king  uninvited,  and  risk
being  put  to  death.

Ver.  13. — Think  not  with  thyself.  Liter-
ally, "imagine  not  in  thy  mind."  That
thou  Shalt  escape  in  the  king's  house,  /.  e.
"  that  being  an  inmate  of  the  palace  will  he
any  protection  to  thee;"  it  will  be  no  pro-
tection— you  will  no  more  escape  than  any
other  Jew.


Ver,  14. — Then  shall  there  enlargement.
or  respiration  (marg.  literally,  "breath"),
and  deliverance  arise  to  the  Jew«  from
another  place.  Mordecai  is  confident  that
God  will  not  allow  the  destruction  of  his
people.  Without  naming  his  name,  he  im-
plies a  trust  in  his  gracious  promises,  and
a  conviction  that  Haman's  purpose  will  be
frustrated  ;  how,  he  knows  not,  but  certainly
in  some  way  or  other.  If  deliverance  does
not  come  through  Esther,  then  it  will  arise
from  some  other  quarter.  But  thou  and
thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed.  A
denunciation  of  Divine  vengeance.  Though
the  nation  will  be  saved,  it  will  not  benefit
you.  On  you  will  fall  a  just  judgment —
having  endeavoured  to  save  your  life,  you
will  lose  it — and  your  "father's  house"  will
be  involved  in  your  ruin.  We  may  gather  .
from  this  that  Esther  was  not  Abihail's  only
child.  Who  knoweth,  &c.  Consider  this
also.  Perhaps  (who  knows  ? )  God  has  raised
you  up  to  your  royal  dignity  for  this  very

Eurpose,  and  none  other,  that  you  should
e  in  a  position  to  save  your  nation  in  this
crisis.

Ver.  15. — Fast  ye  fbr  me.  Fasting  for
another  is  fasting  to  obtain  God's  blessing
on  that  other,  and  is  naturally  accompanied
with  earnest  prayer  to  God  for  the  person
who  is  the  object  of  the  fast.  Thus  here
again  the  thought  of  God  underlies  the  nar-
rative. It  has  been  supposed  that  Esther
could  not  have  meant  an  absolute  fast —
complete  abstinence  from  both  food  and
drink — for  so  long  a  period  as  three  days  j
but  Oriental  abstemiousness  would  not  be
very  severely  taxed  by  a  fast  of  this  length.
The  time  intended — ffom  the  evening  of  the
first  to  the  morning  of  the  third  day — need
not  have  much  exceeded  thirty-six  hours,  I
also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise.
"  Likewise  "  is  to  be  taken  here  in  its  proper
sense,  as  meaning  "in  like  manner.  We
also  will  abstain  both  from  meat  and  drink
during  the  same  period.

Ver.  17. — Mordecai  .  .  .  did  according
to  all  that  Esther  had  commanded.  I.  e.
gathered  the  Jews  together,  and  proclaimed
a  three  days'  fast.  Though  without  authority,
he  would  naturally,  under  the  circumstances,
have  sufficient  influence  over  his  countrymen
to  induce  them  to  do  his  bidding.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1— ^- — The  cry  of  a  doomed  people.  The  decree  against  the  Jews  was  not
yet  known  in  the  palace ;  Esther  herself  was  not  yet  informed  of  it.  And  the  signs
of  sorrow  and  mourniTig  were  prohibited  within  the  royal  precincts ;  nothing  of  ill
omen  was  suffered  to  come  before  the  king  and  his  household.  But  in  tlie  city  evil
tidings  (which  ever  travel  fast)  soon  came  abroad.

L  Thb  fibst  notb  of   laubntation  was  dttkrkd  by  Mobdbcai.     The  rending


OH.  IT.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER


of  clothes  in  grief  was  practised  by  the  Persians  as  well  as  by  the  Jews.  The  Nine-
vites  in  their  penitence  sat  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  It  was  and  is  the  custom  of
Orientals  to  weep  aloud  in  times  of  mourning.  All  these  expressions  of  sorrow  and
lamentation  were  in  the  circumstances  natural  and  proper.  It  was  the  woe  of  s
patriot.  Mordecai  was  not  thinking  so  much  of  himself  as  of  his  people ;  he  made
their  sorrows  and  alarms  his  own.  It  was  the  sorrow  of  a  godly  man.  He  did  not
simply  mourn ;  he  evidently  humbled  himself  before  God,  and  implored  Divine  pity
and  help.

II.   THB    CRT  WAS  COMMUNICATED    TO    AND  TAKEN   DP    BY  THB   JeWS  THBOUrTlIODT

THE  EMPIRE.  The  news  of  a  great  victory  flies  and  flashes  through  a  land,  awakens
the  universal  joy,  and  the  land  is  filled  with  gladness  and  song.  And  the  tidings  of
the  impending  calamity  spread  fiir  and  wide  through  the  provinces  of  Persia,  and
created  consternation  in  thousands  of  hearts.  They  mourned  as  they  thought  .of  the
land  of  their  fathers,  and  of  all  the  privileges  enjoyed  in  that  sacred  and  fertile
territory — ^their  proper  home  and  inlierit?nce.  For  now  they  were  not  only  doomed
to  exile ;  they  were  marked  for  destruction.  They  fasted,  doubtless,  as  a  religious
exercise,  accompanying  their  fasting  with  repentance  and  with  prayers.  They  wept
and  wailed,  knowing  that  though  their  cry  could  not  pierce  th«  walls  of  the  palace
at  Shushan,  it  would  penetrate  the  gates  of  heavein,  and  reach  the  ear  of  the  King  of
kings.  They  lay  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  as  permitting  themselves  no  comfort  or  ease
in  prospect  of  their  own  and  their  brethren's  ruin.  Thus  they  prepared  a  way  for
the  tender  mercy  of  God  to  visit  them  from  on  high.

Practical  lesson : — Sinners  against  whom  a  sentence  of  Divine  wrath  might  right-
fully be  issued  should  lose  no  time  ii.  humbling  themselves  before  the  Lord,  and
confessing  their  sins  with  contrition  and  repentance,  that  they  may  partake  in  the
mercy  of  heaven,  and,  through  the  redemption  of  Christ  Jesus,  be  saved  from  the
wrath  to  come.

Vers.  4 — 9. — Sympathy.  Although  Esther  was  lodged  in  a  palace  and  surrounded
with  luxury  and  honour,  she  did  not  lose  sight  of  her  kinsman,  Mordecai.  Least  of
all  was  she  indifferent  to  his  trouble  and  sorrow.  Hence,  when  informed  of  his
mourning,  she  sent  to  him,  and,  when  aware  of  the  cause  of  his  distress,  entered  into
it,  taking  his  grief  as  her  own.  A  beautiful  illustration  of  sympathy — an  emotion
and  disposition  which  adorns  our  humanity,  and  relieves  men  of  many  of  their
sorrows,  and  lightens  many  of  their  cares.

I.  Sympathy  is  based  upon  cub  common  humanity  and  kindred.  "  I  am  a  man,
and  deem  nought  human  foreign,  a  matter  of  unconcern,  to  me."  The  sympathies
of  some  are  restricted  to  their  own  household,  or  their  own  nation ;  but  it  becomes  us
to  cherish  a  fellow-feeling  for  all  mankind.  Still,  as  in  this  narrative,  kindred  is  a
proper  ground  for  special  sympathy.

II.  Sympathy  has  its  surest  basis  in  religion.  The  Scriptures  teach  us  that
God  has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men.  We  are  children  of  one  family.
Not  only  so,  but  the  same  Father  has  pitied  us,  and  the  same  Saviour  has  died  for  us.
What  emphasis  do  these  facts  give  to  the  inspired  admonitions :  "  Look  not  every
man  upon  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  upon  the  things  of  others."  "  Bear  ye
one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil  the  law  of  Christ."  "  Rejoice  with  those  who  do
rejoice,  and  weep  with  them  that  weep."

III.  Sympathy  is  beneficial,  alike  to  him  who  displays  it,  and  to  him  who
^  ITS  OBJECT.  The  heart  is  richer  and  happier  for  entering  into  the  feelings  of
another.  And  the  heart  is  relieved  that  feels  another  shares  its  burden.  Unman
society  is  made  more  bright  and  blessed  by  the  prevalence  of  the  sacred  hubit  of
sympathy.  Of  this  virtue,  as  of  mercy,  it  may  be  said,  "  It  blesseth  him  that  gives
and  him  that  takes."

IV.  Sympathy  is  thb  ploweb  ok  which  the  fbuit  is  help.  Mere  sentimontal,
unpractical  sympathy  is  worse  than  vain ;  it  is  a  mockery.  But  where  right  feeling;
leads  to  right  action,  it  proves  its  intended  value.  In  the  case  before  us,  Esther's
sympathy  with  her  kinsman's  anxiety  and  sorrow  led  her  to  put  forth  all  her  efforts,
in  compliance  with  his  wish,  to  secure  the  end  dear  to  his  heart.

Practical   Vsunpi- — 1.    Shut  not  up   your  heart  from   sympathising  with   your


•«  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [CH.  iv.  1—17.

neighbour's  woe.  To  do  so  will  be  more  harmful  to  you  even  than  to  him.  2.  Let
sympathy  be  expressed.  It  is  well  that  those  in  trouble  should  know  that  you  feel
with  and  for  them.  3.  Let  sympathy  take  a  practical  form.  If  tears  and  prayers
•re  all  you  can  give  to  show  your  sympathy,  well  and  good.  But  if  you  have  more
to  give,  withhold  it  not,  for  Christ's  sake.

Ver.  8. — An  intereestor.  If  Haman's  influence  with  the  king  of  Persia  was  used
for  harm,  why  should  not  Esther's  be  used  for  good  ?  It  was  a  natural  and  happy
thought  on  the  part  of  Mordecai  to  use  his  ward's  influence  with  Ahasuerus  for  the
deliverance  and  safety  of  the  Jews.  And  the  sequel  shows  the  wisdom  of  Mordecai's
counsel,  and  the  efiBcacy  of  Esther's  pleading.  Christ,  our  High  Priest,  is,  as  such,
our  Advocate  with  the  Father.  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  As  a
fig^e  of  our  Redeemer,  the  Intercessor,  consider  Esther,  as  possessing  two  qualifica-
tions for  successful  advocacy.

L  An  intercessor  should  have  stmpatht  with,  and  interest  in,  the  case  op  those
FOB  WHOM  HE  PLEADS.  Esther  had  this  qualification  ;  she  loved  her  cousin,  she  loved
her  people.  She  could  not  think  of  the  destruction  of  the  Jews  without  distress.  She
was  prepared  to  plead  hard  for  her  people's  life.  So  with  Christ.  He  is  the  Son  of
man,  bone  of  our  bone,  flesh  of  our  flesh.  He  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our
infirmities ;  for  he  was  tried  and  tempted  in  all  things  as  we  are,  yet  without  sin.
How  fitted  is  he  then  to  represent  our  case,  to  plead  our  cause  I  We  have  in  God
the  Father  a  Sovereign  waiting  to  be  gracious,  and  in  Christ  the  Son  a  Mediator
and  Advocate  who  will  do  his  part  to  secure  our  salvation.

II.  An  intercessor  should  have  influbncb  with  the  person  whose  pavoue  is
TO  BE  SOUGHT.  Esther  had  this  qualification.  The  king  loved  her  above  his  other
wives,  and  would  naturally  be  disposed  to  please  her,  and  receive  her  requests  with
favour.  So  with  Christ.  He  is  the  Son  of  God,  the  "  beloved  Son,"  in  whom  the
Father  is  "  well  pleased."  Him,  therefore,  the  Father  "  heareth  alway."  His  relation
•  to  the  Father,  his  obedience  and  devotion,  all  entitle  him  to  the  Father's  confidence.
And,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  he  does  not,  cannot  plead  in  vain.  To  have  the  advocacy
of  Christ  is  to  have  the  favour  of  God.  Gratefully  avail  yourselves  of  Christ's
prevailing  intercession,  and  through  him  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God.

Ver.  11. — 2%«  golden  seeptre.  The  superstitious  reverence  which  surrounded  the
throne  of  Ahasuerus  is  manifest  from  the  whole  tenor  of  this  narrative.  Capricious
and  absolute,  his  frown  was  feared  as  the  most  awful  of  earthly  ills ;  and  his  smile
was  sought,  with  abject  slavishness  and  adulation,  as  the  herald  of  honour,  riches,
and  power.  Even  his  wife  could  not  approach  unbidden  into  the  presence  of  the
"  great  king,"  save  at  the  peril  of  her  life.  When  he  was  pleased  to  stretch  forth  the
golden  sceptre  of  clemency  and  mercy,  all  was  well.  The  golden  sceptre,  which
encouraged  the  timid,  assured  the  suppliant  of  a  gracious  reception,  and  was  the
earnest  of  royal  favours  and  blessings,  may  be  taken  as  an  emblem  of  the  merciful
regard  and  purposes  of  the  King  of  kings.  In  the  gospel  of  his  Son  our  heavenly
Ruler  and  Lord  extends  to  us  the  golden  sceptre  of  his  grace.

I.  It  is  a  sceptre  OP  botal  power.  Originally  the  sceptre  was  the  rod  of  the
chief  with  which  he  smote  the  cowardly  and  the  recreant,  and  thus  it  became  the
emblem  of  kingly  rule.  All  God's  acts  are  acts  of  a  just  authority,  enforced  by  an
irresistible  power.  Whilst  his  sway  extends  over  his  whole  creation,  as  a  moral  sway
it  is  exercised  upon  righteous  principles  over  his  moral  and  accountable  subjects.

II.  It  is  a  sceptre  OP  botal  PAVoub.  It  is  evident  from  the  narrative  that  Esther
had  no  hope  except  from  the  clemency  of  the  king.  Her  position  as  queen  did  not
even  give  her  the  right  to  approach  the  throne  unbidden.  When  Ahasuerus  stretched
forth  the  golden  sceptre  she  knew  that  she  was  regarded  with  favour.  Our
heavenly  King  extends  to  us  the  favour  of  his  royal  nature.  His  word,  his  gospel,  is
the  expression  of  his  regard  for  men.    His  anger  is  turned  away,  and  he  comforts  us.

III.  It  is  a  sceptre  OP  botal  mbrct.  Esther's  approach  was  a  presumption,  an
offence.  But  the  symbolical  act  we  are  considering  assured  her  that  her  offence  was
overlooked,  and  she  herself  accepted.  In  the  gospel  God  appears  not  only  as  kind,
but  as  merciful.     He  addresses  the  sinful  suppliant,  and  says.  Fear  not  I    I  am  tbo


Oh.  it.  1— it.]  the  book  OF  ESTHEB,  «7

Lord  fhat  hath  meroy  on  thee  I    Thou  shalt  not  perish,  but  ahalt  have  pardon  and
life  eternal

IV.  It  is  a  sceptre  or  BOTAL  BOUNTf .  The  act  of  Ahasuerus  was  the  earnest  of
further  kindness.  "  What  is  thy  petition,  and  what  is  thy  request  ?  "  She  had,  in
response,  only  to  ask,  and  to  have.  God  has  given  us  his  Son,  and  the  gospel,  which
tells  us  of  this  gift,  tells  us  that  all  provision  is  made  for  ns.  This  is  the  language
of  our  royal  Father:  "  All  that  I  have  is  thine  1 "

Ver.  14. — Enlargement  and  deliverance.  What  a  sublime  confidence  is  apparent
in  this  language  of  Mordecai  to  Esther  I  He  took  a  very  different  mode  of  reasoning
and  persuasion  from  what  might  have  been  expected.  Why  did  he  not  say.  My  only
hope,  the  only  hope  of  the  nation,  is  in  thee  ;  if  thou  fail  us  we  are  undone  ?  Because
he  believed  Israel's  salvation  to  be  dear  to  Israel's  God.  This  led  him  to  put  the
matter  thus ;  "  If  thou  altogether  boldest  thy  peace  at  this  time,  then  shall  there
enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to  the  Jews  from  another  place."

I.  God,  in  his  fbovidencb,  often  accomflishes  gbeat  wobes  bt  the  hands  op

HUMAN  AGENTS.

II.  If  thb  likeliest  fail,  then  the  unlikeliest  will  be  baised  up  and

EMPLOTID.

III.  All  tbinos  and  fowebs  that  abb  advebse  notwithbtandino,  thb  fub-
P0SE8  or  God  shall  certainlt  bb  fulfilled.

IV.  It  is  a  obbat  frivilege  to  have  the  oppobtunitt  of  cabbtino  out  the
flans  of  thb  All-wibb.  Especially  is  this  so  when  we  have  the  means  of  bringing
enlargement  and  deliverance  to  the  people  of  God.  See  to  it  that  you  do  not  mistake
the  "  time  to  speak  "  for  the  "  time  to  be  silent."

Ver.  14. — The  purpose  of  power.  "  Purpose  "  is  a  watchword  of  modem  intellectual
warfare.  "  Cause  "  and  "  purpose  "  are  words  that  awaken  keenest  intellectual  strife.
Thinkers  are  divided  into  those  who  believe  that  the  will  is  the  cause  of  human  acts,
and  that  many  of  those  acts  are  evidence  of  purpose ;  and  those  who  believe  our  acts
to  be  the  necessary  results  of  physical  antecedents  acting  upon  our  nervous  system.
And  those  who  do  not  believe  in  human  purpose  naturally  enough  have  no  belief  in
Divine  purpose.  According  to  them  mind  counts  for  nothing  as  a  factor  in  the
universe.  Believing  in  purpose,  both  human  and  Divine,  we  may  nevertheless  be  on
pur  gn^ard  against  dogmatically  afBrming  that  this  and  that  event  is  evidence  of  the
intention  of  Heaven.  Purpose  is  in  the  life  of  man ;  yet  when  we  endeavour  to
fathom  its  mysteries,  it  is  well  that  we  should  propose  the  question  with  the  modera-
tion and  tentativeness  which  characterised  the  language  of  Mordecai :  "  Who
knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "

L  •heee  abb  bvidbnces  of  Divine  purpose  in  the  life  op  men  generally.
Whatever  doubt  we  may  have  of  individual  cases,  however  muchwemaybeinfluenced
by  our  own  prejudices  and  fancies  in  judging  of  such  cases,  it  scarcely  admits  of
doubt  that_  human  life  has  a  reason  for  its  existence  and  for  its  opportunities.
Especially  in  reading  the  biographies  of  great  and  good  men  we  are  impressed  with
this  belief.^  And  what  strength  does  it  impart  to  a  man  to  believe  that  God  has  a
work  for  him  to  do.    Divine  purpose  may  be  wrought  out  by  unconscious  agents.

"  There's  a  Divinity  that  shapes  our  endi,
Bough-hew  them  how  we  will  1 "

II.  Pbovtobnck  sometimes  makes  it  CT.EAB  WHAT  THE  DmsB  FUBPOBB  IS.  Observe
the  expression:  "  such  a  time."  A  crisis  is  observable  in  the  life  of  most  men.  An
opportunity  opens  up.  The  vocation  is  made  apparent,  or  rather  audible.  A  relation-
ship is  appointed.  A  service  is  required.  God's  finger  is  visible,  and  he  is  heard
saying,  "  This  is  the  way ;  walk  ye  in  it  I "

III.  At  such  TIMES  THERE  IS  IMPOSED  A  BACBED  BESFONSiBiLiTT.  The  call  of  Provi-
dence may  be  disregarded.  Through  negligence,  or  fear,  or  distrust  persons  may
shrink  from  responding  to  the  requirement  of  Heaven. .  But  at  how  fearful  a  cost  I
On  the  other  hand,  to  have  wrought  the  work  of  God  is  to  have  lived  not  in  vain.
And  Divine  grace  is  sufficient  for  us.

Practical  lessons: — 1.  Study  the  indication!  of  God's  wilL     Aik,  "Lord,  wk«t


at  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [ch.  it.  1—17.

wilt  ihon  have  me  to  do  ?  *  2.  Follow  the  leadings  of  God'a  providence.  Say, "  Lead
Lord,  and  thy  servant  shall  be  found  in  thy  steps  1 "

Ver.  16. — A  fast.  Fasting  is  often  mere  superstition,  as  when  men  suppose  that
there  ia  merit  in  their  abstaining  on  certain  days  from  certain  kinds  of  food,  thinking
that  mortification  of  appetite  is  in  itself  a  virtue,  and  that  God  must  needs  be  pleased
with  what  pains  or  distresses  his  creatures.  Fasting  is  sometimes  a  mockery.  It  is
well  known  that  many  religionists  keep  the  letter  whilst  they  break  the  spirit  of  a
fast.  It  is  certainly  difficult  to  sympathise  with  the  asceticism  of  those  who  fast  oti
Fridays  upon  salmon  and  champagne.  Yet  this,  like  other  religious  observances
that  are  now  largely  superstitious,  or  at  all  events  formal,  has  its  origin  in  laudable
desires,  and  springs  from  good  tendencies  in  human  nature.

I.  A  COMMON  SOEBOW  NATURALLY  SEEKS  A  COMMON  EXPRESSION.  When  a  Com-
munity is  smitten  by  a  general  calamity,  it  is  unbecoming  that  any  members  of  that
community  should  indulge  in  feasting  and  mirth.  When  the  Jews  were  threatened
with  destruction,  how  natural  that,  at  Esther's  suggestion,  the  Hebrew  population  of
the  city  should  join  in  a  general  fast.

II.  A  COMMON  WANT  NATURALLY  LEADS    TO  UNITED    SUPPLICATION.      Together  the

people  were  endangered ;  together  they  sought  deliverance  from  their  redeeming
God.  A  fast  is  not  only  a  time  of  abstinence  from  pleasure,  it  is  a  time  of  prayer ;
and  God  in  heaven  is  gratified  by  conjoined  and  blended  supplication  and  interces-
sion. What  mercies  await  the  society,  the  city,  the  nation  which  will  agree  with  one
heart  to  seek  the  Lord.

III.  It    IS    THE    SPIRITUAL    FASTINO    WHICH    IB    ACCEPTABLE  TO  THE  SEARCHER  OF

HEARTS.  Often,  in  the  presence  of  fasts  which  are  merely  outward,  haS  he  addressed
the  indignant  question  to  formal  religionists,  "Is  it  such  a  fast  that  I  have  chosen?"
Often  has  the  appeal  been  addressed  to  such,  "Rend  your  hearts,  and  not  your
garments  i "  The  case  of  the  Ninevites  is  an  illustration  of  the  combination  of  a
formal  with  a  real  fast,  and  is  a  proof  that  such  a  fast  is  not  disregarded  by  God.
Let  the  words  of  our  Saviour  be  remembered :  "  When  thou  fastest,  anojut  thy  head
and  wash  thy  face,  that  thou  appear  not  unto  men  to  fast ;  and  thy  Father  who
seeth  in  secret  shall  reward  thee  openly."

Ver.  16. — "  If  I  perish,  I  perish!"  The  bosom  of  the  queen  must,  when  she
uttered  these  affecting  words,  nave  been  rent  with  diverse  emotions.  The  entreaty  of
Mordecai,  the  danger  of  her  people,  the  benevolence  of  her  own  nature,  all  urged  her
to  venture  into  the  presence  of  the  august  yet  capricious  king.  Yet  her  knowledge
of  the  court  rules,  her  fears  for  herself,  must  have  withheld  her  frOm  the  daring  act.
She  faced  the  possible  consequences,  she  prepared  herself  for  the  Worst.  Doubtless
she  commended  herself  to  the  care  of  Heaven,  and,  forming  the  resolve,  exclaimed,
"  If  I  perish,  I  perish  I  "  Hearers  of  the  gospel  have  sometimes  been  convinced  of
their  sin,  and  yet  have  not  been  able  to  appropriate  to  themselves  the  promises  of
God's  word.  They  have  felt  that  there  is  no  refuge  save  in  the  cross  of  Christ,  and
no  hope  save  in  the  mercy  of  God.  After  long,  sore  conflict,  such  anguished  suf-
ferers, with  a  faith  which  is  half  despair,  have  been  able  to  cast  themselves  before
the  feet  of  the  King,  whose  displeasure  they  dread,  and  in  whose  mercy  they  scarcely
dare  to  hope.  They  have  ventured  all  upon  Divine  compassion,  and  the  earnestness,
the  distress,  the  utter  helplessness  of  their  hearts  have  found  utterance  in  the  cry  of
Esther,  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish  I  "

I.  The  cry  is  the  utterance  of  sincerity  and  earnestness.  The  language  is  full
of  feeling,  of  passion.  It  was  no  feeble  emotion  which  could  prompt  to  such  a
determination.  This  is  the  spirit  in  which  a  sinner  should  come  into  the  presence  of
the  King,  seeking  for  pardon.

II.  It  is  the  utterance  of  felt  unwobthiness.  And  none  can  come  aright  unto
God  save  he  who  comes  with  the  cry  of  the  penitent  publican,  "  God  be  merciful  to
me  a  sinner  t  "

III.  It  is  the  utterance  of  conscious  need.  Nothing  but  the  keenest  sense  of  the
necessity  of  the  case  could  have  impelled  Esther  to  the  course  of  action  abe  took
Similar  is  the  motive  which  brings  the  sinner  to  the  Lord.


OH.  IV,  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  89


'  Nothing  in  my  hand  I  brine,
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling.


IV.  It  is  the  utterance  of  mingled  fear  and  hopb.  Uncertainty  and  dread
mingled  in  the  queen's  mind  with  sonle  gleam  of  hope.  It  is  not  unnatural  that  the
poor  helpless  sinner  should  shrink  from  the  view  of  a  holy  God,  should  scarcely  dare
to  hope  for  his  favour.

V.  It  is  the  utterance  of  A  mind  upon  which  the  king  will  have  mercy.  As
Esther's  fears  were  dispelled  by  the  attitude  and  language  of  her  consort,  so  the
penitent,  lowly,  believing,  and  prayerful  suppliant  shall  never  be  rejected  by  a  God
who  delighteth  in  mercy.  The  spirit  which  God  will  not  disdain  is  that  of  the
lowly  suppliant  who  casts  aside  every  plea  save  the  Divine  compassion.

"  I  have  tried,  and  tried  in  vain,
Many  ways  to  ease  my  pain  }
Now  all  other-hope  is  past,
Only  this  is  left  at  last :
Here  before  thy  cross  I  lie,
Here  I  live,  or  here  I  die.

"  If  I  perish,  be  it  here,
With  the  Friend  of  sinners  near|
Lord,  it  is  enough — I  know
Never  sinner  perished  so  :
Here  before  thy  cross  I  lie,
Here  I  cannot,  cannot  dial"

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Distress.  We  have  a  very  vivid  picture,  in  these  few  touches,  of  a
nation's  exceeding  sorrow.     We  are  reminded  of —

I.  The  heartlesrness  and  impotence  of  tybannt  in  regard  to  it.  The  king
could  cheerfully  speak  the  word  which  caused  thecalaraity,  and  then,  when  its  sorrow
surged  up  to  his  palace  wall,  shut  his  doors  against  the  entrance  of  any  sign  of  it ;
"  for  none  might  enter  into  the  king's  gate  clothed  with  sackcloth  "  (ver.  2).  The
tyrant  first  becomes  responsible  for  grievous  and  widespread  woe,  and  then  takes
measures  to  prevent  its  utterance  from  disturbing  his  royal  pleasure  or  repose.  Such
is  selfishness  in  imchecked  power.  But  though  heartless,  it  will  discover  the  limits  of
its  sway ;  the  hour  will  come  when  it  wil!  find  itself  impotent  as  a  leaf  in  the  flood  ;
when  the  loud  and  bitter  cry  of  a  people's  wrongs  and  sufEerings  will  pass  the
sovereign's  guards  and  penetrate  his  gates,  will  find  entrance  to  his  chamber  and
smite  his  soul.

II.  Its  craving  for  expression.  "  Mordecai  rent  his  clothes  and  put  on  sack-
cloth with  ashes, .  .  .  and  cried  with  a  loud  and  bitter  cry"  (ver.  1).  "And  in  every
province  .  .  .  there  was  great  mourning  among  the  Jews,  and  fasting,  and  weeping,
and  wailing,  and  many  lay  in  sackcloth  and  ashes"  (ver.  3).  All  strong  feeling-
craves  utterance ;  joy  in  song,  grief  in  tears.  In  this  case  intensity  of  national  dis-
tress found  expression  in  the  most  speaking  and  striking  forms  to  which  Eastern
misery  and  despair  were  accustomed  to  resort — in  "  sackcloth  and  ashes  ; "  a  "  loud  and
bitter  cry ;  "  "  fasting,  and  weeping,  and  wailing.''  To  command  ourselves  when  we
sufEer  pain  or  stand  in  grave  peril  is  manly  and  virtuous.  Yet  it  is  but  shallow
wisdom  to  say  that  crying  will  not  make  it  better.  There  is  real  and  valuable  relief
in  the  act  of  utterance.  In  saddest  griefs  the  worst  sign  of  all  is  a  dead  silence,  the
undimmed  eye.

"  Home  they  brought  her  warrior  dead  |
She  nor  swooned  nor  uttered  ciy.
All  her  maidens,  watching,  ssid,
She  must  weep,  or  she  will  die."

Even  the  "  loud  and  bitter  cry  "  is  not  without  its  worth  to  the  heart  that  utters  it
(Esau — Gen.  xxvii.  34).     Sorrow  may  utter  itself  in  many  ways ;  the  best  of  all  is  in


90  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  iv.  1—17

prayer — in  hallowed,  soothing,  reasBuring  communion  with  our  heavenly  Father,
telling  all  our  tale  of  grief  in  the  ear  of  our  Divine  Friend.  Next  best  is  human
mmpathy — the  unburdening  of  our  souls  to  our  most  tried  and  sympathising  friend.
We  may  well  be  thankful  that  he  has  so  "  fashioned  our  hearts  alike  "  that  we  can
reckon  on  true  and  intense  sympathy  in  the  time  of  our  distress.  A  third  channel  iB
in  sacred  poetry.  How  many  of  the  bereaved  have  had  to  bless  God  for  the  hymng
and  poems  in  which  their  own  grief  has  found  utterance,  through  which  it  has  found
most  valuable  relief.

III.  Its  PiTEOUSNESS.  1.  TTe  are  moved  by  it.  Our  hearts  are  stirred  to  their  depth
by  the  recital  of  the  woes  which  are  endured  by  great  numbers  of  men  and  women,
when  fire,  or  flood,  or  famine,  or  the  sword  of  man  comes  down  upon  them  in
irresistible  calamity.  2.  Are  not  the  angels  of  God  moved  by  it,  and  do  not  these
"  ministering  spirits  "  with  unseen  hands  minister  then  to  the  children  of  need  and
Borrow?  3.  God  himself,  v.-ek'novr,  is  moved  hy  it  "  I  have  surely  seen  the  affliction
of  my  people"  (Exodi  iii.  7).  H6  "heard  their  groaning"  (Exod.  ii.  24).  If  the
woe  of  the  world  is  not  doubled,  it  is  largely  swollen  by  the  sorrowful  sympathy  it
excites.  But  it  is  well  it  should  be  so,  for  such  sympathy  is  good  for  those  who  feel
It,  and  it  is  the  spring  of  remedy  and  removal.

IV.  The  distress  of  the  Church  of  Christ.  Looking  on  the  afflicted  Israelites
at  this  crisis  of  their  history,  we  may  regard  them  as  a  type  of  the  Church  of  God  in
its  distress.  Thus  regarding  the  subject,  we  remark — 1.  That  God  allows  his  Church
to  pass  through  very  strange  and  trying  scenes.  It  is  wholly  inexplicable  to  us,  but
it  IS  a  certain  fact  that  he  has  done  so,  and  it  is  probable  that  he  will  do  so  again.
There  have  been,  and  will  be,  crises  in  its  history.  Persecution  will  assail  it.-
Infidelity  will  seek  to  undermine  it.  Worldliness  will  endeavour  to  corrupt  it.  It
may  go  hard  with  it,  and  its  very  life  be  threatened.  2.  That  in  its  distress  and
danger  it  must  seek  Divine  deliverance  God  only  can,  and  he  will  rescue  and
restore.  Kt  the  eleventh  hour,  perhaps,  but  then,  if  not  earlier,  he  will  interpose  and
save.  But  his  aid  must  be  (1)  earnestly,  (2)  continuously,  (3)  bdievingly  sought  by
his  faithful  children. — C.

Vers.  1—3. — An  unyielding  grief.  I.  The  suffering  caused  bt  one  evil  act
CANNOT  BE  estimated.  It  was  casy  for  Haman  to  draw  up  the  instrument  of  destruc-
tion, and  for  the  king  to  let  him  affix  his  signet  to  it,  and  then  for  both  to  sit  down
to  drink;  but  very  soon  through  that  easily-performed  act  thousands  of  families
were  plunged  into  an  agony  of  terror  and  grief.  One  sin  committed  lightly  may
extend  widely,  and  descend  to  many  generations  in  its  disastrous  effects.  There  is
no  calculating  the  issues  of  evil.  The  chief  enemy  to  the  happiness  of  men  is  man,
through  the  evil  that  is  in  him.  "  Man's  inhumanity  to  man  makes  countless
thousands  mourn."

II.  A  BELIGIOUB  virtue  MAT  BE  BROUGHT  TO  SPECIAL  SUFFERING  BT  GIVING  OCCA-
SION TO  THE  MALEVOLENT  WRATH  OF  AN  EVIL  MIND.  We  Can  Understand  how
Mordecai,  when  he  learned  the  diabolic  scheme  of  revenge  which  Haman  had  set  on
foot,  should  have  been  almost  unmanned  by  his  horror  and  grief.  Was  not  the
decreed  slaughter  of  all  his  countrymen  the  result  of  his  own  conduct  towards
Haman?  This  thought  would  bite  into  his  soul.  Israel  might  have  been  in  safety
and  peace  but  for  him.  Of  all  the  griefs  awakened  by  the  king's  proclamation,
Mordecai's  would  be  the  greatest.  See  here — 1.  How  grief  varies  in  its  outward
manifestations.  To  us  Mordecai's  behaviour  may  seem  wild  and  unreasonable.
But  in  the  East  such  signs  of  mourning  were  the  rule,  and  even  amongst  Western
peoples  wailings  in  times  of  bereavement  are  not  uncommon.  Real  sorrow  is  glad  to
embrace  any  outlet  that  may  ease  its  inward  burden.  Differences  of  temperament
also,  as  well  as  of  custom,  have  much  to  do  with  differing  expressions  of  grief.  2.
How  deep  grief  kills  every  sense  of  danger.  Mordecai  raised  his  "  loud  and  bitter
cry  in  the  midst  of  the  city,"  and  at  length  seemed  about  to  enter  the  king's  palace,
when  he  was  reminded  that  sackcloth  was  not  allowed  to  show  itself  there.  Such
conduct  was  very  bold ;  the  king  and  his  favourite  were  set  at  nought  by  it.  But  it
must  be  attributed  to  the  fearlessness  of  a  profound  grief  which  could  not  but  tell
Itself  forth  in  spite  of  conse^uouces.     3.  How  vain  the  attempt  is  to  enclos  t  any


OH.  IV.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  91

spot  or  circle  of  human  life  from  the  inroads  of  suffering.  Esther's  elevation  to  th«
throne  did  not  make  the  happiness  secure  which  it  brought  to  herself  and  Mordeoai.
Neither  did  the  foolish  law  that  prohibited  sackcloth  or  any  sign  of  mourning  from
entering  the  king's  gate  prevent  the  intrusion  of  sorrow  into  that  guarded  sanctuary
of  ease  and  lust.  Many  hope  to  avoid  grief  by  avoiding  its  signs  and  scenes,  and  by
surrounding  themselves  with  all  that  is  pleasant  and  joyous.  But  the  hope  is  vain.
Wliatever  may  be  their  success  or  failure,  there  is  one  visitor  which  cannot  be  warded
off.  Into  every  palace  and  cottage  alike  death  perforce  enters,  and  brings  its  own
solemn  gloom.  Every  human  life,  however  resplendent  in  worldly  attributes,  must
in  the  end  succumb  to  that  assailant.  Happy  the  soul  that  possesses  the  life  eternal,
God's  gift  to  men  in  his  Son,  which  swallows  up  death  in  victory  (1  Cor.  xv.
64—57).

III.  Godly  principle  shows  its  strength  bt  remaining  firm  in  presence  of
ANT  suffering  which  it  may  bring  on  itself  or  on  others.  Amidst  all  his  grief
and  fear  Mordecai  never  entertained  the  idea  of  withdrawing  from  the  stand  which
he  had  made  against  Haman.  We  find  him  some  time  afterwards  still  maintaining
his  erect  and  defiant  attitude,  and  thereby  increasing  the  malignity  of  the  favourite.
His  example  is  a  noble  one,  but  it  is  not  singular.  Our  Lord  himself  forewarned  his
disciples  of  the  sufferings  they  would  have  to  endure  for  his  name's  sake  (John  xvi.
1 — 4),  yet  he  calmly  pursued  his  course,  and  laid  on  his  followers  all  the  burden  of  his
cross.  Nor  were  his  apostles  unlike  him.  Taking  up  his  cross,  they  freely  laid  it  on
others.  They  were  never  weakened  in  tlieir  labours  by  fear  of  the  persecutions,
cruelties,  losses,  and  deaths  which  resulted  from  the  reception  of  their  gospel.  If
we  do  our  duty  to  God  wo  may  safely  leave  results  in  his  hand.  Mordeoai's  firmness
in  obeying  religious  principle  at  all  costs  ultimately  taught  him  and  others  this  great
lesson. — D.

Vers.  4 — 12. — Sympathy.  Mordecai's  strange  appearance  at  the  king's  gate  made
a  stir  in  the  palace.  It  was  seen  by  Esther's  "maids  and  chamberlains,"  and  by
them  it  was  described  to  the  queen.  When  Esther  heard  of  the  condition  of  the
man  whom  she  loved  as  a  parent  she  was  "exceedingly  grieved."  Then  she  took
such  measures  as  she  could  to  show  how  much  she  felt  and  suffered  with  Mordecai.
Let  us  learn  from  her  conduct —

I.  That  in  times  op  trial  the  sympathy  of  those  whom  we  love  is  a  pbeciods
thing.  When  Esther  sent  robes  to  Mordeoai  to  replace  his  sackcloth,  and  loving
messages  with  them,  she  would  pour  a  real  solace  into  his  sorely-tried  heart.  She
did  not  know  at  first  the  cause  of  his  anguish,  but  she  did  her  best  to  put  her  own
loving  heart  beside  his,  and  by  the  sweet  contact  to  comfort  and  strengthen  him  in
his  mysterious  sorrow.  In  many  cases  of  suffering  we  can  do  little  more  than  pour
into  the  ear  a  breath  of  sympathy.  Tliat  often  is  the  best  blessing  that  can  be  given
or  received.  We  should  all  cherish  and  freely  exhibit  "a  f ellow-f eeling  "  with  those
of  our  friends  who  are  "in  any  distress."

II.  That  a  true  sympathy  is  eager  to  express  itself  in  beneficial  action.
Esther's  first  attempt  to  comfort  Mordecai  having  failed,  she  sent  a  trusted  servant
to  him  to  ascertain  what  his .  so  loudly-pronounced  manifestations  of  sorrow  really
meant.  She  could  not  live  in  peace  while  he  was  in  such  visible  unrest.  She  longed
to  know  all,  that  she  might  do  all  that  she  could.  It  is  not  good  to  indulge  in  idle
sentiment.  Many  are  content  if  they  feel  well,  or  surrender  themselves  for  a  time  to
tender  emotions.  No  practical  good  results  from  their  sensibility,  nor  is  any  intended.
There  is  a  good  feeling  which  is  satisfied  with  itself.  Such  was  not  Esther's.  Let
tis  beware  of  it  (see  Matt.  vii.  21 ;  xxi.  28 — 31  ;  Luke  x.  33 — 35).

III.  That  the  most  eager  sympathy  may  seem  helpless  in  presence  of  the
objects  that  attract  it.  When  Esther  learned  through  Hatach  the  cause  of
Mordecai's  distress,  and  received  the  copy  of  the  royal  decree,  her  sorrow  and
sympathy  would  be  greatly  intensified.  They  were  now  extended  to  all  her  people.
Yet,  queen  as  she  was,  she  felt  unable  to  do  anything  to  give  help.  There  are
troubles  before  which  the  most  powerful  have  to  confess  themselves  powerless.
Few  griefs  are  so  keen  as  that  which  springs  from  •  conscious  inability  to  satisfy  the
heart's  compassionate  yearnings.      Ld  ''onnection  with  Esther's  dimcultiea  let  ua


92  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [ch.  iv.  1—17

notice  here — 1.  Mordecai's  charge.  It  was  that,  after  reading  the  royal  decree,
Esther  should  go  to  the  king  and  make  supplication  before  him  for  her  people  (rer.
8).  This  he  laid  upon  her  as  a  solemn  duty.  The  obligations  of  duty  are  increased
by  high  position  and  influence.  2.  Esther's  strait.  However  willing  to  obey
Mordecai,  Esther  was  aware  of  a  twofold  obstacle  to  her  following  his  guidance  in
this  instance.  It  was  a  universally  known  law  of  the  Persian  court  that  no  one,  man
or  woman,  should  approach  the  king  uninvited  under  the  penalty  of  death  (ver.  11).
The  life  of  any  intruder,  on  whatever  mission,  could  only  be  saved  by  the  king's
holding  out  to  him  or  her  his  golden  sceptre.  In  ordinary  circumstances  the  un-
bidden entrance  of  the  queen  would  be  most  likely  to  receive  the  royal  sign  of  safety
and  welcome.  But  Esther  had  a  special  fact  to  communicate  to  Mordecai  on  this
point.  For  thirty  days,  or  a  month,  the  king  had  never  sought  her  company,  and
she  had  no  hope  that  he  might  now  give  her  an  opportunity  of  speaking  to  him.
This  forgetfiilness  of  Esther  on  the  part  of  the  king  may  perhaps  have  been  owing
to  the  vicious  influence  of  Haman.

IV.  That  testing  occasions  arise  in  the  histobt  of  bvbbt  life.  No  position,
however  exalted,  is  free  from  them.  Many  fail  to  meet  them  honestly  and  heroic-
ally, and  therefore  sufEer  more  than  they  gain  by  them.  Happy  are  those  who,  under
the  power  of  faith  and  a  sense  of  duty,  withstand  and  conquer  them  to  good  ends
(1  Pet.  i.  6,  7).— D.

Ver.  5. — Hie  cry  of  the  wretched.  "  Then  called  Esther  for  Hatach, .  .  .  and  gave
him  a  command  to,  Mordecai,  to  know  what  it  was,  and  why  it  was."  Esther  ^ars
of  Mordecai's  grief  from  her  maids  and  chamberlains.  She  sends  raiment  first.
She  then  sends  Hatach  to  ask  Mordecai  "what  his  grief  is,  and  why  it  is."  She  is
much  troubled  when  she  learns  the  real  state  of  danger  in  which  he  and  herself  are
placed.  She  does  not  seem  to  have  thought  so  much  about  her  people  as  about
her  uncle,  who  had  been  unto  her  as  a  father.

I.  Those  living  in  ldxuky  and  ease,  away  from  the  sight  of  the  tboijbles  of

THE  POOR,  often  DO  NOT  FEEL  ANXIOUS  FOR  THEIR  WELFARE.      This  is  the  tendency  of

all  luxurious  life,  that  we  measure  the  position  of  others  by  our  own;  or  we  think
not  of  others  as  having  such  fine  feelings.  We  believe  it  is  one  of  tbe  great  evils  of
the  present  day  that  the  struggle  to  attain  and  maintain  what  is  called  refined  life
and  position,  society,  is  crushing  out  the  sympathy  once  felt  for  those  on  the  lower
levels.  An  indifEerentism  to  their  claims  springs  up  in  proportion  to  the  anxiety  to
gratify  personal  selfishness.

II.  There  are  many  Mordecais  in  every  city  wearing  the  sackcloth  of  poverty,

AND  bearing  the  ASHES  OF  SORROW,  WHO  HAVE  A  STRONG  CLAIM  ON  THE   SYMPATHY  OF

Christians.  They  want  something  more  than  mere  -doled-out  crumbs  of  charity ;
they  need  a  heartfelt  sympathy,  and  real  help.  This  is  what  Christ  gave  them  on
earth.  He,  the  most  intellectual,  refined,  and  sinless  Being  that  ever  lived,  bent  to
the  lowliest,  strengthened  the  weakest,  bore  with  the  frailest,  came  into  closest  con-
tact with  disease  and  sin,  so  that  it  seemed  that  he  "  himself  took  our  infirmities,"
and  became  "  sin  for  ns."  His  whole  life  was  a  going  out  of  self  and  living  for
others. — H.

Ver.  Xi.-^Discerning  opportunities.  "  Who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  td
the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  We  can  imagine  Esther  saying  to  herself,
"  Away  with  all  my  cowardice,  my  weak-heartedness.  Why  should  I  fear  to  go  and
plead  for  my  people  ?  "  She  says  to  herself,  "  Can  I  be  so  unworthy  of  my  descent
as  an  Israelite  ?  Will  God  forsake  me  when  striving  to  save  and  serve  his  chosen
people  ?  Come,  0  thou  that  leddest  thy  people  as  a  flock,  and  lead  me  now  to  a
prosperous  ending  of  my  hazardous  work  I  O  thou  that  didst  break  the  power  of
Pharaoh,  restrain  that  of  our  enemy  I  0  thou  that  didst  go  forth  with  Joshua  and
help  him  by  hailstorms  from  heaven  against  the  Amalekites,  unsheathe  thy  sword
against  this  Agagite,  this  Haman  who  seeks  our  hurt  I  Cause  me,  0  G-od,  like
Miriam,  to  praise  thee  in  gladsome  song  because  the  enemy  and  his  designs  are  alike
overthrown.  Unworthy  am  I  to  be  an  instrument  in  thine  hands ;  yet,  if  I  come  to
the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this,  make  me  ready  to  do  thy  will."


OB  IT.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  M

I.  Opportunities  for  doinq  good  come  to  Christians  in  bvebt  place.  They  can
benefit  their  family,  the  nation,  or  the  Church.

II.  Opportunities  of  doing  good  should  be  seized.  Gone,  they  may  have  passed
for  ever.  Generally  the  opportunities  of  doing  the  greatest  good  are  brie£  The
time  of  the  death  edict  is  approaching.

III.  If  opportunities  are  neglected  it  is  well  to  have  bemindkbs.  Parents,  friends,
or  ministers  may  be  as  reminding  Mordecais.

IV.  The  thought  that  an  opportunity  is  specially  given  by  God  fob  sbbvihg  hih
has  a  great  efEect  in  leading  to  the  performance  of  duty. — H.

Vers.  13 — 17. — A  bold  faith.  I.  Difficulties  do  not  daunt  the  stbong.  Mor-
decai  quite  understood  the  force  of  the  twofold  barrier  to  Esther's  appealing  to
the  king.  Yet  if  it  had  been  a  hundredfold  he  would  have  urged  her  to  face  it.
Neither  a  legal  folly  nor  any  amount  of  personal  risk  could  justify  irresolution  or
inaction  when  a  whole  people  might  be  saved  by  a  bold  attempt.  Obstacles  that  seom
insurmountable  in  ordinary  times  dwindle  much  in  presence  of  great  emergencies.

II.  If  we  are  true  to  God  ourselves  we  shall  wish  and  pray  that  our  beloved
ones  may  be  true  also.  No  being  on  earth  was  so  precious  to  Mordecai  as  Esther,
but  his  very  love  would  long  to  see  her  faithful  to  her  God  and  country.  Esther
would  have  been  to  him  no  longer  what  she  had  been  in  the  past  if  now  she  had
failed  to  undertake  the  mission  which  God  seemed  to  lay  upon  her.  Parents  send
forth  their  sons  to  do  battle  for  their  country,  and  they  would  much  rather  that  they
should  die  on  the  field  than  prove  recreant  to  honour  and  duty.  •

III.  A  faithful  love  is  rational  in  its  demands.  We  should  neither  make
sacrifice  ourselves,  nor  ask  sacrifice  from  others,  without  good  cause.  In  such  cases
we  should  be  clear  in  our  faith  and  judgment.  To  Mordecai  Esther  seemed  the  one
appointed  instrument  of  thwarting  Haman  and  saving  Israel.  The  reasons  of  this
conviction  he  stated  to  the  queen  with  great  simplicity  and  force.  Let  us  look  at
them.  1.  As  a  Jewess,  her  life  was  already  doomed.  Let  the  edict  once  be  put  in
force,  let  blood  once  be  shed,  and  even  she  would  not  escape,  any  more  than  Vashti,
the  immutability  of  Persian  law.  Better  to  risk  life  in  trying  to  prevent  a  dreadful
iniquity  than  to  expose  it  by  a  timid  quiescence  to  almost  certain  death.  2.  If  she
failed,  deliverance  would  come  by  another.  Here  was  an  expression  of  a  strong  and
prophetic  faith ;  and  in  it  we  learn  the  secret  of  Mordecai's  persistent  opposition  to
Haman.  He  trusted  in  God,  and  had  a  firm  persuasion  that  God  would  yet  deliver
his  people.  Esther  and  her  house  might  be  destroyed,  but  some  other  saviour  would
be  raised  up  to  testify  to  the  faithfulness  and  omnipotence  of  the  God  of  Israel.
God  is  not  dependent  on  any  one  instrument,  or  on  any  multiple  of  one.  He  raises  up
and  casts  down  at  will,  and  chooses  his  servants.  Amidst  all  the  weaknesses  of  his
people  his  covenant  stands  sure.  3.  She  might  have  been  raised  to  the  throne  just
for  the  purpose  of  saving  her  people  at  this  juncture.  The  circumstances  of  her
slevation  were  peculiar.  There  was  a  mystery  in  them  which  indicated  to  the
thoughtful  Mordecai  the  hand  of  God.  To  some  extent  the  mystery  was  now
explained.  Esther  was  the  instrument  provided  by  God  for  the  "enlargement  and
deliverance  of  Israel."  Every  opportunity  of  doing  good  is  virtually  a  Divine  call.
When  God  points  the  way  we  should  pursue  it,  at  whatever  cost,  as  the  only  right
way.  The  providence  of  God  is  often  remarkably  shown  in  the  occasions  which
demand  from  us  special  service  for  him  and  his  people.

IV.  A  MIND  that  closes  ITSELF  AGAINST  CONVICTION  IS  ITS  OWN  ENEMY.      Whether

from  fear,  or  pride,  or  evil  inclinations,  many  harden  themselves  against  the  demon-
strations of  reason  and  experience ;  they  shut  the  window  of  the  soul  against  any
fresh  light.  TLey  take  a  stand  which  implies  the  impossibility  of  any  change  or
advancement.  Reasoning  is  lost  on  them.  But  Esther  at  once  felt  and  acknow-
ledged the  force  of  Mordecai's  argument.  She  could  not  resist  it,  and  did  not  try.
Her  heart  was  convinced,  and  in  the  answer  she  returned  she  frankly  confessed  it.  An
openness  to  conviction  is  a  condition  of  growth  and  usefulness ;  stubborn  prejudice
is  a  bar  to  wisdom  and  its  fruits.

V.  CONVIOTIONS  SHOULD  BE  CARRIED  OUT  IN  ACTION.  We  are  often  tempted  to  act
fai  opposition  to  the  dictates  of  our  inward  judgment.    The  wiK  may  fail  to  be


B4  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  [oh.  iv.  1—17,

governed  even  by  the  deepest  conviction.  It  is  sad  when  acknowledged  truth  and
actual  conduct  are  at  variance  with  each  other.  Esther  affords  us  an  example  oi
loyal  obedience  to  conviction,  in  face  of  the  weightiest  temptation  to  set  it  aside.
Having  been  convinced  by  Mordecai's  representations,  she  resolved  to  do  what  these
urged  upon  her  as  a  sacred  duty.  And  in  the  words  by  which  she  conveyed  her
purpose  to  Mordecai  she  gave  a  remarkable  display  of — 1.  Piety.  The  three  days'
fast  which  she  laid  on  herself  and  her  maidens  inside  the  palace,  and  on  Mordecai
and  the  Jews  of  Shushan,  was  a  humble  and  prayerful  casting  of  the  whole  matter
on  Divine  help.  No  mention  is  made  of  prayers,  but  the  fast  was  all  a  prayer.  Tlie
queen  knew  her  own  weakness ;  she  knew  also  the  true  Source  of  strength ;  she  felt
that  the  work  was  God's,  and  that  she  was  but  a  feeble  instrument  in  his  hands ;
and,  therefore,  she  desired  her  countrymen  to  unite  with  her  in  humiliation  and
supplication  before  the  God  of  Israel.  Trial  achieves  much  of  its  purpose  when  it
brings  a  soul  thus  to  the  feet  of  God  under  a  sense  of  dependence  on  his  merciful
succour.  Victory  is  really  won  when  endangered  weakness  feels  itself  under  the
shadow  of  the  Almighty.  2.  Heroism.  All  irresolution  had  now  faded  from  Esther's
mind.  Having  appealed  to  God,  she  was  no  longer  doubtful ;  strength  had  already
been  given  her.  She  w?s  prepared  for  the  sacrifice.  "If  I  perish,  I  perish,"  A
godly  heroism  ! — one  inspired  by  God  and  fed  by  communion  with  him.  Esther's
words  were  not  emotional,  or  self-confident,  or  desperate;  they  were  the  result  of
earnest  meditation,  and  must  not  be  separated  from  her  proposal  of  a  three  days'
fast.  We  are  reminded  by  them  of  the  words  of  our  Lord  when  communing  with
his  Father  before  he  went  to  thecross:  "  Nevertheless,  not  my  will,  but  thine  be
done."  Esther  is  a  type  of  Israel's  Messiah.  We  see  in  her  conduct  at  this  time  the
working  of  that  Holy  Spirit  who  led  God's  Son  to  the  sacrifice  of  himself  for  the
salvation  of  men.

VI.  The  way  into  the  presence  of  the  King  of  kings  is  open  and  free  to  all  who
truly  seek  him.  To  the  earnest  suppliant  or  loving  child  the  Divine  majesty  is  act
hedged  round  by  formalities  that  create  distance  and  terror.  God  is  near  to  all  who
call  upon  him.  He  dwells  with  the  humble  and  contrite.  All  may  come  to  him  by
the  way  that  he  has  consecrated  in  his  Son,  and  come  at  any  time.  None  are  refused
a  hearing  and  a  welcome.  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  bis  angels  over  every  one
that  seeks  his  face. — D,

Vers.  16 — 17. — Resolving  to  run  risks.  Deep  and  intense,  if  not  prolonged,  must
have  been  the  struggle  in  the  breast  of  the  beautiful  queen  of  Persia.  The  doom
that  awaited  her  if  she  was  unfavourably  received  was  terrible,  and  would  be  imme-
diately executed.  She  had  not  only  to  do  that  which  was  "  not  according  to  the
law"  (ver.  16),  but  also  to  ask  a  great  boon  of  the  king,  to  bring  before  him  her
Jewish  extraction,  and  to  measure  her  influence  against  that  of  the  great  favourite.
She  did  not  seem  at  this  time  to  be  in  any  especial  favour  with  Ahasuerus  (ver.  1 1 ),
and  it  appeared  as  if  the  human  chances  were  much  against  success.  But  the  nobler
motives  triumphed  in  the  struggle ;  she  would  not  refuse  to  attempt  this  great  de-
liverance, let  come  what  might.  The  worst  was  death,  and  "  if  she  perished,  she
perished  "  (ver.  16).  These  are  memorable  words  ;  if  they  are  not  often  on  human
lips,  the  thought  which  breathes  in  them  is  often  in  human  minds,  and  the  feeling  of
which  they  are  eloquent  is  often  in  human  hearts.  Men  in  every  age  and  land  are
running  great  risks,  trusting  everything  to  one  cast  of  the  dice,  imperilling  life,  or
much  if  not  all  that  makes  life  dear,  on  some  one  hazard.  The  words  of  Esther  are
sometimes  found  on  lips  unworthy  to  use  them  ;  they  are  perverted  or  misapplied.
Sometimes  they  are  (1)  the  motto  of  a  foolish  fatalism.  There  is  a  certain  keen  but
desperate  pleasure  in  the  intense  excitement  which  precedes  the  moment  when  for-
tunes are  either  made  or  lost.  The  gambler,  as  well  as  the  hypocrite,  "has  his
reward,"  such  as  it  is,  in  the  slaking  of  that  feverish  thirst  for  highly-wrought
feeling,  and  he  either  wins  what  he  he  has  not  fairly  earned,  and  what  he  is  certaii
to  squander  in  dissipation,  or  he  loses  perhaps  all  the  precious  fruits  of  many  years'
toil.  He  risks  everything  on  one  throw,  and  "if  he  perishes,  he  perishes.  In
whatever  ways  men  run  such  risks,  whether  it  be  a  kingdom  or  a  fortune  or  a
competency,  they  greatly  exceed  their  rights ;  they  run  risks  which  they  have  n»


OH.  IV.  1-17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHEB.  «l

moral  right  to  run,  and  are  walking  in  a  perilous  and  guilty  path.  These  words  arn
(2)  the  expression  of  a  needless  fear.  It  is  sometimes  said  by  those  who  are  anxiously
•eeking  salvation,  that  if  tliey  perish,  they  will  perish  at  the  foot  of  the  cross.  This
is,  perhaps,  only  the  trembling  of  a  great  hope,  the  shadow  of  a  new  and  great  joy.
Tlie  earnest  soul  seeking  salvation  from  sin  through  Christ  Jesus  cannot  perish.  He
tliiit  helieveth  shall  not  perish.  God's  word,  which  is  the  very  strongest  basis  on
wliich  to  build  any  hope,  is  our  sure  guarantee.  So  also  with  the  future  blessedness.
We  need  not,  in  presence  of  death,  indulge  even  in  this  measure  of  uncertainty.
Death  is  finally  conquered.  Christ  is  the  Lord  of  life  eternal,  and  will  most  as-
suredly bestow  it  on  all  who  love  his  name.  We  shall  not  perish  in  the  darkness  of
death,  but  live  on  in  the  brightness  of  immortal  glory.  That,  however,  to  which  these
words  of  Esther  are  specially  applicable  is  this  ;  they  are —

The  utterance  op  moral  hiboism.  Esther  came  to  her  conclusion  after  serious
and  earnest  thought.  Her  life  was  dear  to  her.  She  had  everything  to  make  it
precious  and  worth  keeping  if  she  honourably  could,  but  affection  for  her  kindred
and  interest  in  her  race  weighed  all  selfish  considerations  down.  She  would  go
forward,  and  if  she  did  perish,  her  life  thus  lost  would  not  be  a  vain  and  worthless
sacrifice,  but  a  glorious  martyrdom.  Such  struggles  men  are  still  called  on  to
pass  through,  such  victory  to  gain :  the  soldier  as  he  steps  into  rank  on  the  day
of  battle  ;  the  philanthropist  as  he  visits  the  hospital  or  waits  on  the  wounded  ones
lying  stricken  on  the  field  of  slaughter ;  the  physician  as  he  goes  his  round  when
the  pestilence  is  raging ;  the  sailor  as  he  mans  the  lifeboat;  the  evangelist  as  he
penetrates  into  the  haunt  of  the  vicious  and  the  violent  criminal ;  the  missionary  as
he  lands  among  the  savage  tribe.  In  presence  of  this  risk-running  of  ours,  we
remark — 1.  That  though  we  may  timidly  shrink  at  first,  yet  afterwards  we  may  do
noble  service.  Witness  this  case  of  Estlier,  and  that  of  Moses  (Exod.  iv.  13).  2.
That  if  not  the  greater,  yet  the  lesser  risks  we  should  all  be  ready  to  run.  If  not  life
itself  (1  John  ill.  16),  some  precious  things  in  life.  Something  surely,  if  not  much,  in
health,  or  money,  or  friendship,  or  reputation,  or  comfort  we  will  venture  for  Christ
and  for  our  fellows.  If  we  never  undertake  anything  but  that  in  which  there  is
perfect  security  from  injury  and  loss,  we  shall  do  nothing,  we  shall  "  stand  all  the
day  idle."  3.  That  we  have  tlie  very  strongest  inducement  to  run  great  risks.  The
will  of  Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  25) ;  the  example  of  Christ ;  the  example  of  Christian
heroes  and  heroines ;  the  crying  need  of  the  world ;  the  blessed  alternative  of
present  triumph,  for  if  we  perish  we  do  not  perish,  but  live  eternally.  4.  That  tee
should  sustain  the  hands  of  those  who  are  passing  through  perils  for  us.  Esther's
maidens  and  "the  Jews  present  in  Shushan  "  (ver.  16)  fasted  (and  prayed),  that
the  end  might  be  as  they  hoped.  .  We  who  wait  while  others  labour  or  fight  must
"strengthen  our  brethren  ;  "  we  must  seek  by  our  earnest  prayer  to  touch  the  hand
that  turns  the  heart  of  kings,  and  that  holds  and  guides  all  uie  threads  of  human
destiny. — C.

Ver.  14. — The  suggestion  for  the  hour.  "  And  who  knoweth  whether  thou  ait
come  to  the  kingdom  for  sucli  a  time  as  this  ?  "  The  history  is  very  easily  under-
stood as  carried  forward  in  the  preceding  thirteen  verses  of  this  chapter.  The
faith  of  Mordecai  does  not  always  seem  at  its  best,  and  his  apparent  suspicion  of
Esther  (ver.  14)  seems  scarcely  in  close  accord  with  the  thought  that  "  deliverance
will  arise  to  the  Jews  "  from  some  quarter.  Probably  he  felt  that  it  was  his  to  use
all  the  means,  to  let  nothing  go  by  default,  and  to  tax  himself  with  an  hundredfold
earnestness  of  effort,  since  by  his  conduct  it  was  that  the  present  calamity  had
found  its  occasion.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  one  cannot  but  notice  and  admire  how
his  mind  evidently  searched  all  round  for  the  providence  of  the  God  of  himself
and  his  people.  This  it  is  which  transpires  in  this  passage,  "And  who  knoweth
wliether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  We  may  forget
awhile  the  relation  which  existed  between  Mordecai  and  Esther ;  for  it  k  neither
teacher  nor  taught  that  need  monopolise  attention,  though  in  this  case  they  naturally
attract  it.     But  let  us  notice —

I.  The  exact  position  which  needed  stimulating  help  and  direction.  1.  It  wa«
one  that  could  not  haTe  been  calculated  for  or  provided  against.    It  waa  unforeseen,


06  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [CH.  iv.  1—17.

and  it  would  have  been  unreasonable  to  exact  that  it  should  have  been  foreseen.  Ai
matter  of  fact,  Mordecai's  stored  memory  might  possibly  have  been  able  to  produce
historical  instances  of  atrocities  in  their  outside  like  the  present.  But,  even  then,
not  as  the  result  of  the  ofience  of  one  unimportant  individual  offered  to  one  courtier.
The  hand  of  Mordecai  had  indeed  touched  a  spring  which  set  going  unexpected
machinery  of  fearful  kind  to  unexpectedly  threatening  effect  But  the  touching  of
that  spring  was  not  an  idle  act.  It  was  not  an  accidental  or  an  inquisitive  act.  It
was  better  even  than  an  innocent  act.  For  it  was  right  and  brave,  and  full  of  moral
courage.  Of  the  many  times  we  find  ourselves  involved  in  perplexity,  in  unexpected
danger,  how  often  can  we  say  as  much  as  this  ?  2.  It  was  one  involving  the  ten-
derest  considerations.  Apprehensions  were  indefinitely  intensified  by  the  interests
of  incalculable  moment  which  were  known  to  be  concerned.  Hearts  inexpressibly
dear,  lives  innumerable,  and  invested  now  more  than  ever  with  an  awful  and  mysteri-
ous sacredness,  were  in  question.  These  were  the  very  things  to  unedge  discern-
ment and  to  unnerve  purpose.  3.  It  was  an  occasion,  the  whole  weight  of  which
showed  now  as  if  gathering  into  one  bulk,  and  moving  over  the  head  and  anxious
heart  of  one  woman.  It  is  apparent  throughout,  even  when  Mordecai  seems  to  urge
Esther,  and  not  to  pity,  that  her  one,  her  only  unresting  desire  was  to  know  the
rightest,  best  course  to  take.  She  was  already  a  gilded  victim,  a  captive  bird  that
had  ever  most  of  all  loved  freedom,  a  prisoner  in  fetters,  not  less  fetters  because
each  link  was  of  wrought  gold.  How  could  she  tune  her  harp,  and  sweep  its  strings,
and  sing  her  song  in  that  strange  place  ?  Yet  he  who  loved  her  dearest  and  most
prized  all  that  she  was,  helpless  to  resist  the  rapacity  of  those  who  rifled  his  honest
threshold,  kept  as  near  as  possible  to  that  prison  of  a  palace,  that  if  was,  which  held
her  (ch.  ii.  11).  He  found  in  his  heart  the  undying  seed  of  some  faith,  and  some
inexplicable  hope,  that  there  was  possibly  a  reason  in  it  all,  and  a  use  for  it  all,  and
that  "  somehow  good  would  be  the  final  goal  of  ill "  so  hard  to  bear.  In  all  the  in-
imitable brevity  of  Scripture,  what  a  tale  of  love  and  loss,  and  of  the  hanging  on  to
uncertain  hope,  escapes  from  within  these  fewest  words  1  And  was  it  she,  the  object
of  this  tender  solicitude,  who  was  competent  to  bear  the  overhanging  load  of  respons-
ibility, and  the  brunt  of  blame,  in  case  of  failure  ?  Stouter  hearts  and  of  sterner  stuff
than  all  with  which  we  can  credit  Esther  would  collapse  before  the  prospect.  4.  It
was  an  occasion  distracted  by  aggravating  contradictions.  If  all  is  to  depend  on
Esther,  as  she  is  now  urged  to  believe,  there  was  every  motive  for  action,  but  over-
whelming reasons  for  inaction.  Love,  apparent  duty,  urgent  expostulation,  the
pressure  of  beloved  command,  the  impetus  of  long  habits  of  obedience,  all  pointed
one  way,  and  said  one  thing.  But  it  was  not  the  merely  slothful  man's  lion  in  the
way  that  bid  her  beware  of  that  way,  and  think  of  another.  No ;  it  was  reason,  by
the  dictates  of  which  men  not  only  rightly  act,  but  also  rightly  abstain  from  acting.
It  was  calmness  of  judgment,  the  more  to  be  admired  because  the  circumstances
were  enough  to  unbalance  almost  any  judgment.  It  was  matter  of  knowledge  with
Esther,  and  of  universal  consent  in  addition,  that  the  peril  was  what  none  but  the
madman,  or  the  desperate,  or  the  extremity  of  despair  itself  would  dare  to  face.
Can  this  be  defended  then  as  just  ground  for  moral  action,  when  there  are  ten  thousand
chances  against  you,  and  what  you  endanger  is  your  all  ?  There  can  be  no  doubt  as
to  the  right  answer  to  this,  except  for  the  occasion,  the  emergency  of  which  lies  in
the  fact  that  some  advance  must  be  made.  Those  passages  of  life,  far  from  unknown
to  us,  which  are  of  this  kind  still  present  the  most  trying  problemB  of  our  whole
history.

II.  Thb  exact  position  which  the  instructor  took.  1.  It  was  one  that  seemed
hard,  that  inclined  to  the  unfeeling.  This  is  exactly  what  a  teacher's  position  must
not  unfrequently  seem,  seem  without  being  so.  Even  to  those  who  overhear,  his
tones  sound  sharp  and  quick,  just  as  those  of  Mordecai  do  now  to  tis.  We  must  do
justice  to  Mordecai.  We  may  justly  suppose  that  he  knew  the  circumstances  pre-
cisely, the  mental  character  of  Esther  precisely,  the  precise  point  of  the  dangerous
way  where  she  would  need  a  moment's  quick  help,  the  momentary  stimulus  of  the
master's  sharp  summons,  lest  she  should  yield.  "  Even  as  the  serpent  beguiled  Eve
through  his  Bubtilty."  Mordecai  knew  that  history,  and  dared  not  take  for  granted  that
his  Esther  was  better,  safer,  stronger  than  Clod's  Eve     The  luxurious  palace  of  Persia


OH.  IV.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  Vt

was  a  poor  travesty  of  the  charms  of  Eden,  but  it  had  its  seductions.  And  there  was  no
knowing  where  the  serpent  did  not  lurk.  2.  It  was  one  that  applied  itself  to  move  at
once  that  whole  description  of  hindrance  to  right  action  which  arises  from  self-regard.
This  is  a  native  principle,  one  of  the  greatest  significance,  of  essential  and  unnumbered
uses.  The  vast  mass  of  humanity  could  never  be  moved  along  of  any  external  force
whatsoever ;  but  this  Divine  contrivance,  this  merciful  provision — a  spring  of  energy
and  action  in  each  and  every  unit  of  which  the  mass  is  made — throws  life  into  it.
The  unwieldy  loses  its  unwieldiness,  its  movements  are  determined,  and  its  advance
is  irresistible.  Valuable,  however,  as  this  principle  of  self-regard,  it  easily  oversteps
«  certain  border-line.  All  the  indications  with  regard  to  Esther  look  another  way.
She  has  self-regard,  she  is  the  opposite  of  selfish.  At  first  the  tone  of  Mordecai  seems
somewhat  out  of  harmony,  however,  with  this  supposition.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it
is  quite  open  to  us  to  believe  that  he  had  no  individual  suspicion  of  Esther.  He  dis-
trusted not  her,  but  the  extreme  peril  of  the  situation  for  human  nature.  His  well-
versed  knowledge,  by  experience  and  by  observation,  of  the  dangerous  points  where
human  nature  was  liable  to  the  most  sudden  and  disastrous  break-downs  made  him
tremble  for  the  Esther  he  loved  so  well.  These  two  things  he  knew :  first,  that  there
was  insight  a  certain  powerful  assault  of  temptation  for  Esther;  secondly,  that  one
of  the  grandest  achievements  of  any  shepherd  of  souls  is  when  he  cuts  off  m&  enemy's
approach  by  the  simple  method  of  preventing  the  object  of  attack  from  straying  away
alone.  3.  liast  of  all,  when  these  negative  preparations  were  made  a  great  step  in
advance  is  taken.  We  will  suppose  that  Mordecai  had  done  some  little  violence  to
his  own  feelings  and  affections,  for  he  had  not  been  accustomed  before  to  use  such
peremptory  tones  or  personal  arguments  to  Esther.  But  it  was  worth  while  to  take
some  pains,  in  order  to  prepare  for  the  moment  that  was  coming.  The  moment  had
come.  He  plies  his  last  argument.  He  knows  it  is  his  best  by  far.  He  watches  for
its  effect,  but  without  much  doubt  as  to  what  it  would  be.  From  the  lower  arguments
of  policy,  of  appeal  to  feeling,  of  memory  dishonoured,  he  crosses  over  to  religious
appeal.  It  scarcely  amounted  to  appeal.  It  was  a  fruitful  hirU.  Let  it  fall  in  the
right  soil,  and  fertile  as  the  soil,  so  fruitful  would  the  seed  be.  A  woman's  discern-
ment is  notably  quick,  and  her  sight  intuition,  and  the  eye  of  Esther  opened  and
met  the  eye  of  Heaven  falling  on  her  and  on  all  her  anxiety.  This  eye,  like  that  of
a  portrait,  followed  her  now  everywhere.  And  timid,  baffled,  almost  numb  faith  felt
its  own  hand  again,  and  reached  it  forth  to  that  which  was  offered  to  it.  This  was
the  suggestion  that  solved  the  problem,  exiled  hesitation,  and  decided  that  action
should  get  the  better  of  inaction, — "  And  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the
kingdom  for  such  a  time  as  this?" — B.

Ver.  16. — JSelfs  supreme  capitulation.  "If  I  perish,  I  perish."  The  suggestion  of
Providence  being  concerned  in  the  matter  was  like  life  from  the  dead  to  Esther.  The
idea  of  Providence  having  been  now  some  time  working  up  to  this  point  was  an  im-
mense comfort  and  impulse  to  her  mind.    It  was  a  flash  of  light  that  lit  up  the  whole

ene  for  one  moment.  And  when  that  one  moment  was  sped,  the  darkness  that
,«turned  was  not,  as  before,  unrelieved.  There  was  a  distinct  line  of  light  athwart  it
Confidence  as  to  the  final  issue  of  all  was  far  from  present.  Nothing  like  absolute
conviction  that  in  the  end  all  would  be  well  could  Esther  boast.  Suspense  in  some
shape  still  prolonged  its  unwelcomed  sojourn.  But  it  was  no  longer  the  agonised
suspense  of  not  knowing  what  to  do,  of  not  knowing  whether  to  move  at  all.  The
pent-up  heart  is  bad  enough,  but  solitary  confinement  must  make  it  much  worse.
Pent-up  hope  is  a  terrible  strain,  but  the  strain  becomes  much  worse  when  it  must  be
tolerated  without  one  active  effort,  one  healthy  struggle.  This  phase  of  things  had
now  passed  by  for  Esther.  She  had  gone  faithfully  through  it,  and  was  none  th«
worse  for  having  treated  it  as  a  thing  that  needed  to  be  gone  through  faithfully
and  unhurriedly.  Mordecai  was  not  necessarily  in  the  right  when  he  seemed  to
wonler  at  Esther's  hesitation.  Though  we  credit  him  with  being  a  wise  man,  a  good
man,  and  very  full  of  pride  in  Esther  and  love  to  her,  Esther  very  likely  felt  that  he
had  not  put  himself  quite  in  her  position,  and  could  not  do  so.  But  it  was  because
she  had  gone  faithfully  through  the  struggle,  and  well  looked  at  the  question  on  both
sides,  and  considered  its  alternative  difScultios  and  perils,  that  when  enough  light  did

■8TBIB.  ■


S8  THF  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [cb.  iv.  1—17.

come  she  used  it  in  a  moment ;  and  when  thought  had  done  its  fair  amount  of  work,
hesitation  fled,  and  determination  succeeded  to  its  place.  To  wearied  human  inquiry,
to  exhausted  human  resources,  to  bewildered  human  wisdom,  comes  in  most  welcome
the  ministry  little  thought  of  before,  of  the  Invisible.  You  are  immediately  dis-
posed to  gift  it  with  omniscience  and- all  power.  And  the  theory  of  a  Providence,
anticipating,  interposing,  overruling,  becomes  faith.  It  is  embraced  with  ardour,
and  soon  shows  that  it  possesses  the  highest  stimulus  to  duty.  This  never  fails  to
answer  obedient  to  its  call,  even  though  when  it  answers  obedient  it  brings  this  ex-
clamation to  the  steps  of  the  altar,  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish  I  "  Let  us  observe  that
this  is  the  impassioned  exclamation —

I.  Of  one  WHO  FELT  THE  BELIEF  OF  AT  LAST  SEEING  DDTT.  The  mind  must  have
groped  about  in  darkness,  must  have  been  distressed  by  doubt,  must  have  known
conflict  even  to  anguish,  before  it  would  have  expressed  itself  thus,  and  here  is  some
part  of  its  relief.  Esther  had  come  to  see  it,  not  "  through  tears,"  perhaps,  with
their  more  purified  light,  but  through  the  most  painful  obscurities  and  harassing
incertitude.

II.  Of  one  WHO  SAW  duty  to  follow  IT  at  its  proper  cost.  The  sight  of  duty  i*
often  the  signal  for  shutting  the  eyes,  for  turning  the  back,  for  filling  the  mind  with
diverting  occupation,  for  trying,  by  one  method  or  another,  to  forget  it.  Not  so
here.

III.  Of  one  whose  fixed  resolve  was  not  due  to  desperation,  nor  to  stoicism ;
not  due  to  over-wrought  feeling,  nor  to  blunted  sense  and  affection  and  faculty.  The
fixed  determination  here  betokened  was  that  of  one  who  had  "  counted  the  cost,"  who
evidently  felt  the  cost  to  be  that  denoted  by  a  very  large  price,  and  one  which  merited
consideration  first.

IV.  Of  one  WHO  had  so  estimated  the  task  which  she  was  to  attempt  that
SHE  BEGGED  HELP,  begged  sympathy — begged  that  chiefest  kind  of  help,  the  union
of  all  kindred  souls  in  religious  exercises,  in  religious  prostration  before  the  Unseen,
in  the  faith  unfeigned  which  believed  it  possible  and  right  to  strive  with  all  conceiv-
able endeavour  to  influence  and  prevail  upon  the  sovereign  Disposer  of  all  things.

V.  Of  one  WHOSE  enterprise,  if  fatal,  was  bound  to  win  the  crown  of  the
MARTYR.  Whose  enterprise,  if  not  fatal,  but  yet  unsuccessful,  bore  testimony  to  the
will,  the  courage,  the  spirit  of  the  martyr.  Whose  enterprise,  if  neither  fatal  nor
unsuccessful,  but,  on  the  contrary,  leading  the  way  to  more  abundant  glory  and  joy
here,  yet  still  had  this  testimony  about  it,  that  it  had  practically  shown  the  best  part
of  any  sacrifice,  and  through  the  cross  had  reached  the  crown.

VI.  Of    one    WHOSE    SPIRIT   BREATHED   RESIGNATION   WHERE    IT   DID    NOT   REACH   TO

THE  SUBLIMER  HEIGHT  OF  TRUST.  For  whatever  reason,  Esther  had  not  attained  to
the  exercise  of  a  calm  trust.  She  more  distrusted  the  badness  of  the  circumstances
than  she  trusted  the  goodness  of  her  cause ;  the  badness  of  the  king's  whim  than
the  goodness  of  the  purpose  which  was  far  above  his ;  the  badness  of  the  earthly  law
than  the  goodness  of  that  mercy  which  is  "  high  as  the  heavens  and  vast  as  the
clouds."  It  would  seem  evident  that  her  knowledge  was  not  clear.  One  of  the
people  of  God,  yet,  for  want  of  priest  and  prophet,  of  sacrifice  and  of  temple-worship,
of  dream,  of  oracle,  of  seer,  times  went  hard  with  her  religious  education.  The
"  word  of  God  was  precious  in  those  days,"  and  in  that  land  of  her  captivity ;  and
ilie  the  sufferer  thereby.

The  lessons  suggested  by  the  language  of  this  supreme  scene  in  the  conflict  of
Esther  are  numerous,  and  of  a  remarkably  diversified  kind.  1.  The  figure  of  human
virtue  here  is  impressive  in  its  consent  to  bow  to  vicarious  suffering,  though  it  were
only  consent ;  in  its  love,  and  solicitude,  and  obedience,  and  in  the  conduct  of  its  own
struggles.  2.  The  reproach  is  ever  memorable  which  it  conveys  to  how  many — whose
knowledge  is  light  itself,  yet  whose  thought  and  deed  fall  so  far  below  those  of  one
whose  knowledge  was  manifestly  very  partinl,  very  clouded.  3.  The  cry  is  arresting
because  of  its  strong  sympathy  of  tone  with  the  cry  of  one  who  feels  himself  a  real
sinner  against  the  law  of  God,  and  finds  himself  as  yet  more  "  driven  "  because  of
the  conviction  of  that  sin,  and  the  overshading  dread  of  its  liability  to  punishment,
than  he  finds  himself  drawn  of  the  mercy  of  his  God,  and  able  to  repose  deep,  calm
tru«t  in  his  Saviour.     The  soul  urged  by  conviction  of  sin,  oppressed  with  the  sense


cfi.  tv.  1—1?.]  TBE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


of  its  desert  of  wrath,  and  tremblingly  afraid  of  death,  has  often  found  its  way
aright  to  the  crosa,  though  to  use  words  carrying  the  moat  impossible  of  significa-
tions for  any,  once  arrived  there- — "If  I  perish,  I  periah  I "  4.  Whatever  we  may
justly  admire  of  the  spirit  of  Esther  here  displayed,  and  of  the  stops  by  which  she
rose  to  it  as  she  contemplated  her  own  possible  and,  as  she  thought,  likely  sacrifice,
how  glad  we  are  to  turn  away  to  the  tremendously  favourable  contrast  of  him  whose
vicarious  sufferings,  whose  infinite  love,  whose  eternal  sacrifice,  was  certain,  was
voluntary,  was  cheerful  amid  surpassing  anguish,  and  patient  with  the  patience  of
the  lamb  sacrificed. — B.

Ver.  16. — Prayer  and  resolve.  "  Go,  gather  together  all  the  Jews  that  are  present
in  Shushan,  and  fast  ye  for  me,"  &c.

I;  Esthee's  faith  in  prayer.  She  looks  to  God,  not  to  man.  She  has  faith  not
only  in  her  own  prayers,  but  in  those  of  others.  She  feels  her  need  of  the  prayers
of  others.     She  is  ready  to  share  that  which  she  enjoirs  on  others.

II.  Esther's  piety  known  in  the  palace.  Her  maidens  are  so  under  her  influence
that  she  knows  that  they  all  will  be  ready  to  join  in  the  observance  of  fasting  and  in
offering  prayer  to  the  God  of  Israel.  This  was  a  remarkable  thing,  remembering  iJiat
these  maidens  belonged  to  an  Oriental  and  pagan  court.

III.  Esther's  decision  to  dare  anything  for  the  sake  of  others.  Great  her
decision  of  character  1  She  will  not  let  the  opportunity  for  helping  others  pass,  and
then  strive  to  atone  for  her  neglect  by  useless  regrets.  How  great  her  devotion  I
"  If  I  perish,  I  perish  !  "  She  would  certainly  have  pefished  if  she  had  not  gone  in
to  the  king.  The  decrees  of  a  Persian  monarch  were'unalterable.  Remember  how
Darius  was  sore  displeased  with  himself;  and  set  his  heart  on  Daniel  to  deliver  him,
and  laboured  to  the  going  down  of  the  sun  to  deliver  him.  He  doubtless  sought  to
devise  means  of  maintaining  the  law  and  yet  evading  its  import.  Into  the  den  of
lions  Daniel,  the  king's  favourite,  was  cast,  and  to  the  slaughter  Esther,  though
queen,  would  have  been,  by  ruthless  decree,  when  the  time  was  come  ;  but  prayer,
fasting,  decision,  saved  her.  God  interposed  to  soften  the  heart  of  the  king,  as  well
as  to  give  him  a  sleepless  night,  perhaps  from  a  disturbed  conscience. — H.

Ver.  14. — Providence  and  human  agency.  We  are  very  apt  to  under-estirnate
the  value  of  our  own  lives.  When  we  contemplate  the  countless  as  orlds  which  con-
stitute the  universe,  the  countless  ages  which  make  up  duration,  how  unspeakably
insignificant  do  we  and  our  affairs  appear  I  But  we  must  not  be  misled  i^y  such
reflections.  Even  as  the  presence  of  the  least  particle  conceivable  affects  all  material
existence,  so  the  most  insignificant  human  life  influences  in  some  measure  the  eternal
course  of  events.  Mordecai  wished  to  impress  Esther  with  a  due  sense  of  her  own
responsibility.  She  was  not  an  ordinary  individual,  but  a  queen  ;  she  was  allied  to  the
man  who  swayed  the  destinies  of  nations  ;  her  position  invested  her  with  boundless
power  for  good  or  evil.  The  time  had  come  when  she  must  either  act  in  a  manner
becoming  her  resources,  must  use  the  opportunities  at  her  disposal  to  save  her  people,
or  incur  the  guilt  of  neglecting  her  duty  at  the  most  momentous  c/i^iis.  As  a  Jew,
Mordecai  believed  in  Providence,  but  not  in  a  Providence  that  weakened  human
responsibility.     Let  us  consider  the  main  points  emphasised  here.

I.  That  Providence  is  independent  of  human  agency.  "Forifth.u  altogether
boldest  thy  peace  at  this  time,  then  shall  there  enlargement  and  deliverance  arise  to
the  Jews  from  another  place."  These  words  suggest — 1.  That  Providence  is  a  well-
established  fact.  The  confidence  of  Mordecai  was  doubtless  begotten  of  a  conviction
that  God  governs  the  affairs  of  men.  To  him  this  was  not  a  matter  of  speculation  ;
for,  apart  from  the  teaching  of  reason,  he  enjoyed  the  light  of  revelation,  and  was
familiar  with  the  wonderful  history  of  his  people.  Some  profess  to  derive  comfort
from  their  atheism.  They  rejoice  to  think  that  there  is  no  God ;  or,  if  there  be  one,
that  he  has  left  the  world  to  manage  for  itself.  As  well  might  the  passengers  in  a
railway  train  be  jubilant  because  they  had  got  rid  of  the  engineer,  and  were  left  to
the  mercy  of  an  unguided  locomotive.  2.  That  the  designs  of  Providence  are  never
thwarted.  The  Jews  had  not  yet  fulfilled  their  mission.  The  great  Deliverer  of  man-
kind who  was  to  come  out  of  Judab  had  not  appeared.    Mordecai  knew  that  until

h2


100  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  iv.  1—17

the  Divine  purposes  were  acoomplished  the  nation  could  not  be  destroyed.  Henc«
the  sublime  assurance  of  his  speech.  The  Jews  had  passed  through  a  similar  crisis
before,  when  Pharaoh  pursued  them  through  the  Red  Sea.  Profane  history  abounds
with  like  instances.  The  Greeks  were  about  to  be  crushed  by  the  iron  heel  of  the
invader  when  they  won  the  battle  of  Marathon.  The  English  nearly  lost  their  inde-
pendence through  the  Spanish  Armada,  which  the  tempest  scattered  to  the  four  winds
of  heaven.  We  should  never  be  bowed  down  by  calamities.  If  we  are  children  of
the  great  Father  we  need  not  fear.  Above,  beneath,  and  around  us  there  are  unseen
powers  which  steadily  carry  out  his  eternal  decrees.  3.  Thai  Providence  it  the
refuge  of  the  oppressed.  To  no  other  power  could  tlie  Jews  have  appealed  in  their
dire  distress.  The  wealth,  and  rank,  and  influence  of  the  greatest  empire  in  the  world
were  against  them.  We  need  not  wonder  if  they  gave  way  to  despair.  But  the  God
of  Abraham  had  arranged  for  their  sure  deliverance.  The  labours  of  legislators,
philanthropists,  and  divines  had  been  powerless  to  release  the  negro  race  in  the  United
States  of  America  from  their  intolerable  bondage.  Their  wrongs  seemed  to  multiply,
and  their  fetters  to  he  more  securely  fastened,  as  the  years  rolled  on.  But  an  incident
as  terrible  as  it  was  unexpected — the  civil  war — led  them  to  liberty.  Let  the  oppressor
tremble,  and  the  oppressed  be  encouraged ;  for  the  triumph  of  might  over  right  cannot
be  permanent.

U.  That  Peovidence  avails  itself  of  human  agency.  "  But  thou  and  thy  father's
house  shall  be  destro3'ed  :  and  who  knoweth  whether  thou  art  come  to  the  kingdom
for  such  a  time  as  this  ?  "  Providence  is  not  a  synonym  for  fate.  While  it  employs
human  agency,  it  never  interferes  with  individual  liberty ;  it  leaves  every  man
accountable  for  his  conduct,  whether  of  omission  or  commission.  The  words  of
Mordecai  imply — 1.  That  Providence  places  m^i  in  certain  positions  for  definite  ends.
"  Who  knoweth,"  Ac.  The  supposition  in  this  case  was  natural.  The  elevation  of
Esther,  Just  before  the  threatened  destruction  of  the  Jews,  was  most  significant.  It
pointed  out  to  her  the  way  of  duty  with  unmistakable  precision.  Are  we  in  difficulties
as  to  what  our  own  life-work  may  be  ?  If  so,  it  must  be  due  to  want  of  reflection.
Rulers  and  subjects,  rich  and  poor,  learned  and  unlearned,  have  their  distinct  spheres
of  action  in  reference  to  material  interests  ;  their  work  is  cut  out  for  them,  so  to  speak,
by  the  very  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed.  In  like  manner  we  might  nearly
always  answer  the  question,  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  us  to  do?"  by  answering
another  question  far  less  profound,  "  What  can  we  do  ?  "  2.  That  Providence  chastises
men  for  their  unfaithfulness.  "  But  thou  and  thy  father's  house  shall  be  destroyed  "
Mordecai  felt  certain  that  if  Esther  failed  to  do  what  lay  in  her  power  to  avert  the  coming
calamity  she  would  be  singled  out  for  retribution.  To  be  in  a  position  of  influence
at  the  very  time  when  that  influence  could  be  turned  to  such  a  noble  account,  and  yet
remain  culpably  inactive,  would  have  been  to  invite  the  reproaches  of  men  and  the
anger  of  God.  Deliverance  would  doubtless  have  arisen  from  another  quarter,  and
in  that  case  she  might  have  persuaded  herself  that  her  own  efforts  were  superfluous ;
but  the  sophistry  which  so  easily  deluded  her  own  mind  would  have  been  powerless
to  arrest  the  course  of  righteous  punishment.  The  ways  of  Providence  are  very
mysterious  ;  things  come  to  pass  in  the  most  inexplicable  manner ;  but  we  need  not
be  baffled  thereby.  What  is  to  be  will  be,  in  spite  of  our  negligence,  in  spite  of  our
indolence,  in  spite  of  our  opposition  ;  but  woe  be  to  us,  for  all  that,  if  we  fulfil  not
the  duties  of  our  position.  In  the  checking  of  war,  in  the  progress  of  civiUsation,
in  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  in  the  advancement  of  religion,  we  have  each  hia
allotted  share,  and  there  is  a  tribunal  before  which  we  must  all  answer  for  the  manner
in  which  we  acquit  ourselves.  The  Jews  in  the  time  of  Deborah  and  Barak  triumphed
over  their  enemies,  but  Meroz  was  not  therefore  excused  for  its  cowardly  inactivity.
"  Curse  ye  Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof ;
because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the
mighty."— B.

Vet.  16. — Esther's  resolve.  The  absence  throughout  this  book  of  any  reference  to
God  is  a  most  peculiar  feature.  Some  have,  on  this  ground,  gone  the  length  of  deny-
ing its  Divine  authority.  But  the  religious  spirit  is  so  prominent  in  this  verse  as  to
deprive  such  an  objection  of  its  force.     Note  that  the  proof  of  piety  should  not  be


OH  IV.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  101

sought  in  the  language  men  employ,  but  rather  in  the  principles  which  guide  their
conduct.  There  are  circumstances  which  compel  men  to  be  real.  In  the  presence  of
a  great  disaster,  a  great  sorrow,  or  a  great  danger  they  manifest  their  true  character.
Esther  had  at  this  time  comprehended  the  awful  possibilities  of  the  situation  ;  cruel,
speedy,  certain  death  stared  her  in  the  face  ;  and  the  first  thing  she  did  in  her  agony
was  to  appeal  to  God,  the  God  of  her  fathers,  whom  she  now  openly  acknowledged
as  the  arbiter  of  events.     Observe —

I.  That  the  believer  never  enters  upon  a  solemn  undertaking  without  in-
voking THE  FAVOUR  OP  GoD.  "  6o  and  gather  all  the  Jews,"  &c.  The  fast  was  to
be  long  and  general)  such  as  became  the  solemnity  of  the  occasion.  Fasting  must  be .
regarded  as  an  Oriental  custom,  which  well  suits  the  demonstrative  disposition  of  the
people,  who  give  vent  to  their  griefs,  their  joys,  and  their  religious  ardour  in  extrava-
gant outward  manifestations.  The  custom  is  not  enjoined  upon  us  in  Scripture,  though
doubtless  it  ought  not  to  be  prohibited  in  cases  where  it  may  be  of  spiritual  advantage.
But  the  principle  which  underlies  the  custom  is  universal,  namely,  that  increased
devotion  gives  strength  for  the  performance  of  duty.  1.  Esther  desired  others  to
interest  themselves  in  her  behalf.  "  Fast  ye  for  me,  and  neither  eat  nor  drink  three
days,  night  or  day."  The  human  heart  tiraves  for  sympathy,  which,  when  obtained,
gives  it  courage  in  the  hour  of  trial.  Thus  the  missionary  in  foreign  lands,  wlien  he
remembers  that  thousands  of  his  bretliren  are  pleading  his  cause  with  God  at  a
certain  appointed  season,  forgets  his  isolation  and  nerves  himself  afresh  for  his  work.
Besides  this,  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  fervent  prayers  of  righteous  men,
even  when  ofEered  for  others,  avail  on  high.  2.  Esther,  while  she  sought  the  sympathy
of  others,  was  careful  also  to  perform  her  own  part.  "  I  also  and  my  maidens  will
fast  likewise."  The  aid  of  others  is  liable  to  be  over-estimated,  and  thus  may  become
a  snare  to  those  who  seek  it.  No  scene  on  earth  is  more  deeply  afEecting  than  that
presented  by  a  minister  of  religion  kneeling  at  the  bedside  of  a  dying  sinner,  praying
God  to  have  mercy  upon  his  soul ;  but  if  the  dying  man  relies  solely  upon  what  the
minister  can  do  for  him  he  is  the  victim  of.  a  terrible  delusion.  "  Tho  consolations
of  the  Church,"  administered  to  the  impenitent  in  his  extremity,  are  sonietimes  worse
than  a  mockery  ;  for  a  notion  is  entertained  that  the  priest  relieves  him  of  all  respons-
ibility as  regards  his  spiritual  condition.  The  prayers  of  others  may  help  our  own,  but
can  never  make  tliem  unnecessary.    Observe  again —

II.  PjSTHKr's  APPEAL  TO  THE  KING  AS  COMPARED  WITH  THE  PENITENT'S  APPEAL    TO

GoD.  "  And  so  will  I  go  unto  the  king,"  &c.  We  are  struck,  in  the  first  place,  by
several  points  of  resemblance.  1.  Esther  was  bowed  down  by  a  crashing  load  of
sorrow.  Iler  nation,  her  kindred,  and  even  her  own  life,  were  in  jeopardy.  Their
enemies  were  already  making  preparations  for  the  ghastly  carnival  of  blood.  The
thought  of  innocent  babes  and  helpless  women  being  dragged  to  the  slaughter,
amidst  the  derisive  shouts  of  furious  crowds,  thrilled  her  heart  with  unutterable
anguish.  The  penitent  has  been  brought  face  to  face  with  his  lost  condition.  Ruin,
death,  despair,  encompass  him  round  about.  Like  the  publican,  he  smites  upon  his
breast  and  cries,  "Lord  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner.''  2.  Esther  felt  thai  no  one  be-
sides the  king  had  power  to  help  lier.  To  propitiate  Haman  would  have  been  impossible,
for  the  infamous  plot  was  of  his  contrivance.  To  gain  the  favour  of  any  other  prince
would  have  been  useless  so  long  as  Hainan  occupied  such  an  exalted  position.  There
was  no  one  left  but  the  king  to  whom  it  was  ad  visable  to  appeal.  The  penitent  looks  up
to  God  as  his  only  refuge.  He  abandons  indifference,  he  renounces  pleasure,  he  spurns
self-righteousness  ;  for  he  perceives  how  utterly  powerless  they  are  to  shelter  him
from  the  wrath  to  come.  He  is  persuaded  that  if  he  is  to  be  rescued  it  must  be
through  the  intervention  of  the  Almighty.  3.  Esther  was  willing  to  stake  all  upon
one  bold  appeal.  "  If  I  perish,  I  perish  1 "  She  knew  the  stern  law  which  ordained
certain  death  for  those  who  came  unbidden  into  the  king's  presence,  unless  he  held
out  the  golden  sceptre  to  thera.  She  knew  also  the  capricious  temper  of  the  king,
who,  after  such  ardent  professions  of  attachment,  had  not  wished  to  see  her  for  the
last  thirty  days.  Still  she  had  sufBcient  faith  in  his  generosity  to  put  it  to  the  test,
in  spite  of  unfavourable  appearances.  The  penitent  is  probably  not  without  some
misgivings  when  he  first  turns  to  God.  Not  that  he  doubts  for  a  moment  the  good-
ness, mercy,  and  loving-kindness  of  God,  but  because  he  sees  the  enormity  of  his  own


102


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  V.  1—8


guilt.  Yet  he  ventures  into  the  Divine  presence  ;  and  when  he  remembers  that  God
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  liira  up  for  us  all,  he  is  confident  that  his  suit
will  not  be  in  vain.

But  we  are  struck,  in  the  second  place,  with  several  points  of  contrast.  1.  The
penitent  is  encouraged  by  God's  express  invitation— Esther  had,  no  encouragement  of
the  kind.  For  various  reasons  the  king  desired  that  his  privacy  should  be  undis-
turbed. Hence  the  severity  of  the  law  in  reference  to  intruders.  But  God's  heart
yearns  over  the  penitent,  and,  like  the  prodigal's  father  in  the  parable,  eagerly  watches
for  his  approach.  "  Look  unto  me,"  saith  he,  "  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the
earth ;  for  I  am  God,  and  there  is  none  else."  "Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  2.  The  penitent  appeals  to  God  with
the  certainty  of  being  heard — Esther  had  no  certainty 'of  the  hind.  Her  confidence
at  best  amounted  to  no  more  than  a  hope ;  and  we  can  easily  conceive  that  this  hope
varied  in  strength,  from  hour  to  hour,  according  to  her  frame  of  mind.  But  not  a
shadow  of  doubt  need  ever  cross  the  penitent's  mind.  He  can  lay  hold  on  the  Divine
promises — promises  whose  foundations  are  firmer  than  those  of  the  eternal  hills.
3.  The  penitent  can  appeal  to  God  whenever  and  wherever  he  will — Esther  had  to
wait  her  opportunity.  The  king,  no  doubt,  had  his  own  way  of  spending  his  time,
with  which  Esther  must  have  been  well  acquainted.  He  would  not  be  seen  anywhere
and  at  any  time  even  by  those  who  might  venture  into  his  presence  without  permis-
sion. And  had  he  been  far  from  home  at  this  very  time,  a  circumstance  which
sometimes  happened,  access  to  him  would  have  been  absolutely  impossible.  But
God  is  not  subject  to  the  limitations  of  time  and  space.  At  midnight  as  at  midday,
in  the  wilderness  as  in  the  city,  in  adversity  as  in  prosperity,  the  penitent  can  always
find  him^  "Out  of  the  depths,"  saith  the  Psalmist,  "have  I  cried  unto  thee,  0
Lord."— B.


EXPOSITION.    §  9.


CHAPTER  V.

Ahastterus  reoeivino  Esther  rAVOTJR-

ABLT,  she  INVr>  TS   HIM  ANn   HaMAN  TO  A

BANQUET.     Allowed  to  ask   whatever

BOON  SHE  LIKES,  SHE  INVITES  THEM  BOTH
TO  A  SECOND  BANQUET  (ch.  V.  1 — 8).  Esther,
we  must  suppose,  kept  her  fast  religiously
for  the  time  that  she  had  specified  (ch.  iv.
16),  and  then,  "on  the  third  day,"  made  her
venture.  It  has  been  iskcd,  Why  did  she
not  request  an  audience,  which  any  suhject
might  do,  and  then  prefer  her  request  to  the
king  ?  But  this  would  probably  have  been
wholly  contrary  to  Persian  custom  ;  and  to
do  such  a  thing  may  not  even  have  oocuiTod
to  her  as  a  possible  course.  Set  audiences
were  for  strangers,  or  at  any  rate  for  out-
siders, not  for  the  members  of  the  court  circle.
To  have  demanded  one  would  have  set  all  the
court  suspecting  and  conjecturing,  and  would
certainly  not  have  tended  to  predispose  the
king  in  her  favour.  She  took,  therefore,  the
step  which  had  seemed  to  her  the  one  pos-
sible thing  to  do  from  the  time  that  Mordecai
made  his  application  to  her,  and  entering  the
Imwr  court,  stood  conspicuously  opposite  the


gate  of  the  king's  throne-room,  intending  to
attract  his  regard.  It  happened  that  the
king  was  seated  on  his  throne,  looking  down
the  pillared  vista  towards  the  door  (ver.  1),
which  was  of  course  open,  and  his  eye  rested
on  the  graceful  form  (ch,  ii  7)  of  his  young
wife  with  surprise,  and  at  the  same  time  witl;
pleasure  (ver.  2).  Instantly  he  held  out  to
her  the  golden  sceptre,  which  showed  that
her  breach  of  etiquette  was  forgiven ;  and,
assuming  that  nothing  but  some  urgent  need
would  have  induced  her  to  imperil  her  life,
he  followed  up  his  act  of  grace  with  an
inquiry  and  a  promise — "What  is  thy  re-
quest, queen  Esther  ?  It  shall  even  be  given
thee  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom"  (ver.  3).  The
reader  expects  an  immediate  petition  on  the
part  of  the  queen  for  the  life  of  her  people  j
but  Esther  is  too  timid,  perhaps  too  wary,  to
venture  aU  at  once.  She  will  wait,  she  will
gain  time,  she  will  be  sure  that  she  has  the
king's  full  affection,  before  she  makes  the
appeal  that  must  decide  everything  ;  and  so
for  the  present  she  is  content  with  inviting
Ahasuerus  and  Haman  to  a  "banquet  of
wine"  (ver.  4).  It  is  not  quite  clear  why
she  associates  Haman  with  the  king ;   but


ra.  V.  1—8.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


103


perhaps  she  wishes  to  prevent  him  from  sus-
pecting that  she  looks  on  him  as  an  enemy.
At  the  customary  time,  towards  evening,  the
banquet  takes  place  ;  and  in  the  course  of  it
the  king  repeats  his  offer  to  grant  her  any
boon  she  pleases,  "  even  to  the  half  of  the
kingdom"  (ver.  6).  Still  doubtful,  still
hesitating,  still  unwilling  to  make  the  final
cast  that  is  life  or  death  to  her,  she  once
more  temporises,  invites  the  pair  to  a  second
banquet  on  the  morrow,  and  promises  that
then  at  last  she  will  unbosom  herself  and
say  what  it  is  which  she  desires  (vers.  7,  8).
The  king  once  more  accedes  to  her  wish,  as
we  gather  from  the  sequel  (ch.  vii.  1) ;  and
80  the  final  determination  of  the  matter  is
put  off  for  another  day.

Ver.  1.— On  the  third  day.  The  third
day  from  that  on  which  Esther  and  Mordecai
had  communicated  together  through  Hatach
(ch.  iv.  6 — 17).  Esther  put  on  her  royal
apparel.  This  is  certainly  the  meaning,
though  the  elliptical  phrase  used  is  uncom-
mon. Esther,  while  she  fasted,  had  worn
>ome  garb  of  woe  ;  now  she  laid  it  aside,  and
appeared  once  more  in  all  the  splendour  of
her  royal  robes.  She  took  up  her  position
directly  in  front  of  the  king's  apartment,
with  the  object  of  attracting  his  attention,
and  perhaps  with  the  knowledge  that  he  was
upon  his  throne,  whence  he  could  not  fail
to  see  her.  The  king  sat  upon  his  royal
throne,  ....  over  against  the  gate.  In  a
Persian  pillared  hall  the  place  for  the  throne
would  be  at  the  further  end,  midway  between
the  side  walls.  The  throne  would  be  elevated
on  steps,  and  would  command  a  view  down
the  midmost  avenue  of  columns  to  the  main
entrance,  which  would  commonly  occupy
that  position.

Ver.  2. — Esther.  .  .  tonched  tne  top  of  the
sceptre.  This  was,  no  doubt,  the  customary
act  by  which  the  king's  grace  was,  as  it
were,  accepted  and  appropriated..  It  is  analo-
gous to  that  touch  of  the  person  or  of  the
garments  which  secured  the  suppliant  mercy
among  the  Greeks.

Ver.  3. — What  is  thy  request?  It  shall
be  even  given  thee.    The  practice  of  grant-


ing requests  beforehand  is  one  common
among  Oriental  monarchs.  Sometimes  no
limit  at  all  is  placed  to  the  petitioner's
liberty  of  choice — seldom  any  less,  wide  limit
than  that  of  the  present  passage.  According
to  Herodotus  (ix.  Ill),  there  was  one  day  in
the  year  on  which  the  king  was  bound  to
grant  any  request  made  by  a  guest  at  his
table.  To  the  half  of  the  kingdom.  Com-
pare Mark  vi.  23,  where  Herod  Antipas  makes
the  same  limitation.

Ver.  4. — Let  the  king  and  Haman  come
this  day  unto  the  banquet  that  I  have  pre-
pared. Such  an  invitation  as  this  was  very
unusual.  Ordinarily  the  king  and  queen
dined  separately,  each  in  their  own  apart-
ments ;  family  gatherings,  however,  not  be-
ing unknown  (Plut.,  'Vit.  Artaxerx,,'  S  6;
Athen.,  'Deipnsoph.,'  iv.  p.  145,  A).  But
for  the  queen  to  mvite  not  only  the  king,
but  also  another  male  guest,  not  a  relation,
was  a  remarkable  innovation,  and  must  have
seemed  to  the  fortunate  recipient  of  the  in-
vitation a  high  act  of  favour.

Ver.  6. — "VlOiat  is  thy  petition?  Ahasu-
erus  has  understood  that  it  was  not  for  the
mere  pleasure  of  entertaining  himself  and  his
prime  minister  at  a  banquet  that  Esther
adventured  her  life.  He  knows  that  she  must
still  have  a  request — the  real  favour  that  she
wants  him  to  grant — in  the  background.  He
therefore  repeats  the  inquiry  and  the  promise
that  he  had  made  previously  (ver.  8).

Ver.  7. — My  petition  and  my  request  is.
Esther  still  hesitates  to  prefer  her  real  re-
quest. We  are  not  likely  to  be  able  in  the
nineteenth  century  to  understand  a^i  the
motives  that  actuated  her,  or  all  the  work-
ings of  her  mind.  Perhaps  nothing  kept  her
back  but  the  natural  fear  of  a  repulse,  and  a
desire  to  defer  the  evil  day  ;  perhaps  she  saw
some  real  advantage  in  putting  off  the  deter-
mination of  the  matter.  At  any  rate,  she
again  declined  to  declare  herself,  and  merely
gave  her  two  guests  a  second  invitation  for
the  ensuing  evening.  She  concludes,  how-
ever, with  a  promise  that  she  will  ask  no
further  respite.  I  will  do  to-morrow  as  the
king  hath  said.  /.  e.  I  will  prefer  my  real
request ;  I  will  ask  the  favour  which  was  in
my  thoughts  when  I  adventured  myself  in
the  inner  court  without  having  received  sa
invitation.


HOMILETICa

Ver.  1. — A  royal  throne. — This  verse  is  full  of  royalty.  Esther  pnt  on  "her
royal  apparel,"  and  stood  in  the  inner  court  of  "the  king's  house."  "The king  sat
upon  his  rnval  throne  in  the  royal  house."  This  royal  throne  may  Buggest  to  ua
some  thoughts  concerning  the  throne  of  "  the  King  of  kings."

I.  This  royal  throne  must  be  approached  with  Eevebencb.  The  blessed  and  only
Potentate  sits  thereon.  Before  his  seat  it  behoves  the  creatures  of  hia  power  to  fall
prostrate  in  reverential  adoration.


104  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  [ch.  v.  1— «.

II.  This  royal  throne  must  be  approached  with  confidence.  "  He  that  Cometh
onto  God  must  believe  that  he  is,  and  that  he  is  a  rewarder  of  them  that  diligently
seek  him."  It  is  not  honouring  God  to  come  to  him  doubtfully  or  distrustfully.
On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  question  his  faithfulness  and  his  truth.

III.  This  royal  throne  must  be  approached  by  us  in  the  attitude  of  8INNKB8  AHB
SUPPLIANTS.  It  is  a  throne  of  grace,  and  to  it  we  come  boldly,  that  we  may  "  obtain
mercy,  and  fiijd  grace  to  help  in  time  of  need."  Let  us  draw  near  as  those  whose
only  claim  is  upon  Divine  mercy,  whose  only  hope  is  in  Divine  condescension  and
bounty.

IV.  This  royal  throne  must  be  approached  by  the  way  of  faith  in  the  Divine
Mediator,  Jesus  Cheist.  The  High  Priest  and  Intercessor  both  removes  every
difficulty  in  our  access,  and  inspires  us  with  those  sentiments  of  confidence  and
filial  love  which  will  animate  us  in  laying  our  many  petitions  for  urgent  blessings  at
the  very  footstool  of  the  throne.  Asking  through  Christ,  and  in  his  name,  we  cannot
be  refused  and  disappointed.

Ver.  3. — What  is  thy  request  J  With  what  trembling  and  anxiety  did  the  queen —
imcalled — venture  into  the  presence  of  Ahasuerus  I  She  was  supported  by  the
knowledge  that  she  was  doing  her  duty  to  her  kindred,  and  that  the  prayers  of
thousands  were  accompanying  her,  and  seeking  a  blessing  upon  her  application.
Still  it  must  have  been  to  her  a  relief,  a  joy,  when  the  grfden  sceptre  was  held  out
for  her  to  touch,  and  when  the  king  said  to  her,  "  What  wilt  thou,  queen  Esther  ?
and  what  is  thy  request?  it  shall  be  even  given  thee  to  the  half  of  the  kingdom."
The  whole  tenor  of  the  Scriptures,  and  some  express  statements  and  promises,  justify
U8  in  believing  that  very  similar  to  this  is  the  declaration  and  assurance  of  the  Most
High  to  those  who  draw  near  to  his  throne  of  grace  in  his  appointed  way,  and  in  the
spirit  he  approves.  To  such  the  King  of  grace  and  mercy  says,  "What  is  thy
request?     It  shall  be  given  thee."

I.  Here  is  A  token  of  favour.  This  is  not  the  language  of  rebuff,  of  indifference ;
it  is  the  expression  of  a  gracious  regard.  There  is  evinced  a  disposition,  a  readiness
to  bless.

II.  Here  is  A  sign  of  interest.  Whatever  is  necessary  for  the  satisfaction  of  the
suppliant  shall  receive  the  king's  consideration.  He  is  concerned  for  the  petitioner's
welJEare.

III.  Here  is  an  encouragement  to  prefer  requests.  If  before  the  lips  were
sealed  through  fear,  language  like  this  is  enough  to  open  them.  Who  can  refrain
from  asking  who  feels  the  pressure  of  his  need,  and  at  the  same  time  hears  a  voice
like  this  drawing  him  onwards  ?

IV.  Here  is  A  promise  of  liberality.  This  language  was  the  earnest  of  good
things  to  come.  The  petitions  are  virtually  answered  before  they  are  presented.  Is
it  not  amazing  that  when  we  have  such  inducements  to  pray  our  prayers  should  be
so  infrequent  and  so  cold  ?

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — 8. — Buman  and  Divine  sovereignty.  Prayer.  These  verses  suggest
thoughts  on  the  sovereignty  of  man  and  of  God,  the  suggestion  being  almost  entirely
one  of  contrast  rather  than  comparison.

I.  The  dignity  of  the  human  monarch  and  that  op  the  Divine.  "  The  king  sat
upon  his  royal  throne  in  the  royal  house  "  (ver.  1).  The  words  are  suggestive  of  tho
exceeding  pomp  and  state  with  which  Persian  majesty  surrounded  itself,  of  tl.e  power
it  wielded,  of  the  obsequious  reverence  it  claimed.  We  are  reminded  of — 1.  Eoyal
rank.  We  make  much  of  the  different  degrees  of  dignity  that  exist  amongst  us  ;  from
the  common  walks  of  life  we  look  up  beyond  the  knight  to  the  baronet,  to  the  earl
to  the  marquis,  to  the  duke,  to  the  king,  to  the  emperor,  and  feel  something  approach-
ing to  awe  in  the  presence  of  exalted  human  rank.  But  what  are  these  human  distinc-
tions to  that  which  separates  the  mightiest  monarch  on  earth  from  him  who  t»  (what
they  call  themselves)  the  "  King  of  kings,"  who  sits  not  "  in  the  royal  house,"  but  on


OH.  V.  1-8. J  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  lOS

the  throne  of  the  universe  ?  Merest  bubbles  on  the  surface  !  invisible  specks  in  the
air  I  small  dust  of  the  balance !  (Isa.  xl.  22 — 25).  2.  Royal  power.  Some  human
sovereigns  have  "  the  power  of  life  and  death  " — an  awful  prerogative  for  mortal  man
to  wield.  They  can  exalt  or  humiliate,  enrich  or  impoverish.  But  they  have  "  no
more  that  they  can  do"  (Luke  xii.  4).  What  is  their  power  to  his,  who  "  is  able  to
destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell "  ?  (Matt.  x.  28).  3.  Royal  tuill.  The  will  of
tt"  human  monarch  is  often  exercised  quite  capriciously.  Esther  could  not  tell
whether,  when  "  sue  stood  in  the  inner  court  of  the  king's  house"  (ver.  l),she  would
be  graciously  welcomed  or  instantaneously  ordered  for  execution.  All  turned  on  the
mood  of  the  moment.  God's  will  is  sovereign,  but  never  capricious.  He  doeth
'"'  according  to  his  will,"  &c.  (Dan.  iv.  35),  but  never  wills  to  do  that  which  is  unwise,
unjust,  unkind.  By  everlasting  and  universal  principles  of  righteousness  he  decides
what  he  will  do  toward  the  children  of  men.

II.  The  accessibility  and  treatment  of  the  human  and  the  Divine  sovereign.
The  subject  wants  to  approach  the  sovereign ;  he  has  requests  to  make  of  him.  Let
UB  contrast  the  accessibility  and  treatment  of  the  earthly  with  that  of  the  heavenly
monarch.  1.  When  he  may  be  approached.  Esther  was  not  acting  "according  to  law  "
(ch.  iv.  16)  in  now  drawing  near.  She  did  it  at  the  peril  of  her  life.  We  picture  her
waiting  for  the  king's  notice  with  tearful  eye  and  trembling  heart,  lest  the  "  golden
sceptre"  (ver.  2)  should  not  be  held  out  to  her.  Our  great  and  gracious  King  is
accessible  to  the  meanest  of  his  subjects  at  any  moment.  There  is  indeed  a  Mediator
(1  Tim.  ii.  5)  between  him  and  us,  but  through  him  we  may  come  "  at  all  times."
Sis  throne  on  which  he  sits  is  a  throne  of  grace.  His  sceptre  is  one  of  boundless
beneficence.  We  may  touch  it  when  we  will  (ver.  3).  11  he  rebukes  us,  it  is  not  for
coming  when  he  does  not  send;  it  is  for  not  coming  oftener  than  we  do.  "Men
ought  always  to  pray."  2.  How  he  may  he  pleased.  Queen  Esther  sought  accept-
ance by  attention  to  her  personal  appearance ;  she  "put  on  her  royal  apparel."  That
which  we  are  to  wear  to  gain  the  favour  of  our  Sovereign  is  other  than  this.  We  are
to  "  be  clothed  mth  humility  "  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  "  He  has  respect  unto  the  lowly  "  (Ps.
cxxxviii.  6).  Of  such  as  the  poor  in  spirit  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven  (Matt.  v.  3).
Another  garment  we  must  have  on  in  our  approach  to  the  king  is  that  of  faith.
Without  that  it  is  "  impossible  to  please  him  "  (Heb.  xi.  6).  3.  What  it  is  hepromises.
The  king  of  Persia  made  promise  to  Esther  in  very  "  royal "  fashion  ;  he  offered  her,
in  word,  much  more  than  he  had  any  intention  of  granting.  "  It  shall  be  given  thee
to  the  half  of  the  kingdom "  (vers.  3,  6).  To-day  he  promises  superfluously ;  to-
morrow he  may  virtually  withdraw  his  word.  There  is  no  wisdom,  carefulness,  cer-
tainty about  it.  God's  promises  are  righteous,  wise,  generous.  (1)  Righteous,  for  he
gives  nothing  to  those  who  are  deliberately  vicious  or  impenitent,  who  "  regard
iniquity  in  their  heart "  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  (2)  Wise,  for  he  gives  sufficiency  to  those  who
are  his  servants,  and  who,  as  such,  ask  for  their  daily  bread  (Ps.  1.  15  ;  Prov.  xxx.  8 ;
Matt.  vi.).  (3)  Generous,  for  he  gives  abounding  spiritual  blessings  to  those  who  seek
them  in  Christ  Jesus  (Luke  xi.  13 ;  Rom.  viii.  32).  Not  tremblingly  to  an  earthly
throne,  like  Esther,  do  we  come,  but  "  boldly  to  the  throne  of  grace  "  (Heb.  iv.  16 ;
Eph.  iii.  12),  to  find  grace  for  all  our  sin  and  help  for  all  our  need. — 0.

Vers.  1 — 3.  — ^Self-devotion  eficouraged.  "  On  the  third  day,''  when  the  fast  was  over,
Esther  proceeded  to  visit  the  king  on  her  mission  of  deliverance.    We  notice  here —

I.  A  PROMISE  FAITHFULLY  KEPT.  Whatever  tremblings  may  have  visited  her  heart,
Esther  gave  no  signs  of  hesitation.  Good  resolutions  often  fade  before  the  time  of
performance  arrives.  Promises  are  often  forgotten  or  wilfully  broken  in  the  presence
of  'danger.  1.  Let  us  keep  truthfully  our  promises  to  men.  An  easy  breaking  of  our
word  to  others  is  inconsistent  with  a  good  conscience  or  a  Christian  spirit.  Besides,
it  destroys  confidence,  imperils  success,  and  is  the  parent  of  much  unhappiness.  Our
word  should  be  as  "  good  as  our  bond  "  (Matt.  v.  37).  2.  Let  us  hold  sacred  our
prolliises  to  God.  Vows  to  the  Most  High  should  not  be  lightly  made ;  when  made
they  should  be  religiously  performed.  All  who  confess  Christ  should  strive  earnestly
and  prayerfully  to  fulfil  their  engagement  to  be  his.  The  son  in  our  Lord's  parable
who  promised  to  go  into  his  father's  vineyard,  but  did  not  go,  is  •  warning  against
all  false  or  unfulfilled  profession  (Ps.  Ixvi.  13, 14  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58).    8.  Let  us  remem-


IU6  TUE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEK.  [CH.  v.  1—8.

ber  that  "God  is  faithful."  His  "word  endureth  for  ever."  His  promise  is  sure.
He  is  the  unchanging  One.  Read  1  Cor.  i.  9  ;  2  Cor.  i.  20  ;  1  Thess.  v.  24  ;  Heb.
z.  23  ;  Bev.  xxi.  6.

II.  A  BEFITTING  ATTIRE.  Before  going  to  the  king  Esther  put  off  her  Backcloth,
and  clothed  herself  in  her  royal  robes.  We  are  struck  by  the  contrast  between  hei
conduct  now  and  her  conduct  when,  as  a  maiden,  she  was  being  prepared  to  make
her  first  appearance  before  the  king.  Changed  circumstances  account  for  it.  1.  Now
she  was  queen.  There  is  a  propriety  in  dress  as  in  all  other  things.  Inattention  to
bodily  attire  is  no  sign  of  virtue  or  religion.  It  may  be  the  mark  of  (1)  an  idle  and
slovenly  spirit,  (2)  a  want  of  self-respect,  (3)  a  vanity  which  affects  the  singular,
(4)  a  desire  to  show  disrespect  to  others.  Dress  in  all  stations  is  a  visible  indication
of  character.  Simplicity  is  to  be  studied,  but  also  appropriateness.  Women  who
have  the  "  inward  adorning  "  referred  to  in  1  Pet.  iii.  3,  4  will  hardly  fail  with  respect
to  a  suitable  "  outward  adorning."  2.  Now  she  had  to  consider  not  herself  only,  but
others.  The  destiny  of  Israel  seemed  to  rest  on  this  one  act  of  hers.  So  she  pre-
pared herself  carefully  for  it.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  be  indifferent  to  our  conduct
when  the  happiness  or  life  of  other  people  may  be  affected  by  it.  Matters  of  per-
sonal taste  or  feeling  may  well  be  sacrificed  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  need  our
help.  Even  with  respect  to  conscience  we  should  beware  of  so  narrowing  it  by
prejudice  as  to  cripple  our  freedom  in  doing  good.  What  to  Esther  was  a  little  extra
care  in  the  arranging  of  her  apparel,  when  she  had  resolved  to  transgress  the  king's
law,  and  to  risk  her  own  life  in  her  effort,  to  save  her  people  ?  Some  Christians  in
primitive  times  could  make  no  concessions  to  their  brethren  or  to  Christian  liberty
with  respect  to  meats,  and  drinks,  and  holy  days,  and  traditional  ceremonies;  and
some  now-a-days  have  the  same  difficulty.  But  what  are  such  things  compared  with
the  salvation  of  men  ?  Relatively  to  the  great  gospel  end,  and  the  spirituality  of
Christ's  kingdom,  all  things  connected  with  outward  rite  and  arrangement  should
be  esteemed  of  small  value.  The  action  of  God  in  Christ  is  presented  to  us  in  this
same  light  (Rom.  viii.  32).

III.  A  GOOD  BEGINNING.  It  was  not  a  long  way  from  Esther's  apartments  to  the
king's  throne-room  ;  but  there  are  short  journeys— even  from  room  to  room — more
trying  than  the  traversing  of  deserts.  We  have  a  most  pitiful  sympathy  with  Esther
when  we  see  her  in  the  inner  court  adjoining  the  hall  in  which  the  king  sat  on  his
throne — royally  clad,  yet  unbidden,  and  perhaps  stared  at  in  silent  -wonder  by  the
oflSciais ;  and  we  are  relieved  and  delighted  when  we  find  the  king  observing  her
through  the  door  and  giving  her  a  sign  of  welcome.  The  golden  sceptre  was  held
out,  and  Esther  advanced  to  touch  it.  Tlius  the  broken  law  was  condoned.  The
first  braving  of  perilous  duty  often  scatters  the  fears  of  anticipation.  A  happy
beginning  may  not  insure  a  prosperous  end;  but  it  stimulates  faith  and  energy,  and
has,  therefore,  much  influence  in  shaping  things  towards  the  end  desired.

IV.  A  RESTORED  FAVonB.  The  sight  of  Esther  revived  in  the  king's  heart  the
affection  which  had  been  cooled  under  the  influence  of  the  favourite.  We  must  not
take  the  offer  of  "  half  of  the  kingdom  "  in  a  literal  sense.  It  was  an  Eastern  phrase
which  indicated  on  the  part  of  kings  a  special  favour.  So  far  down  as  our  Lord's
time  we  find  Herod  making  the  same  promise  to  the  daughter  of  Herodias.  Esther
would  quite  understand  its  meaning.  It  expressed  affection,  and  promised  a  gracious
hearing  to  any  request  she  had  to  make.  This  was  the  second  and  best  encourage-
ment to  the  self-devoted  servant  of  Israel.  1.  A  formal  sign  may  conceal  thought  or
feeling,  but  in  words  the  heart  betrays  itself.  An  acute  hearer  will  easily  detect
sincerity  or  insincerity  in  the  words  of  a  speaker.  Even  adepts  in  dissimulation
deceive  less  than  they  imagine  by  false  and  artful  words.  Our  language  should
be  the  true  and  honest  reflex  of  what  is  in  our  hearts.  Every  species  of  lying  is
hateful,  2.  A  misreckoning  of  our  own  influence  may  lead  us  to  misjudge  the  feel-
ings of  others.  A  better  acquaintance  with  those  whom  we  think  dislike  us  may  show
that  we  have  been  mistaken.  We  should  be  on  our  guard  against  harbouring  un-
grounded prejudices  or  mistrusts  with  respect  to  friends  or  neighbours.  Especially
should  we  avoid  misjudging  God,  or  shrinking  from  his  presence  when  we  need  help,
under  mistaken  notions  and  fears  as  to  his  character  and  will.  3.  The  helps,  and
rewards  of  duty  grow  with  the  faithful  discharge  of  duty.     Encouragements  rise  in


CH.  V.  1—8.]  THE  SOOK  OF  ESTHER  lOT

the  path  of  the  man  who  faces  self-denials  and  dangers  at  the  call  of  God  or  con-
science. Every  step  will  disclose  new  springs  of  help  and  hope.  "  Light  is  sown
for  the  righteous  "  (Ps.  xcvii.  10,  11). — D.

Vers.  4 — 14. — Prudence  versus  Guile.  I.  Everything  has  its  beabon.  Why  did
not  Esther  at  once  lay  open  her  heart  to  the  king  ?  Was  she  confused  by  his  unex-
pected kindness,  or  seized  with  timidity  at  the  moment  of  peril  ?  Most  likely  she
was  prompted  by  an  intuitive  feeling  that  the  time  was  not  fit.  She  might  lose
everything  by  precipitancy.  It  is  wise  to  study  occasion  or  opportunity.  Many
failures  have  resulted  solely  from  want  of  attention  to  time  and  place  (Eccles.  iii.  1).

II.  Pkudencb  wobkb  patiently.  The  invitation  to  the  banquet  would  provide  a
better  opportunity.  Yet  Esther  again  deferred  her  request,  though  the  king  repeated
his  promise  to  grant  her  any  boon,  to  "the  half  of  his  kingdom."  She  was  acting
now  not  in  .the  dark,  or  under  impulse,  but  under  a  new  light  and  in  watchful  thought.
Her  regaining  of  influence  over  the  king  gave  her  confidence  and  made  her  patient.
Her  woman's  instinct  told  her  that  by  prolonging  suspense  she  would  increase  iior
power.  The  king  once  hers,  she  could  defy  Haman.  So  she  worked  and  waited.
The  prudence  of  the  righteous  may  be  more  than  a  match  for  the  guile  of  the  wicked.
These  sometimes  seem  to  resemble  each  other ;  but  the  distinction  between  is,  that
while  prudence  is  honourable  in  method  and  pure  in  motive,  guile  is  impure  and
unscrupulous.  God  disciplines  his  people  into  patience,  and  then  sends  them  deliver-
ance through  it.  It  is  often  harder  to  wait  than  to  work  or  to  suffer.  Patience,
therefore,  is  an  excelling  grace  (Ps.  xl.  1 — 4 ;  James  i.  3,  4).

III.  The  bitter  mingles  with  the  sweet  in  the  cup  of  the  wicked.  Haman
was  a  proud  man  when  he  went  forth  from  the  banquet.  To  have  been  alone  with
the  king  and  queen  at  their  private  feast,  and  to  he  invited  to  a  similar  feast  on  the
next  day,  was  almost  too  much  honour  for  his  vain  soul  to  bear.  But  he  had  not
gone  far  when  his  eye  fell  on  the  unbending  Mordecai.  Then  indignation  tooK
possession  of  his  heart.  What  a  humbling  of  pride  I  what  a  beclouding  of  joy  I
So  is  it  always  with  the  happiness  of  the  wicked.  It  is  ever  meeting  with  signs  of
menace — a  word,  a  look,  an  attitude,  an  enemy — which  make  it  fade.  A  Mordecai
sits  at  the  gate  that  leads  from  its  feastings.  Evil  joys  are  attended  by  a  mocking
shade  which  has  only  to  appear  to  turn  them  into  wormwood.

IV.  Household  sympathies.  It  was  natural  that  Haman,  on  reaching  home  from
the  palace,  should  call  his  friends  around  him,  and  tell  them  of  the  double  honour  he
had  received.  _  Nothing  is  pleasanter  to  behold  than  a  united  family  in  which  there
is  a  free  sharing  of  confidences  and  sympathies,  all  the  members  rejoicing  in  the
happiness  of  each.  But  if  the  family  be  godless  and  wicked,  and  bound  together  by
common  interests  of  an  evil  kind,  then  all  the  pleasantness  of  the  picture  vanishes.
Such  was  the  family  of  Haman.  His  wife  and  friends  knew  the  arts  by  which  he
had  gained  the  royal  favour,  and  the  terrible  revenge  he  was  about  to  execute  on  the
whole  Jewish  race  forthe  otfence  of  Mordecai.  Yet  they  flattered  him  as  he  flattered
the  king,  and  stimulated  him  in  his  abounding  criipes.  Saddest  of  sights  that  of  a
family  whose  bond  is  wickedness  1  Learn,  further — 1.  How  character  influences.
A  man  who  acquires  power  draws  about  him  his  own  circle,  and  infuses  his  spirit
into  all  the  members  of  it.  Children  catch  the  spirit  and  habits  of  their  parents.
Men  are  known  by  the  companions  that  attract  them.  2.  How  pride  puffs  itself  up.
It  was  a  glowing  story  which  Haman  told  of  his  wealth,  and  grandeur,  and  promo-
tions, and  of  the  special  honours  which  even  Esther  was  conferring  on  him.  His
vanity  plumed  itself  rarely  before  his  admiring  hearers.  But  to  us  5ie  exhibition  is
repugnant.  I'';  was  a  self -feeding  of  all  that  was  worst  in  the  man,  and  a  kindling  of
hateful  fires  in  the  hearts  that  were  listening.  The  boaster  little  suspected  what  the
favour  of  Esther  meant.  "  Pride  goeth  before  destruction."  3.  How  pride  resents
affront.  The  lecital  of  an  ill-gotten  glory  was  ended  by  a  confession  that  all  was
dimmed  by  th(>  remembrance  of  one  man.  The  higher  his  advancement  to  honour,
the  more  deeply  did  the  iron  of  the  Jew's  contempt  enter  into  Haman's  soul.  He
described  to  his  home  circle  his  passing  of  Mordecai  at  the  king's  gate,  and  the
difficulty  with  which  he  had  restrained  an  outflow  of  his  passion.  The  self-restraint
of  eril  men  in  presence  of  supposed  insult  is  exercised  not  that  they  may  overlook


108  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  [oH.  T.  1—8,

or  forget,  but  that  they  may  inflict  a  deadlier  vengeance.  4.  How  the  result  of  con-
Bultationa  will  be  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  that  governs  them.  The  practical
question  before  Haman  and  his  friends  came  to  be,  How  should  Mordecai  be  dealt
with  ?  There  was  no  thought  of  pity  or  forgiveness,  or  even  of  silent  contempt.
The  insulted  favourite  could  no  longer,  even  in  prospect  of  the  coming  slaughter,
possess  his  soul  in  patience.  The  conclusion  arrived  at  was  consistent  with  the
fierce  animosity  that  had  communicated  itself  to  every  breast.  Justice,  compassion,
wisdom  were  swallowed  up  in  the  common  hatred.  Notice — (1)  The  proposer  of
the  scheme  of  punishment.  We  infer  that  it  was  Zeresh,  the  wife  of  Haman.  She,
as  his  most  intimate  companion,  would  be  most  influenced  by  his  spirit,  and  would
enter  most  sympathetically  into  his  ambitious  projects.  The  tenderest  nature  may
become  brutalised  by  the  dominance  of  evil.  (2)  The  nature  of  the  adopted  pro-
posal. It  consisted  of  three  parts : — (a)  That  a  gallows  fifty  cubits  high  should  be
constructed  for  the  hanging  of  Mordecai.  The  higher  the  gibbet,  the  more  con-
spicuous, and  therefore  the  more  satisfying  the  vengeance  of  the  favourite.  (6)
That  Haman  was  to  get  the  king's  sanction  for  the  hanging  of  the  Jew  on  the
morrow.  Having  secured  a  decree  for  the  destruction  of  all  the  Jews,  it  would  be
an  easy  matter  to  obtain  the  premature  sacrifice  of  this  one  Jew.  (c)  That  Haman,
having  done  this  business,  was  to  "  go  in  merrily  with  the  king  unto  the  banquet."
Merrily  I  with  so  much  evil  in  his  heart  I  with  so  much  blood  on  his  head  I  (Ps.  i.  1 ;
ii.  1—4).

V.  God  sends  blindness  to  those  whom  he  means  to  destroy.  Haman  had  no
perception  of  any  influences  that  were  working-  against  him.  So  vainly  secure  was
his  sense  of  power  with  the  king,  that  he  took  Esther's  banquets  as  intended  to  confer
special  honour  on  himself.  God  had  entered  tlie  lists  against  him.  It  was  God  who
had  given  to  Mordecai  the  heroism  of  faith.  It  was  God  who  had  strengthened  the
timid  Esther,  and  given  her  "  a  mouthpiece  and  wisdom."  And  it  was  God  who  had
allowed  Haman  to  erect  a  gallows  for  himself.  How  blind  we  become  when  we
fight  against  God  I — D.

Ver.  2. — The  hour  that  revealed  duty.  This  verse  speaks  of  an  hour  when  dark-
ness turned  to  light,  gloomy  foreboding  to  well-grounded  hope  ;  and  when  the  anguish
of  trembling  suspense  was  lifted  ofE  many  a  heart,  as  an  unhealthy  vapour  lifts  itself
and  vanishes  before  the  growing  sun.  Though  it  was  most  true  that  many  a  heart
was  this  hour  relieved  of  its  strain  of  anxiety,  and  was  immensely  gladdened,  yet,  as
the  immediate  task  had  devolved  upon  Esther,  so  no  doubt  the  immediate  relief  was
hers.  In  her  first  and  chiefly  the  battle  was  fought  and  the  victory  won.  In  what
she  thought,  did,  and  obtained  we  may  find  concentrated  the  important  suggestions
of  the  hour  in  question.     Notice  three  things : —

I.  The  unpromising  appearances  which  this  hour  presented.  They  were  not
mere  dim,  vague  impressions  which  it  made,  nor  were  they  fancies.  These  appear
ances  were  true  for  the  human  point  of  view,  however  they  might  be  overruled  by
Divine  power  and  goodness.  For  men  they  were  hard  facts,  with  which  it  was
necessary  to  deal.  Thus  it  was  certain  that — 1.  The  hour  was  one  which  found
incalculable  human  interests  at  stake.  The  blotting  out  of  existence,  the  swift
swallowing  up  of  human  lives  innumerable,  with  all  their  precious  freightage  of  love
and  joy,  of  purpose  and  hope,  was  no  light  fancy,  no  vague  fear  now.  Yet  that  was
the  appalling  uncertainty  beneath  the  burden  of  which  the  solemn  hour  bended.
It  was  not  dull  cloudiness  of  sky  alone,  and  that  made  worse  by  unnecessary  appre-
hension and  weak  fearfulness.  It  was  one  defined  dark  mass  of  cloud.  2.  To  all
human  appearance  the  question  of  the  hour  depended  on  the  caprice  of  one  man.
[t  did  not  resemble  some  case  of  great  interest,  which  was  going  to  have  the  best
attention  of  a  select  number  of  the  best  of  people,  and  thereupon  a  deliberate  decision
be  taken.  In  that  hour  the  momentary  whim  of  a  capricious  despot  would  decide
the  question  of  life  or  death,  for  the  innocent  Esther  first,  and  after  her  for  a  whole
race,  of  which  she  was  then  the  head  and  representative.  But  all  the  while  this  is,
truly  speaking,  only  a  forcible  case  of  a  constant  phenomenon,  a  genuine  fact  of
human  life.  We  can  see,  when  shown  in  the  dimensions  of  the  instance  before  ui
here,  the  same  thing  which,  because  it  is  on  a  lesser  scale,  eludes  both  belief  and  even


en.  V.  1—8.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  108

notice  in  our  ordhiary  life.  3.  The  responsibility  of  doing  the  best  possible,  or  all
that  was  posaible,  for  that  hour  rested  on  one  gentle,  loving  woman.  What  a  dis-
proportion I  The  case  is  that  of  the  lives  of  perhaps  a  million  people.  The  judge
IS  a  sensual,  capricious  Eastern  despot.  The  advocate  and  intercessor  is  Esther.
And  it  may  be  immediate  death  to  her  so  much  as  to  stand  where  she  does.  The
occasion  witnesses  her  not  defiant,  not  overcome.  It  exhibits  her  a  pattern  of  human
Belf-forgetfulness — that  secret  of  so  much  of  a  soul's  highest  influence  on  earth,  and
of  its  "power  to  prevail"  with  heaven.  She  has  collected  most  calmly  a  soul's
whole  force ;  strength  suflfioient  to  the  day  is  hers  ;  and  in  her  may  most  truly  be
seen  an  example  of  "  strength  made  perfect  in  weakness."

II.  The  careful  prepaeations  made  for  this  hour.  1.  The  crisis  had  not  been
recklessly  nor  negligently  met.  Deep  thought  had  been  spent  upon  it.  '  Anxious
consultation  had  been  held  upon  it.  Loving  and  mature  advice  had  been  offered
and  accepted  regarding  it.  2.  To  meet  and  counteract  the  things  of  sight,  and
"  that  do  appear,"  resort  had  been  had  to  faith.  The  interposition  of  the  Unseen  had
been  sought  in  "fastings  oft"  and  long.  Esther  had  sent  word  to  Mordecai  (ch.  iv.
16),  "I  also  and  my  maidens  will  fast  likewise."  3.  In  this  supplication  of  Heaven
the  aid  of  intercession  had  not  been  forgotten.  Esther  had  not  overlooked  the
importance  of  a  general  union  of  her  people  in  reUgious  exercise.  She  called  into
vitality  and  determined  activity  the  whole  combined  and  sympathetic  force  of
multitudes,  who  at  her  instance  did  for  three  days  put  away  from  themselves  every
other  thought,  care,  hope,  that  they  might  be  found  "watching"  as  regards  the
crisis  of  this  hour.  What  an  interesting  suggestion  arises  from  the  words  (ch.  iv.
17),  "So  Mordecai  went  his  way,  and  did  according  to  all  that  Esther  had  com-
manded him."  The  tender  ward  has  become  the  strong,  firm,  religious  teacher  of  her
guardian.

III.  The  «rand  results  of  this  hour.  1.  The  event  of  the  hour  disappointed
all  fear,  rewarded  amply  all  anxious  preparation,  fulfilled  more  than  the  most  that
hope  had  dared  contemplate.  2.  The  event  of  the  hour  proved  different  from  all
that  could  be  reckoned  upon  at  the  hands  of  mere  human  goodness.  And  an  impress-
ive lesson  of  religion  was  taught:  "The  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord"
(Prov.  xxi.  1).  This  was  what  secured  the  rest.  "  The  king  held  out  to  Esther  the
golden  sceptre  that  was  in  his  hand.  So  Esther  drew  near,  and  touched  the  top  of
the  sceptre."     3.  The  event  of  the   hour  was  grander  because  of  its  contrasts.

(1)  Esther's  darkest  hour  changes  to  light;  Haman's  day,  ablaze  with  light  and
confidence   and   boasting,   is   overspread,   and  goes   out   in  darkness   and   storm.

(2)  The  change  for  Esther  and  her  people  themselves  is  great  indeed  between  the
beginning  and  the  end  of  that  hour.  Toil  brought  rest  so  quickly.  Fierce  struggle
brought  peace  so  sweet.  Anguish  brought  bliss  so  full.  These  are  the  contrasts,
as  safe,  as  blessed,  as  they  were  sudden. — B.

EXPOSITION.    §  10


Haman,  exulting  at  these  signs  op
royal  favour,  is  the  more  exasperated
AT  Mordbcai's  contempt  of  him.    At  the

BIDDING  OF  HIS  WIFE  HE   RESOLVES  TO  IM-

piLE  Mordecai,  and  causes  a  lofty  cross

ro  BE  ERECTED    FOR   THE    PURPOSE   (ch.    V.

9 — 14).  The  favour  shown  him  by  the  king
and  queen  in  admitting  him  to  the  very
close  intimacy  implied  in  their  making  him
the  sole  companion  of  their  private  hours,
produced  in  Haman  a  dangerous  exaltation
of  spirit.  He  seemed  to  himself  to  have
attained  the  pinnacle  of  a  subject's  greatness.
Returning  horns  in  this  frame  of  mind,  and


having  to  pass  through  the  gate  where
Mordecai  was  on  duty,  he  was  more  vexed
than  usual  with  that  official's  disrespect,
which  was  more  pointed  and  open  than  it
had  ever  been  before  (ver.  9).  However,  he
took  no  immediate  notice  of  the  porter's
conduct  (ver.  10),  but  proceeded  to  his  own
house,  where  he  assembled  his  friends,  and
communicated  to  them,  and  at  the  same  time
to  Zeresh  his  wife,  the  circumstances  which
had  so  greatly  raised  his  spirits.  The  climax
was  that  "  Esther  the  queen  had  let  no  man
come  in  with  the  king  unto  the  banquet  that
she  had  prepared  hut  himself ;  nay,  more,  ht


119


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  T.  »— 14


was  again  invited  on  the  morrow  to  banquet
with  her  and  the  king"  (ver.  12).  He
added,  however,  Mordecai's  insult  remaining
fresh  in  his  recollection,  that  all  his  glory,
all  his  honours,  availed  him  nothing — were  as
nothing  in  his  eyes — so  long  as  he  was  con-
demned to  see  Mordecai  the  Jew  every  time
that  he  passed  though  the  palace  gate,  and
to  be  treated  by  him  with  contempt  and
contumely  (ver.  13).  Upon  this  Zeresh
made,  and  Haman's  friends  approved,  a  pro-
posal that  a  lofty  cross  should  be  at  once
erected  in  the  court  of  Haman's  house,  on
which  Mordecai  should  be  impaled,  with  the
king's  consent,  as  soon  as  it  was  finished.
Haman  agreed  to  this,  recovered  hia  spirits,
and  gave  orders  for  the  cross  to  be  made  (ver.
14).

Yer.  9. — Mordecai  .  .  .  stood  not  up,  nor
moved  for  him.  Originally  Mordecai  had
merely  declined  to  prostrate  himself  before
Ilaman  on  religious  grounds.  Now  he
looked  upon  Haman  as  his  personal  enemy,
and  would  not  even  acknowledge  hia  -pre-
sence. There  is  nothing  more  galling  than
such  utter  contempt  shown  openly  in  the
presence  of  others.

Ver.  10.  — Haman  refrained  himselt  That
is  to  say,  so  far  as  speech  and  act  went.  He
said  nothing  ;  he  did  not  strike  his  insulter ;
he  did  not  order  his  servants  to  drag  the
fellow  outside  the  gate  and  give  him  the
bastinado.  But  he  did  not  "  reirain  his
heart."  He  allowed  the  aifront  that  he  had
received  to  remain  in  his  mind  and  rankle
there.  It  poisoned  his  happiness,  marred  all
his  enjoyment,  filled  him  with  hatred  and
rage.  When  he  came  home,  he  sent  and
called  for  his  friends.  It  was  not  so  much
to  be  partners  in  his  joy  that  Haman  called


bis  friends  around  him  as  to  be  companions
in  his  grief.  It  is  true  that  his  speech  to
them  was  chiefly  occupied  with  boasts  ;  but
the  true  intention  of  the  discourse  is  seen  in
its  close — "All  this  availeth  me  nothing,"
&c.

Ver.  11. — The  multitude  of  his  children.
Literally,  "of  his  sons."  Of  these  we  see
by  ch.  ix.  7 — 10  that  he  had  ten.  To  be
the  father  of  many  sons  was  accounted
highly  honourable  by  the  Persians  (Herod.,
i.  136).  How  he  had  advanced  him  above
the  princes.     See  above,  ch.  iii.  1.

Ver.  13.  All  this  availeth  me  nothing.
The  bitter  drop  in  his  cup  deprived  Haman's
life  of  all  sweetness.  He  had  not  learned
the  wisdom  of  setting  pleasure  against  pain,
joy  against  sorrow,  satisfaction  against  an-
noyance. Much  less  had  he  taught  himself
to  look  upon  the  vexations  and  trials  of  life
as  blessings  in  disguise.  His  was  a  coarse
and  undisciplined  nature,  little  better  than
that  of  a  savage,  albeit  he  was  the  chief
minister  of  the  first  monarch  in  the  world.
So  little  proof  is  worldly  greatness  of  either
greatness  or  goodness  of  soul.

Ver.  14. — let  a  gallows  be  made.  Rather,
" a  pa^g  "  or  "  cross."  The  Persians  did  not
hang  men,  as  we  do,  but  ordinarily  executed
them  by  impalement  (see  the  comment  on
ch.  ii.  23).  Fifty  cubits  high.  This  is  a
very  improbable  height,  and  we  may  suspect
a  corruption  of  the  number.  It  occurs,  how-
ever, again  in  ch.  vii.  9.  Speak  thou  unto
the  king.  Haman's  wife  and  friends  assume
that  so  trifling  a  matter  as  the  immediate
execution  of  one  Jew  will  be  of  course  al-
lowed at  the  request  of  the  chief  minister,
who  has  already  obtained  an  edict  for  the
early  destruction  of  the  entire  people.  It
certainly  would  seem  to  be  highly  probable
that  Xerxes  would  have  granted  Haman's
petition  but  for  the  accident  of  his  sleeiiless-
ness,  as  narrated  in  the  next  chapter.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  11,  12. — Prosperity  and  self-gratulation.  In  Oriental  courts,  wliere  pro-
motion depends  upon  the  favour  of  the  sovereign,  it  is  sometimes  as  rapid  as  it  ia
undeserved,  and  as  insecure  as  it  is  rapid.  So  was  it  with  the  worthless,  vain,  arro-
gant Haman.  His  career  is  full  of  instruction,  especially  as  an  instance  of  the
efEects  and  perils  of  prosperity.

I.  Observe  the  elements  of  worldly  prosperity.  1.  Riches.  The  minister's
position  gave  him  the  opportunity  of  acquiring  vast  wealth,  especially  by  means
of  extortion,  and  oppression,  and  bribes.  And  the  king  gave  his  favourite  large
sums  of  money,  in  that  lavish  and  insane  caprioiousness  which  distinguished  him.
2.  Family.  We  are  told  that  Haman  had  ten  sons,  and  we  know  that  a  large
number  of  sons  was  counted  in  Persia  the  highest  blessing  of  fortune.  3.  Promotion
and  power.  What  Haman's  origin  was  we  are  not  told,  but  that  he  was  raised  by
royal  favour  to  a  station  he  could  never  have  anticipated  is  clear  enough.  He  was
the  first  of  subjects,  and  had  the  ear  of  the  king,  who  delegated  to  him  his  authority,
banding  him  his  signet  to  use  as  he  thought  fit.    4.  Pre-eminence  over  rivals.    This,


cs.  V.  §— 14.3  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  ill

to  such  a  nature  as  Haman's,  was  no  moan  element  in  joy  and  self-gratulation.  To
pass  others  in  tlie  race,  to  see  them  behind  him,  to  have  them  supplicating  his  favour
and  good  word  with  the  monarch,  all  this  was  very  gratifying  to  the  minister  of
state.  6.  Favour  with  the  queen.  He  only  was  invited  to  the  banquet  given  by
Esther.  True,  he  misconstrued  the  motive  of  the  invitation ;  but,  at  the  time,  to
himself  and  to  the  courtiers  this  must  have  been  regarded  as  a  proof  how  high  he
stood  in  royal  favour.  6.  The  companionship  of  the  monarch.  Haman  was
evidently  admitted  to  frequent  audiences  ;  he  had  the  ear  of  the  king,  and  was
not  presuming  when  he  deemed  himself  "  the  man  whom  the  king  delighted  to
honour."

II.  Observe  the  natubal  effects  of  prosperity.  That  Haman's  "head  was
turned  "  by  the  giddy  elevation  to  which  he  had  climbed  is  clear  enough.  1,  Joy
and  elation.  2.  Boasting  and  self-confidence.  So  convinced  was  he  that  he  was
secure  of  favour  a,nd  power,  that  he  vaunted  of  his  greatness  before  his  family  and
friends.  3.  Contempt  of  those  in  adversity.  This  is  ever  a  proof  of  a  mean,  a  little
mind.    Remark,  that  the  higher  Haman  rose,  the  more  did  he  despise  the  lowly.

III.  Observe  the  dangers  of  worldly  prosperity.  1.  There  is  danger  lest  men
forget  the  vicissitudes  of  life.  "  In  my  prosperity  I  said,  I  shall  never  be  moved."
"  Riches  take  to  themselves  wings  and  flee  away."  "  Man  that  is  in  honour  con-
tinueth  not."  2.  There  is  danger  lest  men  forget  the  approach  of  death.  How  often
has  God  said  to  the  prosperous,  the  boastful,  the  self-confident,  "Thou  fool,  this
night  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee  !  "  3.  There  is  danger  lest  men  lose  sym-
pathy with  thoge  in  obscurity  or  adversity.  4.  There  is  danger  lest  men  forget  God.
They  say,  like  the  great  king,  "Is  not  this  great  Babylon  that  I  have  built?"
like  Israel,  "  My  power,  and  the"  might  of  my  hand,  hath  gotten  me  this  wealth."
Let  these  considerations  lead  the  prosperous  to  reflection,  to  trembling,  to  searching
of  heart.

Ver.  13. — SappinetB  marred.    A  little  "  screw  loose  "  may  spoil  the  working  of  a

vast  and  powerful  engine.  A  clot  of  blood  upon  the  brain  may  suddenly  deprive  of
life  a  man  seemingly  healthy  and  certainly  powerful.  A  seeming  trifle  may  spoil
the  content  and  embitter  the  life  of  a  prince.  And  so  mean  a  person  as  Mordecai,  by
so  insignificant  an  act  of  disrespect  as  is  here  mentioned,  may  mar  the  happiness
of  a  great  minister  of  state  like  Haman,  and  may  make  even  his  prosperity
miserable.

I.  Consider  THE  unsatisfactoby  natuee  of  all  earthly  happiness.  1.  It  is
at  the  mercy  of  circumstances.  Ahab  was  a  powerful  and  prosperous  king ;  but
whilst  he  could  not  have  Naboth's  vineyard' for  his  own  pleasure  nothing  gave  him
any  satisfaction.  Place  your  welfare  in  worldly  good,  set  your  heart  upon  an  earthly
object,  and  something  will  certainly  occur  to  show  you  the  vanity  of  such  an  aim  and
of  such  a  trust  Whatever  Haman  gained,  it  was  insuflScient  to  make  him  happy.
A  poor  Jew  would  not  do  him  reverence;  it  was  the  fly  in  the  apothecary's  ointment
2.  It  is  at  the  mercy  of  an  evil  heart.  The  same  circumstances  which  spoil  the
pleasure  of  a  worldling  have  no  power  to  occasion  a  Christian  one  moment's  distress
or  anxiety.  If  Haman  had  not  been  a  bad,  and  selfish,  and  vain  man  he  would  never
have  troubled  himself  about  the  conduct  of  Mordecai.  A  good  conscience  and  a
quiet  heart,  with  the  habit  of  referring  to  God's  judgment  rather  than  to  men's,  will
render  you  largely  independent  of  common  causes  of  solicitude  and  vexation.

II.  This  consideration  should  lead  us  to  seek  cub  happiness  there  where  earthly
tbodbles  will  have  little  poweb  to  mar  it.  Not  in  outward  prosperity,  not  in
the  approval  or  the  applause  of  men,  not  in  pre-eminence  and  authority,  is  true
happiness  to  be  found.  But  in  the  favour,  the  fellowship,  and  the  approbation  of
him  "who  searcheth  the  heart  and  trieth  the  reins  of  the  children  of  men."  They
who  make  this  choice  choose  that  good  part  which  shall  not  be  taken  away  from
them.

Ver.  14. — Malevolent  purpose  and  pleasure.  This  one  verse  contains  the  record
of  "  a  world  of  iniquity,  and  shows  us  to  what  lengths  sinners  may  proceed  in  their
evil  plans.     Happily  the  sequel  shows  us  that  there  is  One  who  says  to  the  raging


112  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  t.  f— 14

sea  of  human  malevolence  and  impiety,  "Hitherto  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further;
and  here  shall  tiiy  proud  waves  be  staj^ed  I  "  Follow  the  clauses  of  the  verse,  and
behold  the  progress  of  atrocious  crime.

I.  Wicked  counsellobs.  Wife  and  friends,  instead  of  expostulating  with
Haman  because  of  his  folly,  "  fooled  him  to  the  top  of  his  bent."  They  counselled
liim  as  they  knew  he  would  fain  be  counselled.  It  is  too  generally  so  with  the
families  and  companions  of  the  great.  Haman's  responsibility  was  not  diminished
because  his  friends  were  partakers  of  his  sin.

II.  Unjust  peoposals.  What  had  Mordecai  done  that  deserved  hanging?  His
ofEence  was  trifling,  and  should  have  been  altogether  disregarded.  It  is  a  serious
thing  to  take  away  the  life  oven  of  a  murderer ;  how  much  more  of  an  innocent,
unoffending  man.

III.  Influence  abused.  The  minister  could  not  put  the  poor  Jew  to  death  by  his
own  authority.  The  plan  was  to  speak  to  the  king,  and  to  get  his  sanction  for  the
detestable  deed.  It  is  well  when  a  sovereign  is  reluctant  to  use  liis  prerogative  and
order  the  execution  of  a  capital  sentence ;  as  the  Roman  emperor,  who  in  such
a  case  exclaimed,  I  would  I  could  not  write  my  name;  or  as  Edward  VI.,  who
could  hardly  be  persuaded  to  sign  the  order  for  burning  one  condemned.  There
was  no  apprehension  of  any  diificulty  with  Artaxerxes  ;  let  him  but  be  urged  by
his  favourite,  and  the  deed  was  done.  An  awful  responsibility,  to  give  such
advice.

IV.  The  heart  relieved  and  rejoiced  by  an  unjust  act.  As  Stephen  Gardiner
would  not  dine  until  the  tidings  readied  him  that  the  Protestant  bishops  were  burnt
at  Oxford,  so  Haman  could  not  enjoy  the  banquet  until  the  order  for  Mordecai's
impalement  or  crucifixion  had  been  given  by  the  king.  They  sleep  not,  except  they
do  evil.

V.  Pleasure  in  the  prospect  of  sin.  "  The  thing  pleased  Haman  1 "  What  a
"  thing  I  "  and  what  a  man  to  be  pleased  therewith  1

VI.  Mischief  anticipated.  Already,  before  the  project  was  sanctioned  by  the
king,  the  order  was  given  to  rear  the  gallows,  that  the  evil  work  might  be  accom-
plished. Little  thouglit  they  whose  body  should  be  hanged  thereon,  ere  many  hours
were  passed.

Practical  lesson: — The  heinousness  of  sin;- the  need  of  a  Divine  remedy;  the
wisdom  and  grace  of  God  in  the  gospel  of  Christ.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  13. — The  bathos  of  confession.  After  all  necessary  allowances  and  snbstitn-
tions  have  been  made,  it  may  be  very  justly  said  that  Shakspere's  Wolsey  is  essen-
tially dwarfed  by  Scripture's  Haman,  and  that  not  the  finest  of  Shakspere's  five  act
plays — wonderful  products  of  human  genius  as  they  are — but  must  yield  to  the  ten
briefer  chapters,  with  their  five  chief  characters,  of  our  Book  of  Esther.  The  book
is  indeed  a  consummate  epic  of  the  human  heart.  Its  photographs  are  vivid  and
accurate,  but  they  are  not  the  facsimile  of  a  countenance  alone,  but  of  thirgs
revealed  and  laid  bare,  in  the  fallen  type  of  man,  by  the  most  skilful  anatomy.
What  an  extraordinary  proclamation  it  makes,  at  one  and  the  same  time,  of  the
vanity  of  human  greatness  and  of  the  greatness  of  human  vanity.  How  forcibly
does  it  remind  us  of  that  Scripture  that  saith  not  in  vain,  "  The  heart  is  deceitful
above  all  things,  and  desperately  wicked ;  "  and  there  bids  us  hold  our  breath  awhile.
We  can  scarcely  go  on  to  say,  "  Who  can  know  it  ?  "  for  we  find  it  manifestly  set
forth  as  known  by  One  at  all  events,  whose  finger  guides  us  to  the  observation  of  it,
and  whose  pencil  limns  it.  Certainly  the  present  passage  lays  bare  such  a  heart  to
the  core  of  it,  and  at  the  core  it  is  bad.  It  is  of  an  aggravated  type.  It  reveals
a  miserable  creature  on  his  own  showing,  judged  by  his  own  standard,  and  at  the
confession  of  his  own  lips.  We  have  no  diflSculty  in  imderstanding  the  description
which  Haman  gives  of  himself.  But  the  difficulty  would  lie  in  crediting  the
phenomenon  of  any  man,  knowing  his  own  symptoms  so  well,  being  ready  to  speak
them  so  frankly,  where  they  are  what  they  are  here.     Let  us  notice —


OH.  \.  9—14.]  THB  BOOK  Of  ESTUEB.  113

I.  SOMK  STRIKINQ  AND  DISCBEDITABLE  FACTS  WHICH  HamAN'b  OWN  LANOnAOI
BIVEALS  ABOUT  HIMSELT.  Haman  finds  himself  in  trouble.  He  analyses  it  himself,
and  unhesitatingly  publiflhes  the  results  And  in  doing  so  he  shows  these  two  things
about  himself : — 1.  He  can  confess  without  penitence,  without  shame.  In  confession
one  would  have  hoped  to  find  a  favourable  symptom.  But  it  aggravates  the  case  if
what  in  ten  thousand  other  instances  would  have  been  some  redeeming  feature,  is
none  here.  His  confession  proves  that  his  trouble  is  of  the  smallest  kind,  and  of  the
smallest  quantity.  He  is  exalted  with  honour,  he  is  laden  with  wealth,  he  is  closely
surrounded  with  a  profusion  of  earthly  blessings.  It  is  the  very  point  of  his  own
representation  that  he  had  touched  the  summit  of  success.  But  there  was  a  humble
man,  no  competitor  whatever  of  his,  low  down  on  the  rungs  of  the  ladder,  nor  seek-
ing to  climb  higher.  He  did  not  cross  Haman's  path,  but  Haman  sometimes  crossed
his.  This  man,  not  for  whim,  nor  to  affront,  but  for  his  religion's  sake,  did  not  make
the  obeisance  which  the  rest  around  were  making  to  this  rising  or  risen  sun.
Haman  did  not  know  the  loss  by  feeling  it.  He  did  not  know  it  till  some  one,  who
owned  to  the  gift  of  not  being  able  to  do  anything  so  well  as  mischief,  informed  him  of
the  fact.  And  on  this  omission,  recurring  at  a  critical  moment  of  Haman's  glory,  it  is
that  Haman  eon/esses  to  himself,  to  his  wife,  to  his  friends  specially  called  together,
that  all  his  wealth,  glory,  promotion  are  "  nothing "  to  him  while  Mordecai  with-
holds his  obeisance.  This  is  the  confession  he  makes  without  one  expression  of
penitence,  without  one  sign  of  shame.  2.  He  is  content  to  have  self-knowledge
without  realising  any  of  the  benefits  that  might  accompany  it.  It  is  not  every  one
who  knows  his  nature's  and  his  own  disease  so  well.  There  are  few  who  could
speak  the  plague  of  their  own  heart  so  plainly.  There  was  also,  apparently,  freedom
fiom  that  form  of  deception  which  in  things  of  high  moment  must  ever  be  the
worst — »eZ/^-deception.  Yet  if  we  want  to  commend  Haman  for  all  this,  it  is
impossible.  We  have  to  take  away  more  with  our  left  hand  than  we  give  with  the
right.  He  is  not  ignorant  of  self,  yet  he  has  no  idea  of  improving  self.  He  is  not
self-deceived,  yet  he  is  not  awake  to  the  enormity  of  his  danger.  Ho  describes
his  own  loathsomei  symptoms,  yet  loathes  them  not.  He  speaks  them,  to  boast
them.

II.  The  terrific  forces  op  evil  which  underlay  those  facts.  1.  Immoderate
ambition.  From  the  moment  that  his  lip  made  the  confession  which  it  did  make,
Haman  should  have  seemed  to  hear  it  as  charging  him  to  come  down  and  "  avoid
ambition."  His  confession  should  have  sounded  the  knell  of  ambition,  since,  if  not,
it  were  certain  to  sound  another  knell.  2.  The  intense  worship  of  self.  Haman
must  be  all,  and  have  all.  He  cannot  let  an  obscure  exile  in  the  land  have  a  thought,
a  liberty,  a  conscience,  a  will  of  his  own.  He  cannot  tolerate  the  slightest  infringe-
ment of  his  own  rights.  3.  The  rankling  of  unforgivingness.  A  forgiving  spirit
would  have  saved  Haman  all  the  destruction  that  was  about  to  descend  upon  his  head.
No  wound  of  any  sort  whatsoever  has  such  a  determined  bias  towards  a  fatal  result
as  the  wound  received  and  not  forgiven.  Do  whatsoever  else  you  will  for  that  wound,
this  undone,  it  is  almost  certain  that,  if  in  itself  not  fatal,  it  will  become  so.
4.  A  greed  that  had  grown  with  getting,  an  appetite  that  increased  with  feeding,  and
which  was  now  rapacious  as  the  grave.  Haman  had  everything  except  one  thing
which  he  would  never  have  missed  unless  he  had  been  told  of  it.  The  whole  day
was  bright  but  one  moment  of  it,  and  then  it  was  only  overcast.  The  whole  sky
was  fair  and  shining  except  one  little  touch  of  it.  The  whole  prospect  was  glorious
except  for  one  duller  spot.  Life  was  a  luxurious  banquet,  immensely  to  his  taste,
and  there  were  no  fingers  of  a  hand  writing  dread  things  on  the  wall  to  spoil,  but ,
it  was  spoiled.  Haman  says  it  was  utterly  spoiled,  profoundly  unsatisfactory.  One
little  diminution  of  dignity,  one  little  drop  of  incense  withheld,  one  little  humble,
harmless^  presence,  fascinates  him,  as  a  basilisk  would,  nor  releases  him  till  he  is  lured
to  his  ruin.  "  Dead  flies  cause  the  apothecaries'  ointment  to  stink,'  says  Solomon ;
and  "the  buzzing  of  an  insect  too  near  the  ear  may,"  says  Pascal,  "thwart  a  thought


ike  Mng's  gate.'

tSTHEB.


114  tllE  UOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  v.  9—14

Lessons: — 1.  In  the  larger,  bolder,  blacker  portrait  of  Haman  is  tbere  not  s^m*
Bemblanoe  of  self,  when,  amid  opportunities  and  advantages  innumerable,  comforts
and  joys  innumerable,  bright  prospects  and  hopes  innumerable,  we  put  them  all  far
from  us  just  because  everything  conceivable  is  not  to  our  mind.  2.  We  are  prona
to  share  the  perverse  nature  of  Haman  when,  as  mere  matter  of  fact,  we  overlook  a
thousand  mercies  we  possess  in  favour  of  keenly  noticing  the  absence  of  one  with-
held, like  Eden's  apple,  or  withdrawn  after  long  enjoyment  of  it.  3.  We  are  prone
to  share  the  unfruUful  nature  of  Haman.  No  fact  has  come  to  be  better  ascertained
in  human  life  than  this,  that  it  is  not  those  who  have  most  who  .give  most.  The
greatest  opportunity  often  witnesses  the  least  improvement  of  it. — B.

Ver.  13. — Unavailing  honour.  "Yet  all  this  availeth  me  nothing,  so  long,"  &c.
How  many  look  with  envy  upon  Haman  as  he  rides  forth.  His  servants  hasten  on
before  him,  crying,  "  Bow  the  knee,  bow  the  knee."  Grateful  to  him  is  the  reverence
he  receives.  He  cares  not  that  it  is  reverence  lacking  respect,  so  long  as  there  is
outward  obeisance.  Such  an  one  is  sure  to  observe  the  least  slight.  His  temper
will  not  endure  to  see  one  erect  head  among  so  many  bowed  backs.

I.  The  cause  of  a  prime  minister's  discontent.  One  day  Haman,  as  he  goes
forth,  cannot  help  seeing  that  there  is  one  who  bows  not  before  him.  He  pretends
not  to  see  the  slight,  but  with  difficulty  he  refrains  from  commanding  his  attendants
to  inflict  summary  vengeance  on  the  ofEender.  Mordecai  thus  treated  Haman  not
only  once,  but  constantly.  It  has  been  suggested  that  as  the  king  claimed  in  some
sense  Divine  honours,  so  by  his  command  he  intended  that  Haman  should  have  in
some  degree  Divine  honour  paid  to  him.  Knowing  this,  Mordecai  dare  not  bend.
Some  may  have  called  it  obstinacy,  but  it  was  in  reality  consistency,  Allurements
and  threats  are  tried  upon  him,  but  in  vain.  Now  if  Mordecai  refused  honour  to
whom  honour  was  due,  he  was  in  the  wrong.  None  may  practise  incivility.  Re-
ligion teaches  us  that  we  should  "  be  courteous."  After  all,  what  a  trifle  it  was  that
vexed  the  mind  of  this  grand  vizier  I  It  was  the  one  drop  of  poison  in  the  cup
of  his  joy.  It  was  the  black  cloud  glooming  the  sunshine  of  his  prosperity.
Although  he  has  attained  an  elevation  that  may  at  one  time  have  seemed  far  beyond
his  reach,  he  finds  that  thorns  bestrew  his  path,  and  even  leave  their  sharp  points  on
his  pillow.

II.  Modern  instances  op  similar  discontent.  Who  that  looked  upon  Haman
as  he  rode  forth  in  all  the  glory  of  purple  and  gold,  or  as  he  lounged  on  his  divan  in
the  midst  of  his  friends,  would  have  supposed  that  he  had  anything  to  cause  him  so
much  annoyance  ?  And  yet  is  it  not  always  so  ?  There  is  a  skeleton  in  every
house,  the  worm  in  every  rose,  sorrow  in  every  heart.  Look  at  that  stately  mansion ;
see  how  richly  it  is  furnished ;  pictures  of  the  choicest  character  deck  the  walls ;
busts  and  antiques  are  here  and  there ;  the  velvety  carpet  feels  like  a  mossy  bank
beneath  the  -feet.  Ask  the  occupants  of  the  mansion  if  they  are  content,  and  per-
haps the  owner  will  tell  you,  "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing,"  so  long  as  my  neigh-
bour on  the  hill  has  a  house  larger  and  better  furnished.  The  wife  will  perhaps  tell
you  that "  all  this  availeth  nothing,"  so  long  as  a  certain  family  is  accounted  as  higher
in  the  social  scale  than  hers ;  or  because  at  a  dinner-party  she  noticed  with  annoyance
that  some  one  had  taken  precedence  of  herself ;  or  because  she  had  not  been  invited  to
some  great  gathering  where  certain  persons  of  higher  rank  were  expected.  The  vexa-
tions of  the  weak-minded  and  exclusive  are  more  than  equal  to  those  of  the  excluded.
The  petty  social,  fanciful  annoyances  oft  make  all  comforts  and  possessions  to
"  avail  nothing  "  in  the  production  of  real  happiness.  Enter  the  shop  of  that  trades-
man. What  a  large  business  he  carries  on  ;  yet  he  in  his  soul  is  not  happy.  He  is
envious.  He  will  confess  to  himself,  if  not  to  you,  "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing,"
BO  long  as  a  certain  competitor  in  the  same  business  can  buy  cheaper,  or  make
money  more  rapidly.  Go  along  a  country  road,  and  note  some  pretty  homestead
nestling  among  the  trees  ;  surely  that  must  be  the  abode  of  content  and  peace  !  You
approach  it.  Meeting  the  occupant  thereof,  you  congratulate  him  on  the  beauty  of
his  dwelling-place  and  on  the  charm  of  the  surrounding  hills ;  he,  haggard  and  worn,
only  replies,  "All  this  availeth  me  nothing."  Look  at  my  neighbour's  bam,  how
much  larger,  and  his  crops,  how  much  finer  than  mine.    So  Qie  warrior  or  statMsman,


Dfi.  VI.  1—14.]


The  book  of  estHeb.


Ill


the  preacher  and  the  potentate,  are  often  alike  discontented.  They  are  dissatisfied,
successful  men.  The  blessings  and  privileges  they  possess  are  notliirig  ;  the  trifling
lack  or  annoyance  is  everything.  Their  state  is  as  sinful  as  it  is  miserable.  They
are  lineal  descendants  of  Haman  the  Agagite.  All  the  joys,  honours,  comforts  of
the  world  are  after  all  only  "  as  a  lamp  that  goeth  out,  leaving  a  disagreeable  smell ;
whereas  the  peace  which  flows  from  an  eternal  God  is  like  a  sun  which  shineth  more
and  more  to  the  perfect  day."  To  prefer  the  world  to  heavenly  and  spiritual
delights  is  to  act  according  to  the  folly  of  one  who,  being  heir  to  a  kingdom,  should
yet  prefer  some  map  or  model  to  the  kingdom  itself.  How  easily  might  the  map  be
torn  or  the  model  be  broken  I  The  possession  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  in  the
heart  can  never  be  destroyed.  Those  who  possess  it  will  not  make  Haman's  con-
fession, "  All  this  availeth  me  nothing."  They  will  say  rather,  "  Seeking  first  the
kingdom  of  heaven  and  its  righteousness,  all  other  things  are  added  thereunto."— H.


EXPOSITION.    $11.


CHAPTEE  VI.


Ahasttbrus,  being  wakeful  during
the  nioht,  has  the  book  of  the  chron-
icles   read    to    him,   and   finds   that

MORDBCAI  HAS  RECEIVED  NO  REWARD.     HB

MAKES  Haman  name  a  pitting  reward,

AND  THEN  DEPUTES  HIM  TO  CONFER  IT  ON

MoRDECAi  (eh.  vi  1 — 11).  It  is  among  the
objects  of  the  writer  of  Esther  to  show  how
the  smallest  circumstances  of  life,  those
most  generally  regarded  as  left  to  chance,
work  ogether  for  good  to  such  as  deserve
well,  and  for  evil  to  such  as  deserve  evil.
He  now  notes  that  the  turning-point  In
Haman's  and  Mordeoai's  fortunes  was  the
apparently  trivial  circumstance  of  Ahasuerus
on  a  particular  night  being  troubled  with
sleeplessness.  This  led  to  his  having  the
book  of  the  chronicles  read  to  him  (ver.  1).
Another  seeming  chance  caused  the  reader
to  include  in  what  he  read  the  account  of
Bigthan's  and  Teresh's  conspiracy  (ver.  2).
This  brought  Mordecai's  name  before  the
king,  and  induced  him  to  ask  the  question,
"  What  honour  and  dignity  hath  been  done
to  Mordecai  for  this  ? "  The  question  could
only  be  answered  in  one  way — "  There  is
nothing  done  for  him"  (ver.  3).  Such
neglect  being  a  gross  breach  of  Persian  law,
and  a  great  dishonour  to  the  king  who  had
allowed  it,  Ahasuerus  naturally  takes  the
matter  up  with  earnestness.  Something
must  be  done  at  once  to  remedy  the  neglect,
some  agent  must  be  found  to  set  it  right,
and  so  the  king  asks,  "Who  is  in  the
court  ? "  Morning  has  probably  arrived
during  the  reading,  and  Haman,  impatient
to  get  the  king's-  consent    to   Mordecai's


execution,  has  come  with  the  dawn  to  prefer
his  request  The  king  is  told  that  Haman
waits  without,  and  sending  for  him,  antici-
pates the  business  that  his  minister  had
intended  to  lay  before  him  by  the  sudden
question,  asked  the  moment  he  has  entered,
"What  shall  be  done  unto  the  man  whom
the  king  delighteth  to  honour?"  It  was
natural  that  Haman,  after  the  favour  shown
him  on  the  preceding  day,  should  imagine
himself  the  person  aimed  at,  and  should
therefore  fix  upon  the  very  highest  honour
that  was  within  the  range  of  his  conceptions
(vers.  8,  9).  He  thus  became  the  suggester
of  honours  for  Mordecai  which  might
otherwise  not  have  occurred  to  any  one.
Ahasuerus,  full  of  the  idea  of  his  own
neglect,  and  ready  to  make  any  reparation,
consents  to  all  that  is  proposed,  and,  un-
aware that  there  is  any  unpleasantness
between  Haman  and  Mordecai,  bids  his
minister  confer  the  honours  which  he  has
suggested  (ver.  10).  The  royal  command
cannot  be  disputed  or  evaded,  and  so
Mordecai  is  escorted  thrcfugh  the  city  by  his
enemy,  who  had  expected  about  that  very
time  to  be  superintending  his  impalement
(ver.  11).

Ver.   1.— The   book   of  records    of  the

chronioles.  Compare  ch.  ii.  !i3,  where  the
title  is  given  more  briefly,  as  "the  book  of
the  chronicles."  See  also  oh.  x.  2.  The
character  of  the  book  has  been  already  ex-
plained (see  comment  on  ch.  li,  23).  They
were  read.  Either  because  tAe  king  could
not  read  himself  ('Ancient  Monarchies,
voL  iv.  p.  184),  or  because  the  sound  of  a
man's  voice  might  (it  was  thought)  induce
drowsiness.
Ver.  2.— It  was  found  written.  See  th*
12


116


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  VI.  1—14.


last,  words  of  ch.  ii.  Bigthana.  "  Big-
than"  in  ch.  iL  21 ;  "Bigtha"  inch.  i.  10.
The  Persian  name  would  be  best  represented
by  the  fullest  form  of  the  three.

Ver.  3. — The  kingf  said,  What  honour  and
dignity  hath  been  done  to  Uordecai  for  this  t
The  discoverer  of  a  conspiracy  against  the
life  of  the  king  would  in  any  country  have
been  regarded  as  entitled  to  some  reward.
In  Persia,  where  "royal  benefactors"  formed
a  distinct  class,  and  had  their  names  in-
scribed on  a  special  list  (Herod.,  viii.  85),  it
was  especially  incumbent  on  the  monarch  to
see  that  every  such  person  received  a  return
proportioned  to  the  valne  of  his  service.
Ahasuerus  seems  to  have  supposed  that  some
honour  or  dignity  must  have  been  conferred
upon  Mordecai,  tho.igh  he  could  not  recol-
lect what  it  was ;  audit  is  difficult  to  under-
stand how  the  omission  to  reward  him  had
occurred,  unless  there  was  a  prejudice  against
him  among  the  high  court  officials,  who  may
have  known  that  he  was  a  Jew,  though  his
fellow-servants  did  not  (ch.  iii.  i).

Ver.  4. — The  king  said,  Who  is  in  the
court  ?  Probably  some  high  officer  of  state
was  required  to  be  always  in  attendance  upon
the  monarch,  to  take  his  orders  at  any  mo-
ment. Now  Haman  was  come.  Early
morning  is  a  common  time  for  the  transaction
of  business  at  an  Eastern  court.  Haman
»as  so  anxious  to  get  the  business  on  which
he  was  bent  despatched,  that  he  had  come
perhaps  even  before  daybreak,  and  was  wait-
ing in  the  outer  court,  to  get,  if  possible,
the  first  audience.  This  haste  of  his  to
elfect  Mordecai's  destruction  led  to  his  being
the  person  deputed  to  do  him  the  highest
honour.

Ver.  5. — And  the  king's  servants  said
unto  him,  Behold,  Haman  standeth  in  the
court.  The  servants  looked  into  the  court,
and  seeing,  somewhat  to  their  surprise,
Haman  there,  mentioned  him  to  the  king.
They  would  naturally  mention  the  highest
official  whom  they  saw  in  attendance.

Ver.  6. — Haman  thought  in  his  heart.
Literally,  "  said  in  his  heart "  i.  e.
"thought."

Ver.  8.— Let  the  royal  apparel  be  brought
To  wear  a  dress  previously  worn  by  the  king
was,  under  ordinary  circumstances,  a  breach
of  Persian  law  (Plut.,  'Vit.  Artax.,'  §  5);
but  the  king  might  allow  it  (Herod.,  vii.  17)
or  condone  it  (Plut.,  1.  8.  c).  The  horse  that
the  king  rideth  upon.  Bather,  "a  horse
that  the  king  hath  ridden."  And  the  crown
royal  which  is  set  upon  his  head.  Bather,
"and  that  hath  a  crown  royal  set  on  his
head."  Some  peculiar  ornament  by  which
the  royal  steed  was  made  conspicuous  is
intended,  not  his  own  crown,  which  even
Xerxes  would  scarcely  have  allowed  another
to  wear.  See  ven.  9  and  11,  where  the  dreaa


and  the  horse  are  refeired  to,  but  the  criiwn,
as  an  adjunct  of  the  horse,  not  particular-
ised.

Ver.  9. — Bring  him  on  horseback  through
the  dty,  and  proclaim  before  njn.  Com-
pare the  honours  given  to  Josejih  in  Egypt
(Gen.  xli.  43).

Ver.  10. — Make  haste.  The  king  will
have  no  more  delay  in  a  matter  which  has
been  delayed  far  too  long.  Haman  is  to
"  hasten,"  and  confer  the  honour  at  once.
Uordecai  the  Jew,  that'  sitteth  in  the  king's
gate.  Mordecai's  nationality  and  liis  em-
ployment were  probably  mentioned  in  the
book  of  the  chronicles.  From  these  the
king  has  learnt  them,  and  he  uses  probal.ly
the  very  phrase  of  the  records.  Let  nothing
fail.  Observe  every  particular  of  honour
that  you  have  mentioned ;  let  there  be  no
omission  of  one  jot  or  tittle.

Ver.  11. — Then  took  Haman  the  apparel
It  was  impossible  for  Haman  to  excuse  him-
self;  there  was  no  ground  on  which  he  could
decline  the  office  thrust  upon  him.  Ii.8-
luctantly,  without  a  word,  he  performed  the
king's  bidding.

§  12.  Haman  iietotins  home.  Desponik
enot  of  himself  and  his  friends  (i:h.
vi.  12 — 14).  There  was  as  yet  no  real  reason
for  Haman  to  feel  depressed,  or  to  regard
himself  as  having  lost  favour  with  the  king.
He  had  been  made  an  instrument  in  anot'ner
man's  honour,  and  had  suffered  a  disappoint-
ment ;  but  otherwise  he  was  situated  as  on
the  day  preceding,  when  he  "went  forth"
from  the  palace  "joyful  and  with  a  glad
heart "  (ch.  v.  9).  But  he  seems  to  have  had
a  presentiment  of  impending  calamity.  AU
had  as  yet  gone  so  well  with  him  that  the
first  vexation  seemed  like  a  turn  in  the  tide,
ominous  of  coming  evil.  And  the  fuar  of
his  own  heart  found  an  echo  in  the  hearts  of
his  wife  and  friends.  Among  the  last  were
some  who  had  the  i-cpntation  of  being  "  wise
men" — ^perhaps  Magians,  acquainted  with
arts  from  which  it  was  supposed  they  could
divine  the  future.  These  persons  ventured
on  a  prediction.  "If  Mordecai,  before
whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fa'l,  be  of  the  seed
of  the  Jews,  thou  shalt  not  prevail  against
him,  but  shalt  surely  (or  uf-erly)  fall  before
him."  With  this  evil  presage  ringing  in  his
ears,  Haman  quitted  his  house,  and  accom-
panied the  palace  eunuchs  who  had  been
sent  to  conduct  him  to  Esther's  second
banquet.

Ver.  12.— And  Uordeca.*  oame  again  t«


OH.  VI.  1—14.]


IHE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER


111


the  king'8  gate.  Returned,  i.  «.,'  to  his
former  condition  and  employment.  The  high
honour  done  him  was  regarded  aa  sufficient
reward.  Having  his  head  covered.  Like
David  when  he  fted  from  Absalom  (2  Sam.
XV.  30  ;  comp.  Ps.  xliv.  15).

Ver.  13. — His  wise  men.  Magians,  per-
haps, whom  he  was  in  the  habit  of  consult-
ing concerning  the  future.  On  the  supposed
prophetic  powers  of  the  Magians  see  Herod.,
1.  107,  120  ;  vii.  19  ;  Duvis,  Fr.  7,  &c.  If
Uordeeai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews.  It  is
difficult  to  understand  how  this  could  any
longer  be  regarded  aa  doubtful.     His  fellow-


servants  knew  it  (ch.  iiL  4) ;  Haman  knew
it  {ibid.  ver.  6) ;  Ahasuerus  knew  it  (supra,
ver.  10).  The  "  wise  men  "  profess  to  regard
it  as  uncertain,  perhaps  to  give  their  words
a  more  oracular  character.  Thou  shalt  surely
fall.     Rather,  "  thou  shalt  utterly  fall."

Ver.  14. — Came  the  king's  cha.nberlain8,
and  hasted  to  bring  Haman.  This  is  a
custom  not  elsewhere  mentioned  as  Persian,
but  quite  in  accordance  with  Oriental  ideas.
The  polite  host  sends  his  servants  to  escort
guests  of  importance  from  their  own  homes
to  the  place  of  entertainment.


H0MILETIC8.

Ver.  1. — A  wakeful  and  eventful  night.  There  is  something  dramatic  in  this
remarkable  story.  The  movement  is  so  regular  and  orderly,  the  plot  unfolds  itself
so  effectively,  the  crisis  is  reached  so  opportunely,  that  the  story  miglit  be  taken
for  a  consummate  work  of  art.  In  reality  it  is  a  work  in  which  nature,  or  rather
Providence,  is  signally  conspicuous.  This  verse  introduces  the  second  part  of  the
narrative.  Hitherto  Mordecai  has  been  depressed,  and  Haman  has  been  exalted.
But  the  tide  has  now  turned.  From  this  point  pride  is  to  fall,  and  humility  is  to  be
raised.

I.  A  KINO  CANNOT  COMPEL  SLEEP.  Sleep  is  one  of  the  best,  most  precious  gifts
of  God  to  man.  "  He  giveth  his  beloved  sleep."  The  cares  of  business,  of  state,  of
pastoral  life,  may  sometimes  banish  slumber,  of  which  it  is  well  said —

"  The  wretched  he  forsakes,
Swift  upon  downy  pinions  flies  from  grief,
And  lights  on  lids  unsullied  with  a  tear."

It  i«  not  every  statesman  who,  like  Lord  Burleigh,  can  take  off  his  gown  and  say,
Lie  there.  Lord  Treasurer ;  or  who,  like  Lord  Liverpool,  can  draw  ofE  the  cares  of  a
kingdom  with  his  stockings.  Ruminating  upon  the  afiairs  of  his  empire,  his  ambitious
projects,  Ahasuerus  could  not  sleep.

II.  A  SEEMINGLY  SLIGHT  INCIDENT  MAY  INVOLVE  GREAT,  MOMENTOUS  ISSUES.      Often

may  sleep  have  gone  from  the  king's  eyes  and  nothing  of  consequence  have  followed.
But  that  night  was  memorable,  for  that  night's'sleeplessness  was  the  occasion  of  the
salvation  of  Mordecai,  and  perhaps  of  Israel,  In  the  providence  of  God,  as  though
to  rebuke  men's  self-confidence,  little  things  are  sent  on  high  errands.  Solomon
speaks  of  small  things  which  are  yet  exceeding  great.

III.  Records  prove  serviceable  to  kings  and  to  kingdoms.  Books  record  what
men  forget.  We  know,  not  only  from  sacred,  but  also  from  profane  history,  that  the
Persian  kings  kept  chronicles  of  all  the  important  transactions  of  their  reigns.  It. is
believed  that  these  great  kings  were  unable  to  read  themselves,  and  that  there  were
educated  attendants  vvhose  business  it  was  to  read  aloud,  in  the  hearing  of  the  monarch,
from  the  state  records  preserved  in  manuscript.  Thus,  on  this  occasion,  the  services
of  Mordecai  were,  so  to  speak,  disinterred  and  brought  to  light.

IV.  An  aroused  conscience  reproaches  for  forqetfulness  and  ingratitude.
How  easy  it  is  for  the  great  to  overlook  benefits  they  have  received,  to  take  them  as
matters  of  course  I  But  the  inquiry  Ahasuerus  made  shows  that  he  was  not  altogether
insensible  to  the-  claims  which  the  Jew  had  upon  his  memory  and  his  gratitude.  It
was  late,  but  not  too  late,  to  make  some  recompense  for  a  neglected  and  forgotten
aerrice.

V.  'nius  self-indulgence  is  aroused  to  act  with  justice  and  oenebositt.  The
king  had  slept  long  enough ;  it  was  time  to  awake  and  to  act.  And  this  night's  vigil
prompted  him  to  a  day's  justice.

Lessons : — 1    Let  waking  hours  of  night  be  spent  in  profitable  thougbta.    2,  Let


118  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [ch.  vi.  1—11.

us  be  convinced  of  the  overruling  providence  of  Ood.    3.  Let  as  remember  thai
"  man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity."

Ver.  3. — Royal  ingratitude.  The  awakening  conscience  of  Ahasuerus  deserves
our  attention.

I.  He  is  sensible  that  nis  rnEFEUVER  deserved  "honour  and  dignity."  The
king  had  rewarded  a  wortliless  favourite  with  wealth  and  power;  but,  as  he  now
learned,  a  man  who  had  preserved  his  life  had  been  passed  over  unnoticed  and  unre-
warded. It  was  discreditable  in  the  sight  of  the  nation  and  before  his  own  judgment
that  it  should  have  been  bo.

II.  He  is  surprised  at  himself  upon  learning  that  nothing  has  been  done
FOR  HIM.  How  this  could  have  happened  we  do  not  know.  It  was  customary  for
"  royal  benefactors  "  to  be  lavishly  rewarded  with  riches,  jewels,  offices,  or  favour.
But  Mordecai  had  been  left  at  the  gate  of  the  palace,  as  though  he  had  done  nothing
but  porter's  work,  as  though  the  king  had  not  been  indebted  to  him  for  his  life.

III.  He  awakes  to  self-reproach  and  to  a  purpose  op  recompensing  the
neglected.  It  is  too  customary  for  the  great  to  take  all  services  as  a  matter  of
course.     Well  is  it  when  such  a  mood  gives  place  to  a  juster  view  and  endeavour —

"Sweet  music's  melting  fall,  but  sweeter  bx
The  still,  small  voice  of  gratitude. "

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Gratitude  is  a  duty  and  a  virtue.  Nothing  is  baser  than
ingratitude.  Those  who  have  served  us  should  never  be  forgotten  by  us,  and  when
opportunity  occurs  we  should  testify  our  gratitude  by  deeds.  2.  As  we  owe  more  to
God  than  to  our  fellow-men,  to  be  ungrateful  towards  him  is  to  be  insensible  of  the
highest  benefits,  is  to  incur  the  sharpest  condemnation.  "  Forget  not  all  his  benefits. "
And  show  forth  his  praise  not  only  by  your  lips,  but  by  your  lives.

Vers.  6 — 9. — "  Whom  the  king  delighteth  to  horumr.^'  It  does  not  seem  that
Ahasuerus  had  any  intention  at  this  time  to  humiliate  Hainan.  His  whole  mind  was
get  upon  restitution  and  compensation  to  Mordecai,  whom  he  had  so  long  neglected.
As  he  had  no  knowledge  of  his  favourite's  dislike  to  the  Jew,  his  only  motive  in
requiring  Haraan  to  lead  Mordecai  through  the  city  was  to  show  his  gratitude  to  his
humble  friend  and  benefactor.  The  honour  which  Mordecai  received  was  indeed,
in  its  circumstances,  very  unusual,  yet  perhaps  not  unparalleled.  Doubtless  the
minister  thought  he  was  preparing  honour  for  himself  when  he  was  really  uncon-
sciously arranging  a  triumph  for  the  man  whom  he  hated,  and  whose  death  he  was
compassing.  The  magnificence,  the  royal  splendour  of  the  Jew's  progress  through
the  city  afforded  satisfaction  to  the  king's  heart,  whilst  they  were  as  gall  and  worm-
wood to  Haman.  For  Mordecai  was  "  the  man  whom  the  king  delighted  to  honour."
God,  having  reconciled  and  pardoned  the  penitent  sinner  through  Jesus  Christ,  the
Mediator,  takes  pleasure  in  putting  upon  the  accepted  and  beloved  all  the  honour  he
can  bestow  and  we  can  receive.

I.  The  honour  God  puts  upon  his  people  is  heightened  by  the  contrast  be-
tween their  former  and  their  present  state.  The  change  between  Mordecai
in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  uttering  a  loud  and  bitter  cry,  and  Mordecai  upon  the  king's
horse,  and  arrayed  in  royal  robes,  is  as  nothing  compared  with  the  contrast  between
the  impenitent  and  unforgiven  sinner  and  the  justified  and  rejoicing  believer  in
Christ.

II.  Christians  are  honoured  in  being  made  "kings  and  priests  unto  God."
The  Jewish  exile  clad  in  regal  attire  may  be  a  figure  of  the  Christian  whom  God
crowns  and  honours,  whom  he  exalts  to  his  favour  and  unites  to  his  Son.

III.  Christians  are  adopted  into  the  family  of  God — are  made  his  sons.

IV.  Christians  enjoy  the  attendance  and  ministry  of  glorious  angels.
Mordecai  was  led  through  Shushan  by  "the  first  minister  of  the  crown."  For  the
children  of  God  are  provided  the  ministrations  of  the  angels,  who  "  are  sent  forth  to
minister  for  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation."

V.  Christians  shall  be  brought,  sharing  the  nature  or  God,  to  share  also
BIS  QTERN4L  HOME.    As  Mordccai  came  to  tiike  his  place  in  the  palace,  at  the  door  ^


OH.  VL 1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  11>

which  he  had  sat,  and  to  wield  power  over  the  empire,  bo  those  whom  the  heavenly
King  deligliteth  to  honour  shall  enter  his  presence,  share  his  joy,  and  sit  with  his  Son
upon  the  throne  of  dominion.

Ver.  12. — Glory  exchanged  fw  woe,  "  Boast  not  thyself  of  to-morrow,"  says  the
wise  man,  "  for  thou  knowest  not  what  a  day  may  bring  forth."  Yesterday  Haman
was  full  of  exultation  and  of  boasting ;  his  place  was  by  the  throne  ;  his  enemy  wag
at  his  feet.  This  morning  that  enemy  is  in  favour;  his  own  position  is  imperilled  ;
his  vaunting  seems  vain ;  his  prospects  gloomy.  As  Haman  goes  to  his  house,  after
executing  the  king's  behest,  his  heart  is  filled  with  apprehensions.

I.  His  malice  is  disappointed  and  defeated.

II.  His  jot  is  exchanged  for  modrnino.

III.  His  glorying  is  succeeded  by  shame.  He  covers  his  head,  as  not  daring  to
look  any  one  in  the  face,  as  fearing  that  disgrace  and  disaster  are  at  hand.

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Remember  the  vicissitudes  of  human  affairs.  2.  "  Put  not
your  trust  in  princes,"  or  "in  the  son  of  man,  in  whom  is  no  help."  3.  "  Humble
yourselves  before  the  mighty  hand  of  God."  It  is  better  to  come  before  him  in  low-
liness and  contrition  now  than  to  appear  before  him  in  shame  hereafter.

Ver.  13. — Forebodings  of  ruin.  Bad  counsellors  are  poor  comforters.  Haman
had  recourse  to  his  wife,  the  wise  men,  and  his  friends,  only  yesterday ;  and  they
advised  that  a  gallows  should  be  reared,  and  that  the  king  should  be  petitioned  that
Mordecai  might  there  be  hanged.  To-day  Haraan  comes  to  the  same  circle  of  his  inti-
mates, tells  what  has  befallen,  and  unfolds  his  fears.  They  do  but  predict  his  speedy
ruin.  He  might  well  have  used  the  language  of  Job — "  Miserable  comforters  are  ye
all  I"    They  foretell—

I.  The  good  poetdne  of  Mordecai,  contrasting  with  Haman's  ill  fortune.
"Thou  shalt  not  prevail  against  him,  but  shalt  surely  fall  before  him."  The  rise  and
fall  of  favourites  at  court  was  a  familiar  spectacle.  That  Mordecai  should  displace
Haman  in  royal  favour  seemed,  after  the  events  of  the  day,  probable  enough.

II.  The  failure  of  Haman's  project,  contrasting  with  the  advancement  and
SECURITY  OF  THE  Jews.  The  plot  and  decree  against  the  captive  Hebrews  were  well
known ;  and  it  was  well  known  that  Haman  was  the  origin  of  these  nefarious  designs.
Now  those  who  had  aided  and  abetted  the  unprincipled  favourite  foresee  that  he  will
be  disgraced,  and  that  his  devices  will  all  be  brought  to  nothing.

Application : — 1.  Let  persecutors  tremble.  All  things  are  not  in  their  power.  When
they  rage  and  imagine  a  vain  thing,  he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  shall  laugh.  The
day  of  Oieir  downfall  and  defeat  is  hear  at  hand.  2.  Let  the  persecuted  take  heart.
"  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to  deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptation."  The  enemies  ot
the  righteous  man  shall  "  surely  fall  before  him."

"  God  on  his  saints  looks  watchful  ilowa,

His  ear  attends  their  cry.
The  wicked  sink  benejith  his  frown,

Their  very  name  shall  die  ;
But  he,  at  length,  the  just  will  crowa

With  victory  and  joy  1 "

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORSL

Ver.  \.—The  sleepless.  We  are  not  surprised  to  read  that  "  on  that  night  could
not  the  king  sleep.  '  Not,  indeed,  that  there  was  anything  in  Ahasuerus  (Xerxes)
to  make'  us  expect  a  restless  night ;  he  appears  to  us  here,  as  elsewhere,  as  a  painful
illustration  of  human  heartlessness.  That  many  thousands  of  his  subjects  were
about  to  be  butchered  in  order  that  his  coffers  might  be  filled  sJiould  have  caused
the  monarch  many  a  troubled  day  and  many  a  sleepless  night ;  but  such  was  the
character  of  the  man  that  no  one  suggests  the  impending  massarre  as  the  explana-
tion of  the  king's  restlessness.  He  had  reached  that  fearful  spiritual  condition  in
which  human  life  w^s  of  no  account  to  him  sp  that  his  power  might  be  continue^


120  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  VI.  1—14.

and  his  pleasures  multiplied  or  secured.  It  is  a  striking  instance  of  Divine  pro-
vidence. He  who  "  holds  the  king's  heart  in  his  hand,"  who  can  touch  with  the  finger
of  his  power  the  secret  springs  of  our  thought  and  feeling,  now  sent  troubled  thoughts
to  this  Persian  king.  That  Lord  of  heaven,  Keeper  of  Israel  who  slumbers  not  nor
sleeps  (Pb.  cxxi.  4),  now  gave  a  wakeful  night  to  this  earthly  monarch.  He  wag
interposing  on  behalf  of  his  chosen  people.  God  willed  that  the  sovereign  should
not  slumber  in  order  that  he  might  thus  be  led  to  have  "  the  book  of  records  of  the
chronicles  brought  and  read  before  the  king,"  and  Mordecai's  services  be  thus
brought  to  his  royal  notice.  Little  did  Ahasuerus,  as  he  tossed  his  restless  head  on
the  pillow,  imagine  that  a  Divine  hand  was  laid  on  his  troubled  brain.  As  little  do
we  know  when  the  finger  of  God  is  working  on  us,  with  us,  for  us,  or  mercifully
against  us.  Thinking  of  the  sleepless  sons  and  daughters  of  men,  we  may  have  in
view —

I.  The  sleepless  whom  we  pity.  We  do  well  to  pity  with  heartfelt  compassion
those  who  tell  us  that  they  "cannot  sleep  at  night."  Scarcely  a  sentence  comes
more  plaintively  from  human  lips.     Well  does  one  of  our  own  poets  write —

"  Pity  !  oh,  pity  the  wretches  who  weep.
For  they  must  be  wretched  who  cannot  sleep
When  God  himself  draws  the  curtain."

Whether  it  be  pain,  or  trouble,  or  sorrow  that  causes  the  sleepless  hours,  we  may  pity
sincerely  and  pray  earnestly  for  these.

II.  The  sleepless  whom  we  admire.  Those  who  (1)  tenderly  nurse  the  sick
through  the  livelong  night,  or  (2)  sympathetically  attend  the  sorrowful  in  then
sleepless  hours,  or  (3)  are  "  about  the  Father's  business,"  seeking  the  salvation  of
others.  It  is  the  women  who  "  watch  "  the  best.  There  were,  humanly  speaking,
at  least  three  women  who  could  have  watched  that  "  one  hour  "  (Matt.  xxvi.  40),  and
would  not  have  been  found  asleep  by  the  agonising  Master.  Few  of  the  children  of
men  are  more  worthy  of  our  admiring  affection  than  those  self-denying  sisters  who
tvatch  so  patiently  lest  there  should  be  need  of  the  ministering  band  or  the  comforting
word.

III.  The  sleepless  whom  we  are  obliged  td  blame.  There  are  those  in  every
city  who  cannot  sleep  hecau*e  they  cannot  forget.  They  shut  their  book  at  night,
but  have  soon  to  sigh —

"  Oh  God  !  could  I  so  close  my  mind
And  clasp  it  with  a  clasp."

They  pay  in  restless  hours  the  dark  penalty  of  vice  or  crime ;  they  are  pursued  and
punished  by  dread  of  the  wrath  of  Gjd  or  of  the  justice  of  man,  or  by  the  rebukings
of  their  own  conscience.  For  such  there  is  no  remedy  or  escape  but  confession,
reparation,  forgiveness,  human  and  Divine.     "  Return  on  thy  way  "  at  once.

IV.  The  sleepless  whom  we  much  wish  to  serve.  Those  who  cannot  sleep
because  of  "  great  searchings  "of  heart ; "  who  are  asking  that  old  new  question,
"  How  shall  mortal  man  be  just  with  God  ?  "  who  will  give  themselves  no  rest  till
the  way  of  peace  is  found,  till  they  have  "  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ."
There  are  none  anywhere  so  deserving  and  demanding,  so  certain  to  receive,  the
tender  sympathy  and  delicate  help  of  those  who  minister  in  the  gospel  of  the
Saviour.

v.  The  sleepless  whom  we  hope  to  join.  On  the  other  side  of  the  river  of
death  is  a  land  where  that  which  has  been  will  not  be,  where  we  shall  change  this
"  body  of  our  humiliation,"  and  shall  be  clothed  upon  with  the  "  body  of  his  glory."
There  will  be  no  sleeplessness  like  that  of  which  we  have  spoken ;  no  weary  tossing,
no  heart-ache,  no  distress,  no  agitation.  But  there  wiU  be  sleeplessness  of  another
kind,  for  there  will  he  no  more  need  of  long  periods  of  unconsciousness  and  inactivity
there.  There  will  be  "  no  more  fatigue,  no  more  distress,"  no  more  exhaustion ;  and
therefore  "there  will  be  no  night  there,"  and  no  sleep,  but  ceaseless,  tireless,  anex-
hausting  energy;  there  they  serve  him  "day  without  night."  These  we  hope  one
day  to  join.     Let  us  live  "  in  Christ ; ''  then  shall  we  "  fall  asleep  in  him,"  and  then


CH.  VI,  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  121

sliall  we  awake  in  the  morning  of  an  everlasting  day  where  the  shadows  never  fall,
a  land  full  of  light  because  full  of  the  near  presence  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord. — 0.

Vers.  2 — 14. — The  honour  that  cometh  from,  man.  Unable  to  sleep,  the  king  calls
for  something  to  beguile  the  weary  hours  ;  he  has  the  chronicles  of  his  reign  read  to
him ;  he  is  struck  witli  the  fact  of  his  own  life  having  been  saved  by  Mordecai,
inquires  what  has  been  the  reward  given  to  this  dutiful  subject,  discovers  that
nothing  whatever  has  been  done  fqr  him,  and  calls  for  Haman  to  ask  his  counsel.
Haman  is  at  hand,  full  of  his  murderous  design  against  Mordecai.  We  picture  to
ourselves  his  impatience  as  the  king  broaches  another  subject ;  his  secret  exultation
as  Ahasuerus  proposes  to  do  honour  to  some  favourite,  and  as  he  himself  suggests  that
which  would  feed  his  own  vanity.  We  see  his  astonishment  and  chagrin  as  he  finds
that  it  is  none  other  than  the  hated  Jew  himself  who  is  to  be  honoured.  We  mark
his  prolonged  and  intolerable  vexation  as  he  acts  as  the  agent  in  carrying  out  the
king's  commandment.    Concerning  the  honour  that  comes  from  man,  we  learn  here—

I.  The  bightness  of  paying  that  which  is  due  and  of  accepting  that  which
IB  earned  (vers.  10,  11).  Mordecai,  who  evidently  and  comraendably  made  much
of  self-respect,  did  not  think  it  wrong  to  accept  the  honour  the  king  now  laid  upon
hiin.  He  suffered  himself  to  be  arrayed  in  the  "  royal  apparel,"  he  mounted  the
"horse  that  the  king  rode  upon,"  and  was  led  with  acclamation  through  the  streets
(vers.  8 — 11).  He  may  have  enjoyed  it ;  it  was  in  accordance  with  Eastern  tastes
and  habits,  and  he  had  fairly  earned  it.  It  is  lawful  in  God's  sight  to  enter  upon
and  enjoy  the  fruits  of  our  own  exertions ;  "  the  labourer  is  worthy  of  his  hire."
Among_  the  rewards  that  men  give  their  fellows  is  that  of  honour.  And  rightly  so.
Adulation  or  flattery  is,  on  the  part  of  those  who  pay  it,  simply  contemptible,  and  on
the  part  of  those  who  receive  it  both  childish  and  injurious  ;  it  is  a  thing  to  be  unspar-
ingly condemned  in  others,  and  religiously  avoided  in  ourselves.  But  to  congratulate
on  hard -won  success,  to  praise  the  meritorious  product  of  toil  and  skill,  to  pay  honour
to  those  who  have  lavished  their  energies  or  risked  their  lives  to  serve  their  fellows,
this  is  right  and  good.  And  to  receive  such.honours  from  the  Ups  or  the  hands  of  men
—if  they  be  meekly  and  gratefully  taken — this  too  is  right.  "  If  there  be  any  ....
praise"  we  are  to  "  think  on  "  and  to  practise  it.  We  should  praise  the  praiseworthy
as  well  as  condemn  the  faulty.  The  approval  of  the  wise  and  good  has  had  much  to
do  with  building  up  fine  characters,  and  bringing  forth  the  best  actions  of  noble  lives.

II.  The  vanity  op  reckoning  on  the  honour  of  the  great  (vers.  6,  10,  13).
Haman  had  risen  to  high  dignity ;  he  enjoyed  much  of  royal  favour ;  he  now  felt
that  he  might  certainly  reckon  on  being  the  chief  recipient  of  the  most  signal  honour
the  sovereign  could  pay.  But  God  has  said,  "  Cursed  is  the  man  that  trusteth  in
man,  that  maketh  flesh  his  arm ; "  "  Put  not  your  trust  in  man,  nor  in  the  son  of  man  ; "
"  Put  not  your  trust  in  princes. "  Their  favour  is  fickle  ;  their  countenance  is  change-
ful ;  their  hand  may  caress  to-day  and  crush  to-morrow.  To  his  unspeakable  chagrin,
Haman  found  that  the  royal  hand  was  about  to  distribute  favour  to  his  bitterest  foe,
and  thus  pierce  his  soul  by  kindness  to  another.  Covetousness  of  human  honour  is
a  sin  and  a  mistake ;  it  ends  in  disappointment,  sooner  or  later,  as  the  records  of
every  kingdom,  ancient  or  modem,  Eastern  or  Western,  will  prove  abundantly.  It
injures  the  soulalso,  for  it  begets  a  selfishness  which  finds  a  horrible  satisfaction  in
others'  humiliation,  and  keeps  from  a  generous  joy  in  others'  preferment.  Honour
"from  man  only"  is  good  in  a  low  degree.  It  must  not  be  eagerly  coveted  as  the
chief  prize,  or  heavily  leant  upon  asthechief  staff  of  life.     "Seekitnot,  nor  shun  it."

III.  The  wisdom  of  seeking  the  honour  that  is  of  God  (ver.  3).  "What honour
and  dignity  hath  been  done  to  Mordecai  for  this  ?  "  "  There  is  nothing  done  for
him.'l  Five  years  had  passed,  and  Mordecai  had  found  his  reward  in  his  own  sense
of  doing  his  duty,  and  in  the  approval  of  the  God  he  served.  Apart  from  the  praise
and  recompense  of  man,  it  is  worth  while  to  do  right,  to  act  faithfully ;  for  there  is
one  Sovereign  that  does  not  overlook,  and  is  sure  to  bless  in  his  own  time  and  way.
"Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour,"  he  says.  This  honouring  of  God  may  be
either  (1)  that  which  he  causes  men  to  give  us,  or  (2)  his  own  Divine  approval.
This  latter  is  the  better  of  the  two,  for  it  (a)  is  intrinsically  the  more  worth  having ;
(6)  leads  to  no  disappointment ;  (c)  "  sanctifies  and  satisfies  "  the  heart ;  and  (d)  b


122  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  vi.  1—14.

consistent  with  the  enjoyment  of  the  same  thing  by  every  one  else,  and  even  prompts
ns  to  strive  to  make  otliers  possessors  of  it.  It  is  not  the  seed  of  selfishness,  but  the
germ  of  generosity. — C.

Vers.  1 — 4. — A  forgottem.  service  brought  to  mind.     I.  Grandeur  of  outward

CONDITION    DOES    NOT    PROTECT    MIND   OR    BODY   AGAINST    ORDINARY    INFIRMITIES.      The

king  of  Persia  could  not  at  will  command  sleep.  Tlie  loss  of  the  power  to  sleep  is
not  confined  to  any  position,  though  it  is  perhnps  more  common  amongst  the  rich
than  the  poor.  The  humble  labourer  may  find  sounder  and  sweeter  sleep  on  his
hard  couch  than  a  mighty  and  luxurious  king  on  his  bed  of  down.

II.  How   TO   SPEND   .SLEEPLESS   HOURS   BECOMES   AN    IJIPORTANT   QUESTION   TO   MANY.

The  nervous,  the  heart-burdened,  and  the  invalided  often  sigh  in  vain  for  sleep,  and
many  are  the  devices  contrived  to  relieve  the  monotony  of  wakefulness.  Some
resort  to  anodynes  which  enforce  sleep,  but  at  the  same  time  destroy  vitalit}',  and
subject  their  victims  to  a  terrible  bondage.  Others  seek  help  from  the  reading  of
sensational  or  impure  books,  which  defiles  the  heart  and  weakens  the  conscience.
The  king  might  have  done  worse  than  call  for  the  chronicles  of  his  reign.  It  is  good
to  review  the  past.  Nor  could  there  be  a  better  time  for  looking  back  at  what  is
gone  and  done  than  in  the  still  solemnity  of  the  night  watches.  A  man  is  unjust  to
himself,  and  incurs  great  loss,  who  cannot  devote  occasional  hours  to  retrospection.
Many  a  godly  man  has  found  sweet  profit  in  following  David^s  method  of  occupying
a  sleepless  mind  (Ps.  iv.  4  ;  Ixiii.  6,  6).

III.  A  REVIEW  OF  THE  PAST  WILL  IN   EVERY   CASE   RECALL  THE   MEMORY   OF   MERCIES

RECEIVED  AND  OF  DUTIES  UNDONE.  The  king  had  not .  listened  long  to  the  reading
before  he  heard  the  record  of  the  conspiracj'  of  the  two  chamberlains  against  his
life,  and  of  his  deliverance  from  it  through  the  faithfulness  of  Mordecai.  Arrested
by  this,  there  rose  in  his  mind,  in  connection  with  it,  not  the  thought  of  the
suitable  reward  which  had  been  bestowed  on  his  deliverer,  but  the  question  whether
any  reward  had  been  bestowed  at  all.  He  soon  found  that  the  great  service  of
Mordecai  had  been  unacknowledged.  In  the  record  of  every  mans  life  there  are
notes  of  thoughtlessness,  ingratitude,  and  wrong-doing.  None  of  us  can  look  back
without  being  convicted  of  many  sins  and  neglects.  This  thought  should  keep  us
humble,  and  lead  us  to  seek  the  Divine  mercy  and  help.  Past  failures  should  be  as
"  stepping-stones  to  higher  things."

IV.  Reparable  omissions  or  injuries  done  in  the  past  should  be  repaired.
Here  the  king  sets  us  a  lesson.  If  we  can  now  pay  in  full  creditors  whose  bygone
claims  we  failed  to  meet,  it  is  our  duty  to  do  so.  It  is  not  enough  to  express  sorrow
for  any  evil  we  have  done  if  we  can  in  any  measure  make  amends  for  it.  Deeds  in
such  a  case  are  better  than  words.     Zacoheus  (Luke  xix.  8).

V.  A  WORK  OF  reparation  SHOULD  BE  done  at  ONCE.  There  is  no  time  Unfit  to  begin
it.  The  king,  while  still  in  bed,  in  the  early  morning,  bestirred  himself  without  a
moment's  delay  to  discharge  his  neglected  duty.  He  remembered  his  former  good
intentions,  and  the  forgetfulness  that  followed  delay.  Unfulfilled  obligations  are
often  the  result  of  a  disposition  to  put  off.  Happy  the  man  who  has  the  will  to
obey  at  once  every  clear  sense  of  duty.  He  will  save  himself  and  others  from  much
suffering.  How  many  lose  themselves  by  putting  off  decision  for  Christ  (Ps.  xc.  12 ;
2  Cor.  vi.  2).— D.

Vers.  4,  14. — Exaltation  and  humiliation.  I.  Haste.  Having  seen  the  gallows
prepared  for  Mordecai  over-night,  Haman  was  early  astir  next  morning.  He  was
m  the  court  of  the  palace  while  the  king  was  yet  having  the  chronicles  read  to
him,  resolved  to  seize  the  first  moment  to  get  permission  to  hang  the  Jew.  His
plan  of  revenge  was  to  be  executed  and  done  with  long  before  the  hour  of  the
queen's  banquet  (Prov.  i.  16).  "The  children  of  this  world  are  wiser,"  because
more  diligent,  "  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light."  If  the  self-denial
and  earnestness  with  which  men  pursue  evil  and  worldly  things  were  equally
exhibited  by  all  the  righteous  in  pursuit  of  the  things  of  Christ,  the  world  itself
would  soon  be  brought  to  the  feet  of  God.

II.  CoiNOtDBNOB.     When  the  king  wanted  an  adviser  at  that  early  hour,  Haman


OH.  VI.  1— U.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  123

happened  to  be  in  the  court.  The  thoughts  of  both  the  king  and  his  favourite
happened  to  be  occupied  and  excited  by  the  same  man.  The  haste  of  Haman  to  get
Mordecai  hanged  happened  to  meet  the  haste  of  the  king  to  get  him  rewarded.
Faith  can  often  discern  the  marks  of  a  Divine  providence  in  what-men  call  accidents
or  coincidences.  Belief  in  a  living  God  is  inconsistent  with  belief  in  any  "  fortuitous
concourse."

III.  Ebrob.  The  question  put  by  the  king  to  Haman  at  once  led  him  astray.
Whose  honour  would  the  king  delight  to  promote  if  not  that  of  the  man  on  whom
he  had  already  bestowed  such  unusual  distinction?  His  vain  heart  betrayed  him.
How  greedy  is  vanity.     How  selfish  are  the  slaves  of  sin.     The  answer  of  Haman

~  was  shaped  by  his  own  desires.  The  honour  he  suggested  would  have  been  foolish
and  worthless  as  given  to  any  other  person  than  himself.  But  the  only  thing  left
for  his  ambition  to  aspire  to  was  such  a  public  and  resplendent  exhibition  of  the
royal  delight  in  him  as  that  which  he  described.  A  man  of  evil  does  not  easily
suspect  good  feeling  or  good  purpose  in  any  associate.  He  projects  himself  into
his  judgment  of  others.  Thus  he  is  very  liable  to  make  mistakes.  His  whole  life
is  a  mistake — an  error  from  beginning  to  end.

IV.  Disappointment.  When  the  king  commanded  Haman  to  do  unto  Mordecai
every  whit  of  what  he  had  recommended,  the  blow  that  fell  on  the  astonished
favourite  must  have  been  heavy.  That  the  man  for  whom  he  had  made  a  gallows
should  receive  the  honour  which  he  had  proposed  for  himself  1  what  a  reversing  of
things.  There  are  many  disappointments  and  reverses  which  attract  our  entire
sympathy,  but  we  can  only  rejoice  when  the  expectation  of  the  wicked  is  cut  short.
It  was  a  fit  measure  of  justice  that  Haman  should  have  proposed  the  honour  which
Mordecai  was  to  wear.  Judgment  pursues  the  evil-doer.  In  the  end  all  his  hopes
will  be  disappointed.

V.  Humiliation.  Haman  had  not  .only  to  see  done,  but  to  do,  what  the  king
commanded.  He  was  the  "  one  of  the  king's  most  noble  prijices  "  who  had  to  array
Mordecai  in  royal  apparel,  and  place  him  on  a  horse,  and  lead  him  through  the  city,
and  proclaim  before  him,  "  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom  the  king
delighteth  to  honour."  And  all  this  he  did  to  the  man  whom  he  most  hated,  and  for
whom  he  had  erected  a  gallows.  It  was  a  bitter  humiliation,  but  there  was  no
escape  from  it.  Those  who~  climb  to  worldly  greatness  by  wrong  ways  have  to  eat
much  dirt.     They  sharpen  the  knife  that  will  sooner  or  later  enter  their  soul.

VI.  Exaltation.  Mordecai  yielded  himself  up  to  the  king's  mode  of  honouring
him.  He  put  himself  in  the  hands  of  Haman,  and  went  quietly  through  the  whole
process.  It  was  a  triumph  that  might  be  justly  enjoyed,  and  one  too  that  promised
greater  things.  God  was  manifestly  with  his  servant.  Unseen  influences  were  at
work.  The  attempt  to  deliver  Israel  was  prospering.  This  public  honour  would
strengthen  Esther,  and  have  some  effect  on  the  king.  The  bad  man  who  led  the
Jew's  horse  and  proclaimed  his  favour  with  the  king  was  declining  in  power,  and  the
desired  redemption  of  a  devoted  people  was  drawing  near.  Thus  God  encourages
those  who  trust  him.  He  makes  their  enemies  serve  them.  Amidst  much  darkness
and  fear  he  causes  his  light  to  shine,  and  gives  his  servants  bright  indications  of  a
coming  victory.

VII.  HuMiLlTy.  A  Haman  would  have  been  intoxicated  by  such  an  honour  as
ivas  conferred  on  his  enemy.  To  Mordecai  the  parade  through  the  city  was  but  an
empty  pageant,  except  in  so  far  as  it  might  contribute  to  his  purpose  of  saving
Israel.  Hence  we  find  him,  after  putting  ofE  the  royal  robes,  returning  to  his  post
at  the  king's  gate.  The  passing  honours  of  the  world  make  no  change  in  those  who
are  weighted  with  the  pursuit  of  honours  which  the  world  cannot  give.  Their  chief
desire  is  to  be  at  their  post  and  do  the  work  given  them  by  a  higher  than  an  earthly
master — "  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  their  God  "  (Micah
vi.  8).  It  required  no  effort  for  Mordecai  to  descend  from  his  momentary  exaltation
to  his  humble  position  as  a  palace  servitor.  His  duty  was  in  the  king's  gate.  How
blessed  to  be  able  to  subordinate  all  merely  personal  or  earthly  things  to  the  service
of  God.

VIII.  Omens.  The  result  of  that  morning's  proceedings  was  depressing  to
Haman.     He  retired  to  his  home  again  to  consult  his   wife  and  friends.     How


124  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  vi.  1—14.

difEereiit  his  tale  now  from  that  which  had  inspired  him  and  them  the  night  before.
Tlie  tall  gallows  in  the  courtyard  was  a  gaunt  mockery.  The  shame  that  had  so
unaccountably  overtaken  its  lord  laid  a  cold  hand  on  the  hearts  of  all  his  household.
The  fear  of  Israel,  that  strange  people  who  trusted  in  a  God  of  gods,  entered  strongly
into  their  thoughts,  and  made  their  words  ominous.  The  conviction  was  felt  and
expressed  by  them  that  if  Mordecai  were  a  Jew,  Haman  had  already  begun  to  fall,
and  that  a  disastrous  end  was  inevitable.  History  affords  many  instances  of  the
power  of  omens  to  destroy  the  happiness  and  hope  of  bad  men.  The  silent  work-
ings of  Divine  providence  have  their  eCect  on  the  wicked  ap  well  as  on  the  good.
In  the  one  they  inspire  a  fear  which  saps  energy  and  skill ;  in  the  other  they  work  a
faith  which  gives  strength  and  light.  King  Saul  is  not  the  only  one  whose  heart  and
hand  have  been  paralysed  by  superstitious  fears  arising  from  a  rebellion  against
Divine  rule.  In  the  path  of  the  wicked  spectres  of  A.  holy  and  avenging  power  are
ever  rising  up  to  throw  blight  on  their  aims  and  hopes.  There  is  judgment  even  in
this  world.     God  reigns. — D.

Ver.  1. — A  sleepless  monarch  and  a  wakeful  Providence.  The  place  of  this
verse  fully  vindicated  by  its  contents.  "When  its  position  is  observed  in  the
original  it  is  found  to  be  very  nearly  the  bisection  of  the  book.  Certainly  it  is  the
critical  point,  the  hinge  on  which  the  deep  moral  and  religious  interest  of  the
history  turns.  There  is  a  sense  in  which  it  might  seem  that  up  to  this  point  the
reader  has  but  groped  his  way.  He  has  asked  for  a  little  more  distinctly  religious
light  and  speech.  He  craves  to  see  a  Divine  presence,  and  to  hear  the  accents  of  a
Diviner  voice  than  have  been  hitherto  vouchsafed.  Perhaps  these  are  still  witli-
held  in  their  fullest  manifestation,  but  it  can  no  longer  be  felt  that  any  vital
element  of  evidence  is  absent.  The  night  in  question  was  the  night  between  the
two  banquets  of  Esther,  the  night  before  the  almost  certainly  foregone  conclusion
of  permission  to  hang  S'lerdecai  on  the  new-made  gallows  of  Haman.  Everybody
was  not  in  the  secret.  Neither  Esther,  nor  Mordecai,  nor  the  king  himself  knew  of
the  project.  Yet  from  a  merely  human  point  of  view  it  was  all  but  certain.  How
the  night  passed  for  Esther  and  for  Mordecai  we  know  not.  Both  had  to  acknow-
ledge distinguishing  mercies  which  the  preceding  day  had  brought.  But  they  both
knew  that  one  crisis  happily  passed  did  but  usher  in  another,  and  if  this  should  not
issue  as  favourably,  vain  were  the  promise  of  the  day  before.  Likely  enough,  then,
the  solemn  hours  of  that  night  were  counted  by  them  with  wakeful  anxiousness.  For
what  issues  of  life  or  death  hung  upon  the  next  day.  Haman's  night  invites  not  a
solitary  sympathy.  This  much  we  may  surmise  about  it,  that  it  was  disturbed  by  the
noise  of  those  who  "  made  the  gallows  "  (ch.  v.  14  ;  vi.  4 ;  vii.  9),  and  that  its  length
was  not  prolonged  over-far  into  the  morning.  But  the  storm-centre  travels  toward  the
night  of  Ahasuerus,  and  there  very  soon  it  threateningly  hangs.  Ahasuerus  was  not
a  good  man ;  he  was  not  a  good  king.  How  otherwise  could  he  have  permitted  an
insufferably  vain,  self-seeking  minion  like  Haman  to  be  such  a  welcome  and  close
companion  ?  How  could  he  have  committed  to  such  a  subject  an  authority  so
dangerously -approaching  his  own?  Yet,  as  we  have  before  seen  (ch.  i.  4),  there  was
a  certain  large  lavish  way  about  Ahasuerus — the  outside  of  a  certain  kindliness,
impulsiveness,  iirthinking  trustingness  within,  wliich  proved  a  heart  not  callous.
These  qualities  did  indeed  harmonise  well  with  what  we  read  elsewhere  of  Xerxes,
and  how  his  feelings  so  overcame  him  when,  from  his  throne  of  marble,  he  reviewed
his  innumerable  troops  crossing  the  Hellespont,  and  reflected  upon  human  mortality.
Ahasuerus  was  thoughtless  and  rash — the  very  things  that  cannot  be  defended  in
either  king  or  man — but  he  was  not  yet  abandoned  of  every  higher  presence ;  he
was  not  yet  "  let  alone."  As  the  word  of  God  here  detains  us  to  make  special
remark  on  the  sleepless  night  of  this  king,  and  exhibits  it  as  the  very  crisis  of
the  providential  history  under  relation,  let  us  note —

I.  Some  of  the  significant  facts  gathering  round  it  as  the  experience  of  the
KING.  1.  We  observe,  and  with  some  surprise,  that  there  seems  not  the  slightest
disposition  on  the  part  of  the  king,  or  of  any  one  else,  to  attribute  it  to  a  physical
cause,  nor  to  minister  to  it  any  physical  antidote.  Neither  the  soporific  of  a  drug
or  of  drinking,  nor  the  soothing  of  music,  nor  any  diversion  are  offered  to  it.     Noi


OH.  VI.  1—14.]  THE  BOOK  OP  B8THBB.  125

is  it  possible  to  suppose — as  will  hereafter  appear — that  "the  book  of  records  of  the
chronicles  "  was  sent  for  under  the  expectation  that  it  would  serve  simply  to  amuse,
or  to  dissipate  thought  and  kill  time.  2.  However  harassing  it  may  have  been,  it
seems  to  have  been  endured  till  morning.  The  brief  description  which  follows  the
statement,  that  "the  king's  sleep  fled  that  night,"  argues  that  what  ensued  happened
all  in  close  connection,  and  so  as  to  end  with  an  hour  that  found  men  gathered  in  their
usual  way  in  the  gate,  and  Haman  arrived  (doubtless  not  late)  in  the  court.  This
would  give  time  for  thought's  growth  into  determination.  3.  Whether  the  sleepless-
ness of  the  night  was  occasioned  by  any  moral  thoughtfulness  or  not,  it  was  in  this
direction  that  the  mind  of  Ahasuerus  ran.  Sleepless  hours  are  often  enough  weary
hours,  yet  perhaps  more  than  we  think  they  open  opportunity  and  offer  choice  to  us.
They  ripen  the  thought  of  iniquity,  as  they  were  at  this  very  time  doing  for  Haman ;
or  they  are  precipitating  thought  of  good  quality  and  beneficent  result,  as  they  were
now  doing  for  Ahasuerus.  Either,  then,  the  sleeplessness  of  Ahasuerus  was  occasioned
by  a  moral  movement  of  things  within,  or  it  turned  to  that  use.  In  either  alternative
there  was  a  moral  strangeness  and  significance  about  it.  The  dark  and  imperfect
religiousness,  which  was  all  that  can  be  claimed  for  it  in  and  of  itself,  does  in  some
senses  add  to  its  interest.  4.  The  thoughts  of  that  sleepless  night  did  not  die  away.
Generally,  how  soon  they  do  pass  away,  like  the  dreams  of  deep  sleep.  They  are
"like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew;  as  the  chafE  that  is  driven  of  the
whirlwind  out  of  the  floor,  and  as  the  smoke  out  of  the  chimney."  Nature's  dark-
ness, human  stillness,  even  the  body's  attitude  of  repose,  all  favour  highly-stimulated
forms  of  thought.  The  sleepless  night  is  often  memory's  field-day.  Regrets  and
new  resolutions  meet  together ;  repentance  and  remorse  alternate ;  the  thoughts  of
happier  days  and  the  projects  of  more  innocent  ones  crowd  the  mental  rendezvous —
but  with  dawn  they  have  trooped  away.  But  now  not  so  with  the  thoughts  of  the
sleepless  night  of  the  King  Ahasuerus.  They  last,  and  they  lead  on  to  action.  Pur-
pose and  determination  do  not  die  away.  They  live,  and  to  good  purpose.  In  his
own  way,  and  for  once  true  to  his  light,  though  a  light  that  burned  lurid  and  low,  he
will  hearken  to  his  "  law  and  testimony,"  if  haply  they  have  anything  to  say  to  him.
II.  Some  of  the  significant  suggestions  arising  got  op  it  in  evidence  of  an
BVEB-WAKEFUL  PROVIDENCE.  1.  The  evidence  of  the  simple  facts  'of  this  night  is  in
favour  of  the  interference  of  some  external  cause.  It  is  not  straining  facts  to  take
this  view  of  them,  it  would  be  restraining  their  legitimate  force  not  to  do  so.  There
is  no  known  cause  for  the  restlessness,  but  it  is  decided.  The  .two  things  that  might
have  been  expected  to  constitute  a  cause  evidently  exert  no  influence.  The  proximate
effect,  for  all  that,  nevertheless  looks  in  that  direction.  2.  The  kind  of  use  to  which
the  sleeplessness  is  turned  argues  not  only  external  interference,  but  the  external
interference  of  One  above.  This  man,  a  most  extremely  unpromising  subject  on
whom  to  work,  is  wrought  upon  practically  to  religious  purpose.  Thought,  and  read  -
ing,  and  listening,  and  question,  and  action  follow  one  another  in  quick,  orderly,  Divine
kind  of  succession.  3.  The  means  employed  are  like  those  of  Divine  operation,
very  simple,  awhile  miatakable  for  most  natural  events.  4.  The  beneficent  nature
of  the  results  of  that  night — opportune,  to  the  exact  moment  of  time — and  the  exceed-
ing greatness  of  them  evidence  together  a  merciful  wakeful  Providence.  That  Pro-
vidence is  ever  wakeful  when  men  are  most  deep  asleep,  but  is  not  then  least  wakeful
when  sometimes  it  bids  us  wake  and  keeps  us  sleepless. — B.

Ver.  6. — Vanity.  "  Now  Haman  thought  in,"  &o.  It  sometimes  seems  as  though
the  satire  of  circumstance  and  human  event  could  go  no  further.  But  the  fact  in  such
case  is,  that  nothing  can  surpass  the  exactness  of  the  Divine  aim  for  the  mark  which
it  is  intended  to  reach,  and  for  the  moment  at  which  it  reaches  it.  The  present  point
of  the  history  shows  a  conjunction  of  four  events,  which;  so  far  as  all  human  design
went,  might  certainly  have  been  the  last  to  meet  together.  But  they  produce  a
brilliant  effect.  Four  moments  meet,  and  their  work  is  the  work  of  years  of  prepara-
tion, and  of  consequences  never  to  be  forgotten.  A  humble  and  good  man,  but  one
dishonoured,  is  in  supreme  danger.  The  very  acme  of  the  iniquitous  purpose  of  a
revengeful  heart,  surfeited  wi&  self  and, vanity,  is  touched.  An  arbitrary  despot
suddenly  remembers  an  omission  on  his  part,  and  resolves  upon  making  a  profuse


126  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTSEB.  [ch.  vi.  1— li

compensation  for  it.  And  lastly  arrives  on  the  sceiie  the  form  of  Divine  retribution.
Of  these  four  there  can  be  no  doubt  which  was  the  dominant  fact.  The  rest  wera
accurately  timed  to  it.  One  led  the  way  ;  the  rest  were  irresistibly,  if  unconsciously,
attracted  to  it.  This  verse  gives  us  what  purports  to  be  a  statement  or  description  of
a  "thought  in  the  heart."  It  may  be  called  the  natural  history  of  a  "thought  in  the
heart ;  "  not,  indeed,  of  any  or  every  su';h  thought,  but  of  one  that  once  literally  was,
and  which  may  have  had  many  like  it.     We  may  notice —

I.  On  what  authority  this  description  bests.  For  the  history  is  not  of  a
flattering  kind.  In  all  its  brevity  it  is  of  an  exceedingly  cutting  nature.  It  is  of  the
nature  of  a  stricture,  and  a  severe  one.  It  is  a  keen  incisive  thrust  into  an  individual
character.  In  every  such  case  it  behoves  us  to  be  more  than  ever  careful  "  not  to
judge,  lest  we  be  judged,"  and  to  scrutinise  narrowly  the  authority  on  which  they
speak  when  others  pronounce  judgment  in  our  hearing.  For  if  the  judgment  of  what
is  in  the  depth  of  another's  heart  be  not  absolutely  true,  it  is  essentially  unjust  and
uncharitable.  Our  own  superficial  criticisms  often  err.  They  carry  on  their  face
their  condemnation,  and  but  for  this  would  be  more  reprehensible  and  more  disas-
trous than  they  are.  But  what  we  have  before  us  .is  no  superficial  critique,  it  is  the
pronouncement  of  the  authoritative  Spirit  of  all  truth  himself.  •  The  scalpel  of  the
inspired  anatomist  cuts  deep,  ar.d  as  trenchantly  as  deep.  We  are  glad  to  recollect
whose  is  the  responsibility ;  and  when  we  recollect  we  think  with  firmer  thought  and
tread  with  surer  step.

II.  What  was  the  nature  op  the  thought  it  revealed.  It  was  a  thought  of
self,  and  of  what  was  supposed  to  be  self's  glory  and  advancement.  There  are  times
for  all  when  it  is  right  and  needful  to  think  of  self,  and  to  act  for  what  shall  seem,  on
the  whole,  the  best  for  self.  There  are  other  times  when  it  is  the  greatest  mistake
to  think  of  self.  The  occasion  in  question  was  one  of  this  kind.  It  is  an  occasion
in  itself  far  from  destitute  of  its  own  proper  honour.  1.  Haman  is  called  in  as  a
counsellor,  and  a  counsellor  of  his  king.  2.  He  is  appealed  to  for  something  beyond
advice.  With  him  lies  the  determining  of  a  certain  case  laid  before  him.  To  be  the
dispenser  of  dignities  and  rewards  is  to  sit  upon  a  throne  very  near  royalty  itself.
3.  The  occasion  is  not  a  mere  formality,  to  be  guided  only  by  precedents,  and  requiring
a  musty  search  to  find  them.  4.  The  recipient  of  the  distinction,  whoever  he  might
be,  would  also  be  ever  beholden  in  some  sort  to  the  word  that  should  drop  from
Haman's  lip.  The  occasion,  therefore,  was  one  which  especially  begged  for  a  Bingle
eye,  a  clear  judgment,  transparency  of  motive.  But,  in  fact,  self  blocks  up  the
whole  prospect.  The  thought  in  the  heart  of  the  king's  counsellor  at  that  moment
was  this :  "  To  whom  would  the  king  delight  to  do  honour  more  than  to  myself  f  "
Among  all  unjust  and  partial  judges,  was  there  ever  any  more  unjust  ?

III.  What  were  some  of  the  more  condemning  ob  aggravating  symptoms  of
the  thought  itself.  1.  It  was  not  only  self,  but  self  in  the  shape  of  insufEerable
vanity.  It  mounted  to  the  pitch  of  morbid  vanity.  Some  are  hurried  on  by  selfish-
ness headlong.  But  it  is  a  sleek,  a  smiling,  a  self-garlanded  victim  we  have  here.
To  the  dignity  of  position  already  belonging  to  him  fuller  gratification  (as  has  been
seen)  is  offered  ;  but  it  is  not  honour  that  his  eye  can  see,  that  his  mind  can  appre-
ciate. The  grace  and  the  force  of  his  honoured  position  weigh  nothing  with  him.
But  the  most  egotistic  vanity  shuts  out,  and  at  a  most  critical  moment,  the  very  idea
of  the  barest  possibility  of  a  worthy  competitor  with  himself  1  He  cannot  credit  the
notion  of  a  fellow-creature  to  compare  with  himself.  Alas,  from  "  flattering  lips  and
double  tongue  "  he  had  neither  prayed  nor  striven  to  be  saved  ;  but  least  of  all  from
those  flattering  lips,  above  all  measure  the  worst,  which  first  belong  to  self  and  then
flatter  the  vanity  of  self.  2.  It  was  not  only  self,  but  self  in  the  shape  of  an  un-
chastised,  unmortifled  haughtiness  of  heart.  How  exquisitely  beautiful  the  reverse
of  this.  How  plaintive  the  honest  and  deeply-felt  disowning  of  it:  "Lord,  my
heart  is  not  haughty,  nor  mine  eyes  lofty :  neither  do  I  exercise  myself  in  great
matters,  or  in  things  too  high  for  me.  Surely  I  have  behaved  and  quieted  myself,  a*
a  child  that  is  weaned  of  his  mother :  my  soul  is  even  as  a  weaned  child  "  (Ps.  cxxxi.
1,  2).  Turn  from  David  in  this  psalm  to  Haman,  and  how  is  one  revolted  I  The
thoughts  of  yesterday  afternoon  and  last  night,  which  saw  such  an  amazing  fitness  in
a  "  gallows  fifty  cubits  high  "  for  the  obscure  and  sorrowful  and  stung  man  Mordecai,


OH,  TL  1—14.]


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


m


who  did  not  so  much  as  turn  round  upon  him  like  the  trodden  worm,  but  who  only
could  not  bring  himself  "  to  rise  nor  move  to  him  " — these  were  the  "  imaginations
and  the  high  things  "  which,  because  he  had  not  mortified  them  nor  cast  them  down,
were  now  going  to  mortify  him  to  the  quick,  and  to  cast  him  down  for  ever.  He  had
schooled  himself  to  "refrain  himself  " — no,  not  to  refrain  himself,  but  only  for  a  short
while,  for  policy's  sake  (ch.  v.  10),  the  manifestations  of  self.

IV.  To  WHAT  THIS  "  THOUGHT  IN  THE  HEART  "  LED.  It  is  to  be  remarked,  and  with
the  seriousness  that  belongs  to  a  moral  phenomenon  and  fact  in  our  life,  with  what
unerring  certainty,  with  what  unpitying  pace,  the  moment  travels  on  which  shall
prove  the  fatal,  because  unguarded,  moment  for  those  who  knowingly  and  continuously
"  regard  iniquity  in  their  heart."  It  may  linger,  but  it  is  on  the  move.  It  may  not  be
seen,  yet  it, is  only  just  out  of  sight.  Till  that  which  is  snatched  at,  as  the  crowning
moment  of  choicest  opportunity  of  all  the  life,  proves  that  which  peremptorily  seals
the  man's  fate.  Never  with  surer  conviction,  never  with  more  intuitive  perception,
never  with  more  ill-concealed  self-gratulation,  never  with  glibber  tongue,  had  moment
come  to  Haraan  than  that  which  sounded  for  him  the  knell  of  death  itself,  and  left
him  to  the  company  of  stricken  amazement  for  ever.  And  though  as  yet  no  one
uttered  a  whisper  of  this  to  Haman,  and  he  bowed  his  neck  to  the  yoke  and  did  the
day's  dread  task  to  the  minutest  point,  "letting  nothing  fail,"  Haman  knew  it  all.
Then  wife  and  friends  confirmed  it.  And  for  the  first  time  this  many  a  day  he  saw
himself  and  his  position  when  "  he  hasted  to  his  house  mourning,  and  having  his
head  covered."  How  strange  the  contrast  to  the  Haman  who  the  morning  of  that
day  "thought  in  his  heart,"  &c. — B.

Ver.  13. — Conjugal  -confidences.  "And  Haman  told  Zeresh  his  wife."  The  first
indication  of  Haman's  falling  from  power  was  when  he  was  commanded  by  the  king
to  array  Mordecai  in  the  royal  robes  and  lead  him  through  the  city.  His  mortification
was  great.  Directly  he  could  escape  from  his  hateful  duty  he  hastened  home  and
told  his  wife.

I.  There  should  be  no  secrets  between  husband  and  wife.  Where  there  are
Becrets  there  is  always  a  danger  of  an  outbreak  of  passion  or  jealousy.  Happiness
is  endangered.

II.  Haman  told  of  his  checks  as  well  as  his  advances  ;  his  disappointments
AS  WELL  AS  HONOURS.  Sometimes  men  tell  their  good  fortune  and  hide  the  bad ;  and,
on  the  other  hand,  some  husbands  make  their  wives  miserable  from  fear  of  approach-
ing disaster.

III.  Haman  had  a  faithful  warning,  but  little  consolation,  in  his  conjugal
confidence.  Zeresh  told  him  that  "  if  Mordecai  be  of  the  seed  of  the  Jews,,  before
whom  thou  hast  begun  to  fall,  thou  shalt  not  prevail  against  him,"  &c.  She  was  a
candid  friend  and  a  true  prophet.  Wives  should,  however,  seek  to  comfort  the
bread-winner  under  his  trials.

IV.  Haman  had  to  involve  his  wife  in  his  overthrow,  and  rightly  lets  her
KNOW  all  that  befalls  him.  No  man  can  sufEer  alone.  As  Achan  "  perished  not
alone  in  his  iniquity,"  so  Haman.  His  bitterest  regrets  must  have  been  that  be  had
t(  involve  wife  and  family  in  ruin. — H.


EXPOSITION.


13.


CHAPTER  VII.

.  At  the  second  banquet  Esther  de-
HOiTNOEs  Haman,  and  the  king  con-
demns him  to  be  impaled  on  the  cross

PREPARED    FOR    HAMAN    (ch.    vU.     1  — 10).

Esther  had  promised  to  make  her  true  peti-
tion at  the  second  banquet  (ch.  v.  12),  and
now  kept  her  word.  When  the  king  for  the
third  time  put  the  question,  "What  is  thy


petition,  queen  Esther?  and  what  is  thy
request?  It  shall  be  performed,  even  to
the  half  of  the  kingdom,"  she  opened  all  her
mind.  "If  I  have  found  favour  in  thy
sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  seem  good  to  the
king,  let  my  life  be  given  to  me  at  my  peti-
tion, and  my  people  at  my  request "  (ver.  3).
My  supplication  is  for  my  own  life  and  for
that  of  my  people — no  less  a  danger  than
this  has  moved  me.  "  We  are  told,  I  and  my


128


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHBB.


[oh.  vil  1—10.


people,  to  be  destroyed,  slain,  made  to
perish."  Had  it  been  anything  less  than
this,  had  we  been  merely  sentenced  to  be
sold  as  slaves,  I  had  kept  my  peace  (ver.  i) ;
but  that  did  not  content  "the  enemy" — we
are,  one  and  all,  to  suffer  death.  Esther's
answer  must  have  made  all  clear  to  the  king
— that  his  wife  was  a  Jewess ;  that  her  life
was  forfeit,  like  those  of  her  countrymen,
by  the  terms  of  the  decree  ;  that  Haman  was
"the  enemy"  whom  she  feared.  But  he
will  assume  nothing,  he  will  have  all  clearly
set  before  him,  and  therefore  he  asks,  "  Who
is  he,  and  where  is  he,  that  durst  presume
in  his  heart  to  act  so?"  Then  comes  Esther's
final  declaration,  clear,  direct,  unmistakable :
"The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked
Haman  "  (ver.  6),  this  man  here  before  you,
this  man  who  eats  our  salt,  and  would  take
one  of  our  lives.  Fiercely  angry,  but  con-
fused and  hesitating,  the  king  rises  from  the
banquet,  and  quits  the  room,  stepping  pro-
bably through  an  open  door  into  the  palace
garden.  Now  is  Haman's  last  chance.  Can
he  excite  the  pity  of  the  queen  >  Can  he
prevail  on  her  to  intercede  for  him  and  make
Ms  peace  with '  the  king  ?  He  entreats,  he
supplicates,  he  "falls  upon  the» couch"  on
which  Esther  reclines,  in  his  eagerness  to  win
her  consent  (ver.  7.)  At  this  moment  the
king  re-enters  the  room  (ver.  8),  and  takes
advantage  of  Haman's  breach  of  etiquette
to  accuse  him  of  rudeness  to  the  queen.  The
attendants  see  in  the  accusation  a  sentence
of  death,  and  "cover  Haman's  face"  (ver.
8).  Then  one  of  the  eunuchs,  who  knows
all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  anxious
for  that  kind  of  retribution  which  is  known
to  moderns  as  "  poetic  justice,"  suggests  that
the  cross  prepared  for  Mordecai  wiU  serve
well  for  the  execution  of  Haman.  The  king
readily  consents  to  the  suggestion  (ver.  9),
and  Haman  is  impaled  on  the  cross  which  lie
had  erected  for  his  enemy  in  the  court  of  his
own  house  (ver.  10).

Ver.  1. — The  king  and  Haman  came  to
banquet  (marg.  drink).  In  Persian  feasts
the  solid  dishes  were  few,  and  the  time
was  mainly  passed  in  drinking  and  eating
dessert  (Herod.,  i.  133).

Ver.  2.  —And  the  king  said  again.  Esther
had  promised  to  let  her  real  request  bo
known  at  this  banquet  (ch.  v.  8).  The  king
therefore  once  more  gives  her  the  opportunity.


On  the  second  day.     On  the  second  occasion
of  being  entertained  by  Esther.

Ver.  3. — let  my  life  be  given  me,  &c.
First  of  all,  I  ask  at  the  king's  hands  my
own  life,  which  is  threatened'  (ch.  It.  13) ;
secondly,  I  ask  tSe  life  of  my  people,  in
whose  sentence  it  is  that  I  am  involved.
Some  rhetorical  skill  is  shown  in  separating
the  two,  so  as  to  make  them  correspond  tc
the  two  clauses  of  the  king's  address  —
"  What  is  thy  petition  ? "  and  "  What  is  thy
request  ? "

Ver.  4.— For  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people.
Haman  has  paid  our  price,  has  given  ten
thousand  talents  for  us,  and  you,  0  king,
have  sold  us  to  him.  The  reproach  is  covert,
but  clearly  contained  in  the  words ;  and  so
the  king  must  have  understood  Esther.  To
be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish.
The  use  of  three  synonyms  for  one  and  the
same  thing  is  not  mere  verbiage,  but  very
expressive.  "We  are  sold,  all  of  us,  to  be
overwhelmed  in  one  universal,  promiscuous,
unsparing  destruction. "  Although  the  enemy
could  not  countervail  the  king's  damage.
"Although,  even  in  that  case,  the  enemy
(Haman)  could  not  (by  the  payment  that
he  has  made)  compensate  the  king  for  the
damage  that  ho  would  suffer  by  losing  so
many  subjects."  So  Gesenius,  Rambach,
Dathe,  and  others.  But  it  is  simpler,  and
perhaps  better,  to  understand  the  passage  aa
Berthoau  does:  "for  the  enemy  (Haman)  is
not  worthy  to  vex  the  king,"  or  "is  not
worth  vexing  the  king  about."

Ver.  S . — Who  is  he  t  Ahasuerus  asks  the
question  to  "make  sure,"  as  we  say — not
that  he  could  really  be  in  any  doubt  That
durst  presume.  Rather,  "that  hath  pre-
sumed" (offric  eroXfdjffe. — LXX).

Ver.  6. — The  adversary  and  enemy.  Esther
adds  a  second  term  of  reproach — "enemy" —
stronger  than  the  one  which  she  had  used
before  (veT.  i),  to  stir  up  the  king  to  greater
anger.

Vers.  7,  8. — Ahasuerus  rose  up  from  the
banquet  "in  his  wrath" — he  could  no  longer
remain  quiet— and  entered  the  palace  garden,
on  which  Esther's  apartment  probably  looked ;
partly,  perhaps,  as  Bertheau  says,  to  cool  the
first  heat  of  his  fury  in  the  open  air ;  partly
to  give  himself  time  for  reflection,  and  con-
sider what  he  would  do.  Haman  also  rose
from  table,  and  standing  near  her,  began
pleading  with  Esther  for  his  life,  which  he
felt  that  she,  and  she  alone,  could  save.  Evil,
he  saw,  was  determined  against  Mm  by  the
king;  but  a  woman's  heart  might  be  more
tender,  and  he  might  perhaps  move  tho
queen  to  allay  the  storm  that  she  had  raised,
and  induce  the  king  to  spare  him.  He
therefore  pleaded  with  all  the  earnestness  la
his  power,  and  at  last  threw  himself  forward
on  the  couch  where  Esther  reclined,  seeking


OH.  ni.  1 — 10.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


121


perhaps  to  grasp  her  feet  or  her  garments,
as  is  usual  with  suppliants  in  the  East.  At
this  crisis  the  king  returned,  and  miscon-
struing Haman's  action,  or  pretending  to  do
80,  exclaimed  aloud,  "Will  he  even  force
the  queen  with  me  in  the  house?"  The
terrible  charge  hiought  matters  to  a  conclu-
sion— it  was  taken  as  a  call  on  the  attendants
to  seize  the  culprit  and  execute  him.  They
covered  his  face,  apparently,  as  that  of  a
condemned  man  not  worthy  any  more  to  see
the  light,  according  to  a  practice  common
among  the  Romans  (Liv. ,  L  26  ;  Cic.  '  pro
Rabir. ,'  iv.  13)  and  the  Macedonians  (Q.  Curt. ,
'Vit.  Alex.,'  vi  8),  but  not  elsewhere  men-
tioned- as  Persian.


Yer.  9. — Harbonah,  one  of  the  chamber-
lains, said  before  the  king.  Rather,  "  Har-
bonah, one  of  the  chamberlains  (eunuchs)
that  served  before  the  king,  said."  The
"  eunuchs  that  served  before  the  king''  were
those  of  the  highest  grade,  as  appears  from
eh.  i.  10.  Harbonah  was  one  of  them.  Who
had  spoken  good  for  the  king.  Or,  "who
spake  good."  The  reference  is  to  his  detec-
tion of  the  conspiracy  (ch.  iL  22).  In  the
house  of  Haman.  This  had  not  been  men-
tioned previously.  It  adds  one  touch  of
extra  barbarity  to  Haman's  character,  that
he  should  have  intended  the  execution  to
take  place  within  the  walls  of  hiiown  house.


HOMILETICS.

Ver.  3. — Spare  our  life  I  Was  ever  so  unexpected  a  request  presented  as  thiB  ?
When  the  king  in  his  capricious  favour  offered  his  consort  whatsoever  she  desired,
even  to  the  half  of  his  kingdom,  she  asked  what  might  have  been  naturally  enough
implored  from  the  royal  clemency  by  some  wretched  malefactor  condemned  to
expiate  his  crimes  by  death.  Give  us,  me  and  my  people,  our  life  I  How  strange  a
boon  to  beg  1  A  queen  high  in  favour,  at  a  royal  banquet,  to  ask  that  her  life  should
be  spared,  and  her  kindred  delivered  from  an  unjust  and  violent  end — in  fact,  a
massacre  !  Thus  were  the  eyes  of  the  king  opened  to  the  infamy  of  his  minister,
and  thus  was  Esther  made  the  agent  in  the  redemption  of  Israel.  In  tjiis  petition  we
have  an  example  of  the  request  which,  as  suppliant  sinners,  we  are  bound  to  offer
before  the  throne  of  grace.     It  implies —

I.  A  SENSE  OF  DANQEB.  It  is  something  to  be  alive  to  this.  Esther  had  only
lately  come  to  know  of  the  peril  in  which  she  and  her  countrymen  and  country-
women stood.  Awake  to  the  impending  danger,  she  was  emboldened  to  urge  her
plea.  So  with  us.  A  worse  enemy  than  Haman  has  plotted  against  the  children  of
men.  A  worse  fate  than  massacre  awaits  those  who  fall  into  the  snare  of  the  foe.
The  word  of  God  comes  to  us  as  a  word  of  warning,  urging  us  to  "  flee  from  the
wrath  to  come."  Bondage  is  bad,  but  death  is  worse.  And  "the  wages  of  sin  is
death."

II.  A  HOPS  OP  DELIVERANCE.  Esther  had  her  fears  ;  she  had  gone  m,  saying,  "If
I  perish,  I  perish  I  "  Yet  she  was  encouraged  by  the  gracious  demeanour  and  the
genvious  promise  of  the  king.  Therefore  she  said,  "  //"  I  have  found  favour  in  thy
sight,  0  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king."  We  have  no  need  of  such  "  ifs  "  in  our
approach  and  our  prayer  to  the  King  of  heaven.  He  "  delighteth  in  mercy."  "  II
we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  faitliful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse  us
from  all  unrighteousness."  Our  hope  in  Divine  mercy  is  well  founded ;  for  it  is
founded  both  upon  Divine  promises  and  upon  the  "  unspeakable  gift,"  which  is
both  the  means  and  the  pledge  of  the  gift  of  pardon  and  the  gift  of  life.

III.  A  DESIRE  FOR  THE  SALVATION  OF  OTHERS.  Esther  Was  not  SO  selfish  as  to  ask
that  she  and  her  kinsman,  Mordecai,  might  be  spared ;  her  desire  was  that  the  whole
nation  of  the  Jews  might  be  delivered.  Similar  was  the  attitude  of  Paul,  who  said^
"My  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  for  Israel  is,  that  they  may  be  saved!  '
When  we  seek  salvation  through  Christ  we  cannot  seek  it  for  ourselves  alone ;  w«
■hall  pray  for  our  households,  for  our  nation,  for  our  race.

"  Thy  light,  that  on  our  souls  hath  shoiw
Leads  us  in  hope  to  thee  :
Let  us  not  feel  its  rays  alone^

Alone  thy  people  be.
0  bring  our  dearest  friends  to  Qod|

Remember  those  we  love ;
Fit  them  on  earth  for  thine  abods,
Fit  them  for  joys  above."
KTHIB.  K


130  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  vu.  1—10

Vers.  9,  10. — The  oppressed  avenged.  This  was  indeed  the  hand — as  the  heathen
would  liave  said,  of  Nemesis — as  we  Cliristians  say,  of  a  righteous  God  and  Buler.
Upon  the  tree  erected  for  the  impalenaent  of  Mordecai,  the  cruel,  bloodthirsty  con-
epirator  Haman  was  sentenced  himself  to  die.  "  The  gods  are  just,  and  of  our
pleasant  vices  make  whips  to  scourge  us."

I.  Opthn  we  observe,  for  a  while,  innocence  suffering  and  threatened,  and
SIN  powerful,  insolent,  and  triumphant.  Never  was  a  more  striking  instance  of
tliis  tlian  was  furnished  at  the  court  of  the  Persian  king.  Yet  since  the  world  began
similar  spectacles  have  been  beheld.

II.  A  righteous  and  Almighty  Rdler  looks  down  from  his  throne  and  observes
sncH  SCENES.  It  is  not  we  only  who  mark  the  inequalities  and  apparent  wrongs
of  1  uman  life.  An  all-seeing  Eye  is  ever  upon  the  prosperous  sinner  and  the
afflicted  saint.  "All  things  are  naked  and  opened  unto  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom
we  have  to  do."

III.  The  time  will  come  when  the  oppressor  shall  be  brought  low,  and  the
LOWLY  AND  RIGHTEOUS  SHALL  BE  EXALTED.  Perhaps,  as  in  the  case  before  us,  in
tliis  world  ;  assuredly  in  the  general  judgment.  "  The  Lord  reignetli  ;  "  and  though
he  may  have  reasons  we  cannot  fully  understand  for  permitting  the  temporary  reign
of  injustice,  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  shall  assuredly  do  right.

Ver.  10. —  Wrath  pacified.  Ahasuerus,  unlike  Jonah,  "did  well  to  be  angry."'
Haman  had  plolted  against  the  life  of  his  favourite  queen,  and  one  of  his  most
serviceable  friends,  and  against  an  unoffending  community.  And  he  had  all  but
usurped  the  royal  authority  in  causing  the  gallows  to  be  reared  on  which  he  intended
that  Mordecai  should  be  put  to  death.  A  righteous  anger  led  to  what  would  have
been  deemed  in  him,  an  arbitrary  sovereign,  a  just  act  of  retribution.  And  only
when  the  judicial  sentence  was  carried  out  against  the  offender  was  "  the  king's
wrath  pacified."

I.  Human  anger.  I.  This  is  sometimes  righteous.  "  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not."
Indignation  against  wrong  and  wrath  with  the  oppressor  are  virtues,  without  which
man  is  scarcely  human.  2.  Anger  is  always  to  be  treated  with  suspicion.  We  are
all  prone,  like  Ahasuerus,  to  be  angry  with  whathurts  ourselves,  and  our  sense  of  our
rights  and  dignify,  rather  than  with  what  is  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Let  us
ask  ourselves  whether  our  anger  is  justifiable — is  sympathy  with  the  Divine  right-
eousness, or  is  mere  selfish  passion.  3.  Anger  shou'd  not  be  confounded  with
personal  revenge.  Wrath  may  be  pacified  by  malevolent  action,  and  then  "  sin
lieth  at  the  door."

II.  Divine  angeb.  1.  God  is  angry — with  the  wicked — every  day.  The  Scrip-
tures represent  him  as  regarding  the  evil-doing  of  men  with  displeasure  and  with
wrath.  2.  In  the  midst  of  wrath  God  remembers  mercy.  This  is  the  message  of
the  gospel,  which  does  not  conceal  God's  indignation  at  sin  or  his  displeasure  with
the  sinner ;  but  shows  that  he  is  just,  and  the  Justitier  of  the  believer  in  Clirist.  He
condemns  the  sin  in  pardoning  the  sinner.  "  Thou  wast  angry  ;  but  thine  anger  is
turned  away,  and  thou  comfortedst  us."

LessLUs: — 1.  Kejuice  that  God  is  pacified  and  reconciled.  2.  Accept  his  offers
of  mercy.    S.  Seek  to  share  his  placable  and  forgiving  spirit.

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Veri.  8,  4. — The  effectual  prayer  of  a  true  priestess.  From  the  darker  side  of
human  nature  and  its  painful  suggestions  we  are  glad  to  come  out  to  tlie  light  and
air  of  its  more  hopeful  aspects.  We  are  able  to  do  this  now  without  presumption  or
incaution.  A  brittle  thread  of  hope  for  the  very  despondent  is  still  a  welcome  sight
to  the  eyes  of  those  who  look  on.  The  plaintive  prayer  of  the  oppressed  is  touch-
ing not  leabt  to  those  who  may  happen  to  overhear.  And  the  signs  of  a  deep
sorrow  sinking  almost  to  abject  submission,  rather  than  bearing  the  marks  of  a
healthy  resignation,  will  not  fail  to  wake  betimes  our  tenderest  sympathy.  These
are  the  more  inviting  conditions  under  which  the  scene  now  presents  itself  to  us.
King  Ahasuerus  is  present,  on  the  grandeur  of  his  throne,  and  with  the  dread


OB.  VII.  1— lO.J  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHEE.  181

authority  of  his  golden  sceptre.  But  it  is  not  he  who  is  the  central  figure.  Esther
ia  the  central  figure.  Hainan  also  is  there,  the  would-be  destroyer  of  a  scattered
nation  of  people,  whose  head  is  already  bowed  in  the  day  of  punishment.  But  the
eye  shuns  hira,  and  flees  past  him  to  the  vista  which  shows  that  same  people
reviving  their  hope  and  lifting  again  the  head.  And  in  the  bacltground  of  this
scene  there  is  one  specially  hopeful  sign.  It  is  not  much  that  can  be  said  at  any
time  to  the  honour  of  Ahasuerus,  yet  we  feel  somewhat  propitiated  towards  him  when
we  remember  that  the  arbitrary,  imperious  monarch  has  waited,  and  has  even  asked
three  times,  for  the  prayer  which  Esther  is  now  at  last  about  to  offer  before  him.
Upon  her  he  is  bending  a  gracious  eye,  and  to  her  he  is  lending  an  attentive  ear
Esther  has  become  awhile  the  priestess  of  her  people.  Let  us  consider  her  appear
anoe  in  this  character.     We  have  from  her  lips —

I.  A  PBAYEB,  THE  SUBJECT  OF  WHICH  WAS  LIFE.  The  prayer  asked  for  life.  It
asked  the  least,  for  anything  less  would  be  of  no  worth  without  this  being  secured
first.  It  asked  the  least,  but  what  signified  everything  beside.  Esther's  prayer  told
its  tale,  and  told  it  all,  but  told  it  most  simply.  No  general  phrases,  no  hasty
sentences  ;  each  word  had  been  weighed,  not  indeed  to  produce  an  artificial,  but  a
transparent  efEect.  The  skill  in  it  was  the  skill  of  sincerity  and  profound  earnest-
ness alone.  There  was  art  in  it,  but  the  art  of  artlessness,  not  of  artfulness.  This
prayer  for  just  life  and  breath  for  herself  and  the  congregation  of  her  people
breathes  a  tone  of  wonderful  humility,  and  has  an  extraordinary  promise  of  content
in  it.  The  voice  of  it  surely  must  have  faltered  through  falling  tears,  or  been  choked
in  sobs,  when,  in  the  name  of  all  that  venerable  nation,  so  long  lifted  above  all
nations  of  the  earth,  Esther  adds  that  if  it  had  been  only  a  question  of  bondage,
and  of  selling  into  such  bondage  of  every  man  and  woman  of  them,  it  was  not  her
voice  that  should  have  been  heard  to  deprecate,  nor  her  lips  that  should  have  been
parted  in  prayer  to  prevent  it.  But,  she  says,  the  case  was  one  of  greater,  even  of
supreme  extremity.  They  were  sold — to  death.  They  were  sold,  in  the  words  of
the  opportunely-quoted  "decree,"  "to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish."
Many  drops  of  big  tears  had  those  words  been  to  an  unnumbered  multitude  of
sensitive  and  high-spirited  people ;  but  now  were  they  not  for  the  first  time  like
drops  of  molten  lead  to  the  hearing  of  Haman?  For  him  they  were  hot  with  terror,
heavy  with  doom,  while  their  effect  upon  Ahasuerus  was  electric.  Who  does  not
feel  that  a  prayer  for  life  must  be  respectfully  listened  to,  at  least  ?

II.  A  PBAYEB  THAT  BESTED  OS  SACBIFIOE.  Esther  does  not  purport  to  bring  an
outer  sacrifice.  A  most  real  and  precious  sacrifice  she  does  in  fact  bring.  She  was
herself  the  sacrifice,  and  she  knew  it  full  well.  Though  with  modesty,  and  as  mute
as  could  be  under  the  circumstances,  she  does  in  a  veiled  manner  utter  the  fact,  and
claim  the  plea.  She  pleads,  as  she  had  been  taught  and  urged  by  Mordecai  to  plead,-
that  she  had  been  raised  up  by  Providence  for  this  hour,  and  "  to  this  end  "  had  been
placed  where  of  late  she  was  found.  There  are  many  outer  forms  of  sacrifice,  but
the  principle  at  work  here,  and  but  thinly  concealed,  is  the  leading  principle  invoked
in  them  all.  So  Esther  makes  this  the  plea :"//"/  have  found  favour  in  thy  sight,
0  king,  and  if  it  please  the  king."  And  "if  she  had  found  favour,"  was  it  not  the
result  of  a  most  real  intrinsic  sacrifice  of  self  ?

III.  A  PBAYBR  WHICH  HAD  FOR  ITS  CHIBFEST   BURDEN  IKTERCESSION.      Esther  WaS  aS

"  merciful "  a  priestess  as  she  was  a  skilful  one.  She  lets  not  go  of  the  argument,
the  plea,  the  sacrifice  which  was  found  in  herself;  and  she  keeps  this  well  in  the
foreground.  But  our  ear  can  hear  well  that  her  prayer  is  really  intercession.  It  is
"  my  people  "  she  has  ever  in  sight,  ever  "deep  graven  on  her  heart."  Her  people's
name  is  kept  close  linked  with  her  own.  She  had  no  thought  of  permitting  them  to
get  separated  from  her.  They  and  she  had  the  prospect  of  being  about  to  share  and
share  alike  the  "decree,"  and  she  takes  care  to  pray  and  pray  alike.  This  was
necessary  with  all  the  old  high  priests  under  the  law.  Only  of  Christ  was  it  not
true,  who  "  needed  not  to  offer  a  sacrifice  first  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for  the
people's."  But  this  is  the  language  of  Esther :  "  Let  m^/  life  and  my  people  be  given
me :  .  .  .  for  we  are  sold,  I  and  my  people."

IV.  A  PBAYEB  WHICH  IN  MANY  EBSPEOTS  IS  A  SUBLIME  TYPE  OF  THE  SOUL'S  PBAYEB

TO  God.     Within  the  four  comers  of  Esther's  prayer  there  are  some  amazing

k2


132  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  vii.  1—10-

analogies  with  the  prayer  of  man  to  God,  of  the  sinner  trembling  between  fear  and
hope  to  the  Saviour,  of  the  helpless  creature  stricken  with  the  sense  of  unparalleled
need  to  the  Possessor  and  Spirit  of  life.  Esther's  prayer  is  indeed  horror  to  ou*
ei!,TS  to  hear,  and  grates  on  every  highest  sensibility  of  our  nature,  when  (though  no
fiiult  to  her)  we  think  of  it  as  addressed  to  a  fellow-creature.  But  we  may  now  put
this  out  of  sight.  The  postulates  of  prayer  are  here — 1.  In  the  praying  disposi-
tion of  the  suppliant.  Here  are  the  deep  feeling,  the  just  estimate  of  the  critical
character  of  the  occasion,  the  overwhelming  sense  of  the  prize  of  life.  There  are
also  to  be  noticed  the  natural  selection  of  simplest  language,  the  choice  of  briefest
fcrguments,  and  all  these  held  in  hand  with  a  self-command  almost  inconceivable
— another  touch  of  a  true  analogy.  All  these  are  the  things  which  characterise
heavenward  prayer  where  intense  spiritual  importunity  exists.  2.  In  the  absolute
ownership,  the  omnipotent  power,  the  sovereign  sceptre  of  the  being  addressed.
These  do  belong  to  him  whom  man  addresses  in  prayer  when  he  prays  heavenward.
And  when  these  two  postulates  of  prayer  meet,  rare  indeed  are  the  exceptions  to
that  result  which  in  one  blessed  word  we  call  mercy. — B.

Ver.  6. — A  changed  attitude.  The  priestess  has  risen  from  her  knees,  and  appears
suddenly  transmuted  into  prosecutrix  for  herself  and  her  people.  The  posture  of
prayer  is  exchanged  for  the  full-drawn  height.  The  suppliant  attitude  is  replaced  in
a  second  by  the  defiant.  Inclining  arms,  and  hands  clasped  in  prayer,  are  flung  wide
apart.  The  extended  right  hand  points  a  finger  of  vigorous  decision  at  Haman,  that
type  of  monstrous  iniquity.  The  averted  eye,  shunning  him,  is  to  Ahasuerus,  the
present  object  of  hope  and  trust.  As  one  looks  on  from  the  distance,  the  tones
scarcely  heard  just  now  have  risen  from  suppliant  earnestness  to  the  pitch  of  indig-
nant force  and  unmistaken  denunciation.  Such  the  transformation.  And  one  token
of  genuineness,  it  was  the  work  of  an  instant.  The  explanation  of  so  violent  a  con-
trast and  so  rapid  a  change  is  the  extreme  opposite  of  any  native  fickleness,  of  any
tendency  to  infidelity,  of  any  unreality  of  heart.  The  opposed  appearances  are  due
to  one  fixed  purpose,  one  imperious  necessity,  one  unalterable  religion.  In  the  midst
of  most  unpronifsing  sun'oundings  we  seem  to  see  here  the  long  prostrate  image  of
righteousness  upraised  again.  Truth  and  goodness,  oppressed  and  down-trodden
without  mercy,  recover  their  standing.  There  rises  in  the  centre  before  our  vision
what  might  seem  a  Divinely-sculptured  form,  for  its  beauty,  its  truth  of  outline,
and  its  suddenness.     Let  us  note  some  of  its  suggestions.

I.  It  stands  fob  the  present  a  solitary  testimony  to  REB0KB  iNiQtriTT.  Such
has  been  almost  always  at  the  first,  and  often  for  a  while,  the  history  of  integrity,  of
truth,  of  conscience.  A  unit  of  these  heavenly  forms  appears.  The  individual  is
raised  up.  Strength  is  made  perfect  in  the  weakness  of  one.  One  has  to  bear,  and
bears  the  brunt.  One  has  to  do  the  work,  and  does  it.  One  has  to  set  the  example,
and  show  the  way,  and  leap  into  the  gulf,  and  unfurl  the  banner,  and  uplift  the
standard.  One  hangb  UPON  the  cross.  And  there  stands  here,  in  the  person  of
Esther  denouncing  the  "  wicked  adversary  Haman,"  one  figure,  absolutely  alone,
testifying  rebuke  of  sin,  and  of  the  sin  of  the  mighty.  There  are  few  positions
more  dangerous  to  the  person  who  takes  it  than  this.  The  one  rebuker  of  the
iniquity  of  the  many,  or  of  the  powerful,  needs  to  be  sure  of  his  cause,  and  sup-
ported by  an  informed  conscience ;  otherwise  he  has  little  to  expect  from  those  on
whom  he  visits  rebuke.

II.  The  attitude  ok  it  has  succeeded  immediately  to  that  of  prater.  How
many  of  the  greatest  works  have,  in  point  of  historical  fact,  grown  out  of  prayer.
They  have  taken  form  after  the  silence  and  meditation  of  prayer.  They  have  grown
out  of  the  strength  given  in  answer  to  strong  supplication  and  tears.  The  illustra-
tions which  Scripture  offers  are  many,  and  are  the  beacons  for  us.  But  the  illustra-
tions of  all  history,  and  of  our  own  lives,  far  surpass  them  in  number.

III.  It  is  of  the  type  of  the  gentle  and  weak  and  dependent,  though  fob  its
WOKK  one  would  HAVE  EXPECTED  THE  CONTRARY.  At  any  time  gentleness  has  its
own  proper  force,  tenderness  its  peculiar  strength,  and  dependence  can  often  summon
a  far  vaster  might  to  its  service  than  any  independence  possesses  of  itself.  But  there
•re  times  when  the  feminine  and  the  tender  is  manifestly  endowed  with  on  unutual


OH.  yn.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  13S

force,  and  then  it  takes  additional  advantage  from  the  hackground  of  weakness
which  belongs  inherently  to  it.  So  now  we  are  the  more  bound  to  study  the  reason
of  it  when  we  find  the  eye  of  this  one  woman,  with  an  unusual  exercise  of  it,  flash-
ing a  force  of  conviction  which  rends  in  twain  the  hard,  gnarled  courage  of  one  of
the  worst  of  hearts,  and  shivers  the  flint.  Tenderness  is  one  thing,  and  strength
another.  Yet  here  we  find  the  type  of  the  one  usurping  the  prerogative  of  tlie
other,  and  td  almost  unequalled  advantage.  Not  only  "  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes
and  sucklings  has  God  perfected  praise ; "  but  often  does  God  choose  "  the  weak
things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty."  And  so  he  brings  it
to  light  that  it  is  not  the  force  of  man  at  all  which  really  wins  the  victory,  but
the  force  of  his  truth,  his  goodness,  his  justice,  himself.

IV.  This  is  a  form  which  divides  bo  much  op  tab  world  as  is  in  its  presence
INTO  TWO  GREAT  PARTS.  We  have  here  an  humble  instance  of  what  the  cross  of
Christ  did  when  it  stood  betwixt  the  two  other  crosses.  It  showed  the  world  divided
into  the  penitent  and  the  impenitent,  the  believing  and  the  unbelieving.  So  now  the
world  is  forced  into  one  of  two  classes :  there  is  he  who  consents  to  the  judgment
of  Esther  and  will  execute  it,  and  there  is  he  who  is  convicted  and  condemned  irre-
sistibly by  it.  The  one  consents  with  the  deepest  emotions,  the  other  suffers  con-
viction with  a  fear  and  trembling  that  positively  incapacitate  him  from  governing
his  actions  or  taking  the  most  ordinary  precaution.  When  truth  and  justice  are  the
vision,  the  background  being  really  nothing  else  than  the  sky,  then  the  immediate
consequences  to  all  beholders  are  either  those  of  consenting  sympathy,  or  of  stricken
amazement  and  confusion  of  face.  Seldom  was  the  work  of  severance  better  done
than  by  Esther  now.  Her  form  seems  to  bring  the  whole  scene  to  life  again,  as
though  we  were  there.  And  the  more  we  gaze,  the  more  we  justly  wonder  at  the
achievement  of  the  moment,  which  shows  Esther  with  finger  pointed  at  Haman,  and
sajfing,  "  The  adversary  and  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman."

V.  This  is  the  form  op  conviction  left  mistress  of  tee  situation.  The  posi-
tion is  evidently  in  many  respects  more  impressive  than  that  wliicli  found  Nathan
confronting  David,  and  saying,  "  Thou  art  the  man."  Nathan  had  a  heart  not  callous,
a  conscience  not  lifelong  injured,  to  deal  with — those  of  one  man.  How  different  the
conditions  of  Esther's  task  I  What  a  contrast  this  moment  to  the  moment  when,
after  the  fasting  of  herself,  her  maidens,  and  her  people,  she  presented  herself  within
sight  of  the  despot,  nor  breathed  freely  till  the  golden  sceptre  was  extended  to  lior  !
Such  the  change  for  those  who  watch  and  pray,  who  pray  and  fight,  who  know  and
follow  and  trust  the  good  that  is  above.  They  come  to  a  point  sometimes  where  all
seems  endangered,  but  prayer  and  trust  and  work  convert  that  very  time  into  the
date  of  an  exceeding  great  moral  victory.  Up  to  this  time  Esther  had  been  a  queen
but  in  name ;  now  she  was  a  queen  in  deed  and  of  a  truth.  The  form  of  Esther  is  a
very  faint  type,  but  a  very  true  prophecy,  of  that  great  victory,  which  is  ever  draw-
ing nearer,  which  sliall  show  wickedness  prostrate,  righteousness  supreme. — B.

Ver.  7. — Moments  that  flash.  "  And  the  king  arising  .  .  .  went  into  the  palace  gar-
den." Esther  spoke  plainly  enough  when  she  turned  and  charged  as  her  "  enemy  this
wicked  Haman."  Her  words  seemed  almost  incredible  to  the  king.  Haman  watches
to  see  how  they  are  taken.  The  king  rises  in  anger  from  the  table  and  steps  out  into
the  garden.  Here  he  paces  to  and  fro  meditating.  He  is  wise  to  have  a  fe\v'  quiet
moments  before  deciding  as  to  his  action.  Perhaps  they  were' only  moments  of  delay
before  announcing  sentence.  They  were  also  moments  in  which  would  flash  upon
him — 1.  The  reckless  character  of  his  own  dealings  with  an  innocent  and  captive
people.     2.  His  complicity  in  the  designs  of  a  murderous  and  greedy  wretch.

I.  There  are  moments  which  come  to  us  at  different  periods  which  flash
LIKE  THOSE  IN  THE  PALACE  GARDEN.  We  have  had  some  problem  to  work  out ;  or
we  have  been  going  through  a  series  of  circumstances,  the  end  of  which  we  could
not  comprehend,  when  at  one  point  all  becomes  clear.  We  are  like  men  on  board  a
vessel  when  the  fog  lifts  and  shows  them  to  be  near,  unexpectedly,  to  some  well-
known  headland.  Or  we  have  "  tracked  "  through  a  dense  forest,  and  have  come  to
its  edge  at  last,  when  a  wide  view  ojiens  out  before  us.  These  moments  come  lo
the  routh  when  a  friend  or  parent  dies ;  or  when  he  first  finds  out  how  faithless  ii


134  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  vii  1—10.

aome  professed  friend.  Or  they  come  when,  later  in  life,  we  listen  to  some  searching
sermon  ;  or  when  affliction  falls  upon  us.  To  some  they  come  most  un&xpeotedly,
when  engaged  in  ordinary  afEairs.  The  Holy  Spirit  uses  such  moments.  Paul  knew
what  such  raomeuts  meant  when,  outside  Damascus,  the  light  flashed  from  heaven,
tnd  he  saw  himself  in  his  real  state.

II.  It  is  well  to  take  time  fob  meditation  after  any  sudden  revelation.
When  angry  we  should  pause.  He  that  ruleth  his  spirit  is  greater  than  he  that
taketh  a  city.  On  the  meditation  of  a  few  moments  how  much  may  depend.  Here
it  was  the  deposition  and  execution  of  a  prime  minister,  and  the  salvation  of  a  whole
nation. — H.

Ver.  8. — The  covered  countenance.  "As  the  word  went  out  of  the  king's  mouth
they  covered  Haman's  face."  A  hint  is  sufficient  for  the  king's  8er\'ants.  It  is  to
them  a  matter  of  little  import  whether  they  robe  Ilaman  for  exaltation  or  cover  his
face  for  execution  ;  whether  they  lead  him  to  a  banquet  or  to  a  gallows.  Their  duty
is  to  obey  their  king.     So  with  the  angels  ;  they  minister  for  joy  or  punishment.

I.  To  BE  IN  DISGRACE  WAS  TO  BE  UNWORTHY  TO  SEE  THE  KING.  Nathaniel  Hawthorne
represented,  in  one  tale,  a  man  as  wearing  ever  a  crape  veil,  and  in  death  wishing  it
to  be  kept  over  his  face,  because  he  felt  his  own  unworthiness.

II.  To  BE   CONDEMNED   OP   GOD   W0U111    BENDER   US    UNABLE  TO    SEE    HIM.      As    light

dazzles,  so  God's  purity  alone  would  blind  us.  Our  own  sin  will  be  the  covering.  When
death  shall  throw  his  black  pall  over  us,  unless  mercy  lifts  it,  our  own  hands  will
never  tear  it  away.  We  should  examine  our  hearts,  and  see  whether  there  is  any
cherished  sin  which  may  eventually  lead  to  our  rejection  and  condemnation.  Let
there  be  no  "  veil  "  on  our  hearts  as  on  those  of  Israel,  that  there  may  be  no  covering
our  faces  as  Haman's  was  covered. — H.

Ver.  9. — Righteous  retribution.  "  Hang  him  thereon."  Short  time  elapsed  be-
tween the  discovery  of  Haman's  crime  and  his  suffering  for  it.  He  had  observant
enemies  around.  'Those  who  had  been  willing  to  fawn  upon  him  while  hs  was  in
power  are  rendy  to  turn  against  him  on  his  fall.  They  let  the  king  know  of  the
gallows  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai.  "  Hang  him  thereon,"  says  the  king,  witii
respect  to  the  builder.

I.  We  CANNOT   FAIL  TO  BE  STRUCK  WITH   THE   SUITABILITY   OF   THE   PUNISHMENT   TO

THE  CRIME.  Hainan  "hoisted  with  his  own  petard."  Into  the  trap  he  digged  for
another  he  fell.  See  another  fitting  illustration  of  this  in  Adoni-bezek,  who,  having
disab'ed  seventy-two  by  the  excisions  of  thumbs  and  great  toes,  was  himself  served  in
the  same  way,  and  confessed,  "  As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me  "  (Judges i.  7).

II.  In  THE  FUTURE   THE   SUITABILITY   OF   THE   PUNISHMENT   TO  THE  SIN  OF  THE   LIFE

WILL  BE  CLEARLY  SEEN.  It  will  be  the  outgrowth  naturally  of  our  sin,  and  not  an
arbitrary  infliction  on  the  part  of  God.  Despisers  of  parents,  oppressors  of  the
weak,  the  intemperate  and  sensual,  will  find  how  fitting  is  the  retribution  to  the  sin,
and  will  have  to  confess,  as  Haman  must  have  done  in  his  heart,  that  it  is  just. — H.

Ver.  10. — The  terrible  consummation  of  a  wicked  life.  Our  first  impulse  on  read-
ing these  words  is  to  praise  Ahasuerus  for  his  faithful  administration  of  justice ;  for
if  ever  a  man  deserved  summary  vengeance  at  the  hands  of  the  law,  it  was  Haman.
But  a  little  reflection  must  correct  our  judgment.  The  whole  transaction  reveals  the
fickle,  passionate,  unscrupulous  disposition  of  the  tyrant.  Without  any  apparent
reason,  or  at  least  without  any  regard  to  his  merits,  he  had  made  a  special  favourite
of  Haman,  and  had  lavished  upon  him  all  the  honours  at  his  command ;  and  now,  in
a  fit  of  uncontrollable  rage,  he  hurries  him,  without  any  pretence  of  a  trial,  to  a
felon's  death.  Flatterers  are  the  most  unreliable  of  men.  Those  who  lick  the  dust
at  your  feet  in  prosperity  are  the  most  likely  to  tread  upon  your  neck  in  adversity.
There  is  but  one  step  between  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David,"  and  "  Away  with
him  I  crucify  him  I  "  The  king's  servants,  who  vied  with  each  other  in  their  obse-
quiousness to  Haman  while  he  enjoyed  their  master's  favour,  were  now  so  eager  to
execute  him  that  they  could  scarcely  wait  for  the  sentence.  The  text  is  in  many
respects  one  of  the  most  striking  in  the  whole  Bible,  and  ia  fraught  with  weighty  anJ
pennaneBt  lessons.    Note —


OB.  VII.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  13i

L  The  tehbible  consummation  of  a  wicked  careeb.  It  sometimes  happens  that
the  ungodly  flourish  in  the  world  to  such  an  extent  that  our  faith  in  eternal  righteoua-
nesB  is  staggered.  We  could  point  to  men  whose  road  to  power  was  paved  with
injustice,  treachery,  and  bloodshed.  Many  an  upright  heart,  crushed  for  its  very
uprightness,  has  poured  forth,  in  contemplating  suoh  men,  the  despairing  complaint
of  the  Psalmist,  "  Verily  I  have  cleansed  my  heart  in  vain,  and  washed  my  hands  in
innocency."  But  a  careful  observation  of  facts  would  doubtless  show  that  even  in
this  world  excessive  wickedness  frequently  brings  about  its  own  requital.  Pharaoh
perished  in  the  Red  Sea  ;  the  dogs  licked  the  blood  of  Ahab  in  Samaria  ;  Herod  was
eaten  of  worms  upon  his  throne.  There  are  circumstances  about  the  case  of  Haman
which  separate  it  from  all  others,  but  in  its  essential  features  it  is  but  one  among
thousands.  Three  elements  in  Haman's  character  may  be  mentioned  which,  wliile
they  contributed  to  his  temporary  success,  led  to  his  final  ruin.  1.  Boundless
ambition.    2.  Boundless  pride-     3.  Boundless  cruelty.

II.  The  ignominious  extinction  of  an  infamous  bach.  Some  think  that  Hainan
was  an  Amalekite ;  and  we  are  told  that  the  Amalekites,  for  their  hostility  to  tlio
Israelites,  had  been  singled  out  for  retribution.  The  Lord  said  to  Moses,  "I  will
utterly  put  out  the  remembrance  of  Amalekfrom  under  heaven."  The  threat  was  not
carried  out  at  once  ;  for  ages  the  footsteps  of  justice  seemed  to  linger,  and  the  delay
had  only  intensified  their  malignity.  But  here  the  last  of  the  race  dies  upon  the
gallows,  for  after  this  they  disappear  altogether  from  history.  Piety  runs  in  families,
and  BO  does  wickedness.  God's  blessing  rests  upon  families,  and  so  does  his  curse.
This  is  not  due  to  haphazard,  caprice,  or  favouritism  ;  but  there  is  always  a  definite
cause  for  it.  Think  of  the  Stuarts  of  England,  and  the  Bourbons  of  France.  By
trampling  upon  the  rights  of  the  people,  and  seeking  self-aggrandisement  at  the
expense  of  righteousness,  they  sinned  no  less  against  Heaven  than  against  humanity.
But,  as  if  pursued  by  an  inexorable  fate,  they  were  hurled  from  the  summit  of  power
to  the  ignoble  obscurity  which  they  so  richly  deserved.  Let  us  beware  of  commit-
ting "  presumptuous  sins,"  lest  they  should  taint  our  families,  and  doom  them  as
well  as  ourselves  to  eternal  disgrace.

III.  The  signal  defeat  of  a  heaetlbss  pubpose.  The  incident  before  us  is  one
of  those  incidents  which  cannot  be  accounted  for  except  on  the  supposition  of  an
overruling  Providence.  We  perceive  cunning  baffled,  crime  punished,  impiousness
abashed  in  such  a  wonderful  way,  that  to  attribute  the  whole  afEair  to  mere  chance
Would  be  the  height  of  foil}'.  1.  Haman  was  degraded  just  when  he  thought  oj
reaching  the  goal  of  his  ambition.  The  highest  dignities  of  the  kingdom,  next  to
those  enjoyed  by  the  king,  were  his  already.  His  vanity,  his  love  of  authority,  his
fondness  for  display  had  nothing  to  desire.  And  now  the  only  annoyance  that  dis-
turbed him  was  about  to  be 'removed  —  the  people  which  he  hated  was  aboiil
to  be  annihilated — and  he  was  about  to  become  absolute  master  of  the  situation.
Henceforth  he  would  be  admired,  courted,  envied  by  all  the  world.  But,  alas,  it  was
not  to  be.  "  There  are  miny  devices  in  a  man's  heart  ;  nevertheless  the  counsel  of
the  Lord,  that  shall  stand."  Haman  had  left  that  counsel  out  of  his  calculation  ;
hence,  when  he  thought  of  attaining  the  climax  of  honour,  he  was  plunged  into  the
abyss  of  shame.  Prosperity  is  the  worst  thing  that  can  happen  to  the  wicked  man.
Adversity  may  mellow  his  heart,  and  produce  reflection,  repentance,  and  reformation  ;
but  a  course  of  unbroken  triumph  only  hardens  his  heart,  and  hastens  the  inevitable
catastrophe.  "  For  when  they  shall  say,  Peace  and  safety;  then  sudden  destru(tiiin
Cometh  upon  them,  as  travail  upon  a  woman  with  child  ;  and  they  shall  not  escape. "  2.
Haman  perished  on  the  very  gallows  that  he  had  erected  for  another.  This  was
probably  the  bitterest  ingredient  in  his  cup  of  woe.  Imagine  his  chagrin,  his
confusion,  his  despair,  when  he  found  that  the  huge  instrument  of  death  which  he
had  set  up  at  such  great  expense  to  punish  his  unbending  antagonist  was  to  be
employed  for  no  other  purpose  than  his  own  execution  1  And  who  knows  but  that
Mordecai  himself  was  among  the  crowd  who  witnessed  the  scene  ?  There  was  an
awful  fitness  about  the  punishment.  After-ages  have  with  one  consent  pronounced
it  just  No  utterance  commends  itself  to  universal  approval  with  greater  force  thnn
this:  "Whoso  diggeth  a  pit  shall  fall  therein;  and  he  that  roUeth  a  stone,  it  will
ratuni  upon  him."    We  are  reminded  here  that  as  virtue  is  its  own  reward,  so  sin  ia


136  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  til  1—10.

its  own  punishment.  Haman  died  on  a  gallows  of  his  own  constraction ;  ao  shall
every  impenitent  sinner  perish  through  his  own  waywardness.  "  Thine  own  wicked-
ness shall  correct  thee,  and  thy  backslidings  shall  reprove  thee." — B.

Vers.  1 — 6. — Accused  and  convicted.  I.  Taenished  gilt.  Haman  would  hardly
go  "  merrily  "  to  Esther's  second  banquet.  His  heart  would  be  heavy  with  the  day's
disappointments,  and  his  ears  would  be  haunted  with  the  gloomy  vaticinations  of
his  friends.  The  glory  of  the  honour  wliich  had  so  inflated  him  was  dimmed.
Worldly  delights  that  are  ardently  anticipated  may  be  robbed  of  their  promise  even
before  thoy  are  touched.

II.  Whetted  curiosity.  The  king's  desire  to  hear  Esther's  petition  grew  with
delay.  For  a  third  time  he  asked  her  to  speak,  and  encouraged  her  by  the  largest
promise.  Idle  curiosity  is  a  weakness  and  a  snare.  There  may  be  a  legitimate  and
even  dutiful  curiosity,  and  that  too  in  connection  with  individual  cases.  A  loving
desire  to  give  help  will  often  justify  even  a  seeming  intrusion  into  the  privacy  of  a
friend's  sorrow.  A  sympathetic  word  may  cause  a  secretly-burdened  heart  to  open  and
relieve  itself,  and  thus  give  an  opportunity  of  affording  it  the  benefit  of  wise  counsel
and  timely  sucfcour.  Our  Saviour  has  "  a  fellow-feeling  with  our  infirmities,"  and
desires  the  full  confidence  of  his  people,  that  he  may  help  them  in  their  "  time  of  need."

III.  Unburdened  desire.  The  queen  knew  that  the  time  had  come  for  her  to
speak.  She  could  no  longer  delay  without  injuring  her  cause.  If  it  is  well  to  know
when  to  be  silent,  it  is  also  well  to  know  when  to  speak.  It  is  folly  to  expose  a  great
matter  to  a  heart  that  may  be  cold  or  hostile.  Esther's  matter  was  exceedingly  great,
and  she  could  not  subject  it  to  any  needless  risk  by  a  premature  disclosure.  But
now  the  king  was  so  favourable  to  herself,  and  so  interested  in  her  secret,  as  to  make
it  plain  that  she  must  tell  all.  So  she  laid  before  the  king  the  weighty  burden  she
had  been  silently  carrying.  What  a  relief  to  open  a  secret  sorrow  to  those  who  can
feel  for  us  and  gfive  us  an  effective  solace  I  We  can  at  all  times  speak  to  God.
Whatever  barriers  of  fear  and  distrust  stand  between  us  and  him  are  of  our  own
making.  The  Bedeemer  of  men  is  ready  to  share  our  every  burden  and  to  exceed
our  largest  desires.

IV.  Powerful  pleading.  Much  wisdom  and  mach  pathos  mark  the  words  in  which
Esther  presented  her  petition.  Observe — 1.  How  heroically  she  united  herself  with
her  people.  It  was  for  her  own  life  and  the  life  of  her  people  that  she  prayed.  That
the  queen  was  a  Jewess  would  be  startling  news  to  the  king  and  Haman,  and  would
certainly  quicken  the  fears  of  the  latter.  Esther  calmly  elected  to  be  numbered  with
the  Israelites,  and  to  die  with  them  if  they  were  to  die.  She  only  cared  to  live  if  they
were  permitted  to  live.  It  was  a  strong  way  of  putting  the  matter  before  the  king.
It  is  better  to  suffer  with  God's  people  than  to  share  the  splendours  of  their  enemies.
The  example  of  Moses  is  suggested  (Heb.  xi.  24 — 26).  That  of  Joshua  too  (Josh,
xxiv.  15).  Especially  that  of  Christ,  who  made  himself  one  with  us  that  he  might
redeem  us  from  evil.  2.  How  energetically  she  described  the  doom  contrived  for  her
people.  She  used  the  very  words  of  the  royal  proclamation — "  To  destroy,  to  kill,  and
to  cause  to  perish  " — showing  the  ruthless  determination  of  the  enemy.  Then  there
was  an  indignant  allusion  to  the  bribe.  "  We  are  sold,  I  and  my  people,"  to  be  thus
destroyed.  A  further  sting  to  the  listening  Haman.  Hatred  of  wrong  and  pity  for
the  oppressed  give  force  to  the  tongue  of  the  advocate,  when  it  is  free  to  speak.
Strong  feeling  can  only  express  itself  in  strong  words.  Direct  and  plain  are  the
utterances  of  a  heart  that  is  breaking  with  a  desire  to  save  the  innocent.  Happy  are
the  victims  of  evil  who  have  an  advocate  like  Esther.  She  reminds  us  of  the  great
Advocate,  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  Our  elder  Brother,  the  vanquisher
of  the  giant  oppressors  of  our  race,  ever  works  and  pleads  for  his  people  (Heb.  vii.
26  ;  1  John  ii.  1).  3.  How  pathetically  she  pleaded  the  submissive  spirit  of  herself
and  her  race.  If  it  had  been  only  bondage  that  was  threatened  she  would  have  been
silent.  Her  scattered  people  were  used  to  hardships,  and  had  been  trained  to  quiet
submission.  Yet,  as  she  gently  insinuated,  even  if  the.  enemy  had  been  content  to
reduce  the  Jsraelites  to  serfdom  and  poverty,  he  would  not  have  saved  the  king  from
damage.  A  free,  orderly,  and  industrious  people  was  of  more  value  to  the  state  than
k  race  of  slaves.    This  was  a  far-sighted  truth  much  in  advance  o£  her  day.    Insub-


CH.  VII.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  137

ordination  of  peoples  has  generally  been  the  result  of  oppressive  rule.  Nations  have
been  wonderfully  patient  under  all  sorts  of  unjust  exactions  and  crushing  burdens  ;
but  there  is  a  point  beyond  which  the  most  patient  submission  cannot  go.  All  are
free  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  No  oppressions  there.  Citizens  are  sons  (John  i.  12;
Bom.  viii.  14, 15,  21).

V.  Responsive  emotion.  The  pleading  of  Esther  instantly  roused  within  the  king's
mind  a  turbulence  of  feeling.  "  Who  or  where  is  the  man  who  durst  presume  in  liia
heart  to  do  so  ?  "  .  Was  he  ignorant  of  the  decree  against  the  Jews  ?  Had  he  sealed
it  in  a  careless  or  drunken  moment?  Or  was  he  thinking  of  Haman  and  his  presump-
tion when  he  cried,  "  Who  or  where  is  the  man  ?  "  We  cannot  say.  All  we  know  is
that  he  yielded  himself  up  to  the  power  of  Esther's  words.  We  learn  several  things
here.  1.  That  the  worst  men  may  retain  a  certain  amount  of  good  which  only  requires
occasion  to  be  inflamed  into  indignation  against  heartless  sin.  There  is  a  point  in
every  heart  which  the  truth  may  peradventure  reach.  This  should  be  encouragement
to  all  workers  for  God.  2.  That  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  susceptible  to  the  accents
of  injured  innocence.  We  should  cherish  sympathy  with  the  weak  sufEering,  and  be
ever  ready  to  set  our  faces  against  injustice  and  violence.  3.  That  false  friends  are
worse  than  avowed  enemies.  Flatterers  like  Haman,  who  use  the  power  they  acquire
for  selfish  and  pernicious  ends,  are  more  to  be  feared  than  rebels  or  conspirators.  A
smoof'i  tongue  may  work  greater  evil  than  an  unsheathed  sword.  4.  That  we  should
be  thankful  for  awakenings  to  unconscious  peril,  even  though  they  cover  us  with  shame.
It  is  loss  disgraceful  to  confess  our  weakness  and  folly  than  by  persistence  in  them
to  allow  wickedness  to  run  its  course.  It  may  be  noble  to  welcome  a  light  that  con-
demns us,  but  it  can  only  be  despicable  and  ruinous  to  close  our  eyes  against  the
truth  in  order  to  shield  our  pride.

VI.  Resistless  accusation.  Esther's  opportunity  had  come  at  last.  "  Who  is  the
man  ?  "  cried  the  excited  king.  There  is  the  man,  answered  the  queen,  pointing  her
finger  to  her  second  guest.  "The  adversary  and  the  enemy  is  this  wicked  Haman."
The  charge  fell  like  a  thunderbolt  on  the  culprit ;  a  deadly  fear  seized  his  heart.
There  he  stood  convicted,  speechless  and  trembling.  We  think  of  David  before  God
and  his  prophet  Nathan :  "  Thou  art  the  man  "  (2  Sam.  xii.  7).  The  avenger  may
wait,  but  his  time  will  come.  God  is  long-sufEering,'but  even  his  patience  may  be
exhausted.  — D.

Vers.  7 — 10. — Judgment.  I.  A  silent  wrath.  Feeling  may  be  too  deep  for
utterance.  The  king  s  silence  was  ominous.  He  could  not  speak  for  the  moment  in
answer  to  Esther's  charge,  but  neither  could  he  sit  still ;  and  when  he  rose  and  went
out  Haman  felt  that  the  king  had  abandoned  him.  Whenever  God  tUms  from  an  evil-
doer, and  ceases  to  speak  to  him,  the  end  is  not  far  off.  It  is  a  solemn  thought  that
God  may  thus  withdraw  his  mercy,  and  leave  a  sinner  to  himself.     That  is  fatal.

II.  A  VAIN  FRAYEB.  In  the  absence  of  the  king  Haman  besought  his  life  at  the
hands  of  Esther.  But  the  queen  was  now  powerless.  She  could  render  no  help  to
the  intended  destroyer  of  her  race.  In  presence  of  the  Judge  prayer  will  be  too  late.
Vainly  shall  the  impenitent  cry  to  the  mountains  and  rocks  to  fall  on  them  and  hide
them  from  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  (Rev.  vi.  15 — 17).

III.  A  SIGN  OF  Doou.  On  his  return  from  the  garden  the  king  saw  Haman  at  the
feet  of  Esther  in  an  agony  of  imploration.  He  uttered  a  harsh  word  at  the  sight,
and  perhaps  gave  a  signal,  whereupon  his  attendants  "  covered  Haman's  face."  A
sign  of  death  I  Judgment  had  been  pronounced,  and  the  great  man  had  fallen.  In
a  moment  the  brilliant  fabric  which  wickedness  had  reared  crumbled  into  the  dust.
How  many  are  thus  startled  by  the  signs  of  approaching  death  I  How  many  will  be
similarly  overtaken  in  "  the  day  of  the  Son  of  man  1 "

IV.  A  PITILESS  SUGGESTION.  Harbonah's  name  is  memorable  and  blessed  among
the  Jews ;  but  his  words  seem  servile  and  heartless.  He  and  his  companions  had
probably  fawned  on  the  favourite  whilst  he  was  in  power  ;  but  now,  in  ms  eagerness
to  please  the  wratlif  iil  king,  he  suggests  the  infliction  of  a  special  ignominy.  No
confidence  can  be  placed  in  the  sycophants  of  the  great.  When  the  wicked  fall  their
friends  turn  into  enemies.  The  same  motives  that  make  men  flatter  them  in  pros-
perity make  men  iniult  them  in  adversity.    Nor  will  the  impenitent  derive  any


138  THE  COOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  tii   t—IO-

advantage  before  the  tribunal  of  God  from  the  things  or  beings  in  which  they  trusted
on  earth.  All  refuges  will  then  fail  them.  Their  boasted  defences  will  prove  a
mockery.

V.  An  appropriate  end.  When  Harbonah  spoke  of  the  gallows  in  Haman's  house,
the  king  said,  "  Hang  hitn  on  it."  And  so  Haman  was  hanged  on  the  very  gibbet
which  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai.  A  most  fit  yet  terrible  retribution  I  The
would-be  murderer  was  "hoist  with  his  own  petard."  Evil  contrived  against  the
innocent  recoils  with  deadly  force  on  the  contriver.  The  person  who  maliciously
injures  receives  more  harm  than  the  person  on  whom  he  inflicts  injury.  The  wicked
themselves  fall  into  the  pit  which  they  dig  for  the  righteous  (Ps.  vii.  15,  16).

VI.  An  appeased  wrath.  The  execution  of  Haman  gave  quiet  to  the  king's
mind.  Justice  had  been  done,  and  the  way  opened  up  for  a  great  deliverance.  The
mediation  of  the  queen  had  been  effective.  The  enemy  of  Israel  had  been  destroyed.
We  have  little  sympathy  with  the  king  in  ooimection  with  the  death  of  Haman  ;  yet
his  action  serves  to  remind  us  of  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God.  The  Bible  tells  us
of  a  Divine  wrath  against  sin,  and  of  the  way  in  which  that  wrath  satisfied  itself.
Justice  was  appeased  and  sin  was  punished  and  slain  in  the  sacrifice  of  God's  Son.
On  the  cross  justice  and  mercy  meet  in  amity.  "  He  who  knew  no  sin  was  made  sin
for  us  "  (2  Cor.  v.  21).  "  Christ  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust "  (1  Pet.
iii.  18).  And  now  the  salvation  of  a  doomed  race  is  heralded  by  the  gospel  through-
out the  earth  (Isa.  Iv.  1 ;  Matt.  xi.  28,  30  ;  John  iii.  14— 18).— D.

Vers.  1 — 7. — A  crisis,  a  plea,  and  a  deliverance.  We  have  here — 1.  A  most  serious
crisis.  "So  the  king  and  Haman  came  to  banquet  with  Esther  the  queen"  (ver.  1).
The  culminating  point  in  this  great  issue  is  now  reached.  The  lives  of  the  chosen
people  of  God  throughout  all  Persia,  in  all  her  provinces,  hang  on  this  interview  be-
tween an  arbitrary  sovereign,  his  wife,  and  his  minister.  Except  the  wife  shall  pre-
vail over  the  crafty  and  all-powerful  statesman,  the  race  must  die  by  one  cruel  blow.
2.  A  powerful  plea.  At  the  king's  invitation  (ver.  2)  the  queen  makes  her  appeal
in  simple  but  forcible  language.  She  appealed  (1)  to  his  affection  for  herself :  "  Let
my  life  be  given  me  at  my  petition,  and  my  people  at  my  request "  (ver.  3)  ;  (2)  to
his  pity  for  a  suffering  people :  "  We  are  sold,"  and  sold  not  even  to  bitter  bondage,
but  "  to  be  destroyed,  to  be  slain,  and  to  perish  "  (ver.  4)  ;  (3)  to  his  sense  of  what
was  politic  :  the  loss  of  so  many  subjects  would  be  greatly  to  "  the  king's  damage  "
(ver.  4).  3.  A  great  deliverance  (vers.  5,  6).  Having  readily  consented  to  the
slaughter  of  thousands  of  his  subjects,  the  king  with  equal  readiness  consents  to
their  lives  being  spared.  He  appears  to  have  been  shocked  at  the  idea  of  what  was
contemplated  ;  but  he  had  not  reckoned  on  the  sanguinary  decree  including  his  own
wife  in  its  evil  range.     We  learn —

I.  The  mysteeiousness  of  God's  government.  Why  the  Divine  Ruler  should
allow  his  Church  to  come  into  such  terrible  danger,  barely  escaping  from  utter  de-
struction ;  why  he  should  sometimes  permit  such  fearful  atrocities  to  be  inflicted,  not
interposing,  as  here,  to  save  them,  but  allowing  the  beheadings,  burnings,  burials
alive,  imprisonments,  &c.  on  which  so  many  skies  have  looked  down  in  different  cen-
turies ;  why  he  should  allow  a  Haman  of  ancient  times,  or  an  Alva  or  Claverhouse
of  more  recent  times,  to  wreak  such  cruelties  on  the  people  of  God,  and  why  he  should
choose  such  instruments  to  avert  and  overthrow  as  one  woman's  beauty — ^this  we
cannot  tell.  God  does  and  suffers  many  things  which  we  do  not  understand.  He
declines  to  interpose  when  we  should  have  confidently  expected  his  aid.  The  truth
is  that  he  is  too  high  and  too  great,  and  we  are  too  low  and  too  small  to  understand
him.  "  His  way  is  in  the  sea,  his  path  in  the  great  waters,  and  his  footsteps  are  not
known."  "  His  ways  are  past  finding  out."  We  are  but  very  little  children  before
him,  and  must  wait  awhile ;  we  shall  understand  hereafter  what  we  know  not  now
(John  xiii.  7).

II.  The  good  work  that  onb  weak  voice  mat  do.  Little  did  Esther  think,  when
she  was  first  acc^ted  as  queen,  that  she  would  do  a  good  work  for  her  race  which
■hould  never  be  lorgotten.  But  the  hour  came  for  her  to  make  a  great  attempt ;  she
made  it,  and  succeeded.  Her  success  was  due  to  her  courage  and  her  charms  and  her
address.     Bat  these  were  the  outcome  of  a  life  of  virtue  and  piety.     By  the  exercise


CH.  VII.  1—10.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  IM

of  these  she  had  "  bought  up  the  opportunity  "  (redeemed  the  time),  and  "  when  A«
occaBion  came  she  was  equal  to  the  occasion."  Wisely  use  the  present,  and  whe»
the  hour  of  opportunity  comes  you  will  be  ready  to  speak,  to  strike,  to  suffer,  or  to
save.

III.  The  UNENVIABLENESa  OF  BANK  AND  POWEK  WITHOUT  WISDOM.      Judging  from

the  notion  of  mere  worldliness,  we  should  say  that  Ahasuerus  occupied  the  most
enviable  position  in  Persia.  As  king  of  that  great  empire,  he  held  in  his  hand  all
that  men  usually  desire.  But  judging  from  a  distance,  impartially,  and  in  the  light
of  God's  truth,  how  little  should  we  care  to  be  such  as  he  was.  How  unlovely  the
haste  and  passion  of  the  man.  Hungrily  seizing  the  opportunity  of  reimbursing  his
treasury,  he  makes  a  decree  which  would  have  the  effect  of  slaughtering  a  race,
of  ultimately  weakening  his  resources,  and  of  taking  the  life  of  his  own  queen.
Happily,  but  accidentally,  in  the  right  mood  when  the  chance  is  given  him  of  retriev-
ing his  error,  he  turns  with  characteristic  passion  and  precipitifticy  on  his  favourite
minister,  and  wreaks  vengeance  on  his  head.  Moral  littleness  in  high  places  is  very
pitiable.

IV.  The  unsospected  range  of  oub  actions  in  theib  effects.  How  amazed
was  Ahasuerus  to  find  that  in  striking  at  the  Jews  he  was  aiming  a  blow  at  his  own
wife,  and  so  at  himself.  All  our  actions,  good  and  bad,  stretch  further  and  come
closer  home  than  we  realise  at  the  time  when  we  do  them. — 0.

Vers.  8 — 10;  viii.  1,  2. — Seversals.  Human  life  is  well  likened  to  the  river
which  glides  smoothly  and  evenly  along  from  the  spring  where  it  rises  to  the  sea
into  which  it  falls.  But  it  is  also  well  compared  to  the  wheel  which  takes  to  the
bottom  that  which  was  at  the  top,  and  to  the  top  that  which  was  at  the  bottom.
There  is  much  of  orderly  and  regular  procedure ;  there  is  much  also  of  change  and
reversal.  Seldom,  indeed,  does  human  life  present  before  our  eyes  the  picture  of  so
signal  and  complete  a  reversal  as  that  told  in  the  text.  Haman,  the  favourite,  the
prime  minister  of  state,  the  all-powerful  courtier,  the  wealthy  and  strong  noble,
hanged  on  the  gallows ;  Mordecai,  the  despised  Jew,  whose  life  was  seriously  threat-
ened, and  likely  to  end  most  ignominiously,  promoted  to  highest  favour  and  greatest
influence  with  the  king.  These  reversals  were  not  mere  accidents ;  they  illustrate
the  truths —

I.  That,  sooneb  ob  later,  successful  sin  will  be  , overthrown  (vers.  9,  10).
We  all  "  see  the  prosperity  of  the  wicked,"  as  the  Psalmist  did,  and,  like  him,  we  are
grieved  and  troubled  by  it.  But  we  must  be  like  the  patient  patriarch,  and  wait  to
see  "the  end  of  the  Lord."  If  we  wait  long  enough  we  shall  find  that  sin  meets
with  its  due  award.  The  guilty  empire  founded  in  usurpation  and  bloodshed,  and
maintained  by  violence  and  corruption,  goes  down  and  goes  out  in  ignominy  and
disaster.  The  guilty  adventurer  rears  his  head  for  many  years,  but  misfortune  and
misery  overtake  him  in  time.     Haman  goes  to  the  gallows  at  last.

"  The  mills  of  God  grind  slowly,  but  they  grind  exceeding  small ;
With  patience  he  stands  waiting,  but  with  exactness  grinds  he  alL "

The  truth  is,  that  sin  carries  in  itself  the  seeds  of  its  own  discomfiture  ;  these  must
germinate,  and  grow,  and  bear  fruit  in  time.  "  I  have  seen  the  wicked  in  great
power,"  &o. ;  but  wait  awhile,  and  "lo,  he  is  not:  he  has  passed  away"  (Ps.
xxxvii.  35).

II.  That,  sooneb  ob  lateb,  pebsecdted  righteohsness  will  triumph  (ch.  viii.  1, 2).
Haman  has  gone  to  the  gallows,  and  now  Mordecai  takes  the  chief  chair  of  state.
Honesty  proves  the  true  policy  in  the  end.  Purity,  uprightness,  integrity,  kindness
-  -these  have  in  them  the  power  and  prophecy  of  ultimate  success.  Let  the  godly
man  who  is  oppressed  by  iniquity  bear  his  burden,  and  also  his  testimony ;  let  him
patiently  pursue  his  course,  looking  up  and  looking  on,  and  somewhere  in  the  future
the  crown  of  a  pure  success  awaits  hira — if  not  here,  hereafter.  "  Weeping  may
endure  for  a  night" — possibly  a  lohg  night — but  "joy  comes  in  the  morning."  It
may  be  the  morrow  of  the  distant  future,  but  it  will  then  be  the  beginning  of  a
cloudless  and  endless  day.

III.  Th4T  sin  continuallt  buffers  from  its  own  hand.    "They  hanged  Haman


140


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[oh.  VIII.  1—17


on  the  gallows  that  he  had  prepared  for  Mordecai "  (ver.  10).  Into  the  very  trap  he
laid  for  another  his  own  foot  falls.  We  learn — 1.  Thai  tin  frequemtly  brings  on  itself
t/ie  very  evil  it  designed  for  others.  A  man  hent  on  ruining  another  (by  legal
measures,  or  unfair  under-selling,  &c.)  often  impoverishes  himselE.  A  man  in  his
wrath  goes  out  to  slay,  and  is  himself  the  slain  one.  The  accuser  of  others  is  con-
demned by  others,  and  suffers  general  reprobation.  2.  That  sin  invariably  suffers  as
the  consequence  of  the  evil  which  it  does.  If  it  does  not  endure  the  very  evil  it
designs,  it  does  bear  its  penalty.  No  man  can  hurt  another  without  being  hurt
himself.  The  chief  victim,  the  principal  sufferer  from  sin,  is  the  sinner.  Every
act  of  evil,  every  thought  of  sin,  inflicts  a  damaging  wound,  more  or  less  obvious,  in
the  breast  of  the  evil-doer,  in  the  heart  of  the  sinner.  Contrast  with  this  stem  truth
the  obverse —

IV.  That  goodness  always  blesses  the  agent  as  well  as  the  object.  It  is
not  mercy  only,  but  eVery  kind  of  work,  that  "  blesses  him  that  gives  and  him  that
takes."  "  Give,  and  it  shall  be  given  unto  you."  "  He  that  watereth  shall  himself
be  watered." — 0.


EXPOSITION.    §§  14, 15, 16.


CHAPTER  VIII.
Haman's  hottse  given  to  Esther,  and

THE  kino's  signet  MADE  OVEK  TO  MOKDBCAI

(ch.  viii.  1,  2).  Two  consequences  followed
vnmediately  on  Haman's  execution.  His
property  escheating  to  the  crown,  Ahasuerus
made  the  whole  of  it  over  to  Esther,  eitlier
simply  as  a  sign  of  favour,  or  in  compensation
of  the  alarm  and  suffering  which  Haman  had
caused  her.  Further,  Haman's  office  being
vacant,  and  Mordecai's  close  relationship  to
Esther  having  become  known  to  the  king,
he  transferred  to  Mordecai  the  confidence
which  he  had  been  wont  to  repose  in  Haman,
and  gave  him  the  custody  of  the  royal  signet.
Under  these  circumstances  Esther  placed
Mordecai  in  charge  of  the  house  which  had
been  Haman's,  as  »  snitable  abode  for  a
minister.

Ver.  1. — On  that  day  did  the  king  .  .  .
give  the  house  of  Haman.  When  a  criminal
was  executed,  everything  that  belonged  to
him  became  the  property  of  the  crown,  and
was  disposed  of  according  to  the  king's  plea-
sure. It  pleased  Ahasuerus  to  make  over  to
Esther  the  house  of  Haman,  with,  no  doubt,
all  its  contents,  attendants,  furniture,  and
treasure.  The  Jews'  enemy.  This  now  be-
comes Haman's  ordinary  designation  (see  ch.
ix.  10,  24).  Traditional  practices  have  in
many  places  kept  up  his  memory  as  one  of
the  most  hated  adversaries  of  the  nation
(see  Stanley,  'Lectures  on  the  Jewish  Church,'
Third  Series,  pp.  177,  178).  And  Mordecai
came  before  the  king.  Mordecai  became  a
high  official — one  of  those  in  constant  at-
tendance on  the  king.  For  Esther  had  told
wluit  he  was  to  her.    /.  e.  had  revealed  his


relationship,  had  told  that  he  was  her  cousin.
Mordecai  having  been  recognised  asa  "king's
benefactor"  (ch.  vi.  3—11),  and  Esther  hav-
ing been  forced  to  confess  herself  a  Jewess
in  order  to  save  her  nation  (ch.  vil  3,  4),
there  was  no  object  in  any  further  conceal-
ment.

Ver.  2. — And  the  king  took  off  his  ring.
The  king's  signet  would,  as  a  matter  of
course,  be  taken  from  Haman  before  his
execution  and  restored  to  Ahasuerus,  who
now  once  more  wore  it  himself.  Business,
however,  was  irksome  to  him,  and,  having
resolved  to  make  Mordecai  minister  in
Haman's  room,  he  very  soon  took  the  signet
off  again,  and  made  it  over  to  the  new  vizier.
And  Esther  set  Mordecai  over  the  house  of
Haman.  It  would  not  have  been  seemly
for  Esther  to  give  away  what  she  had  received
as  a  gift  from  the  king.  She  was  therefore
unable  to  make  Mordecai  a  present  of  the
house.  But  she  did  what  was  equivalent —
she  set  him  over  it,  made  him  practically
its  master.  Thus  he  was  provided  with  a
residence  suitable  to  his  new  dignity.

At  Esther's  request  Ahasuerus  allows
the  issue  of  a  second  edict,  permitting
THE    Jews  to  resist   ant  who  should

ATTACK  THEM,  TO  KILL  THEM  IN  THEIR  OWN
DEFENCE,  AND  TO  TAKE  POSSESSION  OF  THEIR

GOODS  (ch.  viii.  3 — 14).  The  execution  oi
Haman,  the  confiscation  of  his  property,  the
advancement  of  Mordecai  into  his  place,
though  of  favourable  omen,  as  showing  the
present  temper  and  inclination  of  Ahasuerus,
left  the  Jews  in  as  great  danger  as  before.
In  most  countries  there  would  neither  have
been  delay  nor  difficulty.  The  edict  which
went  forth  on  the  13th  of  Njan  (ch.  iii.  12),
•nd  which  could  not  be  executed  till  the  13th


CH.  TUI.  1—17.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER


141


of  Adar,  would  have  been  cancelled,  revoked,
recalled.  But  in  Persia  this  could  not  be
done ;  or  at  any  rate  it  could  not  be  done
without  breaking  one  of  the  first  principles
of  Persian  law,  the  principle  that  "the
writing  which  is  written  in  the  king's  name,
and  sealed  with  the  king's  ring,  may  no
man  reverse  "  (ver.  8).  It  was  therefore  ne-
cessary to  devise  a  mode  whereby  the  desired
escape  of  the  Jews  might  practically  be  ob-
tained, and  yet  the  edict  remain  unrevoked,
and  the  king's  honour  be  saved.  At  first
Mordecai  and  Esther  do  not  appear  to  have
seen  this,  and  Esther  asked  openly  for  the
reversal  of  the  decree,  only  representing  it
as  the  writing  of  Haman,  and  not  the  writing
of  the  king  (ver.  6).  But  Ahasuerus  pointed
out  that  this  could  not  be  done.  Anything
short  of  a  reversal,  any  new  decree,  he  would
sanction ;  but  he  could  do  no  more — ^he  could
not  revoke  his  own  word  (ver.  8).  The
course  actually  followed  was  then  devised,
probably  by  Mordecai.  The  old  decree  was
allowed  to  stand ;  but  a  new  decree  was
issued  and  signed  in  the  usual  way,  whereby
the  Jews  were  allowed  and  encouraged  to
resist  those  who  should  attack  them, — ^to
"gather  themselves  together,  and  to  stand
for  their  life  ;  to  destroy,  slay,  and  cause  to
perish  all  the  power  of  the  people  of  the
province  that  would  assault  them," — and
were  further  permitted  to  "take  the  spoil  of
them  for  a  prey,"  or,  in  other  words,  to  seize
the  property  of  all  whom  they  should  slay
(ver.  11).  The  royal  posts  carried  out  this
decree  (ver.  14),  as  they  had  the  former  one  ;
and  it  was  publicly  set  forth  and  proclaimed
in  every  province,  that  if  the  Jews  were
attacked  under  the  terms  of  the  one,  they
might  defend  themselves  and  retaliate  on
their  foes  under  the  terms  of  the  other  (ver.
13).  As  the  second  decree  was  issued  on  the
23rd  of  Sivan,  the  third  month  (ver.  9),  and
the  day  appointed  for  the  attack  was  the
13th  of  Adar,  the  twelfth,  there  was  ample
time — above  eight  months — for  the  Jews  to
make  preparations,  to  organise  themselves,
to  collect  arms,  and  to  arrange  an  effective
resistance.

Ver.  3. — Esther  spake  yet  again  before
the  king.  It  might  have  seemed  to  be  the
business  of  Mordecai,  as  the  king's  chief
minister,  to  advise  him  in  a  matter  of  public
l^licy  and  one  in  which  the  interests  of  so


many  of  his  su ejects  were  vitally  concerned.
But  the  new  mmister  did  not  perhaps  feel
sure  of  his  influence,  or  quite  know  what  to
recommend.  Esther  was  therefore  again  put
forward  to  address  the  king.  Fell  down  at
his  feet.  Compare  1  Sam.  xxv.  24 ;  2  Kings
iv.  37,  &c.  And  besought  him  ...  to  put
away  the  mischief  of  Haman.  /  e.  begged
him,  first  of  all,  in  a  vague  way,  to  "cause
to  pass  " — -put  away,  or  undo — the  mischie/
of  Haman — ^not  suggesting  how  it  was  to  be
done.

Ver.  4. — Then  the  king  held  out  the
golden  sceptre.  Either  Esther  had  again
intruded  on  the  king  uninvited,  or  there  was
a  double  use  of  the  golden  sceptre.  1.  In
the  pardon  of  those  who  so  intruded ;  and,
2.  In  the  ordinary  granting  of  requests.  Ii
was  perhaps  held  out  on  this  occasion  sim-
ply to  express  a  readiness  to  do  as  Esthei
desired.

Ver.  5. — If  it  please  the  king,  &c.  The
long  preface  of  four  clauses,  winding  up  with
"  If  /  be  pleasing,"  is  indicative  of  Esther's
doubt  how  the  king  will  receive  her  sug-
gestion that  it  should  be  written  to  reverse
the  letters  (comp.  oh.  iii.  13)  devised  by
Haman.  To  ask  tlie  king  to  unsay  his  own
words  was  impossible.  By  representing  the
letters  as  devised  by  Haman,  and  written  by
Hainan,  Esther  avoids  doing  so.  But  she
thereby  blinks  the  truth.  In  excuse  she
adds  the  striking  distich  contained  in  the
next  verse — "  For  how  could  I  endure  to  see
the  evil  that  is  coming  on  my  people  ?  oi
how  could  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  o(
my  kindred  ? "

Vers,  7,  8. — Then  the  king  .  .  .  said
unto  Esther  the  queen  and  unto  Mordecai.
The  king,  it  would  seem,  took  time  to  give
his  answer  ;  and  when  he  gave  it,  addressed
himself  to  Mordecai,  his  minister,  rather
than  to  Esther,  his  wife.  "  See  now,"  ho
said,  "I  have  done  what  I  could — I  have
given  Esther  Haman's  house  ;  I  have  had
Haman  himself  executed  because  he  put
forth  his  hand  against  the  Jews.  What  yet
remains  ?  I  am  asked  to  save  your  country-
men by  revoking  my  late  edict.  That  may
not  be.  The  writing  which  is  written  in
the  king's  name,  and  sealed  with  the  king's
seal,  may  no  man  reverse.  But,  short  of
this,  1  give  you  full  liberty  of  action.  Write
ye  also  for  the  Jews,  as  it  liketh  you,  in  the
king's  name,  and  seal  it  with  the  king's
ring.  Surely  you  can  devise  something
which  will  save  your  people  without  calling
on  me  to  retract  my  own  words,  and  at  the
same  time  break  a  great  principle  of  Persian
law.''

Ver.  9. — Then  were  the  king's  scribea
called.  The  king  had  said  enough.  Mordecai
saw  a  means  of  reconciling  the  king's  scruple
with  the  safety— or  if  not  with  the  absolute


142


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHBB.


[CH.  VIH.  1 — 17


safety,  yet  with  the  escape  and  triumph — of
h  is  people.  The  Jews  should  be  allowed  to
stand  on  their  defence,  should  be  encouraged
to  do ,80,  when  the  time  came  should  be  sup-
ported in  their  resistance  by  the  whole  power
of  the  government  (ch.  ix.  3).  A  new  decree
must  issue  at  once  giving  the  requisite  per-
mission, and  copies  must  be  at  once  distri-
buted, that  there  might  be  no  mistake  or
misunderstanding.  So  the  "king's  scribes"
were  summoned  and  set  to  work.  In  the
third  month,  the  month  Sivan.  This  is
another  Babylonian  name.  The  month  was
sacred  to  the  moon-god,  Sin,  and  its  name
may  be  connected  with  his.  It  corresponded
with  the  latter  part  of  our  May  and  the
early  part  of  June.  To  the  lieutenants,  and
the  deputies  and  rulers.  Compare  ch.  iii.  12,
where  the  same  three  classes  of  rulers  are
mentioned.  An  hundred  twenty  and  seven.
See  the  comment  on  ch.  L  1.  And  to  the
Jews.  Copies  of  the  former  edict  had  not
been  sent  especially  to  the  Jews.  They  had
been  loft  to  learn  their  danger  indirectly
from  the  people  among  whom  they  dwelt ;
but  Mordecai  took  care  that  they  should  be
informed  directly  of  their  right  of  defence.

Ver.  10. — He  wrote  in  the  king's  name.
As  Haman  had  done  (ch.  iii.  12).  And  riders
on  mules,  camels,  and  young  dromedaries,
Tliere  is  no  "and"  before  "riders"  in  the
original,  and  the  clause  is  clearly  exegetical
of  the^  preceding.  Neither  "mules,"  nor
"camels,"  nor  "young  dromedaries"  are
mentioned  in  it,  and  the  best  translation
would  seem  to  be — "  the  riders  on  coursers  of
the  royal  stud,  the  offspring  of  thorough-
breds." It  is  noticeable  that  both  Herodotus
(viiL  98)  and  Xenophon  ('Cyrop.,'  viii.  6,  §
17)  speak  of  horses  as  alone  employed  in
carrying  the  Persian  despatches.

Ver.  11. — Wherein  the  king  granted.
Rather,  "  that  the  king  granted. "  Mordecai
sent  "letters,"  which  said  "that  the  king
granted  to  the  Jews  to  gather  themselves
together,"&c.  To  gather  themselves  together.
Union  ia  strength.  If  all  the  Jews  of  a
province  were  allowed  to  collect  and  band
themselves  together,  they  would  at  once  be
a  formidable  body.  Scattered  in  the  various
towns  and  villages,  they  might  easily  have
been  overpowered.  To  stand  for  tueir  life.
The  Jews  nave  sometimes  been  spoken  of  as
the  aggressors  on  the  actual  13th  of  Adar,
but  there  is  no  evidence  to  support  this
view.  The  edict  clearly  only  allowed  them
to  stand  on  the  defensive.  Of  course,  when
fighting  once  began,  both  sides  did  their
worst.  In  repelling  attack  the  Jews  had
the  same  liberty  to  destroy,  to  slay,  and  to
cause  to  perish  as  their  adversaries  (ch.  iii.
13).  little  ones.  Rather,  "families."  Take
the  spoil  of  them  for  a  prey.  t.  e.  "seize
their  property."    The  earlier  edict  had  given


the  same  permission  to  the  Jews'  enemiet
(ch.  iii.  13).

Ver.  13. — This  verse  reproduces  ver.  14  of
ch.  iii.,  with  a  slight  modification  of  the
last  clause.  It  is  probable  that  a  copy  of
the  decree  was  originally  inserted  at  the  end
of  the  verse.

Ver.  14. — The  posts  that  rode  upon  mules
and  camels.  Rather,  "that  rode  on  coursers
of  the  stud  royal  '  (see  the  comment  on  ver.
10).  The  verse  repeats  ch.  iiL  15,  with  small
additions.  It  appears  that  the  later  posts
were  urged  to  liaste  still  more  strongly  than
the  earlier  ones — not  that  time  really  pressed,
but  from  superabundant  caution — that  there
might  be  an  opportunity  for  further  com-
munications between  the  provinces  and  the
court,  if  doubt  was  anywhere  entertained  as
to  the  king's  intentions.

MOEDBOAl'S  HONOUK  AlfD  THE  JeWS'  JOT

(ch.  viiL  15 — 17).  Ahasuems  was  not  con-
tent even  now  with  what  he  had  done  for
Mordecai.  Before  his  minister  quitted  the
presence,  the  king  presented  him  with  a
crown  of  gold,  and  a  robe  and  vest  of  honour ;
and  thus  arrayed  he  proceeded  into  the  city
of  Susa,  where  the  new  edict  was  already
known,  and  had  been  received  with  satisfac-
tion (ver.  15).  The  Persians,  who  formed
the  predominant  element  in  the  population
of  the  town,  sympathised  with  the  Jews,  and
rejoiced  in  the  king's  favour  towards  them  ;
while  the  Jews  of  Susa,  having  passed  from
despair  to  oonfident  hope,  were  full  of  glad-
ness and  thankfulness.  In  the  provinces
the  decree  had  a  still  wanner  welcome.  Its
arrival  was  celebrated  with  "a  feast"  (ver.
17)  and  "  a  good  day."  It  led  also  to  many
of  the  heathen  becoming  proselytes  to  the
Jewish  religion — some  perhaps  from  convic-
tion, but  others  because  they  thought  it
safer  to  place  themselves  manifestly  on  the
Jews'  side  before  the  day  of  the  struggle.

Ver.  15. — Royal  apparel  of  bine  and  white-
The  Persian  monarch  himself  wore  a  purple
robe  and  an  inner  vest  of  purple  striped  with
white  ('Ancient  Monarchies,'  vol.  iv.  pp.
163, 154).  The  robes  of  honour  which  he  gave
away  were  of  many  different  colours,  but
generally  of  a  single  tint  throughout  (Xen.,
'  Cyrop.,'  viii.  3,  §  3) ;  but  the  one  given  to
Mordecai  seems  to  have  been  blue  with  white
stripes.  These  were  the  colours  of  the  rovaJ
diadem  (Q.  Curt.,  'Vit.  Alex.,'  iii  3).  A
great  crown  of  gold.  Kot  a  tall  crown,
like  that  of  the  monarch,  which  is  called  in
Hebrew  kether  (Greek  Kirapm),  but  'atdrd'h,
a  crown  of  an  inferior  kind,  frequently  worn


d&  viii. ;— i?.j


ttlE  BOOfe  Ot"  feSTHEti.


uii


by  noUes.  And  with  a  garment  of  fine
linen  and  purple.  The  "fine  linen"  was  of
course  white.  The  real  meaning  of  the  word
thakrik,  translated  "  garment,"  is  doubtful.
Gesenius  understands  an  outer  garment —
"the  long  and  flowing  robe  of  an  Oriental
monarch;"  in  which  case  the  "apparel"
previously  mentioned  must  be  the  inner  vest.
Others,  as  Patrick,  make  the  thakrik  to  be
the  inner,  and  the  "apparel"  (J,'M,sh)  the
outer  garment.  The  Septuagint,  however,
translates  thakrik  by  StaSriiia,  and  its  con-
junction with  the  "crown"  favours  this
rendering.  The  diadem  proper  of  a  Persian
monarch  was  a  band  or  fillet  encircling  the
lower  part  of  his  crown,  and  was  of  blue,
spotted  or  striped  with  white.  Ahasuerus
seems  to  have  allowed  Mordecai  to  wear  a
diadem  of  white  and  purple.  The  city  of
Shushan  rejoiced.  As  the  Susanchites  had
been  "perplexed"  at  the  first  edict  (ch.  iii.
15),  so  were  they  "  rejoiced  "  at  the  second.
Such  of  them  as  were  Persians  wonid  na-
turally sympathise  with  the  Jews.  Even
the  others  may  have  disliked  Haman's  edict.


and  have  been  glad  to  see  it,  praeticaily,
reversed.

Ver.  16. — The  Jews  had  light.  A  meta-
phor for  "happiness"  (comp.  Isa.  Iviii.  8).

Ver.  17. — A  feast  and  a  good  day.  The
provincial  Jews  made  the  whole  day  on
which  they  heard  the  news  into  a  holiday,
and  not  only  rejoiced,  but  feasted.  Many  of
the  people  of  the  land  became  Jews.  Ap-
plied for  and  obtained  admission  into  the
Jewish  nation  as  full  proselytes  (comp.  Ezra
vL  21,  with  the  comment).  The  fear  of  the
Jews  fell  upon  them.  There  was  about  to
be  in  each  great  city  where  tnere  were  Jews
a  day  of  struggle  and  bloodshed.  The  Jews
would  have  authority  on  their  side  (ch.  ix.
3),  and  might  be  expected  to  be  victorious.
Persons  feared  lest,  when  victorious,  they
might  revenge  themselves  on  all  who  had
not  taken  their  part,  and  thought  it  safer  to
become  Jews  than  remain  neutral.  But  it
can  only  have  been  a  small  minority  of  the
population  in  each  city  that  took  this  view.
There  was  no  sudden  great  increase  in  the
numbers  of  the  Jewish  nation.


HOMILETICa

Vers.  1,  2. — The  lowly  eoealted.    In  the  East,  where  monarchs  are  absolute,  and

where  king's  favourites  are  ministers  of  state,  changes  of  fortune  are  familiar  and  pro-
verbial. When  one  of  our  statesmen  quits  oiSce  he  usually  does  so  in  an  honourable
way,  and  loses  little  of  consideration  by  the  change.  But  a  vizier  when  deposed  ia
disgraced,  his  property  is  often  forfeited,  and  he  himself  is  often  put  to  a  violent
death.  So  was  it  with  Haman.  When  the  king's  wrath  turned  against  him  he  was
slain,  and  his  palace  and  establishment  given  to  the  queen,  and  his  ofSce  and  authority
to  Mordecai.

I.  In  God's  providence  the  righteous  and  lowly  aee,  even  in  this  woeld,
OFTEN  EXALTED  TO  HONOUR.  "  The  Lord  bringeth  low,  and  lifteth  up.  He  raiseth
np  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and  lifteth  up  the  beggar  from  the  dung-hill,  to  set  them
among  princes,  and  to  make  them  inherit  the  throne  of  glory."  History  records
many  striking  instances  of  the  elevation  to  high  positions  in  Church  and  State  of
those  born  in  poverty,  but  qualified  by  natural  gifts,  by  high  character,  by  faithful
service,  for  exalted  station.  It  is  a  Divine  law,  and  no  artificial  regulations  should
interfere  with  its  working.  In  Scripture  we  often  meet  with  instances  of  the  younger,
the  weaker,  the  despised  being  raised  to  honour  and  "power.

II.  Under  God's  righteous  government  the  lowly  and  faithful  on  earth

SHALL  BE  raised  TO  HONOUR  AND  HIGH  SERVICE  HEREAFTER.      If  it  be  asked  why  SO

many  pure  and  gentle  characters  are  allowed  by  Providence  to  remain  through  life
in  positions  of  obscurity,  the  true  answer  is  this :  They  are  training  for  positions  of
authority  and  honour  in  the  future  life.  Those  who  here  are  faithful  over  a  few
things  shall  there  be  made  rulers  over  many  things,  shall  enter  into  the  joy  of  their
Lord.  There  are  mansions  for  them  there  to  inhabit ;  there  is  authority  for  them
there  to  exercise ;  there  is  favour  for  them  there  consciously  and  eternally  to  enjoy.

Ver.  3. — Putting  away  mischief.  There  was  great  wisdom  in  Esther's  application
to  the  king.  In  appearing  before  him  unbidden  she  did  so,  as  before,  at  the  risk  of
her  life.  But  her  confidence  in  the  power  of  her  charms  over  the  king  was  not  un-
warranted. She  was  too  prudent  to  ask  Ahasuerus  to  revoke  his  own  decree  for  the
destruction  of  the  Jews.  She  treated  it  as  the  decree  of  the  wicked  Haman,  and
implored  him  to  "  put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman,  and  the  device  tiiat  he  bad  devised


144  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [en.  viii.  1—17.

against  the  Jewa."  This  expression,  "putting  away  mischief,"  is  striking  and
■uggestive.

I.  There  is  some  mischief  ■which,  once  done,  cannot  be  undone.  Set  a  hug«
stone  rolling  down  a  mountain's  side,  and  you  cannot  stop  its  descent  until  it  reach
the  lake  below  the  precipice.  Open  the  sluice,  or  make  a  breach  in  the  dyke,  and  you
cannot  keep  out  the  flood  of  waters.  So  if  in  anger  you  slay  a  man,  if  in  lust  you
ruin  a  woman,  if  in  wanton  wickedness  you  corrupt  and  mislead  a  child,  the  evil  ia
largely  irretrievable.  A  bad  book,  once  issued,  does  its  deadly  work ;  a  false  report,
once  spread,  creates  misery  and  distress.

II.  ThEBB  ABE  CASES  IN  WHICH  MISCHIEF  MAY,  TO  A  CERTAIN  EXTENT,  BE  PUT  AWAY.

A  misstatement  may  be  corrected ;  a  calumny  may  be  retracted  ;  an  alarm  may  bo
contradicted.  Eestitution  may  be  made  for  theft ;  reparation  for  injury.  Govern-
ments which  have  done  harm  by  unjust  and  unwise  enactments  may  undo  sometjiing
of  the  harm  by  repealing  bad  laws,  and  replacing  them  by  laws  that  are  righteous.
Amendment  and  reversal  are  permissible,  and  are  indeed  morally  obligatory,  where  evil
has  been  wrought  or  intended.

III.  The  WISDOM  of  God  has  devised  a  way  fob  putting  away  the  mischief  of
81N  IN  THE  WORLD.  A  God  who  18  just,  and  the  Justifierof  the  ungodly  who  repents
and  believes  in  Jesus,  is  a  Being  who  demands  our  grateful  and  lowly  adoration.  In
Christ  Jesus  he  "  reconciles  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  trespasses
unto  them."

Practical  lessons : — 1.  The  consideration  of  the  difficulty  there  is  in  undoing  mischief
should  make  us  cautious,  and  watchful,  and  prayerful  that  no  evil  in  society  may
originate  in  us.  2.  Yet  this  difBculty  should  not  deter  us  from  making  strenuous
efEort  to  repair  mischief  when  mischief  has  been  done.  Esther  and  Mordecai  were,
with  God's  blessing,  successful  in  their  efforts,  partially  at  all  events,  to  undo  Haman'g
mischief.  Let  their  example  stimulate  and  encourage  us  in  every  benevolent  task
and  undertaking.

Ver.  6. — Patriotism.  Esther's  life  was  now  safe,  and  probably  her  cousin's  too.
But  that  was  not  enough.  Her  nation  was  still  in  danger.  The  royal  decree  had
delivered  the  Jews  througiiout  the  empire  into  the  hands  of  their  enemies.  In  a  few
months,  unless  measures  were  meantime  taken  to  check  and  hinder  the  malice  of  their
foes,  thousands  of  Israelites  might  be  exposed  to  violence,  pillage,  and  massacre.
The  thought  was  to  Esther  cruel  beyond  bearing.  "  How,"  said  she,  "  can  I  endure
to  see  the  evil  that  shall  come  unto  my  people,  the  destruction  of  my  kindred  ?  "
This  was  patriotism  indeed.

I.  Patbiotism  implies  a  sentiment  op  sympathy.  Esther  felt  for  her  people,  her
kindred.  Every  lover  of  his  country  will  not  only  rejoice  in  its  prosperity,  cherish  a
glow  of  pride  and  satisfaction  in  any  great  deeds  of  his  countrj-men,  but  will  grieve
over  national  calamities  and  mourn  over  national  sins  ;  will  "  sigh  and  cry  for  the
abominations  that  are  done  in  the  land."

II.  Patriotism  deters  men  from  doing  anything  that  can  injure  thkir  country.
If  personal  advantage  can  be  secured  by  any  harm  to  his  country,  the  patriot  will
spurn  the  thought  of  so  profiting  himself  at  the  expense  of  the  nation.  As  a  citizen,
whose  life  must  have  some  influence,  he  will  refrain  from  conduct  by  wliich  his
countrymen  might  suffer.

III.  True  patriotism  will  lead  men  to  seek  not  only  the  material  prosperity,
BUT  the  real  and  moral  greatness  of  their  common  countby.  They  cannot  con-
template uninterested,  unmoved,  a  state  of  society

"  Where  wealth  accumulates,  and  men  decay."

The  progress  of  knowledge,  of  virtue,  of  true  religion  amongst  their  kindred  will  be
Bought  with  ardour  and  zeal.

IV.  Patbiotism  will  lead  to  pbactical  effort  to  avoid  thbeateninq  dangers
The  patriot  is  unwilling  to  contemplate,  to  anticipate  evil.  But  mere  sentiment  ia
insufficient,  and  he  will  exert  himself  to  avert  the  evil  he  dreads.  Especially  will  he
ose  any  influence  he  possesses  with  those  who  have  the  means,  the  power,  the  oppor-
tunity of  assisting  t»  secui-e  the  safely  and  welfare  of  the  country.    The  example!


cH.  viH.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  14»

of  Ezra  and  of  Nehemiah,  among  the  children  of  the  captivity,  show  us  what  trm
patriotism  will  lead  men  to  undertake  and  do  and  bear.  But  the  supreme  examplCi
alike  of  patriotism  and  of  philanthropy,  is  to  be  beheld  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  wept
over  Jerusalem  as  well  as  over  the  world,  and  who  would  fain  have  averted  ruin  from
the  city  he  favoured  with  his  teaching  and  ministry,  and  in  which  he  shed  his  precioua
blood.

Vers.  7 — 14. — Sdf-defenee.  The  permission  of  Ahasuerus  appears  to  ns  singular
almost  to  madness.  Indeed,  it  could  only  have  been  such  a  character  as  we  know
Xerxes  to  have  been  that  could  have  coolly  contemplated  plunging  every  province
and  every  city  of  his  empire  into  the  horrors  of  civil  war.  However,  it  seemed  better
to  him  to  grant  permission  to  the  Jews  to  arm  and  to  defend  themselves  than  to
reverse  formally  the  decree  he  had  already  issued  for  their  destruction.  So  first  the
despot  commands  the  enemies  to  arm  against  the  Jews,  and  then  commands  the  Jews
to  arm  themselves  against  their  enemies.

I.  Self-defence  is,  within  limits,  a  natural  eight.  What  is  the  alternative  ?
In  the  case  of  an  individual  it  may  be  a  violent  death  ;  in  the  case  of  a  nation  it  may
be  either  subjection  or  annihilation.  Thus,  civilisation  may  be  replaced  by  barbarism,
and  Christianity  by  idolatry  or  fetishism.

II.  Self-defence  is  a  legal  bight.  Here  the  Jews  were  expressly  directed  to
defend  and  deliver  themselves  And  there  are  cases  where  the  law  justifies  the  put-
ting forth  of  force  in  defence  of  life  and  property,  and  he  who  smites  his  assailant  is
held  guiltless.     Great  defenders  of  their  country  are  enshrined  in  a  nation's  memory.

III.  Self-defence  is  sometimes  put  forward  as  a  hypocritical  pretence.  It
has  often  happened  that  an  aggressive,  ambitious  nation  has  endeavoured  to  persuade
itself,  to  impose  upon  its  neighbours,  to  believe  that  its  action  is  merely  defensive  in
mustering  armaments,  enlisting  warriors,  and  making  war.  All  the  while  designs  of
empire,  of  spoliation,  of  subjugation  may  be  before  the  nation''B  mind.

IV.  Self-defence  is  a  spiritual  law.  If  we  are  anxious  to  defend  ourselves,  our
property,  our  families  from  violence  and  theft,  how  anxious  should  we  be  to  secure
ourselves  against  the  assaults  of  the  devil.  Every  Church  should  be  a  confederation
for  common  protection  against  the  inroads  of  error  and  of  sin.

Ver.  16. — A  city's  joy.  It  is  observable  that  the  inhabitants  of  Susa  are  repre-
sented, in  more  than  one  place  in  this  book,  as  entering  into  the  circumstances  and
sharing  the  emotions  of  their  Hebrew  neighbours.  It  is  believed  by  eminent  scholars
that  the  educated  Persians  had  strong  sympathies  with  the  religious  beliefs  and
practices  of  the  Jews.  Thus  they  wept  with  them  in  their  fears  and  griefs ;  they
rejoiced  with  them  in  their  deliverance  and  happiness.

I.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  civic  life.  Not  only  an  individual,  but  a  city,
•  nation,  has  a  character,  a  unity,  a  life  of  its  own.  As  in  our  own  country
Manchester  and  Birmingham  have  a  distinctive  life,  as  in  France  Paris  has  a  remark-
able individuality,  as  in  the  middle  ages  the  Italian  cities  had  each  its  own  corporate,
intellectual,  and  social  individuality  ;  so  it  is  reasonable  to  look  for  the  evidences  of
such  civic  life  wherever  a  community  has  existed  for  several  generations,  and
traditions,  memories,  sympathies  have  grown  up  and  prevailed.

II.  Communities  are  capable  op  impulses  and  movements  distinctitb  of  them-
selves. When  London  turned  out  to  welcome  Garibaldi,  it  was  a  remarkable  instance
of  the  way  in  which  a  population  is  moved  as  with  the  stirring  of  one  mighty
impulse.  There  is  something  terribly  grand  in  the  spectacle  of  a  vast  city  moved
with  one  mighty  wave  of  emotion.  Such  a  wave  passed  over  London  upon  the  occa-
sion of  the  death  and  burial  of  the  great  Duke  of  Wellington.

III.  The  spontaneous  manifestation  of  a  popular  sentiment  in  a  city  has
BOUEtimes  great  moral  significance.  Indignation,  grief,  sympathy,  relief,  gladness,
may  all  find  a  voice  in  the  cry  that  rises  from  the  bosom  of  a  vast  population.  Often
the  popular  instinct  is  unmistakably  right.  Vox  popvli,  vox  Det.  So  in  the  case
before  us,  when  "  the  city  of  Shushan  rejoiced,  and  was  glad."

Vers.  16, 17. — A  nation's  rdief  and  gladneit.  God  often  interposed  on  behalf  of
his  chosen  people  the  Jews,  but  never  more  signally  than  on  this  occasion.  No  wonder

BSTHEB.  Ii


146  THE  BOOK  0?  feSTflEtl.  {pa.  vni.  1— it.


that  far  and  wide  throughout  the  Persian  empire  the  Israelites  put  forth  signs  of
galvation  and  of  rejoicing.

I.  Wht  the  Jews  rejoicbd.  1.  In  the  downfall  of  their  enemy.  Haman  was
hated  with  an  especial  hatred.  "  Cursed  be  Haman  1 "  was  their  cry,  when,  in  Purim,
they  celebrated  the  day  when  the  Lord  delivered  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  enemy.
2.  In  their  patronage  by  a  queen  of  their  own  blood  and  nation.  A  Jewess  upor,
the  throne  was  the  agent  in  bringing  to  the  Jews  security  and  prosperity.  3.  In  their
countryman  Mordecai  being  exalted  to  be  a  chief  minister  of  state.  This  happened
often  during  the  captivity.  Daniel  especially  is  an  instance  of  a  0  ew  exalted  to  high
rank  and  power  in  a  heathen  empire.  4.  In  the  favour  towards  them  of  the  great
king.  From  being  their  adversary  and  oppressor,  Ahasuerus  was  turned  to  be  their
friend.  5.  For  permission  to  defend  themselves.  If  the  decree  against  them  could
not  be  reversed,  it  was  matter  for  rejoicing  that  a  decree  of  the  same  authority
warranted  them  in  standing  upon  their  defence.  6.  In  their  consequent  delivery
frpm  the  fear  of  massacre.  "  All  that  a  man  hath  will  he  give  for  his  life."  And
now  life  was  secure ;  and  they  rejoiced  as  those  raised  from  the  brink  of  death._

II.  How  THE  Jews  kejoiced.  We  have  in  these  verses  a  bright  and  vivid  picture
of  the  gladness  that  diffused  itself  throughout  the  empire  on  the  occasion  of  the
deliverance.  1.  Light  and  gladness.  2.  Feasting  and  a  good  day.  3.  The  adhesion
of  many  to  their  religion  and  their  fellowship.  4.  The  sympathy  of  many  who
respected  and  esteemed  them,  their  character,  and  their  religion.

Ver.  17. — "A  good  day.''  This  expression  is  probably  figurative.  The  time  oi
relief,  and  thanksgiving,  and  confidence,  and  hope  is  viewed  as  a  day  having  a
character  of  its  own.  And  no  wonder  that,  so  viewed,  it  should  be  called  here  "  a
good  day."

I.  It  was  good  in  its  betrospeot.  A  day  of  evil  had  been  dreaded  and  looked
forward  to  with  justice,  and  it  had  been  converted  into  a  day  of  peace.  A  day  of
Divine  interposition  summoned  all  to  admire  the  unexpected  interposition  of  Divine
providence  which  had  taken  place.

II.  It  was  good  in  its  realisation.  It  was  a  good  day  for  the  rescued  and  saved,
for  the  agents  who  had  effected  the  deliverance,  for  the  people  among  whom  they
dwelt,  and  even  for  the  king,  whose  reign  and  reputation  were  saved  from  a  stain
both  black  and  bloody.  .

III.  It  was  good  in  its  anticipation.  Some  months  were  yet  to  elapse  before  all
danger  was  past.  Yet,  in  the  changed  prospect,  how  could  the^  Jews  do  other  than
give  thanks,  rejoice,  and  triumph  ?  Let  this  "  good  day  "  serve  to  us  as  an  emblem
of  the  day  of  Divine  visitation  and  human  privilege.  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time ;
now  is  the  day  of  talvation."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  6. — True  patriotism.  Esther  felt  that  her  work  was  not  yet  done.  An  over-
confident and  sanguine  disposition  might  have  taken  for  granted,  as  we  do  in  the  mere
retrospect,  that  all  else  which  was  requisite  would  follow  as  matter  of  course.  She  had
met  as  yet  no  rebuff,  had  suffered  no  failure.  Each  move,  well  considered  beforehand,
had  been  crowned  with  success,  surpassing  the  utmost  that  she  or  Mordecai  had  dared
to  imagine.  In  the  flush  of  personal  success,  and  of  joy  because  of  the  safety  and  great
promotion  of  Mordecai,  she  does  not  forget  the  larger  family  of  her  "  people  "  and
"kindred."  The  fearful  decree  is  not  reversed.  It  still  overhangs  the  heads  of
thousands  upon  thousands.  Esther  feels  that  her  mission  will  not  be  fulfilled  until
she  has  obtained  the  abrogation  of  the  decree,  and  secured  the  lives  of  her  people.
In  all  the  methods  she  had  employed  hitherto  a  remarkable  calmness  and  circum-
spection are  observable.  But  now  a  change  is  visible  in  favour  of  a  demonstrative-
ness  which  it  must  have  required  very  strong  effort  to  keep  up  to  this  time  in  such
restraint.  Esther  "  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  the  king,  and  besought  him  with  te<irs  to
put  away  the  mischief  of  Haman,  and  his  device  that  he  had  devised  against  the
Jews  "  (ver.  3).  This  change  is  interesting  to  observe,  as  occurring  at  the  time
when  thought  and  affection  left  self  and  home  for  the  scattered  kindred  of  a  hundred


OH.  VIII.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  Ot  ESTHDS.  Ul

and  twenty -seven  provinces.  This  verse  is  the  irrepressible  outcry  of  true  patriotism.
It  is  the  expostulation  o£  vivid  and  tender  sympathy.  It  is  the  argument  of  a
foroible  principle  of  our  nature,  which  oversteps  the  boundaries  of  the  personal  and
the  domestic  in  order  to  travel  much  farther,  and  to  embrace  the  national.  It
mounts  by  the  stepping-stones  of  self-love  and  sacred  family  love  to  the  love  of
vast  numbers  of  those  never  seen  nor  personally  known,  yet  in  some  special  sense
related.  The  passage  suggests,  by  a  leading  illustration,  the  general  subject  of
patriotism  ;  and  we  may  notice —

I.  What  TBUB  PATRIOTISM  IS.  1.  It  is  evidently  an  original  and  ultimate  principle.
As  soon  as  ever  it  was  possible  it  showed  its  existence  The  fact  of  its  presence,  and
operative  presence,  has  been  visible  in  all  ages,  traceable  in  all  kinds  and  degrees  of
civilisation  —  among  the  barbarous,  and  among  the  most  advanced  and  elevated
nationalities.  2.  It  is  a  principle  of  a  high  moral  kind.  A  form  of  love  above  the
Bympathy  which  is  between  individual  and  individual,  above  that  which  lies  between
those  born  of  ihe  same  parents,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  falling  short  of  that  universal
love  of  man,  as  such,  which  is  one  of  the  very  highest  teachings  of  Christianity.  3.  It
is  a  somewhat  quickened  regard  for  those  united  to  us  by  community  of  race.  A
stronger  interest  in  their  welfare  and  advantage  is  marked  by  it,  while  divested  as
far  as  possible  of  any  conscious  reflex  action  or  benefit  to  self.  This  affection  was
no  doubt  exceedingly  strong  in  the  Jewish  race,  was  at  Esther's  time  greatly  intensi-
fied by  adversity  and  persecution  and  natural  causes,  but  owed  its  most  determined
hold  to  distinctly  Divine  purpose.

II.  Thb  use  of  patriotism  in  the  individual  character.  1.  It  must  be  enlarging
to  the  heart.  It  must  expand  the  affections  in  their  outlook,  which  then  seek  the  various
and  the  distant  instead  of  ever  keeping  at  home.  It  must  give  greater  and  freer
exercise  to  the  more  important  moral  elements  of  our  nature.  2.  It  must  operate  ever
as  a  distinct  corrective  to  some  portion  of  the  dangers  of  selfishness.  There  is  much
selfishness  in  our  self-love ;  there  is  often  not  a  little  even  in  the  family  and  domestic
circle ;  sympathies  may  run  round  indeed,  but  in  too  narrow  a  circle.  But  the  circle
is  immensely  widened  by  this  community  of  interest,  while  yet  kept  within  a
manageable  area.  3.  It  is  able  to  give  enough  natural  motive  to  the  awakening  of
moral  energies,  which  without  it  would  have  found  no  sufficient  appeal.  In  point
of  fact,  some  of  the  grandest  displays  of  human  force,  and  among  tiiem  that  of  the
present  history,  have  been  due  to  it.

III.  Its  usefulness  to  public  society.  There  will  be  a  vast  amount  of  this
necessarily  entailed  indirectly  and  unconsciously,  as  arising  from  the  previous  con-
siderations ;  but,  in  addition,  manifest  practical  use  on  a  large  scale  will  also  result.

1.  It  secures  the  prospect  of  bringing  together  to  one  point  a  great  aggregate  of
force  in  emergency.     It  is  like  public  opinion  in  action,  seasoned  by  genuine  affection.

2.  It  is  equal  also  to  the  converse  of  this,  spreading,  as  in  Esther's  example,  the
willing  benefit,  the  critical  advantage  of  opportunity,  of  one  loving,  praying  heart,
over  a  vast  area.  3.  Pervading  the  whole  mass  of  mankind,  it  so  divides  it  up  and
so  allots  it,  that  in  place  of  unwieldiness  a  well-knit-together  organisation  is  found.
Thus  it  offers  a  strong  and  very  traceable  analogy  to  the  body  with  its  members.

IV.  That  in  patriotism  we  have  another  evidence  op  Divine  design  in  the
BTRUCTDRE  OF  HUMAN  SOCIETY.  For — 1.  It  Cannot  possibly  be  attributed  to  mere
human  arrangement  or  compact.  2.  It  does  not  at  all  really  contravene  eithei  the
descent  of  all  from  one  head,  or  the  fact  tiiat  "  God  has  made  of  one  blood  all  nations
of  the  earth."  3.  Its  operation  is  not  malevolent,  setting  "nation  against  nation."
It  is  beneficent,  and  is  ever  growing  to  show  itself  more  and  more  so,  leading  up  to
mutual  service,  mutual  dependence,  and  mutual  love,  to  the  attainment  of  which  it
were  very  hard  to  see  any  other  way  so  compact,  so  sure. — B.

Vers.  15 — 17. — A  type  of  universal  joff.  Tliis  passage  tells  the  tale  of  great  joy.
The  question  of  the  prophet  Isaiah,  "  Shall  a  nation  be  born  at  once  ?  "  as'^ed  now
nearly  two  centuries  ago,  is  answered  in  an  unexpected  way,  and  in  something  superior
to  mere  literal  sense.  New  life  is  a  great  thing,  and  the  sensations  of  young  life  have
much  joy  in  them.  But  in  the  same  kind  of  sense  in  which  the  father  rejoiced  over
the  prodigal  son  on  his  return  with  livelier  and  more  demonstrative  joy  than  overthn

l8


148  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  viii.  1—17.


obedient  son  who  never  went  astray,  and  in  the  same  kind  of  sense  in  which  it  is  said
that  "  there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth  more  than  over  ninety  and
nine  just  persona  which  need  no  repentance,"  is  it  true  that  there  is  more  joy  in  life
rescued  from  the  doom  of  death  than  in  life  just  fresh,  though  it  be  fresh  from  the
Creator's  hand.  Yes,  there  is  more  joy  therein,  both  for  those  who  are  chiefly  con-
cerned, and  for  those  who  look  on.  And  was  it  not  thus  in  the  best  sense  that  a  nation
was  now  "born  at  once"  when  darkness,  exceeding  distress,  and  the  anguish  of
apparent  helplessness  all  dropped  off  in  a  moment,  and  "  the  Jews  had  light,  and  glad-
ness, and  joy,  and  honour,  .  .  .  and  a  feast  and  a  good  day  in  every  province,  and  in
every  city"?  Evidently  some  special  stress  is  laid  upon  the  description  of  the  gladness
of  the  Jews.  We  cannot  for  a  moment  wonder  at  their  gladness,  that  is  one  thing.
But  the  detailed  and  full  announcement  of  it  on  an  inspired  page  is  another  thing,
and  leads  us  to  expect  that  there  are  some  facts  about  it  which  should  invite  notice
and  will  reward  more  careful  thought.

I.  It  was  the  gladness  of  a  vast  ntjmbeb  op  feople.  A  great  philosopher  of
British  name  and  reputation  has  remarl^d  two  things,  and  very  truly,  on  this  subject.
First,  how  much  less  disposed,  comparatively  speaking,  men  are  to  sympathise  with
the  manifestations  of  joy  than  with  those  of  genuine  sorrow.  To  the  best  of  human
nature  it  is  easier  to  weep  -with  those  who  weep  than  to  laugh  with  those  who  laugh.
This  is  a  just  discernment,  and  gives  the  balance  of  goodness  to  the  intrinsic  quality  of
unfallen  human  nature,  where  it  may  get  a  possibility  of  betraying  its  native  worth.
Secondly,  that  this  is  especially  true  when  it  is  the  joy  of  an  individual  that  is
ostentatiously  paraded.  Here  the  case  is  the  opposite.  The  joy  is  the  joy  of  all  and
of  each.  Gratitude  and  thankfulness  were  the  spring  of  it,  and  there  was  no  need  to
moderate  either  itself  or  its  expression,  because  it  was  general  and  universal.  There
were  none  (at  all  events  none  entitled  to  consideration)  on  whom  it  would  jar,  or
whose  finer  susceptibilities  would  suffer.  On  the  contrary,  the  only  discordant
element  would  be  produced  by  him  who  made  himself  the  exception  or  offered
to  stand  aloof.  Note,  that  such  real  general  joy  is  a  very  rare  phenomenon  on
earth.

II.  It  was  the  gladness  of  evert  class  and  kind  of  the  people.  Old  mer
'"little  children  and  women"  (ch.  iii.  13),  young  men  and  maidens,  rich  and  poor
strong  and  weak,  all  these  could  participate  in  it.  Our  human  joys  are  often  spoilt,
are  often  much  diminished  to  the  best  of  persons,  by  the  inevitable  memory  of  those
who  are  without  what  gladdens  us.  Think  how  a  victorious  army  may  rejoice,  and
generals  and  leaders  be  glad ;  but  what  of  the  hundreds  of  families  of  every  class
over  the  kingdom  who  have  lost  husbands,  brothers,  sons  ?  Or  think  how  the  great
body  of  a  nation  may  rejoice  because  of  the  victories  of  its  armies  ;  but  at  what
havoc  of  untold  sorrow  and  misery  of  numberless  others  belonging  to  conquering
or  the  conquered.  Think  how  rare  is  the  occasion  of  any  national  joy  which  really
reaches  and  touches  the  heart  of  all  kinds  and  ages  of  the  people.

III.  It  was  a  gladness  which  had  several  elements  in  its  composition.  The
fourfold  analysis  of  it  cannot  be  condemned  for  mere  surplusage  of  language  as  it
lies  on  the  page  of  Scripture.  And  these  are  the  four  elements — "  light,"  "  gladness,"
deep  "  joy,"  "  honour."  Each  of  these  elements  is  a  good  one.  The  first  and
last  speak  for  themselves.  Let  us  interpret  the  second  as  the  gladness  of  the  young
hearts  and  of  manifestation,  and  the  third  as  the  deeper-sinking  joy  of  the  old,  and
those  who  felt  and  thought  more  than  they  showed  or  spoke.

IV.  It  was  the  gladness  of  a  reaction.  The  reaction  was  just.  It  would
have  argued  callousness,  an  insensate  heart  indeed,  if  it  were  not  felt,  and  very
powerfully  felt.  To  have  great  mercies  is  a  common  thing,  to  respond  to  them  far
too  uncommon.  The  contrast  of  "the  horrible  pit  and  the  miry  clay"  with  the
"  rock  and  the  established  going  "  of  the  pilgrim  is  one  which  should  waken  deepest
joy.     It  is  light,  joy,  honour  all  in  one.

V.  It  was  gladness  in  answer  to  a  deliverance  which  was  not  only  very

GREAT  AND  VERT  UNEXPECTED,  BUT  WHICH  WAS  THE  EEStTLT  OF  A  MABVELLOUS  INTER-
POSITION OF  Pbovidbnob,  wrought  by  one  feeble  woman,  and  prepared  for  by  a  most
extraordinary  series  of  precisely-adapted  events.  And  all  this  was  "  prepared  foi
God's  peopl«."    Through  much  tribulation,  indeed,  through  darkness,  cruel  oppres-


OH.  vui.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  1«

Rion,  patient  endurance  on  the  veiy  border  of  despair,  they  had  been  wonderfully
brought  out  to  the  light,  joy,  honour  of  that  time.

VI.  It  was  a  gladness  which  makes  ns  thine  of  anothes.  It  makes  ns  feel  for
another,  long  for  another.  That  was  of  a  nature  that  must  be  rare  in  occurrence,  nor
would  we  wish  it  other.  And,  after  all,  the  duration  of  it  could  only  be  temporary.
But  it  may  well  bear  our  thought  onward  and  upward.  The  gladness  of  the  people
of  God  in  heaven  will  fill  out  every  part  of  the  description  of  this  gladness.  It  will
fill  out  every  part  of  it  worthily.  There  all  will  be  glad.  There  all  varieties  of
purified  spirits  will  be  glad.  There  the  light  and  gladness  and  joy  and  honour  will
all  be  to  perfection.  How  glorious  the  reaction  that  will  then  be  felt  for  us,  with  the
doom,  and  the  law's  decree,  and  the  despair,  and  the  sorrow,  and  the  tear  all  and  for
ever  gone.  And  when  we  shall  all  admit  to  what  it  is  owing — to  the  most  marvellous
interposition  of  all ;  and  to  whom  it  is  owing — to  him  who  "  with  strong  groaning  and
tears"  pleaded  for  us  and  saved  us. — B.

Ver.  6. — Repairing  mischief.  "  Let  it  bo  written  to  reverse  the  letters  devised  by
Haman."

I.  What  a  legacy  of  evil  is  left  bt  the  wicked.  E.  g.  By  Voltaire,  Paine,
Napoleon  I.,  and  others.

II.  What  efforts  are  necessary  to  repair  Evil  once  weought.  It  is  so  much
easier  to  destroy  than  to  build  up.

III.  Great  evils  may  be  removed,  ob  at  least  overruled,  by  Providence.  If  thia
were  not  believed,  the  arm  of  the  Christian  would  be  paralysed.  We  have  to  beware
of  that  phase  of  belief  which  would  lead  to  the  postponement  of  spiritual  effort
because  Christ  is  to  come  again.  We  must  not  let  it  be  supposed  that  the  work  of
Christ,  the  word  of  God,  and  the  gift  of  the  Spirit  are  all  failures.  The  mischief
wrought  by  evil  is  to  be  repaired  by  Christ's  gospel  and  healed  by  his  love.  1.  What
are  we  doing  to  repair  the  mischief  others  have  wrought  ?  What  are  we  doing  to
undo  our  own  wrong-doing  ? — H.

Vers.  16,  17. — Brightened  life.  "  And  the  Jews  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy,
and  honour,"  &c.  When  the  tide  of  evil  turned,  great  advantages  flowed  to  the
Jews.     So  when  a  man  forsakes  his  evil  way  he  will  find  certain  results  follow.

I.  Light.    He  will  see  the  meaning  of  God's  word  and  of  life.

II.  Gladness.  He  will  not  be  afraid  to  rejoice,  but  will  see  that  the  Christian  has
the  truest  right  to  be  glad,  seeing  he  is  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  death.

III.  Honour.  People  respect  a  true  Christian,  but  they  despise  the  hypocrite.
Every  man's  character  is  rendered  of  greater  worth  by  his  Christianity.

IV.  Usefulness.  Others  will  be  won  to  the  same  good  way.  "  Many  of  the
people  of  the  land  became  Jews."     Influence  will  constantly  spread.

V.  Safety.  The  former  enemies  of  the  Jews  were  afraid  to  touch  them  or  speak
against  them.  The  evil  powers  that  oppose  man's  spiritual  welfare  will  not  be  able
to  injure  him,  because  God  will  protect,  and  the  habit  of  watchfulness  will  be
fixed. — H.

Vers.  S — 14. — Consecration,  Mndred,  law,  and  folly.  In  these  words  we  have —
I.  The  manifoldness  of  human  conseceation.  "  And  Esther  spake  yet  again
before  the  king,  and  fell  down  at  his  feet,  and  besought  him  with  tears,"  &c.  (ver.  3).
Emboldened  by  her  first  success,  Esther  goes  in  again  to  the  king,  again  endangering
her  own  position,  and,  indeed,  her  own  life,  on  behalf  of  her  people.  The  former
time  she  may  have  been  influenced  by  Mordecai's  reminder  that  her  own  death  was
determined  by  the  king's  decree.  Now,  however,  she  had  no  reason  to  be  apprehen-
sive on  that  ground.  Her  second  act  of  intercession  was  purely  unselfish.  It  is  a
beautiful  instance  of  goodness.  The  lovely  queen  risking  her  dignity,  her  wealtli,
her  happiness,  her  very  life  on  behalf  of  others ;  pleading  with  the  capricious  and
uncertain  sovereign  ;  shedding  for  others,  as  she  had  not  for  herself,  tears  of  tender
compassion ;  bringing  her  beauty  and  her  charms  wherewith  to  insure  the  safety  of
the  peoj^e  of  God.  In  how  many  ways  may  we  serve  the  cause  of  goodness  and  of
God.     What  varied  offerings  may  wo  lay  on  the  altar  of  the  Lord  1    Each  man  must


150  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  viii.  1—17.

consecrate  his  best :  the  learned  man  can  bring  his  knowledge,  the  wise  his  sagacity,
the  rich  his  wealth,  the  titled  his  rank,  the  fearless  his  courage,  the  energetic  his
vigour ;  the  engaging  woman  can  bring  her  charms,  the  loving  her  affection,  the
beautiful  her  beauty.  Our  God  "  has  commanded  our  strength  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.  28).
It  is  true  that  he  requires  of  us  "  accoiding  to  that  we  have,  not  according  to  that  we
have  not "  (2  Cor.  viii.  12)  ;  but  he  asks  of  each  of  us  the  best  we  have  to  bring,  and
of  what  he  has  given  na  freely  to  give  him  and  his.

II.  The  special  love  wb  owe  to  cub  own  people.  "  How  can  I  endure  to  see  the
evil  that  shall  come  upon  my  people  ?  or  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my
kindred  ?  "  (vur.  6).  Our  Lord  had  on  more  than  one  occasion  to  teach  that  the  affec-
tion of  ordinary  human  friendship  toward  himself  must  give  place  to  a  purely  spiritual
attachment.  In  him  we  form  and  cultivate  and  magnify  these  spiritual  affinities  and
relationships.  Yet  they  are  not  inconsistent  with  special  interest  in  those  to  whom
the  bonds  of  nature  bind  us.  We  know  how  intensely  strong  was  the  feeling  of  the
Apostle  Paul  toward  "  his  brethren,  his  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh ''  (Rom.  ix.
1 — 3).  If  we  do  not  wish  to  endure  the  intolerable  pain  of  witnessing  the  "  evil "  and
destruction  of  our  own  kindred,  but  wish  for  the  joy  of  seeing  theija  "  walking  in  the
truth,' '  we  must  bring  all  our  influence  to  bear  on  their  hearts  in  the  time  when  we  can
♦.each  them,  touch  them,  lead  them.

III.  The  frailty  op  human  law,  and,  we  might  add,  the  presumption  of  human
legislators.  The  decree  which  this  great  "king  of  kings"  had  just  issued  was  no
sooner  published  than  he  wanted  to  reverse  it.  He  and  his  brother  kings,  indeed,
professed  that  the  law  of  the  Medes  and  Persians  altered  not  (ch.  i.  19 ),  and  when  Esther
came  with  her  petition,  Ahasuerus  declared  that  what  was  "written  in  the  king's
name,  and  sealed  with  the  king's  ring,  may  no  man  reverse  "  (ver.  8).  Technically
and  formally  it  was  so ;  in  part  it  was  so  truly.  But  in  substance  this  was  but  a
vain  pretence.  Measures  were  instantly  taken  to  reduce  the  former  decree  to  a
nullity.  Much  of  the  most  beneficent  legislation  of  later  years  has  been  the  undoing
of  what  former  acts  had  done,  the  repealing  of  old  and  evil  laws.  Solemnly  and  with
all  the  forms  of  state  we  enact,  and  tlien,  a  few  years  on,  with  the  same  solemnity  we
repeal.     Such  are  the  laws  of  man.

IV.  The  ikbepabableness  of  human  folly  (vers.  9 — 14).  King  Ahasuerus  might
hang  Haman  with  great  promptitude  ;  a  word  from  him,  and  the  executioners  were
rendy  with  willing  hands  ;  biit  he  could  not  easily  undo  the  evil  work  of  his  favourite.
That  bad  man's  work  left  dark  shadows  behind.  He  himself  was  disposed  of,
but  what  of  the  decree  he.  had  been  the  means  of  passing  ?  That  could  not  be
quickly  reversed,  or  its  effects  removed.  The  custom,  if  not  the  constitution,  ad-
mitted of  no  formal  repeal.  Consequently  the  most  energetic  measures  had  to  be  taken
to  prevent  a  general  massacre.  The  king's  scribes  had  to  be  called  together  (ver.  9) ;
letters  had  to  be  written  in  every  language  and  sent  to  every  province  in  the  empire
(ver.  9)  ;  horses  had  to  be  pressed  into  the  service  (ver.  10)  ;  and  then  all  that  could
be  done  was  to  sanction  and  encourage  a  stout  resistance  on  the  part  of  the  Jews
when  they  were  attacked :  they  were  "  to  stand  for  their  life,  to  destroy,  to  slay,"  &c.
(ver.  11).  This,  no  doubt,  led  to  severe  and  fatal  strife  in  some,  if  not  in  many,
places.  In  truth,  the  king  could  nat  wholly  undo  what  his  thoughtless  folly  and
excessive  confidence  had  done.  We  never  can  wholly  wipe  out  the  evil  consequericei
of  our  folly  and  mir  sin.  We  may  do  much  to  counteract,  but  we  cannot  wholly
remove.  Godlessness,  selfishness,  worldliness,  vice,  error,  in  former  years,  these  have
left  their  traces  on  our  hearts  and  lives,  and  on  those  of  others  also,  and  all  the  waters
of  all  the  seas  cannot  wash  them  out.  Sin  may  be  forgiven,  folly  may  be  pardoned,
but  their  miserable  consequences  flow  on — who  shall  say  how  far? — in  a  polluting
stream.  It  does  not  take  a  royal  hand  to  do  what  is  irreparable.  The  hand  of  a
little  child  is  strong  enough  for  that. — C.

Vers.  15 — 17. — Sunshine.     We  have  in  this  passage —

I.  A  flash  of  honoub  to  an  individual  (ver.  15).  Mordecai  goes  forth,  grandly
attired,  coronet  on  head,  the  recipient  of  highest  royal  favour,  receiving  also  the
honour  of  the  acclaiming  populace.  He  would  not  have  been  human  if  he  had  not
enjoyed  liis  triumph     Perhaps  Oriental  human  nature  counted  such  a  public  ceremony


OB.  vin,  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  161

dearer  than  English  nature  would.  But  this  was  only  a  flash  of  enjoyment,  very  soon
gone.  "  What  is  wanted  here  ?  "  said  one  proud  spectator  to  another  at  a  Boman
triumph.  "'  Permanence,"  said  the  other.  One  hour,  and  it  would  be  over.  We  learn
that  (1)  there  is  a  place  in  our  life  for  such  brief  enjoyments.  We  need  not  refuse
them  because  they  are  of  the  world ;  coming  to  us  in  the  course  of  faithful  service,
they  may  be  regarded  as  sent  of  God  to  brighten  and  to  cheer  us.  But  we  must
remember  that  (2)  it  is  only  a  small  place  they  must  he  allowed  to  occupy.  They
must  be  counted  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance,  not  the  solid  weight  in  the  scale.
Our  strong  temptation  is  to  make  far  too  much  of  them ;  to  rate  them  far  above  their
true  value ;  to  give  to  their  acquisition  a  measure  of  time  and  energy  which  they  do
not  deserve  ;  to  sacrifice  more  precious  things,  even  sacred  principles  themselves,  \v
order  to  obtain  them.  Then  they  break  under  our  hand  and  bruise  us,  and  we  kno^v
how  foolish  and  wrong  we  have  been.  But  Mordecai  had  more  reason  to  rejoice
in —

II.  The  satisfaction  op  the  city.  _"  The  city  of  Susa  rejoiced  and  was  glad  "
(ver.  15).  It  is  much  for  one  man  to  give  satisfaction  to  a  whole  metropolis,  espe-
cially if,  as  here,  the  gladness  is  due  to  real  patriotism,  and  is  a  tribute  to  substantial
worth.  Men  may  give  lightness  of  heart  to  the  populace  by  very  questionable  and
even  unworthy  means :  by  indiscriminate  bounty,  by  pretentious  charlatanism,  by
empty  oratory.  But  to  do  what  Mordecai  now  did, — to  give  joy  to  the  city  because  all
men  felt  that  they  were  in  the  hands  of  an  honest  and  capable  administrator,  who
would  seek  their  interest,  and  not  his  own  at  their  expense, — this  is  not  unworthy  the
ambition  of  a  Christian  man.  It  may  be  that  this  is  beyond  our  reach,  but  we  may
learn  from  it  to  indulge  an  honourable  aspiration.  We  are  filling  some  post  in  the
world,  and  probably  in  the  Church.  We  should  aspire  to  be  such  workmen  in  the
narrower  sphere  we  thus  occupy  that,  when  the  hour  of  promotion  comes  to  us,  that
will  give  satisfaction  to  our  fellows,  and  we  shall  receive  their  congratulations.
ExceUenoy  may  sometimes  escape  the  notice  it  deserves  ;  yet,  as  a  rule,  men  mark
the  faithful  and  devoted  servant,  and  they  rejoice  when  he  "  goes  up  higher."  But
Mordecai  witnessed  that  which  still  more  gladdened  his  heart —

III.  The  jot  of  an  entire  people.  "  The  Jews  had  light,  and  gladness,  and  joy,
and  honour,"  &o.  (vers.  16,  17).  The  keenest  physical  gratification  (it  is  said)  is
found  in  the  sudden  cessation  of  acute  pain,  in  the  sense  of  great  relief.  All  Jewry,
throughout  the  whole  of  Persia,  now  felt  the  keen  delight  of  being  relieved  from  their
terrible  fears.  It  is  to  render  the  truest  and  most  appreciated  service  to  relieve  men's
soul  of  great  fear  and  dread.  To  give  temporal,  and,  still  more,  spiritual,  relief  is
to  confer  the  most  valuable  boon.  Happy  is  he  who,  like  Mordecai,  has  the  means
at  doing  this  on  a  large  scale  ;  he  will  earn  the  blessing,  deep  and  fervent,  of  many
souls.  But,  here  again,  if  we  cannot  achieve  the  greater  things  we  must  attempt  the
smaller  ones.  There  are  anxious  cares  we  can  remove  from  some  mind  ;  there  is  a
heavy  spiritual  burden  we  can  help  to  lift  from  some  heart.  The  blessing  of  one  soul
"  ready  to  perish ' '  is  well  worth  our  winning,  cost  what  pains  it  may.  The  brightest
feature  in  the  whole  scene  is  the —

IV.  Conversion  to  the  trob  faith.  "Many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became
Jews,"  &c.  (ver.  17).  The  "  fear  of  the  Jews  "  may  have  been  in  part  the  high  re-
gard felt  for  them,  perhaps  not  unmixed  with  some  hope  and  apprehension.  So  great
was  this  regard  thijt  their  Persian  neighbours  even  adopted  their  faith  and  worshipped
the  true  and  living  God.  Thus  the  conquered  became  the  conquerors ;  thus  the
captives  led  captive.  We  learn  here — 1.  How  God  overrules,  making  his  Church  the
stronger  for  the  very  designs  which  were  intended  to  despoil  and  even  to  extinguish.
2.  How  we  may  prevail,  even  in  humble  positions  winning  to  our  side,  and  so  to  nis
cause,  them  that  are  "  our  masters  according  to  the  flesh."  The  little  maid  in  the  Syrian
general's  service  caused  the  living  God  to  be  honoured  in  Damascus  (2  Kings  v.)  ;  the
captive  Jews  in  Persia  led  many  around  them  to  adopt  their  purer  faith ;  those  among
OB  who  are  "  in  service,"  who  are  "  under  authority,"  may  live  lives  of  such  attractive
worth  that  they  will  win  those  who  rule  to  the  service  of  the  Divine  Master.— 0.

Vors.l— 3. — Hopeful  changes.  I.  The  changes  in  ntniAN  life  abe  often  wonobb-
FDL.     They  startle  ils — 1.  By  Iheir  suddenness.     An  empirti,  a  city,  a  hooB*,  a


162  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [cH.  Tm.  1—17.

reputation,  or  a  power  which  it  has  taken  long  to  huild  up  may  fall  in  a  day.  2.  By
their  eompletenett.  What  may  have  seemed  durable  as  time  itself  passes  away  and
leaves  no  memorial.  "  Like  the  baseless  fabric  of  a  vision,"  magnificent  empires  have
perished,  and  left ''  not  a  wrack  behind  "  (Ps.  ix.  6).  3.  By  the  rapid  succession  oj
evertit  tofiich  lead  up  to  them.  Our  narrative  includes  in  the  history  of  one  day  the
king'B  sleeplessness,  the  rending  of  the  chronicle,  the  adoption  of  Haman's  device,
the  honouring  of  Mordecai,  the  humiliation  of  Haman,  Esther's  banquet,  the  accusa-
tion, conviction,  and  death  of  Haman,  the  bestowal  of  Haman's  wealth  on  the  queen,
the  promotion  of  Mordecai  to  Haman's  place,  and  the  successful  intercession  on
behalf  of  the  Jews.  God  may  bear  long  and  patiently  with  the  wicked,  but  when
his  time  arrives,  "then  sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them"  (1  Thess.  v.  3).

II.  It  is  pleasant  to  bestow  and  receive  jdst  rewards.  When  the  king  gave  to
Esther  "  the  house,"  or  rather  the  possessions,  of  Haman,  he  expressed  thereby  his
sense  of  the  danger  and  anxiety  to  which  his  folly  had  exposed  her ;  his  sense  too  of
the  faithful  and  wise  manner  in  which  she  had  delivered  himself  from  the  toils  of
a  guileful  and  presumptuous  man.  There  was  an  evident  stroke  of  justice  in  the
awarding  to  Esther  the  wealth  of  the  man  who  had  promised  to  the  king  the  wealth
of  the  Jews  as  the  price  of  their  blood.     Justice  never  sleeps.

III.  Gratitude  is  the  sign  op  a  true  heart.  Some  easily  forget  benefits  received.
A  change  of  position  or  a  lapse  of  time  will  often  cause  the  remembrance  of  past
favours  to  fade.  But  Esther  never  forgot  what  she  owed  to  Mordecai,  and  now  she
told  the  king  "  what  he  was  to  her;  "  how  much  he  had  been  and  still  was  to  her  I
The  very  simplicity  of  these  words  gives  them  a  peculiar  depth  and  tenderness  <rf
meaning.  The  queen's  gratitude  to  Mordecai  was  shown — 1.  In  explaining  her
onrn  indebtedness  to  him.  2.  In  describing  him  as  the  real  instrument  of  securing
the  exposure  of  Haman  and  the  present  felicity.  3.  In  winning  for  him  favour  and
promotion.  4.  In  setting  him,  as  her  manager,  over  the  house  of  Haman.  She  could
not  do  too  much  for  the  man  who  had  done  so  much  for  her.  The  gratitude  which
lives  unfadingly  in  the  heart,  and  is  ever  prompt  to  show  itself  in  action,  is  a  beautiful
feature  of  character.  What  gratitude  is  due  to  God  I  How  should  we  remember
and  esteem  him  who  "  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us  I  "  "  What  shall  we  render
unto  the  Lord  for  all  Aw  benefits  ?  '  (Ps.  cxvi.  12 — 14).

IV.  How  BWBBT  THE  FREEDOM  WHICH  PERMITS  A  TRUE  HEART  TO  POUR  ITS  CON-
FIDENCES INTO  THE  EAR  OF  AFFECTION  I  Till  now  Esther  feared  the  king,  and  dared
not  give  him  her  confidence.  She  had  secrets  in  her  breast  which  oppressed  her,  but
which  she  could  not  divulge.  But  the  removal  of  Haman,  the  enemy  and  obstacle,
brought  her  near  to  the  king,  and  she  felt  free  to  tell  him  all  that  was  in  her  heart.
The  benefit  and  happiness  of  the  marriage  tie  are  sadly  marred  by  the  possession  of
secrets  on  either  side,  or  by  the  want  of  a  free,  full,  and  loving  confidence.  The
charm  of  friendship  too  is  in  proportion  to  the  freedom  it  gives  to  the  opening  of  the
heart.  There  is  no  enemy  on  the  part  of  our  God  and  King  to  shut  his  heart  against
us.  All  enemies  have  been  destroyed  in  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  because  we  will  not,  if
we  have  not  the  freedom  of  intercourse  with  God  which  belong  to  children — "  the
glorious  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God."

V.  The  PROMOTION  of  the  wise  and  good  to  power  is  a  BLESSING  TO  THE  WORLD.

The  king  gave  the  seal  which  he  had  taken  from  Haman  to  Mordecai.  Henceforth
the  sagacious  and  capable  Jew  was  to  occupy  the  place  of  grand  vizier,  or  chief
friend  and  counsellor.  Here  again  justice  notched  a  conspicuous  mark.  The
humble  and  heroic  man  for  whom  Haman  had  erected  a  gallows  was  put  in  the
wicked  favourite's  place— made  second  to  the  king.  From  that  time  the  monarch  and
his  empire  had  some  real  ground  of  prosperity  and  peace.  Mordecai's  influence  grew
and  extended  until  it  became  a  paramount  power  and  blessing  in  all  the  hundred  and
twenty  and  seven  provinces.  Happy  the  monarch  and  nation  that  are  under  the
guidance  of  a  wisdom  that  is  simple-hearted,  clear-sighted,  experienced,  and  godly.
How  many  examples  have  we  in  the  history  of  the  world  of  the  benefit  conferred  on
nations  by  the  promotion  of  the  wise  and  good  to  oSicea  of  power,  and  of  the  misery
and  rain  effected  by  the  promotion  of  the  wicked  !

VI.  "The  benefits  received  by  a  true  heart  will  enlabob  it«  simpathies  fob
OTHERS  WHO  ABE  IN  BUf  f  ERINQ  AfiD  NEED.    There  is  a  joy  over  obtained  good  which  ia


OH.  VIII.  1—17.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER'.  158

utterly  selfish.  It  is  self-absorbed,  and  has  no  consideration  for  the  eSect  it  may
have  on  others.  It  may  be  natural  enough,  yet  nothing  is  more  hateful.  The  true
godly  soul  will  long  to  share  its  own  joys  with  those  whom  it  loves.  Beyond  that,
its  own  sense  of  joy  will  quicken  its  sympathy  with  all  the  distressed,  and  its  desire
to  bring  the  light  of  its  joy  into  the  regions  of  darkness  and  death.  Hence  Esther
was  not  content  with  her  own  happiness.  She  could  not  feel  happy  until  she  had
emancipated  her  people  from  the  doom  that  threatened  them.  Her  own  deliverance
from  the  enemy  stimulated  her  to  work  out  that  of  Israel.  So  long  as  the  edict
against  the  Jews  was  in  force,  the  purpose  for  whioh-she  had  ventured  all  was  unac-
complished. It  is  only  when  our  Lord  shall  have  redeemed  all  his  people  and  brought
them  to  everlasting  honour  that  he  shall  "  see  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be  satined  "
(laa.  liu.  11).— D.

Vera.  3 — 6. — An  effective  advocate.  A  second  time  Esther  entered  into  the  king's
presence  unbidden.  A  second  time  the  king's  sceptre  was  extended  to  her.  Her
own  safety  and  queenly  state  had  been  secured,  but  her  people  were  still  exposed
to  the  murderous  decree  which  Haman  had  beguiled  the  king  to  i  .al  and  promulgate.
She  now  appeared  as  an  advocate  for  Israel.     Learn  here —

I.  That  advocacy  should  be  clear  as  to  its  grounds.  The  grounds  on  which
Esther  pleaded  were  such  as  the  following: — 1.  That  the  edict  of  extermination  was  the
device  of  the  enemy  Haman.  The  wicked  man  himself  having  been  exposed  and
punished,  his  evil  design  should  be  countermanded.  2.  That  all  her  people  through-
out the  empire  were  as  innocent,  and  therefore  as  unworthy  of  death,  as  herself.
Justice  and  mercy  combined  in  calling  for  a  reversal  of  the  cruel  edict.  3.  That  the
destruction  of  a  numerous  people  scattered  through  the  empire  would  create  universal
alarm  and  confusion,  and  inflict  irreparable  loss  on  the  king's  estate.  Esther's  grounds
of  appeal  were  clear  and  strong.     She  had  a  good  case.

II.  That  advocacy  should  be  disinterested.  The  queen  had  gained  much  by
the  death  of  Haman  and  the  restored  affection  of  the  king,  but  she  was  willing  to
sacrifice  all  on  the  altar  of  her  people's  deliverance.  Personal  honour  and  wealth  were
as  nothing  to  her  so  long  as  Israel  was  trembling  under  the  uplifted  sword.  She
presents  us  with  a  type  of  Christ,  who  "  emptied  himself  of  his  glory"  and  offered
up  his  life  on  the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  a  condemned  world.  Advocacy,  to  be
effective,  must  have  no  back-look  on  self.

III.  That  advocacy  should  be  earnest  and  persuasive.  The  body  in  all  its
expressions  is  responsive  to  the  soul  that  animates  it.  Cold  feeling  will  be  content
with  cold  words  and  impassive  features ;  but  when  the  heart  is  swayed  by  strong
emotion  the  whole  outward  frame  will  yield  itself  to  the  power  of  the  inward  force.
Words,  looks,  movements,  gesticulations,  tears  will  all  unite  in  expressing  a  desire
that  commands  the  spirit.  Thus  Esther,  when,  against  the  law,  she  again  entered
uninvited  into  the  king's  presence,  "fell  at  his  feet  and  besought  him  with  tears."
Earnestness  makes  short  work  with  restrictive  formalities.  A  full  heart  when  once
unlocked  cannot  but  be  persuasive.  The  whole  attitude  of  Esther  was  eloquent.  Such
advocacy  could  not  fail  to  move  even  an  Ahasuerus.  We  are  reminded  by  it  of  Christ's
sweet,  yearning,  solemn  prayer  in  behalf  of  his  disciples  as  given  in  John  xvii.

IV.  That  advocacy  should  be  in  full  sympathy  with  the  cause  in  which  it
IS  EMPLOYED.  No  advocate  can  be  perfectly  effective  unless  he  can  put  himself  in
the  place  of  those  for  whom  he  is  pleading,  and  can  plead  for  them  as  if  he  were
pleading  for  himself.  Listen  to  Esther: — "  How  can  I  endure  to  see  the  evil  that
shall  come  unto  my  people?  or  how  can  I  endure  to  see  the  destruction  of  my
kindred  ?  "  She  thus  identified  herself  with  her  people  and  kindred.  If  they  suffered,
she  would  suffer;  if  they  weie  destroyed,  how  could  she  live  ?  The  queen  took  on
herself  the  burden  of  her  nation.  Again  we  think  of  Christ,  the  Divine  Advocate.
He  became  "bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  "  took  on  himself  omt  like-
ness," that  he  might  enter  into  our  experiences,  and  bear  our  burden  before  God,
and  become  an  effective  and  prevailing  Advocate.  Hence  his  sympathy,  his  "fellow-
feeling,"  his  oneness,  and  his  all-powerful  intercession  (Heb.  ii.  17,  18  ;  iv.  15,  16).

V.  That  advocacy  fob  the  suffering  and  perishing  is  the  duty  and  pbivilbgb
OF  THE  GODLY.     History  affords  many  examples  of  noble  advocacy  in  behalf  of  tha


IW  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER  [CH.  vm.  1—17.

justly  doomed  and  the  unjustly  oppressed.  Such  Bible  instances  as  Abraham's
pleading  for  the  cities  of  the  plain,  Moses'  intercession  for  rebellious  Israel,  and  Paul's
willingness  to  lose  himself  for  the  sake  of  his  unbelieving  kindred,  readily  occur.  In
modem  times  the  long  and  arduous  advocacy  of  the  emancipation  of  the  slave  has
become  memorable.  To  the  Christian,  as  to  his  Master,  Christ,  "  the  field  is  the  world."
Men  are  "perishing  for  lack  of  knowledge."  Multitudes  everywhere  are  in  bondage
tu  sin  and  death.  It  shou'd  be  our  part  to  do  what  we  can  to  bring  "deliverance  to
the  captives,"  and  to  "save  them  who  are  appointed  to  die;"  and  with  our  labours  we
should  unite  the  earnest  prayer  of  the  advocate.  "  The  effectual  fervent  prayer  of  a
righteous  man  availeth  much  "  (James  v.  16 — 20). — D.

Ver.  17. — Religiov^ prospef)-ity.  Persecution  always  defeats  its  own  object.  Viewed
as  mere  policy,  it  is  the  worst  that  can  be  employed.  Persecute  error,  and  it  will  spread
tenfold ;  persecute  truth,  and  it  will  spread  a  hundredfold.  Unless,  therefore,  you  wish
the  principles  you  hate  to  gain  ground,  persecute  not  at  all.  Haman,  while  he  brought
utter  ruin  upon  himself  by  his  cruel  attempt  to  exterminate  the  Jews,  raised  the
latter  into  an  incomparably  better  position  than  they  occupied  before.  The  Jews  in
their  triumph  were  likely  to  adopt  the  same  persecuting  policy  as  had  been  exercised
against  themselves.  It  would  have  been  simply  the  natural  result  of  the  treatment
they  had  received.  The  Romish  persecution  of  Protestants  in  our  own  country
led  Protestants  in  their  turn  to  persecute  the  Eomanists.  The  people  of  the  land
were,  therefore,  not  without  reason,  in  mortal  fear ;  and  many  of  them  through  fear
became  proselytes  to  the  Jewish  religion.  But  a  profession  of  faith  made  under  such
circumstances  was  about  the  most  worthless  that  could  be  imagined.  The  Church
of  God  has  had  a  most  chequered  history.  Sometimes,  like  the  noonday  sun,  it  has
shone  with  unrivalled  splendour ;  sometimes,  hke  the  cloud-wrapped  moon,  its  light
has  been  lost  in  darkness.  In  the  captivity  of  Egypt  it  was  trodden  down  by  its
oppressors  ;  under  the  leadership  of  Moses  it  struggled  again  into  freedom.  In  the
reign  of  Solomon  a  temple  was  built  to  Jehovah ;  in  the  reign  of  Jeroboam,  son  of
Nebat,  the  calves  were  worshipped  at  Bethel  and  Dan.  And  we  may  add  that  under
the  new  dispensation,  even  as  under  the  old,  its  fortunes  have  been  variable  to  the
last  degree.  The  text  contains  a  graphic  description  of  the  Church  in  prospebity.
In  times  of  religious  depression  it  is  customary  with  good  people  to  pray  for  better
things — a  revival  of  the  religious  spirit,  an  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  an  increase
of  godly  enthusiasm.  But  frequently,  when  this  takes  place,  those  who  desire  it
most  are  greatly  disappointed,  just  because  the  form  it  takes  is  contrary  to  their
expectation.  For  ages  the  Jews  longed  for  the  advent  of  the  Messiah,  but  when  he
came  they  put  him  to  death.  It  is  important,  therefore,  that  in  seeking  religious
prosperity  our  minds  should  be  free  from  misconceptions.    This  leads  us  to  notice —

I.  The  nature  of  rkligious  prosperity.  It  implies — 1.  An  increase  of  spiritu-
ality among  professing  Christians.  Beware  of  supposing  that  the  success  of  a
Church  is  identical  with  increased  membership.  This  is  a  fatal  mistake,  and  has  led
to  the  most  lamentable  consequences.  True  religion  consists  in  spiritual-mindedness.
It  is  the  result  of  a  change  of  heart  produced  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  Except  a  man
be  born  of  water  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."  It
follows  that  a  Christian  is  separate  from  the  world.  He  views  everything  in  the
light  of  the  world  to  come.  He  rejoices  to  sufEer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,
for  he  has  respect  unto  the  recompense  of  the  reward.  No  genuine  revival  can  take
place  apart  from  increased  purity  and  unworldliness.  2.  An  increase  of  good  works
among  professing  Christians.  Good  works  are  the  necessary  concomitants  of  spirit-
ual-mindedness. "  Every  good  tree  bringeth  fo'th  good  fruit."  The  first  proof
that  a  man  is  bom  again  is  the  earnestness  with  which  he  inquires  what  he  must  do.
Instances — the  multitude  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  the  jailer  at  Philippi,  Saul  of
Tarsus.  The  Church  is  described  as  a  vineyard,  for  which  God  hires  labourers,  whom
he  rewards  according  to  their  services.  The  absence  of  works  is  therefore  a  sure  sign
of  the  absence  of  spiritual  life.  What  the  Spirit  said  to  each  of  the  Churches  of  Asia
was,  "  I  know  thy  works."  No  real  prosperity  can  co-exist  with  indifEerence  and  indo-
lence. 3.  An  increase  of  sinners  saved.  "  Many  of  the  people  of  the  land  became
Jews."     A  most  conclusive  evidence  of  their  thriving  condition.    A  spiritual,  work-


OH.  viii.  1— 17.}  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  IM

ing  Church  exerts  a  power  which  attracts  outsiders  into  its  ranks.  At  the  begin-
ning of  the  apostolic  age,  when  the  disciples  were  in  the  fervour  of  their  first  love,
it  is  recorded  that  "the  Lord  added  to  the  Church  daily  such  as  should  be  saved."
It  is  the  business  of  a  Church  to  seek  the  lost.  This  duty  it  owes  to  itself  no  less
than  to  the  world.  Without  converts  it  must  gradually  decay,  and  ultimately  die.
It  enjoys  the  highest  success,  therefore,  only  when  multitudes  of  the  perishing  flock
within  its  gates.

II.  The  causes  of  religious  prospebitt.  When  possessed,  to  what  is  it  due  ?
When  lost,  how  can  it  be  recovered  ?  1.  It  is  in  one  sense  ike  work  of  God.  It  was
God  who  laid  down  the  foundation  of  the  Church.  "Tims  saith  the  Lord,  Behold,  I
lay  in  Zion  for  a  foundation  a  stone,  a  tried  stone,  a  precious  corner-stone,  a  sure
foundation :  he  that  believeth  shall  not  make  haste."  And  not  a  single  stone  has
been  subsequently  placed  in  the  spiritual  edifice  without  his  co-operation.  "Without
me  ye  can  do  nothing."  "Except  the  Lord  build  the  house, they  labour  in  vain  that
build  it."  If  we  would  have  a  revival,  we  must  pray  God  to  send  down  the  Com-
forter to  "  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment."  2.  It
is  in  another  sense  the  work  of  man.  The  grandest  triumphs  of  the  gospel  have  been
achieved  by  means  of  humim  instrumentality.  The  Protestant  reformation,  the
Methodist  revival,  the  evangelisation  of  Madagascar.  Many  ask,  "  What  have  we  to
do  ?  ''  The  answer  depends  upon  the  special  circumstances  of  the  inquirers.  Some
are  able  to  preach  the  word,  some  to  teach  the  young,  some  to  visit  the  poor.  If
your  Church  he  languishing,  seek  the  cause  among  yourselves.  Are  you  slumbering,
inactive,  prayerless  ?

III.  The  effects  of  relwious  pkosperity.  These  are  represented  here  as  three-
fold. 1.  Joy.  "The  Jews  had  joy  and  gladness."  This  is  invariably  the  case;
and  what  more  natural  ?  The  released  captive  is  glad,  the  victorious  army  is  jubi-
lant, the  flourishing  city  is  full  of  glee,  and  shall  the  Church  be  difEerent  ?  "  When
the  Lord  turned  again  the  captivity  of  Zion,  we  were  like  them  that  dream.  Then
was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter,  and  our  tongue  with  singing."  It  is  said  of  the
first  disciples,  after  they  had  witnessed  our  Lord's  ascension,  which  was  to  them  an
earnest  of  the  coming  of  his  kingdom,  that  they  "  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  great
joy;  and  were  continually  in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing  God,"  2,  Contentment,
"A  feast  and  a  good  day."  With  the  luxuries  they  enjoyed  they  were  abundantiy
satisfied.  In  religious  revivals  the  means  of  grace,  the  services  of  the  sanctuary,
the  ordinances  of  religion,  are  thoroughly  appreciated.  Duties  which  in  stagnant
seasons  are  a  burden  become  a  pleasure.  Of  the  man  who  is  "like  a  tree  planted  by
the  rivers  of  water,"  the  Psalmist  saith,  "  His  deli(jht  is  in  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and
in  his  law  doth  he  meditate  day  and  night."  The  prevalence  of  bitterness,  strife,
and  unrest  is  a  sign  of  spiritual  poverty.  Cattle  bred  in  the  fertile  plains  are
generally  in  good  condition  ;  cattle  bred  on  the  barren  hills  are  not  only  lean,  but  grow
immense  horns.  3.  Infliience.  "  The  fear  of  the  Jews  fell  upon  them."  The  power
of  the  Jews  was  felt  in  the  land,  and  they  were  respected  accordingly.  The  world
.Tdmires  power;  it  is  the  weak,  the  puny,  the  pretentious  that  are  held  in  contempt.
When  religion  is  despised,  and  its  professors  treated  with  scorn,  it  is  time  to  inquire
into  the  reason.  May  it  not  be  due  to  the  sentimental,  emasculated  caricature  of
godliness  that  is  too  frequently  set  up  for  the  reality?  Strong,  robust  Christian
manliness  commands  the  homage  even  of  opponents.  When  the  Church  appears  in
her  proper  character — a  pure,  living,  active  Church — an  astonished  world  asks,
"Who  is  she  that  looketh  forth  as  tlie  morning,  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as  the  sun,
and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners?  "— R.


EXPOSITION.     §§  17,  18.

CHAPTER  IX.
Result  of  the  second  edict:  the  Jewb
kesist    their    enemies,    and   effect   4
great  slaughter  of  them,  but  do  noi

LAY  HAND  ON  THEIE  OOODS  (ch.  ix.  1 — 16).


The  Jews  of  all  the  provinces,  having  kad
ample  time  to  prepare  themselves,  "gathered
themselves  together  iu  their  cities,"  as  the
day  fixed  by  the  first  edict  approached  (vcr.
2),  and  made  their  arrangements.      Theii


156


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH.  TX.  1—32.


"  enemies  "  no  doubt  did  the  same,  and  for
some  time  before  the   13th  of    Adar  two
hostile   camps  stood  facing  each  other  in
each  of   the  great  towns  throughout   the
empire.     Mordecai's  position  at  the  capital
being    Icnown,    and    his    power    evidently
established,   the   Persian  governors    of  all
grades   understood   it  to  be   their  duty   to
throw  their  weiglit  into  the  scale  on  behalf
of  the  Jews,  and  lend  them  whatever  help
they  could  (ver.  3).    At  last  the  day  arrived,
and  the  struggle  took  place.      The    Jews
everywhere  got  the  better  of  their  adver-
saries.    In  "  Shushan  the  palace"  as  it  was
called,   or  the   upper  town,   of  which  the
palace  formed  a  part,  they  killed  600  of  them
(ver.  6).     In  the  rest  of  the  empire,  if  we
accept  the  numbers  of  the  present  Hebrew
text,  as  many  as  76,000   (ver.  16).     The
Septuagint  translators,  however,  who  would
have  no  reason  for  falsifying  the  text,  give
the  number  as  16,000,  which  seems  to  be
intrinsically  more  probable.     They  also,  on
the  ensuing  day,  the  14th  of  Adar,  by  special
permission    of  Ahasiierus,   contended  with
their  adversaries  in  Shushan  a  second  time,
and  slew  on  this  occasion  300   (ver.   15).
Among  the  killed,   the   only  persons  men-
tioned by  name  are  ten  sons  of  Haman,  who
were  slain  in  "  Shushan  the  palace  "  on  the
first  day,  while  on  the  second  day  pel-mission
was  given  to  expose  their  bodies  on  crosses
(ver.    14).      A  remarkable    feature   of   the
struggle,   and  one  which  is  noticed  three
several  times  (vers.  10,  15,  16),  was,  that,
notwithstanding    the    clause    in  the    edict
which  allowed  the  Jews  "  to  take  the  spoil  of
their  enemies  for  a  prey"   (ch.  viii.    11),
neither  in  the  capital  nor  in  the  provinces
did   the    triumphant    Israelites    touch    the
property  of  those  opposed  to  them.     There
was  an  evident  wish  to  show  tliat  they  were
not  actuated  by  greed,  but  simply  desirous
of  securing  themselves  from  future  molest-
ation.

Ver.  1. — To  have  power  over  them.  Or,
"  to  get  the  masteiy  over  them  "  (comp.
Dan.  vi.  24,  where  the  same  word  is  used).
Had  rule.     Or,  "  had  the  mastery."

Ver.  2. — The  Jews  gathered  themselves
together.  Acting  on  the  first  clause  of  tlie
edict  (ch.  viii.  11).  In  their  cities.  By
"  their  olties  "  the  writer  means  not  cities
exclusively  Jewish,   but  cities  where  Jews


formed  an  element  in  the  population,  aa
Susa,  Babylon,  Damascus — perhaps  Rhagea
and  Ecbatana — and  no  doubt  many  others.
Cities  exclusively  Jewish,  like  Nearda,  in
later  times  (Joseph. ,  'Ant.  Jud. ,'  xviii.  9,  §  1),
scarcely  existed  as  yet  out  of  Palestine.  To
lay  hand  on  such  as  sought  their  hurt
The  defensive  character  of  the  Jews'  action
is  again  noted.  Only  if  their  hurt  was
sought  (comp.  Ps.  Ixxi.  13,  24)  did  they  lay
hand  on  any  ;  only  against  those  who  sought
their  hurt  did  they  lift  a  finger.  The  fear
of  them.  Not  now  such  fear  as  is  mentioned
in  ch.  viii.  17,  ad  fin.,  but  a  downright
coward  fear  of  their  prowess.  Fell  upon  all
people.  Rather,  "  all  the  people,"  i.  e.  all
the  many  subject  nations  of  the  Persian
empire  among  which  the  Jews  were  scat-
tered.

Ver.  3. — All  the  rulers  of  the  provinces,
and  the  lieutenants,  and  the  deputies.
Compare  ch.  iii.  12  and  viii.  9,  where  the
same  enumeration  is  made,  though  not  quite
in  the  same  order.  And  officers  of  the  king.
Literally,  "  they  who  did  the  work  of  the
king. "  The  Septuagint  renders  by  jSairtXticoi
ypafifiartig,  "  royal  scribes  ;  "  but  officials
of  all  classes  seem  to  be  intended.  Helped
the  Jews.  Rather,  "upheld,  supported."
Active  physical  help  does  not  seem  to  be
meant,  but  rather  the  moral  aid  and  sup-
port that  a  government  easily  gives  to  the
side  which  it  favours  in  a  civil  disturbance.
The  fear  of  Mordecai  fell  upon  them.  It
would  give  the  sense  better  to  translate
"had  fallen."

Ver.  4. — Mordecai  was  great.  Compare
ch.  viii.  2, 16  and  x.  3.

Ver.  6.  — la  Shushan  the  palace.  I.  e.
the  upper  city,  where  the  palace  was.  The
area  of  the  hill  is  above  a  hundred  acres,
and  there  are  many  repiains  of  residences  on
it  besides  the  palace.  It  was  probably
densely  peopled.

Vers.  7—10. — And  Parshandatha.  Ra-
man's ten  sons  have  unmistakably  Persian
names,  so  that  no  countenance  is  given  by
them  to  the  theory  that  he  was  a  foreigner.
Formerly  it  was  customary  that  they  should
be  written  in  each  MS.  of  the  Book  of
Esther  in  three  perpendicular  lines,  to
signify  (as  it  was  said)  that  they  were  hanged
on  three  parallel  cords.  In  reading  them
the  ten  names  were  uttered  in  one  breath,  in  |
memory  of  the  supposed  fact  that  they  all
died  in  one  instant.  It  would  be  wrong,  |
however,  to  attach  credit  to  these  traditions,
which  simply  si»w  the  persistent  hatred
with  which  the  Jews  regarded  their  great
enemy.  Slew  they.  With  the  sword,
probably  (see  ver.  5),  and  in  fair  fight.

Ver.  11. — The  number  .  .  .  was  bi^ught
before  the  king.  It  was  customary  in  all
wars  for  the  number  of  tlie  slain  to  be  care-


3H.  IX.  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


167


fully  made  out  and  recorded.  In  the  Baby-
lonian transcript  of  the  Behistun  Inscription
the  numbers  are  given  with  extreme  exact-
ness—e.  g.  546,  2024,  4203,  &c.  On  this
occasion  it  would  seem  that  only  a  rough
calculation  was  made.  Still  the  king  took
care  to  be  informed  on  the  subject,  and  the
Jews,  aware  of  this,  were  not  left  absolutely
uncontrolled.

Ver.  12. — What  have  they  done  in  the
rest  of  the  king's  provinces  ?  !N'ot  an  in-
quiry, but  an  exclamation.  How  many
must  they  not  have  killed  in  the  whole
empire  if  they  have  slain  500  in  Susa  alone  !
Now,  what  Is  thy  petition  ?  Still,  if  this  is
not  enough,  if  anytliing  more  is  needed  for
the  Jews'  security,  ask  it,  and  "  it  shall  be
done."

Ver.  13. — Esther's  request  for  a  second
day  of  slaughter  has  a  bloodthirsty  ap-
pearance ;  but,  without  a  more  complete
knowledge  of  the  facts  than  we  possess,  we
cannot  say  that  it  was  unjustifiable.  It
would  seem  that  the  Jews  in  Susa  gathered
themselves  in  the  upper  town  on  the  ap-
pointed day,  and  were  engaged  there  the
whole  day  with  their  enemies.  Esther  asks
that  they  may  be  allowed  a  second  day —
either  in  the  upper  or  the  lower  town,  it  is  not
clear  which — to  complete  their  work,  and
fiee  themselves  from  all  danger  of  further
persecution  from  their  foes.  She  is  not
likely  to  have  made  this  request  unless
prompted  to  make  it  by  Mordecai,  who
must  have  had  means  of  knowing  how
matters  really  stood,  and,  as  the  chief
minister  over  the  whole  nation,  is  likely  to
have  been  actuated  rather  by  general  views
of  policy  than  by  a  blind  spirit  of  revenge.
Still  it  must  be  granted  that.there  is  some-
thing essentially  Jewish  in  Esther's  request,
and  indeed  in  the  tone  of  the  entire  book
w^hich  hears  her  name.

Ver.  14. — They  hanged  the  ten  song  of
Haman.  Exposure  on  a  cross  was  regarded
as  a  deep  disgrace,  and  was  a  punishment
often  inflicted  by  the  Persians  on  persons
killed  in  some  other  way  (see  Herod.,  iii.
125 ;  vii.  238 ;  Xen.,  '  Anab.,'  iii  1,  §  17  ;
Pint.,  '  Vit  Artax.,' §  17).

Ver.  15. — For  the  Tews.  Rather,  "and,
the  Jews,"  or  "so  the  Jews."  The  Hebrew
has  the  vav,  conjunctive,  which  is  here
certainly  expressive  of  a  sequence,  or  conse-
quence.

Ver.  16. — Gathered  themselves  together,
and  stood  for  their  lives.  /.  e.  did  as  the
edict  directed  them  (ch.  viii.  11).  And  had
rest  from  their  enemies.  The  idea  of  "rest"
seems  out  of  place  when  the  subject  of  the
narrative  is  slaughter,  and  the  number  of
the  slain  has  still  to  be  told.  Some  suspect
corruption,  others  an  interpolation.  And
■lew  of  their  foes  seventy  and  five  thousand.


The  LXX.  had  in  their  copies  fifteen  for
seventy-five,  or  one-fifth  of  the  received
number.  The  smaller  number  is  more  in
harmony  with  the  600  killed  at  Susa  than
the  larger  one.

Festival  held,  and  peast  of  Pueim
INSTITUTED  (ch.  ix.  17—32).  A  natural
Instinct  led  the  Jews,  so  soon  as  their  tri-
umph was  accomplished,  to  indulge  them-
selves in  a  day  of  rest  and  rejoicing  (ver.
17).  After  toil  there  is  need  of  repose ;  and
escape  from  a  great  danger  is  followed,  almost
of  necessity,  by  "gladness."  The  writer  of
the  Book  of  Esther,  practising  his  usual
reticence,  says  nothing  of  the  character  of
the  "gladness;"  but  we  can  scarcely  be
wrong  in  believing  it  to  have  been,  in  i;he
main,  religious,  and  to  have  included  grati-
tude to  God  for  their  deliverance,  the  ascrip-
tion of  praise  to  his  name,  and  an  outpouring
of  the  heart  before  him  in  earnest  and  pro-
longed thanksgiving.  The  circumstances  of
the  struggle  caused  a  difference,  with  regard
to  the  date  of  the  day  of  rejoicing,  between
the  Jews  of  the  capital  and  tho^e  of  the
provinces.  The  metropolitical  Jews  had  two
days  of  struggle,  and  could  not  "rest"  until
the  third  day,  which  was  the  15th  of  Adar
(vor.  18) ;  the  provincial  Jews  began  and
ended  their  work  in  one  day,  the  13th,  and
so  their  thanksgiving-day  was  the  14th,  and
not  the  15th  of  the  month  (ver.  17).  The
consequence  was,  that  when  Mordecai  and
Esther  determined  on  commemorating  the
wonderful  deliverance  of  their  time  by  an
annual  festival,  analogous  to  that  of  th/
passover,  to  be  celebrated  by  all  Jews  every-
where throughout  all  future  ages,  some  hesi-
tation naturally  arose  as  to  the  proper  day
to  be  kept  holy.  If  the  14th  were  kept,  the
pro^'incial  Jews  would  be  satisfied,  but  those
of  Susa  would  have  cause  of  complaint ;  if
the  15th  were  the  day  selected,  the  two
parties  would  simply  exchange  feelings.
Under  these  circumstances  it  was  wisely
resolved  to  keep  both  days  (ver.  21).  Nothing
seems  to  have  been  determined  as  to  the
mode  of  keeping  the  feast,  except  that  both
days  were  to  be  "days  of  feasting  and  joy,"
and  days  upon  which  the  richer  members  of
the  community  should  send  "portions"  and
"gifts"  to  the  poorer  ones  (ver.  22).  The
name,  "feast  of  Purim,"  was  at  once  attached
to  the  festival,  in  memoiy  of  Hamau's  con-


108


THE  BUUK  UJf  ESTHER


[CH.  !X.  1—32


saltation  of  the  lot,  the  word  "  Pur  "  meaning
"lot"  in  Persian  (ver.  24).  The  festival
became  a  national  institution  by  the  general
consent  of  the  Jews  everywhere  (ver.  27),
and  ha,s  remained  to  the  present  day  among
the  most  cherished  of  their  usages.  It  falls  -
in  early  spring,  a  "lonth  before  the  passover,
and  occupies  two  diys,  which  are  still  those
fixed  by  Mordecai  and  Esther,  the  14th  and
16th  of  Adar.  The  day  preceding  the  feast
is  observed  as  a  fast  day,  in  commemoration
of  Esther's  fast  before  going  in  uninvited  to
the  king  (ch.  iv.  16).

Ver.  18.~The  Tews  which  wereatShnshan
assembled  together.  I.e.  "  gathered  them-
selves together  to  battle."  The  verb  is  the
same  as  that  used  in  ver.  16  of  this  chapter,
and  in  ch.  viii.  11  ;  ix.  2.

Ver.  19. — The  Jews  of  the  villages,  that
dwelt  in  the  unwalled  towns.  Rather,
"  the  Jews  of  the  country,  who  dwelt  in  the
country  towns."  There  are  places  where  the
word  translated  "unwalled"  connotes  that
idea — e.  g.  Ezek.  xxxviii.  11  ;  Zech.  ii.  8 ;
but  the  main  notion  which  it  expresses  is
always  that  of  a  "country  region."  Here
walls  are  not  at  all  in  the  thought  of  the
writer,  who  intends  a  contrast "  between  the
Jews  of  the  metropolis  and  those  of  the  pro-
vinces. Ecbatana  and  Babylon  are  "country
towns  "  to  a  Jew  of  Susa,  such  as  the  writer.
A  good  day.  Compare  ch.  viii,  17,  with  the
comment.  Sending  portions  one  to  another.
Compare  Neh.  viii.  10  ;  and  for  the  precept
on  which  the  practice  was  founded  see  Deut.
xvi.  14.  In  modern  times  the  Jews  keep  up
the  practice,  and  on  the  15th  of  Adar  both
interchange  gifts,  chiefly  sweetmeats,  and
make  liberal  offerings  for  the  poor  (comp.
ver.  22,  ad  Jin.).

Ver.  20. — Mordecai  wrote  these  things.
Mordecai  seems,  in  the  first  instance,  to  have
written  to  the  provincial  Jews,  suggesting  to
them  the  future  observance  of  two  days  of
Purim  instead  of  one,  and  explaining  the
grounds  of  his  proposition,  but  without
venturing  to  issue  any  ordor.  When  he
found  his  proposition  well  received  (vers.  23,
27)  he  sent  out  a  second  letter,  "with  all
authority"  (ver.  29),  enjoining  the  observ-
ance.

Ver.  21.— To  stahlish.  /.  e.  "with  a
view  to  establishing  " — not  actually  doing  so.

Ver.  22. — The  month  which  was  turned
unto  them  from  sorrow  to  joy.  This  was
the  key-note  of  Purim,  the  dominant  idea,
to  whii;h  all  else  was  secondary  and  sub-
ordinate—sorrow turned  into  joy,  "mourning
into  dancing,"  utter  destruction  i.ito  a  signiu
triumph.  Ps.  XXX.  might  well  have  been
written  at  this  time.


Ver.  23. — The  Jews  undertook  to  do  as
they  had  begun.  I.  e.  "  to  observe  the  14tli
day."  And  as  Mordecai  had  written  to
them.    /.  e.  "and  to  observe  also  the  15th.''

Ver.  25.- — But  when  Esther  came  before
the  king.  Rather,  "when  the  matter  came
before  the  king."  It  is  impossible  to  supply
a  proper  name  which  has  not  occurred  once
In  the  last  eleven  verses.  We  must  suppose
the  feminine  sulEx  attached  to  the  verb  bo,
"came,"  to  be  superfluous,  as  it  is  in  Ezek.
xxxiii  33.  His  wicked  device  should  return
upon  Ms  own  head.  Compare  Ps.  vii.  16.
The  device  of  Haman  to  maiSsacre  all  the
Jews  turned  to  the  destruction  of  the  Jews'
chief  enemies,  and  of  Haman  himself  and
his  sons  among  them.

Ver.  26. — Wherefore  they  called  these
days  Purim  after  the  name  of  Pur.  They
took  the  Persian  word,  that  is,  and  gave  it  a
Hebrew  plural,  either  because  the  Persian
method  of  casting  involved  the  use  of  several
lots,  or  because  Haman  cast  "Pur"  several
times  (ch.  iii.  7).  For  all  the  words  of  this
letter.  I.  e.  "  on  account  of  what  was  said
in  Mordecai's  letter  to  them  "  (ver.  20).  And
of  that  which  they  had  seen,  &c.  "  And
on  account  of  what  they  had  themselves  seen
and  suffered."  Mordecai's  arguments  were
backed  up  by  their  own  personal  experience,
and  the  recollection  of  what  "had  come  to
them. "

Ver.  27. — All  such  as  joined  themselves
to  them.  I.  e.  "  all  who  should  become
proselytes  to  their  faith  "  (see  above,  ch.  viii.
17).  According  to  their  writing.  Accord-
ing to  the  writing  concerning  the  days  which
they  had  received  from  Mordecai  (ver.  20).

Ver.  28. — That  these  days  should  be  re-
membered and  kept  throughout  every  gener-
ation, every  family,  &c.  The  universal  adop-
tion of  the  Purim  feast  by  the  Jewish  nation,
originating  as  it  did  at  Susa,  among  the
Persian  Jews,  never  a  very  important  part  o'
the  nation,  is  a  curious  fact,  and  is  certainlj
not  satisfactorily  accounted  for  by  the  beauty
and  popularity  of  the  Book  of  Esther  (Ewald),
nor  by  the  dignity  and  power  of  Mordecai.
Mordecai  had  no  ecclesiastical  authority ;
and  it  might  have  been  expected  that  the
Jews  of  Jerusalem  would  have  demurred  to
the  imposition  of  a  fresh  religious  obligation
upon  them  by  a  Jew  of  the  Dispersion,  who
was  neither  a  prophet,  nor  a  priest,  nor  even
a  Levite.  The  Jews  of  Jerusalem,  in  their
strongly-situated  city,  which  was  wholly
theirs,  and  vrith  their  temple-fortress  com-
plete (Ezra  vi.  15),  can  scarcely  have  felt
themselves  in  much  danger  from  an  attack
which  was  to  have  begun  and  ended  in  a
day.  But  Joiakim,  the  high  priest  of  the
time  (Neh.  xii.  10 — 12),  to  whom,  as  we
have  seen  ('Introduction,'  §  3),  the  Book  of
Fisther  was  attributed  by  some,  must  hav*


OH  IX.  1—32.]


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


16i>


given  his  approval  to  the  feast  from  the  first,
and  have  adopted  it  into  the  ceremonial  of
the  nation,  or  it  would  scarcely  have  become
universal.  Hooker  ('Eccl.  Pol.,'  v.  71,  §  6)
rightly  makes  the  establishment  of  the  feast
an  argument  in  favour  of  the  Church's  power
to  prescribe  festival  days ;  and  it  must  cer-
tainly have  been  by  ecclesiastical,  and  not
by  civil,  command  that  it  became  obligatory.
That  these  days  .  .  should  not  fail,  .  .  .
nor  the  memorial  of  them  perish.  As  a
commemoration  of  human,  and  not  of  Divine,
appointment,  the  feast  of  Purim  was  liable
to  abrogation  or  discontinuance.  The  Jews
of  the  time  resolved  that  the  observance
should  be  perpetual ;  and  in  point  of  fact  the
feast  has  continued  up  to  the  present  date,
and  is  likely  to  continue,  though  they  could
not  bind  their  successors.

Ver.  29. — Then  Esther  the  queen,  the
daughter  of  Abihail,  .  .  .  wrote.  The  un-
usual designation  of  Esther  as  "daughter  of
Abihail "  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  her
having  so  designated  herself  in  the  letter.
With  all  authority.  Rather,  ''with  all
earnestness,"  or  "  impressiveness. "  Liter-
ally, the  word  used  means  "strength."  To
confirm  this  second  letter  of  Purim.  The
fi/rst  letter  is  the  one  which  is  mentioned  in
vers.  20  and  26.  That  letter  having  elicited
the  favourable  reply  contained  in  vers.  26 — 28,
a  "second  letter  of  Purim"  was  now  issued,
"  confirming "  and  establishing  the  observ-
ance. It  went  forth  not  as  an  edict,  or  in
the  king's  name,  but  as  a  letter,  and  in  the
names  of  Esther  and  MordecaL

Ver.  30. — And  he  sent  the  letters.  Rather,
'  he  sent  letters."  In  addition  to  the  formal
"letter  of  Purim,''  which  was  of  the  nature
of  an  ordinance,  though  not  of  legal  force,
Mordecai  sent  informal  letters,  which  em-
braced other  topics  besides  the  Purim  feast,
as  for  instance  words  of  salutation,  and  per-


haps a  reference  to  the  keeping  of  a  fkit
before  the  two  Purim  days  (ver.  31),  These
he  sent  to  all  Jews  throughout  the  whole
empire,  inclosing  with  them  the  formal
"letter  of  Purim."  With  words  of  peace
and  truth.  Perhaps  beginning  thus  :  "Peace
and  truth  be  with  you" — a  modification  of
the  usual,  "Peace,'  &c.  (Ezra  iv.  17),  or,
"All  peace"  {ibid.  V.  7),  with  which  letters
ordinarily  began.

Ver.  31. — As  they  had  decreed  for  them-
selves and  their  seed.  "As  they — i.  e.  the
Jews  generally — had  decreed  "  (see  ver.  27).
The  matters  of  the  fastings  and  their  cry.
These  words  stand  in  no  clear  grammatical
relation  to  the  preceding,  and  are  otherwise
very  difficult  to  explain.  They  are  thought
to  allude  to  the  establishment  by  the  pro-
vincial Jews,  apart  from  Mordecai  and  Esther,
of  the  13th  of  Adar  as  a  day  of  fasting
and  wailing ;  but  if  so,  it  is  strange  that
nothing  has  been  previously  said  of  this
ordinance.  The  plural  form  of  the  word  for
"fastings"  is  also  suspicious,  since  it  does
not  occur  elsewhere  in  the  Old  Testament.
Altogether,  it  is  perhaps  most  probable  that
the  words  were  originally  the  gloss  of  a  com-
mentator, written  in  tlie  margin,  and  that
they  have  been  accidentally  transferred  to  the
text.    They  do  not  occur  in  the  Septuagint.

Ver.  32.— The  decree  of  Esther.  Rather,
"a  commandment  of  Esther."  Some  fresh
act  seems  to  be  intended — something  beyond
the  joint  letter  of  Esther  and  >lordecai ;
though  why  it  was  needed,  or  what  addi-
tional authority  it  could  give,  is  not  apparent.
And  it  was  written  in  the  book.  I.e.  "  this
commandment  of  Esther  was  inserted  in  the
book  of  the  chronicles,"  where  the  writer
probably  found  it.  No  other  book  being
mentioned  in  Esther  but  this,  "the  book
can  have  no  other  meaning  (see  ch.  ii.  28 ;
vi.  1 ;  I.  2).


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 16. — Deliverance  and  victory.  The  history  of  "  the  chosen  nation  "  is
full  of  Divine  deliverances.  The  present  is  only  one  of  the  many  instances  in  which,
by  faith,  the  Israelites  "escaped  tlie  edge  of  the  sword,  out  of  weakness  were  made
strong,  waxed  valiant  in  fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens."

I.  The  means  of  the  deliverance  and  victory  here  related.  Eoyal  authority
primarily  accounts  for  it.  Only  by  the  sanction  of  the  king  could  the  Jews  dare  to
draw  the  sword  and  withstand  their  foes.  Ministerial  encouragement  supported
this  sanction.  It  was  known  that  Mordecai,  the  chief  minister  of  Ahasuerus,  was
thoroughly  earnest  in  the  matter,  and  would  countenance  his  countrymen  in  their
proceedings.  0£Scial  help  was  given.  Probably  the  enemies  of  the  Jews  were
among  the  idolatrous  tribes,  and  the  Persian  officers  and  rulers  were  instructed  to
favour  the  Jews  against  their  heathen  foes.  National  courage  explains  the  valiant
stand  which  was  made  by  the  children  of  the  captivity.  "A  good  cause,  a  good
conscience,  and  a  good  courage  "  secured  the  victory.

II.  The  completeness  of  tlie  deliverance  and  victory.  Fear,  panic,  dread  of  the
Jewi  sdized  their  enemies,  and  the  oppressed  "  liad  rule  over  "  tiie  oppressors.     Tht


ICO  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [ch.  ix.  1—32

enemies  were  slain  in  great  numbers  wherever  an  encounter  took  place.  Mordecai
and  his  party  triumphed  over  their  foes  in  the  public  hanging  on  the  gibbet  of  the
dead  bodies  of  Haman's  ten  sons.  The  magnanimity  of  the  victorious  was  shown  in
their  not  laying  hand  upon  the  spoil,  which  was  wise,  inasmuch  as  it  was  thus  made
apparent  that  their  only  aim  was  security,  and  that  they  sought  not  plunder,  and  also
that  they  did  not  wish  to  avail  themselves  of  the  king's  generosity,  but  to  replenish
his  treasury  rather  than  their  own.

III.  The  marvel  of  the  deliverance  and  victory.  How  contrary  to  the  designs  of
Haman,  the  most  powerful  personage  in  the  realm  1  How  contrary  to  the  expectations
of  the  Jews  themselves,  who  were  naturally  enough  oppressed  with  the  sense  of  their
danger,  and  the  prospect  of  their  extermination  I  How  contrary  to  the  forebodings
of  the  neighbours  of  the  Jews,  who  had  joined  in  their  distress  and  lamentations
with  true  and  friendly  sympathy.  "  God's  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  neither  our
thoughts  as  his  thoughts."  This  is  the  appropriate  benediction  which  the  reader  of
the  Megillah,  at  the  feast  of  Purim,  pronounces  at  its  close :  "  Blessed  art  thou,  0
Lord  our  God,  King  of  the  universe,  who  hast  contended  our  contest,  judged  our
cause,  hast  avenged  our  wrongs,  requited  all  the  enemies  of  our  souls,  and  hast
delivered  us  from  our  oppressors.  Blessed  art  thou,  who  hast  delivered  thy  people
from  all  their  oppre8sors,.thou  Lord  of  salvation."

Vers.  20 — 22. — The  feast  of  Purim.  Other  Jewish  festivals,  as  the  passover  and
tabernacles,  were  instituted  by  express  Divine  authority.  The  feast  of  Purim  was
instituted  by  the  authority  of  Mordecai  and  Esther.  Yet  its  observance  was  un-
doubtedly sanctioned  by  the  God  whose  merciful  interposition  it  commemorated.
The  festival  has  been  observed  by  the  Jews  from  that  day  to  this ;  the  observance
consisting  of  a  preliminary  fast ;  of  a  sacred  assembly  in  the  synagogue,  when  the
Megillah  (or  roll)  of  the  Book  of  Esther,  is  unfolded  and  solemnly  read  aloud ;  and
of  a  repast  at  home,  followed  by  merry-making,  and  the  sending  of  presents.  The
feast  of  Purim  was,  and  is —

L  A  BEMINDER  OF  AN  ERA  OF  CAPTIVITY.  The  Jews  are  put  in  memory  of  the  fact
that  a  large  portion  of  their  nation  was  once  in  exile  in  Persia,  and  that,  although
their  captivity  must  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  their  sin  and  of  God's  displeasure,  yet
they  had  not  been  as  a  nation  forsaken,  but  had  been  spared  and  recalled  to  the
land  of  promise.

II.  A  MEMORIAL  BOTH  OF  THE  ENEMIES  AND  OF  THE  FRIENDS  OF  THE  NATION.     When,

in  the  reading,  Haman's  name  is  mentioned,  the  synagogue  is  filled  with  the  noise  of
stamping  and  rattling,  and  with  shouts  of  "  Cursed  be  Haman  I  may  his  name  perish  1 "
At  the  same  time  the  memory  of  the  great  benefactors  of  Israel,  Esther  and  Mordecai,
is  cherished  with  gratitude  and  warmth.

III.  A  COMMEMORATION  OF  A  DiviNB  DELIVERANCE.  The  name  "  Purim "  means
•*  lots,"  because  Haman  cast  lots  for  a  lucky  day  for  the  execution  of  his  malignant
project.  "The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,  but  the  disposal  thereof  is  of  the  Lord."  No
wonder  that  the  joy  of  salvation  was  too  great  to-find  expression  in  one  celebration.
It  was  felt  that  one  generation  might  well  speak  God's  praises  to  another,  and  declare
his  mighty  works.  Purim  may  serve  as  an  emblem  of  the  deliverance  which  the
God  of  all  grace  has  wrought  on  behalf  not  of  Israel  only,  but  of  all  mankind.  He
is,  in  Christ  Jesus,  a  God  "  mighty  to  save."

Ver.  22. — Sending  portions  and  gifts.     This  usage  is  quite  a  carrying  out  of  the

Erinciple  of  the  Divine  law,  which  prescribed  remembrance  of  the  widow  and  father^
)ss  upon  those  who  were  prosperous  in  Israel.  We  find  an  interesting  parallel  to
the  present  passage  in  Nehemiah ;  when  the  law  had  been  read  and  expounded  in
the  hearing  of  the  people,  they  "went  their  way  to  eat,  and  to  drink,  and  to  send
portions,  and  to  make  great  mirth."  These  presents  were  sent  by  the  people  to  one
another  in  friendship  and  courtesy ;  to  the  poor  in  charity.  It  is  a  usage  which,
though  it  may  be  carried  too  far  and  abused,  has  yet  its  advantages.

I.   It  TENDS  TO  CEMENT  THE  BONDS  OF  SOCIETY  BY  DISPOSING  TO  KINDLY  THOnOHTS

AND  BBQARDS.  A  neighbourly  gift  is,  in  some  cases,  better  than  a  mere  message  of
inquiry,  or  congratulation,  or  condolence.


OH.  n.  1— 32.J  THE  BOOfi.  OF  ESTHER.  161

II.  It  iFroRDS  a  fuse  flbasubb  to  the  giver.  To  share  the  gifts  of  Providence
with  the  less  fortunate  opens  the  heart  and  enlarges  its  sympathies.  It  ia  a  check
to  natural  selfishness.

III.  It  is  benepicial  to  the  eeceiveb.  A  friend's  gift  is  a  token  of  that  friend's
remembrance  and  love.  And  many  a  poor  household  is,  at  Christmas-tide,  made
bright  by  the  presents  thought  appropriate  to  the  season.  Children  especially  are
pleased  with  such  gifts,  and  their  pleasure  is  worth  our  consideration.

IV.  Gifts  besemble,  in  cub  poor  wat,  the  benefactions  of  Providence,  and  the
beneficent  miracles  of  cub  Saviodb.  "  He  openeth  his  hand,  and  supplieth  the
wants  of  every  living  thing."  Christ  gave  bread  to  the  hungry,  and  turned  water
into  wine  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  guests  at  a  wedding-feast.

V.  The  practice  is  a  recognition  of  our  common  dependence  upon  Heaven,  and
OOR  MO  ruAL  BROTHERHOOD.  How  much  better  to  carry  out  such  usages  upon  the
suggestion  of  Christian  motive,  and  in  connection  with  Christian  fellowship,  than
for  worldly  display,  or  policy,  or  from  ordinary  good-nature  I

Ver.  28. — A  holy  memorial.  Memory  is  a  Divine  ^£t,  to  be  used  for  the  glory  of
the  Giver.  Every  individual  has  his  memories ;  for  his  past  life  has  been  marked
by  events  important  to  himself,  and  worthy  of  being  now  and  again  recalled  to
awaken  gratitude,  humility,  confidence.  Every  family  has  its  memories ;  and
domestic  anniversaries  may  be  observed  with  advantage,  especially  to  the  young.
Every  nation  has  its  memories — of  great  reigns,  great  deliverances,  great  conquests,
&c.  Every  religion  has  its  memories — of  its  founder,  its  fundamental  facts,  its
triumphs.     The  Jews  had  reason  to  remember  Purim.

I.  WHAT  18  SPECIALLY  WORTHY  TO  BE  REMEMBERED?  Our  deliverances.  God's
mercies.

II.  Why  should  such  things  be  remembered  ?  To  encourage  us  to  the  exercise
of  devout  gratitude.  To  foster  our  trust  and  faith  in  him  whose  mercies  we  call  to
mind.    To  honour  God.     "  Forget  not  all  his  benefits."

III.  How  should  holy  memorials  be  observed?  1.  With  sacrifices  of  praise.
"  Let  us  exalt  his  name  together."  "  The  Lord  hath  done  great  things  for  us,  where-
of we  are  glad."  2.  With  gatherings  of  fellowship.  Where  mercies  have  been
experienced  in  common  they  should  be  acknowledged  in  common.  There  is  some-
thing inspiring  and  elevating  in  the  celebration,  by  a  multitude,  of  a  great  event,  a
signal  mercy.  So  with  the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper.  3.  With  tokens  of
practical  kindness.  Festivals  are  holy  in  proportion  as  those  who  take  part  in  them
are  unselfish,  disinterested,  and  kind.  4.  With  especial  reference  to  the  young.  In
youth  public  observances  impress  themselves  upon  the  memory.  The  Jews  took
pains  to  instruct  their  children  in  the  meaning  of  the  passover  and  the  other  national
festivals.  Thus  the  perpetuity  of  the  memorial  is  secured.  We  should  celebrate
God's  loving-kindness,  and  "  tell  it  to  the  generation  following."

Ver.  30. — Words  of  peace  and  truth.  Words  are  of  inestimable  weight,  for  evil
or  for  good.  Human  words  move  men  mightily ;  and  of  Christ's  words  we  know
that  they  shall  "  never  pass  away."  This  description  of  the  message  which  Mordecai
and  Esther  sent  to  their  countrymen  throughout  the  empire  is  very  significant.  It
consisted  of  words  which,  whilst  they  were  words  of  truth,  concealing  nothing,
declaring  all,  were  yet  words  of  peace,  speaking  peace  unto  Israel.

I.  Words  can  eeveal  truth.  The  speech  uttered  is  the  expression  of  the  inner,
the  mental,  speech.  1.  This  should  be  the  case  in  all  instruction.  Teachers  should
make  it  their  first  concern  that  their  words  should  be  words  of  truth.  Especially
should  this  bo  so  in  all  religious  instruction  given  and  received.  2.  This  is  the  case
in  the  best  and  highest  literature.  We  value  language  for  its  beauty ;  but  its  highest
interest  and  charm  lies  in  its  power  to  embody  truth.  3.  This  is  the  case  with  Divine
revelation,  which  is  the  truth  of  God,  made  known  to  aa  in  him  who  is  the  Word,
and  in  all  inspired  words.

II.  Words  can  diffuse  and  eestore  peace.  They  may  do  this  by — 1.  Assuring
the  endangered  of  protection,  as  was  the  case  in  the  narrative  before  us.  2.  Re-
moving suspicion  and  fear,  as  friendly  and  gracious  words  have  often  power  to  do.

BHTHBB.  V


IG2  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  a.  1—32

3.  Assuring  offenders  of  reconciliation  and  favour.     It  ia  in  this  manner  that  the
words  of  Christ's  gospel  are  emphatically  "words  of  peace."

III.  Words  of  truth  abr  the  surest  foundation  for  words  of  peace.  The
peace  brought  about  by  false  words  is  hollow,  temporary  only,  and  vain.  But  the
full  truth  being  declared,  a  sound  and  lasting  peace  may  follow,  heralded  and  assured
by  appropriate  words,  'j'he  Christian  revelation  exactly  agrees  with  the  description
of  these  words ;  it  brings  truth  to  our  understanding  and  peace  to  heart  and  life.

Ver.  31. — Fasting  and  crying  remembered  amidst  feasting  and  singing.  It  is  not
good  to  banish  from  the  mind  perils  and  sorrows  through  which  we  have  passed,
and  from  which  we  have  been  delivered.  In  times  of  prosperity  and  rejoicing  it  i?
well  to  keep  before  us  the  mutability  of  all  earthly  things.  Life  is  a  chequered
scene,  a  changing  landscape.  To-day  is  unlike  yesterday,  and  unlike  to-morrow.
Undue  elation  and  undue  depression  are  alike  unworthy  of  the  Christian.  By
remembering  past  griefs,  troubles,  and  dangers —

I.  We  dispose  ourselves  to  humility.  Such  was  our  lot,  such  our  position,  such
our  apprehensions  and  alarms  but  a  short  time  since.  Let  us  not  then  be  puffed  up
with  self-satisfaction  because  the  cloud  has  blown  over  and  the  sky  is  blue  again.

II.  We  encouraqe  gratitude.  Who  has  turned  fasting  to  feasting,  and  crying  to
songs  ?  God  is  our  deliverer ;  he  has  "  turned  again  our  captivity."  To  him  be
praise.

III.  We  season  and  brighten  our  jots.  It  is  pleasant  to  look  back  upon  the
shipwreck  from  which  we  have  been  rescued,  the  battle  out  of  which  we  have  come
unscathed  ;  it  gives  a  zest  to  the  enjoyments  of  to-day  wheii  we  remember  the
bitterness  and  the  anguish  of  days  gone  by.

IV.  We  foster  a  spirit  of  dependence  and  ooNFinENCE  IN  God.  Unmixed  pros-
perity is  not  favourable  to  spiritual  life.  "Sweet  are  the  uses  of  adversity."
Remember  your  complaints  and  prayers,  and  how  they  were  heard  and  answered
from  above.  "  He  drew  you  out  of  many  waters."  So  shall  your  trust  be  steadfast
and  sustaining.

V.  We  enjoy  a  foretaste  of  some  of  the  jovs  of  heaven.  When  we  come  to
the  rest  above,  we  shall  look  back  wonderingly,  gratefully,  upon  the  scene  of  conflict
from  which  we  shall  then  be  delivered  ;  it  will  seem  perhaps  largely  a  scene  of  fast-
ing and  of  crying.  And  the  retrospect  will  surely  enhance  the  "  pleasures  which  are
for  evermore."

Ver.  32. — "Written  in  the  hook."  Tradition  is  the  simplest  mode  of  transmitting
what  is  memorable  from  generation  to  generation.  Ordinances,  festivals,  celebra-
tions, are  a  kind  of  acted  tradition,  and  have  always  been  in  use  among  nations  and
religious  communities.  But  there  are  certain  respects  in  which  literature  is  preferable
to  either  oral  tradition  or  commemorative  festival,  and  certainly  these  receive  force
and  point  and  power  from  what  is  written  in  their  explanation.  The  origin  of  the
feast  of  Purim  was  committed  to  the  form  and  keeping  of  literature.  Whether  the
reference  is  to  the  Book  of  Esther,  or  to  the  chronicles  of  the  Persian  kingdom,  or  to
some  other  document,  is  matter  of  dispute.  In  any  case,  the  story  was  "  written  in
a  book" — in  a  scroll  of  manuscript,  from  which  copies  were  made  for  the  use  and
information  of  those  interested  in  the  events  recorded.     This  literary  document —

I.  Secured  an  accurate  record.  Tradition  is  proverbially  untrustworthy.  The
only  thoroughly  trustworthy  evidence  for  the  historian  is  that  furnished  by  contem-
porary documents.

II.  Diffused  good  tidings.  Copies  were  multiplied,  and  wherever  people  ot
Hebrew  race  were  found,  there  this  delightful  story  pursued  them.

III.  Perpetuated  lasting  memory,  and  insured  universal  celebration.  As  a
matter  of  fact,  the  record  has  assisted  towards  these  ends.  The  roll  of  Esther  is
unfolded,  and  the  story  read,  even  to  this  day,  in  the  Jewish  synagogues  throughout
the  world.

IV.  Awakened  unfailing  gratitude.  The  book  does  not  contain  the  name  of
God,  but  God  himself  is  apparent  on  every  page,  and  its  reading  cannot  fail  to
stimulate  thanksgiving  and  praise.     How  grateful  should  we  be  that  the  great  facts


cB.  IX.  1—32 )  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTIIEK.  163

of  the  gospel  have  been  ooiniuitted  to  writing,  and  that  we  possess  in  the  Scripture*
the  means  of  verifying  our  most  sacred  beliefs  I

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  2—6. — J  reign  of  terror.  "  The  Jews  gathered  themselves  together  in  their
cities,"  &c.  There  were  many  greedy  to  possess  the  property  of  the  Jews,  and  such  as
cherished  spite  against  them,  who  were  glad  of  the  permission  to  slay  and  plunder,
wliich  Haman's  letters  gave.  When  the  king's  letters  wliich  reached  the  Jews  gave
tliem  permission  to  withstand  those  who  opposed,  there  must  have  been  great  per-
plexity in  many  minds  and  fear  in  many  hearts.

I.  Foolish  laws  bring  about  rkigns  of  terror.  The  foolish  consent  of  the  king
bee  ime  law,  and  then  by  another  absurd  law  it  could  not  be  clianged  or  checked.

II.  In  eeiqns  of  terror  the  innocent  have  to  suffer  with  the  guilty.

■  III.  In  reigns  of  terror  the  good  must  stand  together.  In  the  world  there  ia
a  great  fight  for  goodness,  truth,  :iiul  Chiist  to  be  still  waged.  Anarchy  suits  the
prince  of  darkness.  The  Christian  is  in  every  sense  the  friend  of  order,  good  govern-
ment, and  righteousness. — H.

Vers.  27,  28. — A  memorial  feast.  "  And  the  Jews  ordained  and  took  upon  them  . . .
that  these  days  should  be  remembered."

I.  The  memorial  feast  was  in  recognition  of  a  great  deliveranoe.  The  deliverance
effected  by  Mordecai  and  Esther  for  the  Jews,  hints  at  that  effected  for  us  by  Jesus.
There  are  points  of  great  similarity.  The  Lord's  Supper  is  not  only  a  feast  of  love,
but  in  memory  of  our  great  deliverance  from  sin  and  death.

II.  The  memorial  was  ordained  reahily.  Gratitude  led  to  this.  A  fuither  ibject
was  a  desire  to  stimulate  to  similar  faith  in  God  in  further  circumstances  of  trial.

III. -The  memorial  was  to  be  perpetual.  How  faithfully  have  the  Jews  of  every
age  kept  that  which  was  "  ordained."  We  should  keep  that  which  Jesus  instituted.
Parents  may  lay  upon  their  children  certain  moral  obligations,  but  not  now  ceremonial
burdens.     That  which  they  enjoin  should  be  first  observed  by  "  themselves." — H.

Ver.  32. — Valuable  lessons  from  unpromising  materials.  "The  book."  The  Book
of  Esther  is  secular  in  its  tone,  has  no  mention  of  the  name  of  God,  and  no  recognition
in  the  Gospels  or  Epistles  ;  still  it  is  of  great  value.

I.  It  gives  A  VALUABLE  PICTURE  OF  LIFE  at  a  certain  period  of  the  world's  history.
The  luxury  of  an  Oriental  court,  the  tyranny  of  rulers,  the  emptiness  of  regal  pomp,  the
danger  from  conspiracies,  the  plottings  of  politicians,  and  misery  of  oppressed  peoples,
are  well  depicted  in  this  book.  Hints  are  given  of  the  means  provided  for  dissipating
ennui  by  reading  (ch.  vi.  1),  of  the  correct  recording  of  public  events  (eh.  is.  32),
and  of  the  facilities  provided  for  rapid  communication  (ch.  viii.  10 — 14).

II.  It  gives  A  CLEAR  indication  OF  THE  WORKING  OF   GOD  IN  THE  INTERESTS  OF  MEN.

1.  In  a  nation  outside  the  pale  of  the  covenant  people.  2.  In  preserving  at  a  most
critical  period  the  nation  selected  by  himself  to  be  the  means  of  keeping  up  a  know-
ledge of  the  unity  of  the  Godhead  and  the  hope  of  a  Messiah.  Hence,  if  God's  name
is  not  mentioned,  his  working  is  seen.  As  the  name  of  the  Queen  of  England  is  not
written  in  full  on  all  the  ships,  forts,  guns,  carriages,  &c.,  but  only  a  V.  R.  or  the
broad  arrow,  so  the  name  of  God  may  not  be  mentioned  in  the  whole  Book  of  Esther,
yet  his  cipher  is  in  every  chapter,  verse,  and  word.  The  shady  parts  of  the  Bible  are
to  be  studied  as  well  as  the  bright ;  its  valleys  are  to  be  explored  as  well  as  its  heights
to  be  scaled.  — H.

Ver.  1. — The  antagonisms  of  nations.  "  In  the  day  that  the  enemies  of  the  Jews
hoped  to  have  power  over  tlieni.  Tliough  it  was  turned  to  the  contrary,  that  the  Jews
had  rule  over  them  that  hated  them."  This  passage  tells  a  history  of  vicissitude
doubly  remarkable.  It  may  be  put  thus  :  there  was,  in  the  lirst  instance,  a  great
reverse  of  fortune  in  the  experience  of  each  of  two  nationalities.  But  this  did  not  end
all.  At  the  same  time  it  constituted  a  striking  reversal  of  the  mutual  relations  of
those  two  peoples.    In  the  first  instance  the  people  who  had  been  exalted  are  cast


164  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [m.  tx.  1—32.

down  ;  and  the  people  who  had  been  cast  down,  lifted  up.  But  this  was  a  little  matter
compared  with  the  consequence  immediately  resulting,  and  which  sLowed  bo  promin-
ently to  view ;  namely,  a  most  significant  and  determined  alteration  of  the  attitude  of
the  one  to  the  other.  The  lessons  suggested  by  this  passage,  whatever  they  may  be,
offer  themselves  on  the  scale  of  national  magnitude.     We  are  reminded —

I.  Of  the  antagonisms  to  which  national  life  offers  oppobtunitt — an
opportuTrity  which  the  world's  history  shows  to  have  been  ever  lamentably  improved.
The  antagonism  of  the  individual  is  reproduced  on  a  more  terrible  scale,  and  with
consequences  inconceivably  disastrous.  It  must  be  noted  that  this  spirit  of  national
antagonism  bears  not  only  the  reproach  of  the  direct  sin  and  miseries,  of  which  war  is
the  declared  manifestation ;  it  is  an  enemy,  the  indirect  ravages  of  which  add  up  to
a  fearful  amount.  This  may  be  seen  from  observing  in  the  place  of  what  it  is,  that
it  so  often  stands.  1.  It  is  antagonism  usurping  the  place  of  natural  and  sympathetic
love.  2.  It  is  antagonism  turning  out  healthy  emulation,  and  stimulating  rivalry.
8.  It  is  antagonism  hindering  to  an  amazing  degree  that  plenty,  and  wealth,  and
cheapness  which  come  of  mutual  sustentation,  of  inter-trading,  of  each  nationality,
according  to  its  physical  advantages  and  its  genius,  pursuing  its  own  bent,  to  share
llie  abundance  of  its  consequent  production  with  other  nations.

II.  Of  the  insufficient  causes  of  the  antagonisms  to  which  nationav,  life  is
EXPOSED.  1.  They  emphatically  do  not  lie  in  any  international  necessity  of  nature.
They  mean  always  fault  and  sin  at  some  door.  They  cannot  be  justified  by  any
supposed  likeness  to  the  natural  storms  of  our  earth  and  skies,  though  these  may  frame
into  an  unhappy  analogy  with  them.  2.  They  do  not  reside  in  any  international
necessity  of  trade  or  other  interest.  3.  They  are  rarely  enough  owing  to  the  deter-
mined will  or  fitful  passion  of  the  great  body  of  the  people.  These  will  adopt  them,
it  is  true,  and  will  soon  be  heated  by  false  sense  of  national  glory ;  but  they  do  not
originate  them.  4.  They  are  rarely  enough  due  to  fault  on  one  side  alone.  6.  Even
wlien  mingled  with  some  just  occasion,  they  are  rarely  enough  what  could  not  be
averted  by  the  wise  treatment  of  those  in  high  authority.  6.  They  strongly  resemble
tlie  antagonisms  and  antipathies  of  private  individuals  in  these  two  respects — that
tliey  arise  from  the  smallest  matters,  and  take  occasion  from  temper  and  pride.

III.  Op    the  MULTIPLIED    RESPONSIBILITY  AND    IMPORTANCE    WHICH   NATIONAL  LIFE

THROWS  UPON  INDIVIDUALS.  It  is  easy  to  see  that  nations  the  largest,  the  mightiest
tlie  most  complex  are  but  made  up  of  individuals.  But  it  is  not  so  easy  to  believe,  it
is  not  so  welcome  to  the  mind  to  remember  at  all  times,  how  the  greatest  events,  for
good  or  for  ill,  depend  very  largely  on  the  character  and  conduct  of  individuals.
Thus  national  life  immensely  increases  the  importance  of  the  individual.  It  is  the
highest  in  an  ascending  series  of  terms.  For  instance — 1.  There  is  the  intrinsic
importance  of  individual  life  to  each  man.  2.  There  is  the  importance  that  inevitably
attaches  to  the  head-of-family  life.  3.  There  is  the  importance  that  belongs  to  all
pvblic  life,  in  all  the  varying  and  numerous  places  of  Church  and  of  State.  4.  There
IS  the  importance  which  is  inseparable  from  the  place  of  the  governing,  the  highest
places  in  the  state.  This,  though  strictly  comprehended  in  the  foregoing  head,  de-
mands to  be  classified  separately,  because  of  its  highest  significance,  its  superlatively
critical  issues.  Haman  had  done  a  world  of  mischief.  To  human  eye  it  can  scarcely
be  said  that  Mordecai  had  recovered  the  balance.  The  one  caused  the  intensest
hatred  of  "  the  enemies  of  the  Jews"  to  blaze  up,  to  the  unmeasured  misery  of  the
Jews.  And  when  things  were  reversed,  and  "  it  was  turned  to  the  contrary,"  though
u  lesson  of  terrible  retribution  was  displayed,  and  though  justice  should  seem  to  have
another  sacrifice  offered  at  her  shrine,  yet  love  is  left  as  far  in  the  rear  as  ever.  The
whole  family  of  envy,  jealousy,  malice,  cruelty  have  it  too  much  their  own  way — so
far  as  our  human  point  of  view  can  see  or  calculate.

IV.  Of  the  wonderful  room  for  display  of  the  overruling  providence  of  God
WHICH  national  LIFE  PRESENTS.  Two  centuries  before  the  history  contained  in  this
narrative,  the  prophet  had  said,  "  When  thy  judgments  are  in  the  earth,  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  world  will  learn  righteousness.  There  are  given  to  us  all  the  quiet,
argent,  infinitely  numerous  lessons  of  providence  in  our  individual  lives.  How  are
they  unobserved,  lost,  smothered  in  the  thoughtless  coarse,  the  hurried  rate  of  our
Lves  I    They  look  in  vain  into  our  very  eyes  ;  they  whisper  in  vain  in  our  very  ears ;


CH.  IX.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  165

they  knock  in  vain  at  our  very  doors  ;  they  plead  in  vain  with  our  reason,  our  self-
interest,  our  conscience.  But  with  overwhelming  effect  come  at  times  national
providences.  Tliese  speak  sometimes  as  with  the  voice  of  thunder,  and  they  are
seen  sometimes  witli  the  vividness  of  the  lightning's  flash  by  hundreds  of  thousands
at  one  and  the  same  moment.  The  great  subject  suggested  by  our  present  history,
then,  demands  the  attention  of  statesmen,  of  legislators,  of  all  public  men  in  their
degree,  and  may  obtain  many  a  valuable  cross  light  from  the  subject  already  con-
sidered  of  patriotism. — B.

Ver.  16. — The  law  of  national  self-preservation.  This  passage,  with  two  some-
what similar  passages  preceding  it,  may  read  at  iirst  like  the  narration  of
sanguinary  cruelty,  and  the  indefensible  havoc  of  human  life.  Our  strongest
sympathies  were  but  very  lately  with  the  Jews,  for  whom  fearful  destruction  was
devised  without  the  slightest  shadow  of  justifiable  provocation.  We  rejoiced
with  them  when  the  cloud  that  overliung  burst,  and  they  seemed  to  be  delivered
from  their  former  terrible  outlook.  But  already  we  begin  perhaps  to  repent,  and
to  feel  that  neither  our  sympathy  nor  our  gratulation  were  well  merited.  Though
the  destruction  that  threatened  the  Jews,  and  with  such  aggravating  circumstances,
is  averted,  it  is  little  (even  though  it  be  true  that  they  were  not  the  side  originally  in
fault),  if  all  that  is  gained  is,  that  the  hands  that  shed  blood  are  changed  from  the
one  side  to  the  other.  If  no  slaughter  is  spared,  if  for  pity's  sake  human  life  be  not
saved,  if  those  who  were  the  unjustly  doomed  become  in  the  hour  of  their  own  mercy
the  first  to  doom  others,  even  though  they  may  do  so  with  tenfold  provocation  and
with  some  rough  sort  of  justice,  we  may  be  inclined  to  feel  for  a  moment  that  there
was  after  all  not  so  very  much  to  choose  between  the  two.  A  little  closer  study  of
the  context,  however,  will  sufiSce  to  show  that  such  is  not  a  fair  description  of  the
case.  The  subject  suggests  rather  the  statement  of  the  law  of  self-preservation,
not  of  the  individual,  but  of  the  nation.  Again,  therefore,  we  hav^  a  question  of  great
interest  offering  itself  on  the  scale  of  national  magnitude.  This  circumstance  will
facilitate  the  consideration  of  it  under  conditions  in  some  respects  more  favourable.
When  treated  as  a  question  affecting  the  individual,  it  has  often  been  entangled  by
casuistry ;  but  when  considered  in  the  unusual  proportions  here  presenting  themselves,
its  broader,  bolder  outlines  will  perhaps  come  out  to  view  more  plainly.  The  right
o£  taking  life  for  the  sake  of  self-preservation,  or  in  self-defence,  may  be  sufficiently
sketched  out  of  the  material  of  the  present  narrative.  If  that  right  is  to  be  fairly
allowed  for,  and  at  the  same  time  limited  as  exactly  as  may  be,  it  may  be  said  to
postulate  the  foUovving  conditions: —

I.  That  the  occasion  be  one  of  UNDonBTED  necessity.  In  the  present  instance
the  whole  number  of  the  Jews  scattered  throughout  the  127  provinces  now  subject
to  Ahasuerus  had  been  threatened  with  extermination.  There  could  be  no  doubt
of  their  imminent  danger,  and  of  their  helplessness.  When  Esther  (ch.  viii.  5)
supplicated  the  king  "to  reverse  the  letters  devised  by  Haraan  .  .  .  which  he
wrote  to  destroy  the  Jews  in  all  the  king's  provinces,"  the  king  met  the  difficulty
of  his  former  irreversible  decree  and  irreversible  letters  by  giving  authorily  to
the  threatened  Jews  "  to  gather  themselves  together,  and  to  stand  for  their  life,  to
destroy.  .  .  all  the  power  of  the  people  and  province  that  would  assault  them"
(ch.  viii.  11).  He  cannot  reverse  his  own  former  decree  literally,  but  by  a  fiction
he  does  so  very  really,  very  eflfectually.  Esther  and  Mordecai  would  at  that  time
have  been  gladly  content  to  have  simply  removed  from  their  own  race  the  decree
that  dbomed  them,  but  from  the  time  that  this  way  of  putting  the  matter  was  revealed
by  the  king,  and'the  whole  responsibility  of  saving  themselves  was  thrown  so  far  on
tlreir  own  efforts,  the  occasion  became  one  of  undoubted  necessity.  It  was  not  war,
it  was  not  murder,  it  was  not  gratuitous  massacre — it  was  a  case  of  self-defence.

II.  That  there  be  the  least  sacriitice  of  life  that  would  attain  the  needful
SND.  It  IS  remarkable  that  the  exact  number  should  be  so  carefully  given  of  the  two
slaughters  in  Shushan  (vers.  6,  15),  and  of  the  aggregate  of  that  (ver.  16)  which
took  effect  through  the  "king's  provinces."  That  Esther  asked  for  another  day's
opportunity  of  taking  the  lives  of  the  enemies  of  her  people  in  Shushan  (vers.  13—
15)  may  safely  be  understood  to  be  owing  to  special  necessities  not  given  in  detail


166  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  ["«•  "t.  1—52.


It  need  not  for  one  moment  indicate  any  wish  that  one  life  more  should  be  sacrificed
than  should  be  necessary  for  the  safety  of  the  Jews.  Now  when  the  sum-total  of  the
slain  are  added,  amounting  to  75,800,  ^rsi,  the  number,  large  as  it  seems,  probably
does  not  reach  the  number  of  the  Jews  who  were  to  have  been  exterminated ;
secundly,  it  is  certain  there  was  no  comparison  between  the  numbers  relatively —
for  in  the  case  of  the  Jews  the  slaughter  was  to  have  been  of  all,  while  75,800  were
but  a  small  proportion  of  the  entire  population  not  Jews;  and  thirdly,  there  not
only  is  no  evidence  of  there  having  been  any  indiscriminate  slaughter  on  the  part
of  the  Jews,  but  presumably  none  were  slain  except  such  as  rose  up  to  slay.  This
self-defence,  therefore,  on  the  part  of  the  Jews  probably  left  more  living  men  than
would  have  been  left  under  the  circumstances  if  the  Jews  had  suffered  their  own
lives  to  be  unresistingly  taken.

III.  That  the  least  possible  gain  outside  of  the  one  gain  of  life,  the

BUPEBME    OBJECT    SOUGHT,    BE    TAKEN    BY    THE    ACT   OF   SELF-DEFENCE.      In   the    decree

granted  by  King  Ahasuerus  special  provision  was  spontaneously  made  that  the  Jews
should  appropriate  the  spoil  on  their  successful  resistance  of  the  enemy.  Never-
theless, when  the  time  came  they  refused  to  do  so.  And  evidently  much  significance
attached  to  this  conduct.  It  is  repeated  as  many  as  three  times  in  this  chapter.  On
every  occasion  on  which  a  victory  on  their  part  is  announced,  this  is  added  —
that  instead  of  laying  hands  on  the  prey,  they  emphatically  refrained  from  doing'BO.
This  difEerences  self-defence,  and  the  taking  of  life  in  self-defence,  very  greatly  from
other  occasions  in  which  life  is  taken.

IV.  That  eevenge  be  the  least  possible  element  in  it.  In  cases  of  sudden
need  of  self-defence  there  will  be  no  room  for  the  feeling  of  revenge.  Self-defence,
however,  will  by  no  means  be  requisite  only  in  such  cases.  Where  there  is  long
delay  it  is  impossible  to  predicate  that  none  of  the  spirit  of  revenge  may  enter  into
the  hearts  of  some  out  of  the  many ;  but  there  is  no  need  to  suppose  that  now  there
was  any  in  the.  hearts  of  the  principals.  Esther  and  Mordecai  desired  one  thing —
the  safety  of  their  people.  They  wished  for  "  rest  from  their  enemies."  They
probably  felt  that  they  were  the  ministers  of  righteous  retribution.  They  desired
that  Haman's  ten  sons  "hanged  on  the  gallows"  should  still  drive  home  on  an
impressed  populace  the  sense  and  conviction  of  what  a  force  righteous  retribution
was,  and  how  much  men  ought  "  to  stand  in  awe  "  because  of  it ;  but  there  is  no
proof  whatever  that  in  all  the  relief  to  the  bitterness  of  their  soul  revenge  played
any  part.  The  lessons  of  this  portion  of  the  narrative  are  not  needed  for  the  pulpit
on  every  Lord's  day  certainly,  but  it  may  be  they  are  provided  here,  in  the  universality
of  the  use  of  the  Divine  book,  for  some  special  and  solemn  crises. — B.

Vers.  19,  22. — The  elements  of  perfect  joy.  "A  good  day,  and  of  sending  portions
one  to  another  :  .  .  .  days  of  feasting  and  joy,  and  of  sending  portions  one  to  another,
and  gifts  to  the  poor."  Twice  then,  among  the  other  particulars  of  the  people's  glad
celebration  of  their  deliverance  from  a  savage  massacre,  is  this  detail  included,  that
they  sent  "  portions  one  to  another ; "  and  once  it  is  added  that  they  sent  "  gifts  to  the
poor."  This  was  no  ancient  prescription  of  the  law,  so  far  as  literal  command  is  con-
cerned. But  the  spirit  of  it  is  no  doubt  to  be  detected  even  there,  especially  in  those
passages  which  urge  the  principle  of  taking  care  that  days  of  general  joy  should  be  felt
in  their  warming  influence  by  "  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow."  In  the
same  spirit  we  read  in  Neheraiah  (ch.  viii.  10),  however,  what  comes  verbally  much
nearer  our  present  passage.  A  day  of  deep  feeling  and  special  cause  of  joy  was
to  be  observed  as  a  day  of  feasting,  and  of  sending  "  portions  unto  them  for  ^Shom
nothing  is  prepared."  There  can  be  no  question  that  we  have  here  a  portion  of  the
genuine  history  of  the  human  heart.  We  seem  to  hear  some  of  the  better  and
simpler  utterances  of  human  nature.  The  joy  of  the  saved  people  of  God  is  before
us.  And  whatever  other  marks  it  may  have,  it  certainly  has  those  which  make  it  a
type  of  Christian  joy  on  earth.  In  this  light  principally  we  may  now  regard  it.  We
notice  here —

I.  A  general  and  simultaneous  jot.  It  was  not  in  every  respect  equal.  But  in
one  respect  it  was  equal,  in  that  wherever  it  spread  it  was  the  joy  of  life,  of  life
rescued  from  the  brink  of  destruction.     Joy  need  not  be  equal  all  round  a  family,


CH.  IX.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  167


■nor  all  round  the  world's  family;  for  there  are  in  hearts  exceedingly  various
degrees  of  susceptibility,  and  these  by  themselves  are  sure  to  govern  largely  the
exact  amount  of  what  can  be  called  happiness  or  joy.  All  that  is  necessary  to  the
one  largest,  purest,  most  loving  heart  in  the  whole  circle  is,  that  all  others  be  blessed
and  happy  at  the  same  time,  and  according  to  the  full  measure  of  their  capacity.
But  a  joy  that  is  not  general,  that  is  exposed  to  overhearing  the  sounds  of  complain-
ing, or  the  sighs  of  those  who  mourn  alone,  or  the  echoes  of  the  outcry  of  pain,  is
deeply  felt  to  be  imperfect.

II.  A  JOT  FULL  OF  MO'iUAL  KINDNESS.  Quite  Independently  of  the  differences  in
human  life  that  show  one  man  rich  and  possessing  all  things,  and  another  poor  and
needy,  there  are  differences  within  a  far  less  range  of  compass,  and  yet  innumerable.
These  do  not  show  the  extremes  of  condition  ;  and  by  Divine  wisdom  they  do  make
the  room  for  all  the  play  of  sympathy,  for  all  the  works  of  mutual  kindness.  These
save  hearts  from  stagnation,  and  make  the  healthful  ripples  and  movement  after
movement  of  life,  stirring  the  affections  within.  Wore  all  this  at  an  end,  the  dead
level  of  human  life  and  feeling  would  be  appalling  indeed.  The  joy  Ihat  does  not
find  this  room  for  mutual  service,  for  "  readiness  to  good  works,"  for  interchange  of
the  offices  of  affection  and  friendship,  if  general,  would  nevertheless  bo  selfish  to  the
last  degree.  How  happy  that  short  reign  of  community  of  goods  in  the  eary
apostolic  history,  when  all  "  of  them  that  believed  were  of  one  heart  and  one  soul :
neither  said  any  of  them  that  aught  of  the  things  which  he  possessed  was  his  own  ;
but  they  had  all  things  common."  And  that  would  be  inferior  to  the  conscious
pleasure  of  a  constant  exchange  of  the  tokens  of  sympathy  and  of  the  deeds  of
kindness.  In  the  joy  that  should  shut  out  the  prizes  of  mutual  service  it  would  be
felt  that  there  was  something  wanting.

III.  A  JOY  FULL  OF  CHARITABLE  KINDNESS.  There  Can  be  no  doubt  that  the  kind-
ness of  charity  is  in  reality  an  easier  exercise  and  a  less  rare  grace  than  that  of  a
perfect  mutual  kindness.     Yet  we  know  the  special  honour  put  upon  poverty  both

-by  the  life  and  the  lip  of  Jesus,  And  we  know  the  abounding  promises  that  his
word  makes  to  those  who  pity  and  give  to  the  poor.  There  is  indeed  a  certain
subtle  danger  that  may  lurk  in  the  perpetual  exercise  of  charitable  kindness.  The
giver  can  almost  always  reckon  on  the  exaltation  of  position  whicli  belongs  to  the
patron.  He  may  be  injured  by  what  underlies  the  beautiful  and  ever-welcome
words  of  the  regretful  Job :  "  When  the  ear  heard  me,  then  it  blessed  me  ;  and  when
the  eye  saw  me,  it  gave  witness  to  me."  Nevertheless,  men  little  need  at  present  to
be  warned  of  the  danger ;  they  seldom  come  near  enough  to  this  temptation  And,
meantime,  must  not  the  joy  that  knows  not  the  spirit  of  charity  to  the  poor  fstally
want  ?  There  must  be  something  different  from  vacant  want  indeed,  bad  as  that
should  be.  That  joy  must  feel  itself  "  a  guilty  thing."  But  now  in  tliis  typical  joy  o£
God's  suddenly-rescued  people  in  the  daj's  of  Esther  all  these  elements  were  present.
The  people  had  all  been  in  one  danger,  had  all  enjoyed  one  deliverance,  and  they
all  experience  one  general  pervading  joy.  Common  suffering  while  it  lasts  draws  us
near  to  one  another  by  a  proverb  ;  it  is  rather  the  index  of  cowardi;8  of  heart.  But
when  the  return  of  common  mercy  finds  us  drawing  near  to  one  another  in  the  works
of  practical  fellowship,  and  showing  compassion  to  the  poor  in  the  works  of  charity,
then  a  happiness  is  kindled  of  the  best  that  earth  knows.  The  companions  in  danger
and  in  rescue  are  found  still  companions  in  prosperity.  In  woe  and  in  weal  they
have  learned  to  be  one.  The  common  escape  from  danger  quickens  a  sincere  com-
passion. And  this  history  cannot  be  judged  to  fall  short  of  portrajdng  the  one
danger  of  the  whole  race  of  mankind,  the  one  rescue  open  to  them,  and  the  one
united  life  of  joy,  of  love,  of  charity  that  Christians  ought  to  live  hare  on  earth. — B.

Vera.  21,  27,  28,  31. — The  religion  of  national  gratitude.  Mordecai  and  Esthpr
were  not  the  people  to  receive  great  blessings  and  then  at  once  to  forget  them.  We
not  unfrequently  see  those  who  have  had  hair-breadth  escapes  from  the  worst  of
calamities  recover  in  a  moment  their  previous  light  and  jaunty  spirits.  They  seem
insensible  to  the  risk  which  had  so  imperilled  them,  and  certainly  are  not  grateful  for
the  mercy  which  had  rescued  them.  They  do  not  return  either  to  give  thanks  to  mnn
or  glory  to  God.     It  is  far  otherwise  now  with  Mordecai,  with  Esther,  »nd,  at  their


168  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  [oh.  n.  1—32-

initiative,  with  the  mass  of  the  people.  Wherever  Mordecai  had  sent  to  his  people
the  messages  of  relief  and  the  warrants  to  resist,  tliere  he  now  sends  proposals  which,
if  acceded  to,  will  insure  the  perpetual  memory  of  their  deliverance,  and  will  suggest
ever  new  gratefulness  for  it.  Esther  joins  heart  and  hand  in  the  same,  and  the
people  themselves  warmly  approve  the  suggestion.  They  solemnly  and  enthusi-
astically adopt  the  proposal.  They  "  undertook  to  do  as  they  had  begun,  and  as
Mordecai  had  written  to  them."  The  method  of  observing  an  anniversary  to  all
generations  is  accepted  as  the  means  by  which  "  the  memorial  "  of  their  deliverance
"  shall  never  perish  "  from  them  or  "  their  seed."  It  is  evident  that  a  deep  religious
interest  was  thrown  into  this  matter,  and  the  account  of  it  is  repeated  as  many  as
four  times,  and  with  minuteness  of  detail.  The  example  is  good  for  individuals.
The  precedent  is  good  for  nations.     We  have  here —

I.  A  LEADING  INSTANCE  OF  NATIONAL  QBATITUDE.  There  is  great  danger  of  the  fit
occasions  of  national  gratitude  passing  by  unimproved.  This  may  often  arise  simply
from  the  fact  that  "  what  is  every  one's  business  is  no  one's."  The  danger  needs  to
be  counteracted,  and  sometimes  it  is  efEectually  counteracted.  Three  conditions
present,  will  exhibit,  the  fair  and  happy  display  of  national  gratitude.  1.  The  benefit
must  be  in  its  character  such  as  reaches  the  heart.  Whether  cheap  bread,  cheap
health,  or  cheap  Bible ;  whether  free  laws,  free  knowledge,  or  free  conscience,  it
must  be  what  is  adapted  to  all,  and  can  be  appreciated  by  all.  The  blessing  called
life  had  perhaps  never  been  considered  in  this  light  by  the  Jews  till  they  were  so
near  to  losing  it.  But  it  was  what  every  one  of  them,  young  and  old,  and  of  every
class,  appreciated.  2.  The  benefit  must  be  such  as  has  reached,  either  directly  or
indirectly,  every  class  of  the  people.  In  highly-developed  communities  it  should
form  part  of  the  self-imposed  work  of  all  kinds  of  public  and  religious  teachers  to
sliow  the  value  of  benefits  which  may  be  only  indirect,  and  how  they  claim  gratitude.
In  the  present  instance,  the  benefit  for  which  such  gladness  and  joy  had  sprung  up
had  pcnftrated  not  only  to  every  class,  but  to  every  individual.  3.  The  call  to  cele-
brate the  benefit  must  be  made  so  as  to  win  the  hearty  approval  and  co-opera-
tion of  the  people.  The  moral  influence  of  Mordecai  and  Esther  was  evidently
very  great.  Their  own  example,  their  own  deep  interest  in  the  course  suggested,  was
contagious.  The  urgency  with  which  they  wrote  helped  to  throw  conviction  of
duty  and  entlmsiasra  toward  its  performance  into  the  hearts  of  all  the  people.  God
never  loves  a  cheerful  giver  more  than  when  the  cheerful  giving  is  in  very  simple
matters — that  of  thanks,  or  praise,  or  grateful  adoration  presented  to  himself.

II.  A  SOLEMN  RESOLUTION  FOB  THE  PERPETnATION  OF  NATIONAL  GRATITUDE.      Much

kindly  feeling  passes  away  for  want  of  embodiment.  It  dies  down  within,  and  there
comes  "  no  second  spring  "  for  it.  Certainly  gratitude  is  liable  soon  to  die  away.
The  most  solemn  claim  of  affection  that  the  world  knows  is  couched  in  the  language
of  the  claim  of  gratitude :  "  Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me."  In  this  perpetuation  of
national  thanksgiving  we  may  notice — 1.  The  wise  method  by  which  it  was  obtained.
(1 )  The  happy  moment  was  seized  by  the  moral  leaders  of  the  people  for  giving  a
religious  character  to  the  joy  that  already  possessed  them.  Mordecai  made  use  of
the  excited  state  of  feeling  to  say,  Let  it  take  the  direction  of  thanksgiving.  (2)  The
right  moment  was  seized,  when  the  "  willing  mind  "  of  a  whole  people  would  be
inclined  to  make  a  day  into  an  anniversary  ever  to  be  observed.  After  the  people
had  once  pronounced  assent,  as  it  were  with  one  voice,  and  their  chief  men  had  put
their  hand  to  the  engagement,  they  would  not  be  likely  to  turn  back.  The  resolu-
tion of  that  critical  time  has  lasted  and  has  borne  fruit  now  over  twenty-three  cen-
turies. 2.  The  good  ends  which  it  would  serve.  Love  and  thankfulness,  and  praise
and  gratitude,  are  all  alike  in  one  respect,  that  they  ask  no  utilitarian  questions.  Their
motive  lies  in  themselves.  And  probably  it  was  never  more  so  than  in  this  history.
Yet  we  are  permitted  to  observe  the  many  directions  in  which  they  bear  good  fruit.
The  perpetuation  of  national  thanksgiving  on  the  right  occasion — ^that  is  to  eay,  not
after  every  bloody  battle,  to  which  the  Lord  never  sent  forth  his  people ;  and  in  the
right  method — i.  e.  not  in  such  a  way  as  will  gratuitously  wound  the  feeling  of  another
nation, — is  adapted  to  produce  great  and  good  results.  (1)  The  acknowledgment  is
«  direct  act  of  glorifying  God.  (2)  It  keeps  liira  in  the  memory  of  the  people  as  the
Giver  of  all  good,  as  the  Sovereign  Ruler  and  the  beneficent  Friend.     (3)  It  reminds


OH.  K.  1—32.]  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  169


again  and  again  of  the  need  once  felt  so  keenly,  of  the  poverty  once  so  trying,  of  the
exceeding  peril  which  once  threatened,  of  the  boundless  relief  once  experienced.
God's  people  were  bidden  to  remember  how  "  they  were  bondsmen  in  Egypt,"  to
"  look  t.0  the  rock  whence  they  were  hewn,  and  to  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  they
were  digged."  And  these  are  the  memories  that  chastise  the  pride  of  the  human
heart,  and  raise  the  tone  and  level  of  the  character,  and  lead  gradually  nearer  real
safety  and  real  prosperity.  They  are  also  the  memories  which  for  the  future  guide
to  the  right  source  of  confidence  and  of  help.  Of  whatever  advantage  we  know
these  things  to  be  in  any  individual  life,  the  advantage  is  one  immensely  multiplied
in  the  case  of  a  nation — multiplied,  that  is,  by  the  whole  number  of  those  who  go
together  to  compose  it. — B.

Vers,  n — 32. — The  ^ectt  of  ddiverance.  Our  narrative  closes  with  a  bright
picture,  in  which  all  clouds  are  scattered  ;  it  is  as  sunshine  after  rain.  Among  the
results  of  Israel's  triumph  we  notice —

I.  Rbst.  All  the  Jews  in  the  empire,  except  those  in  Shushan,  rested  on  the  14th
of  Adar.  The  Jews  in  Shushan,  after  their  two  days'  conflict,  rested  on  the  15th  of
Adar.  Then  all  had  rest.  So  utterly  broken  was  the  power  of  their  enemies  that
they  had  xest  not  only  from  a  past  fear,  but  from  anxiety  as  to  the  future.  How
sweet  is  rest  after  the  agitation  of  a  long-threatened  peril — to  the  soldier  when  the
battle  is  fought  and  won ;  to  the  nation  when  the  foes  who  sought  to  destroy  it  are
bereft  of  power.  The  soul-rest  of  a  victory  over  sin  and  death  is  the  gift  of  Christ
to  those  who  follow  him  (Matt.  xi.  28—30  ;  John  xiv.  27) ;  and  when  all  the  conflicts  of
earth  are  over,  "  there  remaineth  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God,"  an  eternal  heaven
(Heb.  iv.  9—11).

II.  Jot.  It  is  natural  that  joy  in  its  inward  emotion  and  outward  manifestations
should  be  proportionate  to  the  benefit  that  has  occasioned  it.  The  wonderful  deliver-
ance of  the  Jews  filled  them  with  a  wonderful  joy ;  their  hearts  ran  over  with  glad-
ness. So  also  to  the  man  who  appropriates  Christ  and  his  redemption  there  is  a
"  joy  of  salvation,''  "  a  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory"  (1  Pet.  i.  8).
John  the  Baptist's  "  joy  was  fulfilled  "  at  the  hearing  of  "  the  Bridegroom's  voice  "
(John  iii.  29).  Jesus  explained  his  object,  in  teaching  his  disciples  the  truth,  as  being
"  that  my  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that  your  joy  might  be  full "  (John  xv.  11).
The  religion  of  God  is  a  religion  of  joy.  It  slays  fear  and  banishes  gloom.  It  turns
all  things  into  channels  of  a  joy  that  is  heaven-born.  Sackcloth  may  be  the  symbolic
garb  of  the  penitent,  but  robes  washed  white  and  shining  are  the  symbolic  clothing
of  the  true  believer.  "Songs  of  deliverance"  encompass  the  saved  (Ps.  xxxii.  7:
Pliil.  iv.  4;  IThess.  V.  16).

III.  Unity.  Common  trials  and  common  triumphs  have  great  power  in  binding
men  together.  Both  in  their  grief  and  in  their  joy  the  Jews  became  as  one  family.
Heart  flowed  into  heart,  and  all  stood  up  and  (frew  close  in  compact  oneness.  The
deliverance  would  add  immensely  to  the  sense  of  brotherhood  which  the  common
terror  had  excited.  In  presence  of  such  experiences  minor  differences  in  opinion  and
practice  vanish.  The  more  that  Christians  realise  their  own  need,  and  God's  mercy
in  Christ,  the  more  readily  will  they  regard  each  other  as  brethren  of  the  "  household
of  faith."  The  history  of  the  Church  of  God  shows  in  a  signal  way  how  God  often
sends  alternate  tribulations  and  triumphs  just  to  bring  his  people  closer  to  himself,
and  tliereby  closer  to  each  other  against  their  common  foes.

IV.  Labqe-heabtednbss.  a  true  joy  enlarges  the  heart;  a  sense  of  goodness
received  excites  a  desire  to  do  good.  Grace  is  communicative.  If  we  love  Christ,
we  shall  love  all  whom  Christ  loves.  If  we  have  joy  in  God,  we  shall  long  to  impart
tli.it  joy  to  others.  The  gladness  of  a  God-saved  soul  diffuses  itself  like  the  light.
This  effect  of  deliverance  was  shown  by  the  Jews  in  three  ways : — 1.  In  their  "  feast-
ing "  together.-  Social  gatherings  in  connection  with  great  events  or  interests,  when
wisely  conducted,  afford  a  good  opportunity  for  mutual  encouragement  and  edification.
2.  In  their  "sending  portions  one  to  another."  Not  content  with  words  or  messages,
they  exchanged  presents,  as  tokens  of  thankful  congratulation  and  sympathy.  A
sense  of  the  Divine  favour  should  make  the  heart  generous  and  liberal.  3.  In  their
presenting  "gifts  to  the  poor."    It  was  remembered  that  there  were  many  nrho  had


170


THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.


[CH  X.  1 — S,


not  the  means  of  celebrating  the  common  deliverance ;  so  the  poor  received  giftsi
that  all  might  rejoice  together.  "  Freely  ye  have  received,  ^eely  give  "  (1  John
iii.  17).

Memorials : — 1.  A  written  record.  "  Mordecai  wrote  these  things "  (ver.  20).
Some  have  inferred  from  this  sentence  that  Mordecai  was  the  author  of  the  Book  of
Esther.  It  is  aslikely,  however,  that  the  book  was  composed  by  another  from  writings
left  by  Mordecai.  In  any  case,  a  suitable  record  of  the  events  in  which  the  Jew
played  so  important  a  part  was  made  to  become,  through  its  insertion  in  the  sacred
canon,  the  best  and  most  enduring  monument  of  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from
the  wiles  of  Haman.  2.  An  annual  festival.  Esther  and  Mordecai  ordained  that
the  Jews  everywhere  should  celebrate  yearly  the  victory  over  Haman  by  a  three  days'
feast.  From  that  day  tp  this  the  feast  of  Pur,  or  Purim,  has  held  its  place  among
the  other  established  festivals  of  Israel.  At  the  present  time  its  observance  is  attended
by  much  excess.  Memorial  institutions  have  a  great  evidential  value.  Just  as  the
Lord's  Supper  and  the  Lord's  day  at  once  commemorate  and  attest  the  facts  of  our
Lord's  death  and  resurrection,  so  the  feast  of  Purim  is  a  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the
narrative  contained  in  the  Book  of  Esther.  Memorials  of  past  deliverances  should—
(1)  Keep  alive  our  sense  of  gratitude.  (2)  Teach  us  our  dependence  on  God.  (3)
Strengthen  our  faith  in  God.  (4)  Warn  us  against  the  temptations  and  dangers  of
sin,  and  constrain  us  to  lead  a  holy  and  God-fearing  life.  To  have  our  "  names  written
in  heaven  "  is  a  better  memorial  than  any  that  could  be  fashioned  on  earth. — ^D.


EXPOSITION.     §  19.


CHAPTER  X.
Conclusion. — The  greatness  of  Ahasu-
ERUs,  AND  or  Mordecai  undeb  him  (ch.
z.).  The  Book  of  Esther  might  hare  been
expected  to  terminate  with  the  institution  of
the  Purim  feast.  All  that  has  gone  before  is
subordinate  to  this,  and  the  reader  would  be
satisfied,  and  require  no  more,  if  the  book
stopped  at  the  end  of  ch.  ix.  But  the  writer,
perhaps  from  personal  attachment  to  Mor-
decai, perhaps  from  mere  patriotic  pride  in
him,  cannot  bring  himself  to  lay  down  the
pen  until  he  has  put  on  record  the  full
greatness  of  his  hero,  and  the  strength  and
support  that  he  was  to  the  Jews  of  his  day.
He  has  already  told  us  that  "  this  man  Mor-
decai waxed  greater  and  greater  "  (ch.  ix.  4).
He  now  expands  this  statement.  The  essence
of  Mordecai's  greatness  consisted  in  his  being
"next  unto  king  Ahasuei-us"  (ver.  3),  his
chief  minister  and  altar  ego.  Thus  the  great-
ness of  Ahasuerus  is  inrolred  in  his.  So
the  chapter  commences  with  a  few  words  on
Ahasuerus'  greatness.  It  has  already  been
noticed  more  than  once  (ch.  i.  1  ;  viii.  9)
that  he  "ruled  from  India  to  Ethiopia,  over
an  hundred  and  twenty-seven  provinces."  It
is  now  added  that  he  "  laid  a  tribute  opon
the  land,  and  upon  the  isles  of  the  sea  "  (ver.
1).  This  mention  of  "laying  a  tribute"
was  the  chief  reason  why  in  former  days  ao
man;  writan,  indndini;  Hooker,  identified


the  Ahasnerns  of  this  book  with  Darius,  the
son  of  Hystaspes.  But  it  is  not  necessary
to  suppose  that  the  firit  laying  of  a  tribute
on  the  provinces  of  the  Persian  empire  is
here  intended  ;  and  Xerxes,  after  the  Grecian
expedition,  which  seriously  altered  the  bounds
of  his  dominions,  may  well  have  made  a
new  assessment,  in  which  the  islands  of  the
Mgean,  or  some  of  them,  and  certain  other
maritime  tracts,  were  included.  For  the
rest  of  Ahasuerus'  "  power  and  his  might,"
the  writer  ia  content  to  refer  his  readers  to
"the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the  kings
of  Media  and  Persia"  (ver.  2),  which  con-
tained also  an  account  of  "the  greatness  of
Mordecai,  whereto  the  king  advanced  him."
This  greatness  forms  the  sole  subject  of  the
concluding  verse,  which  declares  Mordecai's
position — (1)  with  respect  to  the  Persians —
"  next  to  the  king ; "  and,  (2)  with  respect  to
the  Jews — ' '  great  among  them,"  ' '  accepted,"
and  their  protector  and  benefactor,  "seeking
their  wealth,"  or  welfare,  and  "speaking
peace,"  or  insuring  tranquillity,  to  all  the
whole  race  or  people.

Ver.  1. — King  Ahasuerus  laid  a  tribute
on  the  land.  Darius,  tlie  son  of  Hystaspes,
was  the  first  to  do  this  (Herod.,  iii.  89) ;  but,
as  the  tribute  had  to  be  rearranged  &om
time  to  time  {ibid.,  vt  42),  any  subsequent
Pursiau  monarch  who  made  a  fresh  arrange-
ment might  be  said  to  "  lay  a  tribute  on  the
Aerzei  it  not  anlikely  to  hare  doae


BH.  X.   1— 3.J


THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.


171


90  after  his  return  from  Greece,  as  he  had
lost  portions  of  his  territories.  And  on  the
islands  of  the  sea.  The  Hebrew  expression
translated  by  "  islands  of  the  sea  "  includes
maritime  tracts.  Xerxes  by  the  Greek  expe-
dition lost  the  islands  of  the  Mgeim,  but
still  held  certain  tracts  upon  the  coast  of
Europe,  which  were  occupied  for  a  consider-
able time  by  Persian  garrisons  (Herod.,  vii.
106,  107).  These  would  necessarily  be  in-
cluded in  any  assessment  that  he  may  have
made,  and  it  is  even  not  unlikely  that
Xerxes  would  lay  his  assessment  on  the
iElgean  islands,  though  he  might  not  be  able
to  collect  it.

Ver.  2. — All  the  acts  of  his  power  and  of
his  might.  These  are  unknovm  to  us.  After
the  failure  of  the  Grecian  expedition  Xerxes
attempted  nothing  further  on  that  side  of
his  empiM,  and  the  Greeks  consequently
record  nothing  more  concerning  him.  He
may  have  made  expeditions  in  other  direc-
tions. But  the  chief  evidences  that  we  hare
of  his  activity  point  to  his  having  sought  to
gratify  his  ambition  and  .give  vent  to  his
grand  ideas  by  erecting  magnificent  build-
ings.   The  book  of  the  chronicles.     See  ch.


ii.  23  ;  vi.  i ;  ix.  32.  The  kings  of  Media
and  Persia.  It  is  indicative  of  the  intimate
connection  of  the  two  Iranian  empires  that
one  "book"  contained  the  records  of  both.
The  fact  of  the  connection  is  fully  estab-
lished by  profane  history.  Its  exact  nature
is  not  perhaps  even  yet  fully  understood.
"  Media  "  seems  to  be  placed  before  "  Persia  "
in  this  place  on  chronological  grounds,  be-
cause the  Median  history  preceded  the  Per-
sian history,  and  was  therefore  recorded  first
in  the  "book."

Ver.  3. — Next  unto  king  Ahasuerus.  Com-
pare Gen.  xli.  40 ;  Dan.  v.  7  ;  vi.  3.  Pro-
fane history  neither  confirms  this  nor  con-
tradicts it.  We  know  almost  nothing  of
Xerxes  from  profane  sources  after  his  return
to  SusainB.c.  479.  Accepted  of.  Or,  "be-
loved by."  The  wealth  of  his  people.  1.  e.
their  welfare.  Speaking  peace  to  all  his
seed.  It  is  generally  allowed  that  by  "his
seed  "  we  must  understand  those  of  the  same
stock  with  himself — "the  seed  of  Israel."
"Speaking  peace"  to  them  seems  to  mean
"promoting  their  peace  and  safety" — in-
suring them,  so  long  as  he  lived  and  ruled,  a
quiet  and  peaceful  existence.


HOMILETICa

Ver.  1. — A  Tdn^t  trihute  and  power.  Ahasuerus  is  certainly  not  brought  before
us  in  this  book  as  a  model  king.  He  was  careless  of  the  lives  of  his  subjects,  in-
difEerent  to  justice,  callous  to  suffering,  capricious  in  his  likings,  and  fond  of  his  own
pleasure  and  ease.  If  Xerxes  be  the  Ahasuerus  of  this  book,  it  would  be  hard  to  light
in  history  upon  a  character  less  worthy  of  respect.  Yet  he  was,  if  not  a  great  king,
king  of  a  great  empire — an  embodiment  of  the  idea  of  sovereignty  and  monarchy.

I.  Observe  the  character  of  his  dominion.  He  levied  taxes  upon  the  land  and
upon  the  isles  of  the  sea.  He  exercised  power  and  might  over  his  subjects.  He  was
•osponsible  to  no  earthly  authority.

\L  Observe  the  extent  of  his  dominion.  Not  only  in  this  verse,  but  throughout
the  book,  the  vastness  of  the  Persian  empire  and  the  might  of  the  Persian  sceptre
appear  as  a  great  fact  in  the  world's  history.

IJ.I.  Observe  the  limits  of  his  power.  The  Most  High  ruled,  as  ho  ever  does
rule,  and  turned  the  heart  of  the  subject  king  as  he  would.  We  feel  that  the  moving
power  in  the  great  transaction  was  Divine.     Man  rules,  but  God  overrules.

IV.  The  power  of  Ahasuerus  suggests  the  authoritt  and  empire  of  God
himself.  Not  only  by  similitude,  but  also  by  contrast.  This  earthly  king  was
defeated  by  the  Greeks,  despised  by  his  subjects,  assassinated  by  his  servants,  and
his  kingdom  passed  away  to  be  no  more  seen.  But  "the  Lord  reigneth."  'His
dominion  is  an  everlasting  dominion."  "  Of  his  glory  there  is  no  end."  He  demands
the  submission  of  our  will  and  the  tribute  of  our  praise.

Ch.  ix.  4 ;  x.  2. — The  greatness  of  Mordecai.  Before  taxing  leave  of  this  interesting
and  typical  character,  it  may  be  well  to  review  the  elements  of  the  greatness  which,
in  these  two  passages,  is  so  glowingly  ascribed  to  him.     Mordeoai's  greatness  was —

i.  A  contrast  to  his  former  humiliation  at  the  door  of  the  palace,  ii.  A  contrast  to
the  ignominious  death  for  which  at  one  time  he  seemed  destined,  iii.  A  state  for
which  his  past  sufferings  and  patience  had  probably,  in  a  measure,  prepared  him.  iv.
Directly  occasioned  by  his  act  of  loyalty  and  faithfulness,  v.  Occasioned  by  the
discovery  of  Haman  his  enemy's  malice,  vi.  Concerted  with  the  royalty  of  his
relative,  Esther,  vii.  The  direct  bestowment  of  +he  king,  Ahasuerus.  viii.  Manifest
in  the  palace,    ix.  Extending  to  all  the  provinces  of  the  vast  empire,  where  his  fame


m  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [ch.  x.  1—3.

was  known  and  his  power  was  felt.  x.  ProgresBive,  for  he  became  greatei  and
greater,  xi.  Exercised  for  the  public  good  ;  in  this  respect  a  signal  contrast  to  him
he  replaced,  xii.  Recorded  in  the  chronicles  of  the  Persian  kingdom  for  the  inform-
ation of  future  generations,  xiii.  Eecorded  and  sanctified  in  a  book  of  canonical
Scripture  for  the  instruction  and  encouragement  of  fidelity  and  piety  throughout  all
time.     xiv.  Permanently  commemorated  in  the  interesting  Jewish  festival  of  Purim.

Ver.  3. — The  wealth  and  peace  of  a  people  the  patriots  aim.  It  is  a  fine  description
of  the  aim  of  Mordecai's  public  life  with  which  this  book  closes.  What  more  could
be  said  of  the  patriotic  statesman  in  any  kingdom  than  this  :  that  he  was  ever  found
"  seeking  the  wealth  of  his  people,  and  speaking  peace  to  all  his  seed  "  ?

I.  Wealth.  Under  this  we  include  not  simply  riches,  but  welfare  in  every  sense :
prosperity,  security,  progress,  happiness — all  that  can  truly  enrich  and  bless  a  nation.
Patriotism,  observe,  has  regard  to  the  people.  It  is  no  special  class  or  interest  tliat
the  true  patriot  seeks  to  benefit,  but  all  his  countrymen.  Now,  whilst  this  virtue  does
not  take  so  wide  a  range  as  pliilanthropy,  it  is,  like  philanthropy,  opposed  to  self-
seeking.  It  is  an  expansive,  liberal,  generous,  and  withal  practical  attitude  of  mind.
And  this  end  is  sought  by  personal  effort,  by  the  exercise  of  wisdom  in  the  choice  of
means,  and  by  diligence  in  their  use.

II.  Peace.  Under  this  must  be  included  peace  of  heart,  such  as  arises  from  a
sense  of  justice  and  security  of  government ;  social  peace,  such  as  prevails  where
neighbours  dwell  in  amity ;  political  peace,  or  freedom  from  civil  broils  and
tumults ;  general  peace,  or  concord  between  different  races  and  nations ;  universal
peace,  such  as  is  destined,  according  to  prophetic  declarations,  to  pervade  the  whole
earth.  All  these  will  be  dear  to  the  patriot's  heart,  and  he  will  use  every  endeavour
to  bring  about  these  high  and  noble  ends.  Causes  of  disaffection  and  disunion  and
discord  he  will  seek  to  remove,  and  he  will  do  all  that  lies  within  his  power  to  bring
on  the  reign  of  righteousness,  of  liberty,  of  happiness,  of  concord.  And  in  his
endeavours  the  Christian  patriot  will  be  animated  by  the  love  and  grace  of  the  Divine
Son  of  man,  whose  mission  it  was  to  bring  "  peace  and  good-will  to  men."

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1 — S. — Wisdom  at  the  helm.  These  concluding  verses  give  a  brief  and  com-
prehensive view  of  the  results  of  Mordecai's  advancement  to  power.  The  influence
of  the  great  Jew  soon  made  itself  felt  to  the  utmost  boundaries  of  the  wide  empire.

I.  A  UNIVERSAL  TAXING.  The  laying  of  "  a  tribute  on  the  land  and  the  isles  of  the
sea  "  may  seem  very  arbitrary,  but  it  was  probably  in  the  manner  of  a  notable  reform.
It  is  to  be  attributed  to  Mordecai,  and  is  given  as  a  special  instance  of  his  wisdom  and
power.  Despots  have  many  ways  of  extracting  money  from  those  whom  they  govern,
but  the  only  proper  way  of  supporting  government  is  through  just  and  systematic
taxation.  If  the  satraps  or  governors  of  provinces  send  in  abundant  supplies,  shahs
and  sultans  are  content ;  they  pay  no  heed  to  the  manner  in  which  the  supplies  have
been  secured.  From  this  cause  corruption  and  oppression  still  abound  in  the  East.
Mordecai  adopted  a  system  of  direct  taxation  which  embraced  the  whole  empire,
and  for  tliis  he  succeeded  in  getting  the  king's  sanction.  Let  us  remark — 1.  That
tribute  is  necessary.  Government  cannot  be  efficiently  maintained  without  adequate
support;  it  is  worth  paying  for.  2.  Tribute  should  only  be  raised  for  necessary
purposes ;  not  for  selfish  indulgences  or  vainglorious  conquests,  but  for  the  legitimate
needs  of  the  state.  3.  Tribute  should  be  equitable  in  its  incidence.  It  should  be
borne  by  all,  but  at  the  same  time  it  should  exhibit  a  just  regard  to  the  varying  con-
ditions and  abilities  of  citizens.  4.  Tribute  should  be  levied  openly,  and  only  through
legally-appointed  channels.  Otherwise  injustice  and  corruption  are  encouraged.  6.
Tribute  is  most  satisfactory  when  estimated  and  determined  by  a  people  themselves
through  appointed  representatives.  Self-government  and  self-taxation  are  in  all
respects  better  than  an  irresponsible  despotism.  6.  Tribute  when  just  or  necessary
should  always  be  cheerfully  given.  We  have  a  duty  to  our  rulers.  The  protection,
freedom,  and  peace  secured  to  us  by  a  good  government  are  cheaply  purchased  by  a
taxation  that  is  equally  levied  on  all.  7.  Tribute  is  due  to  the  heavenly  King  as
well  as  to  earthly  monarohs  and  states.  Whilst  rendering  to  Ca;sar  what  is  Cesar's,
we  should  be  careful  to  render  to  Qod  what  is  God's  (Matt.  xxii.  21).


OH.  X  1—3.]'  THE  BOOK  OP  ESTHER.  178

II.  Other  acts  op  wisdom  and  gbeatnebb.  These  are  only  noted,  not  described
They  were  many  and  illustrious.  But  though  our  narrative  passes  by  these  acts
with  a  simple  allusion  to  them,  it  refers  us  for  detailed  and  complete  information
to  a  good  authority — "  are  they  not  written  in  the  book  of  the  chronicles  of  the
kings  of  Media  and  Persia  ?  "  No  doubt  the  writer  thought  that  archives  of  the  great
empire  would  outlive  his  little  story.  But  where  now  are  they  ?  Where  is  the
empire  itself  ?  Where  are  other  empires,  greater  and  more  brilliant,  that  succeeded
it  as  the  dominant  world-power  ?  All  vanished,  and  their  records  with  them  !  The
only  chronicle  preserved  of  Mordecai's  doings  is  that  given  in  the  Book  of  Esther,
and  its  preservation  is  owing  to  its  having  been  bound  up  with  the  word  of  God  to
men.  Let  us  learn — 1.  The  evanescent  character  of  all  worldly  things.  2.  The  in-
destructibility of  God's  truth  and  kingdom  (Matt.  v.  18  ;  1  Pet.  i.  24,  25).

III.  A  pleasant  kecognition  of  honest  and  honourable  greatness.  Mordeoai
was  powerful  not  only  with  the  king  and  his  heathen  subjects,  but  with  "  the  multi-
tude of  his  own  brethren  "  throughout  the  empire.  His  power,  however,  was  not
forced,  or  grudgingly  acknowledged.  He  was  "  great  among  the  Jews  "  because  he
was  "  accepted  of,"  or  acceptable  to  them.  All  power  that  relies  on  force  and  exacts
an  unwilling  submission  is  bad  and  precarious  ;  that  power  only  is  legitimate  and
secure  which  is  based  on  the  confidence  and  affection  of  a  willing  people.  Mordecai's
acoeptableness  with  his  brethren  of  Israel  sprang  from  two  things : — 1.  He  sought  their
wealth.  In  other  words,  he  studied  their  prosperity.  All  the  laws  of  the  empire  were  so
franied  as  to  secure  their  freedom  of  industry  and  commercial  intercourse.  2.  He
spoke  peace  to  them.  His  acts  had  the  effect  of  delivering  them  from  the  fear  of
their  enemies.  He  held  over  them  the  shield  of  the  king's  protection,  and  enabled
thera  to  live  and  work  in  quiet  contentedness.  We  have  here  an  emblematic  picture
of  Christ's  kingdom.  Prosperity  and  peace  are  the  two  great  blessings  promised  to
the  people  of  Zion  (Ps.  cxxii.  6,  7).  "Quietness  and  assurance  for  ever"  is  "the
effect  of  righteousness"  (Isa.  xxxii.  17,  18).  Christ  is  the  "  King  of  glory"  and  the
"Prince  of  peace."  "The  good  Shepherd"  watches,  defends,  guides,  and  feeds  his
eheep  ;  he  makes  them  "  lie  down  in  green  pastures,"  and  leads  them  "  beside  the
Btill  waters  "  (Ps.  xxiii.  2).— D.

Ver.  3. — The  beneficent  statesman.  It  is  reserved  for  the  very  last  sentences  of  this
book  to  give  to  one  of  the  chief  est  of  its  characters,  perhaps  the  chief  est,  the  place  and
testimony  he  had  well  earned.  For  a  time  these  seemed  withheld,  and  both  the  name
of  Mordecai  and  himself  also  seemed  kept  somewhat  unduly  in  the  background  But
when  we  come  to  the  end,  it  looks  rather  as  though  all  the  book  had  been  in  deep
reality  about  him,  and  as  though  all  had  hinged  on  him.  We  are  left  at  the  close  of
the  book  with  our  last  impressions  as  of  him,  and  he  is  placed  before  us  under  a
very  strong  light.  There  is  no  doubt  much  of  the  patriot  in  the  portrait  we  have  of
Mordecai.  But  the  honourable  summary  of  this  verse  reminds  us  that  he  had  passed
the  mere  politician  and  patriot.  He  has  won  for  himself  the  name  of  the  great  and
the  good  statesman.  He  is  "  next  to  Ahasuerus  ;  "  and  what  he  did  and  what  he  was
affected  not  the  Jews  only,  but  the  whole  empire — all  of  the  various  and  wide  do-
minion of  the  king.  He  is  stamped  on  the  sacred  page  as  the  type  of  A  beneficent
statesman.  There  have  been  not  a  few  who  have  extorted  from  their  own  day  and
generation  the  title  of  great  statesmen,  but  the  claim  has  not  survived  them  long.
The  number  of  the  really  beneficent  statesmen  is  much  smaller,  but  their  renown  is
for  ever.  In  the  amazing  wealth  and  variety  of  Scripture  lesson  for  every  need  of
human  life,  and  of  Scripture  model  for  every  office  of  authority  and  influence  in  human
society,  this  of  the  honest  and  beneficent  statesman  is  not  overlooked.  Neither  must
we  overlook  it,  nor  omit  to  notice,  as  afresh  suggested  by  it,  how  intrinsic  an  argu-
ment is  herein  given  us  for  the  Divine  inspiration  of  the  Bible.  Whence  but  from
such  an  original  could  have  come  to  us  so  many,  so  perfect  models  ?  It  is  doubly
important  that  we  should  remark  how  ample  a  share  of  these  the  Book  of  Esther  con-
tains— evidences  of  inspiration  of  the  highest  kind  and  value.  The  brief  summary
of  this  verse  is  the  more  impressive  as  coming  at  the  very  end  of  the  book.  But  passing
by  all  other  suggestions,  it  speaks  of  a  certain  greatness,  and  a  greatness  evidently
of  very  comprehensive  character.  It  is  the  greatness  of  an  emphatically  good  states-
man.   Let  us  take  the  opportunity  suggested  by  a  leading  instance  of  oonBidering;-<


174  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHER.  '[cH.  X.  1-S.

I.  The  statesman's  OFFICE.  1.  It  is  the  expression  of  government.  If  man  were
only  gregarious,  he  would  need,  and  undoubtedly  be  subjected  to.  government.  All
living  things  are  subject  to  government,  need  it,  and  are  rapidly  being  brought  under
the  rule  of  man,  according  to  the  charter  originally  given  to  man.  2.  It  is  the  expres-
sion of  order.  Man  is  emphatically  not  merely  gregarious ;  he  is  social.  The  variety
of  his  sympathies  and  antipathies  is  very  large,  and  their  range  amazing.  So
much  so,  that  the  saying, "  The  chiefest  study  of  mankind  is  man,"  might,  if  reversed,
express  to  perfection  a  great  truth  for  some,  and  read,  "  The  chiefest  study  of  man
is  mankind."  3.  It  is  the  expression  of  concentrated  purpose,  of  intelligent,  united
advance.  The  highest  and  most  beneficent  results  of  society  would  without  it  be
unattainable  by  the  human  species.  Development  of  society  is  always  tending
toward  higher  developments  of  government.  And  the  beneficial  reaction  is  some-
times abundantly  evident.  Again,  the  higher-developed  form  of  government  is
alv/ays  tending  to  render  possible  higher  social  results.  4.  It  is  in  some  degree  the
expression  of  morality  and  religion.  Where  the  religious  sense  is  lowest,  then  it  is
lowest,  and  vice  versd.  It  has  been  well  said  that  "  the  organisation  of  every  human
community  indicates  some  sense  of  a  Bivine  presence,  some  consciousness  of  a  higher
law,  some  pressure  of  a  solemn  necessity."  Government  (and  therefore  the  chief
personage  of  government)  is  the  outcome  of  the  most  elementary  necessities  of
humanity  in  some  of  the  very  highest  aspects  of  that  same  humanity.  From  the
very  first  this  was  testified ;  and  through  exceedingly  various  forms,  lower  and  higher
in  type,  the  principle  has  ever  held  its  ground,  and  still  excites  attention  and  in-
terest second  to  not  one  of  the  profoundest  problems.

II.  Some  of  the  qenebal  requisites  fob  it.  1.  A  certain  passion  for  humanity
as  considered  in  large  masses.  2.  A  natural  gift  for  discerning  the  genius  of  a
people.  3.  Natural  qualifications  for  exercising  rule.  (1)  Sympathy  strong.  (2)
Justice  clear  and  inviolable.  (3)  Authority,  often  indefinable  in  its  elements,  but
evidencing  its  own  existence  conclusively.  (4)  Temper  and  moderation.  4.  Care-
fully-trained ability  to  calculate  the  efEects  of  certain  legislative  treatment  on  whole
communities  of  people,  and  on  their  mutual  adjustments.  6.  Favourableness  of
position,  as  marked  out  by  Providence.

IIL  Some  of  the  more  specially  moral  and  beneficent  requisites  of  it.  1.  The
"  greatness  "  which  it  inevitably  marks  will  be,  as  far  as  possible,  free  from  the  taint
of  personal  ambition.  Surely  there  was  a  minimum  of  this  in  Mordecai,  as  there  was
a  loathsome  maximum  of  it  in  Haman.  The  very  way  in  which  high  position  is
attained  will  be  a  happy  omen,  or  the  reverse.  2.  Its  "  greatness  "  will  partake  largely
of  the  moral  element.  (1)  It  will  have  ready  for  the  hour  of  special  need  of  it  an  in-
flexible moral  courage.  What  an  illustration  of  this  Mordecai  gave  before  he  attained
nigh  oflBce,  and  when  he  would  not  bow  to  wrong,  and,  when  wrong  became  more
vrong,  still  refused  to  "  move,"  though  dread  punishment  overhung.  (2)  The  natural
temper  and  gift  of  authority  will  more  and  more  become  transmuted  into  moral
authority,  and  become  superseded  by  moral  influence.  Express  mention  is  made  of
this  in  the  career  of  Mordecai.  "  The  fear  of  him,"  of  the  moral  power  that  was
behind  him,  spread  over  enemy  and  grew  comfortingly  in  friend.  3.  Its  greatness
will  lay  itself  out  in  practical  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  crowded  multitude.
Mordecai  "  sought  the  wealth  of  his  people,"  and  it  made  him  "  accepted  of  the  mul-
titude of  his  brethren."  4.  Its  greatness  will  speak  the  things  of  peace.  Special
emphasis  is  laid  on  the  fact  that  Mordecai  "spoke  peace  to  all  his  seed."  The
statesman  is  not  to  seek  to  give  the  impression  of  caste.  He  is  not  to  flourish  upon
war  or  strife.  He  is  not  to  propagate  the  methods  and  the  ideas  of  the  high-handed,
but  all  the  contrary.  Like  the  spiritual  teacher,  he  also  must  not  "  cry,  Peace,  peace,
when  there  is  no  peace ; "  but  he  is  to  make  peace  as  far  as  may  be  possible  by
breathing  peace  upon  all.

IV.  Some  of  its  reward.  Beside  all  such  as  he  will  have  in  common  with  every
obscurest  fellow-man  who  is  faithful,  in  the  satisfaction  of  fulfilling  duty,  in  peace  of
conscience,  and  in  a  persuasion  of  Divine  approval,  he  may  reckon  upon — 1.  The  joy
of  seeing  a  prospered  community,  due  in  some  part  to  his  work.  2.  The  gratitude  of
a  discerning  people  growing  round  his  accumulating  years.  8.  An  honourable,  en-
joring  place  on  the  best  of  the  pages  of  history. — B.


oa.  X,  1-^.j  THE  Book  of  estheb.  Its

Ver.  3. — A  life  summed  up.  "  For  Mordecai  the  Jew  was  next  unto  king  Aliasti-
erus,  and  great. '  Gather  from  Mordecai's  history  something  to  stimulate  our  spirits
in  the  battle  of  life.

I.  We  might  remark  upon  the  way  IN  which  he  earned  his  elevation.  Perhaps
BS  a  Jew,  he  was  a  little  revengeful  towards  aliens  ;  but  he  filled  well  a  lowly  position,
and  80  was  prepared  better  for  a  higher.  Shall  we  desire  rather  to  reap  rewards
than  to  sow  the  seed  which  will  produce  them  ?

II.  Gather  stimulus  from  the  way  in  which  he  peefobmed  his  duty  and  kept  his
INTEGRITY.  In  this  he  felt  that  he  was  already  rewarded.  And  shall  we  not  learn
to  be  patient  ?  Our  impatience  is  our  great  hindrance.  We  do  not  wait,  trusting  in
God,  as  Mordecai.  Yet  "  he  knoweth  the  way  that  we  take,"  and  in  his  own  time
will  bring  us  forth  when  sufficiently  tested,

III.  Gather  lessons  from  the  fact  that  HIS  prosperity  was  materially  aided  by
HIS  faith  and  prayer.  By  his  words  to  Esther  we  are  sure  he  looked  to  God  for
deliverance.  When  the  deliverance  came  it  involved  his  prosperity  as  well  as  that
of  his  people,  just  as  a  stranded  vessel,  when  again  floating,  carries  forward  not  only
the  captain,  but  any  passengers  on  board.  Mqrdeoai  firmly  believed  that,  even
though  Esther  held  her  peace,  "  enlargement  and  deliverance  would  arise  to  the  Jews
from  some  other  place.  We  can  pray  to  be  made  faithful,  holy,  earnest,  and  in
due  time  the  reward  will  come.     It  will  then  be  in  a  sense  the  result  of  prayer.

IV.  Gather  encouragement  in  seeing  how  his  elevation  came  when  his  hopes
WEBB  at  The  lowest  ebb.  See  on  what  a  trifle  they  turned.  And  thus  it  is  con-'
Btantly  seen  in  life.  Be  prepared  to  seize  the  trifles,  and  remember  that  the  darkest
night  oft  ushers  in  the  brightest  morning.

v.  Gather  also  instruction  in  seeing  how  his  elevation  was  approved  by  his  fellow-
MBN.  We  are  told  he  was  "  accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren."  There  was
little  envy  at  his  rise,  because  there  was  much  humility  in  the  man.  So  there  are  men
in  whose  prosperity  we  may  delight,  because,  instead  of  being  puffed  up,  or  becoming
purse-proud,  they  maintain  their  former  humility,  and  practise  greater  liberality.

VI.  Gather  guidance  from  THE  WAY  in  which  Mordecai  dsed  his  elevation  fob
THK  best  purposes.  He  sought  the  welfare  of  his  people,  and  spoke  "  peace  to  all
his  seed."  Not  only  so,  but  there  is  a  tradition  that  many  of  the  Persians,  and
even  the  king,  believed  in  God  through  him.  Let  us  then  go  through  life  seeking
opportunities  to  do  good,  and  using  those  we  find.  Let  us  make  the  motto  of
Cromwell  ours,  not  only  to  strike  while  the  iron  is  hot,  "but  to  make  it  hot  by  strik-
ing." As  Christians,  let  us  seek  the  welfare  and  eternal  peace  of  others.  We  rust,
we  freeze  when  we  live  only  for  ourselves.  We  should  be  like  the  stream  spoken
of  in  a  fable,  "too  active  to  freeze."  "The  mill-stream  went  dashing  along,  so  that
the  frost  could  not  seize  and  bind  it.  The  traveller  over  the  Alps  in  winter  was  so
earnest  in  striving  to  save  his  brother,  overcome  by  cold,  that  he  was  himself  kept
alive  by  the  attempt."  Remember  that,  after  all,  Mordecai's  elevation  was  but  a
type  of  the  heavenly  honour  aiid  glory  which  awaits  all  those  faithful  in  spiritual
things.  The  "  declaration  of  his  glory  "  was  written  side  by  side  with  that  of  the
king.  He  died  full  of  years  and  of  honour.  That  God  who  had  been  his  guide  in
life  was  his  refuge  in  death.  When  ushered  into  heaven,  he  doubtless  felt  that  lie
had  been,  at  best,  an  unprofitable  servant.  Still,  God  gave  him,  doubtless,  in  that
world  a  position  far  more  elevated,  far  more  lasting,  far  more  satisfactory  than  that
which  he,  the  whilom  neglected  deliverer,  occupied  as  the  prime  minister  of  the
Persian  king, — H,

Ver.  3. — Moral  leorh.  Integrity  must  prosper  sooner  or  later.  Were  it  not  so,  ws
should  lose  faith  in  eternal  righteousness.  Appearances  may  be  unfavourable  for  a
time,  wrong,  sorrow,  suffering  may  precede,  but  either  here  or  hereafter  a  distinction
will  most  assuredly  be  made  between  the  true  and  the  false.  Joseph,  though  consigned
to  prison,  was  subsequently  raised  to  power ;  Daniel,  though  cast  into  the  lions'  den,
eventually  sat  with  princes  ;  Mordecai,  though  threatened  with  death,  finally  became
"next  unto  king  Ahasuerus."  It  is  said  that  Mordecai  was  "great."  What  does
greatness  consist  in  ?  1.  Physical  endovrments.  Strength,  skill,  courage  are  among
these.  The  athlete,  the  warrior,  the  hunter  were  heroes  in  ancient  times.  The
deeds  of  Hercules,  Samson,  Goliath  were  celebrated  in  sonj;.    2,  Mental  powers.


176  THE  BOOK  OF  ESTHEB.  [cH.  x.  1—3

Genius  is  everywhere  admired.  Its  mighty  works  are  the  most  precious  inheritances
of  our  race.  In  literature,  in  science,  in  art,  in  the  numberless  inventions  of  civilised
life,  it  continues  to  bless  the  world.  3,  Uxalted  position.  This  may  be  due  to  mere
accident.  Eings,  princes,  noblemen  are  as  a  rule  bom  to  their  high  rank.  When
such  is  the  case  they  deserve  no  credit  for  it.  High  places  are  sometimes  snatched
by  the  unscrupulous — by  men  who  have  no  better  recommendation  than  their  audacity
—  in  the  universal  scramble  for  power  which  goes  on  round  about  us.  There  is
no  meanness  that  some  will  not  stoop  to,  for  the  sake  of  the  glittering  honours  of
office,  or  even  those  petty  distinctions  which  noble  minds  hold  in  utter  contempt.  But
distinguished  stations  are  also  the  rewards  of  physical  endowments  and  mental
powers  honourably  employed.  Then  are  they  to  be  coveted,  to  be  held  in  high
esteem.  The  case  of  Mordecai  is  a  noted  example.  The  text  leads  us  to  notice
THE  TESTS  OF  MORAL  WORTH.  Speaking  generally,  these  are  numerous ;  but  we  shall
confine  ourselves  to  those  suggested  here — -popularity,  unsdjishness,  peacedblenesi.
Wliom  shall  we  consider  morally  great  ?

I.  The  man  who  stands  well  with  the  best  portion  of  the  communitt.  "  And
accepted  of  the  multitude  of  his  brethren."  Popularity  as  such  has  no  intrinsic  value,
and  to  seek  it  for  its  own  sake  is  degrading  to  the  soul.  Let  any  thoughtful  man,
while  contemplating  the  quality  of  the  exhibition  that  attracts  the  largest  crowd,  ask
himself  whether  the  admiration  of  such  a  crowd  is  really  worth  obtaining,  and  his
inmost  soul  will  answer.  No.  Crowds  have  been  so  often  on  the  wrong  side  in  great
controversies  that  they  have  actually  lost  all  claim  to  respect.  They  have  generally  ap-
plauded unjust  wars ;  they  have  persecuted  the  pioneers  of  knowledge,  both  secnlar  and
religious  ;  they  acquiesced  in  the  death  of  the  Saviour.  And  yet,  though  the  crowds
of  one  age  murder  the  prophets,  the  crowds  of  future  ages  will  always  build  their
sepulchres.  History  ever  does  justice  to  the  memory  of  the  martyr,  and  even  he
becomes  popular  when  too  late.  But  the  Jews  in  captivity,  the  "brethren"  of
Mordecai,  were  a  select  community.  They  possessed  a  knowledge  of  things  Divine
which  placed  them  on  an  incomparably  higher  level  than  the  heathen  among  whom
they  lived.  To  be  accepted  of  them,  therefore,  was  a  mark  of  worth.  "  The  multitude
of  his  brethren."  A  man  may  be  the  favourite  of  a  party  simply  for  party  con-
siderations. But  when  the  upright  among  all  parties  agree  to  honour  him,  it  must  be
on  account  of  sterling  qualities.

II.  The  man  who  devotes  himself  to  promote  the  good  of  others.  "  Seeking  the
wealth  of  his  people."  Self-sacrifice  was  the  Divinest  quality  in  the  Divinest  Man.
"  The  Son  of  man  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his
life  a  ransom  for  many. "  Into  the  kingdom  which  he  came  to  establish  no  man  can
enter  without  denying  himself,  taking  up  his  cross,  and  following  him.  Fallen  man
is  essentially  selfish.  Look  around  you  for  a  single  moment,  and  the  proofs  of  thii
will  crowd  upon  your  view.  Most  of  the  evils  with  which  man  afSicts  his  kind  are
traceable  to  this  source.  But  look  at  the  grand  lives  of  history — ^lives'whioh  light  up
the  gloom  of  sin  and  woe  in  which  the  world  is  enveloped — and  what  constitutes
their  glory  ?  They  are  grand  only  in  so  far  as  they  approach  the  sublime  ideal  which
was  fully  realised  only  by  One.  Take  the  Apostle  Paul.  His  memorable  utterance
to  the  Corinthians  was  the  key-note  of  his  entire  life :  "  I  will  very  gladly  spend
and  be  spent  for  you  ;  though  the  more  abundantly  I  love  you,  the  less  I  be  loved."

III.  The  man  who  exerts  his  influence  in  the  interest  of  peace.  "  And  speak-
ing peace  to  all  his  seed."  The  primary  reference  in  these  words  is  probably  to  the
kindness  of  Mordecai's  disposition,  but  they  are  capable  of  a  somewhat  wider  applica-
tion, so  as  to  include  the  desire  of  maintaining  harmony,  order,  peace.  It  has  been
said  of  mankind,  with  too  much  reason,  that  their  "  state  of  nature  is  a  state  of  war."
Sin  divides  men.  In  private  life,  in  public  affairs,  in  international  relations,  this  is
seen  daily.  Envy,  rivalry,  strife  are  found  everywhere.  Such  is  the  state  of  things
even  in  this  enlightened  age,  that  no  nation  feels  itself  safe  except  it  be  prepared
for  the  most  deadly  struggle  with  its  neighbour.  The  advocate  of  peace  is  conse-
quently a  benefactor  of  his  kind.  The  kingdom  of  God  is  "peace.  The  birth  of
its  Founder  was  heralded  by  angels  who  sang  of  "  peace  on  earth."  The  most  precious
legacy  which  Christ  left  his  people  was  his  "  peace."  And  among  the  grand  utter-
ances of  the  grandest  sermon  is  found  this :  "  Blessed  are  the  peace-makert,  for  they
shall  be  oalled  the  children  of  God." — B.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX


THE    BOOK  OF    ESTHER.


CHAPTKR  L


The  Book  of  Esther

The  Responsibility  of  Rule  ...

A  Royal  Banquet  ...

Temperance

Ambition

A  Great  Feast        ...  _

The  Sated  Sovereign  ._

Vanity    ...  ...  .^

The  Law  of  Temperance      .„

The  Position  of  Women

The  Royal  Feast    ...

The  Hospitality  of  Vainglory

Queen  Vashti

The  King's  Anger ...  .„

Wise  Men  ...  ...

Counsel  ...

The  Influence  of  Example  ...
Rule  in  the  House
A  Drunken  Device
Privileged  Persons  ...

A  Koble  Womanly  Refusal ...
The  Parody  of  Legislature  ...
The  Tyrant-Slave  ...
Court  Influence     ...  .^

The  Fruit  of  Excess
Justifiable  Disobedience      ...
Anger     ...  ...  .~

Motives  of  Self-Restraint    ...
Counsellon  ...  ~


TBEUa

rAS>

PAGE

Counsel   ...            _

^

^

36

3

Example...            ._

M.

••,

37

3

4

Penalties

-

—

sa

5
6

CHAPTER  n.

7

Evil  Counsel  Overruled

41

8

A  Captive  Hebrew

.~

42

9

Esther     ...

...

«.

42

11

Adoption

...

.«

43

12

Reserve  and  Reticence

._

44

13

Watchful  Solicituao

...

44

14

Favour  with  Men   ..

._

-^

46

18

Esther  made  Queen

.„

.«

45

18

Release  and  Gifts  ...

...

...

46

19

Memory's  Visitation

1**

...

46

20

The  Verdict  of  Pleasure

an  I

Qtrust-

20

worthy  Basis  of  Action

.•*

...

43

21

A  Relative's  Solicitude

*••

*..

49

22

Simple  Tastes

.•4

■••

49

23

An  Unexpected  Coronation

.••

•  M

49

24

Vain  Regrets

•  •«

•M

50

26

Esther    ...

•  ••

■  •a

61

27

Mordecai

...

...

62

28

The  Pagan  Harem  and  the  Christian

29

Home  ...

•  ••

...

S3

80

Filial  Obedience    ...

>••

,,,

56

81

A  Plot  in  the  Palace

•  ••

, ,,

66

83

Worldly  Policy     ...

•M

...

57

84

Conspiracy  and  Fidelity

•W

^

H

INDBX.


THEME

PAGE

THEME

PAGE

Convicted  Conspirators

60

Human  and  Divine  Sovereignty.  Prayei

104

Written,  but  not  Remembered

61

Self-Devotion  Encouraged  ...

..

105

Prudence  verms  GuiIb

...

107

CHAPTER  III.

The  Hour  that  revealed  Duty

•••

108

The  Wicked  Exalted

63

Prosperity  and  Self-Gratulation

•  ••

110

Foolish  Pride  and  Wild  Resentment ...

63

Happiness  Marred

•■•

111

Danger  of  Quick  Success     ...
Contrasts

64

64

Malevolent  Purpose  and  Pleasure
The  Bathos  of  Confession    ...

M*

111
112

A  Loyal  Disobedience

65

Unavailing  Honour             _

m.

114

Profession  and  Practice

66

The  Perfection  of  Steadfastness

67

CHAPTER  VL

The  Intemperateness  of  Contempt     ...

69

A  Wakeful  and  Eventful  Night

117

Revenge  ...

70

Royal  Ingratitude

118

A  People  Scattered  and  Apart

74

Whom  the  King  Dcligliteth  to  Honour

118

The  Price  of  Blood

74

Glory  Exchanged  for  Woe   ...

...

119

Power  in  Bad  Hands

75

Forebodings  of  Ruin

119

Heartless  Counsels  of  Destruction     ...

75

The  Sleepless

119

Festivity  Within  ;  Perplexity  Without

75

The  Honour  that  Cometh  from  Man  ...

121

Superstition  and  Cynicism  ...

76

A  Forgotten  Service  brought  to  Mind

122

The  True  Church  described   by   Un-

Exaltation and  Humiliation

122

truthful  Lips     ...

77

A  Sleepless  Monarch  and  a  Wakeful

Consulting  Omeus               ...

79

Providence

124

A  Greedy  Grand  Yizier

79

Vanity    ...            ...            _

126

Swift  Couriers

80

Conjugal  Confidencei

127

Life  Contrasts        ...            ...            _

80

CHAPTER  VII.

CHArTEK  IV.

Spare  our  Life       ...            _

•••

129

The  Cry  of  a  Doomed  People

84

The  Oppressed  Avenged

130

Sympatliy

85

Wrath  Pacified      ...

130

An  Intercessor

86

The  Effectual  Prayer  of  a  True  Priestess

130

The  Golden  Sceptre

86

A  Changed  Attitude

•  ••

182

Enlargement  and  Deliverance

87

Moments  that  Flash

133

The  Purpose  of  Power

87

The  Covered  Countenance   ...

•  ■•

184

A  Fast    ...

88

Righteous  Retribution

■  •■

134

"  If  I  perish,  I  perish  1 "

88

The  Temble  Consummation  of  a  Wicked

Distress  ...

89

Life

...

134

An  Unyielding  Grief

90

Accused  and  Convicted

z

136

Sympathy

91

Judgment

^

137

The  Cry  of  the  Wretched    .„

92

A  Crisis,  a  Plea,  and  a  Deliverance

138

Discerning  Opportunities     .„            „,

92

Reversals

z

139

A  Bold  Faith

93

Resolving  to  Run  Risks

94

CHAPTER  Via.

The  Suggestion  for  the  Hour

Self  s  Supreme  Capitulation               ^

Prayer  and  Resolve

Providence  and  Human  Agency         .„

Esther's  Resolve    ...            ...            .^

95
97
99
99
100

The  Lowly  Exalted             _
Putting  away  Mischief        «
Patriotism
Self-Defence

•••

148

143
144
145

A  City's  Joy

•••

145

CHAPTER  V.

A  Nation's  Relief  and  Gladneai
A  Good  Day

•••

145

146

A  Royal  Throne    ...            «

103

True  Patriotism     ...        •   ...

146

What  is  thy  Reqiient »

1(14

A  Type  of  Universal  Joy     ...

...

147

INDEX.


iH


Repairing  Mischief  ...  ...  149

Brightened  Life     ...  ...  ...  149

Consecration,  Kindred,  Law,  and  Folly  149

Sunshine                ...  ...  ...  150

Hopeful  Changes  ...  ...  ...  151

An  effective  Advocate  ...  ...  153

Keligious  Prosperity  ...  ...  154


CHAPTER  IX.
Deliverance  and  Victory
,^The  Feast  of  Purim
Seniling  Portions  and  Gifts  .
A  Holy  Memorial  ...
Words  of  Peace  and  Truth  ...
Fasting  and  Crying  Remembered  amidst

Feasting  and  Singing
"  Written  in  the  Book  "
A  Beigu  of  Xeiioi  im  —


159
160
160
161
161

162
162
163


THEHE  VXOft

A  Memorial  Feast                ..              ...  163

Valuable  Lessons  from    Unpromising

Materials            ...            ...            ...  163

The  Antagonisms  of  Nations             ...  163

The  Law  of  National  Self-preservation  165

The  Elements  of  Perfect  Joy              ...  166

The  Religion  of  National  Gratitude  ...  167

The  Effects  of  Deliverance  ...            .-  169

CHAPTER  X.

A  King's  Tribute  and  Power              ...  171

The  Greatness  of  Mordecai  ...            ...  171

The  Wealth  and  Peace  of  a  People  tha

Patriot's  Aim     ...            ...            ...  172

Wisdom  at  the  Helm           .„            ...  172

The  Beneficent  Statesman   ...            ...  173

A  Life  Summed  up              _            ...  175

Moral  Work          ^            ^            .m  I7i


■n  ^i  };h  H-ii  )'  »t  ■*'


Jiiiiiiill


mill  "ill  MlKlrtlllJIlllJlii

iM«i,»niiW}iij(n..ii"  !>"<"»«"♦>"»;!,!, rn      u  iiuiiiiiiiii

;iiiiiiiiiiiiir?iiil

|li||iHH«IIHlH9!|


.411H


ilTfii


i«lll!'lH!lipii...
iitmmmiiiSiiiKiiiJi


Hi  ijuriBiMMiiillii'liillilfii

lit  liriMllittHlUHlt)  M  IM'l


u«  iiilil
4.!i|iiiiiiiiii!'i     in


nil
1)111

IHI


null uiiiijii   *iHUI!Hi!

;!!ii!'.ir.!l|iri

iiiiiiH)n,!>wi  '''""■


piiiliiiiiiiigia


^^^^^mMM^^^m^


fiiiiiiii^


liilBlliSli


iisKiiissiissiiisar^


KimH'*!*"'!

IHl.dt  llritjl


hi  iiuiJwitijjiii  MHjt

111  iiiiUUiiMHvi;  mm


ffiiSriiiiiHiiKrm


Jili^^S


j^imHiiiUti
MHiiiji  !i


>  I  m   «rHt  I


.»-;*H  rvris^Si  SSliRfSiHis  «;"««'"


f»umHr^^Ht^JHHIft


*  iil  1  »)»H  1  i  filH>;wfI>n+  ImiHM* ;

Jiiiifllilli


nm  u>*  w_i


wv»  in


^.mMi^mMmm^^^ssm


»)>»». J-V>


^:  ^'^i^  ^;lpipSiiiilliL

>  1 1         i ",,",  •..'m;';»;il|r,''ii;if.',',!!ll  Sill!  !H,!',K!<*^'"»" !i*ti

:,ili|!l!,V.I!llliiiiJiiimi.;iijiii

■'  ii!t;!i",iriiii;,i.iii

ill    iiHii>mi"t'!!'J  HI!    1
.iMI>»!nit;i!'1i!!'.!i'!!r!S|i|!JiJ  ''


111  n


tl  11111  iiimfiHiiiliii  hi  itB!

11111    mWHUIIlHIIHllHl

lill  II  tttt"»illl'"

~    MirrfiflHHllMIHMHlllIll

1111,11  iih!hhI!ii>i  »i"il!;m{  mu.


1   HI  II     )  It      rui m  ""•!"■'''':!:

1    11    1  1       I  111  llllHllmWHHltliHlijl

iH     111  It  i'  iiili  II mt"  H""""^
'  :"    .    i  JIii.i>»iiiniitiitiiiiiiiiiiii


ijHiim  j

lit  I    mt.iiriiriWliiiili»ilii|!;lK

iiiiiimiiHiiMiHWtiiiii;"  •«
