Ny 
ae 


BT 885 .W47 

West, Nathaniel 

The thousand years in both 
Testaments 


i 


ait 
ie ae 

i Minay FY 

aw ¢ Thu, f 

Lie ee 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https ://archive.org/details/thousandyearsinb0Owest 


SEUDIES SIN] ESCHATOLOGY. 


The Thousand Years 


=ST Na 


bov wte Ss FANE NDS: 


‘To whom do we owe it that the Evangelical Church of to-day no 
longer, after the fashion of the old Dogmatics, brands, as a heterodoxy, the 
Chiliastic view of the End-Time, but has taken it up into her deepest and 
innermost life, so that to-day, a believing Christian can scarcely be found 
who does not enjoy it? To whom do we owe it that the Church of to-day 
believes in a glorious future for Israel, and sees, in Old Testament History, 
a Pre-history and forelight of Israel’s End-history, and in Old Testament 
Prophecy a far-sight, not merely of the glory of the Gentile Church, but of 
Israel in a literal sense? To whom do we owe it that the Church, in recog- 
nition of the sensuous reality in which the super-sensuous salvation is 
clothed, has again reinstated Old Testament History in its right, and con- 
ceived the spiritual and corporeal in their organic relations, and limitations? 
We owe it to none other than Bengel. He it was who emptied out the last 
dregs of an Anti-Chiliastic Theology, disposed to Heresy-Mania, under the 
appearance of Orthodoxy, and, even yet more, led, to a better view, the 
Moravian Brethren who thought they realized, in their own fellowship, the 
glorious future of the Church, the so-called Philadelphian Period. He 
burst asunder the chains of a binding traditionalism of interpretation, 
deemed, in his day, almost unassailable, vindicated the mother-right of 
Exegesis to control Dogmatics, and showed, to the Church, the Castalian 
Fount, in the Scriptures, from which she must ever renew her youth.” 

DELITZSCH. 


SEO Dioolt BE SCHATOLOGY. 


THE THOUSAND YEARS 


IN 


BOTH TESTAMENTS 


WITH 


SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS UPON SYMBOLICAL NUMBERS 
THE DEVELOPMENT OF PROPHECY, AND ITS INTERPRE- 
TATION CONCERNING’ ISRAEL, THE NATIONS, THE 
CHURCH, AND THE KINGDOM, AS SEEN IN 
THE APOCALYPSES OF ISAIAH, FZEKIEL, 

DANIEL, CHRIST, AND JOHN. 


BY 


REV. NATHANIEL WEST, D. D. 


h yap pwaptupta tov Inoud éott tO mvedpa TIS TpOYTEtas. 


FLEMING H. REVELL, 
CHICAGO: NEW YORK: 
148 AND I50 MADISON STREET. | I2 BIBLE HOUSE, ASTOR PLACE. 
Publisher of Evangelical Literature. 


Entered According to Act of Congress, in the Year 188c, by 
NATHANIEL WEST, 


In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C. 


elned sa cide 4 Ola Bb. 


A profound interest in the word of divine prophecy has 
become general in our day, among a vast multitude of God’s 
children, and is the necessary result not only of the great 
principle of free investigation set in motion by the Reforma- 
tion of the 16th century, but of a special prediction that, “in the 
Time of the End,” it should be so, Dan. xii:4, and of the fact 
that the End of our Age is fast approaching, Matt. xxiv:32—-40. 
Eschatological questions have stepped to the front, in connec- 
tion with apologetics and polemics in defence of Christianity, 
and this character of the first Age of Christianity repeats itself. 
Among these questions, are the deepening apostasy of 
Christendom from the pure truth and the ancient faith, the 
rapid extension of missions, restoration and conversion of 
Israel, the Antichrist, the coming of the Lord from heaven, the 
judgment of the church and the world, the resurrection from 
among the dead, the binding of Satan, and the millennial 
reign. Educated men, as well as devout souls of humbler 
pretension, begin to see, as never before, that not only “the 
testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of prophecy,” Rev. xix:10, but 
that the prophetic page is a word “more sure” than ocular 
demonstration, or audible voice from heaven; ‘‘a lamp shining 
in a dark place, whereunto they do well to take heed, until the 
Day dawn, and the Day-Star,’—the phosphor of millennial 
glory,—‘‘ arise upon their hearts.” II Pet. i:19. The nearer 
the End of the present Age, the more are their eyes directed 
to those facts of the Scripture where the “ Last Things” are 
the theme, and the more do their hearts begin to breathe the 
prayer, ‘“‘Come, Lord Jesus!”’ There is an unusual “search- 
ing” after the “what time and the what manner of time, the 
Spirit of Christ, who was in the prophets, did point to when 
foretestifying the sufferings of Christ, and the glories after 
these.” I Pet. i:11. Hence the almost fabulous increase of 

e 


vi PREFACE. 


prophetic and apocalyptic literature, in our day, and deep ex- 
egetical investigation in reference to the ‘‘ Last Things,” new - 
volumes daily pouring from the press, in an uninterrupted 
stream. It is one of the predicted “Signs of the Times.” 
Dan. xii:4. 

It is not to be denied that a large part of the professing 
church, swayed by its teachers, is indifferent to these themes, 
and to this phenomenon, and regard the word of prophecy as 
unprofitable, and its unfulfilled part as unintelligible. This 
also is a “Sign of the Times,” Isa. xxix:g-12, even as the 
concurrence of these two contradictory facts, the increase of 
apostasy and extension of missions, constitute another “Sign.” _ 
Matt. xxiv:ro-14. A false spiritualizing, allegorizing, and 
idealizing, interpretation has contributed to rob the predictions 
concerning Israel of their realistic value, fazling to discriminate 
between what ts common to Jew and Gentile alike, in the one 
spirttual salvation which comes to all, and where “there is no 
distinction,” Acts xv:9; Rom. 11:23, and what is peculiar to 
literal Israel, as the people bringing salvation to the world, and 
ordained in the future, as tn the past, to a distinguished place in 
the kingdom of God. Asa result of this false lure, “ blindness 
in part’ has happened to the Gentiles until Israel is saved, a 
blindness that affects all eschatological questions, and has 
brought the Church, in many places, to regard the doctrine of 
the pre-millennial coming of Israel’s Messiah as a “ Jewish 
fable’ not to be believed. Eschatology is assigned to a back 
seat, and the Voice from heaven that summons all to “ hear 
what the Spirit saith to the churches,” and commands a bless- 
ing on “him who readeth and them who hear the words of 
this prophecy,’—the preacher and his congregation,—is dis- 
regarded. Rev. 1:3; 11:7. The Church does not understand the 
present age, nor its relation to the coming age, nor Israel’s 
relation to both, and to the Nations, and to the Church her- 
self. And this blindness will continue until the false systems 
of interpretation, by which it has been caused, are rejected. 
Until the glamour of this enchantment ‘has been dissolved, it 
is impossible to understand either the organic structure of 
prophecy, the mission of the Church, the position of our 
present Age, Israel’s place in history, the Antichrist, the Ages 
and the Ends, the difference between the Kingdom and the 
Church, or the time of Christ’s appearing. The Anti-Semitism 
of our modern times, with its hatred of the Jew,—a thing dis- 
graceful to Christendom, and so unlike the Philo-Israelism of 


- PREPACE. Vil 


the apostolic days,—is due, in no small degree, to these false 
systems of interpretation. 

These pages re-assert, upon the ground of God's word 
alone,—redundant with its justifying proof,—that Doctrine of 
the Pre- Millennial Coming of Christ, which, in the apostolic 
and old-Catholic Church, was, for 300 years, “the test of 
orthodoxy,” and formed a chief article of faith and hope. 
They profess to demonstrate the revelation and the desig- 
nation of ‘the tooo years,” in the Old as well as in the New 
Testament, and more repeatedly in the former than in the 
latter. Hence the title of the book: “ The Thousand Years in 
both Testaments.” ‘Two “ Parts” are devoted to this theme. 
The “ Supplementary Discussions” in their separate and more 
numerous “ Parts,” are auxiliary to this main purpose, sweep- 
ing the wide compass of Scripture from Moses to John, 
discussing the great question of symbolical numbers, exhibiting 
the vital organism of all prophecy, and illustrating the perfect 
unity of the whole word of God. ‘The writer ventures to hope 
that the severe, and hitherto perplexing problem of the 70 
Weeks of Daniel and which, when understood, displays a 
complete scheme of prophecy, divine purpose, course of 
history, and relation of Israel to the Nations and to the 
Church, from the Exile down to the Second Coming of 
Christ, has at length reached a satisfactory solution. Where 
Greek and Hebrew terms appear, the English letter has been 
used, solely for the sake of the ordinary reader. The 
discussion is wholly exegetical and critical, for the reason that 
the writer desired to give to many earnest seekers after truth, 
a biblical foundation in the terms of the Holy Ghost Himself, 
for a precious doctrine which, with some, is more a matter of 
sentiment than of knowledge. ‘The views of distinguished men 
are freely reviewed, and distinctly approved or ‘condemned. 
It is one of the virtues which characterizes all great investi- 
gators, like Augustine, Hengstenberg, Keil, and Kliefoth, that 
the very clearness of their utterances, serves only to expose the 
fundamental error which vitiates their otherwise matchless and 
meritorious work. 

Should any one, reading these pages, dream that the 
writer, by adhering to the literal and realistic interpretation, 
i. e. the grammatical and historical, as opposed to the false 
systems just named, has robbed the “ Church” of her inherit- 
ance in the promises of God, it is enough to answer, Man! 
thine hour is not yet come! ‘Salvation is fem the Tews.” 


~~ 


vill PREFACE. 


The Old Covenant at Sinai, and the New Covenant at Jerusalem, 
were, both, made with the literal Israel, with Jews, and not 
with Gentiles. Heb. viii:8-13. Chrdtstian Israel, according to 
the flesh, was the historic and organic Root and Basis of the 
Church, at the first coming of Messiah. Christian Lsrael, 
according to the flesh, and as a Watton, will be the historic and 
organic Root and Basis of the Kingdom, at Messiah’s second 
coming. It is the uniform doctrine of the Bible. Only after 
the conversion of Israel as a Nation, at the second coming of 
Messiah, will the “zvez/” be taken from the Nations, as from 
Israel, and a national Christianity exist in the glorified King- 
dom of Christ on earth. ‘The Gentile proselyte engrafted into 
the Old Covenant took Israel’s name. The Gentile convert, 
engrafted into the New Covenant, acquires a privilege no less. 
But only in a spirttual sense. ‘The incorporation does not 
annihilate the tree, nor abolish the standing distinction, or 
national contrast, everywhere seen from Moses to John, 
between the native and the wild branches, or “/svae/”’ and the 
“‘ Gentiles.” Spiritually, “zz Christ” there is “neither Jew 
nor Greek,” and for the same reason, “neither male nor 
female.” But he needs instruction in ‘the first principles of 
the oracles of God,” who builds on this the unscriptural 
doctrine that, externally, neither in the “ Church,” nor in the 
“ Kingdom,” are Jew and Gentile, male and female, to be dis- 
covered. The Church is not Christ. The Kingdom is not 
Christ. All nations, and both sexes, are found in both. In 
the spiritual relation, all distinctions disappear. ‘‘ Jz Christ,” 
there is neither parent nor child, husband nor wife. To use 
the sweet words of ‘Tertullian, when speaking of the Christian 
husband and wife, “ ambo fratres,’ “both are brethren.’ In 
the economical or dispensational relation, nationalities, and 
sex, both abide, save in the case of the risen saints. The ant- 
thesis between Israel and the Nations endures, not only in the 
Millennial Age, but on the New Earth. 

These are preliminary thoughts. Our present Age, occu- 
‘pied with evangelizing the Nations, belongs to the “ Times of 
the Gentiles,” when Israel is under foot, and will be followed 
by another in which Christ’s Kingdom will be Israel’s King- 
dom, Gentile supremacy over Israel having passed away, and 
Israel once more placed in their historical position and relation 
to the Nations, asa converted people, holy to the Lord. In 
Abraham's seed, collectively, all Nations shall bless themselves. 


Such is the realistic interpretation concerning Israel and the 
Kingdom of the 1000 years, | | 


PREFACE. LX 


These truths are enforced, in these pages, by constant 
textual reference, and also by ample quotations from men of 
eminent scholarship and piety, than whom the Church enjoys 
none greater. The quotations could have been multiplied a 
hundred fold. Their presence is meant to refute the foolish 
statement, so often made by persons of superficial attainment, 
or improper bias, that the learning of the Age is opposed to 
the pre-millennial view. Nothing is more seriously erroneous. 
The reader will judge whether he can name, as scholars, any- 
where, men superior in learning, authority, influence or true 
devotion to the cause of Christ, or worthier to be trusted than 
the shining lights hereinafter cited. The appeal must, how- 
ever, be made, in the last as well as the first instance, to the 
written Word of God. 

How imperfectly so vast and difficult a theme as “ Zhe 
1000 years in both Testaments,’ has been handled, in these 
pages, the writer is painfully aware. The problems involved 
are among the most intricate. It is a comfort to know that, as 
the evening of our Age approaches, “there shall be light,” and 
“the wise shall understand.” God will raise up faithful men 
to add still better demonstrations of His truth, until the time 
arrives when, as the great Bengel said, not only Old Testa- 
ment prophecy, but the Apocalypse, will become so clear, that 
both will be taught to children as “parts of their juvenile 
instruction,” If the time bestowed upon these pages, and the 
use made of the toil of other men, shall enable any of God’s 
children to catch a glimpse of the glory of His word, and the 
grandeur of His way, or confirm their faith and hope in the 
literal realities of the Sacred Prophecies, and lead them to 
look beyond themselves, to the Coming Kingdom, and its 
bright rewards, and to work, do, suffer, wait, watch and pray 
for its approach, neither the hours nor the labor will have been 
in vain. 

To my'dear brethren in the ministry, and others, noble men 


and women, all “one in Christ,’’ who have assisted to bear the | 


burden of publishing these pages, and but for whose counsel 
and encouragement the pen had many times dropped, not to 
be relifted, and especially to my brothers Dr. L. W. Munhall 
of Germantown, Pa., and Professor Dr. W. G. Morehead of 
Xenia, O., I desire, here and openly, to express my sincere and 
grateful acknowledgments. In the day of recompense, their 


service will not be forgotten! Nor will the deep interest of © 


my dear brethren Drs. Brookes of St. Louis, A, T. Pierson, 


<= 


x PREFACE. 


Philadelphia, Pa., Erdmann of Asheville, Erdmann of Morris- 
town, Duffield of Princeton, S. H. Kellogg and Parsons of 
Toronto, W. Parlane, Esq. of Collingwood, S. P. Harbison 
and Joseph Albree of Pittsburgh, Pa., Hon. J. W. Baldwin of 
Columbus, O., and Benjamin Douglass, Esq of Chicago, fail 
of its reward. To my faithful friend Hon. Henry Hastings 
Sibley, L.L.D. of St. Paul, Minn., thanks are due which I 
know not how to express. More than all, to Him who has 
given me “songs in the night,’ and a love for His dear Son 
that is quenchless, and whose blessed Spirit is the source of 
all light, an eternal self-sacrifice is due. 

I commit this work to the providence of God,—for whose 
glory it is written,—casting my little loaf upon the waters, 
expecting to find,—perhaps not “after many days,’’—that it 
has contributed to instruct, strengthen and cheer, some of 
God’s dear children in their journey Kingdomward. May His 
blessing go with it, pardoning whatever is amiss in conception, 
argument or expression, and opening the hearts of some to 
receive whatever is according to His will. In the hour of 
affliction we learn more of God’s word, and God’s way, than in 
a whole age of sunshine and prosperity, and it is well to remem- 
ber that the prophecies were spoken first in that moment when 
Israel’s night was the darkest. Paradoxical indeed, it was then 
the light was the brightest, the promise the sweetest, and the 
devotion the deepest. So will it be again. Israel will be able 
to say, when emerging from the last great tribulation, as when 
returning from Exile to build the Temple: 


“ The Lord hath chastened me sore, 

But not abandoned me to death. 

The Lordis God. [Te hath given us light; 
Lind the sacrifice with cords, 

EVEN TO THE HORNS OF THE ALTAR!” 


Affliction, Lignt, and Consecration, these are the best hand- 
maids of a true interpretation. 
NATHANIEL WEST. 
St. Paul, Minnesota, June 1, 1889. 


CONTENTS. 


THE THOUSAND YEARS IN BOTH 
TESTAMENTS. 


Pieke ke des 


Common error as to ‘‘ the thousand years,” 1. Van Oosterzee, Aucustine’s 
) g 


A. 


maxim, 2. “schata, 3. Partial and Plenary Fultillment, 4. 

The Kingdom and Prophecy, 4. Israel, Messiah, and the Nations, the 
theme of O. T. Prophecy, 5. Classification of the Prophets, 6. /orms 
Of the- Kingdom. Huds and Aves, 7. Israe] ‘* abides” Israel; -%; 
Prophecy an Organism, 8. Pre-exile Prophecy, Perspective, Composite 
Photography, 9. Problem of Israel’s Future, and of the Millennial 
Age, 9g. The Mystery of the N. T. Church not unveiled in O. T., 10. 
Yom Vehovah and the Millennium, Io. 

General Distribution of Time. Pre-Exile Prophecy, 11. Olam Habba, 
Olam Hazzéh. One End, One Advent, Two Ages, 12. Isaiah’s Brill- 
iant and “‘ Everlasting” Age, 13,14. The Rabbis’ ‘‘ Immortal Age,” 
14. Schematism of the Ages and End, 15. 

LEixtile Prophecy, 15. Two Ends, Two Advents, Two Resurrections, 
Two Judgments, Three Ages, 15. Schematism, 16. Development of 
Olam Habba into Our Dispensation, and the following, in Daniel’s 
Apocalypse, 17. Further development, New Covenant, New-Born 
Israel, 18. Ezekiel’s Apocalypse, the Glory, 18. The Millennial Age, 
Gog, I9. Schematism of Three Ends and Four Ages, i9. Each End 
brings Resurrection, Judgment, and a New Form of the Kingdom, 
20. No Third Advent revealed, 20. 7Zotal 4onology and Teleology 
of Prophecy, 20. iS, 

Sub-Distribution of Time, 21. Colossus, Israel’s Grave-Yard, 21. The 
Four Beasts and Little Horn, 22. Zhe Seventy Weeks, 23. The 7oth 
Week is eschatological, 24. The Great Interval between the 69th and 
70th Weeks, 25. “The Second Advent is the One Common End of the 
Colossus, Grave-Yard, Four Beasts, Horn, 70th Week, and Israel’s sub- 


(xi) 


Re 


CONTENTS. 


jection to the Gentiles, 25. Prophetic Formula, Horizons, and Per- 
spective, 25. Times of Refreshing, when, 27. ‘*The Times of the 
Gentiles’ are 2o0¢ ‘‘ The Thousand Years,” 27. Millennium located, 28. 
Daniel’s ‘‘ People,” who? 29. Wide Range of Prophetic Vision, 29, 30. 
Grand Formula, 30, 31. 

Post-Exile Prophecy, 31. aggai’s Oracle, and the ‘‘Glory,” 32. 
“Marathon” and ‘‘ Maranatha,” 32. Two Advents, Immovable King- 
dom, 32. Zechariah’s Two Advents, 32. Szspenston of the National 
Covenant with Israel, 32. Second Advent, Nocturnal Day, Solar Night, 
Mount of Olives, 32. Israel’s Penitential Hour, Conversion, Deliver- 
ance of Jerusalem, Millennial Age, Feast of Tabernacles, 33. Malachi’s 
Two Advents, the Night, the Storm, the Sunrise, Frisking Calves, 


33, 34- 


PART ail 


Different Names given in O, T. to the “ Thousand Years” of sohn’s 
Apocalypse, 35. The ‘‘ Day of the Lord” is the “‘ Apocalypse of Jesus 
Christ,” 35. Germs of the Millennial Age, 35. ‘‘ Little Apocalypse of 
Isaiah,’’—Isaiah xxiv:21-23,—the Rov Vamim or ‘‘ Multitude of Days,” 
36. Antichrist judged, Satan imprisoned at the beginning of the Rov 
Yamim, and loosed at their close, 37-39. Isaiah’s *‘ Multitude of Days” 
are John’s “‘ Thousand Years,” 39. Resurrection of the Righteous at 
the beginning, Resurrection of the Wicked at the close, of the ‘‘ Multi- 
tude of Days,” 39. Veil taken from the Nations, 40, Auberlen, 4o. 
Nagelsbach, 41. Weber, 41. Crusius, 44. Orelli, 46-48. 

The Apocalypse of Ezekiel; Ezekiel xxxviii:8; Radbdim Yamim, or 
‘*Many Days,” 49. Dry Bones, Gog, 50. Ezekiel’s and John’s pict- 
ures compared, 52. Old Testament Boundaries of the Millennial Age, 
55. Schroeder, 56. Riehm, 57-59. Pastor Koch, 60. 

Leolam, Forever; its Absolute and Relative senses, 60-64. 

Hosea iii:4, the Yamim Rabbim, or Many Days for Zo Ammi and Lo 
Ruhamah, Abiding alone! The 7wo Days. The Third Day, or 
Millennial Glory, 64-71. 

Moses and the Shedd, or 7 Times, 71. Israel’s last Crisis in the Song 
of Moses. ‘‘Ani-Hu,” 72, 73. 

The Psalter; Messianic Days; the Millennial Psalms; Delitzsch, Binnie, 
Herder, Tholuck, Crusius, 74, 75. 

Summing up of the Old Testament names for the 1000 years. Formula 
of the total Avonology, 76, 77. The Combination of the Old Testament 
Eschata by John, 76-78. Anglo-Israelism, 79. 

Scriptural terms, “ Chilzast, Ravyamist.” Bengel, Auberlen, Delitzsch, 


my <P 


SD Pann a a Pe " = 


x 
Loe 


CONTENTS. ie 


Harnack. ‘‘ Jesus was a Chilast.” Trenzeus, Justin, ‘‘ Heresy,” Our 
Hope, 80-82. 

Israel in the Apocalypse of John, 82-85. The Eschatology of the Old 
Testament is that of the New. The Prophets, Christ, Peter, Paul, 
John, all one, 82-87. 


SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Eepiee ate. Ee 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 


The Objection; ‘‘ Symbolical Numbers don’t count.” Bunsen, Kliefoth, 
Milligan, Briggs, gl, 92. 

General remarks. Augustinian view, sfiritualizing interpretation, 93, 
94 Vitringa, 94. Badlogic. Symbolism and Schematism, what? The 
‘‘fioure of a figure,’ 95. Prophecy a Chronometer, 96. Symbolical 
Numbers do count; are literal as well as symbolical, 97-99. 

The Numbers 6 and 7. ‘‘ /deas”’ in numbers, do not vacate their ch1o- 
nological value; 666 the Monogram of Antichrist, the Asd7-Sabbath 
Beast, 99-102. 

The 70 Weeks of Daniel, framed on the Law of the Sabbath. Septen- 
nial Cycles, Jubilee, Newton, 103. The Great Sabbatism, 104-106. 
Subdistribution of the 70 Weeks dominated by the law of the Sabbath; 
are literal; are Sevens of Years, 106-107. Daniel’s Prayer. Its points 
covered in the Hexad of Dan. ix:24; and covered by the 70 Weeks, 107- 
110. Correct translation of Dan, ix:24-27, with notes, 110, 111, Ex- 
position of the 70 Weeks. The 70 Weeks, 111. The 7 Weeks, 112. 
The ‘‘ Athnach”’ or Colon, 113. The 62 Weeks, and 69 Weeks, 114, 
115. Zo Advents, one at the end of the 69 Weeks, one at the end of 
the 70 Weeks, 115. The Crucifixion of Messiah. Destruction of Jeru- 
salem. The Great Jnterval. The ‘‘prince that shall come.” The 
70th or final: ‘‘One Week.” The Outcome for Israel. Christ and 
Antichrist ;—all literal, 115-119. How much fulfilled. Kuenen. Graf. 
Greatness of the Prophecy, 120-127. 

The 69 Weeks. Demonstration of the Messiahship of Jesus, involved 
in the question as to literality. Israel's future alsoinvolved, 127. Vhe 
‘‘ignominious failure”; the ‘‘ Wotse Davar”; a quo; ad quem, Chro- 
nology; Sliding; 128, 129. Persian Edicts in behalf of Israel; Mar- 
gins in reckoning. Cyrus. The éermzni of the 69 and 70 weeks abso- 


va 


CONTENTS. 


(2) 
(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


(6) 


lutely fixed, 130 Thea guo is Cyrus. The ad quem is the Birth of 
Christ, 131. ‘‘ Prince Messiah,” who? Six New Testament Targums 
answer, 131-142. Chronology; /deals, 143. We must abandon our 
favorite dates for the a quo and ad quem of the Cg and 70 Weeks, 
Wright, Sir H. Rawlinson, Hengstenberg, Drummond, Auberlen, 
Kliefoth, Briggs, Milligan, Williams; perplexity and zdea/s, 144, 145. 
Chronology, Wellhausen, Robertson Smith, Monuments, Eclipses, 
Gravestones. God’s word is safe. Jesus ts the Messiah, 145-147. 

The 7oth Week. ~ The agonies of calculation. ‘‘Ignominious fail- 
ures.” Babel of methods and results. Variations by two centuries / 
Auberlen, Leathes, Rinck, Ewald, Graf and Wellhausen, Prideaux, 
Pusey, Desprey, Williams, Eichhorn, Hitzig, Wieseler, Bertholdt, Bleek, 
Rosenmiiller. Chvtst a half a dozen persons. Blunders and Absurd- 
ities, 147-150. Bad exegesis blaming good chronology. Hengstenberg, 
Kiiper, Leathes, Auberlen, Pusey, Orelli, Kuenen, Drummond, Briggs, 
Bosanquet, 150, 151. 


Ae mechs 
THE 1260 DAYS, OR 3% YEARS, 


Perplexing questions, 152, (1) Clearing the Way. Occur under 4 dif- 
ferent forms, in O. and N. Testaments, and literal in both, 153. Tei 
Source and Seat in Dan, ix:27, Are the 70th Week divided into twice 
3% years, or twice 1260 days, equals 42 months, equals ‘‘time, two 
times, and half a time,” 154. (2) Belong to the last Antichrist, still 
future. Dan, ix:26, 27, isthe frame of John’s whole Apocalypse from 
Chapters iv-xix, 155, 156. (3) Where the various time-designations of 
the 7oth Week occur, 156, All egua/, not all adfentical, Hofmann 
wrong, 157. «Are not the 2300 evening-mornings; Auberlen wrong, 
158. The ‘‘ 7wo-Witnesses,” and their relation to the first 1260; the 
‘‘Great Tribulation,” and its relation to the last 1260; the Ase, Reign, 
and Ruin of Antichrist, 159, 160. (4) They are “eral and exact, are 
1260 days, not 1269 years. Importance of this, 161. Zhe Year-Day 
Theory, Guinness, Birks, both in error, 161-163. ‘Their position com- 
pels us to make the 70 Weeks equal 176,000 years, 164. Indefensible 
absurdity of the double-reckoning of the Year-Day interpreters, 165. 
Error to be repudiated at once, 166, (5) A ‘‘ 7ime’’ never means a 
“Day” in prophecy. Scripture is clear, 167. Decided testimony and 
demonstration, by Ewald, Orelli, Kiiper, Pusey, Leathes, Drummond, 
against the Year-Day Theory, and in favor of recognizing the Jaz of» 
Sabbatic Sevens, or Sevens of Years, in the 70 Weeks, 167-169. (6) 


mero TIVE St XV 


The Reformers justified, notwithstanding their error as to the Year-Day 


Theory. Exclusivism, 170, 171. Our narrowness, Typical History, 
Astronomy, M. Cheseaux, 171, 172. Reconciliation of Preterism, Pres- 
entism, Futurism. Leibnitz. ‘‘ Shaped to suit.” Jesus a Preterist, 
Presentist, and Futurist, 173, 174. 


Ere he Lees 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 


Error in our false mode of computing the 70 sevens, wzbrokenly. The 
error schematized, 175-177. Rabbi Isaac’s decision as to the Christian 
failure, 177,.178. _ Repeating the 7 sevens. The Septuagint’s 77 
sevens, 178, 179. Hitzig and the Athnach, 179.. The 7-+62+-1 are 
separate and tndependent periods, and not to be computed 27207 0kenly, 

180, Theaguwo B. C. 536 retained. Excess of 57 years to be accounted 
for, 181, 182. Characteristics of the three periods 7-++62-++1r, 183. The 
70 Sevens are exclusive of all affairs except Jewish, 183. Solution of 
the Mystery, by rejection of the false assumption, 184. Two Intervals, 

one between the 69 and 70; another between the 7 Sevens themselves ° 
Proof of this, 185-189. The Restoration a Double Period designated 
by specific names, Ig0, I91. DIAGRAM of the 70 Sevens and Intervals, 

192. The Characteristics and History. Maccabees. ‘* Wandering 
Jew,” 193, 4. The 7oth Week certain to be literally fulfilled upon 
Jerusalem and the Jews, 195. What vast damage ove error brings to 
God’s Word, 196, 7. God’s Word will stand. The 70 Sevens the 
Almanac of the Ages. The elation of the Books of Ezra and Nehe- 
miah, of our Lord’s Olivet Prophecy, and of John’s Apocalypse, to the 
70 Sevens and their Intervals, 198, 199. Mote as to Intervals, 199. 

Matthew and Daniel in harmony, 200. 

Location of the 7oth Week, erioneously, 201. Perplexity as to the last 

3% years, Hengstenberg, Drummond, Auberlen, Leathes, Briggs, 

Pusey, 202, 3. Palliating considerations, 203, 4. 

New Testament Development of the 7oth Week, (1) in the Olivet Proph- 

ecy, and (2) in the Apocalypse of John, 204-209. ‘‘ Gezea’’ means the 

Jewish Race, as such, 209. 

The Three Great Prophecies Schematized, 209. The Prophecy in Dan- 

iel, in general. Predictions as to the Colossus, Beasts, Syrian Anti- 
christ, 70 Sevens, Antiochus, Ptolemies and Seleucids, 209, 210. The 
““One Week” in Daniel schematized, 211. The ‘‘ One Week” in the 
Olivet prediction, 212. The ‘‘ Oxe Week” in John’s Apocalypse, 213. 


XVi CONTENTS. 


Van Oosterzee’s beautiful word, 213, 214. The ‘‘ One Week” in Paul. 
Magic lantern, 214. The Two WVagids, 214. 

E. End of the 7oth Week, in the fulness of its Events, 214-216. The 
FTallel, 216, 

F. The 2300, 1290, 1335 days. The *‘ Thamid” and Antiochus, 217. 
‘* Palmoni,” the Wonderful Numberer ; a quoand ad quem of the 2300, F 
218, ‘‘ Evening-Morning,”’ what? The critics divided, 219. Dates 
of Daniel’s Visions, 220. Zhe 70 Weeks not cut off from the 2300; thets 
relations, 221-225. True rendering of ‘‘ HiGBIR BERITH,” “‘ AZake a 
firm Covenant,” 222-224. True rendering of Dan, xii:6. “ When an 
End is made of Breaking in pieces the power of the holy people,” 225-227. 
Relation of 2300 to 1290 and 1335 days, 225, 6. The Angel Dismissing 
the Prophet, 226-228. Schematism of the 2520, 2300, 1260, 1290, and 
1335 days, 229. Concluding caution, 229-232. 


Steal, Lae = ; 


THE 144,000. 


A. Literal Jewish-Christian Church of the End-Time, 233. The Sun- 
Clothed Woman, 235. Sheltered 1260 days. The Cithara-Players on 
the glassy sea, 236. ational Christianity the result of Israel's Conver- 
sion, 236, 7. The 144,000 the same in Rev. vii:I-9, and xiv:1-5. The 
Contrast between the 144,000 and the Countless Company. Discussion 
of the question, 235-241. Israel’s Economic Pre-eminence or Privilege 
as God’s national ‘‘ First-Born” son, and “ Choice forever,” 241. Im- 
portant conclusions, 242. Gebhardt, 243. The result of the discus- 

B. sion, 244. Zhe precise Contrast, 244-246. The 144,000 are Paul’s 
** Pas Israel”; other designations, 246, 247. They are literal Israelites, 
Keil, Grobler, Bosanquet, Auberlen, Volck, Boehmer, Koch, Hofmann, 
Luthardt, 246-250. Wrong view of the spiritualizers, 250. Dr. J. A. 
Alexander’s position, 250; answered, 251. Dr. Thomas Chalmer'’s 
position, 251. Kliefoth, Delitzsch, Koch, Reuss, Renan, Luthardt, 
on the subject matter of the Apocalypse, 251-254. 


PART QW 
THE I000 YEARS. 


A. Proofs of their Historic Reality; commensurate with certain Old Testa- 
ment expressions, which are pve-fo7 mative, 255-259. Delitzsch, Orelli, 
259. Briggs, 260. 


SRe 


CONTENTS, XVii 


Development of the 1000 years in the New Testament, 260, Christ, in 
the Synoptists, and Fourth Gospel; the concealment of the 1COo years; 
the suspicion of it, 261-262. /uxtaposttion of events in discourse ts not 
co-existence of events in occurrence, 263. First Resurrection in John v: 
25. Gebhardt, 263. The Zrror in our Creed-Statements, 264. Prof. 
Leathes, 264. 

Two Great and Important Passages, the Stronghold of Post-Millennial- 
ists, Dan. xti:1-3, John v-:25-29, considered, 265. No such doctrine 
as that of a “ s¢multaneous and universal resurrection” found in the 
Bible, 265. True rendering of Dan. xii:i-3, 266-268, Critical Note 
on the passage, 268-269. 

The Passage, 1 Cor. xv:23-28, a third and important one, two Ends 
and the 1000 years between, 268, 9. 

Further Proof of their Historic Reality; grammatically parsed, 269, 270. 
Hengstenberg, DeWette, Glasgow, the Hebrew ‘‘ Yom,” 271. Strug- 
gle of Post-Millennialists to fix the @ gwo of the 1000 years; (a) at the 
First Advent,—Augustine, 272; (b) at Constantine,—Grotius, 274; (c) 
at Charlemagne,—Hengstenberg, 275; (d) at somewhere before the Sec- 
ond Advent,—Whitbey, 277. What this Optimist theory proposes, 278- 
281. A “beguiling Zze”/ Swedenborg’s Millennium, etc. <A ‘‘fun- 
damental Zze”/ Ebrard, 281. A ‘“‘Satanic Zze”/ Luther, Delitzsch, 
Lange, Van Oosterzee, Schaff, 282. Post-Millennialism the theory of 
the ‘“ heretic’”’ Montanus, 282. Responsible for 3 Panics in history, 283. 
The alternatives, 283. Abandonment of Postmillennialism as a Vio- 
lence to God’s Word, 284. Semisch quoted, 285, 


Eee Ln vee, 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE I000 YEARS, 


General View, 286-294. Costof War, Note, 287. Valley of Megiddo, 
Note 290. 

The 1290 and 1335 days, 294. Interval between the destruction of 
Antichrist and the full Redemption of Israel, 295. 

Relation of the Risen Saints to Israel. Bengel’s Dischihasm, 296. 
Dischiliasm refuted. //adztat of the Risen Saints, not ‘‘ over,” but 
‘*on,” the earth; Hofmann, DeWette, Delitzsch, Kliefoth, 298-300, 
The Church of Christ, Oxe zot Two, in the Millennial Age. Luthardt. 
The Bride above and below, One, 301. The Sleeping Saints of God 
waked from thetr graves to share, on earth, the Jubilee of Home-Coming 
Tsvael to thetr beloved land; Luthardt, Weber, Fiiller, Delitzsch, Tre- 
gelles, Koch, Volck, Kiesselbach, Cloter, Hofmann, Baur, 301-303. 


oa, Weer Ter es fet 
i 


sat CONTENTS. 


E. 


Further Confirmation that the Risen Saints are of setired into heaven; 
Isaiah, Daniel, Christ, Paul, Jewish teachers, Gemara Sanhedrin, Orelli, 
Mede. 393-306. 

Extent of the Transformation of the Planet, at Second Advert. Cos- 
mical Process, Geology, 306. Locomotion of the Risen Ones, 
‘‘Heaven Open, the Angels of God ascending and descending on the 
Son of Man,” 306-308. 

The Three Great Parties in the Millennium, Israel, Risen Saints, Na- 
tions, Jerusalem the sustaining center of the Kingdom, 308-310. Skep- 
tical Objections, Cleopatra, Schoolmen, Kliefoth, 310. Vain thoughts, 
311. Israel a Blessing to the Nations; God’s ‘‘ Dew.” “ Life out 
Jrom the Dead,” 312-314. 

The Effect on the Nations, when Israel is converted. Watchword of 
the Nations, Zionite Code, 314, 315. Kant, Charles Sumner, Orelli, 
315, 316. Voliness of the Millennial Age. Hengstenberg, Hofmann, 
Luthardt, Delitzsch, Christiani, Ebrard, Deutero-Adamite Life, 316- 
Sis: 

Mode of Life among the Risen Saints. Saadias, Bechai, Abarbanel, 
Maimonides, Our Lord, 319. Neither marry nor die; are ‘‘ equal to” 
sexless angels; are ‘‘Zke” our Lord, 320. ‘‘ Flesh and Blood,” ‘‘ Flesh 
and Bones,” 321. 

Millennial not Eternal, 321. False construction of ‘* Until,” 322. 
The Bride, and the Outside Nations, and Kings. ‘‘ The ZLamdé is the 
Lamp,” 322. Absolute End of the Ways of God, 323. - 


PART VII. 


IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 


Last Resort of Post-millennialism, 324. Three great antichiliasts; their 
failure, 324. Kliefoth against Post-Millennialism, and in favor of 
” Symbolic magic to get rid of Pre-Millen- 
nialism, 325-327. Z%me means Space,and Years mean Victory, 328. 
Woe to Ariel! 329. Irenzeus, Lactantius, Volck, Luthardt, on symbolic 
numbers, 330. 

Professor Milligan of Aberdeen; his Book on the Apocalypse; a fusion 
of Augustine, Hengstenberg and Kliefoth, 331. 7appy look of the 
round number 1000, and sad look of the broken-backed 3%. Ecumen- 
ical yet Temporary /Var potentiated up to 200,000,000, but Ecumen- 
ical and Eternal Peace potentiated only up to 1000, 332. Backlying 
reason for 34%, and 1000, found in Sabbatic and Jubilee law. The 
1000 years are 10 Jubilees doubled, 333: Professor Milligan’s absurd- 


“* Potentiated Ecumenicity 


Salo Tere ees a. 


4 


Ty “Se 0° SS 


COVE NL RMN ii XIX 


ities, 333. Answered, 334. Hume revived in Professor M.’s objec- 
tions 335. Augustine, Tertullian, Bacon, 336, 7. What ‘‘ Veum Ye- 
hovah,” -‘‘ saith the Lord,” means, 337. Fair interpreters, 337. Vo 
shuffling, and no robbing, 338. 

Organic Relation of Prophetic Nunibers. Prophetic Numbers the cos- 
mic offspring of Sun, Moon, and Stars, 339. The Hierarchy of the 
Heavenly Lights; they are (1) 7ime-Measures, and (2) Event-Indica- 
tors; have imperialand hermencutical offices; ‘‘ rule” literally, 339, 340, 
Area part of prophecy in the sky; given for ‘* Seasons and Times,” and 
“Numbers and Signs,” 340. The Patriarchs, Joseph, Joshua, Heze- 
kiah, 341. The Eastern Magi and the Birth of Christ. Astrology, 341. 
“Sign” over doomed Jerusalem. ‘‘ Signs” at the End of our Age. 
‘“Signs of the Times,” and ‘‘ Times of the Signs,” 342. All cosmic, 
spiritual, and dispensational phenomena interblended; mutual sympa- 
thy. God answering the Heavens, Earth, Corn, Wine, Oil and Jezreel! 
343. Bible-Periodology ruled by the law of the “‘Seven.” Different 
Sabbaths, or Rests, appropriate to the close of Different Periods, 343. 
Israel’s National Redemption sure as the Ordinances of Sun, Moon, and 
Stars; God’s Salvation as good as God’s Astronomy, 346. 

General Summing up, and Conclusion, as to the Prophetic and Symbolic 
Numbers,—and the ‘‘ /dea,” 347, 348. 


Pee ee ae 
THE TESTIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 


The 1000 years literal, the Duration of the Kingdom, 349-354. Vari- 
ous Rabbinical calculations as to Messiah’s temporal reign, 354-357. 
Double- Messiah, 357. 

The Beginning of the 1000 years, dated by the Rabbis, from (a) close of 
the 7oth Week, 358; (b) overthrow of ten-kingdomed Roman power, 
360; (c) destruction of Antichrist, 363; (d) resurrection of the faithful 
dead, 364; (e) Israel’s repentance, 370; (f) advent of Messiah in the 
clouds, 378. 

The End of the 1000 years, fixed by the Rabbis. Two views, with ref- 
erence to Gog and Magog, 375. (1) the war-march of Gog is f7e-mil- 
lennial, 375. (2) It is post-millennial, 376. Confusion of Gog with 
the Antichrist; Discrimination, 377. The ‘‘ Zvz/sper7t”” in Ezekiel 
KXXVili:10, is the. ‘‘ Sataz loosed,” in Rev. xx:7. John clears up all. 
Volck, 378, 


XX CONTENTS. 
AAP ki hon. 
THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 
A. The Jewish Book, 380. Lord Bacon, the Higher Critics, 381. Briggs ~ 


(note), 382. Device of the Greek fathers to escape Chiliasm, 382. 
Keim, Drummond, 383. Doctrine of the 1000 years common to Jewish 
and Christian Church, alike. Yewald, Gebhardt, Bleek, Dorner, De- 
Wette, Boehmer, Wiinsche, 384-387. Maitland thanks Jerome; charge 
of ‘‘ Judaizing”; counter-charge of ‘‘ Heathenizing,” 388. The 
Apocalypse seals the Jewish faith as true, 388, 389. 

Relation of the tooo years to the Second Part of the Apocalypse, 389. 
The 6th Seal opens the ‘‘ Day of the Lord” which precedes the 1009 
years, 390, note. The Double-Episode, 391. The 6 Trumpet-Judg- 
ments. Apostate Christendom, 392. Israel recalled, in the Crisis, 392. 
The Programme in Chapter XI shows the 7oth Week. Kliefoth, Kiibel. 
The Dramatis Persone, 393-395. The Angel of the Covenant. The 
‘‘ Two Witnesses.” Vision of Jerusalem during the 7oth Week. The 
Restoration, 396. The Cyclical Theory, Note, 397. The epoch of 
Chapters X, XI, XII. Antichrist and Israel in conflict, 397, 398. 
New-Born Israel, 399, 400. Gebhardt, Weiss, 400, Rinck, gor. The 
Oath-Swearing Angel in Moses, Daniel, and John; the ‘* AZystery of 
God,” 402, 403. The Open Booklet, 403, 404. Clear position of Chap- 
ter XI. The ‘‘Manly Child.” The whole face of Christendom 
changed; Godet, 404-406, Chapter XIII, what the Beast is 
doing, 406. Chapter XIV, the 144,000, on Mount Sion, 406. Chap- 
ter XV, introduction to the Vials, 407. Chapters XVI-XIX, the pour- 
ing of the Vials, Babylon’s overthrow by Antichrist, Commercial Wail, 
407, 8. The allel! the Jewish Bride, 408, 9. Chapter XX, Sublime 
scene of the Advent of the Lord for Antichrist’s destruction, 409-411. 
Doom of Antichrist and False Prophet, 410. Arrest and Imprisonment 
of the Devil, 411, John’s supreme satisfaction. All the honorary 
Degrees conferred at once, DD.,SS., 412. The ‘* First Resurrection,” 
413, The End of the last 3% years, and the finished ‘‘ Mystery of 
God,” 413. 

Relative and Absolute Ends, 414. The Ultimate Glory no result of 
human endeavor, 415, 416. 


AE pee 
THE I000 YEARS IN EZEKIEL, 


Preliminary word on Ezekiel, Chapter XXXVII, Briggs, 417. Proof- 
text for a literal Resurrection, 418, National Resurrection, 418. Je- 


CONTISICES, XX1 


rome and the ‘‘ Visto Hamosisstma,” 419. Jerome's Canon of Interpre- 
tation, 420, The Great Change of interpretation in 4th century, 42%. 
Ambrose, Augustine, ‘‘spzvit of the age,” Eusebius, 422-424. Orelli, 
note, 424. Lzekiel, chapters xl-xlviit, the favorite retreat of Postmit- 
lennialists, considered, 424. Area picture of restored Israel during the 
1000 years, 425. Kuenen, Van Oosterzee, Smend, Orelli, 426 428. 
Typical prophecy, 429. The Stmetlaritics and Differences between the 
Priest-Code in Ezekiel and in the Pentateuch, 429, 430. The Additions 
as well as Szdbtractions. The Higher-Criticism repelled, 431. The 
picture not that of the Glorified New Heaven and Earth, and New 
Jerusalem, described by John, 432, 433. Cannot be identified with the 
Eternal State, 434. Order of the Eschata, 435. The Symdbolical Inter- 
pretation of these chapters, 435-437. The Bible opposed to it, 437, 
430. God’s omnipotence, faithfulness, compassion, and veracity, 
toward dead Israel, 438. 


LSPS A eG 
OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE 


The idea of the Christian-State a false lure. Optimism, Pessimism, 
439, 440. So-called Christian Civilization, is that of the Christianized 
Beast, 440, 441. The Christian State unknown to prophecy ; Kiibel, 
Bleek, Auberlen, Hahn, 441, 442. Zhe Harlot Babylon is more than 
Rome pagan, or papal. Lt is Apostate Protestantism, as well; and Apos- 
tate Christendom, Auberlen, Milligan, 443, 444. The Christian State 
is a part of the Colossus, and of the Fourth Beast, 444, 44%. Its de- 
scription; War, Europe an armed camp, Whisky, Licentiousness, Pub- 
lic Press, Divorces, Increase of Crime, Lawlessness, Unbelief, the 
‘* What withholdeth,” and the ‘‘ ho withholdeth,” 445-448. Picture 
of the Times of the Christian State, and of the Church-Period, in God’s 
Word; the Paradles,; Christian- Missions; Devil-Missions; the World- 
Acre; a Zizanian Christianity, 449, 450. Further description of this 
by the Holy Ghost, 451. Blood-shedding, adulterous, intemperate, 
mammon-loving, Sabbath-breaking, Christendom, 452. No Millennium 
possible till the Lord comes, 451. What prophets and apostles expected 
in this state of things, 452. Zhe Nations, as such, are converted only 
after Israel as a nation is converted, 452. Marked distinction in the 
Apocalypse between the conversions de/fore the Second Advent and the 
conversions after it; individuals in the one case, nations in the other, 
452. Difference between the representation in the 7 Epistles, and in 
the latter part of the Apocalypse; the one the Church Period before the 


xxii CONTENTS. 


Advent, the other the Atzgdom-Period after the Advent, 453. The 
harmony of all Scripture, in this; Riehm, Binnie, 444, 445. Paul’s 
distribution of the Ages and Dispensations, 456. The ‘‘ masses” reject 
the Gospel in our age; the ‘‘savorless salt”; ‘‘culture”; ‘‘ civilization”; 
Judgment must begin at the House of God; the Christian State thrust 


down to Fell, 456, 457. 
POSTSCRIPT TO PART XI. 


Correcting the false conception of the Mission of the Church in the Present 
Age. Semisch, Kliefoth, Auberlen, Hofmann, Luthardt, Philippi, 
Martensen, Weiss, 458-460. 

DIAGRAM. 


Perspective of New Testament Prophecy, 461. 
LITERAL INTERPRETATION, _ 


David Levi, Isaac da Costa, Bishop Hooker, Vitringa, Roos, Sir Isaac 
Newton, 462. 


AP PN dO 


POST-MILLENNIALISM. 


Condemned by Dr. Delitzsch, 463. 
EXTRACTS FROM EMINENT AUTHORS, 


I. Double Jury of Scholars on Revelation xx:5. ‘‘ The First Resurrec- 
tion.”’ Volck, Rinck, Filler, DeWette, Lammert, Bengel, Kliefoth, 
Christlieb, Lange, Steffann, Rothe, Gresswell, Elliott, Stuart, Alford, 
Starke, Birks, Mede, Hebart, Van Oosterzee, Gill, Seiss, Lechler, 465- 
471. 

II. The 1000 Years in the Apocalypse, by Professor Bleek, 472-450, 

III. The 1000 Years in the Apocalypse, by Professor Von Ewald, 480-487. 

IV. Delitzsch, Orelli, and Lister, on Exalted Zion, 487-491. Concluding 
words by the author, 491, 492. 


SOLI DEO GLORIA, 


PART I. 


woe THOUSAND YEARS IN BOTH 
LESTANE NES: 


_ It is a very common opinion, widely spread through- 
out Christendom, and in most cases believed to be true, 
that “the thousand years” of which John speaks in the 
Apocalypse, Rev. xx:1-7, are mentioned nowhere else 
in the sacred Scriptures. The doctrine of a millennial 
kingdom on earth, introduced by the advent of Christ 
in His glory,isa Jewish fable without support from 
the word of God. A deeper study of the sacred volume 
dissipates this false prejudice and reveals the fact that, 
not only are “the thousand years” of which John speaks 
found everywhere in both Testaments, but that next 
to the eternal state, the millennial blessedness of God’s 
people on earth, and of the nations, is the one high point 
in all prophecy, from Moses to John, the bright, broad 
tableland of all eschatology. The prejudice against 
the study of a theme so sublime and far-reaching, and 
occupying so much space in the revelation God has 
been pleased to give us, is as remarkable in our age, as 


(1) 


2 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


it is inexcusable, although by no means surprising. 
To use the words of Prof. Van Oosterzee, “We cannot 
be surprised that the inner discrepancy between the 
modern theological philosophy and the prophetic and 
apostolic Scriptures should perhaps, on no point come 
forth so clearly, and apparently so irreconcilably, as 
precisely in reference to the doctrine of the ‘Las? 
Things —Eschatology. Were, especially are the terms, 
‘Jewish conception,’ ‘oriental garb,’ ‘poetic imagery, 
‘accommodation to the narrow ideas of the age,’ etc., 
etc., the order of the day, and the doctrine of the con- 
summation of the ages is ordinarily regarded as a mod- 
erately insignificant appendix to some philosophico- 
dogmatic system. In Scripture, on the contrary, it is 
distinctly presented in the foreground, and for the 
believer it attains, with every year and every century, 
increased significance, so that what for a time seems to 
be an appendix, becomes eventually the mazu ques- 
pea. oe 

Every faithful student of the Scriptures, unbiased by 
false theories of interpretation, will attest these words 
as true. What we find in the New Testament as its 
outcome in respect to the ages and the kingdom, has 
already lain in the bosom of the Old Testament from 
the beginning. The closing part of the New Testament 
is but the full flower of which the opening part of the 
Old Testament was the precious seed, the kingdom one 
and the same, in essence, all the way. Nothing appears 
in the later revelation that was not hid in the earlier, 
nothing in John that was not in Moses. This is what 
Augustine meant by his golden maxim, “Novum Testa- 
mentum in Vetere datet, Vetus in Novo patet.” “In the 


* Person and work of the Redeemer, 450. 


yy . 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS, 3 3 


Old Testament the New is concealed ; in the New the 
Old is revealed.” We shall find “the thousand years” in 
many places of God’s word, long before the Rabbis 
ever had a being or a name. 

We shall be obliged in this investigation to make use 
of what men call ‘technical’ terms, in order to save 
circumlocution. We speak of the “Last Things.” The 
Greek term for this is ‘““/schata,” and by these are meant 
what should “come to pass,” not in the “datter,” as often- 
times King James’ version has it, but in the “ast” 
days, as Moses, Joel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Peter, 
Paul and John, preferred to have it. If we study the 
eschatology of the Old Testament, we will find the 
Eschata there identical with the Eschkata of the New 
Testament, and the Eschatology of both Testaments the 
same, only the New is more developed than the Old. 
Such is the organic and genetic character of revelation 
and of prophecy that if “the thousand years” are not in 
Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets, they have no 
right to be in John. To understand the prophets it is 
necessary, however, to understand the Apocalypse, and 
to understand the Apocalypse it is necessary to under- 
stand the prophets. The one is a light to the other, and 
reciprocally. In order to attain a clear conception of 
Old Testament prophecy and its fulfilment, we must 
combine both Advents of Messiah, remembering that 
the first only brought a partzal tulfilment of the pro- 
phetic word which yet awaits the second in order to 
secure its plenary accomplishment. 

Joel’s prophecy as to the outpouring of the Spirit in 
the last days, and of the great and notable day of the 
Lord, with all its terrestrial and celestial phenomena, 
the final redemption of Israel, and the transfiguration 
of the Holy Land, was only incipiently and partly ful- 


4 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


filled to a few, an election out of Israel, at the first com- 
ing of Christ, and awaits a far larger fulfilment at His 
second appearing. So the prediction of Amos, in ret- 
erence to the dispersion and sifting of Israel the “Sinful 


Kingdom,” and God’s visitation of the Gentiles, “after _ 


this,” to take out of them a people for His name, met a 
partial and precursive fulfilment in the first calling of 
the Gentiles to the knowledge of Christ, in the days of 
the apostles, as James in the first council at Jerusalem 
assures us. We sce that by comparing Acts xv:13-18 
with Amos ix:8-12. But there is to be a grander fulfil- 
ment still in coming days, when, now that a Second Dis- 
persion and Sifting of Israel has occurred, since James 
spoke, there shall be a fulness of the Gentiles “after 
this,” also, and finally the fallen Booth of David, or 
Israel's proper Kingdom, as the prophets picture it, 
will be re-erected with the fulness of Israel converted 
to God, and the glorious millennial age heave into view. 
So it is with reference to [saiah’s Redeemer coming to 
Zion, and Hosea’s Israel abiding alone for many days, 
and Micah’s halting daughter of Zion to whom, at 
length, comes the ‘“‘former dominion.” Whateveroe: 
curred to Israel graciously, at the first coming of Christ, 
was only a preliminary fulfilment to be exhaustively 


completed for Israel, at His second coming. Such is 


the law of prophecy and the law of fulfilment, and it 
will save us from many an error, if only we are careful 
to remember it. 


THE KINGDOM AND PROPHECY. 


From first to last, the Kingdom of God on earth, its 
inception, progress, conduct, and consummation in 
glory, is the one theme of Old Testament prophecy. 


To this end were the covenants with Christ, Adam > 


4 
ee & 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. | 5 


Noah, Abraham, Israel and David. To thisend was the 
choice of the one national “Israel,” the “choice forever,” 
as a prophetic, priestly, kingly nation, a messianic and 
mediatorial nation, the one national ‘“ Servant of Jeho. 
vah,” and national Son of God, standing between God 
and mankind, and bringing salvation to a lost world; 
a people from whom should come the one personal 
“Israel,” Prophet, Priest and King, the one Mediator 
and true Messiah, Seed of the woman, Seed of Abra- 
ham, Seed of David, Son of Man and Son of God, in 
whom all nations should bless themselves—/esus Christ. 
Identified with Him, individually, and called by His 
name, stands Israel collectively, in His whole Messi- 
anic work and kingdom. Neither acts without the 
other. The Pentateuch prophecies refer chiefly to the 
people. The Messianic Psalms emphasize the King, 
the Kingdom, and the Priest. Isaiah dwells upon the 
prophetic character of Israel; Ezekiel displays the 
priestly ; Daniel reveals the kingly ; Zechariah blends 
allin one. Old Testament prophecy knows no other sub- 
jects of discourse than these, Israel, Messiah, and the 
Nations. As to the kingdom, Israel had it, under the © 
Old Testament, in its outward form; the Gentiles have 
it under the New Testament, in itsinward form ; in the 
age to come, Jews and Gentiles together, shall have it, 
both forms in one, one kingdom of Messiah, spiritual, 
visible and glorious, with Israel still the central people, 
the prelude of the New Jerusalem and the nations walk- 
ing in its light forever. 

The division of the Davidic kingdom into two, laid 
the ground for all the prophecies concerning the “King- 
dom of /srae/”? and the “Kingdom of /udah,” 7. e., the 
ten-tribed Israel, called “Ephraim,” and the two-tribed 
Israel, called “ Judah,’ as distinguished from “ all 


6 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


Israel,’ or the twelve-tribed Israel, an election from 
whose children shall one day form the national nucleus 
of the millennial kingdom. 

The catastrophe that brought destruction to Jeru- 
salem and captivity to Judah under the Chaldean King, 
forms the ground of the common distribution of the 
canonical prophets into their present classification. 
The Babylonian exile is the middle point If “we 
study the prophecies that speak of the Kingdom 
of Messiah, Israel’s Kingdom, the Millennial Kingdom, 
and the relation of the nations to each,—all as parts of 
the Kingdom of God on earth,—we shall take in all the 
prophets. If we group these around the several great 
epochs of Israel’s history, they will fall into three 
main divisions, (1), pre-exile prophets (2), exile proph- 
ets (3), post-exile prophets. Or, to be still more spe- 
cific, they will fall into five chief divisions: (1) The pre- 
Assyrian, viz., Obadiah, Joel, Jonah; z. ¢., the prophets 
of the period prior to the Assyrian invasion and cap- 
tivity of Israel; (2), The Assyrian, viz., Amos, Hosea, 
Isaiah, Micah, Nahum; (3) The transition prophets, 
viz., Zephaniah and Habbakuk ; (4) The prophets of the 
Chaldean period, viz., Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel; (5) 
the Persian period, or period of the Restoration down 
to the close of prophecy, viz., Haggai, Zechariah, Mala- 
chi. Sixteen in all; all speaking of the Kingdom of 
God and its development through Israel in relation to 
the nations, amid conflicts and victories, judgment and 
mercy, apostasy and recovery, until the whole world 
becomes subject to Israel and Israel’s king. 

Asa further help to our investigation, it is necessary 
we should know that the Kingdom of God, in its develop- 
ment, though one, exists in different forms, and runs 
through various ends and ages. Essentially, it is one. 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. My 


Phenomenally, it is many. It is singular and plural, 
both. It is an everlasting kingdom in its essence. It 
isa temporal kingdom in its forms. It exists forever. 
The Dispensations pass away. The Kingdom. still 
abides. New forms emerge along the ages until the 
endless age arrives, and the final form appears. And 
yet more. With the outer historic development. of 
prophecy as well as of history, an inner genetic devel- 
opment runs parallel. The original prophetic germ, 
found in the first promise in the garden, true to scien- 
tific law, parts itself into law and gospel, divides, ex- 
pands, and assumes more ample and concrete forms. 
What is at first most general, becomes particular. 
What is obscure becomes more clear. The ages and 
the ends are evolved according to the same law of ‘“be- 
coming,” which obtains in the natural world, viz., by 
division and integration. The result from all is that, as 
prophecy advances, what is folded up darkly, at first, is 
opened out in clearer and distincter statement later on, 
The ages and the ends become more definite. The la- 
ter predictions explain the earlier ones. And, along this 
_ line of divine evolution, as there is no “spontaneous gen- 
eration” in the kingdom of God, so there is no “transmu- 
tation of species.”’ God alone creates. Israel, the cre- 
ated people of God, abides Israel, and the history of Israet 
as not a mere frame in which to hang pictures of the New 
Testament Gentile church. Vhe kingdom is ever the king- 
dom, one sided for Israel alone in time past, one sided for 
the Gentiles alone now, outward in the one case, inward 
in the other, but both sided for both in one, hereafter, 
Israel evermore the root, the center, organic basis, and 
ground, of all. By observation of this, we learn the 
characteristic differences between pre-exile prophecy 
on the one hand, and exile with post-exile prophecy on 


8 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


the other. It is precisely along this line of develop- 
ment we detect the evolution of the ages in prophecy 
itself, and are obliged to hold that Prophecy as well as 
History is an “organism,” asis Nature, the Kingdom and 
the Church—the one a parable of the other—“ natural 
law in the spiritual world;” and “spiritual law in the 
natural world,” in short, as Newton showed, a system 
of universal and identical laws producing analogous 
phenomena in different spheres. Where there is life 
there is law. It is precisely along this line of study 
of the Word of God, we discover not only a descrip- 
tion of the Millennial Kingdom yet to be, but are able 
to detect the relative location of the millennial age 
itself, even in Old Testament prophecy, and find it 
exactly as the Apostle John has pictured and located 
it—its character, its name, 1ts measure, and the events 
by which it is opened and closed. The existence of 
“the 1,000 years”’ in the Old Testament is a matter 
of scientific demonstration, as truly as the existence of 
any geological age in the history of the planet, and is 
supported by an exegesis, grounded in the organic 
unity and continuity of prophecy in both Testaments, 
that is unassailable. It is another proof of the truth of 
the golden saying of Augustine, “‘ The New Testament 
lies concealed in the Old, the Old stands revealed in the 
New.” 

The six pre-exile prophets form a connected chain 
ending with Nahum. Of these, Isaiah is the chief, his 
radius of vision spanning all horizons, near, remote, 
and between, and losing itself in the breast of eternal 
glory. He sees all things, however, in one divine per- 
spective, one divine light, one divine picture, Messiah 


the center of all, Israel around Him, the Nations around - 


both. The ends and ages are all confounded in the 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 9 


first end, and the age following. All is a composite 
photography, the events standing cheek to cheek, 
which only later prophecy can separate. On the earlier 
prophets, the exile and post-exile prophets rest as on 
sure ground, the spirit of prophecy being one. Their 
office is not to transcend, but develop, the earlier. 
W hat Isaiah was to the earlier, Daniel was to the later. 
He bequeaths to them, and to us, the great problem of 
the Millennial Age, whose epoch Isaiah, Micah, and 
Ezekiel, have fixed, the problem of Israel’s final future 
and relation to the nations, with Israel’s history 
between the return from exile, and Israel’s. final re. 
demption in the glory of the Kingdom at Messiah’s sec- 
ond coming. Its solution is given, also, in the various 
visions of the four empires, four beasts, and seventy 
weeks, whose last week is rent off from the rest in ful- 
filment, the Roman times of the Gentiles lying be- 
tween—a seventieth week wholly eschatological, the 
basis of the seals trumpets and vials in John’s Apoc- 
alypse. The same problem appears in another form in 
the night visions of Zechariah, Haggai’s shaking of the 
nations, and Malachi’s burning day, whose close is 
crowned with healing from the sun of righteousness. 
The solution of the great problem of Israel’s future, 
sprung from the breach in David’s Kingdom, is the 
solution of the problem of the Millennial Kingdom, and 
comes with Israel’s future acceptance of David's. Son 
as their Lord, the closing up of the ancient breach in 
David’s Kingdom, the union of Israel and Judah in one 
nation, on the mountains of the fatherland forever ;—in 
short, Israel a converted people and _ nation, acknowl. 
edged by Christ in person, the nations applauding. 
With that consummation, after judgments and mercies 
unknown before, and the revelation of Christ Himself 


10 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


in His glory, dawns the Millennial Age. Search where 
we may, through all the prophets, this is the one 
theme, the redemption of Israel, and of the nations 
through Israel, after judgment has fallen on _ both, 
Christ the glory of all. It is the time of the “ King- 
dom restored to Israel.” Search where we may, we 
shall nowhere find unveiled the mystery of the New 
Testament “Church.” See Rom. xvi:25. I Cor. 11:7, 8. 
Eph. iii:8, 9. Col. 1:24-27. Nor does the disclosure of 
this, in the New Testament, avail to destroy the proph- 
etic word of the Old in reference to Israel, or abolish 
the standing contrast in the Old between Israel and the 
Nations, or in the New between Israel, the Nations, 
and the Church. 

It is among the “ Aschata,” or “Last Things, wene 
things to “come to pass in the last days,” or “ End- 
Time,” that we find the Millennial Age. It lies, as we 
shall see, between the ‘You Yehovah,” or “ Day of the 
Lord,” which, in the New Testament, is called ‘‘The 
Apocalypse of Jesus Christ,” and the endless age of the 
“New Jerusalem” in the final ‘‘ New heaven and 
earth.” It is bounded by two distinct judgments, one 
at the opening, one at the close of the Millennial Age, 
the opening judgment being that of the Nations, and of 
all powers, terrestrial and super-terrestrial, opposed to 
Christ and His reign, as also by a judgment upon Israel 
and Jerusalem, ending in the redemption of both. The 
“Yom Yehovah” everywhere precedes the Millennial 
Age, which is the age of Israel’s glory in the King- 
dom, and comprehends in itself most of the Zschata of 
the Old Testament. The judgment that closes the Mil 
lennial Age is represented as a judgment on Gog and 


Magog, which extends itself to a “ visitation” of final - 


doom upon all the wicked, after which Israel rests eter- 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. TE 


nally secure in their glorified land, the nations of the 
saved walking in the light of the Holy City, the Lord 
Himself dwelling forever among His people. Such, in 
general, is the Old Testament representation. 

To understand this, however, it is necessary to know 
first, the manner in which the prophets divided the 
whole course of time, and the way in which the ages 
and ends are represented in prophecy, as also the rela- 
tion in which the £schkata stand to these ends and ages, 
first in pre-exile prophecy, and next in exile and post- 
exile prophecy. 


Ba GENERAL DISTRIBUTION OF TIME. PRE-EXILE 
PROPHECY. 


And first, as to the division of time, in pre-extile proph- 
ecy. \he whole course of time,.from the creation of 
the heaven and earth to the re-creation of the same, is 
divided into two great ages, the bisecting epoch between 
which is called the “ Azad.” [In this End is placed the 
“Yom Yehovah,” during which the personal self- 
revelation of Jehovah in glory, for the deliverance of 
Israel, and the destruction of His and their enemies, is 
also placed, and for the establishment of His kingdom 
merelory cou. earth... To this <“ Day--of the “Lord:” 
belong all the Eschata, or Last Things, that precede 
the age of glory on earth, and are connected with the 
Advent of Messiah. To this one End all prophecy 
constantly looks, in every picture of the future, from 
Joel to Malachi. The first of these two ages is the 
pre-Messianic age, or Jewish age, with all the time 
preceding, and is called in Hebrew theology, ‘ Olam 
Hazzeh,’ “this present world.” The second of these 
ages is the Messianic age, and is called “Olam Habba,” 
or “the world tocome.’”’ The New Testament employs 


12 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


these divisions of time, and they are ever in the mouth 
of our Lord and His Apostles, as ‘“ Azon ho houtos,” 
“this present world,’ and ‘“ Azon ho mellon,” “ the 
world tocome,” i.e. “this age,” and the “ coming age.” 
These terms have no reference to individual life here, 
or the life of the disembodied spirit, after death. The 
bisecting point between them is not death, but the End 
of the first age. They relate wholly to the course of 
earthly history, and the development of the kingdom 
oi God on earth. In pre-exile prophecy in general, 
there is but one End, and that between the two ages, 
the last of which is endless; Oxe End, One Day of the 
Lord, Oxe Judgment, Oze Advent of Messiah in glory; 
an End all-comprehensive and undeveloped with but 
One age succeeding, the Messianic Age, the age of 
Israel in the kingdom and the glory, an End that “ does 
not discriminate between the Parousia in humility and 
the Parousia in glory, but beholds the whole work of 
Messiah as complete.” (Delitzsch.) Therefore does 
Isaiah’s page shine the more intensely, for into that one 
age the whole grace and glory of Messiah’s work is 
concentrated. All the sufferings of the “Servant of 
Jehovah,” all the splendor of His Reward, all there is 
for Jew, and all for Gentile, focalize themselves in that 
one End and radiate out to that one succeeding age. 
It is the uniform view of all pre-exile prophecy. In the 
“Yom Yehovah,’—day of judgment, day of wonders,— 
day of wrath and day of mercy,—day of reeling for 
earth and shaking for heaven,—of tumult, storm, and 
fire,—of dissolution and reconstruction,—the nations 
are judged, the Gentile powers are smitten, Antichrist 
is destroyed, the wicked are swept away, the dragon is 
bound, Satan and his hosts are imprisoned in the pit, 
and Israel’s faithful dead are raised. We see it all in 


eer 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. ie 


the “ Little Apocalypse of Isaiah,”—Chapters XXIV— 
XXVIII. Israel’s times begin. In the proverb of the 
Rabbis, “ Esau is the end of Olam Hazzeh, Jacob is the 
beginning of Olam Habia.” It is the view of the 
prophetic portions of the Pentateuch, the Historical 
books, the Messianic Psalms, and of all the prophets 
prior to the exile. 

The character of this Messianic age is painted in 
colors the most gorgeous and brilliant in the prophets, 
even as it is sung in strains the most inspiring, in the 
Psalms. When the Lord has come and brought salva- 

tion with His own right arm, and Jacob’s tribulation is 
past, everything puts on a new appearance. Under 
the New Covenant, sin is pardoned through Messiah’s 
death, the gospel is preached, the Gentiles are gathered, 
the Spirit is poured from on high, and streams of knowl- 
edge, holiness and life, perpetually overflow. Showers 
of blessing continually fall. The people are all right- 
eous, and the righteous shine. The City of Jerusalem 
is transformed, made glorious not alone by the bound- 
less wealth of nations then tributary to it, but by the 
new-creating presence of the Lord Himself. The 
Temple is rebuilt in glory unsurpassed. The Land 
itself is transfigured toan Eden. Jerusalem is Jehovah's 
throne. Zion is His dwelling place. The very desert 
blooms like Sharon. Unwonted fruitfulness appears. 
All nature is at peace, and man in harmony therewith. 
Idolatry and War and Crime, exist no more. Sin is 
restrained and death is checked, because Satan is bound 
The curse is gone, longevity returns, and Israel’s risen 
saints enjoy a deathless life, fresh and beauteous, as the 
flower on which the morning: dew still rests, and the 
morning light still shines. Ina new heaven and earth, 


14 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


the Holy City is crowned with light, and the nations 
walk in that light. A painless, tearless, sorrowless 
state, the reproach taken from the Jew, the veil taken 
from the nations, and death swallowed up in victory, 
the Bridegroom rejoicing over His Bride, Messiah 
reigning on David’s throne, a festive jubilee, Jehovah 
dwelling with His people, both in perfect fellowship 
and blessedness, is what we see, Eternal splendors 
streaming everywhere. And just because all future 
ages are here inclosed in this one age, therefore, is it, 
for Isaiah, the “everlasting” age, and all things are 
everlasting that belong to it. Not indeed that it has_ 
but one form, and this one form eternal, but that its 
facts are so, be they of grace which is glory begun, or 
of glory which is grace made perfect. All is everlast- 
ing, with Isaiah; an everlasting Kingdom, an everlast- 
ing Throne, an everlasting Covenant, an everlasting 
Nation, an everlasting Name, an everlasting Righteous- 
ness, an everlasting Joy, an everlasting Song, an ever- 
lasting Peace, an everlasting Holiness, an everlasting 
Life, an everlasting Dwelling, an everlasting Rock, an 
everlasting Redeemer, an everlasting Salvation, an 
everlasting God. All, is olamic, zonian, eternal, for- 
ever! All eschatologies are mingled here in one, all 
ends in the one End in which Messiah comes, all ages 
in the one Age which follows that one appearing. The 
Rabbis call it the “Immortal Age,” and say of the 
righteous raised from their graves, that they “sit with 
crowns on their head and behold the splendor of God; ” 
and that “All the good the prophets have spoken 
concerning Israel belongs to Olam Habba,” the “world 
to come.” 

If we represent, in schematic form, the manner 


IN BOTH TESTAMENRBS. | 15 


and ends as seen, in general, in pre-exile prophecy, the 


diagram will stand thus: 


Advent. 
Pre-Messianic Messianic 


Age. Age. 
End. 


That is, two ages and one end between, the last age the 
everlasting one, or age that has no end. 


Ci EXTLE  PRORTIECY. 


Let us come now to speak of exile prophecy. Here 
we find a marked difference from all preceding proph- 
ecy, in respect to the ages and the ends, and the dis- 
position of the Eschata. Events that stood together in 
one picture, in the earlier prophets, begin to be parted 
here. The hints in Hosea, Isaiah, and Micah, of such a 
possible development, and of which we shall speak later 
on, receive now their true significance. We learn how 
the great epochs of Israel’s history are the great epochs 
of prophecy, and that the development of both runs 
parallel. Our attention is attracted to the partition of 
the one end, and the development of the one age fol- 
lowing. Two Ends instead of one appear. Two 
Advents instead of one. Two Judgments instead 
of one. Two Resurrections instead of one. Two Ages 
following the ends instead of one, the endless age, 
Omecourse, «the last. The -~whole cast -and <char- 
acter of the future seem changed, as if some strange 
fatality on the part of the people, still unprepared to 
receive their promised Messiah at His first coming, 
had served to postpone the promised redemption. This 
much is Clear, that national Israel has not profited as it 
should by the catastrophe of the exile, for prophecy 
now speaks of a second destruction of rebuilt Jerusalem 
as the result of Israel’s impenitence, even after the 


16 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


return from Babylon; a second dispersion, another 
long period of desolation, a curse for rejecting Messiah 
Himself. And yet it pictures a second coming of Mes- 
siah, and Israel redeemed at last, triumphant in the 
promised kingdom and glory. ? 

Something new has occurred. The synthesis of 
ends and ages in pre-exile prophecy gives place to 
their analysis in post-exile prophecy. The one end 
parts into two, each part closing itself up again, the 
space between becoming that of an intermediate age, 
though still foreshortened, the age that is endless lying 
behind the last of these ends. Instead of two ages 
and one end, as in pre-exile prophecy, we have three 
ages and two ends, schematized thus: 


ist. Advent. 2d. Advent. 
Jewish Christian Millennial 


Age. Age. Age. 
End. = End, = 


At the end of the pre-Messianic or Jewish Age Mes- 
siah comes, but notin glory. He is “cut off,” and there 
is “nothing for Him’”—no kingdom in the form pre- 
dicted, no crown. He is rooted out by a violent death, 
and Israelis, moreover, rejected. The Messianic Age is 
now divided into two, during the first of which the risen 
Messiah, ascended to Heaven, remains concealed and 
unseen throughout the whole period of Israel’s rejec- 
tion, while the news of His name and His great salva- 
tion goes to the Gentiles. It is the Church-historical 
period between the first and second Advents, a period 
closed up to Daniel, or at most, only briefly alluded to, 
eventhough its termini, the two Advents, are given. It 
is the period when Israel’s national history is a blank be- 
fore God. As the end of the intermediate age, which is 
the end of His concealment in Heaven, He comes again 
and appears “in the clouds of Heaven,” and comes to 


i 


INTBOLT TESS AMEN TS, lay, 


Israel penitent and believing, in the crisis of Israel’s 
last tribulation, and comes to “restore the kingdom to 
Israel.” At His first coming He was rejected by 
Israel, and Israel was rejected by Him. At His second 
coming He is accepted by Israel, and Israel is accepted 
by Him. Then, there was “nothing for Him.” Now 
there is everything for Him. Then, also, there was 
nothing for Israel as a nation. Now, there is all. The 
kingdom and the glory are for both, “ under the whole 
heaven.” Olam Habba, or the world to come, has be- 
come two worlds, of which the first, being an interme- 
diate age, shares the nature of both, and while being 
the “ world to come,” or Olam Habba, with respect to 
the age preceding, is yet “ this present world,” or Olam 
Hazzeh, with respect to the age still following. It is 
our Christian Dispensation. The Yom Yehovah, with 
its unaccomplished £schata, still hes beyond. Such is 
the picture Daniel gives us: Two ends, two ages, two 
advents, for the one end, one age, one advent, of pre- 
exile prophecy. Messiah comes at the beginning of 
the fourth Empire. He comes also at its close. . 

But this is not all. Ezekiel develops the ends and 
ages still more than Daniel does. He has nothing to 
say of the first Advent, as Daniel has, and nothing of 
the Antichrist. He has nothing to say of the mission- 
ary proclamation of the Gospel, or Israel’s prophetic 
calling, as Isaiah has. He leaves to Isaiah the proph- 
etic, to Daniel the kingly, and presents almost exclu- 
sively the priestly side of Israelin the kingdom.’ He 
speaks in his earlier prophecies of the judgments of 
God on Jerusalem and the nations, but, his later visions 
are of Israel’s deliverance and the splendor of their 
land, city and temple, in the day of the personal mani- 
festation of the “glory” to His people, He speaks not 

2 


18 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


only of Israel’s spiritual regeneration by means of the 
“ New Covenant,” which Hosea, Isaiah, and Jeremiah 
have celebrated, but also of Israel’s final restoration as 
a people, their political reunion and national con- 
version, and independence, their blessedness and glory 
in the land promised to their fathers, God’s sanctuary 
in their midst, God their God, and David their Shep-- 
herd-Prince forevermore. Instead of the Valley of 
Dry Bones with the Colossus towering over them, 
what we see is a resurrected people, standing up as a 
great army, and instinct with the “ Spirit of Life from 
God.” It is new-born-Israel of the end-time, coming 
to their inheritance and priestly royalty, re-established 
in their land forever. All this we get in what is called 
“Ezekiel’s Apocalypse,” embracing chapters 37-48. His 
vision of the land, the city and the temple, chapters 
40-48, is but a further expansion of what is foretold in 
chapter 37, and presents the priestly side of the same 
kingdom whose royal greatness Daniel had predicted. 
Great in majesty it was to Daniel. Glorious in holi- 
ness it is to Ezekiel. And, as to Daniel, it came with 
the coming of the ‘Son of Man” in the clouds of 
Heaven, in all its kingly grandeur, so, to Ezekiel, does 
it come in all its priestly ornament and holy beauty, 
with the entrance of the “glory” in the temple. With 
the personal appearing of the “glory” the cosmical 
transfiguration begins, the temple waters flow. 

But the peculiarity of Ezekiel is this, that even to 
this coming age of Israel’s blessedness in the kingdom, 
he sees an “end;” not an end-to the szxzgdom, but an 
end to the age. Another end heaves into sight, the 
transition point between the Millennial Age and the age 
that is endless; an end beyond the second end already 
seen in Daniel; a third end followed by the age with- 


SS 


IN BOTH-TESTAMENTS. 19 


out end. The event that marks this new end is the 
predicted war-march and judgment of Gog and Magog, 
at the end of Israel’s “many days” in the kingdom. 
Just as in exile prophecy the one pre-exile end is devel- 
oped into two, so, once again, these two ends are 
developed into three. In Ezekiel, the second end ex- 
pands itself totwo. Just as,in Daniel, the judgment on 
_ Antichrist and Israel’s restoration in the kingdom, 
marks the opening of the age that hes beyond the sec- 
ond coming, so, in Ezekiel, does the judgment of Gog 
and Magog, which appears as the last judgment, mark 
the close of that age. With that judgment, which, as 
we shall see, extends itself to the resurrection of the 
wicked and their final doom, in John’s Apocalypse, 
Ezekiel’s vision ceases. What we have now, instead of 
two ends and three ages, are three ends and four ages, 
covering all time, from the exile down to the final new 
heaven and earth of which Isaiah speaks, viz.: The Jew- 
ish Age and the end of it, the Christian Age and the 
end of it, the Millennial Age and the end of it, and the 
Endless Age of the New Jerusalem. If we schematize 
the conception the diagram will stand thus: 


1st. Advent 2d. Advent White Throne 
Jewish Christian 6) Millennial Endless. 
Age. Age. Age. : Age. 
6 End. End. End. 


’ 


What to us is now the “ world to come,” will be to 
its own inhabitants “the present world,” even as our 
present age was the world to come, to pre-Christian 
Judaism. As time wears away, and the future comes 
to make the present, then glides into the past, Olam 
Habba becomes Olam Hazzeh, even on the other side 
of the second Advent. In other words, the Messianic 
or everlasting age, which, in pre-exile prophecy, was 


20 THE AHOOUSAND VEAKS 


but one age following Messiah’s one Advent, and 
which in Daniel became two ages, by reason of the 
clear separation of the comings, has, in Ezekiel, become 
three ages by reason of the new end introduced; so 
making four in all, if we begin with the Jewish Age, 
viz.: (1) The period of Old Testament times; (2) the 
Church-historical period; (3) the Millennial Age of 
Israel in the kingdom; and (4) the Eternal State or 
New Jerusalem in the ‘New Heaven and Earth.” 
The end of the Jewish Age brought resurrection, 
judgment, and a new age succeeding. The end of our 
present age will do the same. The end of the Millen- 
nial Age will do the same. In each case the kingdom 
receives a re-establishment in new form. There is a 
re-creation. A personal advent of Messiah marks the 
close of each age, save the Millennial. No third Ad- 
vent at the judgment on Gog or Magog is intimated 
in Ezekiel’s nor even in John’s Apocalypse, for the 
final resurrection and the judgment of the wicked, into 
which the judgment on Gog extends itself, for the 
reason that no second departure of Christ from His 
people is revealed. As in the Old Testament, so in 
the New, the last judgment is perspectively covered 
and connected with the judgment at the second com- 
ing of the Son of Man. 

Such is the entire development of the ages and the 
ends in prophecy,—the Biblical Afonology and Tele- 
ology—[rom Genesis to Regenesis; the whole time 
prior to the first coming being regarded as the pre- 
Messianic Age. Our own age is a parenthetic one. 
The age next beyond that of our own is that of Israel 
in the kingdom. The last age is what we call “ Eter- 
nity ;” time rolling on unto “ages of ages,’ in the 
illimitable future, “ world without end.” 


ee 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 21 


D.—THE SUB-DISTRIBUTION’ OF -TIME. 


The Scriptures give us not only the ages and the 
ends, but also a sub-distribution of prophetic and _his- 
toric time, from the period of the exile or blotting out 
of the visible kingdom of God on earth, down to its 
re-establishment, 2. ¢., from the timeof Israel’s subjec- 
tion to the Gentile power to the time of Israel’s redemp- 
tion from the same; or until the “mystery of God” 
concerning Israel’s blindness and rejection, and Israel’s 
new sight and recovery, is “finished,” under the 
sounding of the seventh trumpet. Beyond that we 
find no sub-distribution, save the judgment on Gog 
already mentioned, and which, in connection with 
Isaiah xxiv:22 and Isaiah Ixv:17, extends itself to the 
final resurrection and judgment, and the New Heaven 
and Earth. The sub-distribution we refer to is found, 
first of all, in the vision of the great metallic image, or 
Monarchy-Colossus, Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream 
(B. C. 604) eighteen years before the destruction of 
Jerusalem (B.C. 586), that image being a symbol of the 
Gentile power standing on Israel’s prostrate body ; or, 
if we combine the visions in Daniel with those in Eze- 
kiel, then the Colossus stands erect in the midst of 
Israel’s national graveyard—“ Habbikah Meleah Atsa- 
moth’—‘the valley full of bones, and very dry,’’—and 
remains standing, while national Israel remains dead, 
until that image is overthrown. In short, that Colossus 
represents a series of four Gentile empires, appearing 
and disappearing in successional order,—four different 
forms or phases of the one God-opposed world-power, 
as it comes in contact with Israel; from the time of the 
Babylonian Empire down to the Cloud-Comer from 
Heaven to overthrow the world-power, erect His 
kingdom on its ruins, and restore the lost sovereignty 


22 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


to Israel. The vision of the four-empired image and 
its fate was given to humiliate the monarch’s pride and 
inspire afresh the sinking hope of Israel. To the same 
end was the vision of the Valley of Dry Bones reani- — 
mated by the word of prophecy, and the blowing of 
God’s Spirit in the last days, given to Ezekiel at the 
Gola, when the news reached him of Jerusalem’s fall 
(Oct. B. C. 586). The one vision shows the Colossus 
falling down, the other Israel rising up; the one, man’s 
kingdoms passing away; the other, Messiah’s kingdom 
come forever, with Israel in the front. 

Again, the same distribution of the period of Israel’s 
national sepulture and corruption, the high Colossus 
standing as the tombstone, with a “ Azc jacet Israel,” as 
it were, upon its breast, is given to Daniel in a new 
vision of four beasts (B. C. 541) forty-five years after 
Jerusalem’s fall—a vision parts of which were ex- 
panded two years later (B. C. 539) under the symbols 
of the Ram and Goat. The design of the beast vision 
was not merely to show how differently from men God 
looks upon the phases of the world-power, they re- 
garding the world-kingdoms as the concentration of 
all materiai wealth, splendor, and might. He regarding 
them as predacious beasts, but also to allow a further 
development {rom the symbol of the ten horns which 
would have been unnatural in the ten toes. Careering — 
on through Babylonian, Medo-Persian, Greek and Ro- | 
man Empires, down to the last outcome of the Roman 
power, divided, lost, and yet revived and reappearing 
in the “ Little Horn,” Gentile power shall wend its 
way—lIsrael still underneath its feet,—until the Moun- 
tain-Stone strikes the Image in its toes, and the Cloud- 
Comer smites the Horn on its head, the one sent whirl- 
ing like the chaff to the wind, the other tossed, living, 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 93 


to the flame, while Israel, resurgent from the grave, 
appears a mighty host, and wields the empire of the 
world. The radius of prophetic vision reaches to the 
Second Coming of the Son of Man. Till then Israel, 
as a nation, is dead, the people scattered, and the 
Holy City trodden under Gentile feet. But then, “at 
that time,” Israel, as a nation, revives. And here we 
meet a strange phenomenon. As it is with Israel and 
the Nations Daniel has to do, and not with the New Test- 
ament Church; as his mission is to prophesy of the 
world kingdoms and Israel’s relation thereto, and the 
fall of these kingdoms when Israel’s “ Basileia” comes; 
so we find that both in the vision of the Colossus (Chap. 
Il) and that of the four beasts (Chap. VII), the whole 
period between the rise of the fourth beast and the 
final ten horns out of which the last Antichrist comes 
(Israel’s last oppressor)—the entire period between the 
First and Second Comings of Christ—is overleaped. 
Or, better, the period itself lies hid without any sign of 
the First Advent, in the legs and feet of the Colossus. 
The terminus a guois not given. It has two aspects, 
viz.: That of the Church-dispensation, and that of Israel’s 
national prostration, both running parallel during the 
same period. With the Church Daniel has nothing to 
do. It is Israel and the Colossus that absorb his atten- 
tion; and neither in the Colossus, nor in the Beasts, is 
the First Advent marked anywhere. The period of 
the Gentile domination runs on continuous to the end. 
Only in the 70 Weeks, does the First Advent appear, 
and the interval between the two comings begin to be 
opened out; as we shall see. 

Once more. Still another sub-distribution of the 
same stretch of time is given in the celebrated proph- 
ecy of the “Seventy Weeks” (Chap. IX), the last week 


24 THE THOUSAND YEARS 
of which is eschatological, since it follows the interval 
that follows the Roman or second destruction of Jeru- 
salem, consequent upon the national rejection of Mes- 
siah “cut off” by the Jews,—a week divided into two 
equal periods of three awd one-half years, or forty-two 
months, or 1,260 days each, during which we have the 
rise, reign and ruin of the last Antichrist, the “ prince 
that shall come” (Magid Habba), the ‘“ Desolator” 
(Meshomem), who perishes beneath the outpoured vials 
of divine wrath. It is of supreme importance to recog- 
nize this fact. The 7oth of Daniel’s seventy weeks 
is zxot immediately sequent upon the 69th week at 
whose ciose Messiah was“ cut off.’ The Jews nailed 
the ‘“ King of the Jews”’ to the cross, and while at the 
Tirst Advent the kingdom came in its spzrztual inward 
power on the day of Pentecost—a “tasting of the powers 
of the world to come,’—it was postponed in ifs 
outward, visible and glorious part, as a polity and public 
sovereignty, until Messiah’s Second Coming; and this 
because of Israel’s unbelief. This is the sun-clear state- 
ment of prophecy. The 7oth week stands in the midst 
of the Yow Yehovah, or Day of the Lord. It precedes 
the Second Advent, the destruction of Antichrist, the 
Resurrection, and Israel's glory in the kingdom re- 
stored to Israel. The Church Fathers saw this; Ire: 
nzeus, Cyprian, Primasius, Hippolytus, Appolinaris, 
and others. Modern eschatologists see it and victori- 
ously defend it,—Delitzsch, Hofmann, Luthardt, Godet, 
Koch, Christiani, Rinck, Baur, Weiss, Nigelsbach, Kar- 
sten, Ebrard, Van Oosterzee, Kliefoth, and how many 
more! More thana hundred living expositors main- 
tain it. The interval, however, between the First and 
Second Advents—our Church-Historical period—twin- 
kles into light. The same interval that lies concealed 


et 

IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 25 

Me 

in the image and four beasts, between the rise of the 
fourth empire proper and the final ten horns, or (what 
is the same thing) the final ‘Antichrist, is here revealed 
as lying between the 69th and‘voth of the “seventy 
weeks,” the period of the Roman “times of the Gen- 
tiles,’ from Czesar onward. At the close of the 69th 
week Messiah comes and-is “cut off,” and there -is 
“nothing for Him,” no Messianic kingdom as _ pre- 
dicted. He is despised, and rejected, and crucified, as 
the “ King of the Jews.” For this the nation is de- 
spised, rejected, slaughtered, and entombed by Gentile 
hands “until He come.” The histories of Israel and 
Christ are analogous, as sin-bearers and_ salvation- 
bringers. The 7oth week resumes God’s gracious 
dealings with the Jewish people, “asa people.” The 
prophetic formula, including the 7o years’ captivity, 
viz.: 70 plus 7 plus 62 plus (interval) plus 1, represents 
the whole stretch of time measured by the height of the 
Colossus, from head to feet, which is also the whole 
stretch of time measured by the life of the four beasts, 
in all reaching to the Second Advent. The ¢ermzni a 
guo and ad quem are the same for all. In pre-exile 
prophecy, the return from exile retreats into the back- 
eround, and the entire period from the exile to the 
final gathering of Israel is viewed as one continuous 
two-day dispersion and subjection. It is true that the 
final redemption of Israel seems to come, in pre-exile 
prophecy, with the return from Babylonian exile itself. 
But that is due to the law of prophetic representation. 
Two horizons, the near and remote, the time-historical 
and the eschatological, are blended into one. The 
present is thrown into the future. The future is at- 
tracted to the present. All things are seen in the light 
of the “end.” Hence prophecy is ‘“ complex and apo- 


¥ 


26 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


telesmatic.” The same law works in exile and post- 
exile prophecy, but modified because of the later stand- 
point, and the progress of both prophecy and history. 
It is here the law of “ perspective” comesin. A First 
Advent is specifically marked in Daniel, and in Zecha- 
riah, yet only to emphasize the fact of Israel’s rejection 
of Messiah, and rejection by Messiah, then leap at once 
to paint the time of Israel’s final struggte and redemp- 


tion, at Messiah’s Second Coming. Until then Israel’s - 


history, as a nation, is a blank before God. All gra- 
cious covenant relations between God and that peo- 
ple, as such, are suspended, on account of Israel's apos- 
tasy. This strange phenomenon, as to the “ over- 
leaping” of the intervals, or what Delitzsch calls the 
“deep silence” of the prophets in their “concealment 
of the mystery of the church,’ has its true ground 
in what Hofmann calls the “ organic structure of 
Old Testament Prophecy in relation to Israel.” And 
herein, Auberlen, following* Baumgarten, has stated 
clearly the solution of the riddie. “Israel, after having 
rejected salvation, ceased to be the subject of sacred his- 
tory, and became that of profane history alone. The 
intervening period between the two Messianic epochs— 
between the time the kingdom of God is taken from 
Israel and given to the Gentiles until the Second Com- 
ing of Christ, z. e., between the destruction of Jeru- 
salem and the conversion of ‘All Israel’ and which 
forms for the people of the covenant a great paren- 
thesis—is veiled from Daniel, in much obscurity, on 
account of his Old Testament and Israelitish stand- 
point.” * 

Thus do the visions of the empires, beasts, and 


*Auberlen Der Prophet Daniel, 141. 


iL 
A= 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. mb 


seventy weeks, concur harmoniously and, with their 
corresponding intervals, span the course of ages from 
the Babylonian time down to the second Advent. All, 
without exception, overleap the interval of Israel’s 
national rejection, and locate the point when I[srael’s © 
blessedness begins at Christ’s secondappearing. Here 
enter those times of “ Return,” “Reviving,” “Refresh- 
fie estitution, “Regeneration, =“ Resurreetion? 
and “Redemption,” foretold for Israel, and the result- 
ant blessing, after judgment, for the nations; millennial 
times described in terms so glowing and so wondertul. 
The pre-condition of them all is the second Advent, 
itself pre-conditioned by the witness of the gospel to all 
nations, and Israel’s begun repentance and return to 
Christ. Nowhere, in all prophecy, is the Millennial 
peoeiocated in the “Times ofthe: Gentiles the 
Church-Historical Period, the time of Israel’s national 
death and resting in the grave. Impossible! Nowhere 
is the word of God guilty of the nameless folly of con- 
founding the “ Times of the Gentiles” with “the 1,000 
years.” It would make all prophecy a contradiction of 
itself. These never come before the fall of the Colossus, 
nor before the overthrow of Antichrist, nor before the 
end of Gentile power, nor before the resurrection of 
the faithful dead; none of which events occur before 
Messiah’s coming in the clouds of heaven, descending 
to alight “on Olivet,” “come to Zion,” and cause His 
voice to “roar from Jerusalem.” (Zech. xiv:3; Isa. lx: 
Ge Dan Vil:0, 22; -xii:2; . Joel-1ii:16)... No figurative 
exposition and no spiritualizing interpretation, such as 
we find in Hengstenberg, Fairbairn, Keil, Brown, 
Milligan, Glasgow, and others of the same school, can 
avail to break the oracles of God, or transmute Israel 
into the New Testament Church, Canaan into Christen- 


$s 


28 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


dom, or the times after Christ's second Coming into the 
times before it. Itisimpossible upon the ground of Old 
Testament prophecy, or of New, in their common distri- 
bution of the ages, to locate the Millennium between the 
First and Second Advents, for the simple reason that, 
between these Advents, Israel lies nationally dead, and 
the Millennial Age begins with Israel's national resur- 
rection. (Ezek. xxxvil: 1-28); and also for the simple 
reason that between these Advents the Gentile Colossus 
still remains standing and the Millennial Age begins 
when the Colossus is struck and blown away like chaff. 
(Dan. ii:35.) And that this was not a fact at the first 
Advent, and is not a fact now, is proved by the further 
lact that Gentile politics and power still.rule, and Israel 
as a nation, is still unrisen from the dead. 

The contrary view which makes a “figure” of the 
Second Advent, would break down the whole Apoca- 
lypse of John which is built up, line for line, on Old 
Testament prophecy, and the words of our Lord in 
His Olivet discourse, and puts the crown and consum- 
mation on Israel’s hope. Impossible—forever impos- 
sible—that the prophetic pictures of Israel’s future, so 
brilliant and glowing, should belong to that period of 
time when, in God’s account, Israel is a blank, their 
nation non-existent, the woful Gentile times; an age 
in history when Jerusalem lies trodden in the dust with 
Gentile chains on her neck, and the proud Colossus 
tramples on the bones of Israel still bleaching in the 

valley, and Israel’s faithful dead still slumber in the 
grave; an age when Israel remains outcast, dispersed, 
rejected, still enthralled and unredeemed! Impossible ! 
Impossible! As impossible as that the Covenant of God 
should break, or the “Strength of Israel” should lie! 
It cannot be! To evade, by dogmatic prepossession or 


IN BOVH TESTAMENTS. 29 


false hermeneutics, or ignorant prejudice, or indiffer- 
ence, the clear revelation of God herein, and insist 
that the “Jewish people,” ‘Daniel’s people,” “Eze- 
kiel’s and Isaiah’s people,” “the whole House of 
Israel,” mean “the totality of believers in all ages of the 
world,’ or “The New Yestament’ Church,” and that 
“the land” means Spain, [taly, Germany, France, Great 
Britain, the United States, “the Territories of Christ- 
endom” (Keil), is to do more than trifle with God’s 
wWeord. “lt 1s to distort and ‘negate it.’ (Delitzsch). 
To plead ‘difficulty of conception” is to bid for the 
rejection of every well-established doctrine. By such 
a method of exposition, all the Zschata of both Testa- 
ments are dislocated, fact is evaporated, development in 
prophecy ignored, our present age misunderstood, no 
time or history beyond the Second Advent allowed, 
Israel’s future destiny and mission denied, the unity 
and continuity of prophecy left unheeded, and our con- 
ceptions substituted for the thought and will of God. 

If we sum up, therefore, the result of our study, the 
whole subject will shine out with a clearness equal to 
the brilliance of the noonday. What we have is the 
development, in prophecy, of God’s kingdom on earth, 
by means of Israel the Messianic people. The history 
of Israel prior to the Prophetic Age, it has not been 
necessary to discuss. It is enough that we began with 
the blotting out of God’s visible kingdom on earth, by 
means of Israel’s subjection to Gentile politics and 
power. From that time onward, the prophets look to 
the time of the restoration of the kingdom to Israel at 
Messiah’s Coming in the clouds of héaven, and even to 
the eternal glory beyond. We get the whole range of 
tei visions in the expressions “ Until,” “Unto,” “After 
two days,” which bring us to the Second Coming, even 


30) FRET HOS. ae VEARS ) ; 

as the sixty-nine weeks bring ys to the First Coming. 
Then we have the “Thiri Day” which is a “Multitude 
of Days,” “Many Days,’ “Elis Days,” “the one thou- 
sand years,” which bring us down to Gog’s destruc- 
tion, the last resurrection and judgment and the final 
new Heaven and Earth. We have swept the ages and 
the ends, and also the intervals in prophecy; all con- 
structed and revealed with special reference to Israel: 
the Jewish or Mosaic Age down to the rejection of 
Israel’s Messiah. Then the interval concealed in 
prophecy, viz., the Church-Historical Period, covered 
simply by “and unto,” in Dan. ix:27, Then comes 
Israel to the front again, when the times of the Gentiles 
are ended at the Second Coming of Messiah to reclaim 
His people, and we enter upon the interval of Gentile 
subjection to Israel’s supremacy, the tables being 
turned in an age of Millennial Glory. Then, after this, 
Israel and the nations, in the New Jerusalem under a 
new heaven and on anew earth, Jew, Gentile, and the 
Church of God, all one, their distinctions still remain- 
ing, their unity eternal, and God all inall. If we put 
the whole Old Testament Chronological Prophecy to- 
gether, concerning Israel, after David’s kingdom was 
broken, we shall get the formula of the combined 70 
years’ Captivity, and the Seventy Year-Weeks, in- 
cluding the Great Interval between the 69th and 7Zoth 
week, thus: 70 years, plus 483 years, or 69 wecks, plus 
the interval of our present age, plus the closing or sev- 
entieth week of years, z.e., seven years; or, in a briefer 
form, the formula will be 70 plus 7 plus 62 plus our in- 
terval plus 1, a formula that covers the whole time from 
the Babylonish captivity down to the Second Coming of 
Christ. If we now annex to this the Vammim Rabbim, 
or “Many Days” of Ezekiel,-z. e., the Millennial Age 


‘ \ 
IN BOTH. TESFAMENTS. 31 
y 


‘ 


for Israel restored, at the close of which is Gog’s de- 
struction and the new heaven and earth predicted by 
Isaiah, then the formula will bé, 70 plus 7 plus 62 plus 
our interval plus 1 plus the “many days,” plus ““Gog’s 
little season” followed by the final judgment and the 
new heaven and earth. We get the total azonology 
and teleology of both Old and New Testament proph. 
ecy with respect to Israel, the Church and the Na. 
tions; and in all we see how Israel, God’s “choice 
forever,” stands out, in rejection and in their calling, 
mission, death and resurrection, as the Bringer, nation. 
ally, of Salvation to mankind. It is God’s plan, and 
full, as Paul tells us, of the “ unsearchable wisdom of 
(Fod,--= Kom. xi:33. “‘Salvation is trom the Jews.” 
John iv:22. 


Pee eOot io xk tL PROPHECY: 


A word here must suffice. Haggai sees the final 
glory of the Messianic kingdom and connects it im- 
mediately with the Second Temple reared by Zerub- 
babel, and into which the “glory” comes and fills the 
house. To him, this consummation is in the near 
future. Once, already, Israel’s God has overthrown 
proud Babylon and brought a partial redemption, 
though poor, to His people. “ Yet once more, it isa 
little while!’’ “How short a time!’ and Israel’s God 
will not only shake one nation but “all nations,” and 
“not only earth, but heaven also, sea and dry land” to- 
gether, and all “the precious things of the nations” shall 
be made tributary to the structure of the Temple, and 
into it the “glory” will enter personally, and “fill the 
House” with His splendor. The Temple shall thus 
become the constant dwelling of Jehovah, the bond of 
union, and the center of all light to surviving na- 


32 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


tions, in a kingdom that cannot be shaken. Haggai 11:6- 
21-23. While this oracle was, in part, fulfilled by the 
personal appearing of Christ in the Temple, whose 
Advent was preceded by the overthrow of the Persian 
and the Greek monarchies and Rome’s Republic, and the 
subjugation of the world by Roman arms,we have Paul’s 
apotelesmatic word for it that it looks to the Second 
Coming of Christ, and that the catastrophe it pictures, 
more appalling than the scenes at Sinai, at Marathon, 
or Salamis, or Philippi, is a universal world-catas- 
trophe, such as we see in John’s Apocalypse under the 
sixth seal, and only after which the ‘‘Basileia Asaleutos,” 
or ‘“ Immovable Kingdom” comes. Heb. -x1i:26-29, 
“Marathon” and “Maranatha” are in the same perspec- 
tive! This is Haggai’s peculiarity, one Advent, the 
Second, and one age following, and yet implying a 
previous Advent of the “ Glory” and to be connected 
with the Second Temple. At any rate, the promised 
kingdom cannot come until after the “ Day of the 
Lord” in which heaven, earth, sea, dry land, and all 
nations are shaken. So says Isaiah 11:10-22; xxiv:1-23. 
In the clearest manner Zechariah distinguishes 
Two Advents, two Ends, and the Millennial Age fol- 
lowing the second, but without Gog and Magog at its 
termination. He sees Zion’s king coming meek and 
lowly riding on a colt, ix:9, then pierced with cruel 
hands, Jehovah’s Fellow smitten by the sword of jus- 
tice, x11:7; xu:10. ‘As a result of this, he:sees thems 


pension of the Covenant with Israel, not God’s Covenant 


of Grace, which is eternal, but the “ Suspension of the 
National Covenant of God with Israel as a People,” (De- 
litzsch, Hofmann, Kohler, Auberlen, Luthardt, Godet, 
Wright, Pember, Anderson, Seiss,) by the breaking of 
the two staves of “ Beauty and Lands,” Zech. x1:7-10, 


A 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS, ao 


Israel’s existence as a covenant Nation forfeited, be- 
cause of Israel’s rejection of Messiah, until the time of 
Israel’s penitence, travail, reunion, and resurrection, 
Micah v.1-3. Ezekiel xxxvu.1-28. He sees Him again 
descending on the Mount of Olives in His Majesty, 
with all His “holy ones” for Israel’s deliverance, and 
the erection of the kingdom in its universal glory. 
The scene is that of the “ Yom Yehovah” replete with 
terrestrial and super-terrestrial phenomena, a day 
unique—nocturnal day and solar night. It is a day 
preceded by the outpouring of the Spirit upon Israel, 
attended by the reappearing of their wounded shepherd 
to them, their national, domestic, personal and univer- 
sal, penitence and tears; beyond the tears “at Hadad- 
rimmon in the valley of Megiddo,” where young Josiah 
fell. At first, Judah is seen in deep apostasy. But, as 
in the case of Paul, so here, a sudden change occurs; 
and Judah fights with superhuman power to raise the 
siege against Jerusalem. Miraculous is Israel’s deliver- 
ance, even by Messiah’s own appearing, xii:1-14; Xll1:1-9, 
xiv:1-7. Then follows the Messianic Age of glory, the 
Millennial day, when Israel’s land is transfigured, Jeru- 
_salem inhabited forever, and the theocracy becomes a 
universal empire with Messiah as the universal king. 
The holiness of Israel is universal also. All nations are 
obedient to Israel’s king. Jerusalem has seen a Jewish 
Christian Passover, and a Jewish Christian Pentecost, 
in which some Gentiles shared. She sees a Jewish 
Christian “‘ Feast of Tabernacles” now, in which all 
nations blend their harvest jubilee. Two Advents, two 
Ends, two Ages, the Millennial Age still following the 
Second Advent as in all the other prophets; this 
is Zechariah’s painted page, a page among the very 
brightest and the richest in all Old Testament prediction, 


3 


34. THE THOUSAND VEARS 


We come to Malachi, the last of the prophets. As 
he stands nearest the First Coming of Christ, and in the 
midst of deepening apostasy, the “Glory” retreats into 
the background, night comes on with the storm attend- 
ing, and the picture of Israel’s near future is dark in- 
deed. The sun has gone down. Malachi predicts two 
Advents, between which Israel is rejected and the Gen- 
tiles do homage to Messiah, yet after which Israel is re- 
deemed through judgment and returns to the faith of 
their fathers. The promise that Messiah’s name should 
be ‘great among the Gentiles,” ete:, 1:3; 1s neathyes 
threatening against apostate Israel, foreboding the re- 
jection of the nation, the passing of the Gospel to the 
Gentiles, and the substitution of a spiritual worship 
for the ancient ritual, “in every place.” This plainly 
looks into the “times of the Gentiles,’ or Church-His- 
torical period, following the first Advent and Israel’s 
national rejection. Nevertheless, Israel shall be saved 
by means of judgment, in the burning ‘“ Day of .the 
Lord,” and by a return to the spiritual essence of the 
ancient faith, under the prophetic testimony of Elias 
sent to restore them, and to herald the Advent of the 
“Angel of the Covenant,” ii:1-3 ; iv:4-6. After purga- 
tion by judgment, and an outpoured Spirit, Israel’s 
worship shall be pleasant to Jehovah, their “land be- 
come fruitful,’ and ‘all nations. call them blessed,” 
lll:I-4, 10-12. After the storm, comes the sunshine. 
Upon all who fear Jehovah’s name, “the Sun of 
Righteousness will rise with healing in His beams,” 
and Israel, redeemed, shall gambol in the glory like 
calves that frisk and play upon the sunlit pasture when 
loosened from their stalls, iv:2, 3. : 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. ; 35 


PART IL. 


lieved Gal ms | DAG ion oye 


A. It remains now to speak definitely of the differ- 
ent zames given tothe Millennial Age in the Old Testa- 
ment, and point out the passages where John found his 
“1,000 years.” In this we shall admire still more the 
unity of both Testaments, and learn that John under- 
stood the prophets better than do most of his expos- 
itors. It will fasten upon us the conviction that the 
New Testament “Apocalypse of Jesus Christ” is but 
the Old Testament Yom YVehovah, in which the Lord 
reveals Himself for the redemption of His people, 
and that the Esehaza in that Apocalypse are only what 
we elsewhere find in Old Testament predictions, in the 
words of Christ Himself, and in the utterances of His 
Apostles; and that in all these Lschata Israel still 
holds his place, as in all the prophets, and still awaits 
the promised glory in the Millennial Kingdom. 

While what we have said concerning pre-exile 
prophecy is true, there are yet not wanting intimations, 
or, if we may so call them, “germs” of the later de- 


velopment of the ages and ends we find in exile and 
post-exile prophecy. These belong to the organic 
nature of prophecy, and in them we find the zames of 
the age which John describes as ‘‘ the 1,000 years.” 
Apoc. xx:1-7.. There is a text in what is known among 
scholars as the “little Apocalypse of Isaiah,” a section 
consisting of chapters xxiv-xxvii. It is found in Isaiah 
XXlv:21-23. Referring to the Yom Yehovah, or Day of 
the Lord, in which Messiah comes to hold judgment 
and restore the kingdom to Israel, the prophet says, 
It shal, come to pass, in that day, that the Lord shall 
visit upon (punzsh) the Host of the High Ones on high, 
and the kings of the earth on the earth. And they 
shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in 
the pit, and shall be shut up in prison. And after a 
multitude of days—Rov Yammim—they shall be visited 
(released for final judgment). ‘Then shall the moon be 
confounded and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of 
Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and glory shall be in 
presence of His ancient ones.” The “ Day of the Lord” 
is, as already seen, that which closes our present age, 
the day of the Second Coming of Christ. The judg- 
ment predicted in the preceding context is that of the 
proud nations, and Israel’s land, to which is added the 
dissolution of the present cosmic order; xxiv:I-20. 
With this is connected the judgment upon the ¢erres- 
trial powers of evil, “the Kings of the Earth on the 
Earth,” or the Anti-christian hosts, and the judgment at 
the same time, of the aerial powers of evil, ‘the Host of 
the High Ones on High,” z. ¢., “the principalities and 
powers and world-rulers of darkness, the spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavenlies,” Eph. v1:12, “the 
prince of the power of the air,” Eph. 11:2, “ the dragon 
and his angels,’ Rev. x1i:7-9; xx:1-3,—in short, Satan 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. OT 


and his legions, who are cast down from their height 
to be shut up in the abyss, as prisoners are chained in 
a dungeon, restrained from public activity, and re- 
served for future release and final judgment. 

The zzme when this dejection of Satan and his le- 
gions occurs is said to be “in that day,” the time when 
Michael stands up to fight for Israel, Dan. xii:1; Rev. 
x11:7, the time when, in the vision of John, “ the angel, 
having the key of the abyss, and a great chain in his 
hand, laid hold of the dragon, the Old Serpent, which 
is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a theusand 
years, and cast him into the abyss, and shut and sealed 
it over him that he should deceive the nations no more, 
until the thousand years should be finished, after which 
he must be loosed for a little season.” Rev. xx:1-3. 

The time of this casting down of Satan and his 
hosts from their zrial mansions to earth, is that men- 
tioned also in- Rev. xii:7, 8, 12, 13, when the dragon, in 
ereat rage, having but “short time” to work upon 
earth before he is sent to the abyss, ‘makes war with 
the woman, and with the remnant of her seed who 
keep the commandments of God, and have the testi- 
mony of Jesus.” That is, it is the time of Israel’s con- 
Persion, Wey. x11:7-11, the time of the close of the testi 
mony of the two witnesses, the end of the first three 
and a half years (1,260 days) of Daniel’s 7oth week; 
in short, the beginning of the great tribulation, Rev. 
X1:7, X1l1:12, at whose end Satan is imprisoned in the 
@ovess Key. xx:1-3. And this time of the judgment 
upon “the Host of the High Ones on High,” is the 
time of the judgment of-the “kings of the earth on the 
earth,” or Antichrist and his armies, who are destroyed 
at the close of the last three anda half years (1,260 
days) at the Second Coming of Christ from “ Heaven 


38 THE THOUSAND YVEARS 


opened,” Rev. xix:11-21. There is nothing clearer than 
that the visions of John, in the text referred to, are the 
companion pieces of the prophecy of Isaiah just quoted. 
The judgments upon Antichrist and his armies, and 
upon Satan and his hosts, are identical in Isaiah and 
John, and occur “in that day,” the day of the Second 
Coming of Christ. 

But this is not all. The imprisonment of Satan and 
his demoniac powers is not their final judgment. The 
prophet speaks of a reckoning “after” this. He fixes 
the duration of the imprisonment at whose close the 
reckoning comes. He defines the length of that dura- 
tion as a “multitude of days,” Rov Yamim. He says 
that “after” this long period which follows Antichrist’s 
overthrow and Satan’s captivity, the final reckoning 
shall come. “After a multitude of days they shail be 
visited,” or as the verb here properly means, “they shall 
be looked after for final retribution.” This implies, as 
is admitted, their future unchaininge and letting loose 
again. ‘They do not escape from prison, but are re- 
leased, or let out, to meet their final award.’ In this, 
all scholars agree. To this, corresponds the account in 
John’s Apocalypse, Rev. xx:1-7, where we read that 
“After the thousand years are finished, Satan shall be 
loosed out of his prison” to play his old game. As, 
after his casting down from the heavenlies, and before 
his imprisonment in the abyss, the ‘“‘short time” of 1,260 
days was allowed him to assail the saints, so between 
his release from prison and his final casting into the 
lake of fire, he is allowed ‘‘a little time” in which to 
muster the nations, and make his last effort against the 
Kingdom of God. This we read in the Apocalypse of 
John who separates the events Isaiah combines in one 
general expression. The demonstration is inductively 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. — 39 


complete that the indefinite period of time called Rov 
Yamim, by Isaiah, or the “Multitude of Days,” is identi- 
cal with the period called Chzla Eve, or “the thousand 
years” by John. The judgments which precede this 
period are the same. The “First Resurrection” which 
occurs at the same time is the same, also; the resurrec- 
tion of the faithful dead, as is clear from Deut. xxxii:39 
Peek xi bios: xie14:; Isa. xxv:8 > xxvirl4,-10; Ezek. 
heey it pc Wan xiti-3% 1b Cor. xvis4; 555°-Revixri83 
xx:5. And the time of these judgments and this resur- 
rection 1s the Yom Yehovah or “the Day of the Lord,’ in 
which the “Lord Himself” visibly reveals His person 
to effect these events. The succeeding long period of 
the “Multitude of Days,” or “The Thousand Years” is 
the same. And the judgments at the close of this 
period are the same. What confirms this all the more 
is the fact. that unless the “visiting” of the imprisoned 
Anti-christian hosts, at the end of the “Multitude of 
Days” involves their resurrection—the resurrection of 
the wicked unto final judgment—there is no text in the 
Old Testament that does. Isa. xxiv:21, 22, 1s the only 
passage; since Dan. xii:2, properly translated, speaks 
only of the resurrection of the righteous. 

But that Isaiah xxiv:22 does inYolve the _resur- 
rection of the wicked, at the close of the “Multitude 
of Days,” is clear from this, that John interprets Isa- 
iah’s prophecy by his own vision of the resurrection 
of the wicked at the close of “the thousand years” 
which, we have seen, are identical with the “Multitude 
of Days.” It stands exegetically fast, that John’s Mil- 
lennial Age is Isaiah’s ‘ Multitude of Days,” dating 
from the Second Advent; that epoch of time which 
runs into the age following; the epoch when Israel is 
redeemed, and nationally restored; when Jerusalem, 


40 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


the “beloved city” becomes the middle point of the 
Millennial Kingdom during “the thousand years,” Rey. 
xx:9, and “the Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount 
Zion, even in Jerusalem, and glory shall be in presence 
Piiktis ancient ones. =/lsanpexiy-2s, 

It is the time when, as the context in Isaiah shows, 
the sleeping saints of God are raised, the veil is taken 
off the nations, and Israel’s rebuke and long reproach 
exiat no more, . lisa, xxvis,t0. 

It will perhaps, assist our understanding, to see how 
this exegesis of the passage in Isaiah, so little under- 
stood by many, is supported by a scholarship than 
which none better can be found. “ The binding of 
Satan,’ says Auberlen, “is, like the thousand years, 
peculiar to the Apocalypse, although, strictly speaking, 
Isaiah prophesies the same thing in chap. xxiv:21-23.” * 
Better still are the words of Nagelsbach upon the 
passage: ‘ The prophet’s eye here sees what will take 
place at the end of the world. _The invincible extra- 
mundane heads of the worldly powers, as well as 
their earthly visible organs, will, according to the 
prophet, be collected as prisoners in the pit, and shut 
up init. But not merely the binding of these angelic 
and worldly powers, but their being let loose for a 
time, is also announced. Only by a brief obscure 
word, perhaps not seen through by the prophet himsel}, 
does the prophet intimate this. We would not, 
perhaps, have understood this word, if the New 
Testament revelation, which is nearer the time of the 
fulfillment, did not throw hght on this dark point. It 
declares expressly that, after a thousand years, Satan 
should be loosed from his prison. Rey. xx:7. Isaiah 


* Der Prophet Daniel, p. 330. 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. AE: 


uses here an indefinite announcement of time, ‘After 
a multitude of days,’ and an indefinite verb, ‘pakad, 
stands here as in Isa. xxiii:17, of a ‘visiting’ which con- 
sists in a looking again after some one who, long time, 
has remained neglected. Jer. xxvi:22. The word is 
here taken in the sense of a visitation for judgment, 
as is seen in the place in the revelation by John. 

“The letting loose of Satan is only the prelude to 
his total destruction, Rev. xx:10. Then follows the 
last, highest, and grandest revelation of God. The 
earth becomes now what it ought originally to have 
been, but was hindered from being by the sin of man, 
the common dwelling place of God and men. The 
heavenly Jerusalem, the Tabernacle in which God 
dwells with men, Rev. xx1:3, descends upon the reno- 
vated earth, and here Jehovah reigns as king. This 
city needs no sun and no moon any more, for the Lord 
Haimselizis ats light.’ * 

mnceeven better still’is the comment of ‘Weber 
on the passage. After showing that in the context the 
prophet predicts (1) the judgment on the earth, and 
plagues on men in general, in the end time, to which 
the sixth seal in the Apocalypse refers; (2) the judg- 
ment on the world-city or Babylon of the future; (3) 
the final judgment on Jerusalem and all who deal 
treacherously with Israel’s remnant, he continues thus: 
“The Lord will hold ‘in that day,’ another judgment. 
He will ‘ visit the Host of the High Ones in the height, 
and the kings of the earth on the earth.’ The earthly 
and heavenly powers, who have deceived mankind 
into apostasy, shall receive their punishment. They 
shall both be visited on that same day. The host of 


* Dr. C. W. E. Nagelsbach, in Lange, on Isa. xxiv:11-23. 


42 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


the high ones on high includes the angels of the nations 


and kingdoms of which Daniel speaks, x:13, 213 xil:I, 
and John, Rev. xii:7. They have exercised over the 
nations a God-opposing influence, and shall be judged 
withthem. What the punishment of these zerial powers 
is we are told. They shall be thrust into a pit, as pris- 
oners are into a dungeon,.and ‘after a multitude af 
days,’ shall be visited. A time comes when once more 
they shall be released and allowed to begin their earlier 
practice of deception. But it shall not continue long ; 
for, after a brief last conflict, the kingdom of Jehovah 


will begin in that full revelation of its glory on earth, - 


before which the light of the sun and moon shall fade, 
and the God-opposed spirits of evil sink eternally in 
the lake of fire. In that day Jehovah of Hosts shall 
rule royally upon Mount Zion, even in Jerusalem, and 
in presence of the ancients shall be glory. The inten- 
tion of the prophet here is to unveil the future as it 
will be at that great turning point of things in the 
development of the kingdom on earth when Israel, 
restored, shall turn the nations to the obedience of God. 
This isachieved through a judgment of the nations, and 
of the wicked spirits who deceived them. This judg- 
ment is universal, and fulfils itself in a series of severest 
plagues wherein God’s hand must be confessed. Only 
a remnant of mankind willsurvive. As Israel, through 
judgment, comes to renovation, so it is with the nations. 
As the sifting of israel will not be in vain, so it will be 
with the nations. A remnant is converted and survives 
the judgment. Upon the ruins of the world-power a 
new kingdom shall arise in which the Lord will reveal 
Himself to all the earth. This is the great announce- 


ment of the prophet. What a lesson it teaches us in ~ 


reference to our own times! How are we compelled 


—?  w e e  a e 


4 
. 
: 

j 
s 
; 
a 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 43 


to confess that the great breach between Christendom 
and the laws, and ordinances, and covenant of God, is 
a present fact, and that with swift steps we are nearing 
the approaching judgment of the end! The age fol- 
lowing this world judgment, and the judgment of zrial 
evil powers is that Millennial Age pictured in Isaiah 
xxv:6-9, in which upon Mount Zion the Lord will pre- 
pare a feast to all peoples, and destroy the veil spread 
over all nations, and swallow up death in victory, and 
take away the reproach of His people forever. There 
is so much likeness, and difference, between the millen- 
nial and eternal states of glory that here we may regard 
the description of both as one, and yet must again sepa- 
rate the one from the other, the one a prelude to the 
other. ‘This mountain’ (Zion) shall be the middle point 
of the Kingdom of God on Earth. No sickness, no dy- 
ing, no weeping, a Sabbath-peace, the commencement 
of the renovation of the earth, of which the Holy 
Land redeemed will be the pledge. No place shall be 
found where God’s people shall be ashamed or _ blas- 
phemed. The Kingdom of God will have now its pol- 
ity not merely in Heaven but on Earth. And this will 
continue until the wicked spirits, released once more, 
gain opportunity to introduce the final judgment, the 
transition act between time and eternity. In that day 
ef Jehovah's self-manifestation and millennial blessed- 
ness, Israel shall sing, ‘Lo, this is our God, we have 
waited for Him. He will save us. This is the Lord. 
We have waited for Him, and we will be glad and 
rejoice in His salvation.’””* Such the splendid com- 
ment of a loved and devoted man whom Delitzsch has 
honored as ‘‘one of the first Hebrew scholars of 
Europe.” 


* Dr. J. W. Weber, Der Prophet Jesaia, pp. 216, 223. 


44 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


These extracts might suffice to show the meaning 
of the prophet, and vindicate the Apostle John from 
the empty charge made so often, that he was indebted 
to the Apocryphal legends and literature of the Rab- 
bis for his conception of “the thousand years!” But 
there is a testimony yet more sublime than all the 
rest, which ought here to be reproduced. It is the 
comment of that childlike, deeply devout, and gifted 
man, Dr. Christian August Crusius, Professor of 
Theology in Leipsic forty years during the last century 
(the successful antagonist of Leibnitz), a man of whom 
Bahrdt said, “ He is the greatest philosopher and rich- 
est thinker of our times,”’ and of whom Kant said he 
felt it an honor to be allowed to testify that “he is the 
clearest philosopher, and second to none in the promo- 
tion of philosophy, in our age.” In his work, “ De 
celo per Adventum Christt commoto,’ A. D. 1757, he 
says, “ With the gradual development of the Kingdom 
of God on earth, since the incarnation, the great his- 
torical events in the spiritual world run parallel. Not 
only earth but heaven also is shaken. The powers of 
evilin the height are in commotion. Under the lead 
of Satan they oppose every step of the development of 
the Kingdom of God. It was so at the incarnation of 
Christ. It was so at His death. It was so at His 
resurrection and ascension. The prince of this worfd 
was even then judged and cast out, and yet not so cast 
out as that all access to zrial regions was forbidden 
him. The final shaking of the heavens was not accom- 
plished, nor will be, until the final Zucta eccleste cum 
Satana.” It is still permitted him to be the “ Prince of 
the power of the air,” and “god of this world,” to 
tempt, accuse and plague the Church of Christ, which 
like her Head, must pass through suffering to victory. 


| 
| 


INV BOTH STE SLAMEWT S, 45 


Once more, in the progress of the judgment on Satan, 
parallel with the progress of the heavenly kingdoni, 
Satan shall be cast down from heaven to earth, amid 
the shaking of the powers of heaven, the earth, and 
the nations. Then, as John in his Apocalypse assures 
us, ‘‘ No more place will be found for him or his angels 
in Heaven.” Rev. xi:7. Knowing this, then, that his 
“time is short,’ Rev. xii:12, he makes use of it to intro- 
duce the Antichrist, Rev. xiii:1, after whose destruc- 
tron he is cast out from the earth itself, chained and 
shut up in the abyss, in a weary long captivity of a 
thousand years, after which, a short period of liber- 
ation being allowed him,—and then eternal judgment, 
megcioscs his career'in the lake of fire. - Rév. xx:1-3; 
7-10. Both these events, the tossing out of Satan from 
heaven to earth, and the overthrow of Antichrist, are 
accompanied by powerful shaking of the heavens. | 
Other shakings had previously occurred, but this one, 
the mightiest of all, and of which both Haggai and 
Paul speak as the final one—the apotelesma—is con- 
nected with the Second Coming of the Son of Man 
and His appearing in glory. At the sound of the 
trumpet, more terrible than at Sinai, the powers of 
heaven shall be shaken, and the light of the sun shall 
be obscured before the splendor of the throne of Maj- 
esty. Then, in place of the things that are shaken, 
will come the Baszleta Asaleutos, the kingdom that can- 
Porepessnaken, Heb. xii:26-29.- Then. Israel, “con- 
verted to the Lord, shall receive the promise, and Jeru- 
salem the seat of the first Christian Church from which 
the gospel—the Zionite law—went forth, shall be made 
glorious as the mother church and mother city of the 
Kingdom of God ; and then all nations shall come and 


46 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


worship before the Lord because His judgments are 
made manifest.’ * | 

From the latest commentary on Isaiah, we venture 
to quote the following admirable words by Prof. Von 
Orelli of Basle—words that will.be welcomed by all: 
“Not the angelic host ministering to Jehovah is here 
intended,” says Orelli, “but the host of the spirit world 
accountable to Jehovah, and which like the possessors 
of earthly power, is subject to His judgment. The fig- 
ure is that of the arrest of State criminals who <at first, 
without regard to the extent of their demerit, are 
thrown into prison, then afterward, at the day of judg- 
ment, are dealt with according to the measure of their 
cult.” “The world-judgment here presented, is pic- 
tured as a cosmical catastrophe, like the deluge, which 
once swept away mankind, but yet more fruitful of 
good. The earth shall altogether lose its hold, and be 
broken under the weight of its sin. The judgment 
shall not merely strike the rulers of the earth, but shall 
reach the super-earthly powers, also, who are not 
blameless before God. Between these, and the sinful 
world-powers there is a close connection, as the book 
of Daniel shows, and which is here asserted through 
the fact that they both are judged together. As com- 
mon criminals, these highest rulers shall be ignomin- 
iously arrested and imprisoned in order that, after a 
long time, they may receive their sentence which shall 
be prononnced by the Lord enthroned on Mount Zion, 
and His glorious judgment host there assembled. Sun 
and moon shail lose their splendor in token of His 
great indignation against the world, while His people, 
redeemed on Mount Zion, dwell in the clearest light, 


* Rev. xv:4. (Quoted by Delitzsch Bibl. Proph. Theologie, pp. 123-138.) 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 4G 


their elders deemed worthy to behold the glory of 
God; so that, according to chap. iv:5, 6, and far more 
gloriously than in Moses’ time, Ex. xxiv:g, 10, they 
shall be permitted to enjoy, permanently, the protection 
of the Shekinah-Cloud as the residence of the Lord who 
has now taken to Himself the sovereignty of the 
world.” 

“After this world-judgment, in which Antichrist and 
his hosts are destroyed, as also Satan and his legions 
judged, and both imprisoned in the abyss, and Israel is 
redeemed and delivered, comes the blessed time of the 
“Multitude of days,” the Millennial Age, on which 
Orelli remarks, “Then following this judgment, comes 
the TZrzumphlied of the redeemed, chap. xxv, as at 
chap. xii, an exalted echo of Israel’s song at the Red 
Sea, Ex. chap. xv. To all nations who do homage to 
the Lord in the end of the days, and undulate like 
swelling billows to the holy mountain to worship there, 
the Lord Himself will prepare a wondrous feast of Joy. 
Itshall be to them a divine surprise when now He takes 
away the covering which, long enough already, has 
veiled the eyes of the nations. They shall behold Him 
as the Dispenser of all life and grace, and taste how 
good fle is to those who bend before His majesty. 

“By a second act of almighty love and power, not 
less miraculous, He will abolish death with all the woe 
that wrung from man uncounted tears, and lift the curse 
which, from the beginning, has weighed so heavily upon 
the human race. Here is, indeed, the end of the ways 
of God with men, of which the New Covenant in Christ, 
the Risen One, has unveiled the aim. As the remnant 
of Israel, so also the remainder of mankind, spared 
through the judgment on the nations, shall be destined 
to -unexpected blessedness by Him the All-Merciful 


48 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


One, and this shall be, of itself, the most beautiful 
apology for Israel, while the pride of Gentile power, the 
odious rival of God’s people, shall be crushed forever.” 

And, in conclusion, on chapter xxvi, the last of the 
“Little Apocalypse of Isaiah,” he gives us this: “The 
songs of victory which first we heard far off in xxiv:14, 
and were next intoned from Zion to the nearing nations, 
v. 15, have now no end. The redeemed hymna new 
song wherein, in glowing words, they justify the ways 
of God. Zion is now a city indestructible whose bul- 
wark and defence are God’s salvation. Toall the right- 
eous who trust in Him, the Rock of Ages, her gates are 
open. And she extols that righteousness. While the 
enemies of God fall into death remediless, v. 14, God’s 
people find an increase of their numbers and a widen- 
ing of their boundaries. All human birth-pains, for a 
better future, have been vain. No living soul has come 
from them; no increase has been born, v.17, 18. But 
Jehovah brings such increase, in an unexpected way, as 
the sudden exclamation, interrupting Israel’s moan, 
announces, ‘Thy dead ones shall live! My dead 
body (Israel) shall arise! Awake! Sing! ye dwellers 
in the dust, for the dew of lights is thy dew, and the 
earth shall bring forth the dead! V. 19. Not only 
shall Israel’s ranks no more be thinned by death, but 
even the faithful who, in the bitter tribulation, have 
succumbed to death, shall come to life again; God’s 
dead ones whom we never may forget, nor be without. 
These and the living church shall meet in life again! 
Flere is something new under the sun! The unyielding 
under-world shall, through the power of heavenly 
dew, be fructified, and the departed rise and bloom in 
light and life again. Then, in that day, the Lord binds 


~ 


IN*=BOTH TESTAMENTS. AQ 


the Dragon, and Israel takes root, and fills the world 
Wit iruit, xxvii:1-6.’* 

_ Such the exposition of the contents, in part, of the 
“Little Apocalypse” of Isaiah, by Orelli—a picture of 
the World Judgment at the Second Advent and of the 
Millennial Age, the “ Multitude of Days,” the “long 
time” following that judgment; a period of blessedness 
opened by the restoration of Israel, the Judgment on 
Antichrist and Satan, the resurrection of the faithful 
dead, and the revelation of the glory of Christ to the 
nations, the companion piece to John’s Apocalypse, 
chapters xix and xx. It is not possible to place the Mil- 
lennial Age before the coming of Christ, except by an 
open contradiction of the Word of God. 


Bee EZEK xO VIPT. 


An exile passage also claims our attention, in proof 
that “the thousand years’ of John’s Apocalypse are 
found in the Old Testament itself. It is the strangely > 
introduced yet significant prediction concerning “Gog 
and Magog,” in Ezek. xxxviii:8.. It comes upon the 
reader suddenly, as an independent prediction of judg- 
ment due to Gog “after many days,” and stands iso- 
lated, as it were, in the text. It seems to be a paren. 
thetic expression. Itisa brief oracle, and yet it is the 
one word on which John’s whole‘representation of the 
order of the Eschatwis pivoted, in the twentieth chapter 
of his Apocalypse. “After many days—Rablim Vamim 
—thou shalt be visited.” The verb (¢¢ppakedh) its tense 
form and import are the same as in Isa. xxiv:22; xxix: 
6, not merely a testing by divine judgment, but a 
destruction. Smend’s rendering “Thou shalt be mus- 
tered,’ and the rendering “Thou shalt be commusstoned,” 


* Orelli, in Strack-Z6ckler’s Kurtz Komm, Der Proph, Jesaia, pp. 86, 
89-93. 


50 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


are insufficient. The verb imports here judicial visita- 


tion for destruction. What the prophet here predicts 
is Satan’s last attempt, through Gog and Magog, in 
the latter years, against the Kingdom of Messiah, after 
Israel has been long time restored, and dwelling safely 
in their fatherland as a reunited and converted people, 
and the final judgment on Gog and his armies. _ 

This prediction occurs in the Apocalypse of Eze- 
kiel, chaps. xxxvii-xlviil, where we find (1) Ezekiel’s 
vision of the Valley of Dry Bones reanimated, or the 
final religious and political rehabilitation of the “whole 
house of Israel,” in their fatherland, for ‘“‘many days,” 
even “forever; one flock under one shepherd, one 
nation under one king, xxxvui:I-28. (2) Ezekiel’s proph- 
ecy of the war-march of Gog and his conglomerate 
swarm against Israel long time restored, and the judg- 
ment on Gog, XXXVIII:I-235 XxXxIxt1-297°7( 7) 
vision of the glory of the temple, city, and land, during 
these “many days,” a further expansion of what is 
foretold in xxxvu:1-28, when the Lord has poured His 
Spirit out upon the people, revived their nationality, 
awaked their faithful dead, and planted them forever 
in their own inheritance. 

The ¢zme of the visitation on Gog is said to be “after” 
these ‘‘many days,” which belong to “the latter years.” 
(1) The terminus a quo of these “ many years” is Israel’s 
restoration, conversion to Christ as a people and a 
nation, and the repossession of their land; the epoch 
of the resurrection of their faithful dead, an event 
included in the promise made xxxvil:I2, as 1s proved 
by Deut. xxxii:39; Ps. xvi:15); xlix:14, 15 > ElOs: sce 
Isa. xxv;6-9; xxvi:14, 19; Dan. xi1:1-3, all of which pas- 
sages refer directly to this same epoch, and forean- 
nounce the literal resurrection of Israel’s faithful dead, 


oe 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 5] 


and non-resurrection of the wicked “at that time,” and 
“in that day.” All this we have in chapter xxxvii. It 
is the terminus a quo. It is the same epoch, also, of the 
judgment upon Antichrist and his armies, and upon Sa- 
tan and his angels, that we find in Isa. xxiv:21, 22; Dan. 
sileiee INC, XU:7-0 ; XxX:1-3. (2) The period, or age, that 
follows this ¢ermznus a quo is plainly the Rabbim Vamim 
or “‘many days,” whose glory, peace and blessedness 
are cescribed in chapters xl-xlvii, which are the ex- 
pansion of xxxvii:1-28, and of what Isaiah has pre- 
Bede 9.11: 2-5. X1:0-0 + XXiV.23.) XXV:60-0.; 1x1-22% 
Pei 1X11-2-12 ; -Ixv:1 7-25; Ixvi:20-23. They are the 
Period, alter \sracl has been “gathered out from 
many nations,” “brought back from the sword,” is 
“dwelling safely, and at rest, in unwalled villages hav- 
ing neither bars nor gates,’—God alone their protec- 
tion,—abundant in wealth and all possessions. Ezek. 
Mxxyiii-o-12, 14. They are the period of the new in- 
dwelling glory in New Israel, chapters xl-xlii; of the 
New Service following the entrance of the Glory in 
the Temple, which He makes the place of His throne 
and of the soles of His feet, xliv-xlvi; of the life and 
healing to the land from the flowing of the Temple 
waters; and of the splendor to the city whose name is 
Jehovah Shammah, “The Lord is there!” xlvi-xlvii. 
(3) The d¢erminus ad quem of these “many days”’ is 
expressly said to be the judgment on Gog, precisely as 
John makes the judgment on Gog to be the close of 
“the thousand years.” Rev. xx:7. “After many days 
thou shalt be visited.” The ¢ermzinz in Isa. xxiv:22, and 
Ezek. xxxviii:8, are, therefore, identical. The passages 
are parallel, supplementary, and mutually explanatory. 
fire enaracter of the “visitation” at the. end of:the 
“many days” is the same in both. The parties “ vis- 


52 -* THE THOUSAND VEARS 


ited” are different, but this is due to the fact that Eze- 
kiel’s prophecy is an advance upon Isaiah’s word, and 
brings to hght new things occurring at the same time 
with those of which Isaiah speaks. In Isaiah, the par- 
ties visited after “‘ many days” are Satan and his angels 
let loose from their imprisonment, and the Anti-chris- 

tian wicked raised from their graves for the last judg- 
ment. In Ezekiel, they are the living nations outlying 

on the extreme borders of the glorified kingdom of 
Israel, whose center is Jerusalem restored and glori- 
fied, and who, as we learn from John, have been de- 
ceived again by Satan let loose. Each prophet is given 

his own work to do, and vision to see, “by the same 
Spirit who divides, severally, to every man as He will.” = 

I Cor. xu:t1, Isaiah says nothing of Gog. Ezekiel 
says nothing of Antichrist. Both say much of Israel's 
final redemption, at the coming and appearing of the 
“Glory.” Both speak of Israel’s long blessedness after 
restoration to their land and conversion to Messiah. 
Both announce a “ visitation” at the end of the “ many 
days” of that blessedness. What is undeveloped in the 

one, is developed in the other. In the combination of i 
both we find the total picture of the end as seen by the 

Old Testament prophets, whose work it was reserved | 
for John, in Patmos, to complete and crown by a de- k 
velopment of prophecy and further revelation, the last 
and brightest God has given. 

If we turn to John’s Apocalypse we shall find his 
Eschata concerning Israel and the Millennial Kingdom 
precisely what they are in the Old Testament, but only 
more developed. We learn the organism and the 
unity, the structure and the continuity, of all proph- 
ecy, its persistence, progress, and perfection. Inter- 
pretation is simply its own self-revelation, the shining 
of its own face, self-evident, infallible. 


ee ee ee 


rn ap aS Se ne ee 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. aia 


Amid the vast variety in the unveiling of the word 
and plan of God, the unity remains the same from 
mae to age.- The ends and ages are the same ‘in 
the New as in the Old Testaments. The Advents there 
p2eeine “Advents here. Israel there 1s- Israel - here: 
Antichrist there is Antichrist here. Gog there is Gog 
here. The judgments there are the judgments here. 
The resurrections there are the resurrections here. 
- The power, the kingdom, and the glory there are the 
power, the kingdom, and the glory here. And the times 
of the Gentiles first, and the times of Israel next, in 
the last unfolding of the Kingdom of God, are the same 
there and here. In short, the relation of Israel to the 
nations, in the outcome of the Kingdom of God, is pre- 
cisely what the prophets, to whom the “mystery ” of 
Israel’s blindness, rejection and recovery, was revealed, 
say it shall be; a mystery finished under the sounding 
echoes of the seventh trumpet. 

In John, we have the period of “the 1,000 years.” 
Their commencing date, or ¢erminus a quo, is identical 
With that in Isa: -xxiv:22, and Ezekiel xxxvi:8. The 
Raevaia that open’ ‘the 1,000 years,’ prove thiss. We 
have (1) the gathering, sealing, conversion, and restora- 
tion of Israel to their own land and city, in the midst 
Sretminulation. and judoment. Rev. vii:1-8; x:7.;:xi:1; 
pied Oe SIS + XVi2-4: XX:9. 

Chapters x, xi, and part of xu, introduce us to Eze- 
kiel’s Valley of Dry Bones, just when the voice be- 
gins to thunder, the witnesses to prophesy, the Spirit 
to come from the four winds, and the earthquake’s 
-shock to attend the resurrection from the dead. The 
whole riddle of Ezekiei’s Apocalypse, z. ¢,, chapters 
XxXvil-xlviii, finds its solution in John’s Apocalypse, 
chapters x-xx:7. (2) We have the personal visible and 


54 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


glorious advent and appearing of Messiah, for the re- 
demption of His people, destruction of His enemies, 
and erection of His Kingdom. Rev. 1:7; yi:107 age 
Mit 5 K1:3, 173 Xiv:15, KVI15 > XIX ;TI-10) ° Web 
the judgment and imprisonment of Satan and His 
angels. Rev. xii:7-9; ‘xx:1-3. We have (4)(¢ie spas 
ment of Antichrist and. his. armies. Réy. xiv-le-cee 
X¥Vi:I6; xix:11-21. We have (5) the resurrection of the 
faithful dead, and their reign with Christ in His king- 
dom of glory on the earth. Rev. V:10; xii rosea 
4-6. And these events are precisely what Moses, Da- 
vid, Hosea, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah, all say 
precede the final glory of Israel, and stand in front of 
and attend the “many days.” And as to the terminus 
ad quem of “the thousand years,” the Aschata here are 
(1) the loosing of Satan and his demonic powers, 
Rev. xx:7, 8; (2) the war march of Gog and the nations 
deceived by Satanic influence against Israel's land and 
city, Rev. xx:9; (3) the judgment of Gog by fireyivevs 
xx:9; (4) the resurrection and judgment of the wicked, 


Rev. xx:12; (5) the judgment of Satan, and his final - 


doom, Rev. xx:11; (6) the final and total destruction of 
death, Rev. xx:13; (7) the final New Heaven and 
Earth, Rev. xxi:t. And all these events are preciser 
what Isaiah and Ezekiel declare and imply shall occur 
at the close of, or “after,” the “many days.” To him 
who declines to accept that spiritualizing and _alle- 
gorizing system of interpretation which negates and 
destroys so much of the prophetic word itself, the con- 
clusion is both necessary and irresistible that the Row 
Vamim of Isaiah and the Rabbtm Yamim of Ezekiel, are 
indeed the Chzlia Ete of John; the “multitude of days” 
and “many days,” the same as the “thousand years.” 
In these two Old Testament Apocalypses of Isaiah, 


| 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 55 


chapters xxiv-xxxvli, and Ezekiel, chapters xxxvii- 
xlvili, where the period of Israel’s blessedness is de- 
fined by these two equivalent terms of time just named, 
the Zschata that bound the opening of this period on 
the one side, and those which bound the close of it on 
the other side, are the same as those we find, respect- 
ively, in John’s Apocalypse, as bounding the two 
extremes of the Millennial Age. And, for the opening of 
this period, the Apocalypses of Daniel and Zechariah, as 
the prophecies of the other prophets, Joel, Amos, 
Hosea, Micah, Zephaniah, Jeremiah, Haggai, when 
combined, show the same events, occurring in the Yow 
Yehovah, during which Messiah comes in glory and in 
judgment, to destroy His enemies, redeem His people, 
and erect His kingdom on the ruins of the Gentile 
powers and on the overthrow of Satan’s empire: and 
if, in reference to the closing of this period, new char- 
acters emerge, or what was but obscure before be- 
comes full formed and clear, it is because of the pro- 
gress of prophecy itself, which, like its fulfilment, has 
a “springing and germinant accomplishment,” its light 
increasing more and more unto the perfect day. And 
if, in earlier pre-exile prophecy, where but one end, 
one advent, and one judgment, with one age following, 
are found, we find a mother-source, or general ground, 
notably in Joel, for doth great judgments, that on Anti- 
christ and that on Gog; and if again in Isaiah, the 
ground is laid not only for these, but for doth resur- 
rections as well, with an interval between; and if, 
Mieester-prophecy, in addition to this, we find, 
notably in Ezekiel, the ground laid for the still 
clearer, farther, and closing revelations of John, in 
whose Apocalypse the remoter “schata stand out, in 
all their brightness, or their gloom, distinct and uncon- 


56 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


foadeds it is because, from first to last, the word of 
prophecy is one continuous genetic movement, strug- 
eling ever to evolve in its conclusion what was first 
mvolved in its beginning. The prophets all supple- 
ment each other, and John is the-all-embracing con- 
summation of them all. His hght illuminates the rest. 

From what has been said it must be clear that the 
Millennial Kingdom is the time of blessedness on earth 
for Israel restored to God, for Israel reclaimed to 
Christ, and lies beyond His Second Coming, beyond 
the resurrection from the dead. This cannot be suc- 
cessfully denied. Even post millennialists confess as 
much, in contradiction of theirown theory. ‘The bind- 
ing of Satan,” says Schroeder, on Hzekiel, in Lange, is 
the necessary preliminary of the millennial kingdom, 
[f he is not to deceive the nations during this ime but 
after it, does so again, then it is clear even from that Zo 
which he afterward deceives them, that his imprison- 
ment means, above all, the cessation of war and violence, 
and of violent combating of the church of God, inas- 
much as the following vision of witnesses unto blood 
seems to point particularly in the same direction.” 
“Gog and Magog both /ollow the resurrection (Ezek. 
XXXvil), asin John’s revelation (Rev. xx:4-6), and he who 
is constrained to recognize, in Ezekiel, chap. xxxvu. 
Israel’s requickening as a nation, will not, thereby, be 
hindered from conceding that it will be followed by the 
requickening from their graves, of “all who are Christ’s,”’ 
as Paul expresses it. Moreover, the repeated “ for- 
ever’ —“ Leolam’’—(in_ Ezekiel, chapter xxxvii)—can 
here be interpreted by the Chzla Ete there (in Rey. 
xx:1-7.)* Again: “After many days’ denotes “the 


* Schroeder on Ezekiel, in Lange, 376, 350. 


i 
SE — —— 


2S) ee ee Le 


i 
a 


el ee at 


71>. eo 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 57 
é ae 

expiration of a long time, and supposed to be the 
last time, which is not only the consummation of 
the Kingdom of God, but of the world generally. 
The words “Days” and “Years” interchange harmon- 
iously in the verse. ‘“ After many days” “in the latter 
years.” That which appears in the single event as 
“many days,’ is, “for the eye of the Apocalyptic seer that 
ranges over the whole, the summation of what is still 
outstanding in years, or time generally. Both these 
phrases denote the Messianic age.” * 

So Schroeder speaks. And we add that, if indeed, 
as is the fact, the binding of Satan precedes the judgment 
on Gog; if it occurs at the Second Coming of Christ 
when the resurrection from the dead takes place; if 
Israel’s political resurrection precedes this personal 
ene. sl “icolam,” “forever, is used in its qualified 
sense as equivalent to “the thousand, years” of John, the 
“long time” or “outstanding” period, next preceding 
the consummation of the kingdom and the world; if all 
this is conceded, then it is hard to see how any who 
accept these conclusions could find relief from their 
force, by resort to the allegorical, spiritual, or symbolical 
theories of interpretation. The relations of the events 
must, at least, remain the same, and the “Many Days” 
must come in detween the Second Coming of Christ and 
the judgment on Gog. If, moreover, we allegorize one 
event, to be consistent we must allegorize all. This 
wrecks the whole prediction, and denies the vast body 
of literal Scripture elsewhere with which it stands 
connected. 

Riehm, as an exegete, though seeking to avoid the 
literal interpretation of prophecy in reference to Israel’s 


* Ibid 362. 


58 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


future, yet finds it impossible to evade the clear repre- 
sentation of Ezekiel himself. He says, “In Ezekiel, we 
certainly read of imminent danger to the Kingdom of 
God in the‘End of the days’ after its restoration. The 
victory of Jehovah divides itself into two acts rather 
widely separated from each other. The judgments 
which bring deliverance to Israel, first of all, fall upon 
the neighboring nations already in conflict with the 
people of God. ‘ After’ Israel’s deliverance, there is a 
time of security and peace, Ezek. xxxviii:8, I1, 12, yet 
still the distant nations have not learned to know Jeho- 
vah’s power, and at the ‘ End of the Days’ they assem- 
ble, under Gog, to fight against Israel, but the Lord 
destroys them, and consumes their country with fire, 
xxx1x:6. Only after this is the kingdom assured against 
further attack, xxxvil:29.” “Most remarkable indeed, 
are the words of Ezekiel in xxvui:25, 26. “477e7) tie 
first judgments securing Israel against surrounding na- 
tions, the kingdom is established in the Holy Land, and 
for a long time the people enjoy undisturbed repose, 
XXXVIIL8, 11,12. At the ‘End of the Days,” Gagan 
Magog make their final attack, after whose destruction 
Israel remains forever secure against their foes.” 
“In Micah, the Messianic king has ascended the 
throne before the final attack of the distant nations; and 
asin the Apocalypse of John, the Kingdom of Christ 
has stood a thousand years before Satan is let loose to 
lead the hosts of Gog and Magog against it, so also in 
Ezekiel, Israel enjoys for a long time the blessing of 
complete communion with Him before they are finally 
assured of their safe possession of the blessing.” * 
Clearly, then, even according to Riehm’s view, the 


* Riehm, Messianic Proph. 110, 111, 210, 


ee a _ 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 59 


“many days” in Ezekiel, are the period of Israel’s 
blessedness in the Messianic kingdom on earth, and are 
bounded at their opening, by the “ first judgments” 
which bring deliverance to Israel and the establishment 
of Israel in the Messianic kingdom on earth, and at their 
close are bounded by the “destruction of Gog.” The 
period detiween these different and separated judgments, 
which stand apart “rather widely,” is a “long time,” 
even “a thousand years,” and Micah, Ezekiel and John, 
herein agree. The millennium announced by John is 
only what the prophets, pre-exile and exile, have fore- 
told, and the duration of which they measure by the 
“many days” between Israel's introduction, by means 
of the Messianic judgment, into the kingdom estab. 
lished in the Holy Land, and the final overthrow of 
Gog. Micah, as well as Isaiah, forecasts “the thousand 
years” of John. Not before, but only after the future 
and final restoration of Israel, does the predicted king- 
dom come; and not before, but only ‘after the thou- 
sand years,” when Gog is judged, is the ultimate glory 
of the kingdom. In other words, the view of the Zota/ 
E'nd- Time, in its widest and most comprehensive scope, 
_as seen by the prophets, and embracing the perfect 
victory of Messiah for Israel’s complete deliverance 
and complete establishment of the kingdom of glory 
on earth, in the latter days, is represented as that of 
two great acts or phases of judgment between which 
jie the “many days” of Ezekiel which are “the thou- 
sand years” of John. In other words again, the “End 
of the Days” of which Ezekiel and Isaiah speak, in 
the texts already referred to, is the end of “the thou- 
sand years,” the ‘‘end” which Paul has in view, in I 
Cor. xv:24, when Messiah’s victory is complete, and, 
all rule, authority and power being put down, and 


60 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


death itself destroyed, the kingdom is surrendered 


to the Father, and God is all in all, I Cor. xv:24-26. 
The harmony and unity of Isaiah, Micah, Ezekiel, 
Paul and John, herein, are both demonstrable and in- 
destructible. Their testimony to the location of the 
Millennial Kingdom the other side of the Secona 
Coming of Christ, is final. Pastor Koch, therefore, in 
his admirable work on “The Thousand Years’ King- 
dom,” eminent not less for its logic than for its critical 
ability and thorough knowledge of the Scriptures, is 
right when, discussing Ezekiel’s “Many Days,” he says: 
“This period of Israel’s peace and blessedness can be no 
other than the thousand years’ kingdom treated of in 
Rey. xx:7-9. The oppression of Israel and the Holy 
Land, by the hosts of Antichrist, precedes it, and Zech- 
ariah speaks of this in chapter xiv, as John does in 
Rev. xix:11-21. Setween the overthrow of Antichrist 
and Gog's march lies the period in Rev. xx:1-6 which 
is nothing else. than “The Thousand Years. 24 ie 
march of Gog follows only “after the thousand years 


are finished.’ * 
GS -LEOLAM SEO RE Vane 


In the extract from Schroeder, quoted above, it was 
said that the term “Zeolam,” ‘forever,’ Ezek. xxxvit: 
25, 20, 28, applied to the duration of the times of Israel 
in the kingdom, in future days, “can be interpreted by 
the Chilia Ete, or ‘Thousand Years,’ in Rev. xx:1-7.” 
This is as exegetically true as it is theologically impor- 
tant, and rests upon the Biblical use of the term itself. 
It refutes the vain charge that Chiliasm denies the 
“everlasting” character of Messiah’s kingdom, because 
it asserts its temporal form in a Millennial Age. 


* Das tausendjiihrige Reich, p. 65. 


oT. 
+e 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 61 


A better knowledge of the wsus loqguendz, and of the 
term “forever,” would render this, like many other 
similar objections, impossible. The kingdom of Mes- 
siah is, as the Scriptures everywhere declare, everlast- 
ing in its essence and existence. It has “no end.” Isa. 
mee tte, 1:6-12. Messiah's throne 1s ‘torever.” “Ps. 
Porous 1.20, 30, xlv:0; Heb.1:8; ‘Ixx:77.' Throughout 
its several forms or dispensations, it is an everlasting 
kingdom also, but yet to cach of these forms there is an 
Pecos Viatt.oxxiv-14 - bleb: ix:267- 1 Cor. xv:24; otis 
olamic, zonian in both, but in a different sense; in the 
first, absolutely so; in the second, relatively so; unlim- 
itea as £0 1ts essence, limited as to its forms. As to-1ts 
essence, no external event can limit it. As to its form, 
external events do limit it. Viewed in its essence 
it is eternal only. Viewed in its essence and form, 
together, it 1s both temporal and eternal, yet called 
eternal in its relative sense, that is, “ age-abiding.”’ 
Essentially it is one, and “endures forever in an ab- 
solute sense. Circumstantially, or dispensationally, it 
is many, its forms evanescent, though each is age- 
abiding. This rests upon the nature of the case, and 
the Biblical expression is accommodated to the fact. 
The wise man tells us God has set “ Olam,” “ Eter- 
nity,” in the heart of man, and he knows “that what- 
soever God doeth it should be Leolam, forever.’ 
Eccl. i11:11,14. No man can find, out the work of God 
from its beginning, or in its end, for no man can con- 
ceive an absolute beginning or an absolute end, because 
“God has set Olam in the heart of man.” Eternity 
transcends human thought, and yet is the innermost core 
of man’s spiritual constitution, writes vanity on all 
things perishable, and bespeaks man’s immortality. In 
spite of the world’s fading fashion which attracts and 


2 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


lures his eyes, and with which he seeks to satisfy his 
longings, “Olam” presides at the center of his soul, 
pointing to an endless future, and an endless work of 
God in which the soul finds its only satisfaction and 
enjoyment. In man’s deep consciousness of what still 
lies before him, all temporal limits are annihilated. In 
this sense, the kingdom of Messiah as a work of God 
is absolutely everlasting. In this sense, it is established 
forever. In this sense, God promises that His Spirit 
shall rest upon converted Israel forever, and His words 
abide in their mouth, the mouth of their seed, and the 
mouth of their seed’s seed from henceforth even for- 
ever; nor will He hide His face from them any more. 
Meanie 21. gek. xxx1x:20: 

But on the other hand, there is another sense of 
Olam, equally important—a shorter sense applied to the 
forms of the kingdom, the age-forms or dispensations. 

The Patriarchal, Jewish, Christian, and Millennial 
Ages are but Stadia of definite duration and various 
fashion in the one development of the Kingdom of God, 
of which Messiah’s kingdom is a part; itself of more 
than one form. Each of these has its “end,” yet each 
is called “the kingdom.” Each is an “Olam,” and lim- 
ited. Each is “Forever,” yet only in the sense of “ares 
abiding,”’ not absolutely endless. And all these succes- 
sive forms, these various ages, these Olammin are but 
the great World-A‘ons, of which “the thousand years” 
is only one. The Old Testament institutions, the 
Aaronic priesthood, the Davidic royalty, the bloody 
sacrifices, and the whole administration, are declared in 
the Old Testament to be “forever,” but which, as Paul 
assures us, means only “till the time of reformation,” 


Heb. ix:10. 


While, therefore, on the one hand, the earlier _ 


1 
wet 
— 
ani 


yy 


a CE ————— ss ae) 


LN O LIL AES LABELS: 63 


prophets contemplate the work of God as one, and 
see but one age following the one end they saw, and call 
it “everlasting” in form as well as essence, the later 
prophets, on the other hand, to whom two ages, then 
three, were revealed, distinguish between the forms of 
these ages, pointing to a time when, under the “New 
Covenant,” the Leviticus shall pass away and a pure, 
spiritual worship supplant the ritual; and, again, toa 
state still further on when an age of victory and glory 
shall crown an age of conflict and of grace. This, Peter 
himself plainly shows when he says that the prophets 
all “searched” not only the “what,” but also the “what 
manner of time,’ the Spirit of prophecy meant when 
He testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the 
eleimesceaiter these: ‘1 Peteri:11. And Paul declares 
' that “once for all, inthe end of the ages, Christ appeared 
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself,” and that “a 
second time He will apnear to them that look for Him, 
apart from sin,” and inaugurate the glories of the 
Beebo come: . ~-bLeb.11%:20-28 61:03 11:5'5 1:14 57x23 75 
X11:26-29. 

And yet, while limited in form, each dispensation is 
Sede oiamic,+.or “forever.” . Heb:: 110-132. > Fhe 
events of the end time for each, while limiting the form, 
do not limit the kingdom itself. The kingdom still 
goes on. It is everlasting still. And such is the case 
with respect to “the thousand years,” or millennial form 
of the Kingdom of Christ. Beyond “‘thethousand years” 
it still endures, even after it has been surrendered to the 
Father. Through all eternity, the Son still rules His 
people even after He Himself has become “subjected to 
Him that did subject all things unto Him.” I Cor. 
xv:28. That is the sounding note of the seventh 
trumpet. Rev. xi:15. But the form of the kingdom, 


64 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


in the eternal state, will differ as greatly from its pre- 
vious form in the millennial state, as that millennial 
form will differ from our present form, and as ours 
again differs from the old Mosaic, or as that did from 
the patriarchal tent. 

Schroeder is right, therefore, as are Kliefoth, 
Oehler, Kiiper, and many others, when saying that 
Ezekiel’s Leolam, Forever, in XXXVvi1:25, 26, 28, 1s the 
equivalent of John’s Chizlia Ete, or “one thousand 
years,” in Rev. xx:1-7. Isaiah’s everlasting age con- 
cealed in its bosom all the relative ages of the great de- 


velopment, and their ¢ermznz, even as Joel’s prophecy 


was ‘generic’? and contained the two judgments of the 
double end, the judgment on Antichrist and the na- 
tions, and the judgment on Gog. And in the whole 
development, all things are connected with temporal 
and terrestrial relations. From first to last, even in the 
New Testament, the ages and the kingdom of the 
heavens are associated with our planet. Nowhere in 
the Old Testament, as nowhere in the New, can our 
popular idea of “an end to the world,” as the ¢ermznus 
where Time and Eternity meet, or Time passes into 
Eternity, and “our planet is no more,” be found. 
Such conceptions are unbiblical, Manichean, Orige- 
nistic, Shakesperean and pessimistic. The “hills of 
Olam” abide forever and forever. Materiality is glori- 
fied, not annihilated, in God’s Kingdom. The creation 
is re-created. A new heaven and earth supplant the 
old, and this degzms with the “many days,” “the one 
thousand years.” 
D. HOSEA III:4. 

Another expression, similar to those already noted, 
is found in Hosea when predicting God’s watchful 
care over Israel in their dispersion and loneliness ;— 


. 


| 
3 
; 


* 


ee 


INKBOTH LI STAMENT S. 65 


the time of Lo Ammz and Lo Ruhamah— Not my peo- 
ple,’ and ‘Not my beloved;” the time when harlot 
Israel, divorced from God, yet separated from idol- 
atry, is stillin desolation and concealment and provi- 
@entially preserved for-God. Hos. 1:6, 9, 10; 11:20-23. 
The words of punishment and grace are alike remark- 
able. “Thou shalt abide for me many days—VYamim 
Rabbim. Thou shalt not play the harlot. Thou shalt 
not be any man’s wife. So will I also be for thee!” 
God’s pledge to the sinful Jewish Church, to apostate 
Israel! To divorced Lo Ammiand Lo Ruhamah! This 
is grace amazing. It tells the topmost mercy, bound- 
less love, and bottomless compassion of God. This is 
Bureiy immeasurable. “ For’-the children oi Israel 
shall abide (dwell, yveshohu) many days,—Yamim Rab- 
bim,—no king and no prince, and no sacrifice, and no 
obelisk, and no ephod and teraphim. Afterward (achar) 
shall the children of Israel return (convert, yashubhu) 
and seek the Lord their God and David their King, 
and shall come with fear to. the Lord and His good- 
ness, in the afterness of the days.” . Hos. 111:3-5. If we 
ask what are these “many days” of Israel’s loneliness 
and isolation, and strangely-pledged preservation for 
God, we can only answer promptly, with Delitzsch, 
“The many days here are the long period of the exile, 
the condition in which the Jewish people is, even now ; 
—a people, but not a State with a King ;—a still wor- 
shiping congregation, but with no sacrifices, a people 
so radically alienated from polytheism that it regards 
itself as the pillar of monotheism ;—a people who, at 
length, shall be seized with a repentant desire for Je- 
hovah, and David its King, that is, as the Targum 
translates, ‘for Messiah the Son of David,’ the King 
David of the final period. Jer. xxx:9. Ezek. xxxiv:23- 


5 


66 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


31; Xxxvil:24-28 ;’ and then he adds: “ The entire Old 
Testament can exhibit no brighter prophecy respecting 
the conversion of Israel than this comparion-piece to 
Rom. xi:25, and which received its full spiritual signifi- 
cation, first of all, in the light of the New.’* It is a 
photograph of the condition of Israel to-day, and as 
certain a prediction of what their end will be, as a 
people, in a few short years. But this is not all. 
There is another aspect of this period. Contrary to 
Pusey’s inadequate comment, the ‘‘many days” here 


are gathered into fwe great days, two historic days, cover-* 


ing the whole time of Israel’s national decease and rest, 
as a nation, in the grave; the whole time of the exist- 
ence of the Valley of Dry Bones; at the expiration of 
which returning Israel’s resurrection shall take place, 
z.e.,0n the third historic day. ‘Come, and let us re- 
turn unto the Lord, for He hath torn and will heal us; 
He hath smitten and will bind usup. A/fter two days, 
—Miyyomaytm,—He will requicken us. Ox the third 
day,—Bayom Hashshelisht,—He will raise us up, and we 
shall live in His sight,’ -z.¢.; “before Him.” “@saaaame 
2. Then follows the age of perpetual sunshine and 
spiritual showers, v. 3, the summer for the just, the 
resurrection glory. 

If we ask what these two historic days are, we can 
only say again, with Delitzsch, “The prophecy refers 
to the people, after the second day of whose death a 
resurrection day follows.” Rom. xi:15. The two days 
of their death are, in the history of fulfilment, the As- 
syrian and Babylonian exile, and the Roman exile, in 
which the Jewish people still are.”+ That is, the first 
day of Israel’s national death is the Old Testament 


* Messianic Prophecies, p. 61. 
t+ Ibid, p. 62. 


\ 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 67 


period of Israel’s destruction as a nation, the people 
carried captive, Jerusalem destroyed, the Temple gone, 
the land depopulated, and the outward kingdom blotted 
out; the second day is the New Testament period, with 
the like catastrophe repeated, the first day reaching to 
the First Coming of Christ, beginning with a new dis- 
pensation, the Roman or second day reaching to the 
Second Coming, the total period being the time of 
Israel, as a nation, in the Valley of Dry Bones, the 
~Monarchy-Colossus still standing unstruck. 

Then comes the “third,” the resurrection day, in 
whose “ morning” Israel arises, the time of Israel’s 
repentance and home-coming, the time when the Co- 
lossus falls, and the Dry Bones stand up erect, reani- 
mated, clothed with flesh, a host exceeding great! 
What we have here is a spiritual resurrection first, 
Ezek. xxxvi:25; a national and political resurrection 
next, Ezek. xxxvii:1-28; a literal corporeal resurrection 
of the faithful dead of Israel last, Ps. xlix;14, 15; Isa. 
fey cio Wan.-xii:[-3. The Apostle Paul quotes the 
words of Hos. xiii:14, “I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave; I will redeem them from death. 
© death, where are thy plagues? O grave, where ts 
thy destruction?” in proof of a literal destruction of 
the body, I Cor. xv:55, and, in his letter to the Ro- 
mans, tells us that this time of Israel’s conversion and 
re-establishment will bring no less an event than “life 
@meiroi the dead.” Rom. xi:15. 

What Hosea gives us here, at the beginning of the 
third day, is precisely what Moses gives us, Deut, 
feso, and David gives us, Ps. xlixi14, 15; ana 
Isaiah gives us, xxv:8; xxvisig; and Daniel gives us, 
Xii:1-3; and Ezekiel gives us, xxxvii:1-28; and John’s 
Pepocalypse ives us, Xi:1I, 18: xii:$;-x:11}~20:4-6. 


68 LHEAT HOU SAND eases. 


Then, after these mighty events that mark the end of 
our present age, or end of Israel’s second day of na- 
tional death, comes the Millennial Age of Israel’s 
blessedness, pictured beautifully, as the times of pe- 
rennial reviving and refreshing, the age of Israel’s 
Dew, and Blossoming, and Lily growth, and deepening 
roots like the Cedar tree, and spreading branches like 
the Olive tree ; the age of blessing to the Nations, when 
they, too, dwelling under Israel’s shadow, shall revive 
as the corn, and bloom as the vine, and be fragrant as 
the wine of Lebanon; and Israel, all holy to the Lord, 
will have no more to do with idols, but, unwithering, 
like the fir’tree, bear holy fruit to God. Hos. xivzge 

The demonstration, then, is clear, inductively. 
Hosea’s “many days” reach from the Assyrian cap- 
tivity down to the Second Advent of Christ. During 
this whole period Israel as a nation lies buried in the 
grave with the Colossus on its breast. Israel’s resur- 
rection as a nation is on the “morning” of the “ third 
day.” “In the history of Christ the history of Israel 
is recapitulated.”” (Delitzsch.) “Israel must die as a 
nation in order to live. From death to life is the path 
for Israel to the kingdom.” (Orelli.) Equally clear is 
it that the “multitude of days” in Isa. xxiv:22,sand 
“Many Days” in Ezek. xxxvii:8, are identical with 
“the Thousand Years” in John, Rev. xx:1-7; andteaua 
from the Second Coming of Christ to the destruction 
of Gog. 

These two vast periods, taken together, cover, there. 
fore, the whole time from the Assyrian captivity to the 
Last Judgment and the final New Heaven and Earth. 
The age next before us is that of the “ Third Day,” the 
“ Sabbatism” of the world. Not at the First Coming of 
Christ was Hosea’s -prediction fulfilled, as is clear 


i 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 69 


from John’s Apocalypse, where, under the sixth vial, 
the Euphrates, beyond which the ten tribes roved 
into concealment among the nations, is “dried up” to 
make way for the return of Israel, under the care of 
Seeeeprinces trom the sunrising. Rev. xvi:1r2. “Il 
Pea sexvil:O. Isa. x1:16; xxiv:10; Ixvi:to; 20; xli:2, 25. 
Zeph. ii:to. It istrue that the terms “ Afterward” and 
the “ Last Days” are standing eschatological formulze 
for the whole Messianic time covered by Isaiah’s ever- 
lasting age, as well as for the time next preceding the 
“Yom Yehovah,” or “ Day of the Lord;” and that, as is 
clear from Joel and Peter, they include the first as 
well as second appearing of Messiah. Isa. u:2. Joel 
me2o, -7\cts 11:17; the outpouring of the spirit on the 
day of Pentecost, as well as the still future outpouring 
preaictcd by Paul. Romi. xi:27, and. parallels; Isa. 
elix:21. Ezek. xxxvi:24, 25; and both which are wrapped 
mom Zechariah s (oracle, Zech. xi:10-14; xtlisl;: 6. 
Compare Rev. i:7. But it is equally true that what- 
ever conversion of Jews occurred on the day of Pente- 
cost, or of any Israelites since, is only the initial, not 
the final, redemption of that people, since Israel, as a 
nation, is still cast away, not gathered, their house 
desolate, and their land still trodden under Gentile 
fect. ne “aiterness of the days” is the end-time at 
mie second coming of Christ. It refers .to the epoch 
of Israel's entrance into the kingdom restored, the 
time when Israel seeks and welcomes Christ as King. 
Puke xiii-34, 35. Kev. xv:3; and also to those super- 
natural days of Messiah, called “his days,” in Psalm 
Ixxii:7, when Israel’s ‘‘handful of corn,” or saved rem- 
nant, “shall shake like Lebanon,” and “they of the city 
shall flourish like grass of the earth,” Ixxi:16; the 
time when those words, so bitter and sad, “Lo Amzmz”’ 


70 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


and “Lo Ruhamah,” shall no more be spoken. Down 
to this very hour Israel has remained pure from the 
sin of “Idolatry” since the day their national exile 
began, and, as a people, will so abide, reserved for the ~ 
Kingdom of Christ at His Coming. The same race, 
punished for sin, is the race reclaimed by grace. 4 
Nationally, as well as personally, God deals with the 
Jewish people. 3 
Israel’s identity abides through all the ages. From — 
the genesis of Israel in Abraham to the regenesis of — 
Israel in Christ, Israel “abides,” Israel, untransmutegs 
; 


- “wae "= 


and, from Sennacherib down to the last Antichrist, will 

so ‘abide,’ kept for that day when the “ Branch of Je- ~ 
hovah shall become an ornament and glory, and He the 
Fruit of the Land bea pride and a boast for the es: 
caped of Israel.’ Isa. iv:2. So sing the prophetic 
Blessing of Judah, the Oracles of Balaam, the Dying — 
Song of Moses, and the Words of David, preluding 
the fortunes of the chosen people down to, and into, 
the ‘‘Last Days.” So sing Hosea and Amos, twom 
prophets of the ten tribes, in concert with all the rest. — 
In God’s strange providence Israel “abides” for Him, 
and not another, unobelisked and unteraphimed, and He — 
is “toward ¢hem,” and will yet “have mercy on them.”7 
Then, in that day of Israel’s home-coming, the Jewish 
Church of the end time will be revived, The Lor 
will renew the Covenant of His love with “Lo Ruha- 
mah,” take away ambiguous “Zaa/z”’ from her mouth, 
and put the loving “/s4z”’ there. He will betroth her 
Himself in righteousness and judgment, in loving kind- 
ness and in mercies, even in faithfulness forevermore. 
In her final tribulation He will allure her to the wil-. 
derness, as John’s Apocalypse also shows us. Rev. xii: 
6, 14; and nourish her, and tenderly repeat His “Amma” 


IN-BOLH TESTAMENTS: val 


to her heart, and breathe ‘Ruhamah!” He will accept 
her penitence and tears, and give her again “the Val- 
ley of Trouble” for a door of hope, and make her sing 
her old Egyptiansong. There will not only be a Wed- 
ding Day, but a Day of Victory. When David’s fallen 
Booth is re-erected, in more than ancient splendor, 
Israel and Judah, reunited, as ‘one nation,” and march- 
ing under “One Head,” shall “come up from the land,” 
victorious, across the plain of Megiddo, where Barak 
fought and Deborah sang, and “Great will be the Day 
Giarezbee: !) HOS iI Tt. 


FE... MOSES. 


But Moses demands a hearing. The Propnets 
nave said nothing on this great matter that even Moses 
had not already said before them. Let it be enough, 
just here, to say that Moses himself defines the time 
during which Israel shall be nationally cast away, and 
at whose close Israel shall be nationally restored, and 
made glorious in their fatherland. If we turn to Levit- 
icus xxvli:18, 21, 24, 28, we shall hear God saying what 
He will do to Israel in case of their apostasy. “If ye 
will not hearken unto me, but will walk contrary to 
me, then I will add to smite you Seven Times (Shcéa’) 
upon your sins.” When, however, in the Ackharith 
Flayyamin, or Last Days, \srael repents, accepting the 
justice of their punishment, nationally, then, says God, 
“T will for their sakes remember the covenant of their 
ancestors, my covenant I made with Abraham, with 
Isaac, and with Jacob, axd I will remember the land.” 
Ley. xxvi;42, 45. Who cannot see that the Seda’ or 
Seven Times of Israel’s national punishment are the 
whole stretch of time in Israel’s chastisement, from the 
smiting of Israel and Judah, as kingdoms, down to the 


7 ye THE THOUSAND YEARS 


“Last Days’ when Israel nationally repents, z. ¢., down 
to the Second Coming of Christ? They are the meas- 
ure of the duration of Israel in the lion’s den, and fur- 
nace of affliction, seven times hot, the whole period of 
the “‘ Times of the Gentiles,” the period of the Colossus 
standing erect on Israel’s grave; the “ Many Days” of 
Hosea, his Two Days,” at whose close Israel’s resur- 
rection and redemption occur, and the Millennial Age 
begins. 

Listen to the “Song of Moses,” Deut. xxx1i:39-43. 
It predicts Israel’s apostasy, and final recovery, as a 
nation, in the Acharith Hayyamin or Last Days, the 
“Find of the Days,” still future to us. The fulfilment of 
that oracle, in Moses, has never yet taken place. Its 
radius of vision reaches to the Second Advent, as all 
successive prophecy shows, and all history confirms. 
Both Testaments conspire to prove this. It points, in 
clearest terms, to the Great Tribulation, the interpo- 
sition of Christ, and the ‘“ making alive” of Israel’s 
faithful dead by Him who “kills” Israel’s adversaries. 
To spiritualize this into a subjective redemption of all 


God’s people, or of the New Testament Church, is to’ 


mock the Scriptures. He who, in Moses, swears, 
as He lilts His hand, ‘“‘ Il Am HE, I kill and I make alive, 
I live forever,’ and vows to “avenge the blood” of His 
martyred ones, and calls the nations to “ rejoice with 
His people” (the. Jews) in that crisis, is He who in 
John, Rev. x:7, lifts His hand and swears that, with the 
seventh trumpet, the [Tribulation shall come to an end, 
the Antichrist be destroyed, Israel be delivered, as not 
only Moses, but Daniel also predicted (Dan. xii:1-3) and 
the righteous dead be restored to life. Such is the 
organic unity of all prophecy from Moses to John. 
Then the “mystery of God” foreshown to the prophets, 


2 a 
ee ee ee ae ee ee ee eS 


ee 


-IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. (o 


“shall be finished” and the kingdom come. John is 
only repeating and filling out Moses and the Prophets !* 
Poorat Deut. xxxi:28, 20; xxxn-30-43; Rev. vi:10} x37; 
meg, qf XIX:11-21; Xx:1-7. Sunlight is not clearer than 
that the Age of Israel's glory in the kingdom is placed, 
by Moses, after the Seven Times of punishment which 
reach down to the very “Zud of the Days,” or “ Acha- 
rith Hayyami” in their utmost development, that is, 
after Hosea’s “two days.” In other words, Moses puts 
it. precisely where Hosea’s “third day” stands, and 
John’s 1,000 years belong. It /ol/ows Israel’s national 
conversion to Christ. Deut. xxx:1-4. And he who 
studies Paul, will find bim teaching the same truth 
when discussing the ‘‘ Jewish Problem,” as men call it. 
In Rom. x:6-10; xi:25-29, he puts Israel’s conversion, as 
a people, even as Isaiah does, Isa. lix:16-21, and Peter 
dees Acts 11:{9-21, at the Second Coming of Christ. 


*, *‘AnI-Hu” (I AM HE) is a covenant name .of Christ, in the Old 
Mestament.. Deut. xxxti73o0; Isa. xlii:ro; xlvi:3-53 xIvili:12. It 1s the 
name of the Second Person of the Trinity (1) making Himself equal in Es- 
sence with God (HE), while yet asserting a distinct Personality. It is the 
consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, of the Word with God, and is 
the ground of John’s Logos doctrine. John i:1. He who here speaks, to 
Moses, is the personal ‘‘Word of God,’’ who appears as the diademed 
Rider on the White Horse, Rev. xix:11, and as the Angel of the Covenant, 
or Maleach Habberith, coming, the second time to Israel, to wake His peo- 
ple out of the Valley uf Dry Bones, and appearing with solar-face, rainbow- 
crown, His shoulders in cloud, and His feet in pillars of fire, Rev. x:1, and 
swearing the same words to John that He swore to Moses. It was ANI-Hu 
who dwelt in the Pillar of Cloud bv day, and Fire by night. It was ANI-Hu 
who spoke to Moses in the ‘‘Bush.” It was ANI-Hu who said to the Jews 
“Except ye believe that I AM HE, ye shall die in your sins.’’ John viii:24,28, 
58. The name is combined, sometimes, with a participle, as ANI-Hu 
HAMMIDDABBER, I AM HE, the Speaking One, a motto Stier has taken for 
his ‘‘Words of Jesus.”’ It is a name asserting the deity, eternity, person- 
ality, majesty, and real presence and glory of Christ, in Old Testament His- 
tory. ANnI-Hu is the ‘‘Alpha and Omega” in the Apocalypse, Isaiah’s Im- 
manu-E]” or ‘‘With-us-God.” The Christ who talked to John in Patmos, 
about Israel’s future, is the same Christ who talked to Moses upon the same 
subject, and in reference to the same time. 


44 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


F.. THE PSALTER. 


Nor is the Psalter silent. All the sweet singers 
of Israel, from David to Ezra, pre-celebrate the same 
future for Israel. They sing in concert with Moses. 
The “Set Time” to favor Zion, as it stands in the 
prophetic outlook, Psalm cii:13-22, is demonstrably 
the “End-Time” when the Angel of _Jehovah, the 
Lord Himself, throned on the “Clouds,” comes with 


His holy « Angels” to “appear in His glory and build ~ 


up Zion,” to “judge the people, the world, the earth, in 
righteousness,” to give the righteous “dominion in the 
morning,” to cause them to ‘wake in His likeness,” to 
“send the rod of His strength out of Zion,” “rule in 
the midst of His enemies,” “smite kings in the day of 
His wrath,” ‘“tredeem Israel,” “make known His salva- 
tion in the eyes of all nations,” and “fill the earth with 


His glory.” It is all eschatological. Those marvelous | 


Psalms, cil, xXCVH;. XViI, XCVi, -xlix; “cx, [xsd eee 
this at once. The expression “ Hzs Days’ in Psalm 
Ixxii:7, denotes plainly the days of Messianic or Mil- 


lennial glory on earth, foretold by the prophets, and as ~ 


following the “Seven Times” of Moses. These “Days” 
_are the “Third Day” of Hosea, the “Many Days” of 
Isaiah and Ezekiel, and the “Thousand Years of John.” 
Moses, the Psalms, and the Prophets, all sing the same 
thing concerning Israel and Messiah, both as to their 
sufferings and glory, all idealizing critics to the contrary 


notwithstanding. A pre-advent Millennium is un-— 


known to the Psalter. That bright constellation of 
five Psalms closing with the 1ooth Psalm, is a chorus of 


Second Advent songs. Delitzsch calls them “Apoc- ~ 
alyptic Psalms.” Prof. Binnie of Aberdeen styles them 


“Songs of the Millennium.” Herder named them a 
“Group of Millennial Psalms.” Tholuck adorned 


~ 


¢ 


~~ 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 7/3) 


them with the title “ Millennial Anthems.” What is 
it they celebrate? The glorious kingdom of the Mes: 
siah, the kingdom restored to Israel, after the Second 
Coming, or personal Self-Revelation of Jehovah, to 
judge the world. Like so many others, they teach as 
the Prophets do, the pre-millennial Advent of Christ, 
and the “ Shower Seasons,” or “ Times of Reviving” 
following, when ‘He shall come down like rain upon the 
mown grass, and as showers that water the earth;” the 
very “times of refreshing” of which Peter spoke, when 
the First Christian Pentecost, their pledge, was fully 
come. Paul tells the Hebrews in his first chapter that 
the 97th Psalm relates to the Second Advent when the 
First-Born Heir of all things 1s publicly installed in His 
inheritance amid the homage of all angels. The Old 
Hundredth Psalm is simply an anticipation of the Mil- 
lennial Age when “ All people that on earth do dwell” 
unite to praise the Lord. What is the 45th Psalm but 
an ‘“ Advent Hymn” as the great Crusius called it, 
“celebrating the victories of the Bridegroom-Warrior 
coming to His kingdom ?” 

~ What is the 97th Psalm but a catalogue of the 
nations whose individuals are put on the burgess 
roll as born citizens of metropolitan Zion when God 
establishes ber in universal empire? That the 37th 
Psalm refers to the Millennial Age, when “the meek 
shall inherit the earth,’ is our Lord’s own teaching. 
The 68th Psalm isa “Great War-Hymn of the Con- 
queror of the World-Power.” The 50th Psalm opens 
with the “Advent of Christ to judgment.” The He- 
brew Poets are all Pre-millennialists, as are the Hebrew 
Prophets, and the Psalter has to do with “the 1,000 
years” as plainly as has the Apostle John. 


76 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


i G. SUMMING UP. 


If we sum up the results of our investigation, we 
shall find that the Spirit of Prophecy has furnished 
us various time-designations which span the whole de- 
velopment of the Kingdom of God on earth from the 
Assyrian captivity down to the final New Heaven and 
Earth. Israel's fate is the measure of all history. Of 
these designations two cover the whole period from the 
Assyrian Exile down to the Second Coming of Christ, 
viz., the “Many Days” in Hosea iii:4, 5, during which 
Israel “abides,” waiting for Jehovah, and which in 
Hosea vi:2,are summed up in “Two Days” the two 
great historic periods of national death for Israel, viz., 
(1) the Old Testament Day of Assyrian and Babylonian 
captivity and dispersion, and (2) the New Testament 
Day of Roman captivity and dispersion, these two 
days reaching down to the time of Israel’s predicted 
return, resurrection, and national rehabilitation in their 
fatherland, at the Second Coming of Christ or in the 
morning of Hosea’s “Third Day,” Hosea vi:2; the his- 
tory of “Israel” the national Messiah, and “Israel” the 
personal Messiah, being modeled on the same divine 
plan. What we further find is that the Messianic 
Kingdom and Glory on earth, z. e., the Millennial Age, 
this side the final Regenesis of all things, is defined, in 
the Scriptures, By no less than six different equivalent 
expressions, Viz. 

Py ftou an Multitude of Days. Isa. xxiv:22. 

. Rabbim Yamim. Many Days. Ezek. xxxvii8. 
Yom Hashshelisht. Third Day. Hos. 11:4, 5. 
His:Days.4)Psa. bx 

Leolam. Forever. Ezek. xxxviw2seeGyes. 

. Chiba Ete. ‘Thousand Years, Jeeves 

all ere of the same period of time, bounded 


Ark wp 


¢ 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. rar 


on each side by the same events, the period detween the 
Second Advent and the Destruction of Gog, or between 
the binding and loosing of Satan. It is important to 
observe that the “Many Days” of Hosea, are a very 
different period from the “Many Days” of Ezekiel, and 
“Multitude of Days” of Isaiah. The former are the 
“Times of the Gentiles,” the times of the Colossus, the 
Four Beasts, Israel’s Graveyard, 69 weeks, with at least 
1890 years of the Interval following the period of Israel’s 
national Rejection and Death. The latter are the Mil. 
lennial Age itself, introduced by the Second Advent, the 
gathering and judgment of the nations, the downfall of 
the Colossus, the destruction of the Antichrist, the 7oth 
week, and the resurrection of Israel. What we further 
find is that the 7oth of Daniel’s 70 weeks is divided into 
twice 3% years or twice 1260 days for the Rise, Reign, 
and Ruin, of Antichrist, and that the formula, 70 years, 
plus 7 year-weeks, plus 62 year-weeks, p/us our Interval, 
plus 1 year-week, all of which make the “Two Days” of 
Hosea, spans the whole time from the Destruction of 
the visible kingdom of God on earth to its setting up 
again; that the “Many Days” of Hosea, which are his 
“Third Day,” span “the 1,000 years” of John; and that 
all, taken together, exhaust the whole prophetic calen- 
dar if we add, hereto, Gog’s ‘little season,” at the 
close of the Millennial Age. The formula of the total 
fEonology is 70 years plus 69 year-weeks, plus our In- 
terval, plus 1 year-week, plus the 1,000 years, plus Gog's 
little season. 

And what we find further, is that no prophet of the 
Old Testament gives a complete, but only a partial pic- 
ture of the End-Time, even as neither Christ, nor any 
Mpostic does, but that the work of John, under the 
_ guidance of the Spirit of Prophecy, was to combine the 


78 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


Eschata of Joel, Amos, Hosea, Micah, Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
Daniel, Zechariah; in short, the Eschata of all the 
prophets, and arrange them tn their temporal order and suc- 
cession, supplementing by one prophet the partial picture of 
the End drawn by another, until all the Eschata fall into 
their places, as they shall occur in history, so furnishing to 
us one grand tableau of the End-Time. This is what the 
Holy Ghost did with the seer in the “Isle that is called 
Patmos.” Nothing is clearer than that ‘the 1,000 years” 
of John are found in the Old Testament prophets, and 
are Hosea’s “Third Day,”’ Isaiah’s “Multitude of Days,” 
Ezekicl’s “Many Days,” bounded by two resurrections, 
two conflagrations, and two judgments, each distin- 
guished from the other, and de¢ween which the Millennial 
Kingdom lies. The New Testament Apocalypse an- 
swers herein, ‘to the Old, as face answers to stace 
in water, and it belongs to the shame and reproach 
due to the superficial knowledge of so many in 


ur day, who pretend to greater things, that they have 


not recognized this fact, in their study of the Scriptures, 
but still keep harping on the old and tuneless string 
that “the Millennium is found in ozly one passage of the 
Bible, and that ina very obscure book called the Apoc- 
alypse!’’ a boast and a blindness which have happened 
in part to many Gentile interpreters who inform us 
that the Israel of Old Testament Prophecy, “Danzel’s 
People” brought out of Egypt,and to whom a future so 
glorious is reserved, after a punishment so great, means 
believers in Christ, the Old and New Testament 
“Church,” from the “first man Adam,” down to the 
‘Second Adam, the Lord from heaven,” a grand 
spiritual company gathered not only from Parthians, 
Medes, Elamites, and dwellers in Mesopotamia, but from 
Greeks, Turks, Germans, Saxons, Romans, Arabs, 


LINO BOTHOLESTAMEN LS: yes) 


Frenchmen, Esquimaux and Indians. What a perver- 
sion, or as Delitzsch calls it, a “destruction and nega- 


tion of the prophetic word,” has the spiritualizing inter- 


pretation of the prophecies not effected! Or what is 
more humiliating to a scholar than the allegorizing 
“Anglo-Israelism” of some in our times! On the con- 
trary, if we only let God speak for Himself—allowing 
Psrac. to “abide > Israel, till the Lord: comes, that 
“Genea’ not passing away, how bright the unclouded 
Apocalypses of Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zech- 
ariah and John! How clear the Millennial Age follow- 
ing the Advent! How false the common view enter- 
tained by the Church, and blindly advocated by so 
many of her teachers! 

I. It does seem strange that any student of God's 
word should doubt, for one moment, the truth that 
blazes everywhere so clearly in the Old as wellas New 
Testaments, viz,, that the Second Coming of Christ 
precedes the Millennium. And it does seem criminal 
that such an unreasoning prejudice should exist in the 
minds of any against the use of a term as Scriptural as 
gues tne) terms? “baptism, “ Baptist,’ -“ Episcopalian?’ 
“Presbyterian ,’’ words which the objectors themselves 
have chosen to consecrate as the names of their several 
denominations, and in which they glory. How unrea- 
sonable is man’s opposition, even to God’s own word! 
‘Man would,” as Bengel says, “take the very words of 
God out of Hisown mouth!” We coin the word “Mil-: 
lennialist,” in Latin, from the words “szzdle” and “annos,” 
which are simply the Roman equivalents for the Greek 


“Chilia Ete” of John in Rev. xx:1-7, the English transla- 


tion of which is a “7housand Years.” It is Scriptural. 
We coin the word “ Czlzast”’ from these same inspired 
words. It is as Scriptural a term, as is “Baptist,” “Pres- 


SO THE THOUSAND) YEARS 


byterian,” or “ Episcopalian,” or “Christian,” and as 
“orthodox” as any of these! It means that he who 
wears it believes that the “Day of the Lord” in which 
Christ comes, precedes the Millennium. The Advent is 
before the Millennium. That is, he is a “ Pre-Millen- 
nialist.” It denies what the Scriptures everywhere 
deny, viz., the fiction of a pre-advent Millennium. With 
equal justice, we might coin the word Ravyamist from 
the Hebrew terms ‘‘Rov Yamim’’ and “Rabbim Yamim,” 
in Hosea, Isaiah, and Ezekiel, there used to denote the 
same truth. Every prophet was a Ravyamist. He 
believed in a period of time, “a/ter’’ Messiah’s Coming 
to judge the Nations, in which Israel, regatnered, 
redeemed, restored, renewed, resurrected, and re- 
nationalized, should enjoy the Messianic glory in the 
kingdom on earth—a period of time called ‘Zany Days,” 
or as John has it, a ‘thousand years,’ and prior to the 
Last Judgment and the final New Heaven and Earth. 
And Christ Himself was a “Ravyamist,” or, as Auber- 
len somewhere truly says, “/esus was a Chiltast.” All 
the Apostles were the same. All the early Apologists 
for Christianity were the same. Can we imagine when 
we hear such a man as Delitzsch say, “7 am a Chilast,” 
and “Chiliasm was the faith of the early Church,” and 
when also we hear the greatest modern patristic 
scholar, Harnack, say, “Chiliasm is inseparably asso- 
ciated with the gospel, and this is its defense,” that 
these men are either heretics or foolish? On the 
contrary, that great martyr and scholar, “Irenzeus the 
Great, "like “Justin the most learned man of his time,” 
catalogued and held as “promoters of heresy,” and 
even of “blasphemy,” all who denied the Chiliastic faith 
which, in their day, was the “test of an orthodox 
church.” It is a proposition no honest critic dare deny 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. 81 


that, if the early church, having such teachers as Ire- 
neeus, Justin, and others of the same apostolic faith and 
influence, and knowing what Hosea, Isaiah, Micah, 
mame, Ezekiel, Zechariah, John, our Lord, and His 
Apostles, had taught, had xot been Chiliastic’in her 
creed, she ought to have been so, and her failure to have 
been so would have convicted her as recreant to what 
Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and His Apostles, 
had revealed of the course of history, and the outcome 
of God’s kingdom on earth. It was impossible, how- 
ever, that, standing next to Christ and His Apostles, 
and with the Psalms and Prophets in her hand, the 
Jew nationally cast away yet only for a time, and the 
Gentile erect on Israel’s grave, and even persecuting 
the church itself, she could have been anything else 
than she was in her creed, and the proof is perfect, and 
increases more and more, with every fresh investiga- 
tion of the early history of the church, that, only by 
means of apostasy from the Word of God, did she sur- 
render for the sake of opulence and power, money and 
prosperity, extension in the empire, and freedom from 
fagot and flame, that blessed truth whose defense from 
Moses to John, God has made the mark of a faithful, a 
suffering. and a witnessing church. And, surely, if the 
pious Hebrew held the Hope of Christ’s Coming to 
judge the nations, restore Israel, and set up His King- 
dom on earth, as the only Hope for the world’s redemp- 
tion, the only way by which Gentile politics and power 
could be overthrown, the Antichrist destroyed, and the 
faithful dead awakened to share the promise of the 
kingdom, much more ought it to be our Hope, bound 
up as it is with our own deliverance, as well as the 
deliverance of Israel, and the final glory of the world. 
What a stupendous absurdity, in flat contradiction to 


6 


82 THE THOUSAND YEARS 


every prophet, that the Millennial Age will come prior _ 
to the “Yom Yehovah,” or “Day of the Lord,” in 7 
which Messiah appears for Israel’s final recovery ! 
Such an idea simply inverts, perverts and distorts, 
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles. The 
whole testimony of prophecy, pre-exile, exile, and post- 
exile, is against it. -The entire New Testamente 
against it. Never, till the Colossus comes down by 
means of judgment, and the Bones of Israel awake in 
the Valley, and the Antichrist is destroyed, and Satan 
is bound, and God’s sleeping saints are raised, and 
heaven, earth, sea, dry land, and the nations are shaken, 
can the kingdom come, as predicted. And that none 
of these marvels can occur apart from the Second 
Coming of Christ, the merest tyro in Biblical knowl- 
edge must recognize as a first principle and truth in 
the interpretation of prophecy. 

J. A-closing word is demanded as to Israel in the 
Apocalypse. That wonderful Book is capable of many 
“applications,” but only of one organic “interpreta- 
tion,” based upon the entire unity, analogy, and identity 
of prophecy. We may “apply” its symbols to the times 
of early Pagan persecution, and also to later Papal 
persecutions. This is the figurative “application” 
based upon the equation of “Israel” with the “Chris- 
tan Church.” The Apocalypse was a book of comfort ; 
to the early church. It was a comfort, also, to the wit- 7 
nesses of Christ in the Middle Age, and during the 
Reformation. But as surely as Israel “abides” Israel, 
and Daniel's “ people” are not the “Church,” so surely — 
is Israel the key for the true and final interpretation of 
the closing prophecy of the New Testament. It 
sums up in itself all the unfulfilled predictions re- 
specting that chosen and predestined race. We meet 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS, 83 


Israel everywhere. The very announcement of the 
Theme of the book, viz., the Lord’s Second Coming. 
refers us to Israel. ‘Behold He cometh with clouds, and 
every eye shall see Him; ¢hey also who pierced Him,” 
Rev. 1:7, z. e. the Jewish nation, as Zechariah assures 
us. The text is a combination of two passages, one 
from Zechariah, the other from Daniel, both in strict 
textual connection, in the prophets, with Israel’s deliv- 
erance at the Second Advent of Messiah. We encoun- 
ter Israel again in the promise made to the Philadel- 
poian Church, Rev. 111:7-11, by Him who is the “Lion 
of Judah’s tribe,” and has “the Key of David.” Israel 
shall be converted in the last time, and in connection 
with the coming of Christ. Again, we find Israel in 
the sealing of the 144,000 out of all their tribes, Rev. 
vi:1-8, just before the Trumpet Judgments occur, and 
the Tribulation begins. Again, we see Israel in chapters 
x, xi and xii, chapters that place us in the very midst of 
Ezekiel’s Valley of Dry Bones, and show us the prophet’s 
word, and the Spirit of Life from God, with attending 
earthquake, beginning that work of spiritual, personal 
and national, conversion and resurrection foretold by the 
prophets. The oath-taking Angel of the Covenant, Solar- 
faced, and Rainbow-crowned, whose shoulders are robed 
in cloud and feet like pillars of fire, reminds us of the 
Pillar of Cloud in the Wilderness, and Him who dwelt in 
it coming to His people again. The “little book”’ is the 
matter of the testimony of the “two witnesses.” Their 
1260 days of witness is the first half of Daniel’s 7oth 
week. The slaughter of the witnesses is in the middle 
of that week, and is the first public persecuting act of 
the last Antichrist. The succeeding 1260 days is the 
second half of that week, the time of the tribulation. 
The “Worshipers,” xi:1, the sun-clothed woman, or 


- 


- 


84 THE THOUSAND VEARS 


Daughter of Zion, xii:1, the “Our Brethren,” xii:10, 
the ‘“‘Woman”’ fled to the wilderness, are all the same, 
the Jewish Christian Church of the End-Time, or 7oth 
week of Daniel. The “Remnant of her seed, who keep 
the commandments of God, and have the testimony of 
Jesus,” and whom Satan, through the Antichrist, per- 
secutes 1260 days, xli:17, xlil:1, 5, 7, are either Gentile 
believers, or the remainder of Israel returning from the 
East under the care of Eastern princes, doubtless both, 
Xvi:12. The 144,000 in xiv:1-5 are Israel again, secure 
with Messiah returned to Zion, after the Trumpet 
judgments are over. Again, Israel stands triumphant, 
in Xv:3, 4, singing ‘the song of Moses the servant of 
God, and the song of the Lamb,” blending their first 
and last deliverances in one, and declaring that the time 
for national Christianity on earth has come, now that 
Israel is victorious, and is a nation converted to Christ. 
What we see in xiv:20 and x1x:11-21, is the Armageddon 
conflict, closed out, in the valley of Jehoshaphat, out- 
side Jerusalem, the Lord Himself descending from 
“Heaven Opened” to destroy the Antichrist, bind 
Satan, raise the faithful dead, and begin the “thousand 
years” blessed kingdom of glory on earth, Rev. xx:1-7. 
And what shines before us in Rev. xx:9, is the “Be- 
loved City,” Jerusalem restored, the home*ot sti 
Daughter of Zion, which, for a “thousand years” has 
enjoyed the uninterrupted peace and glory, foretold by 
the prophets. He who cannot see “/sracl”’ here, in this 
book as distinct from the “Church” and the ‘Watzons,” 
will see nothing. Wonderfulis the regularity of Israel’s 
recurrence! After the 6th verse of the 1st chapter; in 
the 6th of the seven Epistles to the Churches; between 
the 6th and 7th seals; between the 6th and 7th trump- 
ets; between the 6th and 7th vials; in the Wilderness 


IN BOTH TESTAMENTS, 85 


here; on Mount Zion there; a worshiping part in the 
city now; a multitude pressing into the land from the 
East; a shelter, a victory, a triumph, a glory, an effect 
on the nations, and all at the Second Coming of Christ! 
He who cannot see this will see nothing! It is the 
Eschatology of all the prophets. It is the Escha- 
tology of Christ. Is is the Eschatology of the 
Apostles,—one eschatology, from first to last, built 
and based on the one eternal plan and purpose of 
God with respect to Israel, an interpretation grounded 
in the unity, continuity, organic structure, and genetic 
development of all prophecy, divine, infallible, sure, a 
lieht forever. 

A glance is enough to confirm us. John has nothing 
here the prophets have not. He has nothing Christ has 
not, for the Apocalypse was given Him of God, and 
does not mean a literary production, or book, but the 
“Revelation of Jesus Christ” (Rev. i:1), as He comes 
the second time, in the clouds of heaven (Rev. 1:7), and 
to His Covenant people, Israel of Old Testament 
Prophecy, to fulfil the word of His promise to them, to 
deliver them, restore their state, and give them the 
kingdom. He comes, indeed, to judge the professing 
Church and the world, but He comes to Israel as the 
“ Malakh Habberith” or “ Angel of the Covenant’ the 
“Lord Himself;” and “who may abide the Day of His 
Coming, or stand when He appeareth?” (Rev. vi:i7; 
vii:1-8, Malachi iii:2-4). John has nothing, the Apostles 
have not. His Eschatology is the same as that of Peter 
and Paul. Peter binds Israel’s national repentance and 
the Second Coming of Christ together, Acts 111:19-21. 
He tells of scoffers in the last days, of the World-Judg- 
ment, the day of the Lord, the resurrection and glory, 
the visible kingdom, and the New Heaven and Earth. 


86 THE THOUSAND YVEARS 


He sees the judgment at the beginning and at the End 
of the Millennium in one, and overleaps the Millennial 
Age as a “Day,” in order to speak of the final New 
Heaven and Earth. The whole future was before him 
in one view, and is couched in one all-comprehending 
expression. The Conflagration blazes in front, the 
Glory shines beyond. Paul also takes up each escha. 


tological point, and discusses it separately. In II Thess. . 


11:8, we have the Antichrist and Second Coming of the 
Lord, but nothing is said to Israel. In Romans, chap- 
ter xi, we have Israel’s conversion and the Second Com- 
ing, but nothing is said about Antichrist. In I Cor. xv: 
12-57, we hear him discussing the first resurrection at 
the Second Coming, but not a word about either Israel 
or Antichrist. In Rom. viii:17-23, we find him dilating 
upon the glorified inheritance on earth, to be received 
at the redemption of the body from the grave, when 
Christ comes, but nothing about any of the other 
points. 

If we combine all these in one picture, what we shall get 
as a result is Antichrist destroyed, Israel redeemed, the 
Saints raised, the Inheritance glorified, all at the 
Second Coming of Christ, and the Millennial Interval 
between that Coming of Christ to assume the kingdom 
and the remote End when He shall have surrendered the 
Kingdom of God, even the Father, having abolished 
all rule, and all authority and power, and annihilated 
Hades and Death, “that God may be all in all.” I Cor. 
xv:24-28. In short, we get precisely what John has 
given us in the Apocalypse, with this difference, that, 
whereas Peter and Paul discuss the points separately, 
John discusses nothing, but combines all in a total 
tableau of the End-Time, glowing under the highest 
light of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. And so 


INA BOTT ALES LTAMEN ES. 87 


will every student of God’s Word find it, if only he 
comes to that word with an humble heart, free from 
prejudice, and false theories of interpretation, and prays 
that God will open his eyes to see light in God’s light 
alone, accounting all other light as but darkness. 
Blessed book is the Bible, the living word of the living 
God, one word from beginning to end, the work of one 
infinite mind, full of the wonders of wisdom, love and 
power! And from Moses to John, the Eschatology is 
one, because God’s plan is one, the “Thousand Years” 
in John, following the Second Advent, and preceding 
the Last Judgment, being the very Interval Paul him- 
self has acknowledged in I Cor. xv:24, and none other 
than that period of time, called by Hosea, the “Third 
Day,” by Isaiah a “Multitude of Days,” and by Ezekiel 
“Many Days’—in every case, in both Old and New 
Testaments, associated with the Glory of Israel in the 
Kingdom, and the Redemption of the Nations, accom- 
plished at the Second Coming of Christ. The holy 
penmen mutually supplement each other. The Lord 
open the eyes of His Church to see it, love it, and teach 
it, and to Him be the glory forever. 


Supplementary Discussions. 


‘‘ Whoever is familiar with the writings of the prophets, and has devoted _ 
himself with loving attention to the same, will soon discover the right road — 
along which he can safely pass through all the apparent labyrinths of the 
Apocalypse. If we renounce our own thoughts and imaginations, we shall .) 
have no difficulty in finding the meaning of God. The way of simplicity is | 


> ad 


_ the way of Truth. And if we do not forget that Jesus Christ is not only _ 


the confession of our faith and love, but also of our hope, so shall He be 

to us the Key of all prophecy. The testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of 

prophecy.” oe a 
LUTHARDT, 


SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


PALT Ef. 
SYMBOLIC NUMBERS 


I have said in Part | of the previous discussion that 
“The Thousand Years,” in John, are a measure of time, 
and that the formula 70 years plus 70 weeks of years, 
plus the Interval between the 69th and 7oth weeks, plus 
the Thousand Years, plus Gog’s “little season,” spans 
all prophetic chronology, from the Assyrian captivity 
‘and Judah’s exile, down to the final New Heaven and 


Earth. 
Ave Ob PEO ELON, 


I desire, now, to consider the objection made to the 
above view, in modern times, and to-day so popular 
with our spiritualizing and idealizing expositors, an 
objection which forms the last refuge of post-millen- 
_nialism, already driven from the field by exegesis, viz., 

that prophetic numbers are purely and only symbolical, 


(91) 


92 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ideal, and void of all chronological value. They are 
neither mathematical, nor arithmetical, but wholly 
schematic and symbolical, belonging to the outward ideal 
form of the prophecy, but not to its inward, real, essen- 
tial content. In this way, the thousand years are either 
dissolved or identified with the “ideas of eternity and 
ecumenicity.” To calculate even the 70 years of 
Jeremiah, or the 70 weeks of Daniel, is a “folly,” since 
these numbers represent no particular measures of time 
but only abstract ideas and relations applicable to all 
times. So Bunsen, in his “//zppolytus,” saying, “What has 
the Holy Ghost to do with counting years, and months, 
and days’’* Tothe same purpose Dr. Kliefoth in his 
recent “Christian Eschatology,’ speaks. His maxim is 
“Symbolical numbers don’t count’—and “ The number 
1,000 (equal to I10X10X10) as the potentiated ten 
number, expresses the idea of absolute, all-embracing 
ecumenicity, and we should remember that the Scrip- 
ture repeatedly denotes by this number, a thousand 
years which are as one day, and one day as a thousand 
years, before God.” + In like manner, Prof. Milligan 
of Aberdeen in his work on “The Revelation of St, 
John,” and following Augustine and Klhiefoth, re- 
marks, “lf we interpret the thousand years literally, it 
will be a solitary example of a literal use of numbers in 
the Apocalypse, and this objection alone is fatal.” 
Once more, Prof. Briggs, holding the same view, says, 
“We claim that all prophetic numbers are symbolical, 
and that none of them are to be taken as exact or 
literal. The efforts of interpreters to determine from 
the numbers of Daniel the interval to the First Advent, 


* Hippolytus II. 286. 
+ Christliche Eschatologie. 246. 
tRevelation of St. John. 202. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 93 


have ignominiously failed. Their efforts to measure 
the times of the Apocalypse, and indicate the time of 
the Second Advent, are worse than ridiculous. Those 
who indulge in such follies are blindly laboring to un- 
dermine and destroy Hebrew prophecy and the Bible 
itself, of which it is an essential part.’ *” 


B. GENERAL REMARKS. 


In general, and on the whole subject, it must be 
said, first of all, that this idealizing view—even granting 
all that may be justly said against the well meant but 
mistaken reckonings of many of the ablest and most 
devoted servants of God—men like Luther, Bengel, 
Newton, Elhott, who gave their hves to defend and 
not undermine Hebrew prophecy—is xzo¢ the view en- 
tertained by ninety-nine out of a hundred scholars who 
have written on the subject. The theory that divests 
prophetic numbers of their chronological exactness, 
and makes them mere signs, or counters, of “abstract 
ideas and proportions,” is repelled by the overwhelming 
majority of writers on prophecy, in our own time. It 
sprang from the Augustinian view of the thousand 
years, which, asa spiritualizing and allegorizing protest 
against a gross, crass, Chiliasm, swung its reacting 
pendulum to the opposite extreme, interpreting “Israel” 
as the “New Testament Church,” the “Church” as the 
“Kingdom,” and the thousand years as “all the years of 
our Christian dispensation.’+ Just there was the fons 
et origo of this hermenentical delusion, a view repudi- 
diated by all expositors—save the allegorizers and ideal- 
izers who follow Augustine—ever since it received its 


* Messianic Prophecy I. 53. 

+ De Civitate Dei. xx:7. ‘* A@ille annos pro annis omnibus hujus 
secuh’—“a thousand years for all the years of thts present age,” t. e., from 
the First to the Second Advent, 


94 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


death blow in that famous critical conclusion of Vi- 
tringa, viz., “Nothing remains, therefore, but to date 
the commencement of this Millennium from those times 
in which the empire of the Beast terminates,’ 2. e. at 
the Parousia, or Second Advent of Christ. The only 
possible escape from this is to spiritualize the “Parou- 
sia” itself, and make it mean an invisible Advent of 
the Holy Ghost in showers of reviving upon the 
Church, after the manner of Whitby, so inventing a 
spiritual Parousia a thousand years before the literal 
Parousia, that is, a millennium éefore Christ returns 
to judge the world, redeem Israel, raise His saints, 
and assume the Kingdom. Yet, even. here, the thou- 
sand years are held to be a measure of time, although 
indefinite, and placed. wrongly ¢hzs stde the Second 
Coming of Christ. 

On the whole subject, then, and in general, it must 
be repled that, even granting that prophetic num- 
bers are symbolic and schematic, z¢ does not follow that 
they have no temporal value. The fact that they rep- 
resent an “7zdea’’—and no one denies this—does not 
prove that they do not represent “¢zme” also. Grant 
that the thousand vears are either ‘more or less than 
ten centuries,” still they are a@ measure of literal his- 
toric time. To conclude that, because they are not 
just ten centuries “ cractly,” therefore” they tags 
“no chronological value,” is, first of all, an illicit as- 
sumption, and, next, an illicit conclusion, insufferable 
even in ordinary reasoning. It is as intolerable to 
infer that, because they are not “exact,” therefore, they. 


Hujus initium in wis figendum esse temporibus in guibus Impertum Bestia 
terminatur.” 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. O5 


a 


they are “zot’”’ exact. The framework is a part of the 
building, and not mere abstract form. These numbers, 
moreover, represent not anly time, but quantity or 
magnitude, and character or quality. Syidolism is, in- 
decd, the representation of great ideas or truths in 
sensuous concrete forms; as, for instance, in the open- 
ing Christophany of the Apocalypse, the Seven-Sealed- 
Scroll, the Seals, Trumpets, Vials, the Smoke-Altar, 
the Censer, the Swallowed Book, the Sun-Clothed 
Woman, Harlot, Ten-Horned Beast, Cithara-Players 
on the Glassy Sea, etc., etc. Yet, notwithstanding this, 
the very forms in which the truths here signified, are 
clothed, are realistic, denote historic fact, and are a part 
of the essential contents of the prophecy itself, 

Still more. Schematism is different from Symbolism. 
That represents the general, or abstract ideal, in sen- 
suous concrete forms, 77s represents, not the gen- 
eral, or abstract ideal, in any sense, but the concrete real 
itself in individualized, precise, and definite form. Here 
the ideal and the real are one. The Symbolism and the 
Schematism are the same. The form and reality, the 
sign and thing signified, are inseparable. Such are the 
Locusts in Joel and John’s Apocalypse, the Two Wit- 
nesses, the Little Horn or Eighth Head, the Dragon, 
that Old Serpent, the diademed Rider on the White 
Horse, etc., etc. Here belong, also, the prophetic num- 
bers which are both schematic and symbolic, and there- 
fore literal as well as ideal; the 70 years of Jeremiah, 
70 weeks of Daniel, ‘time, times, and a half,” or three 
and a half years twice taken, the two halves of the one 
week in Dan. ix:27, the 1260 days, the 42 months, the 10 
days, 5 months of locust torture, the 4% part killed 
under the Seals, the % part under the trumpets, 
the #, part of the city fallen, the 7,000 perished 


96 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSICNS. 


the 144,000 sealed out of Israel, the 1,600 furlongs, the 
monogram of Antichrist, 666. All these are schematic 
and symbolic indeed; but to infer that they are not 
measures of historic time or locality, or import no literal 
character or quality, is to accuse the Spirit of Prophecy 
of the “folly”? charged on its interpreters. On their face 
these numbers denote, not only ideas, but time, and we 
are told that holy men of old “investigated what the 
manner of the time here signified was.” I Pet. 1:11. 

The Holy Ghost might have schematized by “ines 
geometrically, as well as by xumbers arithmetically, 
had He chosen so to represent the ages and the ends, 
the seasons and the times. In any case, His numbers 
or His lines, while representing “ideas,” represent also 
literal realities in time and space, historic entities, and 
must so be taken. We are not to explain the symbol 
symbolically! The figure of a figure is not tnterpre- 
tation / | 

PROPHECY A CHRONOMETER. 

Biblical prophecy is itself, and by necessity, a divine 
measurer of time, is organically bound to history, and 
connected with a calendar by which the Times and 
Seasons, the ages and the ends, have been regulated in 
the past, are so now, and will be in the future. It 
serves the Watchman of the night as the starry heav- 
ens serve the astronomer, or the traveler familiar with 
their aspect and their motion. It shines as “a light in 
a dark place.” He who has learned to read the proph- 
etic Dial may yet not see distinctly, nor tell precisely, 
what o’clock it is in the Kingdom of God, “to-day” or 
“to-morrow.” But he caz know if it is midnight, or 
the cock crowing. He caz tell if he is nearing suns 
rise, and “the morning cometh.” The Baptist and our 
Lord Himseif, thought so when they cried, “The Time 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 97 


is fulfiiled. Repent. The Kingdom of Heaven is at 
hand !” 

The divine chronometer that ticks God’s ages on 
the face of prophecy may indeed express, in Pythago- 
rean way, “abstract ideas,” but it also measures off the 
“ages and ends,” the “seasons and times,” the “time 
and the manner of time,” in the progress of the Kingdom 
of God. It hasa wondrous Calendar attached, and, if we 
take the figures of the Virgin, the Lion, the Lamb, the 
meapard, the Bear, the Ram, the He-Goat, the Ten- 
Horned Beast, the Dragon, the Two-Horned Prophet, 
it has a curious Zodiac as well. At any rate, it explains 
the past, the present, and all coming time. The proph- 
etic numbers are all grounded, as Leyrer and Crusius 
both discerned, in “the cyclical relations ofa higher order 
of thingsthan we yet see,” but the laws of which work 
ona greater or smaller scale, yet always in the same 
analogous proportion. - Plato knew that God geome- 
trizes. Daniel knew that God chronologizes. In like 
manner, He ponderizes. Science is but his many-col- 
ored mantle. History is but His footsteps. He works 
everywhere, and does all things “ by number, measure, 
and weight.” Somehow or other, with all their sym- ” 
bolism, the 6 days of creation and the 7thof rest, lie at 
the basis of all history, are made the types and meas- 
ures of literal time, and even of days of 24 hours, each. 
And this, just because they were literal periods of time 
themselves, and egua/ periods, if we may judge by the 
record. 

The entire visible world has its roots in the invisi- 
ble. The unseen is the source of all realities, and the 
mind of God is behind all. The trouble is not with 
Gad’s chronology, but with our“ ideas’ of it. Because 
we have made to ourselves 300 different chronologies, 


7 


Q8 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


we conclude that “all prophetic numbers are symbol- 
ical,” and a “symbolical number don’t count!” Ste- 
phen knew enough to tell the Sanhedrim that the 400 ~ 
years of Israel’s bondage in Egypt were prophetic — 
numbers, and so far from dwelling on any symbolic 
meaning they had, he took them as “ exact and literal,” 
and as proof of the truth of God’s predictive word. 
Acts vii:6, 7; Gen. xv:13, 14. No otherwise did Daniel 
regard the 70 years predicted by Jeremiah, full as they 
were of symbolism. For both prophets these were 
“exact and literal.” “Dan. ix:2 Jer. xxvill, 12; xx 
And when Hosea says, “After two Yamim, He will 
revive us (Acts iii:tg-21) in the third Yom we shall live 
in his sight (Isa. xxvi:19; Eph. xxxvii:12; Dan. xii:2),7 
Paul understands him to mean two great measures of 
time, followed by a third Yom, whose morning is intro- 
duced by the Appearing of Jehovah Himself, bringing 
outcast Israel’s “reception” and “life from the dead.” 
Rom. xi:15. And this, notwithstanding all symbolism 
hid inthe terms and the mystic relation of Israel to 
Christ. Since a “Nation” is a “ Person’? before God, 
and dealt with as such, and Israel’s history 1s molded on ~ 
that of Christ, the proof is clear that the conclusion, 
that “‘ because prophetic numbers are symbolical, there- 
fore they don’t count,” is as erroneous in fact as it is 
vicious in logic. 

On the contrary, the prophetic numbers are symbol- 
ical only because, first of all, they are literal. The four 
hundred years did begin and end. Theseventy years 
did begin andend. The one thousand years ska begin 
and end. All are spoken of inthe same way. The 


seven wecks, and sixty-two weeks, did begin and end, 


and so much of Daniel’s prophecy is completed. Mes- 
siah da come “ after threescore and two weeks,” and 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 9y 


peeve weeks. -“Aiter,” “ until?’ “nto,” in answer 
to the question, “ How long?” and “O my Lord, 
Whene” ave chronological, although Professor Milli- 
gan thinks that “ the word ‘after’ is not to be used ina 
chronologieal sense, but rather with the force of subordi- 
nating the secondary to the primary effect (!)*” just as 
Professor Fairbairn thought the word “ frst” in the 
“First Resurrection,” had ‘“‘no temporal significance, but 
only meant the “ greatest,’”—or the “ most important !” 
Four is symbolical only because it is literal—the four 
corners of the earth. Threeis symbolical only because 
it is literal,—the three persons of the Trinity. Ten is 
the same, only because it is literal,—completion only 
because the g digits are exhausted. And Twelve is 
symbolical only because God gave to Jacob 12 sons to 
become the heads of the 12 tribes, the chosen people. 
So are the 6 and 7 symbolical only because God worked 
six days and rested the seventh. The entire Calendar 
is the same. The law of the Sabbath underlies tt all. 


(C)—THE NUMBER SIX. 


Prophetic Numbers are indeed symbolical. No one 
denies this. We know that the sacred 7 is so, and lies 
at the basis of the Sacred Calendar of the Jews, and 
also the Civil Calendar of the Christians. It points to 
the “Rest,” the “ Sabbath” of God. It symbolizes that 
Rest to which all believers come, even now, first in 
their souls by faith;a Rest to which they shall yet 
come, souland body together, and the “sign” of both 
which is the 7th day rest of the Christian Sabbath, 
now. The 6is no less symbolical, just because literal. 
It is a secular number grounded in the 6 days’ work of 
creation which preceded the 7th of rest, the 6 days 


* Revelation of John 212. 


100 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


commanded of God for man’s toil, but in which the 
unbelieving and ungodly, still secular in soul, and 
pressed with worldly care, abide without a Sabbath. 
They remember not the 7th to keep it holy. They have 
no peace, no rest. Their souls have never ceased from 
their work, as God did from His. The 6 can never 
give the 7. The World can never bring, or give, God’s 
rest. If the Kingdom of God and His Christ has 7 
as its holy signature, the Kingdom of Satan and Anti- 
christ has 6 as its signature; an earthly kingdom, car- 
nal, restless, and unsabbatized; the rule of worldly- 
minded men, without a sign of sanctity, or ,covenant 
between themselves and God; a Godless, Christless _ 
kingdom, and a Godless, Christless nation, wherever 
found. Itis the atheist’s mark. It is the apostate’s. 
sign. Itis the seal of anti-Christianity, in league with 
civil power; the 1o-horned “ Beast,” who would blot 
the Heptad from the Calendar and put the Decade there, 
profane the 7 and consecrate the Gand 10. We see the 
symbolism of it in Dan. ili:1, where the Golden Image 
of the Babylonian King was reared upon the plains of 
Dura, ‘ 66 cubits high.” 

“Ideas,” indeed, are here, but literal numbers too, 
and literal measures also. If the number 6 denotes the 
compass of the World-7zme, the number 66 denotes 
the breadth and height of the World-Power in the Baby- 
lonian’s day; 6 multiplied by 10; the number and the 
symbol of a secular completeness. It is all the world 
wants. It expresses all. It means negation; no God, 
no Sabbath, no religion, save the world’s religion; no 
Rest for man or beast; no heaven; no hope; no immor- 
tality. It was thesymbol of the Babylonian monarch’s 
empire over the then civilized and cultured world ; an 
empire with its feet on Israel’s breast. Dan. iii:1-30; 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 101 


11:37, 38. In like manner the number ‘ 666,” the mon- 
ogram of Antichrist, denotes the topmost summit and 
the widest breadth of the anti-Christian World-Power, 
symibolized by the Beast,” the “Little Horn,’ at the 
end of our presentage. It is a power that will abolish 
the Sabbath Day, and substitute its own Calendar for 
God’s, with sounding honors to its heroes, with con- 
course, music and _ procession, ‘“‘cornet and flute, sack- 
but and harp, dulcimer and psaltery,” upon the plains 
of modern Dura, and “woe” to him who fails to wor- 
Swipe it.» Kev. xii:1-8; Dan. in:11. Secular, and only 
e-cular,*it is, aud full of culture, education, atheism, 
persecution, blasphemy and lust; full of gold and sil- 
ver, all that Science, Art, Philosophy and Power can 
bring. Already in our modern revolutions, in the 
Comtist Calendar, in the Communism and Socialism of 
our day, and in the swamp-sounding frog-like “croak” 
of its daily platform, and its press, against religion, we 
have the presage of its coming. Rev. xvi:13. It 1s 
the God-opposed World-Power in league with the God- 
opposed World-Wisdom, the gospel of the flesh, zes- 
thetic and unclean, with spirit-forms and _ scientific 
wonders, as its aids, preparing Christendom for Anti- 
heist, the “Lawless’-one. It is 666, and only 6; 6 
units to reflect the secular days, 6 ¢ensto represent 
attainment of its power, 6 hundreds, the symbol of its 
ecumenical, its universal, sway. It is no false democ- 
racy, or red republic, but the fruit of these, a Scarlet- 
Cezesarism, the last development, for which the others 
are a preparation.* It is headed up in a personal enor- 
mity. Its number is the ‘“‘number of the eas?” the 
“number of his Vame,” the “number of a Man,” and 


* See Martensen. Christian Ethics, 352—356. 


102 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“ascending from the Pt/” Wisdom here is wanted. 
Let him who has it “ count.”’ Permission is accorded, 
Rey. xiii:17, 18. To “count” implies the literality. It 
means a “ Man’’ that isa “ Beast;’a Beast that ism 
“ Devil :” a Devil that is a “God.” This is what ous 
boasted progress, culture, and civilization are coming 
to, the outcome of post millennialism with its church 
leaven for the masses, its conventions to arrest the tide 
of crime in Christendom, and its proud, self-adulant 
statistics! “666” will not down at church bidding 
which has so much of “666” in its own character and con- 
stitution! Sybolical indeed! but dzteral too! And only 
when the Antichrist is overthrown, and the future 
temple built to Christ from all “the precious things of 
all the nations,” will the whole world’s wealth,—the 
spoils redeemed from anti-Christianity,—the treasure 
of the world, its “666 talents of the gold of Ophir” be 
consecrated to His service. I Kings x:14; II Chron. 
ix:13; Isa. Ix:17, 10,13; Hagg. 11:7. (Revssed Versione 
There is something more than mere abstract ideals 
here,” 
(D)—THE SEVENTY WEEKS. 


That tne 70 Weeks of Daniel are measures of dea 


a woe. On) 666." Irensxeus found 666 in the word Zade‘nos written 
Greekly. The Benedictines saw it in Rom7ith, the Roman written Hebrewly. . 
The Protestants found it in Vicar of the Son of God, written Latinly, V7- 
cartus Fillii Dei, on the Pope’s tiara. The Catholics found it in the word 
Luther, and both Catholics and Protestants found it inthe name AZahomet, 
while Pagans see it in the word JZessias, Messiah. Modern critics find it 
in the words Vero Cesar written Hebrewly, although itis known John wrote 
in Greek. Some Germans see it in Gallos Kaiser, the Gallic Cesar, 7. é. 
Napoleon, while some Frenchmen seeit in Bismarck, the German autocrat. 
Ebrard sees, in 6, the number of the Roman World-Power, 7. ce. the 6th head 
of the Beast. Rdsch sees the 6 as the sign of the secular 6 days. Heng- 
stenberg, after Vitringa, sees an allusion to the 666 sons of Adenikam, 
Ezra ii:13,—the self-exalting Lord ! But better than all, Hofmann, Auberlen, 
etc., hold that the future alone will reveal it. Constantine had his Labarum, 
and his Monogram. Antichrist will have his parliament, his number and — 
his banner too! ‘The world will know its ‘* 666!” 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 103 


nite literal time, and not mere symbols of ideas, can- 
not be successfully denied. Ever since God rested 
from His creative work, the number 7 has not only 
borne a sacred Sabbatic value, but has been a meas- 
ure of exact time, and the septennial division of time 
has been the peculiar characteristic of sacred history 
and prophecy, alike, and continues repeating itself 
down to the sounding of the 7th trumpet. Whatever 
chronology men may devise, its supreme test in rela- 
tion to allthe events of Israel’s history, and to all proph- 
ecy concerning [srael’s future, must be the Sacred Cal- 
endar of Sabbatic Years and Jubilees, established 
through Moses, by divine authority. All Hebrew chro- 
nology resvulves itself into Cycles of Sevens, great or 
small, and Daniel’s prediction conforms itself, of set 
purpose, to this ‘law of the Week,” “law of Seven,”’ 
Siawe ol -the Sabbath,” and “law of Jubilee.’ That 
law determines not only the whole period of the 7o 
Sevens, or Weeks, but the formal subdivision into 7 
plus 62 plus 1. Plainly the 70 years’ Captivity, foretold 
by Jeremiah, were determined by that law. These years 
are a series of 10 Sevens, 7 multiplied by 10 equals 7o, 
each year, in the series, answering toa septennial 
period, or period of7 yearsin [srael’s history under the 
monarchy; z.e. each yearof the Captivity represent- 
ing a Sabbatic Year (or every 7th year), which Israel 
had violated in past time, refusing to give the “ Land” 
its covenanted “Rest” from cultivation. The “7 Weeks” 
of prophecy, z. ¢. the first subdivision of the 70 Weeks 
are, as Sir Isaac Newton quickly saw the “ compass of a 
Jubilee,” t.e. 7 multiplied by 7 equals 49 years, ending 
not only in a Sabbatic, but in a Jubilee year, year of 
Israel’s atonement, release and return, and full redemp- 
tion; and, in this case, as the history of fulfilment 


104 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


shows, including the dedication of the Wall of rebuilt 
Jerusalem. The “62 Weeks” next following the 7, are 
‘62 Sevens,” or 434 years, these two subdivisions add- 
ed together, making “69 Weeks,” or “ Sevens,” z. ¢. 483 
years, ending with the Advent of Messiah. So speaks 
the Angel Gabriel, who revealed the prophecy to Dan- 
iel, and was called the Angel of the Advent, uttering 
the oracle, and uttering its fulfilment also: “From 
the Issuing of a word to restore and to build Jerusa- 
lem, unto Prince Messiah, shall be Sevens 7 and Sev- 
ens 62.” Danix:25. The final “One Week, “orsaae 
7, stands removed from the 69 Weeks by the whole inter- 
val of time to elapse between itself and Messiah “cut 
off.” It is chronologically severed from immediate 
sequence upon the 69th week, because of Israel’s fore- 
seen national rejection of their own Prince Messiah 
without whose national acceptance the redemption 
promised to Israel as a nation, could not come. Thus, 
the Great Sabbatism, and Jubilee of Jubilees, due at 
the close of the “70 Sevens,” has been, by Israel’s guilt 
on the one hand, and God’s suspension of His national 
covenant with Israel, on the other, postponed “until 
the time come” when Israel shall be in readiness to re- 
ceive, asa nation, and hail with “‘ Hosanna!” their long 
rejected, yet returning, King. *The-“One Weelke seams 
future, is a “ Seven” of itself, and the entire 70 Sevens 
run out into a Great Sabbatic Jubilee, when Israel, 
nationally ransomed from their Gentile servitude, shall 
returnto their forfeited possessions, re-acquire their lost 
inheritance under God’s national covenant resumed, 
and, forgiven their iniquity, their apostasy finished, and 
their hearts renewed, enjoy their promised Rest, and 
promised “ Land,” forever. Such is God's plan,a plan 
of fixed, measured, and historic movement along the 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 105 


ages, ruled by definite “seasons and times,” and not by 
mere vague, timeless, and abstractideas. The 70 Weeks 
of Years, announced by the Angel to Daniel, along 
with the Interval between the 69th and 7oth Week, have 
as literal a fulfillment as had the 70 years of the Exile, 
or the Crucifixion of Christ, or the Destruction of Jeru- 
salem by the Romans. Israel’s dispersion to-day, is as 
truly a national punishment for the national rejection 
of Christ, as Israel’s dispersion, and captivity for 70 
years, were a national punishment for the violation of 
the Law of the Sabbath, and their national apostasy from 
Meodereey, xxv1;33-35-; [1 Chron. xxxvizr. “The)-post 
millennarian assumption, that Israel is xatzonally cast 
away forever, that God has xo national future for [srael 
restored, and that Israel is now the “ Church,” is the one 
fundamental and false postulate that blinds so many to 
the true interpretation of the “70 Weeks” of Daniel. 
The final goal of prophecy is Israel’s remote future. 
It lies on the distant horizon, or Acharith Hayyamim, 
z. e.at the end of our present age, or dispensation. 
By means of the Angel’s Revelation, Daniel is made 
see, not only the End, but the Way thereto. He knows 
the Messianic Kingdom cannot come to Israel, except 
through Israel’s national acceptance of Messiah. The 
Angel tells him that, even after the return from Exile, 
Israel will deepen in apostasy, rejecting their Messiah 
when He comes; that the rebuilt City and Temple will 
be destroyed as a punishment for their sins, and they 
themselves dispersed again, nor be gathered, save in 
the distant End-Time, through great tribulation; and 
that God, who knows all things and sees the End 
from the Beginning, and all the Way, has ‘measured 
off 70 Sevens” with the Interval “and unto,” as the 
allotted pathway at whose close the ““ Mystery of God” 


106 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


shall be finished, and Israel as a nation be redeemed. 
The ¢zme is delimited, and the Sabbath law holds its 
ground, and shapes the prophecy. It dominates the. 
number 70, and the subdivisions of it, 7 plus 62 plus 1. 
ft is the vital reason of zt. As all Harvests point to the 
one final Harvest when Christ comes, so all Sabbaths 
point to the one final Sabbath at the end of Israel's 
weary world-week of 7 times 70 years’ Captivity, with 
the Interval “and unto” included, the time of the sus- 
pension of the covenant, when Israel, as a nation, is a 
blank before God actually, although, by that same cov- 
enant, reserved to a glorious destiny. God’s chro- 
nology, prophecy, and history, all end in a Sabbatism of 
redemption, jubilee, holiness and rest, in the land 
of Canaan; type of an eternal day! God has respect 
to the “ Seven” and to the “ Saddath,” in all His dealings 
with His people. It is the law of the Sabbath that 
shapes the times and seasons, the ages and the ends, 
the cycles and the epicycles, equal or proportionate, 
and is ingrained inall the processes of Nature. As 
the earth’s circular motion in her orbit, and on her axis, 
gives roundness, not squareness, to the bodies of the 
trees, and to the stems of vegetation, so it is the Law 
of the Sabbath that shapes the growth of the rounded 
times and seasons, articulates them, and runs them out 
into an endless Sabbatic Jubilee. To that all things 
tend. 

The sub-distribution of the 70 Weeks, and the pre- 
diction of the great events connected with them, prove 
these weeks to be literal measures of time, and not 
mere symbols of abstract ideas. The numbers “count.” 
He “ counts” who fixes termini * from” one event “Zo” 
another. He chronologizes and arithmetizes, who 
writes “anzo”’ and “xuzfz/,’ and the events connected 


SVMBOLIC NUMBERS. 107 


therewith prove that the figures “ count.” The 7o is at 
least not 71, 7 isnot og, 62 are not 26, and1 is not 4.. And, 
that ¢2me is involved, the lapse expressed by “ uzfo” and 
“untiw,’ and the question, ‘‘ ow long,’ and the words 
“measured off” or ‘ decreed,” sufficiently declare. And, 
that the “Sevens” or “ Weeks,” are literal Year-Sevens, 
each Seven being Seven Years, and not Seven “ days put 
for Years,’ is proved by the reduction of the last Seven 
to twice 3% years through its reduction to twice 
1,260 days,and by the nature and number of events 
predicted. Itis of the first importance however, to ob- 
serve that the prophecy of the 70 Weeks relates to the 
fortunes of the literal Israel, and to Israel as a nation, and 
is an answer to prayer and anxious investigation of the 
prophets concerning Israel, and the salvation promised, 
through Israel, tothe world. The prophets had spoken 
of a suffering, and of a glorious Messiah, and of Israel's 
relation nationally to both the Suffering and the Glory. 
To Daniel, “searching what, and what manner of time” 
the Holy Ghost signified, when thus testifying, and 
inquiring the relation of the “ what,’ and the “time,” 
and the “manner” of it, to Israel’s 70 years’ Captivity, 
Dan. i1x:2; I Pet. 1:11 ;—to Daniel studying “in the Sa- 
cred Books (Lassepharim), and adding prayer to study ; 
the Angel Gabriel makes the revelation of the future. 
This Apocalypse is an answer, full, and precise, and in 
direct response to the points made in the prayer itself. 
It covers the prayer inthe most perfect manner. It 
speaks in the terms of the prayer. The subjects of the 
Preyer ate (1) the. Peop/e, “ All Israel,’ “ we,” “us,” 
our iathers,~ Israel as a nation in their collective 
unity, or solidarity, ever since they were a nation, ever 
einceney came “out of Egypt,” vs. 7, 11, 20; (2) the 
C7 everusaicm, vs. 2,7, 12,.16; (3)the Temple, the 


108 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“Sanctuary,” in the “holy mountain,” “vs. 316,17; 2a 
The matter of the confession is sixfold (1) Israel’s na- 
tional “transgression,” the apostasy in departing from 
the Covenant, vs. II, 20; (2) Israel’s national “ sins,” 
vs. 16, 18; (3) Israel’s national “ iniquity.” v. 16; (4) 
Israel’s want of enduring “righteousness,” v. 18; (5) 
Israel’s punishment as that foretold, in what Moses fore- 
saw and predicted, vs. 11, 12, 13; (6) Israel’s desolated 
Sanctuary, vs. 17,20. Allthese he weaves into an agony 
of deep-drawn, plaintive supplication, imploring, be- 
seeching, twisting, and undertwisting, his petitions and 
confessions, pleading, plying, and pressing his suit, be- 
moaning himself and ‘ All Israel,” and with the most 
solemn repetition of the dreadful name of “ Jehovah, 
the covenant-keeping God,” appealing to Him as God, 
and as his God, for immediate forgiveness and deliv- 
erance. The appeal is most touching, intense, and sol- 
emn,—‘O Lord, hearken , O Lord, hear ; O Lord, forgive ; 
and do, Defer not, for thine own sake, O my God, for 
thy people are called by thy name.”* v. 21. 

It is in answer to this paroxysm of devotion, sur- 
passed only by the prayer in Gethsemane, that Gabriel, 
darting like a beam of light across the sky, “ flies 
swiftly” and touching Daniel on his knees, gives him 
this prediction of the 70 Weeks. He tells him thatthe 


* Pesha, means to rebel against a sovereign and break covenant allegi- 
ance, to go into open treason and apostasy by departure from God. //hatt- 
aoth, means failures first, then gross sins, as intemperance, adultery, idol- 
atry, refusing to hearken to God’s prophets. Avon, means crookedness, 
perversity of will and disposition, a heart not right, unrighteousness, or 
want of straightness according to arule, and always includes guilt and pun- 
ishment. ‘lhese were Israel’s national character and condition. Daniel con- 
fesses all for his nation, just as David did for himself. ‘‘ Seventy Sevens” 
are decreed in order to stop ‘‘the transgression,” end ‘‘sins,” and cover 
“iniquity.” A grand Afotelesma is here, in this complex prediction, span- 
ning both Advents, reaching not only to Messiah, but to Israel’s ultimate 
and national redemption. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 109 


full redemption of his People, City, and Temple, will 
not come at the close of the Captivity, but only at the 
end of “Seventy Sevens,” the last “ Seven” following a 
long Interval which itself must follow the Sixty-Ninth 
Seven, at whose close Messiah comes. These ‘“‘Sevens”’ 
are decided upon asthe time for accomplishing the 
points inthe prayer. What the Angel says is: 

Verse 24. “Sevens Seventy’ —Shabuim Shibim, are 
decreed upon thy people and upon thy holy city. 

(1) Lecalleh Happesha, to finish, or put a stop to the 
transgression. 

(2) Ulhathem [Hhattaoth, and to make an end of, or 
put away, sins. 

(3) Ulcapper Avon, and to cover over iniquity, or 
condone it by reconciliation. 

(4) Ulhabi? Tsedck Olamim, and to cause everlasting 
righteousness to come. 

(5) Velahhtom Hazon ve-Nabi, to seal, close up, or 
verify, vision and prophet. 

(6) Velimshoach Qodesh Qedashim, to anoint, or conse- 
crate, a holy of holies.” 

Such is the opening announcement of the Davar, the 
word, that “ went forth” from God in the ears of holy 
angels above, while Daniel was praying, v. 23, and 
which Gabriel flew swiftly to tell him. In the vision of 
Nebuchadnezzar, he had learned how Babylon, Persia, 
Greece, and Rome must fall before Israel’s final glory 
should come, with Messiah’s appearing in the clouds of 
heaven. Inthe vision of the four beasts, he had learned 
how the Little Horn from the fourth empire must first 
appear and bedestroyed. Inthe vision of the Ram and 
He-Goat, he had learned how the sore distress of Mac- 
cabean times must first supervene. And now, he is in- 
formed that Messiah will come prior to the time of 


110 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


coming in His glory; come at the deginning of the 
fourth empire after 69 appointed Sevens have passed 
away, as well as at the exd of the fourth empire after 
the 7oth Seven is completed; and that then, when the 
70 Sevens are exhausted, the Wexad of blessing in v. 24, 
will be realized in Israel as a nation, and in their City 
and Temple, even as at the close of the 69th Seven, the 
meritorious ground of the whole redemption shouid 
be laid in the work of Messiah at His first appearing. 
Thus the whole future is grasped in one conception, and 
covered by this one prophecy. And now, the Angel 
calls on Daniel to apply his mind to the revelation 
given, and to discriminate. ‘Let him that readeth un- 
derstand!” 

Verse 25. ‘Know therefore and discriminate; from 
the going forth of a word to restore and build 
jerusalem, wzto Prince Messiah (shall be) Sevens Seven; 
and (shall be) Sevens Sixty and Two ; she shall be re- 
stored and built, (as to) broadplace and rampart, and 
in distress (shall be) the times.” 

Verse 26. ‘‘ And, @fter those Sevens Sixty and 
Two, shall Messiah be violently rooted out, and (there 
shall be) nothing for Him; and the city and the sanc- 
tuary shall the people of a prince, the one that is to 
come, destroy; and his end (shall be) in the overflow- 
ing ; and uxzo that end (shall be) war, a decreed (meas- 
ure or limit) of desolations.’’* 


* It may be objected that the disjunctive Hebrew accents, separating 
“decreed” from desolations” forbids this construction. I follow, however, 
Hengstenberg, Havernick, Lengerke, Maurer, Gesenius, Wieseler, Hitzig, 
Auberlen, rather than the R. V. which renders the words as subject and 
predicate; ‘* desolations are decreed ;” The two clauses stand in apposition, 
‘‘Unto that end shall be war; decreed (measure or limit) of desolations.” So 
it may be objected that the cozjunctive accents, binding ‘‘end” and ‘war” 
together, require the rendering ‘‘Untothe end of the war shall be a decree of 
desolations,”” as Rosenmiiller, and Ewald think. But the binding requires 
only the copula, ‘‘shall be;” ‘‘Unto that end shall be war.” The article is 
wanting to the word ‘‘war’” which, moreover, is not in the genitive, 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. acy} 


Verse 27. “ And he shall make strong (cause to pre- 
vail) a covenant, to the many, One Seven ; and he shall 
cause Sacrifice and Offering to cease, Half of that 
Seven ; and, upon wing of abominations (he shall 
come) a Desolator, even until the Consummation, and 
until that which is decreed is poured upon the one 
desolating.” 

Such is the literal rendering and force of this im- 
portant prophecy. And what we have here is 

1. Seventy Weeks, or 490 vears are delimited, or 
measured off from the course of time, for the purpose 
of accomplishing the six things enumerated in the 
FHlexad of verse 24, viz., the termination of Israel’s 
national apostasy, the hindering of the outburst again 
of Israel’s sins, the covering over of Israel’s iniquity, 
the introduction of abiding righteousness, the verifi- 


cation of what vision and prophet have foretold con- 


cerning Israel, and the consecration, in Israel, of a new 


* Verse 24, Seventy Sevens=Shabuim Shibim. The infinitives, with the 
preposition ‘‘to, ” have a Gerundive force, i. e. for the purpose cf stopping ; 
for the purpose of ending ; for the purpose of covering over. The 70 Sevens 
all contribute to that End and Outcome in Israel’s history. Beautifully, 
Cocceius renders these infinitives, by ‘‘@d coercendum, ad consummandune 
ad expiadum, ad adducendum, ad obsignandum, ad ungendum. Verse 25, 
Going forth of a Word=Motse Davai. Seven Sevens==Shabuim Shibim, 
Sevens Sixty and Two=Shabuzm Shishshim Ushnayim. Prince Messiah 
=Masiach Nagid. Verse 26, Nothing for Him—Azz Lo. A Prince, the 
one that is to come—Nagid Habba. Verse 27. The Many=//arabbim ; 
the definite article is in the long pointing under the first Hebrew letter. A 
Covenant e7th. Make strong—//igbir. One Seven=Shabua’ Echad. 
Sacrifice and Offering—=Zebach and Mincha. Half of that Seven /hatse 
Flashshabua. On Wing of Abominations=A/l Kenaph Shikkutsim. A 
Desolator—=/eshomen. Consummation=Ca/ah, i. e. completion at the end 
of the Week. The one desolating—=Shomem. 

The ‘ Prince Messiah” v. 25 is not the ‘‘ prince the one that is to come’ 
v. 26. The ‘‘ prince the one that is to come’ is not Titus, but the last 
Antichrist, ‘‘ His end ” —ezts—is Antichrist’s end, The subject of the 
verb ‘‘make strong,” v. 27, is not Prince Messiah, but the Nagid or prince 
tocome. It is he who makes the covenant. The ‘‘many” mean the masses 
of the Jewish people. The ‘‘overflowing”’ alludes to the tide of judgment. 
The ‘‘poured upon” is pointed to by the vials in John’s Apocalypse of which 
the verse, Dan. ix:27, is the outline and frame, from Rev..chapter iv-20. 


5 


112 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Sanctuary, no Veil existing, the entire structure being a 
“holy of holies.” To this end and outcome, the 
“Seventy Weeks” are appointed or decreed. The 
Hexad of blessing is the rich fruit, the ripe result, or 
issue of the whole period. Israel, as a nation, and a 
people, in their collective unity, will never more 
become apostate, but, renewed by the Spirit, and 
pardoned of their guilt, be arighteous nation, and mon- 
ument of the truth of prophecy, and shall worship God 
in their own land, and ina sanctuary where God will 
dwell among them forever. This is the final goal or 
ultimate ¢erminus ad quem of the 7o Weeks, viz., 
Israel’s final restoration and complete national redemp- 
tion. This did not occur at the First Advent. 

2. Seven Weeks, or 49 years, the close of which was a 
Sabbatism, and in the history of the period of the Res- 
toration, was made illustrious by the completed work 
of Ezra and Nehemiah. The reader of the Revised 
Version will see acolon placed after the words “ Seven 
Weeks” (:) representing the Masoretic punctuation of 
the text, and used now in the interest of an interpre- 
tation which refers “ Prince Messiah’’ not to Christ, but 
to some other person, “an anointed one,” Onias IL, 
the high priest, or some other one, “cut off ” mothe 
days of Antiochus Epiphanes, a century and a half be- 
fore Christ. The Masorites, who pointed the texm 
simply followed the Maccabean commentators and edi- 
tors of the book of Daniel, who misapplied the 7oth 
of the 70 Weeks of Daniel, to the times of the Macca- 
bean persecution under the Greek, or ¢kzrd prophetic 
empire,—whereas the prophecy refers to the closing 
times of the final form, yet future, of the Roman, or 
fourth prophetic empire,—and sought to teach that, 
“from the going forth of a word to restore and build 


| 
q 
| 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. LS 


Jerusalem unto an anointed one, shall be 7 Weeks;” 
but not “7 Weeks and 62 Weeks.’* That the Angel 
had a reason for dividing the 69 Weeks into 7 plus 62 
there can be no doubt, and as little doubt is there that 
the 7 Weeks cover the period of the Restoration not 
from the first year of Darius the Mede, but from the 
decree of Cyrus two years later, to the Completion 
of the Restoration under Nehemiah. While, therefore, 
we note the memorable period of the Restoration.and 
mark its Sabbatic close, according to the “law of the 


*The Masoretic accents (of which the Angel was totally ignorant, 
giving the sense of the passage with accents of his own votce, pausing where 
he pleased) are used not only as signs of interpunction, but often as a Rab- 
bainic commentary on the text. We are not bound by them in any case, and 
should scrutinize them carefully, especially in Messianic prophecies. Of 
great value, yet they are xo part of the sacred text, It is possible also that 
we may not know fully the reasons of their location in important places, 
and may impute wrong motives to the Jewish editors of thetext. That they 
can be perverted is plain enough. We have a rIght to strip the text of all 
accents, and accent for ourselves, Pusey says the Jews put the Alhnach 
where it is, ‘‘dishonestly.” Hitzig says no man, who knows anything 
about Hebrew as a living language, could put it anywhere else than where 
the Masorites have placed it. Ewald, Bleek, Keil, Kiiper, Davidson, 
Kuenen, Orelli, Riehm, all say it is in the right place, and Briggs remarks 
that the vast body of scholars concur inthis. The question is, does Messiah 
come at the end of 7 Weeks or at the end of 62, or 6g Weeks. The truth is 
that it is not in the power of the A¢huach to settle that question, and it may 
not only be perfectly harmless where it is,—notwithstanding men pervert it, 
—but really serve a good purpose. Kiiper says it may be only a Rest- 
Point, —Aahepunkt,—and to draw attention tothe fact that two independent 
periods are named, but not to separate them in reckoning. Auberlen says it 
marks the fact that the two periods have distinct characteristics. Kuenen, 
Bleek, etc., say it means that the City was to be built during the whole 62 
Weeks, and that Messiah was not Christ but some one 150 years before 
Christ. Canon Cook, in Speakers’ Commentary, justifies the Athiach. 
King James’ Version, and others, reject it, as did Theodotion and the 
Vulgate, and as have the majority of Bible translators. The Septuagint 
itself is neutral, an important fact. Professor Green of Princeton, disputes 
the right of the Revisers to retain it. Prof. Briggs, contra. He would be 
a remarkable Messiah who should come at the end of 49 years, and then be 
* cut off’ at the end of 434 years more! That would make him older than 
Enoch, the 7thfrom Adam! It is certain that, if the Athnach is to be used 
for such purposes, neither Onias, nor Jesus, were the Messiah, and that he 
has not yet appeared, and probably never will! We have no objections to 
the Athnach. It serves an exegetical purpose, but not that of separating 
the 62 from the 7 in reckoning. The text might admit of one or two more ! 


8 


114 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Seven,” we are not to negate the conjunction which 
connects the 7 Weeks and 62 Weeks, whether with or 
without interval, making 69 Weeks, or 483 selected 
years,” from the going forth of the commandment to 
restore and build Jerusalem, unto Prince Messiah.” 

3. Sixty-Two Weeks. These weeks added 4o the 7 
Weeks are 49 years and 434 years, making 483 years of 
selected time ‘decreed upon the people and the City,” 
for the purpose of accomplishing the building of the 
Temple and the City. “Know and discriminate” that 
there are measured times “Sevens Seven,” and ‘Sevens 
Sixty and Two,” chose for the building of the Temple 
and the City, zkese for the building, fortifying, and 
completion of the City. ‘She shall be built, plaza and 
rampart, her broadstreet, her gates, her mural defenses. 
From the going forth of a word to restore, and to 
build Jerusalem,” these 69 Sevens are delimited, and at 
the close of the 69th, expect Messiah. The Angel does 
not say that the last of these two periods is immediately 
sequent on the first, or that there are only 483 years from 
Cyrus decree to Christ. There are times ol apream 
distress, and inaction, intervening. Sacred Sevens are 
however, “decreed upon the people and the city” for ac- 
complishment of God’s Work. As history shows the 
characteristic of the “Seven Weeks” to be the build- 
ing of the Temple and City,so it shows the charac- 
teristic of the “Sixty-Two Weeks” to be the building, 
fortifying and completion of the city, down to the 
time of Herod, who so grandly adorned both it and 
the Temple ; even “unto Prince Christ,” born under his 
rule. This Advent of Messiah is the nearer d¢ermznus 
ad quem, or end, in the prophecy; not the end of the 


70 Weeks, but of the 69 Weeks taken together; the 
end of the 62 Weeks. The end of the 70 Weeks, with ~ 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 115 


their included interval, is Israel’s final redemption from 
apostasy, and their national conversion, recovery and 
glory in the kingdom. 

The ad quem of the 69 Weeks is “ Prince Messiah” 
soon to be cut off, or rooted out. The first ad quem 
gives us the First Advent when Messiah comes in hu- 
mility, to suffer, die, and be thrust out. The second 
ad quem give us the Second Advent when Messiah 
comes in glory, to be accepted by ‘“ His own” who be- 
fore rejected Him. ‘The first is His Appearing; the 
second is His Re-Appearing. Two Advents are here. 
The Hexad of blessing in v. 24, is the ultimate ad quem, 
Israel’s glorious condition at the return of Messiah in 
the clouds of heaven, while 7 plus 62 Weeks give us 
mei yvearcr ad quem, viz., the First Coming of ‘Christ. 
Let our secular chronology be what it may, this is 
what the Angel says to Daniel, viz., that “70 Sevens” 
are appointed for the purpose of bringing Israel’s final 
redemption, and “69g Sevens” are appointed for the 
purpose of bringing Messiah’s first Appearing. 

Wael vencrucijivion of Christ. “ After’ the 69 Weeks 
—how soon after is not said,—shall Messiah be rooted 
out Dy violence, “cut off’ by judicial execution; ‘and 
there shall be nothing for Him!’* This is plainly the 
specification of a time for the death of the “ Servant of 
Jehovah” of whom Isaiah says in chapter lii:8: “He 


* Ve Ain Lo! wrongly translated in King James’ version ‘‘ but not 
_ for Himself.” The phrase denotes the absolute apostasy of the nation, and 
is best interpreted by, ‘‘ He came to (vs own, and His own received Lim 
not!” Even of [lis disciples it is said, *‘ All forsook Him and fled!” and 
‘“As for His generation, who cared that He was cut off out of the land 
of the living, though He had done no violence, nor was deceit found in His 
ieeiee se iatt.. xxvi-56; John i11.; Isa. liii:8, 9; Zech. xiii:7; Psalms 
xxii:t. While the death of Christ was a substitutionary sacrifice for the 
whole world, this expression /’e Azz Lo has no reference to that fact, but 
marks the: complete apostasy of the Jewish nation in the rejection of its 
King. “‘Wehave no King but Casas!” ‘* Not this man, but Barabbas !” 


116 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


was cut off out of the land of the living,” and for the 
“Shepherd” whom Zechariah represents as saying, 
“They shall look unto Me, whom they have pierced,” 
Zech. xii:io. Neither ‘“ Palm Sunday” nor “ Good Fre 
day” lie within the 69 Weeks. 

5. Lhe Second Destruction of rebuilt Jerusalem and the 
Second Temple. This isthe result of Israel’s consum- 
mated national apostasy. Israel’s great “transgression,” 
the apostasy which led to the crucifixion of Christ, and — 
caused the suspension of God's covenant with the na- 
tion; the breaking of ‘Beauty and Bands,” and the 
Destruction again, of the City and the Temple. What. 
the Angel informs Daniel is, that “ Messiah” will come 
while the Second Temple is standing, and the Second 
Temple shall be destroyed because ‘‘ Messiah” has been 
“cut off.” After He comes’ He is cut-off. Affe ie 
cut off, City and Temple are destroyed a second time. 

6. Interval, or the Continuance of the Judgment on both 
City and Temple, and on the Natwon, down toa specified 
time. Asthe crime of Jerusalem transcended that of 
all other cities, so must the continuance of her judg- 
ment. “Unto the End shall be War; a decreed meas-_— 
ure of desolations.” Though rebuilt and restored, with 
broad street and rampart, Jerusalem shall be besieged 
and destroyed, and judgment shall linger upon her, in 
the form of ‘“ War and Desolations,” down to the End 
ol the 7oth Week. Seventy Weeks are measured off; 
Seven and Sixty-two pass away ; Messiah comes, and is 
cut off; Jerusalem and Temple are destroyed; and 
down to the End of the whole decreed time of judg- 
ment, war and desolations, involving a second Dispers- 
ion of the people, are the dark future for unbelieving 
Israel. Yet not forever. There is a “decreed meass 
ure” of national punishment. It is the “ times of the 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 17 


Gentiles,” and this /zterval between the 69th and 7oth 
Weeks, during which the national covenant is sus- 
pended, and Jerusalem lies prostrate under Gentile 
feet, and Israel is nationally cast away, is opened out by 
Messiah Himself, when interpreting this prophecy of 
the 70 Weeks, and resuming and enlarging it. “ Jeru- 
salem shall be trodden down by the Gentiles uz the 
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled,” z.¢.: “ Unto the End.” 
muke xxi:24; Dan. ix:26. Then it will be redeemed. 

7. A prince, the one that is to come. Thisis not “Prince 
Messiah” of v. 25, already come, cut off, thrust out 
from the land,and nothing for Him. That one was the 
Anointed Nagid. But this one, yet to come, is the Un- 
anomtcd Nagid, one spoken of as already known to 
Daniel, “zke coming one,” “ze future one,” in short, 
the Little Horn,’ Dan. vii:8-28, here called “ Nagid 
Hlabba,’ the prince that shall come, and “ Meshomem,” 
the Desolator, and “ Shomem,” one desolating, v. 27. 
It is here that the Anti-Messiah, the Antichrist,is found; 
one standing over against Messiah; one who, like Mes- 
fran, has a “ Coming ;” and who, like Messiah, is a 
“Prince,” and like Messiah, makes a ‘“ Covenant,” and 
with “Israel,” too. 

8. The Seventieth Seven, or One Week. This 7oth 
Week closes the long /nterval that follows the rejection 
of Messiah and destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, A. 
D. 70, and is divided intotwo equal periods of 3% years 
or 1,260 days, and is the mother-seat and source of the 
same numbers found in John’s Apocalypse ; this final 
week being John’s twice 3% years, or twice 1,260 days; 
the “One Seven” of Dan. ix:27, which reappears in 

John’s Apocalypse, and is covered by the Seals, Trump- 
ets, and Vials, opened, sounded and poured, during 
this “ Day of the Lord; in short, an Epitome of the 


118 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Rise, Reign, and Ruin, of the last Gentile ruler, the 
last Antichrist, who perishes beneath the outpoured 
vials of divine wrath. This doom is administered by 
Messiah Himself in person, who appears as the Amen, 
the Faithful and True, to smite the Mock-Messiah of 
the End-Time. It is of this “ Nagid” Isaiah speaks, 
calling him “that Wicked,” Isa. xi:4, and again ‘the 
Enemy coming in,” or invading Palestine, “like a flood” 
lix:19, and of whom Paul speaks in II Thess. 11:8, as 
destroyed by the judicial breath of Christ’s mouth, 
when Israel’s “Redeemer comes to Zion,’ and “ All 
Israel,” for whom Daniel supplicated, and on whom 
the 70 Weeks were determined, “is saved.”” Rom. x1:25. 
At the opening of the “One Week” this Nagid enacts 
a covenant with the Jewish masses, and, by his power, 
makes it prevail during the whole week, yet only for 
a week, z.¢., seven years. At the middle of the Week 
he attains the summit of his power, abolishes the Jewish 
worship and substitutes a worship of himself. During 
the second half of the Week, or final 3% years, or 
1,200 days, he swoops like a vulture, desolating in his 
rage mightier than an Alexander, Antiochus or Napo- 
leon, and continues “even unto the consummation,” 
which marks the exhaustion of the desolation decreed 
on Israel and Jerusalem, and is the end of the measure 
and the time appointed ; the end of the 70 Weeks. Then, 
the Antichrist perishes in the flood-tide of divine indig- 
nation which breaks, like a stream of fire, upon him, 
overwhelmed more fearfully than Pharaoh in the sea. 
9. The Glorious Outcome for Israel. This is the 
Hexad of blessings already referred to in v. 24, due at 
the close of the 70 Weeks; the arrest of ¢he transgres- 
sion or apostasy ; the shutting of sins; the pardon of in- 
iquity; the introduction of enduring righteousness ; 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 119 


the confirmation of the prophet’s word, and the conse- 
cration of a new sanctuary to God. God and Israel as 
a nation, arereconciled. Theapostates have perished. 
New-born Israel serves God in newness of the spirit, 
and not in oldness of the letter. All is concrete, lit- 
eral, exact, real; the 70 Wecks, the 7 Weeks, the Res- 
toration, the 62 Weeks, the Advent, the Crucifixion, 
the Destruction and Dispersion, the Interval; or Unto, 
the 7oth or One Week, the Antichrist, the Covenant, 
the Half of the Week, the Great Tribulation, the 
End of Antichrist, the Consummation, all is literal. 
Two Advents are here in this wonderful “ Word that 
went forth,” while Daniel was supplicating, and which 
Gabriel fled swiftly to tell, and as Gabriel has stood up 
at the one he shall stand up at the other! Two Dis- 
pensations are here. Two Ends are here. Christ and 
Antichrist are here. The Times of the Gentiles are 
here. The Day of the Lord is here. Two Judgments 
are here. Israel cast away, and Israel restored, are 
here. It is the acorn from which comes the whole tree, 
the sketch in which is subsequently filled out the whole 
picture. It is the outlined programme of the far End- 
Time and the pathway to it, for “ All Israel,” Dan. ix:7, 
11,and End-Time bringing a Hexad of blessing, in a 
Jubilee of Jubilees, a Sabbath Rest, and reversion of 
the lost inheritance. It is the time of Israel’s national 
resurrection. Nor could the clock of destiny strike an 
hour more opportune, or appropriate, than this, for 
ransomed Israel’s return from earbored servitude to 
Gentile Nagids, the repossession of their land, forgive- 
ness of their debts, and remission of their sins. 

Of this all-comprehensive, complex, and age-travel- 
ing prophecy, much has been fulfilled already: The 
Return from Exile, the Restoration, the Distress of 


“ 
* “tee 
a 


120 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


Times, the Advent of Messiah, the Crucifixion, the 
Destruction of Jerusalem, War and Desolations, and 
nearly 1900 years of the Interval between the 69th and 
70th Weeks. Roman, Saracen,and Turk, have trodden 
Jerusalem under foot, nor could the valor of Crusaders, 
nor diplomacy, nor sword, redeem it to a “ Holy City” 
before the appointed time! A consecrated ‘ Zemple” 
made it so before. A consecrated ‘“ 7emple” shall make 
it so again. Much yet of this prophecy remains to be 
fulfilled. It is as certain that Israel never yet has real. 
ized the glorious outcome predicted by the Angel, asit 
is that to Israel, nationally, the Sixfold Blessings of 
verse 24th refer. There isa deep genetic and organic 
nexus between the work of Christ at His first Advent, 
and the true relation of that work to Israel, as a nation, 
at His second Advent, which accounts for the peculiar 
atonement-term (Caphar) used in verse 24th, and be 
cause of which interpreters have been wont to care- + — 
lessly refer it to the first Advent, alone. Certainly, 
Messiah did atone for sin, and bring in everlasting 
righteousness, in his own person, and prophecy was 
verihed, and the “Church” was consecrated as a sfzr- 
ztual temple, with an election out of Israel, asa New- 
Born people, unto Ged. But, as certainly, this mighty 
work did not exhaust the prophecy. Not once, in all 
the New Testament, does either Christ, or do His 
Apostles, quote or refer to this verse as fulfilled in His 
Crucifixion, a point Kuenen and Graf, with many more, 
have made the most of, but vainly against the Messianic 
interpretation. The Gerundive force of the Hebrew in- 
finitives points toa continuance of events, both of judg- 
ment and of mercy, dureng, and at the close of, the 70 
Sevens. Not only the events of the Restoration from 
Exile, Maccabean times, the first Advent, and the Cru- 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. S12t 


cifixion, but also Pentecost, the establishment of the 
Church, the rejection of Israel nationally, Missions to 
the Gentiles, Apostasy in the bosom of Christendom 
itself, and the whole development of the long Interval 
into modern culture and civilization, both infidel and 
Christian, a// are covered by the ‘“ Seventy Sevens,” 
decreed upon Daniel’s down-trodden people and their 
desolated city, for the purpose of bringing iu Israel's 
final redemption, yet future, and not far away. And not 
less are the events of the 7oth Week ordained to the 
same End, and must transpirc before Israel’s Sabbatic 
Jubilee can come. The entire “ Times of the Gentiles,”’ 
in which are the “ Seventy Sevens,” with the Interval, 
must belong to the past, the Gospel have gone to all 
Nations, the fulness of the Gentiles be come in, and 
Judgment sit, before the Kingdom can be restored to 
Israel. Then ‘“¢he transgression” of Israel will be 
stopped, and Israel’s sins ended, and iniquity pardoned, 
and a people, all righteous, be created, and the vision 
and prophet be verified, and a new sanctuary exist in 
which God will dwell forevermore. Jerusalem shail 
once more, become. the “Holy Czty,” Israel. a ‘holy 
people,’ and both the center of a new and blessed age. 
All the prophets declare it. Christ taught it in his 
Olivet discourse concerning the End, looking through 
Jerusalem’s destruction and Israel’s dispersion, forward 
to Jerusalem’s recovery and Israel’s redemption, at His 
Second Coming. The Apostles repeat it, in various 
ways. John has portrayed it in glowing symbols. 
What a study is the study of these 70 Weeks, the 
study of Israel under four world empires, the study oi 
the civilized world’s course, first of all, for six centuries 
before the coming of Christ, if we add the years of 
the Babylonian Exile. Of this earlier portion of the 


tba 4 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“ Times of the Gentiles, ”’ /svae/ was 70 years under the 
Chaldean power, from Nebuchadnezzar to Cyrus B.C, 
606 to 536, according to our conventional chronology, 
the Times of the Golden Head of the Great Colossus 
in its relations to the “ holy people” the times of the 
Lion or Chaldean ascendancy, the center of civilization 
and culture at Babylon the center of the world’s his- 
tory. Then under the Persians, 200 years more, from 
Cyrus to Alexander, B. C. 536 to 336, the times of the 
Silver Breast, the times of the Bear, the timesmams 
Zoroaster and the Fire-Worshipers, the center of the 
world’s history and civilization at Shushan where 
Xerxes the Great, Mordecai, Esther, Vashti, and Ha- 
man, were; the times of Marathon and Salamis. Next 
273 years more, from Alexander to Pompey, B. C. 336° 
to 63, the date of Pompey’s conquest of Judea, the 
times of the Brass Thighs, the times of the Leopard, 
the times of Socrates and Plato, of the attempt to force 
Javanic culture upon the Jews, of the period of Mac- 
abean valor, of the wars of the Seleucids and Ptolemies, 
of the Syrian Antichrist, Antiochus, the times of 
Athens, “the eye of Greece” the center of the world’s 
philosophy, science, and art, the times of Alexandria 
and the Septuagint Version, on down to the days of 
Caesar and Brutus, Scipio, Antony, and Cleopatra. 
Then, finally, 63 years more, from Pompey to Christ, 
the times of the dying gasp of the Roman Republic, 
when only the “dregs of Romulus” lived, presaging 
the coming Empire hard as iron and wild as a raven- 
ing beast; Imperial Rome, enriching the land and 
staining the sea with human gore; the initial times of 
the Iron Legs and rise of the monster, exceeding 
dreadful, iron-toothed, brazen-clawed, devouring, break- 
ing in pieces, stamping; the later days of the Asmo- 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 123 


neans and Herodians, the times of Augustus, Tiberius, 
and of Herod the Great when “ Prince Messiah” was 
born; Rome Pagan the center now of the World’s 
civilization, and mistress of all the nations. Across this 
whole period of 69 Weeks of Years, with their attendant 
“Times of Distress,” all ruled in their course, by the 
“law of the Seven,” for Israel’s sake, the Angel’s eye 
swept, and the prophet’s glance was directed; Israel 
still subject to Gentile supremacy, their necks under 
. the Gentile yoke, their City trodden by Gentile feet; a 
Simeon and Anna, a Zacharias and Elizabeth, a Joseph 
and Mary, sighing and waiting for Israel’s Consolation. 

But more. The vision of the 70 Weeks covers a 
wider and farther scope. The Angel’s glance goes to 
the “ End” of the painful road decreed to the tribes of 
the wandering foot, and weary breast. The gigantic 
empires of the Orient, robed in barbaric wealth, have 
folded their mantles and muffled their weird faces and 
flitted away. The classic ages of Greek and Roman 
story have faded from view. “ Prince Messiah” has 
come and been “cut off” by His own. Gethsemane 
and Golgotha bring to Israel, crowned with guilt, no 
national deliverance from Gentile power. A suspended 
national covenant abandons the Jew to behold his City 
fazed to the ground a second time, his “ Temple” a 
second time consumed, and Judah a second time, with 
slaughter and chains, scattered, not only throughout 
the Roman world, but ‘among all nations.” The 
search, of Titus” still stands, to tell the judgment. 

The long Interval following that event,—the Roman 
“Times of the Gentiles,” has already fulfilled more 
than 18 centuries of its appointment. Since Nebuchad- 
nezzar saw in his dream, the “ Great Image” of Gen- 
tile Power, and “a night vision revealed the secret to 


oar 


124 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


talon 


Daniel,” 2429 years have winged their flight, and Israel 
still abides, alone, and uncommiungled, subject still to 
the foreign yoke, their land still trodden down by the 
Gentiles. These are days of the Iron Legs and Ironand 
Clay Feet and Toes; the days of the Beast with Ten 
Horns; the days when, no longer, a single City is the 
center of the world’s civilization, culture, and religion, 
but when each division of the parted Roman Earth has 
its own ‘“ Capitol” of light and power, and “ Centers” 
of guilt and glory. These are the days of Israel under 
the hand of Rome pagan, Rome papal, Rome divided 
into Eastern and Western empires, Rome sundered 
again into a European States-System, Romano-Ger- 
manic forms of rule prevailing, and yet powerless to 
bring peace to the world; the days when the proud 
Colossus itself begins to dream of a Mountain Stone 
that may strike its toes, the days when Israel’s Dry 
Bones in the Valley of Vision begin to move, the days 
when anxious nations forebode some crisis near, some 
great catastrophe, from which a new Center of World 
Unity shall lift its head, and Jerusalem the “ Holy 
City,” once more attract the eyes of mankind. Then 
will enter the final zoth Week, when, through “ Great 
Tribulation,” the “ End” of Israel’s long way will be 
reached, at last, and Gentile Power go down, and 
Israel’s kingdom rise, the Hexad be fulfilled, and 
“ Seventy Sevens ” attain their full accomplishment. 
And now, it might be deemed almost superflous to 
ask, do these prophetic numbers, in Daniel, the 70, the 
7, the 62, the 1, the %, import only abstract ideas, and 
not literal concrete measures of historic time? Because 
they are symbolic, and represent ideas, are they, there- 
fore, merely schematic, and void of chronological 
value? They certainly “count.”” They span the 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 125 


“Times of the Gentiles.”. A word to restore and 
build Jerusalem certainly did go forth, and as certainly 
69 of these- Year-Weeks, and the Interval “ Unto” 
in large proportion, have passed away. The Times of 
the Gentiles, z. ¢., of the Colossus and the Four Beasts, 
are mathematically equal, being demonstrably com- 
mensurate. The Sabbatic law governs their whole 
course, and gives them their dimension and their limit. 

The “‘ Seventy Sevens” underlie the whole develop- 
ment of history and prophecy, since the Angel's word 
to Daniel, and determine not only the fortunes of Israel, 
but the fortunes of the Nations, and of the World. By 
these “ Seventy Sevens” alone, the “ Times of the Gen- 
tiles’’ are measured. Israelis the core of all history, 
as Christ is the center of All Israel, and the events of 
history are only those reverberating after-claps boom- 
ing through the fields of space, of which God’s pur- 
pose is the casual fore-stroke; or better, it is one vital 
organic process, or becoming, in which prophecy ful- 
fils itself by stages, so that even in the sphere of human 
freedom, a divine causality pervades and shapes the 
mighty movement, from its first emergence to its final 
consummation. And measured time, and measured 
space, a true chronology, a true geography, the two eyes 
of history, are seen everywhere. The 70 Weeks of 
Years, not less than the four-empired Colossus, teach us 
this. All point tothe End. Nebuchadnezzar and Cyrus; 
Alexander and Antiochus; Pompey and Caesar; Herod 
and Titus; Constantine, the Othos, and Charlemagne; 
Kaiser, Czar, Sultan and Shah; Cabinets, Parliaments, 
and Congresses, are but the servants of God, under 
His immediate control, ministers of his court com- 
missioned to assert His counsel, though free from 
all intention of their own to execute His will, and 


126 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


fulfil the mystery of the “Seventy Sevens.” Factors 
they were, as others are, unconscious of God’s mind, 
yet none the less instrumental to promote it, a “ Chan- 
cellar Rehum ” and “ Governor Tattenai” obstructing, 
a favoring Darius and Ahasuerus, an Alaric and 
Attila, an Omar and Saladin, a Charles Martel and@ 
Napoleon, a Moltke anda Grand Duke Michael, all co- 
operating, with their Talleyrands and Chathams, their 
Bismarcks and D’Israelis, their Gortschakoffs and Ca- 
vours, to achieve the one great end to which all prohp- 
ecy 18 looking, and to which all history is tending, 
viz., the establishment of the Kingdom of Christ in 
glory on the earth. Zzey mean it not so, but God 
means it so, and it shall be so, because “‘ Seventy Sevens” 
are «lecreed on Daniel’s people and his holy city. 
That is the reason of it, and of scimetars, javelins, the 
1oth Legion, Krupp guns, iron-clads and dynamite. 

All Western politics stand in relation to that pur- 
pose of God,—Rome and all her daughters. The 
whole ‘ Eastern Question ”’ is a part of the mystery,— 
Constantinople, Syria, Palestine, Jerusalem, the Keys 
of the East, and Gates of the World. The courses 
history is no bewildering maze of shifting scenes and 
transient actors, all confused and unaccountable. It is 
governed by a rule, and marches to a destined end. 
Under that rule, Babylon succumbs to Persia, Persia 
to Greece, Greece to Rome, and Rome parted into ten 
Kingdoms, awaits the final Antichrist, her own de- 
struction, and Israel’s jubilee. Gothic devastations, 
Saxon invasions, Norman conquest, Feudal anarchy, 
Modern Independence, Reformation, Revolution, Dis- 
covery, Navigation, Commerce, Trade, Culture, Infi- 
delity, Apostasy, Lawlessness, and Missions, the home- 
less Jew scattered everywhere, “known by the show 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 124 


of his countenance,” “alone,” “abiding for Jehovah, ” 
the whole course of history with its myriads of events, 
gis decreed, marked off, and. measured, by the 
measurements of God in reference to Daniel’s people, 
city, and temple. Under sucha view, it is impossible 
to regard the prophetic numbers which shape the 
Times and the Seasons, the Ages and the Ends, them- 
selves shaped by the ordered motions of the plan- 
ets, God’s great chronometers, as mere zdeal symbols 
of abstract spiritual truths. No difficulties of chro- 
nology will justify a judgment so repugnant to the 
teachings of God’s word. Least of all, will it avail 
in a prediction which is part of a plexus or con- 
nected whole, an organic scheme whose burden is 
the present and future fortunes of a special people, 
“elect forever,” whose times are measured by a 
Sabbath law, and whose goal is crowned with a 
mighty Sabbath Jubilee. Seven times Seven are 
Forty-Nine, and Ten times Seven are Seventy, as truly 
as Seven and Yen are symbols of ideas in the devel- 
opment of the Kingdom of God. 


B—-THE SIXTY-NINE WEEKS. 


But further still, and of vast importance in our war- 
fare with the unbelieving Israelite, and the unbelieving 
believers of modern times, is the fact that our demon- 
stration of the JZesstahship of Fesus of Nazareth depends, 
chronologically, upon the literality of the 70 Weeks of 
Daniel. Otherwise Paul’s argument as to “the fulness 
of the time’”’ when God sent forth His Son, and Matthew’s 
assertion that, “from the carrying away into Babylon, 
unto ¢ke Messiah, are fourteen generations,” and other 
like passages of Scripture, must be surrendered. It is 
a serious matter to say that every attempt to calculate 


128 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


nent 


the 70 Weeks has ended only in “ ignominious failure.” 
Whatever ignominy attends the effort to bind the 70 
Weeks together, in unbroken sequence, and so anni- 
hilate the Intervals between them, there has been zo 
failure in determining the distance from Daniel to the 
First Advent, to such extent as to make the demon- 
stration of the Messiahship of Jesus of Nazareth, a final 
and invulnerable one. Not less important is the literal 
view for Israel’s conversion in days to come. The 
great events that shape the world’s destiny, at both Ad- 


vents, are involved here. The 70 Weeks relate to both ~ 


these Advents, and the Interval between them ; to Israel 
and the Nations; to Christ and Antichrist. They have 
a starting-point or /erminus a quo, and a closing-point or 
terminus ad quem, in history. The starting-point is from 
the “ Motse Davar,” or “ going forth of acommand,” to 
“restore and build Jerusalem,” Dan. 1x:25 ; let that com. 
mand be a word from God, or a Persian edict. In their, 
subdivisions, 7 of the 70 Weeks: reach to some epoch 
unnamed in the prophecy, while 62 more, added to 
the’ 7, reach ‘“anéo Messiah the -Prince, “7 ¢itomiae 
First Advent, when Messiah is cut off, followed 
by Israel’s excision as a nation. Over-glancing the 
great Interval, we touch the 7oth Week, which ends 
with Israel’s complete redemption, as specified in Dan. 
ix:24. Thus, the end of the 69th week brings us to 
the First Advent and Israel’s “ Fal/,” while the end of 
the 7oth week brings us to the Second Advent and Is- 
rael’s “ Ristug again,” or “ Reception,” as‘ Life from the 
dead.” So Paul understood it, Rom. xi:12, 15, 25, 26; 
and Peter, Acts 111:19-21; and Christ, Luke xxi:24) 2a 
and John, Rev. xii;10; xv:2-4. In Daniel, the 7oth 


Week shows Antichrist’s overthrow, Dan. 1x:27. In — 
Luke it shows Israel’s Redemption, Luke xxi:28. Both — 


concur. 


— 


cs 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 129 


While we hold to the literal character of the num- 
bers in Daniel, we are not to be understood as meaning 
that, in the present state of chronological science, any 
one has yet appeared who has been able continuously to 
suit the prophetic numbers as to the distance between 
Daniel and Christ with our received Chronology; 2. e. 
accepting B. C. 536 as the date of the Edict of Cyrus, 
or “going forth of a Word to restore and build Jeru- 
salem,” the starting point, ora quo of the 70 Weeks. No 
one has yet been found skillful enough to make 536 
equal 490. This, however, is far from admitting that 
the numbers in Daniel are merely symbolic. All com- 
putations have proceeded on three assumptions, none 
of which have been proved; the first that B. C. 536 is 
-an infallible date, the second that no interval exists be- 
tween any of the sevens, and the third that all the Weeks 
must be counted successively; to which a fourth may be 
added, viz.: That the ad guem like the a quo, may lawfully 
be made a sliding point, a varied date to suit a varied 
computation. God’s chronology may be, and assuredly 
is, undoubtedly exact and literal, a perfection to which 
the calamity of ours is still a stranger. Nor are the 
events of ancient history, or regal lines of ancient suc- 
cession, in a much better condition. The conclusion of 
some that, because our own erroneous chronology fails, 
it must be the same with God's, is hardly according 
either to Whately or Hamilton. In spite of our failures 
the 70 Weeks of Daniel will remain literal to time’s 
end, as the 7oth will prove, and as the.69 have already 
proved, no matter what fate attends our conventional 
manipulations. It has been the custom to defend the 
literality of the 70 Weeks by allowing a large margin 
for the a guo, a margin extending even to go years, the 
Motse Davar, or issuing of the Edict to “restore Jeru- 


9 


130 SUPPLEMENTARY. DISCUSSIONS. a 


salem,” being distinguished from another edict, though 
part of it, to “ build the Temple.” On this ground, ~ 
supported by the thought that the participle “ gomumg” 
might mean a process of utterances, or continuous 
series of different Edicts for different ends, one to 
‘restore the people and build the House of the Lord,” 
another to ‘build the city,’’ and another to complete 
the fortifications, or defences, and finish the City, the 
beginning of the 69 Wecks, or 70 Weeks,—which is the 
same thing,—has been fixed, now at the Decree of Cy- 
rus, now at that of Darius Hystaspes, now at the Order 
of 7th Artaxerxes, and now at the Grant and Letters of 
20th Artaxerxes, Longimanus. Similarly, the ad guem or 
end of the 70 Weeks, or 69 Weeks, has been placed, 
now at the Advent, now at the Baptism, now at the 
Triumphal Entry, and now at the Death of Christ. In 
the first series we have a margin of over go years; in 
the last, a margin of 33% years, or 37. And yet the 
two termini of the 69 Weeks are as fixed as the “hills 
of Olam,”’—one the Return of the Jews from Baby- 
lonian Exile, the other the appearance of Messiah. The 
Edict of Cyrus cannot be evaded. By divine appoint- 
ment, Koresh, Cyrus II, the son of Cambyses, “Cyrus 
the Great,” “Cyrus the Mule,” was God's “Shepaam 
herd ’’ to whose mouth the order was committed to re- 

store Israel and build both the Temple and the City. 

‘“‘ Jerusalem shall be inhabited ; the Cities of Judah shall 

be built. Cyrus is my Shepherd, and shall perform all | 
my pleasure, SAYING of Jerusalem, She shall be built ; 

and, to Zion, Thy foundation shall be laid!’ Isa. xlix: 

26-28. Nothing is plainer than that. The Edict of 

Cyrus,—whenever it was—was the “ Motse Davar to 

restore and build Jerusalem,” the immovable @ guo of 

the 70 Weeks. The distinction, therefore, which as- 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. Tak 


serts that the Edict of Cyrus related alone to the build- 
ing of the Zemple, but not of the Czty, is untenable as it 
is superficial, and fails to justify a slide of the @ quo 
from B. C. 536,—or whatever the true date may be,— 
to any point historically nearer the Advent. Whatever 
subsequent republication, or further enforcement, of 
that Edict there may have been by any of the Persian 
princes, the starting point of the 70 Weeks is, by God’s 
authority, fixed at the Order of Cyrus. That much, at 
least, is literal. 

And as to the ad quem of the 69 Weeks, or “Unto 
Prince Messiah,’ itis no less so. It has been the habit 
of uncounted critics and commentators to imagine 
that the words “Unto” and “d/cssiah,” are alike vague, 
indefinite, and obscure,—if not “ symbolical,’—the 
one as a point, the other as a person; and the slide has 
been used correspondingly, different interpreters to- 
bogganing from Cyrus himself to Onias, or Seleucus, 
and thence to Christ at his First Coming, stopping not 
short, however, of Christ at His Second Appearing, in 
order to learn what ‘“A/esstah” means; and, as to the “ Un- 
to,’ sliding precisely the same distance, and with the 
same result of agnostic dubiety; winding up their orien- 
tation by rendering the words, in Daniel, “Many shall 
run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased,” by 
“Many shall rush up and down and be confused, and 
not understand !”’* 


* The R. V. retains, without any marginal reading, the rendering in 
King James’ translation, ‘‘run to and fro.”” Long ago, Cocceius more cor- 
rectly rendered the verse, A/ulti scrutabuntur, et major fel cognitio: Many 
shall closely investigate, and greater will become the knowledge, z. ¢. of this 
book. Dan. xii:4. Badly Michaelis: ‘‘ Many shall wander in error, but 
yet knowledge shall increase.” Better Hitzig and Ebrard: ‘‘Many shall 
zealously peruse,’”’ etc. Hzevernick: ‘‘Many shall strive after the knowledge 
of this prophecy, and so shall it be increased.” Lengerke: ‘‘ Many shall 
wander in the darkness of this prophecy, and so, shall knowledge come to 


- -~ a ss ~ pa 
- 


132 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


The divine word, however, fixes the ad quem or — 
close of the 69 Weeks, as infallibly as it does the 
a quo, regardless of our protean-figured and many- 
faced chronology. “From the going forth of a word 
to restore and build Jerusalem unto Prince Messiah 
shall be Sevens Seven, and Sevens Sixty and Two,” 
z.e.from the Motse Davar to Mashiach Nagid shall be 
69 Weeks of Years. The reduction of the last Week, 
by the Angel, to twice 1260 days, and to twice 3% 
years, demonstrates that the rest of the weeks are of 
the same chronological value. Dan.. xii:7, 11, 12. As 
to the “ word” to “yo forth,” 1t was not any backspoken 
word to Jeremiah, whose writings Daniel was reading, 
for that contained no order to restore either temple or 
city, Dan. ix:2, nor was it the word that went forth to 
the Angel-world, announcing the purpose of God, and 
because of which Gabriel, appointed, “ flew swiftly” to 
tell it to Daniel, for this was the word of the Prophecy 
of the .70 Weeks itself, ix:21, 23, 24-27." sit ae 
Decree of Cyrus, as the analogous expression in Esther, 
“Vetse Davar Malcuth,” “Let there go forth a royal word,” 
shows a Persian Edict; the word from God put in the 


them.” Better are Gesenius, Maurer, Fuerst, Winer: ‘‘ Many shall thor- 
oughly go through this prophecy (turning over its pages again and again), 
and so the knowledge of it shall be great.” And Kliefoth, ‘‘Many shall set 
out upon an investigation of this prophecy,” etc. There is a beautiful figure 
in the Hebrew verb, yestotetu. The root (shoot) signifies to “rudder about,” 
or sail on the ocean in search of land; to circumnavigate in order to make 
discoveries as do mariners on exploring expeditions; voyagers. Then, ap- 
plied to the land, it denotes traveling here and there, up and down, spying 
out, prying into, and going through, inquiring, observing, examining, and 
so increasing knowledge. So shall it be, as to this deep, wide, and wonder- 
ful prophecy, in the End-Time. ‘* Many,” not a few.—‘‘shall eagerly 
study,” not read superficially, *‘this whole prophecy of Daniel, and so the 
knowledge,” 7. e. ‘‘the inward perception” (Aaddaath) of its contents, ‘‘will 
become great.” Compare Amos viii:1I, 12. How many earnest souls are 
“‘searching” the meaning of these blessed prophecies to-day, ‘‘eagerly,” like 
men out on the ocean sailing in quest of land! It is a sign of the End, 
“The wise shall understand!” Dan. xii:10. That is the promise, 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. hae 


heart of Cyrus, sent forth by his own hand, and con- 
firmed by his royal successors; the word to build and 
finish the House of God, which involved the City as 
well, “‘ Sayzxg of Jerusalem Ske shall be built, and to 
Zion, Thy foundation shal be laid,” a word performed 
“according to the commandment of the God of Israel, 
and according to the Decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and 
mrtaxeixcs,, Ezra 1:10; Isa..xliv:28; Ezra vi:14; the 
word that went forth “in the first year of Cyrus, king 
of Persia,” Ezra i:1, and, according to our Chronology, - 
fees 36. hat is the # gue-of the 70 Weeks... To 
maintain, under such a commission as Cyrus, the 
“Shepherd,” received, that zs edict intended only the 
building of the Temple, but not of the City, because 
“to restore and build Jerusalem” is not distinctly ex- 
pressed in the decree, is not only to refine too far ina 
critical way, but to contradict the fact that, in pursu- 
ance of that same Decree, the returned Exiles, not only 
laid the Temple foundation, but built for themselves 
even “ceiled houses,” for whose extravagance the 
prophet reproved them. It is the core of the accu- 
sation of Chancellor Rehum to the obstructing Arta- 
xerxes that the people builded the City. Hagg.i:4; Ezra 
iv:3. Nor was the Decree of Darius aught else than a 
reproduction of the lost firman of Cyrus, Ezra vi:1-11, 
enforced by his own, adding no new permission, vs. I1- 
ieeeeNor were the Grant. and Letters of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus aught else than permission in terms to 
build the “Walls and the Gates,” and continue the 
work already begun upon the “ City,” and for 90 years 
Pariedeon.s )-C. 536—445—o1. Neh. i:2; it:1, Ezra 
vii:7. Whatever building of the city was done during 
go years, was in pursuance of the order of Cyrus, 
repeated and re-inforced. So much for the Motse Da- 


134 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ite ee 


var, the starting-point of the 69 or 70 Weeks. It © 
was the Edict of Cyrus, the “Shepherd,” of God’s 
people. * 

And, now, as to the ad quem or closing date and 
event of the 69 Weeks. It is “Prince Messiah,” “A/a- 
shiach Nagid.’ The nouns are in apposition. The ab- 
sence of the article “the” does not detract from a def- 
inite reference to Christ. ‘Prince Messiah” in Dan ix: 
25, and ‘‘Messiah”’ to be “‘cut off” in v. 26a, are one and 
the same person, the future anointed King of Israel, of 
whom David in suffering, and Solomon in glory, were 
eminent types, the “Lord's Anointed,” the Princesg 
the House of David, whose expected appearing was 
Israel’s hope. Contrary to many critics it must be held 
that ‘““Mashiach,” in the above texts, is not a mere vague, 
indefinite ideal, attributive, or appellative, a blind ad- 
jective descriptive of some uncertain “anointed one,” 
Cyrus for instance, Onias III, or Seleucus, or “some 
other man,” a “Great Unknown,” but is a distinctive 
designation, the personal name of Him of whom the 
prophets have spoken, and whose genealogy Matthew 
and Luke have recorded ; the Ruler out of Bethlehem, 
and the Heir to David’s throne. The fundamental pas- 
sages for this are Ps. 11:2, and Ps. xlv. Post-Biblical 
pre-Christian Judaism, resting on Old Testament 
ground, continued to use the word as a proper name, 
the name of the Coming One, “Mashiach’’ and “Hamma- 
shiach.” In U1 Sam. xxiii:1, David is called “‘Messialiee 
In Dan. ix:25, 26a, the term denotes the Priest-King of 
Israel, for whom was reserved the true mz¢re and crown 
of David’s race, when that terrible word went forth 


“It must be remembered that the Edict of Cyrus gave permission to 
the Jews to rebuild their City aS well as their Temple.” Prof. C. H. H. 
WRIGHT, D.D. Zechariah, etc., p. 23. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 135 


against the wicked Zedekiah, the word that forms the 
completed @ guo of the 70 years’ Captivity, the word 
sounding amid the flames of the burning Temple, 
ruined City, overthrown House of David, and Judah 
borne away captive in chains to Babylon: “Away with 
the mitre! Offwith the crown! This ts not this! Up 
with the low! Down with the high! Ruin! Ruins 
Ruin! Even this shall be no more, until That One come 
pose wichiatis, ana 1 will give wt flim!” Ezek. xxi;25: 
fo That One’ the prophets gave witness, the Priest. 
King, Mashiach Nagid, to suffer for Israel, be rejected, 
despised, “cut off,” rooted out, and “nothing for Him!” 
iezekie!s * Until” is. Daniel's “ Unto,’ the Advent of 
Christ. We delight in the utterance of Hengstenberg, 
here, that “the non-Messianic interpretation of Daniel’s 
prediction will remain false as long as God’s Word is 
true, and that is to all eternity!” 

But, admitting all this, the question recurs, as to 
the force of the word “Unto,” “Unto Prince Messiah.” 
Six inspired New Testament Targums on the text settle 
the question, and fix the ad quem, or close of the 69 
Weeks, at a definite point, all sliding excluded. That 
point is not the Baptism of Christ, nor His Triumphal 
Entry when hailed, for a moment, as king, and then re- 
fected, nor the Death of Christ, which occurs “after” 
the closing point, but is the Advent of Christ,—His 
Birth. 

Our first inspired Targum on the text is that of 
Matthew, a Jew, who, writing in the Hebrew, and for 
the Jews, in order to show that fulfilment of Messianic 
prophecy, and recording the genealogy of Jesus, uses 
the same expression, “Ufo Christ,”—yet with the defi- 
nite article “ad ha—Mashiach,” found in the prophet, the 
article indicating a special reference to Him of whom 


136 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. a 


the prophet spoke, “ Unto the Messiah.” He does so, 
moreover, in connection with the statement that certain 
Magi from Babylon where Daniel had received the 
prophecy, and over whom he presided as chief of their 
order, came to Jerusalem inquiring, “ Where is he who 
is dorn King of the Jews?” Trisecting the whole period 
of Israel’s history from Abraham to Christ, into equal 
periods of “ fourteen generations,” he says, speaking of 
the last, that “from the carrying away into Babylon, 
unto the Messiah (the King of the Jews) are fourteen 
generations,’ Matt. 1:17. He thus gives us the a guo of 
the 70 years’ Captivity, and declares the ad quem of the 
last period, and of the whole period to be “the Birth of 
Jesus Christ.” 1:18. This is absolute. If we allow 40 
years for a generation, in round numbers, then, from the 
Captivity to the Szrtk of Christ, the year when Cesar 
enrolled the world, are 40X14—560 years. If we sub- 
tract the 70 years’ Captivity, then 560—70— 490 years, 
the precise measure of the period found in the 70 
Weeks, the end of the Exile being the a guo of the 70 
Weeks. The “14 generations” of the evangelist are 
commensurate with the ‘ 70 Sevens” of the prophet, 
less the 70 years’ Captivity, which the prophet excludes. 
Matthew ; 560 minus 70, equals 490. 
Daniel; 70 multiplied by 7, equals 4go. 

A double witness by two independent calculations, 
both which make it impossible that the ad quem ot 
the Messiah to be “cut off” should ever reach 
either His Death, His Triumphal Entry, or His Bap- 
tism, but that it must .and can only be A. D.1. An 
apparent discrepancy, however, of 7 years, or One 
Week, an error, not of chronology, but of computation, 
meets us. From the Captivity to Christ, is, according 
to Daniel, 69 Weeks, or 483 years, while according to 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 137 


Matthew it is 490 years, 7. ¢. in round numbers. If, re- 
membering how exact computation is by the “ Seventy 
Sevens,” and how less precise that by.“ generations ”’ is, 
and allowing for the difference, regard a generation as 
39% years, this allowance brings the two into perfect 
harmony, and we have, from the Captivity to Christ, 
14 multiplied by 39%, equals 483 years. The two will 
then stand: 

Matthew: 14 multiplied by 39%, equals 483 years. 

Daniel: 69 multiplied by 7, equals 483 years. 

It seems that by two different modes of reckoning, 
mierDy, exact “Sevens, the other by less precise and 
rounded “ generations,” yet both governed by the law of 
the 7 (7 multiplied by 2 equals 14) a difference of “ One 
Week,” or 7 years is made, this difference accounted 
for in Matthew by the round numbers, but in Daniel by 
the fact that the “ One Week ”’ is separated from the 69 
and placed after the long interval following the 69, and 
thus the harmony of the prophet and evangelist is per- 
fect, the ad guem o{ the 69 Weeks being fixed immovably 
at the Birth of Christ. Isthis merely “deal” or “symbolic,” 
or due to “ the trickish nature of numbers ?” Or is it the 
wisdom of God, both revealing and concealing? The 
whole question is solved, for the ad quem of the 7o 
Weeks is not the Azrst Advent but the Second, the close 
of the ‘One Week” still future, while the ad quem ot 
the 69 Weeks is not the Second Advent but the /7rsz. 
The Great Interval between the 69th and 7oth Weeks, * 
by reason of [srael’s rejection of Christ, is opened out 
by our Lord Himself, in Luke xxi:24, the Roman 
‘Times of the Gentiles.” Daniel’s “Unzo the End shal! 
be War,” ix:26, is our Lord’s “ Until the Times of the 
Gentiles be fulfilled.” There is a double “ Uzéo” in 
Daniel, “ Unto Messiah,” and “ Unzto the End,” the one 


ca 


~ 


138 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


the /zrst Advent, the other the Second, the 7oth Week 
still future in Daniel, Matthew calculating in round 
numbers, and this explains the whole problem. The 
ad guem therefore, of the 69 Weeks, was the “ Birth of 
Fesus Christ,’ that memorable time when the Temple of 
Janus was shut, and the Roman world was at peace, 
men dwelling in good will toward each other, and 
“Glory to God in the highest,” was sung, and the sa- — 
Jute of ‘Peace on earth, to men of good will” was 
poured from on high. It was that notable time when 
Augustus Czesar enrolled the world, and shepherds 
were tending their flocks by night, and “ Glory” 
flamed in the sky, and Gabriel, who gave the pre- 
diction to Daniel 500 years before, brought out 
his heavenly orchestra, and choir, and made the_ 
welkin vibrate as he played the overture of A/ashiach 
Nagid, Gloria in Excelsis, that to-be-long-remembered 
year when the Star of Bethlehem shone like a gem set 
in nocturnal blue, and the moon silvered her way with 
unwonted smiles, and Jupiter, Saturn, and Mars, pa- 
raded, glittering in splendor together along the Zodiac’s 
path, and gift-bringing Magi came in barbaric gold, and 
Herod was troubled ; that melody-year when music was 
floating everywhere “in the hill country of Judea,” and 
Elizabeth sang her song, and Mary warbled her sweet 
and thrilling J/agnificat, and Zacharias intoned his 
Benedictus, and good old Simeon sank, overjoyed, to his 
rest, breathing his holy “ Domne! Nune Dimittis /” 
Mashiach Nagid was “ born!” Glorious Christmas ad 
guem it was! Ring the bells! This much,—thank 
God,—is literal and not symbolical, real, and not ideal! 

Once more. Gabriel himself is a Targum on the 
text, to fix the ad quem. He gave the prophecy of the | 
70 Weeks to Daniel. He knew the 483 years were out. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 189 


He went to Mary to tell her that He, whom she soon 
would bear, was the Wugzd, “the Son of the Highest,” 
to whom the Lord God would give “the ¢hrone of His 
father David.” He saluted the Shepherds, saying 
“Good tidings! There is born to you ¢hzs day, in the 
City of David, a Saviour, Christ the Lord!” He employs 
the same words he employed 536 years before, when 
speaking to Daniel. “This day,’ is the ad quem and 
‘““ Christos Kyrtios,” Christ the Lord, is simply the Greek 
for the Hebrew “ Mashiach Nagid !” 

But there is another Targum still, the Targum of 
Peter on the same prophecy. He has an eye on both 
Advents. He is looking at Eschatology, and Soteri- 
ology too! Daniel says of himself, that, “in the year 
one, of Darius,” he was “searching,” (Szztfz) in the old 
prophetic Scriptures (Lassepharim) the a quo and ad 
guem of the 70 years’ Captivity, and all concerning 
Isracl’s promised salvation, and the Advent of Israel’s 
promised Messiah, when Gabriel came and spoke of 
the 70 Weeks, and Messiah “ cut off.” Peter says that 
the old prophets “searched” the ‘what time,” and 
“what manner of time’ Messiah’s Spirit that was in 
them made evident when “ foretestifying the Sufferings 
of Messiahand the Glories after these.” \ Pet.i:to. None 
Seny that Peter's reference is to Daniel. Christ: is 
Messiah, and we have Peter’s inspired word for it that 
the “ Mashiach” predicted by Daniel, to be “cut off,” 
was neither Cyrus, nor Onias, nor Seleucus, nor 
“some other man,” but Jesus Himself. 

Yet another Targum runs to salute us. It is the 
Targum of Paul. He assures us that the One predicted 
to come in “ the fulness of ¢/e time,’ did come and that 
it was then God sent forth from Himself, or ex-apos- 
tolized from heaven, His Son “becoming from a 


140 — SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


woman,” and “becoming under law ” to buy out, asa 
“ransom,” them that were “ under the law,” that, from 
Him they “ might receive the sonship.” Jubilee was 
the design of Messiah’s manifestation. Paul is a par- 
aphrast on Daniel, telling us that “ Mashiach Nagid ” 
was the “ Son of God,” and that the time of His Incar- 
nation and Advent was “the pleroma of the time” ap- 
pointed, in otherwords, the close of the 483 years. The 
“ Word made Flesh” was the answer too. Two other 
Targums are enough to quote in confirmation of the ad 
guem. One is from Prince Messiah Himself, interpret- 
ing this prophecy as He stood with the 69 Weeks be- 
hind Him, and His Crucifixion and Jerusalem’s destruc- 
tion before Him. He had already told His disciples 
that He must be “cut off,” and that Jerusalem and 


Temple must be destroyed. He now expounds, still — 


further, the ancient prediction, and says that by the 
words of the Angel to Daniel, “ And unto the End,” 
ix:26, are intended the Roman “ .7zmes of the Gentiles,” 
at whose close Israel’s glory comes. This ts the Second 
Unto or Second Advent, at the End of the 7oth Week, just 
as the /irst Unto or First Advent was at the close of the 
69 Wecks. Standing within two days of the point — 
called “ After” in the.“ After Sevens Sixty and Twe 
shall Messiah be cut off,” or 33% years “After” the Ad- 
vent, He opens the Great Interval between the 69th 
and 7oth Weeks. Surely, the “ Unto” and the “ After” 
are not the same point. The ad quem, and after the ad — 
guem are not one. The other Targum is that of John. 
To him it was reserved, under the direct teaching of 
Prince Messiah raised, in heaven, to one of the “ Glo- 
ries after His Sufferings,” to expound the wzzanointed 
“ Magid,” or “prince that shall came,” Dan. 1x:26b, as 
the “ Meshomem” or “ Desolator,” and the “he” of v. — 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 141 


27, as the “ Beast ” slain by the sword-stroke, yet re- 
viving, and ascending from the Abyss, and whose 
monogram is “666,” the last Antichrist, Israel’s last op- 
meescor, the Little Horn of the-4th Empire. ~-That 
“ Nagid,” bent on universal conquest appears at the 
opening of the “ One Week”’ following the Interval, as 
the Mock-Messiah of the End-Time, the Rider on the 
white horse of the first apocalyptic seal. It is then, as 
in Daniel, he maxes his “ Covenant”’ with the Jewish 
masses, and his times are the twice 3% years, or twice 
1260 days, of the final 7oth Week, at whose close the 
true Messiah comes for his destruction and Israel’s final 
Fedemption, the “Uxio’ of the whole 7o Weeks, 
with their included Interval, the Second Advent. It is 
the clearest demonstration possible, that the 7oth Week 
is zot at the First Advent, and that the ad quem of the 
69 Weeks is none other than the Lzrth of Christ. 

Thus, these six New Testament Targums of Mat- 
thew, Gabriel, Peter, Paul, Prince Messiah Himself, 
and John, combine, in harmony, to interpret for us the 
Prophecy of the 70 Weeks and to assure us that, not 
the Cross and the Cry, not the Jordan and the Dove, not 
the Hosanna-march from the slopes of Olivet, is the ad 
quem of the “Sevens Seven and Sevens Sixty and Two,” 
but Gabriel himself and Glory above with Peace to 
men of good will below, the Star and the Cradle, An- 
gels and Magi, Shepherds and Songs; in short, Beth- 
lehem-Ephratah httle among the thousands of Judah 
but great by reason of the Advent of Prince-Messiah, 
“the Ruler of my people Israel,” the Szrth of Him who 
was ‘“‘dorn King of the Jews.” The 69 Weeks were not 
unto Viesstah the Przest’’ atoning on the Cross, nor 
unto “‘ Messiah the Prophet ” entering on His public 
ministry, nor unto Messiah hailed momentarily, as a 


142 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. he 


“ King,” by the crowd, then crucified to-morrow, but 3 
unto Messiah the “ Prixce’”’ of the House of David, and _ 
Heir to the throne of His father. His Messianic King- 
dom, as predicted by the prophets, did not come in 
His day. Expressly it is said He is “ cut off” and “there 
zs nothing for lim.” The birth of the Prence,and King 
only by right but not yet by enthronement over the 
“House of Jacob” was the ad guem. Such was the close 
of the 69 Weeks, or 483 years, in the year of the decree 
of Czesar Augustus to enroll the world, 30 years before 
the 15th regnal year of Tiberius, and according to our 
chronology A. U. C. 747, or 748, or 749; according to 
ne) ot 9 | eps age Baa 

The “Seventy Sevens,” therefore, are zot mere ‘“‘zdeal 
spaces void of chronological value,” as the ultra sym- 
bolists would have them. They are proved, by Mat- 
thew’s “generations,” by the reduction of the last 
“Seven” to “days,” and by confirming history, to be 
exact measures of historic time. Worthless, utterly, is 
' the objection that, according to our Chronology the dis- 
tance from the Decree of Cyrus to the Birth of Christ 
is 530 years (B. C. 536—A. D. 1), while, according to 
Danicl,—rather the Angel,—it is ‘Sevens Seven, and 
Sevens Sixty and Two” or 483 years. A whole Synod 
of chronologists must retire before the statement of 
the Angel, and, adjusting their ow chronology to that 
of the Bible, grounded on a true text, either make away 
with the difference of 57 years between their reckoning 
and that of God’s word, or submit that this difference — 
may be accounted for on some principle of sacred com- 
putation perfectly in harmony with their own conclu- 
sions. On the basis of a true text, the verdict will 
always be for the Word of God as against all the ob- 
jections of Science. The demonstration that ‘“Fesus of 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 148 


Nazareth ts the Christ,” is absolute and irrefutable from 
the statements of Gabriel, alone, who both gave the 
prediction of the prophecy of the 69 Weeks, concerning 
Messiah, and presided at its fulfilment, interpreting the 
same. How much more so from the combined testi- 
mony of Prophets and Apostles, Christ, Angels and 
men! Moreover, Christ was to come not before 483 
years had passed away, and certainly before rebuilt Je- 
rusalem was destroyed. Nor was Jerusalem to be de- 
stroyed till some time after Messiah was cut off. The 
Incarnate ‘ Glory” was to enter and tread the Second 
Temple, Hagg. 11:7. All Israel knew that Christ was to 
be expected while yet the City and the Temple were 
still standing, and under the Roman power, and at a 
precisely defined time: Manner, Place, Time, Circum- 
stance,. all were predicted with unerring literality. 
/dcal time is as great an outrage on the facts, as would 
be an zdeal Bethlehem, an zdeal Gabriel, an zdeal 
Augustus, and that latest invention of idealists now 
so popular—an J/deal Christ! It matters nothing, ab- 
solutely nothing, what our chronology may object. 
God has not suspended the faith of believers in His 
Only-Begotten Son, nor the demonstration of the Mes- 
siahship of Jesus, upon the Eponym Canon of Assyri. 
ans, Babylonian Tables, Egyptian Hieroglyphs, Cunei- 
form Inscriptions, or any of our Systems of Chronol- 
ogy. Either Messiah has come, or the Jew is powerless 
to prove his own past national existence, exile, and re- 
turn, the destruction and rebuilding and destruction 
again of his City and his Temple, or the truth of any 
one of his teachers from Moses to John the Baptist. 

If the Azrtk of Christ is the ad quem of the 69 
Weeks, then we must surrender, at once, the cherished 
dates at which so many of us place the a quo of the 70 


144 “SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Weeks, z. ¢. the 7th Artaxerxes Longimanus, B. C. 457, 
and the 2oth Artaxerxes Longimanus, B. C, 445. 
These are the dates accepted by a vast body of evan- 
gelical scholars, such as Ussher, Prideaux, Tregelles, 
Pusey, Wright, Alexander, Newton, Hengstenberg, 
Hzevernick, Hofmann, Auberlen, Stanley Leathes, An- 
derson, Pember, Sir Henry Rawlinson, Wilkinson, 
Dean Milman, etc., etc., on the ground that only by 
this means can the literality of the 70 Weeks of Daniel 
be maintained, and the Weeks be computed. “The 
work of the Restoration,” says Professor Wright, 
“cannot be considered as really accomplished until 
after the date of Nehemiah’s visit to Jerusalem, B. C. 
445,and not even then. And so long as the desolations 
of Jerusalem were not repaired, the 70 years’ Captivity 
were not to be considered at an end!’* This is the 
agony of interpretation! The order to restore and 
build must not go forth till a special request was made 
to fortify the City! 2. ¢., the Decree ¢o restore and build 
was to be first issucd 91 years after the decree of Cy- 


rus !—536—445—o1I, and 71 years after the Temple was | 


finished! The 70 Weeks are to be dated nearly a whole 
century after Gabriel delivered the prophecy, and Cy- 
rus released the Exiles!! So Sir Henry Rawlinson: 


“The 70 Weeks of Daniel can only count from the reign 


of Artaxerxes Longimanus by whom the command to 
restore and build Jerusalem,—street and wall,—was 
siven.’ + “Street and Wall/” This is detect saa 
restore and build Jerusalem” is not merely “Street and — 


Wall.” Hengstenberg labors manfully to prove the _ 


certainty of this mode of computation, but fails to jus- 
tify it. Professor Drummond, of London, says it is 


* Wright: Zechariah and his Prophecies, p. 23. 
+ Rawlinson’s Herodotus IV, 217. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 145 


Hengstenberg’s “one telling argument,” not dreaming 
of its fatality. Auberlen sees the prodigious difficulty, 
and tries to reconcile it with the purposes of divine 
discipline in promoting fazth and expectation! Kliefoth 
justly declares it is impossible to accept the a quo B. C. 
445, or any a quo, other than the edict of Cyrus. Pro. 
fessor Briggs holds to the @ guo from Cyrus, but re- 
mains entangled in the mode of our computation, as 
does Professor Milligan, these last betaking themselves 
to the ideal theory of numbers, while Dr. Rowland 
Williams admonishes us that it is time to “cheerfully 
throw overboard all Messianic interpretations of the 
prophecy,” and rest in the “ Maccabean exposition ” 
alone; an exposition which makes “confusion worse 
confounded.” 

We must abandon the idea that the Decree of Cyrus 
did not involve the building of the City, or that, be- 
cause it was arrested for a time in its execution, there- 
fore it was not the decree, the J/otse Davar referred to 
in the prophecy, and the true a guo of the 70 Weeks. 
Our chronology must take care of itself. The Word 
of God must stand, as it will. When chronologists and 
antiquarians have decided who “Darius the Mede’ was, 
determined the true lines of Persian succession, and 
proved that B. C. 536 is an infallible date for the De- 
cree of Cyrus, it will be time to think that Daniel’s 
prophecy is the work of some Maccabean romancer, 
and that the law of the ‘‘Seven” does not control Is- 
rael’s history, and the destiny of nations. The Assyrian 
monuments, while, like the Egyptian and Babylonian, 
confirming the Scriptures at many points of contact, 
collide with them in many more, and, in some places, 
undoubtedly, some errors of transcribers and editors of 
the Hebrew text have obscured and rendered difficult 


146 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of harmony the Historical Books, and parts of the pro- 
phetic page. This must be admitted. It comes to this 
that Modern Criticism has discovered the problem ofa 
“Jewish Chronology” without being able to solve it. 
The prophecy of the 70 Weeks, however, and the record 
of Matthew, stand invulnerable. Criticism, even in the 
bands of such men as Wellhausen and Robertson Smith, 
is, nevertheless, beginning to see that the Bible contains 
a “symmetrical system of numbers,” and has its own 
methods of computation. And what is more wonderful 
still, the Bones of dead Israel are speaking, and the Sun, 
Moon and Stars are fighting, in their courses, for the 
Bible, pointing out where the text has been corrupted, 
and where the emendation must be made. The Grave- 
stones of the Caraite Jews-, the descendants of the Ten 
Tribes, authoritative and genuine as any Assyrian Epo- 
nym Canon or monuments of Egypt or Babylon, and 
three Eclipses, two of them foretold in Scripture, one 
by Amos, one by Isaiah, the other the eclipse of Thales, 
a standard among astronomers, all appear, with the 
Books of Judith and Tobit, the last literature we have 
of the tribes of Simeon and Naphtali, to fix the date of 
the carrying away of the Ten Tribes, and the fall of 
Samaria, at B. C. 696, and not 722, our conventional 
date, and to demand, not only a redemption of the He- 
brew text, from its past adjustment, in several places, to 
erroneous heathen chronology, but to lower the whole 
reckoning of the Hebrew monarchy to the extent of not 
less than 25 years!* We can rely, with confidence, on 
God, who gave us His holy word, that He will watch 


* Melanges Asiatiques. V. 121. 1886. Chowlsen’s Achtzen Hebr. Gra- 
binschriften. 1865. Strack’s Firkowitch u, s. Entdeckungen. 1876. Bos- 
anquet’s Messiah the Prince. 1869. Dr. S$. Davison, in Jewish Chronicle 
Oct. and Nov. 1868. Zockler’s Handbuch d. Theol, Wissen. Art. Chron- 
ologie. Yol I. 1883. 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 144 


over it, and that no weapon of false criticism, or error 
of textual corruption, that has been formed against it, 
in the past, or is now, shall ever prosper. To deny the 
literality of the 70 Weeks of Daniel, in face of the con- 
firmation of this by both Testaments, and by history 
itself, on the ground of “ Chronology ”’ is only to repeat 
in this respect, what, in other respects, has been done 
and a thousand times refuted. It will be our mercy, if, 
adhering to God’s Word, in spite of all scientific objec- 
tions, we continue to affirm, notwithstanding the 
errors of many of its devoted defenders, and of its ene- 
mies, that God’s measures of time are literal and not 
ideal, and that from the “going forth of a word to re- 
store and build Jerusalem, unto Prince Messiah,” not 
less than 483 literal years did elapse. 


(F)—THE SEVENTIETH WEEK. 


And now, forthe 7oth week itself. The effort to con- 
nect it immediately withthe 69th has led to results in 
exegesis, both amazing and amusing. Never was the 
hopelessness of any task more thoroughly evinced than 
here. Chronology is made the scapegoat for exeget- 
ical offences. Centuries of the keenest criticism, the 
utmost ingenuity of men, invention racked upon the 
wheel, have all been subsidized to save, if possible, the 
prophecy, by a method that could only compromise it. 
Jeremiah’s 70 years are said to mean 7 times 70, or 490 
years, Daniel being the redactor of his predecessor’s 
calculation! The 490 of Daniel include the 70 of Jere- 
miah! That is, 70 equal 490! Again the 7 and 62 are 
said not to be consecutive, but both to date from the 
same point. The 62 include the 7. That is, 434 equal 
fog eesook-at. the Babel of results! The different 
starting-points, or ¢ermint a quo, from which the 70 


148 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


weeks are Stele: are respectively, B. C. 655, 606, cou 
599, 588, 538, 536, 457, 455,454, 445, 444, the extremes — 
varying by two centuries! so placing the close of the 7oth 
weck w shea {srael’s apostasy 1s finished, and the promised | 
glory realized, and the Kingdom is come, at B, C. 165, — 


116, 114, 109, 98, 48, 46, and A. D. 33, 35, 36,45, 46! Cue 


rious, indeed, the struggles of interpreters! Even Au. 
berlen, binding the 69th and 7oth weeks together, un- — 


derstands by the 7oth week the whole time from the © 


Death of Messiah to the Destruction of Jerusalem, that 


is, the final week is from A. D. 33 to A. D. 70,0Rgam 


years equal 37 years! Less valiant than Professor — 
Leathes, he is unable to explain why, if the 7oth week 
is sundered by the Angel from the 69th, and placed after — 
the Interval that follows the 69th, it should yet be con- — 
strued as preceding that Interval. Also the close of 
verse 26, last clause, ‘‘ has no sense,” as Rinck remarks, 


if it is referred to the destruction of Jerusalem already | 


mentioned in the middle of the verse. And he is right 
in this. What mean the words, added, after Jeru- 


salem’s destruction, “‘Azd unto the End, shall be war,a 
decree of desolations ;” if the End isalready Jerusalem’s _ 


destruction? What else can it mean than the Jzterval 
which our Lord Himself describes when interpreting 
this very verse, Luke xxi:24? an Interval whose End is 
the End of the 7oth week? Ewald, starting from B.C. 
588, brings the 7 weeks to B. C. 539, the 62 to B.C. 105, 
then, subtracting 70 years’ captivity, bounds back 

to B. C. 175, then adding 7. years, the 1 weer ‘ 
shoots forward at last, to B. C. 168, the time of Antio- — 
chus Epiphanes, when Israel was finally redeemed! 
Graf, and Wellhausen start from B. C. 606, 604, which ~ 
put Israel’s redemption at B. C. 116, 114; Prideaux ~ 
Pusey, and Leathes, date from B.C. 457, which makes — 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. 149 


the 7oth week end A. D. 33, the middle of the week, 
when Messiah is supposed to be “cut off,’ being the 
end of the week itself! That is, 33 equal 29%! To 
condense much into little, Desprez makes 49 equal 54, 
434 equal 429, and 429 equal 4g0! With Dr. Row- 
land Williams, 490 equal 434, 434 equal 364, 494 
equal 427, and 7 equal 11! - With Eichhorn, Hitzig, 
Wieseler, 490 equal 441, and 70 equal 49! With 
Bertholdt, Bleek, and Rosenmuller, 490 equal 424, and 
424 equal 420! No wonder that there has beena recent 
Hegira to the “ideals! As to the order of the sub- 
divisions of the 70 weeks, with Hofmann, Delitzsch, 
Wieseler, Volck, as even Isaac Newton suggested, it is 
62 plus 1 plus 7, the distance between Antiochus and 
Christ being made 49 years; that is, 49 equal 170! 
Some, like Hilgenfeld, and Hitzig, say the order is 
‘only 62 plus 1, the 7 being included in the 62. Others, 
like Bosanquet, say it is 1 plus 62 plus 7, the last week 
being put first! 

some, like Ewald, exclude, others like Orelli and 
Riehm, include, the 70 years’ captivity. The vast body 
of interpreters hold, however, that the Angel’s order is 
the right one, 7 plus 62 plus 1, although blind, in great 
part to any /uterval. 

Sieiore. Some hold that ‘Prince Messiah” us 
Cyrus or Seleucus; others that he is Isaiah, Judas 
Maccabzeus, or the People; others that he is Onias, 
ai-t,-or the prince to come, z. ¢.,..Antichrist.. ‘“ A7zs 
emis) 7s.end, the City’s end; the “cutting off” at 
the close of the 69th week is said to be the same as the 
“causing oblation and sacrifice to cease” in the mzddle 
of the 7oth week; the ‘“‘ covenant” made for one week, 
with the Jewish masses, by the “prince to come” is 
supposed to be the “ New Covenant.” in Christ’s blood, 


| 


150 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


made with believers; in the words “ cut off, and nothing 
to Him,” the expression and “nothing to Him,” is 
supposed to mean the vicarious “ but not for Himself” 
of King James’ wrong translation; the “he” in “he 
shall confirm,” 1s taken for Christ, instead of Ante 
christ; “unto an anointed one” means unto the con- 
secration of Onias, or the Baptism of Christ ; the “ Holy — 
of Holies”’ means a Person and not a Place; the death 
of Christ occurring “after” the 6gth week, and long 
before the 7oth, is said to occur at the close of the 7oth 
or in the middle of the 7oth, the end of the 7oth being 
its own middle, and the end of the 69th besides ! 

What a mass of worse than Hibernian absurdities, of 
which these are but a few specimens, in the reckoning 
of the 70 weeks! Whata dark labyrinth, compared with 
which the Cretan one was a wide and sunlit boulevard ! 
No wonder that in despair, Hengstenberg, who insists 
on “exact fulfilment,” should yet say of the 70 weeks, 
“Their terminal point is a vanishing one, more or less, and 
does not admit of being chronologically determined 
with mznute precision.” * So Kiiper, his able disciple; 
“We are not to look for strict chronological exactness. 
The numbers, though having a certain value for post-extle 
time, are yet not specially historic, but specifically sym- 
bolic!!!” + So Stanley Leathes in reply to Kuenen; 
“Chronology /az/s us as to the last week.” { Even Au- 
berlen says,“ We are not to expect exact chronolo- 
gical data.” || And Pusey: ‘ We have not the Chron- 
ological data to fix it!’§ And Orelli: “ The historic 
fulfilment certainly does xot fit exactly ina chronolo- 


* Christol, III. 2, p. 185. Riehm. Mess. Proph. 152. 
+ Das Prophetenthum. 375. 

£ O; °D “Prophecy; 236; 

|| Der Prophet Daniel, 157. 

§ Daniel, 240, 


SYMBOLIC NUMBERS. Lot 


gical point of view.’ * And Kuenen, who puts the 
Goud week in B. C. 121—114, and ealls it the time of 
the Antichrist (!) says “ We readily grant our inter- 
pretation does not fully agree with chronology, but it 
is tolerably exact! /!/”"+ So,also, Professor Drummond 
of London, who denies the Messianic interpretation of 
the 70 weeks, and holds the Maccabean, yet confesses 
“The Maccabean interpretation is opposed by serzous 
chronological difficulties.” {| \s it any wonder that Pro- 
fessor Briggs should say in reference to this matter, 
that “the efforts of interpreters have ignominiously 
failed? | Is it not a wonder that his own view 
binding the 69th and 7oth weeks together, should 
still be given?§ Surely, all men will agree with 
Bosanquet, saying, “Every fresh interpretation only 
adds to the force of our conviction that some radicas 
error liesat the foundation of all our Christian tinterpre- 
tations, and, till it is discovered, the 70 weeks of Daniel 
will remain unexplained and inexplicable to the com- 
prehension of every unprejudiced inquirer.” & 


* Die alttest, Weissag. 526. 

+ Prophets and Prophecy iu Israel. 272. 
t Jewish Messiah. 260. 

| Messianic Prophecy. I. 53. 

Eeibid:. J. 424. 

“| Messiah the Prince. 48. 


152 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


| ges ap) Bas Bl 


THE 1260 DAYS, OR 34 Yak 


Like the 1000 years, these much abused prophetic 
numbers have been the subject of great and various dis- 
cussion. Whence come they? Of what are they a 
part? To what are they related? How often are 
they taken? When mentioned, is it always the same 
period that is denoted, or do they represent two dif- 
ferent, equal, and successive, periods? What do they 
import? Are they merely ideal and symbolic, or do 
they represent actual historic time, literaland exact? Are 
they Days put for Years as the Reformers held, on the 
~Year-Day Theory, or .are they simply Days of 24 
hours? Do they stand for the 1000 years, and cover 
our present Dispensation from First to Second Advent, 
as Professor Milligan holds? Are they the half of a 
Great Week of 2520 years which covers the Times of 
the Gentiles as Mr. Guinness holds? Are they the 
period referred to by our Lord in Luke xxi:24, when 
predicting the down-treading that follows Jerusalem’s 
Destruction? And is 7/zs period of down-treading, in 
Luke xxi:24, the same as ¢at of the treading under 
foot the Holy City, 42 months, in Rev. xi:2? Or are 
they the last 3 % years of the profanation of the Sanc- 


A ae 


~ 


THE 1260 DAYS OR 3% VEARS. i BPs’ 


tuary under Antiochus Epiphanes, when the Abomi- 
nation of Desolation stood in the holy place? Or do 
they refer to a Roman occupation of Jerusalem, in the 
time of Titus? These questions form a labyrinth of 
confusion sprung from various systems of interpre- 
tation, and meet the student, everywhere. At one 
time taken ideally, at another literally, and when 
taken literally then conceived of as years, and yet again 
as days, then, still further, applied now here and then 
there, all hope of attaining certainty seems to vanish 
away. 

1. Toclear up this confusion, and dissipate these 


clouds, it is necessary to observe that, in Daniel and 


John, we find one and the same measure of time repre- 
sented by four different forms of expression, viz., (1) 
“time, times, (dual number) and the dividing (or half) 
Memeetine,” Wan. vit:25; xi:7; Rev. xii:14;-(2) “half 
eee lan. 1x:27; (3) “42 months,” Revi-xisi2; xuics ; 
and (4) ‘‘ 1260 days” Rev. xi:3; xu:6. These numbers 
are commensurate. The word “ze” here denotes a 
year as in Dan. iv:16; where it is said, concerning 
Nebuchadnezzar, “ Let 7 ¢zmes passover him,” viz., the 
seven years of his mania, and, asin Dan. xi:13, where 
it is said of the King of the North that he shall return 


Beatethne end of fzmes, even years.”” The “time, two 
_times, and half a time, 


hy 


are, therefore, 2.04 “iteral 
years. his is the first point. The next point is that 
these 3 % years are precisely a % Week of Years, or 


Be seven of Years. The third point is that this 4 
Week, or 3 % years, is exactly 42 months, reckoned 
_ according to the Jewish or prophetic calendar, at 30 


days per month; that is, 30x42 equals 1260 days. The 


last point is that the 1260 days’are by consequence, the 
same measure of time as the other numbers just men- 


154 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. i. 
ee 
tioned ; that is, a #2 Week of Years equals 3 % years, 
or 42 months, or 1260 days. y 

Nothing, therefore, is more absolutely certain, 
than that the wltimate source and seat of the 1260 days 
is the Half Weck of Years, given us by the Angel, in — 
Daniel, i1x:27. First, we have the 70 Weeks of Years 
Shabuim Shibim, which are determined, or measured ~ 
off, not from the 2300 evening-mornings, Dan. viil:14,° 
but from the whole course of time, upon Daniel’s peo- 
ple and the Holy City, and at whose close the events — 
of verse 24 are to be realized, that is, the ending of 
Israel's apostasy, the shutting up of Israel’s sins, the rec- 
onciliation of Israel to God, the introduction of abid- 
ing righteousness among them, the verification in his- 
tory of what prophecy foretold concerning them, and 
the consecration of a new Sanctuary to God. Then 
we have this whole period subdivided, as already seen, 
into 7 Weeks of Years or 49 years, ending with some 
unmentioned event in the prophecy. Then 62 more weeks ~ 
of years, added to the 7, that is 69 weeks of years, 483 
years, to the “ cutting off” of Messiah, or Crucifixion 
of Christ. Next in order, follows the Destruction of © 
Jerusalem by Titus. After this the Long Interval oc- 
curs between this and the “End.” Dan. ix:25, 26. — 
Then comes the 7oth Week of Years, or last Seven, di-— 
vided into two equal parts, each a half Week, Dan. 
ix:27, this “ One Week” being still future to us. 

The correct translation of this whole section of — 
prophecy, so condensed and full of meaning, has estab- — 
lished the fact that the Anointed Prince in verse 25, 
“cut off,’ v. 26, 1s zot the unxanointed “ prince that shall 
come,” in v. 26, but wholly a different person. The ™ 
former is Christ, the latter is Antichrist. The one en- 
ters history defore the Great Interval begins, the other — 


, 


THE 1260 DAYS OR-334 VEARS. £5 


enters after it is gone. The one appears at the First 
Advent, in this prediction, the other at the Second 
Advent, or “End” of Israel’s sad punishment. The 
70th week, therefore, is the Week of the unanointed 
Nagid to come, the Desolator, upon whom the vials of 
wrath are poured, and opens with the Farousia of Anti- 
christ, the Rider, or Mock-Christ, of the first Apocalyptic 
seal, the last Anti-Messiah, whom, coming in his own 
name, the unblieving Jews will receive; a man chang- 
ing times and laws, enacting and violating covenants, 
abolishing the Jewish cult, hating Christianity, setting 
up a New Heathenism, making of himself a God, and 
persecuting the people of the Saints of the Most High. 
Praneix.27; Vii25 5 Xi:44) 45; xin7.7 The beginning: éf 
this Week of Antichrist is not signalized by any event, 
named in the prophecy. 

When it shall commence, is not stated, save at the 
close of the Interval, or Times of the Gentiles. The 
first half of the Week is not developed. The middle 
point of it is clearly marked by his causing the “ Sacri- 
fice and Meat-Offering,’—“ Zebach”’ and “ Mincha,” to 
cease, and setting up the Abomination of Desolation. 
an.ix-27 xi:36. The last half of the week is: unde- 
veloped also. The End, or Consummation of the 
Week, is declared expressly to be the accomplishment 
of what God has determined, and in which this un- 
anointed Nagid, or Desolator finds his doom, under the 
outpoured wrath of Heaven. In short, what we find is 
this, viz., that. Dan. 1x:24-27 zs semply the Outline or Frame 
of the whole history of Israel from the close of the Captivity 
to the Second Advent, and that Dan. 1x:26, 27, zs the 
whole of John’s Apocalypse, from chapter vi-xix, eptto- 
mized, the Old Testament Skeleton of which the Olivet 
Discourse by our Lord, and John’s Apocalypse, are the 


156 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


New Testament outfilling. -The 7oth Week ts Antichrist’s 
Week, and this determines for us, absolutely, the 1260 days. 
They are the 3 % years, twice taken, of the “One 
Week” of Dan. ix:27. That ts their source and thetr seat. 
They represent the Great Tribulation in the last days, 
and the fortunes of Israel at that time, Dan. vil:25 ; xu: 
7;xi:1. They are literal days of 24 hours each; the 
42 months are literal months, and the 3 4% times are 
literal years. | 

3. The expression, “ ¢zime, times, and half a time,” 
or 3 % years, occurs thrice in Daniel and John, viz., 
(1) Dan. vii:25, the period of the domination of the 
Little Horn of the Roman Empire over the Saints of 
the Most High, z.¢. the faithful Jewish people; (2) 


Dan. x1i:7; the period when the last Antichrist of 


whom Antiochus was the type, ceases to break the 
power of the Holy People, the Jewish People ; (3) Rev. 
xli:14; the period of the flight, and sojourn in the 


wilderness, of the Sun-clothed Woman, or Jewish. 


Church of the End-Time. The expression, “42 months,” 
occurs twice, viz. (1) Rev. xi:2; the period: of the 
treading under foot of the Holy City; (2) Rev. xiii: ; 
the period of the persecuting power of the Beast, or 
8th head of the revived Roman Empire. The expres- 


/ 


sion, “‘ 1260 days,”’ occurs twice also (1) Rev. xi:3, the . 


period of the prophesying of the two Jewish Witnesses, 
after the manner of Moses and Elias; (2) Rev. xii:6; 
the period of the Sun-clothed Woman’s flight, and 
sojourn in the wilderness. Seven timesin alle The 


Woman’s sojourn inthe wilderness is said to be “ 1260. 


days,” and a “time, times and a half,”’ which proves 
that ¢kese two measures are one and the same period. 
The identity of the Littlke Horn of the fourth empire 


with the Beast in John, and the final Antichrist of Dan, — | 


simply a ¢yfe of the last Antichrist, and the passages 


LHE 1260° DAYS OR 38% YEARS, ipa 


X45; x11:7; proves that the “time, times, and a half,” 
and the “42 months,” of these, are one and the same 
pertwod. The period is,.demonstrably, the same length 
or measure, in all. 

The only question is, Are these variously designated 
times all contemporancous? That they,are equal, is con- 
eect nie they zenticai?. For. example, Is. the 
period of the prophesying of the two witnesses, iden- 
tical, not merely in length, but in location, with that 
of the Beast’s 3 % years, of persecuting power? We 
are certainly safe if, with so many excellent interpre- 
ters, like Baumgarten, Hess, Hofmann, Delitzsch, 
Siristiani. Koch, Valck, Rinck,. Hebart, Luthardt; 
Godet, Alford, Ellicott, Seiss, etc., we take these num. 
bers as actual, equal, and literal measures of historic 


‘time, yet future,and not as mere ideals of trouble. 


And we are safe, if with all these,—save Hofmann,— 
we deny that they are a7 contemporaneous and identi- 
cal_as to location, even as Kliefoth himself denies. 
Hofmann, however, holds that only one-half of the 7oth 
Week is occupied by all these, viz, the second half or 
last 3 % years, the /ast 42 months, the ast 1260 days, 
and that the first half of the week does not enter here 
at all. “All are contemporaneous!” * He compares 
those passages in Daniel where the Greek Antichrist, 
Antiochus, treads down the Holy People. Dan. viii:13, 
14, 19; xi:12; to which he adds xi:31 ; and. identifying 
the same with the second half of the week tn Dan. 1x:27 ; 
xli:7; and vil:25 ; sees only that second falf, and to this 


- refers a// the numbers just mentioned, not merely in 


Daniel but in the Apocalypse also. It is only, in part, 
we can agree with Hofmann, here. Antiochus was 


* Schriftbeweis, II. 2., p. 686, 


158 SOUPPRLEMENTARK DISCUSSIONS: 


in Dan. vill:13, 14, concerning the taking away of the 
‘“ Continual,”’ and in xi:31, concerning the setting up 
of the “ Abomination,” give us only historic types of the 
times of the last Antichrist. The 2,300 evening-morn- 
ings do not furnish us with “One Week” capable of divi- 
sion into two equal parts, although having direct 
relation to, and foreshadowing, the One Week in Dan. 
9:27, as, also, constitutively entering into it. 

It is significant that while Antiochus was a type of 
the final Antichrist, to a certain extent, there aré) féas 
tures in the photograph of the Antichrist that we do 
not find in the history of Antiochus. The ¢yfe, Dan 
X1:21-35, melts insensibly, according to the law of per- 
spective and prophetic representation, and passes over 
into the aztitype seen in Dan. x1:36-45; xil:1-7, which 
looks to the ‘“ End-Time,” and not to Antiochus at all, 
but far beyond, as even Hofmann himself most conclu- 
sively shows. Theclose of doth the great divisions of 
the book of Daniel (i-vi), (vii-xii), is identical with the 
Second Advent, a fact Auberlen unhappily overlooked, 
limiting the second half of Daniel to Maccabean times. 
It is not the times of Antiochus that are reproduced 
when Antichrist comes, but his own times emerge. It 
is also significant that the “2,300 hundred evening-morn- 
nings” are not named anywhere in John’s Apocalypse, 
and that the 1,290and 1,335 days, lie beyond the last half 
of the 7oth Week. What is perfectly clear is that Daniel’s 
“One Week” for the revived Beast of the fourth em- 
pire, is resumed and filled out. in doth its halves, partly 
in the Olivet discourse, then completely in John, the 
first half covering 6 seals and 6 Trumpets, the second 
half the 7th trumpet or 7 Vials. And what is also clear 
is that the prophesying of the two Witnesses occupies 
the first half of the 7oth Week, during which the 


THE 1260 DAVS OR 8% VEARS. 159 


Christian Jewish Church of the End Time is formed in 
the Holy Land. It is no less clear that the down-tread- 
ing of-the Holy City and persecuting times of the 
Beast, lie in the second half, for the simple reason that it 
is only when the Witnesses have “ completed,” or “ fin- 
wshed”’ their testimony, that the Beast which ascends 
out of the abyss, comes tothe height of his power, 
makes war against them, and slays them, Rev. xi:7. 
Hofmann, therefore, errs, in referring Dan.ix:27 to An- 
tiochus, as greatly as Auberlen and the Church, in gen- 
eral,in reierring it‘to Christ. It belongs to neither, 
but only to the Lzttle Horn, Dan. vii:25, the last Antichrist, 
Dan. xu:7; the Beast, Rev. xiii:5, whose Parousza is at 
the beginning, the point of whose supremacy is at the 
middle, and the close of whose mission is at the End, of 
the Week. In this, Fries, Karsten, Schultze, Kliefoth, 
Splittgerber, Miihe, Diaschel, Grau, Rinck, Ko6hler, 
ioc, Christian, V olck, etc., etc., all agree. The true 
title of this last week. divided into 3% and 3% or twice 
1,260, is simply the Azse, Reign, and Ruin of the Antt- 
christ. Its opening is the Parousza of Antichrist. Its 
close is the Parousza of Christ. The first 3 % or 1,260 
is the period of the Witnesses, forming the Jewish 
Church and a contemporary resistance to the Antichrist. 
The second 3 % or £,260, is the period of the Great 
apwation, Dan. xi:1; Matt. xxiv:22, 29; Rev. -vii:14; 
xiii:5 ; the time when the people are given into Anti- 
christ’s hand, the time of the woman’s sojourn in the 
wilderness, the time of thedown-treading of the Holy 
City, the time of the Beast’s dominion, the time of 
the desolating abomination, the time when the power 
of the Holy People is broken, the time when the cove- 
nant, or treaty with the masses having been violated, 
the Sacrifice and Meat Offering have beeu caused to 


160 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


cease, and new heathenism introduced, of which the 
Antichrist is the head. Here we cannot be mistaken. 
In both Daniel and John, the photographs point-to the 
same individualized Antichrist, a military Rider, Con- 
queror, and Persecutor. The subject of the prophecy 
is the same, the Jews; the empire the same, the Roman; 
the place the same, even Palestine; the time the same, 
the End Time; the 3 %, or 1,260 the same, viz.: the half 
of the ‘One Week ;” the Judgment the same, viz; the 
Destruction of the Antichrist ; the Judge the same, viz: 
the Son of Man coming in the “ Clouds of heaven;” 
from ‘‘ Heaven Opened;” the Kingdom the same, that 
which is given to “ the People of the Saints of the Most 
High ;” the Deliverance the same, that of the survivors 


who are “written in the Book;” and the End of the. 


Week the same, viz.: Israel’s full redemption, the res- 
urrection of the faithful dead, and the millennial age. 
And all these being the same, and events of the 7oth 
Week with their issues, it follows.that the 3% or time, 
times, and a half; or 1,260, or forty-two months, or % 
Week, twice taken, are the same. They, therefore, 
represent neither merely ideal time, nor the 1,000 years, 
nor the whole time from Jerusalem’s destruction by 
Titus to the Second Coming, nor the half of a Great 
Week of 2,520 years, nor the last 3 % years of Anti- 
ochus, nor are they all contemporaneous and identical, 
although they are equal measures of time, nor do they 
represent the period of Mohamwedan or Papal domi- 
nation dated in their last half, either from A. D. 525, 
566, 606, or 725, according to the continuous Histor- 
ical Year-Day Theory; but in their first Halfjmas 
1,260, are the period of the prophesying of the 
two Jewish witnesses, and, in their second half, the 
“shortened days,” Matt. xxiv:22, the “short time” of 


wt, 


- 
‘ 


THE 1260 DAVS OR 8% VEARS. 161 


Satan cast out of heaven and coming down in great 
wrath, the period detween Israel’s Conversion and the 
Destruction of Antichrist at the Second Coming of 
Christ. Rev. xii:12, the period of the last “Great Trib- 
fiton, (an. xu:1; Matt. xxiv:29; Rev. vii:14.* 

4. The importance of the foregoing cannot be over- 
estimated. The defence of the literality of the 3 % 
years, 42 months, or 1,260 days, stands or falls with the 
defence of the literality of the 1,000 years. It has been 
very logically objected, and with great force, that if 
the Year-Day Theory is exegetically correct, and the 
prophetic numbers are not literal, but only “ miniature 
measures of time” standing for larger proportional 
cycles of time, “aday for a year,” then “ the 1,000 years 
must mean, at least, 360,000 years.” Mr. Guinness has 
sought to meet the force of this objection, in his work 
on the “ Approaching End of the Age,” by the argu- 
ment that as the 1,000 years are “ nota time of waiting” 
or “ expectation,” but a joyous “fulfilment,” they are 
not amenable to the objection made.t This is the 
view of Professor Birks, whom he takes as his guide. 
All the prophetic numbers are to be interpreted, he as- 
sures us, upon “the one uniform scale of a day for a 
year,’ —save the 1,000 years. And this, it is urged, must 
be so, because (1) they are all typical; (2) they all rep- 
resent astronomical cycles; (3) the revealing Angel ex- 


* The eschatological equation is this, viz.: (1) Dan. ix:27 equals vii:25 
equals Rev. xi:2, xi:7 equals xiii:5, the 3% of the unanointed prince, the Horn 
of the 4th Empire, the last Antichrist, of whom Antiochus was the type,.and the 
Woman’s sojourn in the Wilderness, the secozd ha/f of the Week, which is 
Rev. xii:6 and 14. (2) Rev. xi:3 equals Dan. ix:27, the 344 of the two 


_ Witnesses, i. e. the frst half of the Week. Both halves are in Dan. ix:27, 


therefore the text is twice used in these equations. M. Godet is right when 
he sees clearly that the Israel in John is the Israel in Daniel. The 144,000, 
are the ‘* People of the Saints of the Most High,” and the Jewish Christian 
Church of the End-Time. 

+ Approaching End of the Age. 306, 307. 


162 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


pressly informed Daniel that the 70 Weeks—Shabuim 
Shibim—were weeks of days put for years, actually 
“announced as 490 days”’; and (4) because the events of 
history have proved to us that these 70 Weeks are 
weeks of years, and are all fulfilled.* Itis with no 
pleasure to ourselves we are constrained to differ from 
men so great, able, and good, and such noble defenders 
of the pre-millennial doctrine. Itis to differ with the 
Reformers, with many excellent scholars, with men like 
Faber, Woodhouse, Cunninghame, Elliott, and Cum- 
ming. But the interests of truth, in this relation, 
leave us no other alternative. In answer to the fore- 
voing, it must be said, first of all, that the 1,000 years 
are, by Mr. Guinness, declared to be an astronomical 
cycle astruly as the 1,260, and therefore the circum- 
stance that these 1,000 are not a period of “ waiting” 
will not exempt them from the law that would make 
them also a ‘‘ miniature measure of time,” 1,000 for 360,- 
000! They are certainly a “prophetic number,” and 
‘all the prophetic numbers must be interpreted on the 
one uniform scale of a day fora year!’ And, more- 
over, “al/ are typical,” according to Mr. Guinness. But 
further, it is contrary to fact (and here hes the funda- 
mental and fatal mistake) that the Angel revealed to 
Daniel that the 70 Weeks were Weeks of ‘“ Days put 
for Years.” That is incorrect. The Hebrew term; 
“« Shebua,’—“ seven,’ does not always mean 7 days. It 
means no more than the term “ Septem” in Latin. It 
may mean hours, days, weeks, months, years, bushels, 
acres, Pharaoh’s lean kine, or the sons of Sceva:— 
which it is,can only be gathered from the “ context, and 


from the nature ol the case.” True, indeed, the Hea 


* Ibid. 302, 303. 


e, 


LEIS 1260 DAYS OR 334 YEARS: 163 


brew term is the common term for an ordinary. week, 
but the proof that it is so used, in the texts where it 
occurs, is gathered from the “‘ context and the nature of 
the case.” It is incorrect to say that it “always” and 
“necessaruy’ denotes 7 days. And that, in the predic- 
tion of the Angel it cannot mean days is established be- 
yond all doubt, by the events foretold and impossible to 
occur in 70 weeks of days or “ 490 days” 2. e. 1 year, 4 
months, and 10 days, prophetic time; as also by the or- 
ganic connection of the prediction with the previous 
490 years during which the Sabbatic year law was vio- 
lated 70 times, and, for which, 70 years’ captivity were 
decreed. We are not dependent (as Mr. Guinness sup- 
poses) on the subsequent fulfilment of the Weeks to 
know whether they are days or years. Still further, it 
is incorrect to hold that the 70 Year-Weeks have “ai/ 
_ been fulfilled.” Only 69 of these weeks have passed 
into history, the 7oth being still future. Neither the 
Angel nor Daniel knows anything of a Year-Day The- 
ory. The“ Seventy Sevens,” as Daniel understood them 
(and as the Angel gave them), were Sevens of Years, a 
7 jor a Year,\7o times 7 Sabbatic Years, 2. ¢., 490 
years. Vhey included the rebuilding of the Temple 
and City after the return from exile, the Advent of Mes- 
siah, the second destruction of both Temple and City, 
a long interval of second dispersion, and the Rise, 
Reign, and Ruin of the last Antichrist, with Israel’s 
final deliverance. A period of 490 days would not be 
chosen by the Angel, as a time in which to represent 
the occurrence of these stupendous events. And, once 
more; the prediction is neither “ figurative, ” nor “ typ- 
ical,” but plain, unfigured and literal prophecy. No 
symbols are here. Even were it symbolic, yet this does 
not deprive the numbers of their literal value. | 


2 


164 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


And it is just for these unanswerable reasons, the 
“1,260 days” cannot be taken to mean 1,260 years. What- 
ever “applications” on a larger scale, men may make 
of them, whatever theories of interpretation men may 
build on such applications, no matter how interesting 
or marvelous the astronomical discoveries of M. Ches- 
eaux may have been, one thing is eternally sure, viz.: 
That the 1,260 days in Daniel and John, cannot be dis- 
lodged from their vital organic relation to the 7oth 
Week of Daniel. They are half of the “One Ween 
in Dan. ix:27.. That is their only and ultimate seat and 
source. They spring from there alone, the fous et origo 
of their being. And because of this, they are days 
standing for days, a day for a day, and not a day fora ~ 
year. The 7oth Week is the last inaseries of 70 Weeks 
of the same co-ordinate character and chronological 
value. To hold otherwise, and interpret otherwise, is 
to wreck the whole prophecy, and make it wild, absurd, 
and ridiculous to the last degree, contradicted by 
Scripture and History alike. A child must be able to 
see that, if the last half of the 7oth week equals 1,266 
years, the first half must equal 1,260 years also, and by 
parity of reasoning, the whole 7oth Week must equal | 
2,520 years, and, by a necessary consequence, each one 
of the 69 co-ordinate weeks of the one series must equal 
2,520 years. And, this being so, then the 70 Weeks — 
must equal 7otimes 2,520 years, or 176,000 years. That — 
is, the Angel informed Daniel that, from-the Motse 
Davar, or Decree of Cyrus, B. C. 536, to the Firstaaaam 
vent and Death of Christ, no less than 176,400 years 
would elapse, or more than 17 times the distance from 
the Creation of Man until now, allowing man’s time on 
earth to be 10,000 years! By what right, on the Year- 
Day Theory, shall we interpret the last halfof the 7oth — 


THE 1960 DA VS. OR-8% VEARS. 165 


Week to mean 1,260 years, and not the first half also? 
And if so, then by what right interpret ove of the 70 
Weeks to mean 2,520 years, and not a the weeks in 
the same way? It is because the 70 Wecks are Year- 
Weeksand not Day-Weeks standing for Years, that the 
“1,260 days” expressly so called in Scripture, are days 
standing for days and not for years,and belong not 
to centuries on centuries past, but are the last 3% 
years of the Antichrist to come. And, if the 7Zoth 
Week belongs, as the Church supposes, to Czrzs¢,. and 
not to Axtichrist,—if it follows in strict chronological 
sequence upon the 69th week, as is generally assumed, 
then with what face can we, as we do, interpret the 
first half of it as that occupied by the ministry of our 
Lord in Galilee and Judea, 3 % literal years, instead of 
the 1,260 years, and the second half of it during which 
it was said the covenant was further confirmed with 
the many believing Jewsup tothe death of Stephen as 
3 % years instead of 1,260 years also? By what right do 
we say that the 7oth Week is “/udfilled” in those 7 years 
or “ One Weck” in the midst of which Christ was “cut 
off,’ on the Day-Day Theory, taking the numbers liter- 
ally, and then wheel about and say, it 1s “ zat fulfilled,” 
and apply it, symbolically, to the Papal or Moham- 
medan Antichrist, dating its first half from somewhere 
in the neighborhood of B.C. 606, and its last half some- 
where in the neighborhood of A D. 1914? The times 
of this ignorance God has undoubtedly winked at, but 
now, as undoubtedly, since light so clear has been shed 
on his Word, commands all interpreters, every where, 
to repent! How much longer will the Church, disre- 
garding Israel, continue to “apply” the 7oth Week of 
Daniel, first, to A. D. 30-37, and next to the period from 
B. C. 606 to A. D. 1914, treating with positive disdain 


166 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


the labors of faithful men, who would redeem God’s — 
word from the “ignominious failures” of its professed | 
expounders? Who cannot see that, in Eschatology, — 
the Church is involved in an error as deep and broad ~ 
as she was in Soteriology, before the Reformation, an — 
error of which one day, she will be ashamed? The 
word of the Puritan Robinson, “Iam verily persuaded, 
[am very confident, that the Lord has more truth yet to 
break from His holy word,’ is only what every pa- 
tient student of prophecy has felt to be true.* Itis only 
by a great inconsistency, that they who hold the Year- — 
Day Theory,and apply the 7oth Week of Daniel either — 
to the Mohammedan or Papal Antichrist, and the Ref- 
ormation, so spiritualizing the prophecies concerning 
Israel, can hold to the final conflict of Israel with the 
last Antichrist, and to Israel’s national conversion. 

5- What we reach then, asan incontrovertible factis 
this, viz.: That the precise measurement of the 3% 
times, or years, the 42 months, the 1,260 days, is fixed — 


* «Nor is it all incredible that a Book which has so long been in the 
possession of mankind, should contain many truths which are not yet dis- — 
covered.” —Lishop Butler. . 

‘“ Even now, after eighteen centuries of Christianity we may be involved 
in some enormous error of which the C hristianity of the future will makeus — 
ashamed.”’—P70f, Alexander Vinet. 

“ All our efforts to arrive at a more perfect knowledge of the Seript- 
ures, imply that hitherto they have been understood but imperfectly.”—D7 
Woods 0 f Andover. : 

‘“ The time is coming when all the dark places of the Scripture will be — 
elucidated.” —Pro/. Moses Stuart of Andover, 

‘There are many passages of Scripture reserved to quell some heresy 
yet unborn, and confound some error that hath yet not a name.”—Robert— 
Boyle, 

‘“ The Truth is a hill not to be commanded, but commanding error that 
now is, and is yet to be.”—Lord Bacon. . 

‘Patefacta omnibus veritas, sed nondum est occupata. Multum ex illa — 
etiam futuris relictum est. Qui ante nos ista moverunt, 202 domini nostri, 
sed duces sunt.” — Seneca. a 

“* Accessu temporum, multis noviter infunditur que forsitan priscis doc- — 

toribus ccelata monstratur.”’—Casszodorus. a 


Si 
oo + 


THE 1260 DAVS OR 8% VEARS. 167 


unalterably by a comparisou of Scripture with Script- 
ure.. Never are 3 % “times” described in Scripture, 
as3 % “days,” but always as 3 % “years,” or 1,260 
moays. Fhe word “time” never denotesa day of 24 
hours, but in prophecy is substituted for the word 
“year.” A comparison of Scripture with Scripture 
meoves this. If, taking a “time” fora “ year,” we: re- 
duce the 3 % times, or half week of Daniel to days, 
what we get is 360days plus 720 days, plus the 180 days 
equal 1,260 days, and if to this, we add 30, we get the 
1,290 days, Dan xil:11; and if to this we add 45 more, 
we get the 1,335 days, Dan. xii:12; and this is precisely 
the calculation of the Angel himself. And that these 
1,260 days are the second half of the ‘ One Week” of 
years in Dan. 1x:27, is clear, (1) because the “ Keren” or 
Horn of the 4th empire, Dan. vu:25, is the unanointed 
“ Nagid,” or prince to come, the Desolator, 1x:27, who 
appears in the 7oth Week at the close of Gentile times, 
the period of supreme power for the one, being 3 % 
years, and for the other, the last half week, identical peri- 
ods ; (2) because both these characters are the last Anti- 
Messiah and persecutor of the Jewish Saints in the End- 
Time, Dan. x11:7, xi:45, of whom Antiochus Epiphanes, 
the “ Melek,” or wilful King, Dan. xi:36-39, and the Horn 
of the 3d empire, Dan. viii:9-13, was the type; (3) be- 
cause the Horn of the 4th empire, the unanointed prince 
to come, the last Anti-Messiah, and John’s first Beast, 
Rey. xi:7, xiii:1-8, and 8th personal head of the Beast, 
Rev. xvii:8, 11, xix:19, 20, are all one and the same animal, 
a compound, diabolical, divine, human brute; a Beast, 
a Man,a Devil, a God; the self-exalting, self-degrad- 
ing, blaspheming factotum in heaven, earth, and hell! 
That great scholar, Professor Heinrich Von Ewald, 
was, therefore, right, when, comparing Scripture with 


168 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Scripture, hesays, ‘“ The 1,260 days, or 42 months, dur- 
ing which the Holy City is trodden down, Rev. x1:2, 
are that short, predetermined period, that /ast 3% 
yearsof thc One Week, which in the second part of Dan- 
iel, andsince Daniel, is the fast standing formula for the 
extremest tribulation immediately preceding the Ad- 
vent of Messiah; a number which Johnin Rev. x1: 
2, and xii:5, designates in a zew way, as 42 months, and 
which Daniel designates in xi1:7-loas Literal days.”* 
So, also, Professor Orelli, “That these weeks (in Dan- 
iel) are spaces of 7 years is seen by comparing Dan. 1x: 
27 with vii:25 and xii:7."+ So Kiiper, in his classic work 
on Prophecy, “ That, by the Skabuzm or Sevens, in Dan. 
1X:24-27; we are to understand Year-Weeks, results 
not alone from their relation to the 70 years’ Captivity 
Dan. ix:2; but from the 1290 and 1335 days in xii:11, 12; 
which stand connected with the “time, times, and half- 
time,’ vii:25, xu1:7; that rise out of the 7oth Weekags 
vided into two equal parts, and to whose last half an 
excess of 30 and 45 days are added, for further expla- 
nation.” { Contrary to Mr. Guinness, Dr. Pusey affirms, 
what all Hebrew scholars will recognize as correct, 
that “In prophecy, ‘Weeks’ are Weeks of Years, and 
not of Days. There could be no ambiguity in the peo- 
ple’s minds. The period could not be 70 Weeks 
of Days, or a year and about 4 months. The events 
are too full for it.’’|| In like manner, Professor Stanley 
Leathes: “ The principle of reckoning by Sadbbatic 
years is here implied.”§ And Professor Drummond, of 
London, in the same way, “From a comparison of Dan. 


*-[ohan, sehritten IT, 223: 

+ Die alttest. Weissagung. 525. 

t Das Prophetenthum, 382. 

| Approaching End of the Age. 303. Pusey on Daniel, 170. 
§ Old Test, Proph. 196. 


THE 1260 DAVS OR 8% VEARS. | 169 


xi1:7, with xi:11, we learn that 3 % ¢zmes are equiva- 
lent with 1260 days, and therefore must be 3% years. 
This pertod ts treated in Dan tx:27 as Half a Week, and 
fence it is evident that the Weeks are Weeks of 
Years.”* These testimonies might be multiplied, but 
are already sufficient to show that the effort of Mr. 
Guinness fo break up this Stronghold and Citadel of 
Futurism, Dan. ix:24-27, by importing into it the 
Year-Day Theory, is unsuccessful. The Scripture 
itself repels it, as it repels the assertion, wholly unjus- 
tified, that the Angel announced the period of 490 
years “‘as 490 days.’t We must decidedly demur to 
that, and ¢hat gone, the Year-Day Theory is gone! 
The fact stands patent, from the organic connection of 
all prophecy that Dan. 1x:26, 27, is the frame or skele- 
ton of John’s Apocalypse, chapters vi-xx; .that the 
ay, times in John, ave the 3 % times in Daniel, the 
Beast being the Little Horn, and therefore the 1260 
days are not days put for years, but days put for days, 
being 3 % literal years still future to us, at the End of 
the Times of the Gentiles. 

6. Were the Reformers, therefore, involved in a 
false view when, believing the Pope to be an Anti- 
christ, they adopted the Year-Day Theory, taking the 
1200 as years, dating from about A. D. 606 or 725? 
Were the translators of King James’ Version, who so 
materially affected their version by this theory, false in 
their Protestantism?{ We answer Wo, intensely JVo. 
The alliance of the Year-Day Theory with Protes- 
tantism was unnecessary. Protestantism did not need 
to stake its great movement upon making the 7oth 


* Drummond. Jewish Messiah, 204. 

+ Guinness Appr. End of the Age, 302, 303. 

t See a series of valuable articles in the ‘‘ 7vu¢h,” April, May, June, 
July, 1888, by Benjamin Douglass, Esq., Chicago, published by James H, 
Brookes, D. D., St. Louis, Mo. 


170 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Week of Daniel cover the whole time from B.C. 600 
to A. D. 1920, and then limit that week to the 7 years 
in whose midst Christ was crucified! We must be- 
ware of the conclusion that, if the Year-Day Theory 
has no exegetical foundation, then Protestantism was 
unjustified. This is a mistake into which we have 
often fallen when defending the Protestant “application” 
of the symbols of Daniel and John to the Papacy, as 
against an exclusive Praeterism which sees in them on/y, 
a reference to Maccabean and Neronian times, and an 
exclusive Futurism which denies every and any reference 
to the past or the present. No less amenable to just 
criticism is that exclusive Presentism, or Continuous 
Historic and Protestant interpretation, which denies to 
these symbols azy relation to the past or the future. 
Protestantism is justified even without any calculation 
of 1260 years, even as Przeterism, within certain limits, 
is justified’ wholly apart from any calculation of » 
1260 days. The events of the 6th decade of the first 
century, or the Neronian times and Roman Jewish 
war, even as the events of the 16th century, or Refor- 
mation-time, do not stand or fall with the strict inter- 
pretation of the 7oth Week in Daniel. Protestantism 
existed before Joachim took the 1260 days for Years. 
Itis independent of any calculations as to Israel’s future. 
It became entangled, hopelessly, as to prophetic inter- 
pretation, when it made the Church of Rome, the Har- 
lot, mean the false /srae/ on the one hand, and Protest- 
antism the ¢vue /srael on the other. But it did not err 
when, seeing the wonderful axalogy, between the feat- 
ures and photographs of the last Antichrist, and those 
of “ Deus Dominus Noster Papa” at Rome, it declared 
that the gleam of the Antichrist glimmered in the 
countenance, and the acts of the Antichrist were re- 


THE 1260 DAVS OR 8% VEARS. - hiya 


flected in the conduct, of his imperial Holiness. Yet 
all, zmperfectly; even as imperfectly in Nero, and in 
Antiochus, other features were represented. 

We must beware of xarrowness, in our views of 
God’s word, while yet we must adhere to strictness, in 
allowing Scripture to explain itself. Grammar, Lexi- 
con, Usus and Organic Unity have their inalienable 
rights. The &schata are Eschata, and Israel is Israel. 
And yet foreglancings of the End meet us all along 
the way to the End, and, for that End, all the previous 
steps are a signal and vast preparation. All history 
Is in some sense, “ ¢yfical.”” That which das been, zs, 
and that which zs, shall be. The view that God operates 
all things by number, measure, weight, and proportion, 
and that, as Newton saw it, the universe is “a system 
of identical laws evolving analogous phenomena,” the 
material related to the moral and religious, as the 
shadow to the substance, and that a profound sympathy 
exists everywhere in all God’s works, no matter in 
what sphere occurring, isa truth not less of Science and 
Philosophy than of Scripture and Theology. While “ap. 
plication” 1s not “ ¢nxterpretation,” yet God’s word is as 
elastic as it is rigid. The law that moulds a tear upon 
the cheek forms a planet initsorb. The “Septate Law’ 
already was mirrored in the Jewish Calendar in Sevens 
of various dimensions, even as it is mirrored in Nature 
in the same way, and also in History. And it is writ- 
ten in the heavens, if M. Cheseaux and others are cor- 
rect, in astronomical cycles corresponding to prophetic 
numbers. We must admitthis. Still, for all this, As- 
tronomy is not exeyesis, even as Geology is not, though 
both confirm the Scripture. Concede, here, all that 
the advocates of the Year-Day Theory, demand, yet, 
when it comes to a question of Biblical interpretation, 


172 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“3% years”’ are not, and cannot be made, “ 1260 years” 
even as “ Daniel's people” cannot be metamorphosed in- 
to the “ Géntile Church.”’ Concede all that is justly 
claimed for types and typical applications, yet the Roman 
Imperator, celebrating his triumph in the Capitol, was 
as little the subsequent Emperor Julius, or Augustus, 
as Antiochus, Nero, the Pope, Mohammed, or Napoleon, 
were, or are, the final Antichrist. The ‘1260 days” are 
dejected Satan’s “short time” Rev. x11:12 ; and to afflict 
the Saints 1260 years under the last Antichrist’s rule is 
more than God is willing to permit. We may not con- 
found things which God has distinguished. 


RECONCILIATION OF )Viliws: 


It is often asked, may not the Year-Day Theory, or 
Presentism, be reconciled with Futurism, or the Day- 
Day Theory, the one for Protestantism, the other for 
Israelism? And we might also ask, may not the Day- 
Day Theory, have a double reference, first to the past, 
and next to the future? In short, may it not include 
Preeterism as well as Futurism, even though Przter- 
ism. on 7/s scale, like Presentism on 7/s scale, is only an 
imperfect shadow of the final Futurism? Why not ? 
May that not be applicable to the different ecclesias- 
tical schemes of prophecy, which Leibnitz said of the 
different philosophical systems of men, viz., that they 
are ‘true in what they affirm, but false in what they deny” 
How many devoted and eminent scholars are among 
the Przeterists! How many, not lest famed, are among 
the Presentists? And what a streaming galaxy among 
the Futurists? Preeterists, like Ewald, say the proph- 
ecies can be “shaped to suit” the events of the Be- 
ginning, or Nero-Time. /resentzsts, like Thiersch, say 
the prophecies can be “ shaped to suit” the events of the 


PiPie 12008 DAYS OF Sie VY LARS: 173 


End-Time. Futurists, like Leyrer, say the prophecies 
can be ‘“ shaped to suit” the events of Middle Time, and 
of Historic Christianity. All use the same expression, 
“shaped to suif,’’ though writing independently of 
each other. There is, certainly, a deep unconscious 
testimony, here, to some deep truth not yet fully de- 
veloped from the word of God; a truth of great im- 
portance in reference to the structure, relation, and de- 
sign of prophecy, as well as to the law of its appli- 
cation. May it not be true that the Lacluszvism of 
each of these three great systems of exposition is the 
bane of that clearer, broader, deeper, higher, rounder- 
sightedness which would bring into perfect fellowship 
and unity of utterance all students of prophecy, care- 
ful only not to confound things that are distinct, 
and not to deny the reference claimed by each? This 
does not involve the vagaries of any, but does con- 
fess the truth that cannot be successfully gainsaid by 
any. The Apocalypse was a support to the early mar- 
tyrsin the time of Decius and Domitian. None can 
deny it. The antecedent events of the Nero-Time 
were typical of still future things.* It did provide 


* T hold strongly to the Domztianic date of the Apocalypse, A. D. 95, or 
96, as against Canon Farrar’s repetition of exclusive Preterism, and sup- 
pression of the evidence, both external and internal, on which the early 
church relied with unbroken uniformity for 500 years. Whoever desires to 
see the demolition of the preeteristic date, A. D. 69, will find it in Lardner 
and Woodhouse, in Hengstenberg and Kliefoth, in Godet’s ‘‘ Studies on the 
New Testament, ” in Milligan’s Appendix to his ‘* Revelation of St. John, ” 
in Elliott’s, ‘‘ Horze Apocalyptice, ” not to mention other works. I have re- 
viewed Canon Farrar’s representation in the ‘‘ 77z?th,’’ October 188%, edited 
by Rev. James Brookes, D. D., St. Louis, Mo. Alford’s Prolegomena to the 
Apocalypse is excellent in its refutation of the speculative criticism that 
makes the Apocalypse a Book written de/ore the Destruction of Jerusalem by 
Titus. Thiersch, Ebrard, Schultze, Harnach, and Volck, vigorously op- 
pose the earlier date, and it is to be regretted that Dr. Schaff, in the later 
edition of his works has changed his former and better view, cn this question. 
The reaction against this extreme Preeterism is setting in strongly, to-day in 
Germany. The ‘‘ Nero hypothesis” ought to be driven out of exegesis. In 


aw 6, x ZL 


~- 


174 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


consolation for the sufferers of the Middle Age and 
Reformation times. And, as surely, it will be Israel’s 
strength in that awful crisis which shall close the Gen- 
tile Dispensation. Jt zs meant for all time. And 
what else as the final book of the future glancing with 
prophetic vision, from time to time, from John to the 
Second Coming, should it be, and viewing all as one, 
than the Revelation of Him who announces Himself as 
Preterist, Presentist, and Futurist, all in one, Jesus 
Christ, “who zs, and was, and zs to comel” Rev. i:4. 


the well chosen words of Professor Thiersch, ‘‘ John’s Apocalypse had some- 
thing greater for its object than the events of the time of Nero and his suc- 
cessors. All those interpreters are fast chained in error who see only herein 
the fall of Jerusalem, and a Roman Emperor as the object of the visions. 
The events of that time served asa means, appointed by Providence for the 
anticipation, vepresentation, and understanding of future things, the 
shadows of a yet more decisive drama to occur at the end of the Christian 
age.” Dre Apost, Zeitalter, 226. The fact that the antecedent events of 
the 6th decade of the first century are, to a certain extent, mirrored in the 
Apocalypse written A. D. 95, or 96, even as all earlier events are mirrored in 
later prediction, does zot prove that the Book was written in Nero’s time. 


PAM CAC SERVO ERROR. 175 


PART III. 


Aa LE CAUSE OF ERROR: 


ine whole: eflect of our discussion, thus far, is’ to 
produce the conviction that the stumbling-block in the 
way of reckoning the 70 Sevens is not in the prophecy 
itself, but in our own zgunorance, “not knowing the 
Scriptures,” or in a false chronology, or, if not that, then 
in a false mode of computing the Sevens, and the Gen- 
ealogies, or in both together. Something is wrong. 
The Angel says, that Many, in the time of the end, 
shall be hike adventurers at sea, turning their rudder 
this way, then that, on the wide ocean, in search of 
land, yet finding none, but at last, by means of their 
very erring, shall increase knowledge, and come to 
shore. So has it been with the writer of these discus- 
sions! If we accept the Cyrus Date B. C. 536—not as 
infallible, for we do not need this,—but only as ap- 
proximately correct, and if it is proper to count the 69 
Weeks unbroken/y—then the solution of the mystery of 
the 70 Weeks is absolutely impossible. Neither an 
Angel, nor an Cedipus, could achieve it. The substi- 
tution of the lower dates (B. C. 457 and 445) will afford 
us no relief. It is impossible that 536 should be 490 or 
483. It is impossible to ignore the Cyrus decree as 


176 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


the a guo of the 70 Weeks. If we take 457, then 79 
years, or if we take 445, then gI years, pass away be- 
tween the Return from Exile, under Cyrus’ decree, and 
the Edict to restore and build Jerusalem! Wearly a 
whole century expires after the Angel’s word to Daniel be- 
Jore the oracle he delivers, even begins to be fulfilled! Be- 
fore the Davar goes forth, two generations of restored 
exiles go down to their tombs! This is intolerable, 
and only proves that it requires greater faith to believe 
an absurdity than it does to believe a miracle. It is 
undeniable that, after a temporary suspension of the 
work, from 2d Cyrus to 2d Darius, 16 years, Ezra 11:8, 
Ii; iv:5, 24, the work was resumed 2d Darius, they 
decree of Cyrus having been found at Achmetha, and 
republished by an order of Darius, with another of his 
own annexed, and was “finished” in the 6th year of his 
reign; 2. ¢. 21 years, exactly, after the decree of Cyrus 
was first made. It is undeniable, also, that the people 
“builded the Czty” as well as the “House of the Lord,” 
under and in pursuance of Cyrus’ decree, and during 
the first years following its first publication, and that 
this was the gravamen of the complaint in the letters 
missive of Chancellor Rehum, Governor Tattenai, 
Bishlam, Shimshai, to the Persian king, and the cause 
of the wrath in the renowned Osnapper’s conglom- 
erate swarm all ready to assail, like bees, the laboring 
captives. Ezra iv:12,16,21. Hagg.i:14. During thie 
early part of the 7 Sevens the reconstruction of the 
dwellings was begun. And just because of these facts, 
they who insist on calculating the 70 Weeks, now 
from B. C. 457, or again from B.C. 445, are compelled 
to first count the 7 Weeks as immediately sequent upon 
the Decree of Cyrus B. C. 536,—(for the release from 
Exile, the Founding of the Second Temple, the Ob- 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. Le 


struction, and the Resumption, cannot be denied to 
have taken place when they did take place),—and then 
carry these same 7 Weeks forward, after they are left 
behind, and count them a second time, in order to forma 
new starting-point for the whole 70! By this means 49 
years are added to the Angel’s prediction, and actually 
enclosed in the Sacred Sevens, so that the Angel is 
made say that 490—490+49—539, or that 483483449) 
—=532. That is, with the 7 Weeks dehind the reckoner, 
they are yet resumed, thrown forward, and recounted, not 
only the 62, but even the final 1 week, being attached 
in order to secure an ad guem for the 70 Weeks, or 490 
years, either the year of our Lord’s Baptism, or the 
year of His Crucifixion! Such is the almost univer- 
sally received computation. Schematized, this gro- 
tesque conception stands thus: 


o) ie) oo 
3 So to 90 years. Se Ka 
S oe SP a. 
i S rnin 
bg 47 Sevens = 7 + 62 + 1 = Yo sevens, Pose 
~ 34 60 to 70 years. mm «649 + 434 + 7 = 490 years. py’ 9 
QO no UL is - WwW > 
Sn 8 Site WOT a 
wm 2s e = @ 
w Dar ae °o Up 
oY @ OV tad > 
wu g 2 


And this is the orthodox gucd erat demonstrandum, in 
our apologetics and polemics, against all Jews and 
Pagans, in proof of the Messiahship of Jesus of Naza- 
reth, from the 70 Weeks of Daniel! Jesus was the 
true Messiah, according to Daniel, who predicted His 
Advent to be 483 years after B. C. 536, decause Messiah 
died just 490 years after B. C.445!! Isit a wonder that 
Rabbi Isaac, in his Chizzuk Emuneh (Rampart of Faith) 
the arsenal of English and French infidelity in the 18th 
century, should say, “Those who will examine the 
books of the Nazarenes will find that there is nothing 
12 


178 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


clearly known amongst them concerning either the be- 
ginning or the ending of the 70 Weeks, one placing 
them here and another there, so that there is no agree- 
ment.’ * It is worse than this. From 80 to go years 
fly away after the Return from Captivity, and 60 to 70 
years expire after the Temple is finished, dcfore the 
Edict to restore and build the City isissued! If the 
Angel said so, we should assent without a murmur, but 
there is no reason why we should say so, then say the 
Angel said it! 

The temptation is plainly immense to amateurs in 
chronography to repeat the 7 Sevens, seeing that, by 
the extra 49 added to the 483 years, or 62 Sevens, we 
get the sum of 532 years, 4834+49—532, to which add. 
ing the 4 years’ error in our Dionysian Era, we have 
exactly the 536 years from Cyrus to Messiah, z. e., just 
76 Sevens, and then proceed by the tools of a higher 
criticism to amend the lower Esdrine text, and defend 
the reading of the Septuagint! The bait is glittering! 
The diagrammed conception would be this : 


Cyrus. 7 + %4Y + 62 = 46 Sevens. Prince. 


Ba. 536, 940.9 400) dad) — ce anvears. Messiah, 


the Dionysian 4 making the 536! The trouble, how- 


* The Sepher Chizzuk Emuneh, or Book of the Fortress of Faith — 
Munimen Fidei, was written by Rabbi Isaac, son of Abraham, a cultivated 
Polish Jew, and orthodox Caraite or descendant from one of the Ten Tribes, 
and who died at Troki A. D. 1594. It is the standard defence of Judaism 
against Christianity. Voltaire says of it, ‘‘The most confirmed infidels have 
alleged nothing that is not already in Rabbi Isaac’s Book.” (dZelanges 7/1, 
344.) It has been turned into Latin, French, Spanish, German, English, 
and gone through Christendom. It isone of the calmest and ablest polemics 
against, —not the Bible,— but our special hermeneutics and handling of the 
Bible, that ever was written. The copy quoted from above (p. 342) is a 
beautiful reprint of Rabbi Isaac’s work, in parallel Hebrew and German 
columns, edited by David Deutsch, Sohrau in Ober Schlesien, 1865. Pp. 395. 
Baron Rothschild contributed 500 francs toward defraying the expense of its 
publication. It was replied to by Wagenseil, of Altorp, 1681, and again by 
J. P. Storr, Tuebingen, 1703. See Liheridgc, Hebrew Literature, p. 444. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 179 


ever, is that the Septuagint says there are “77 Sevens,” 
or 539 years, from Cyrus to Messiah. This, however, 
could be got rid of, just by reversing the rvé/e of the 
Dionysian 4, 2. ¢., subtracting the 4 from the 539 which 
gives us B. C. 535, only one year less than 536, and 
near enough for all practical demonstration. /iis me- 
dia justificat! Why not add the extra 49 years? The 
answer is plain. It is dishonest. The sum of $4.83 may 
be ledgered to mean $5.36 in ordinary business, but by 
no legerdemain in Biblical chronology can 7177! It 
will hardly do to intimate that the Angel’s purpose in 
mentioning 7 Wecks by themselves, was to pay a pass- 
ing compliment to the 7 weeks next following the de- 
cree of Cyrus, then wink us to recount them in front 
of the 62, or start the whole 69 from one or other of 
the lower Artaxerxes dates! The Angel allows us no 
such liberty. He bids us “know and discriminate.” 

He tells us that, “from the J/otse Davar to restore 
and build Jerusalem, unto Mashiach Nagid,” 

1) “there shall be 7 weeks,” 

2) “and there shall be 62 Weeks ;” 

No verb exists, and we are obliged to supply the 
copula “shall be” in the first clause, according to a 
universal law of grammar in all Semitic languages. 
Why should not our translation supply it also in the 
ea clause? “There shall be 7 Weeks; and there 
shall be 62 Weeks.” Doubtless, that was the reason 
why the colon, or Athnach, was placed after the 
7 weeks, but which has been perverted to sustain a 
Maccabean interpretation. It separates the clauses 
into two independent statements, and Hitzig is perhaps 
correct when saying that no one acquainted with either 
writing or speaking the Hebrew language, could either 
point or translate the text otherwise. Why did the 


180 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Angel make two independent periods? Why not say 
“there shall be 69 weeks?”’ ‘The conviction must cer- 
tainly press itself, more and more, upon a thoughtful 
mind, that the grouping of the 70 Sevens into three pe- 
riods implhes a separate existence, separate characteristic, 
and separate interpretation, of each, and perhaps an in- 
terval, longer or shorter between each, and perhaps in 
the groups themselves. 

The peculiarity of the sub-distribution into 74+62+1 
is striking and of supreme importance. _ It is our duty 
to observe that nowhere does the Angel say that there 
are not more than 483 years between the going forth of 
a decree to restore, and Prince Messiah. What he 
does say is that there shall be zot /ess than 482 years. 
The distinction is vital. Messiah will not come before 
7 decreed weeks and 62 decreed Weeks have passed 
away. This much is absolutely certain. And if so, 
our mode of computation must be wrong if the re- 
ceived chronology is right. What we shall have to do, 


is to say that, from Cyrus onward,—yet perhaps not. 


unbrokenly,—there shall be, at least, 7 Weeks or 49 
years, and then determine, if we can, what the ad quem 
of these weeks is. Then, next, we shall have to say 
that, from the a quo of the 62 weeks onward,—yet per- 
haps not unbrokenly,—there shall be, at Jeast, 62 
weeks or 434 years, and then determine, if we can, 
what the a guo of these weeks is. In the 62 weeks the 
ad quem is distinctly stated, but not the a guo. In the 
7 Weeks the a@ quo is distinctly stated, but not the ad 
guem. And the ad quem ot the 62 is the ad quem of the 
whole 69.- And these observations are vital. There is 
foresight and design in this concealment, and it is clear- 
ly meant to exercise our thought, by way of “know- 
ing” and “discriminating.” We are sure if we start 


q 
a 


\ 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 181 


forward from Cyrus. We are sure if we count back- 
ward from Messiah. But we are zot sure that we may 
count unbrokenly either way. /ust there ts the prob- 
lem! The Angel does not say that, after 483 years, 
reckoned unbrokenly from the decree of Cyrus, Messiah 
shall come, but only that after 69 decreed, or selected, 
Weeks of years, will be His Advent. 

If these remarks are correct, then it is possible, by 
changing our mode of computation, to retain the date of 
the Edict of Cyrus (B. C. 536), and explain the great 
post-exile Prophecy of the 70 Weeks, without either 
asserting that date to be infallible, or resorting to vain 
ideals. Counting 7 Weeks or 49 vears unbrokenly, 


merom B.C. 536, brings us to B. C. 487, but we are not 


sure that this is the ad quem of these weeks. Counting 
backward from the Birth of Messiah 62 Weeks, brings 
foto B. C. 434, but we are not sure that this 1s the e 
guo of these weeks. The sum of 49+434(—483) is not 
536 years. Count as we may, we are ever confronted 
with an excess of 53 years, 536—483—53, over and 
above the 483, and if we allow for the 4 years in our 
Dionysian era on which our reckoning is based, then 
57 years face us, outszde the 69 weeks, demanding ex- 
planation. We cannot discharge them. They will 
not down at our bidding. Plainly, these 57 are Gentzle 
times, and no part of the /ewzsh Sabbatic Sevens. They 
belong to an interval, or intervals, somewhere between 
some of these decreed Sevens. This much is absolutely 


~ certain. Ifthe date 536is right, and the decree of Cyrus 


was the Motse Davar spoken of by the Angel, (and both 
these we accept), it does seem clear that our whole 
method of computation has been wrong for 18 centu- 
ries, and has plunged us into quagmires from which 
there was no escape. It is plain as can be, that the 


182 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


7 weeks and the 62 weeks do zot contain the sum of all 
the years between the Decree of Cyrus and the Advent 
of Christ. The full number of the years between these- 
events is 4831+37—540, less the Dionysian 4 which 
gives us 536. 

If we “know and discriminate” the Hebrew text 
clearly, we shall find that the 7 weeks are assigned to, 
and decreed upon Daniel’s people and city, for the 
actual work of restoring and building the Temple, City, 
Walls, Gates, and Houses, and the religious, civil, and 
political organization and reform of the returned Ex- 
iles. The books of Ezra and Nehemiah confirm this. 
The Characteristic of the 7 Weeks is the Restoration, 
This does not exclude the fact of further building and 
adornment, or repair, during the 62 wecks following, as 
was the case after the assault of Antiochus Epiphanes, 
and under the splendor of Herod the Great. The whole 
combined period was to be one in which there should 
be the Times of Distress. “And in distress (or pres- 
sure, or straitness) there shall be the times.” The 
Characteristic of the 62 Weeks is Israel’s deepening 
Apostasy, notwithstanding all God’s favor, a defection 
so great as to lead even to the rooting out of Messiah 
when He comes, a crime resulting in the wreck of the 
whole Restoration, the re-destruction of the rebuilt 
Temple and City, and re-dispersion of the guilty peo- 
ple during a long period succeeding. As to the Char- 
acteristic of the “(One Week,” or final 7, divided into 
two equal parts, it is that of Israel’s final Redemption, 
the preservation of their Temple built a third time, the 
possession of their land, and the destruction of “the 
prince that shall come,” with whom, in the madness of 
their last Apostasy, Israel’s masses have entered into 
covenant, only to suffer tribulation, and who, as a Des- 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 183 


olator Desolated, perishes under the outpoured vials 
of divine wrath. Such are the phases of the devel- 
opment. 

The 70 Sevens, therefore, while covering, are yet cut 
off and cut out from the whole course of Gentile Times, 
and are limited to the accomplishment of a special pur. 
pose, named in the Hexad v. 24. Their sub-distribution 
opens the road to the goal. They are decreed with 
special reference to a special People, a special City, 
and a special End,—‘“upon thy people and upon thy 
city,” and for the purpose of “putting a stop to the 
Apostasy, etc.,” v. 24, z.¢., a stop to Israel’s perpetual 
defection. They have nothing to do with Gentzle de- 
velopment. They are not decreed upon Persians, 
Greeks, Romans, Saracens, Turks, Russians, English, 
French, Germans, or Americans, but only upon /evwis. 
They have nothing to do with the affairs of Shushan, 
Athens, Rome, Mecca, Constantinople, St. Petersburg, 
London, Paris, Berlin, or New York, but only with 
the affairs of Ferusalem. They are exclusive Sevens, 
devoted to the special interests and fortunes of Israel 
and Palestine. They begin that way. They continue 
that way. They end that way. Their fulfilment is 
the execution of God’s purpose with respect to the 
chosen people, chosen city, chosen land. They do not 
Pelate to the Church, or the Church-Period. The Ad- 
vent of Messiah, His Baptism, Life, Death, Resurrec- 
tion and Ascension, the Second Destruction of Jeru- 
salem, A. D. 70, and the course of Christendom, all lie 
wholly ou¢szde their number, valleyed between the 62 
and the final 7. They do not even condescend to notice 
Gentile “culture,” “progress,” and “civilization.”  I[s- 
rael alone is their purpose, object, theme, and end. 

And now, we are ready for our solution of their 


184 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


mystery. The assumption that the “Sevens Seven 
and Sevens Sixty and Two,” with the final “ One 
Week,” are one compacted period cut out, without in- 
terval, from the body of Gentile Times, is contradicted 
by the sub-distribution itself into 746241, by their ex- 
clusion of all Gentile times, save the years that enter 
into their own number, by the space between the Ad- 
vent and the Crucifixion, seen in the word “After,” by 
the space between the Crucifixion and the Destruction 
of Jerusalem, A. D. 70, and by an interval between the 
Destruction of Jerusalem and the end, all these sep- 
arately indicated spaces being but parts of the one 
great space between the 62 and the final 1, so making 
one interval out of all. The Angel himself shows us 
where oze interval is, at least. It les between the 62 
Weeks and the 1 Week, and its Characteristic is the 
second long day of I[srael’s casting away and disper- 
sion, and the down-treading of Jerusalem until Gentile 
times are fulfilled. And our Lord confirms, and inter- 
prets for us, the Angel’s word. Luke xxi:24. 

Ezra the ‘“‘ Shopher,’ who lived to work under the 
7 Sevens and help fulfil the Angel’s oracle, tells us 
where another interval is. None better knew. It lies 
between the 6th Darius Hystaspes when the Sec. 
ond Temple was dedicated, and the 7th Artaxerxes 
Longimanus when Ezra received his Commission un- 
der Edict from that King, the son of Xerxes and Vashti, 
and repaired with a second colony from Babylon, to 
re-inforce the first at Jerusalem, and organize and re- 
form the people. It is an interval of 57 years lying in 
between the first 21 years next following the decree 
of Cyrus, and the last 28 years of the first 49 years of 
the prophecy. In other words, as the 21 years are 3 


Sevens, and the 28 years are 4 Sevens, it lies between the ~ 


; 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. ~ 185 


first 3 and last 4 of the 7 Sevens. Ezra vi:15;vii:1-7. 
From ist Cyrus, 536, to 6th Darius, 515, are Cyrus 9, 
Cambyses and Pseudosmerdis 7, and Darius Hystaspes 
5 full years, 21 in all, or 3 Sevens. How important an 
epoch for Israel was the 6th Darius, we may learn from 
the Behisttin inscription which, reared by himself 
and recording his overthrow of Babylon, a second time, 
in the 5th year of his reign,*—and from Zechariah’s 
appeal to the lingering captives to escape the im- 
pending danger as Darius prepared to move on the 
revolted city,“ Ho! Zion! Deliver thyself! O 
Dweller with the daughter of Babel!” Zech. i:11,— 
and from Zerubbabel’s bringing home the Temple top- 
stone, “with shoutings, Grace! Grace! unto it!”’ Zech. 
iv:7,—as also from the Great Dedication of the Temple, 
and the Great Passover attending. Ezra vi:r4-22. It 
was at that eventful, epoch-making date, were sung the 
words of the 118th Psalm, 


‘The stone which the builders rejected 
Is become the head of the corner ! 

This is Jehovah’s doing ; 
It is marvelous in our eyes! 
This is the day Jehovah hath made, 
We will rejoice and be glad in it.”’ 


Great day for Israel! Fit event to be the ad quem of 
tbe first 3 Sevens ! 

And now, a dlank of 57 years occurs in the Sacred 
History between this great epoch 6th Darius, and 7th 
Artaxerxes which is the immediate date next recorded 
by Ezra. True, indeed, the Book of Esther comes in 
between the 6th and 7th Chapters of Ezra, to tell us 


* See Rawlinson’s Herodotus IV. Appendix. Records of the Past. 
Vols. Land III. Bosanquet, Messiah the Prince, 201. Wright’s Zechariah, 
291. 


186 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


how a plot for the universal massacre of the Jewish 
people in 127 provinces of the Medo-Persian Empire, 
from India to Ethiopia, was devised by a vile Amale- 
kite, and a decree from Xerxes secured for its accom- 
plishment, and only frustrated by that heroic daughter 
of Israel, who, risking her own for the life of her peo- 
ple, said, in the courage of faith, “I will go in to the 
king though it be not according to the law, and if I 
perish, I perish!” Esther iv:16. But this belongs not 
to the Seventy Sevens decreed upon Jerusalem and 
her home-brought exiles. It occurs in the early inter- 
val of the 57 years, and is part of the Times of the 
Gentiles. Like all intervals, it is excluded from the 
count, even as the modern enfranchisement of the Jews 
in Europe belongs not.to the Seventy Sevens, but the 
modern interval itself. 

The 6th Darius is in Ezra vi:15. The 7th Artaxerxes 
is in Ezra vii:1—7.. The interval following 6th Darius 
is found in the words, “ Now after these things, in 
the reign of Artaxerxes, 7th year, Ezra came to Jeru- 
salem.” The length of time over-leaped, includes the 
remaining 30 years of the reign of Darius Hystaspes, 
the full 21 of Xerxes the Great, and 7 years of Arta- 
xerxes the Longhanded; in all, 57 years. No theo- 
cratic work appears to have been done after the great 
jubal epoch, for over half a century. The mighty 
previous effort seems to have exhausted the people 
Love of ease, doubtless, and Gentilizing ways increased, 
until the Lord raised up Ezra to renew the Restoration 
a second time. The prophets Haggai and Zechariah 
had passed to their tombs. How important an epoch 
Ezra’s mission under the Edict of Artaxerxes was, the 
whole world knows, constituting a Second Restora- 
tion, the reform of the people, the re-establishment 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 187 


of the Nomocracy, and the complete organization of 
Israel into a body politic with its Temple cult re- 
vived, though not in its ancient splendor. The 57 
years of interval, taken from B. C. 515, bring us down 
feeb: ©. 458, the 7th year of Artaxerxes. The next 
date given us, is by Nehemiah, Ezra’s contemporary, 
who tells us that, in the 20th Artaxerxes (B. C. 444) 
under the fourth Persian Edict favoring Jerusalem 
and the Jews, he was commissioned as “ 77rshatha,” or 
Governor, of the City, to protect the sepulchres of his 
fathers, the tombs of the kings and the prophets being 
even then exposed, and complete the mural defences 
of Jerusalem, bulwark and tower. Neh. ii:1. Count- 
ing full years, again, the distance from 7th Artaxerxes 
to 20th Artaxerxes, or B. C. 458 to 444, is 14 years, or 
2 Sevens more, in which Restoration work was done.* 
The next date given us by Nehemiah, is 32d Arta- 
xerxes, “12 years” of arduous labor having passed, the 
circumvallation finished, the Wall dedicated, houses 
erected, and further reforms effected. This brings us 
pew to Bb. ©.432. “Accused to the king, by the ene- 
mies of Israel, of a purpose to revolt from the Persian 
Crown, and declare the independence of Israel, now 
that Jerusalem was fortified, Nehemiah went to the 
Persian Court, reporting his labors, remained there 
some time with the king whose “ cup-bearer”’ he had 


* There is every reason to believe that Artaxerxes Longimanus, 3d son 
of Xerxes by Vashti, i, e., Amestris, and who was contemporary with Hero- 
dotus and Thucydides, was the King who sent Ezra and Nehemiah to Jeru- 
salem and sanctioned the restoration of the fortifications. Ezra vii:t. Neh. 
ii:I-8, Rawdlinson’s Herodotus, VV. 217. According to Rawlinson, Wil- 
kinson, Oppert, Heeren, Grotefend, Brugsch, Thirwall, Grote, Curtius, the 
Ist year of Artaxerxes Longimanus was Bb, C. 466-5. ‘This would make the 
7th Artaxerxes to be 459-5, the 20th to be 445-4, the 32d to be 433-2, and 
the 34th to be 431-0. ‘‘The Restoration of the City cannot be considered 
as really accomplished until after the date of Nehemiah’s visit to Jerusalem, 
B, C. 444, and not even then,”’ WRiGHT’S Zechariah, 23. 


188 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


been, enjoyed the friendship of his old companions, 
doubtless wrote the book of Esther, then returned “at 
the end of days,’ after “all this time,” and, finding old 
abuses revived during his absence, re-commenced and 
continued his reformation, ousting the Ammonite from 
the Temple, providing for the Levite ministry, purg- 
ing the people, and closing the whole work of the Sec- 
ond Period of Restoration by the Sanctification of the — 
Sabbath,—fit type of the coming “ Sadbéatism,” follow- 
ing Israel’s final Restoration, and of the “est that re- 
mains for the people of God!” Neh. xu:6, 7; v:14. How 
much time is included in the expression “add this time,” 
and “at the end of days,’ and in the closing period of 
Nehemiah’s labors after his Second Return from the 
Persian Court, is conjecturai. No critic pretends to ~“% 
assign less than 2 years.* If weadd these 2 years to } 
the 12 already given, we have 14 years again, or 2 
Sevens more, bringing us down to 34th Artaxerxes as 
the end of Nehemiah’s iabors, and conclusion of the 
whole double Restoration-Period, the ad guem of the 


* Various writers hold that Nehemiah’s return from the Persian Court 
was ‘‘probably” not before 11th Darius Nothus, i. e., 18 yeavs after his de- 
parture from Jerusalem, Josephus saying that he lived to a high old age. | 
Auberlen says this may be ‘‘probable.” Kurtz says Nehemiah “‘ appeared” 
under Darius Nothus. Thetext affords no support for any of these con- 
jectures. Kliefoth rejects them. Even a ‘thigh old age” for Nehemiah 
would not, as Auberlen truly remarks, ‘‘ require many years,” and Kurtz’s 
indefinite ‘‘appearing” argues nothing as to the end of the 7 Sevens, but 
only as to Nehemiah’s longevity. Both Haggai and Zechariah survived, a 
short time, the 3 Sevens. Many scholars take the expression ‘‘ketfs yamim,” 
“ond of days,” to mean ‘‘end of a year,” and, though the expression itself > 
does not determine this, yet all the circumstances of the situation go to sup- f 
port it. Auberlen fails to find any ad guem for the work of Nehemiah. It is ; 
a “vanishing point,” as itis with most! Sir H. Rawlinson gives B. C. 434, | 


el ee iad ie - ap 


as ‘‘about” the date of the Book of Esther. Niagelsbach, K6hler, Schrader, 
Orelli, make Malachi contemporary with the period of Nehemiah’s absence, 
the prophet thundering away at the Gentile abuses and increasing apostasy, 
while Nehemiah was at the Persian Court. See KLIEFOTH On Daniel, 319; 
Kurtz, Sac. Hist., 248; WINER, Realwort, II, 147, Orelli, in STRACK- 
ZOCKLER’s Kurtzgef. Komm., Malachi 494. Rawlinson’s Herodotus III, 
Appendix. 


i 


a 
a 
Mei 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 189 


7 Sevens, which we set out to find from God’s word 
alone. If now, finally, we add to B.C. :430 the de- 
ficient Dionysian 4, we have, in these 434 years, the 62 
Weeks, wzthout interval, extending from their @ quo, 
which also we set out to find, 34th Artaxerxes, down 
to the Advent of “Prince Messiah.” 

Clear as daylight is the fact that the Restoration 
Time was a Double Period, parted by an interval of 
57 years; a Double Period actually defined in Ezra by 
the dates 6th Darius and 7th Artaxerxes marking the 
boundaries of the interval between the two periods, 
the 1st Cyrus being the a@ guo of the first period, and 
6th Darius its ad guem, a period of 21 years; also taking 
7th Artaxerxes as the a guoof the second period. Then 
comes Nehemiah giving us the ad quem of the second 
period, 34th Artaxerxes, aperiod bisected by his coming 
fo jerusalem in 20th Artaxerxes, ‘Still more; he actu- 
ally gives names to doth these separate periods; calling 
the first period “ the Days of Jotakim, son of Joshua, son of 
Jozadak,” Neh. xii:26, and again, “the Days of Zerubbabel,” 
v. 49; and calling the second period “‘¢he Days of Nehe- 
miah the Governor, and of Ezra the Priest, the Scribe,” v. 
26, and again “che Days of Nehemiah,” v. 47. Ordinary 
readers might not detect these important distinctions, 
but they exist, defining two distinct periods, called 
“Days,” by the activities of the holy mén whose labors 
signalized the same. The 7Zzmes of Zerubbabel and 
Joshua were one period. The 7imes of Ezra and Nehe- 
miah were another; just as we speak of the Times of 
William the Conqueror, and again of Cromwell. And 
these are precisely what we have in the first 3 Sevens, 
or “Days of Zerubbabel” on the one hand, and in the 
last 4 Sevens, or “Days of Ezra and Nehemiah,” on the 
other. This, certainly, ought to be conclusive. Be- 


190 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSION Se 


yond all controversy, the men who lived in and labored 
during those Seven Sevens are the best witnesses of how 
they were distributed. And if we remember that Ezra 
himself was engaged in compiling the canon, and in the 
old Hebrew collection placed the books Ezraand Nehe- 
miah zmmediately after the book of Daniel, to what other 
conclusion can we come than that he put them there in 
order to help us interpret the 7 Sevens of the 70 Weeks, 
and that the Book of Daniel with its sublime prophecy 
of the 70 Wecks is zo¢ a Maccabean production, but was 
known to Ezra? The divine interpretation of the 7 
Sevens, as it stands in Ezra and Nehemiah, is this, 


C g ps 8 S 
\¢ > = o. oa 
S| uy x a om 
n 

; 3 Sevens. §& Hoa Sevens: & 2 Sevens. & 
o = 57 years. > Ss sg 
oO 21 years. Dn ‘al I4 years. iv 14 years. ivi 
ey fm . EB r 


equals 34242 1. e. 7 Sevens or 49 years, a douple pe- 
riod divided by an interval of 57 years, the whole time 
from the a guo to the ad quem of the 7 weeks being 106 
years, 49 of which were selected, or decreed, upon the 
City and People of Israel, for actual restoration and 
rebuilding work. 

Thus we have inductively discovered ¢wo intervals 
between the 70 Sevens, the one between the 3d and 4th 
of the 7 Sevens, the other between the 69th and 7oth 
Sevens. oth these intervals are put there by the sacred 
writers themselves, and are therefore the work of God. 
The Angel, the Prophet, the Scribe, the Rutergms 
Lord, all confirm them. This much is secure. We 
have learned, also, what is meant by the “Seventy Sev- 
ens’ as distinct from “7he Times of the Gentiles.” The 
one stand over in contrast against the other, even as 
Israel stands over in contrast against the Nations, and 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 191 


Jerusalem against all other cities. The one belong to the 
Jews, the other portion to the Gentiles. If, still, a third 
interval may yet appear, by reason of the possibility 
of a revision of our secular Chronology, and also of 
our handling of the Biblical data, so harmonizing the 
regnal times of the kings of Israel and Judah, as also 
shortening the lines of Babylonian, Median, and Per- 
sian, succession, allowing for years of co-regent ad- 
ministrations, zt wzll be found, tf at all, between the 7 
and 62, and nowhere else, with Malachi as the a quo. 
Nor would the discovery of such an interval disturb 
in the least, what we have seen, as already resting on 
the plain statements of the word of God. 

We do not say that such an Interval exists, or that 
the Masoretic Athuach, the English Colon, found at 
the end of the 7 Weeks, indicates such an Interval, 
but only that, should Chronology require, hereafter, 
some gap between the end of Nehemiah’s labors and 
the beginning of 434 years reckoned backward from 
the Birth of Messiah, ¢hzs would in no way affect the 
accuracy of the 7 Sevens as fixed and measured periods 
of historic time. These Sevens did most certainly 
begin. Yhey did most certainly exd. Clearly, three of 
them run on from 1st Cyrus and end in 6th Darius. 
Prairie-like is the gap of 57 years. On its other side, 
are the other four of the Sevens, beginning as Ezra 
declares they do, with 7th Artaxerxes Longimanus, Ezra 
7:7, and which MUST END at @ point 28 years distant, 
and so close the decreed period of the Restoration. Ac- 
cording to our received chronology, and the regnal 
years of Artaxerxes Longimanus, this closing point 
ieetene, 24th Artaxerxes, or B. C. 430. The 7 Sevens 
MUST HAVE a definite end, and this end is required 
to be 2 years after the 32d Artaxerxes, Neh. xi:6. 


192 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Final Redemption of Israel. Dan 9: 24, 
Second Advent of Messiah Dan 7: 18. 


End of the Times of the Gen ile. Luke 21: 24. 
<s 


Dan Oo: 27. 12: 7-Rev. Il. 2; Fyfe 


Athnach 

B. GC. 480 Neh. 13: 6, 7. 5: 14. 
“~ Restoration. 

Ct Bm 

me *. 

RO B. C. 444. Neh, 2: 1. 


20th Artakerxep 
a 


and Sevens Sixt 


3) B. C. 458. Ezra 7: 1-7. 


he 
Ot) mM 
<> @ i = o 
i we Sz 3 vA 
Peel © 
cl “5,833 
ae ees SUBS S Apostasy. 
Oo 3s DSONS 
Deas Rares = 
a 3 dala 
ape > OP oA sae 
Sa olgs qj Missions. 
an rE 8 a 
® 5 qh} Aq rar 
P alam 
E g = ae Ree. 
ee 
Ope 5 
ms . £4. Destruction of Jerusalem A. D. 70. Dan. 9: 26. 
og © oe) ‘ Messiah Cut off, Dan 9: 26. 
o 8 re) Prince Messiah First AAvent.A. D. 1. Dan 9: 25. 
Os) ¢ , 
q ae Nl Antiochus. 
os = » ,  tolemies. Seleucids 
Se) ra] aon 
we 3 : > 
Baht Sto ee Sige 
eS, 
A ee 
S) 
Sire 
a 2 
> 
® 
9) 
D 
ra 
o 
@ 
taf 
D 
eI 


Persian. 


s Seven 


Rest oration 


n 
fon 
PP 
ro 
Ye) 
B. 


C. 515. Ezra 6: 15. 7: 1-%. 
Temple finished 


f=) 

3 

ne 

a 1st Cyrus |B. C. 586. Ezra 1: 1. Dan. 9: 25. 
q Return from Exile. 

Se elf 


b 


ist Nebuchadnezzar B.C. 606. 
Beginning of Times of] Gentiles. 


ty >» # 
Te d,, 
a | 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 1938 


The Characteristic of the first 3 Sevens we know; 
of the interval of the 57 years, the time of Darius, 
Xerxes, Esther, Haman; of Marathon, Thermopyle, 
Salamis; of Miltiades, Leonidas, Themistocles, the 
time of the shaking of the Warzons, of the heaven, earth, 
sea, and dry land! We know the Characteristic of the 
last 4 Sevens next following this interval, under the 
labors of Ezra and Nehemiah. The Characteristic of 
the 62 Sevens we also know,—Apostasy. From the 
death of Nehemiah and Cessation of Prophecy under 
Malachi, 250 years, or more, are an absolute d/ank in 
the History of the Jewish people, save what we learn 
from a fragment in Josephus.* Some intimation in the 
prophecies of Daniel and Zechariah, covering the 
Greek times especially, forecast the latter days of the 
third empire with great distinctness. But from 34th 
Artaxerxes to Antiochus the Great we have no history. 
Tradition preserved in Jewish books, reports some 
@eneral facts, The 62 Sevens were the time of the 
Great Synagogue and the Sanhedrin, the final settle- 
ment of the Canon of Scripture, the rise of Rabbinism, 
of Pharisee, Sadducee and Essene; the time of sore 
chastisement, when the Persian and Greek sceptres 
passed away, Israel’s deepening apostasy visited by al- 
ternate strokes from the Ptolemies on the one side, 
and the Seleucids on the other, and again from Epiph- 
anes, the Syrian Antichrist, who desolated the City, 


broke down the Walls, profaned the Temple, arrested 


the Worship, and set up Abomination in the Holy 
Place. The transient glory of Jewish independence 
won by the brave Maccabean heroes who fought the 
Antichrist of that time, soon glimmered away.t The 


* See Dean Milman’s Hist. Jews. I. 443. 
+ The term ‘‘A/accabee.” given to Judas, the eldest son of Mattathias, 
is the combined initial letters of the Hebrew words in the song of Moses. 
18 


194 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Sibyl resumed her seat. The Hebrew Scriptures were 
turned into Greek. A vast body of apocryphal litera- 
ture appeared. Asmonean and Idumean quarrels for 
crowns disgraced the temple splendor. When, at 
length, the 60th Seven saw the Gentile Eagle fly over 
the Holy Land, and Pompey make Palestine a provy- 
ince of Rome, the masses of the people, the Priests, 
Elders, and Scribes, Hillel, Shammai, and their schools, 
chafing under the Gentile yoke, longed for a Macca- 
bean Messiah to come and save them, a Jewish Czesar 
to wield an all-conquering scepter, annexing the world; 
while others more humble, and few, like Zacharias and 
Elizabeth, Joseph and Mary, Simeon and Anna, waited, 
and wondered, and watched for Him of whom all the 
prophets had spoken. The closed gates of the Temple 
of Janus, Israel looking to catch the first light from 
the “Star out of Jacob,” is the End of the “Sevens 
Seven and Sevens Sixty and Two.” 

We know, also, the fact that,in the Prophecy of the 
70 Weeks, only two specific events are foretold as oc- 
curring between A. D. 1 and the End, or 7oth Week. 
One is the Death of Christ. The other is the Destruc- 
tion of the Temple and City. Volumes are implied. 
More is said than-is written. But only these are 
named. In 7o years after the Messiah has come, the 
whole work of the Restoration is wrecked! The In- 
terval follows, 1800 and more years of which have 


Mi Kamokah Baalim Iechovah? Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the 
gods? Exod. xv:4. MZakkad is the equivalent of Hammer, Judas Aacca 
beus was the Charles Afartel of his day. The word A/akkabi was inscribed 
on the banner of the heroes who fought the Antichrist. and defied both 
Greeks and Romans, and bore in its face a charm like the ‘‘/z hoc Signo 
vinces’ on the Labarum of Constantine. Every man, woman, and child, 
ought to read the books of the Maccabees. All earthly history has no valor 
superior to what the men of that time displayed.” The Apostle Paul has 
made their fame immortal. Heb. xi:35-38. They are the martyrs of the 
Law, battling Apostate Jews and Pagans, together. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 195 


already gone. Ever since “blood, fire and vapor of 
smoke” colored the sky over smoking Jerusalem, Is- 
rael has fulfilled the role in the legend of the “ Wander- 
ing Jew.’ Awtul, sad, weary, the way! But the End 
approaches. And surely, as God has already literally 
fulfilled 69 of the 70 Sevens or 483 years decreed upon 
that people and that city, so surely will He fulfil the 7oth 
also, to ¢hem, in their own land, in their own city, and 
in 7 literal years of their own Sabbatic time. 

In the light of these facts we discover what damage 
‘to the word of God, and to the Church of God, the 
existence of ove time-embalmed error of exposition will 
bring, and indeed, has already brought! How, from 
century to century, exegetes and theologians, profes- 
sors and pastors, transmit, as if by hereditary blindness, 
the thick eye scales of former generations, adding new 
Jaminze of their own, and how, echoing the despair of 
others, and our own, we utter so boldly, precisely 
just what is not the fact, viz., that the numbers in Daniel 
are “entirely symbolical,” and “cannot be regucceg to meas- 
wees of kustoric time. * Exactly the reverse of this is 
the truth. The one assumption, so absolutely false, that 
the Seventy Sevens flow on, like an unbroken river, 
and are to be computed in regular succession, has been 
the source of all this vital mistake. Israel divides 
both the sea and the Jordan. The spiritualizing, or 
idealizing of Old Testament prophecy, and the whole 
false conception of the character of John’s Apocalypse 
have only made the evil almost incurable. Saturated 
with erroris Commentary. From the days of Eusebius 
and Augustine, Jerome, Africanus and Syncellus, the 
Church has gone staggering like Elymas, groping for 
the door. Greek, Latin, Lutheran, Reformed, all are 


* Briggs. Messianic Prophecy I, 426. 


196° SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


in the mire. The best men they have borne, have been 
blinded, and thousands yet are. “Legion,” “Myriad,” 
is the brood of wild interpretations begotten of this 
one prolific error, until commentaries have become 
phantasmagorias and kaleidoscopes. The India-Rub- 
ber character of the Seventy Sevens allow 7 of them 
to be pulled down to the Death of Christ, and the 
next 62 of them to stretch to within 1 Seven of his 
Second Coming! And, because so accommodating to 
our ignorance, we paste upon them the vague label 
“Sacred Times,” or profane them with the name “ Wor/¢- 
Weeks!” The restoring and building of Jerusalem is 
the restoring and building of the “Czrzstzax Church, 
the “Spzrztual Israel,” the “Sacred City!” Tt isveleds 
that Chancellor Rehum, Governor Tattenai, the noble 
lord Osnapper, and the Cis-fluvian Shethar-Boznai, 
held no such views; nor did Joshua and Zerubbabel, 
Haggai and Zechariah, Ezra and Nehemiah. Ezra iv: 
8-24; vit-17. Neh. ii: 1-20. None of them ever made 
the @ guo of the 70 Weeks nearly a century later, or 
nearly a century earlier than the Angel made it, and 
their own living history, fulfilling the Angel’s oracle. 
declared it. It was reseved for the Church, following 
interpreters like Porphyry and Celsus, or some earlier 
Alexandrite Maccabean, to say that the ad quem of the 
70 Weeks abutted against Antiochus, or Christ, or Ti- 
tus, or Onias, or the People, or all five at the same 
time! It took S#zrztual Israel to do this! It is time 
that all this devout destruction of God’s Word were 
stopped, and that, at least, this part of “the transgres- 
sion” were restrained. Perversion can go no farther. 
Our “modes” and our “zdeals” are not God’s. Our 
ways and thoughts are not His. Six times six are 
thirty-six, but Palmoni’s wonderful numbering may 


——— ee eee ee eS eee 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 197 


eount Six at the opening, Ten in the middle, Four 
somewhere else, and Sixteen at the end, of a period 
350 years long. It does not follow that, because Thirty- 
Six Times are decreed, or measured off, upon Babylon 
or Rome, London or Paris, Boston or New York, dur- 
ing three and a half centuries, that therefore 36—-350! 
The“ervgo” is Hibernian! And yet the Church teachers, in 
great part, cling to this mummied delusion of near two 
millennia! And the Jew looks on and smiles, and re- 
peats to his friends our Christian Gentile demonstra- 
tion of the Messiahship of Jesus of Nazareth, and so/¢o 
voce, tells them, and with truth, that evangelical Pro- 
fessors and Church Teachers are saying to-day, that 
the “Demonstration must be thrown overboard!” If 
God does not one day smite the Gentile back with the 
Jewish rod, it will be because His truth has failed! 
But God’s word will stang! The 70 Sevens are an 
Outline of the Philosophy of Universal History, and 
the Almanac of the Ages. They reveal to us an or- 
ganic Unity and theologic End of History such as Hero- 
dotus and Thucydides never dreamed of, simply 
because they were unable to understand Israel’s place 
in the “Times Foreappointed,” Acts xvii:26, and Is- 
rael’s relation to the Nations; a problem that baffled 
even the genius of a Hegel. It is to the credit of Bos- - 
suet, in part, and of Vico, both misled by the Church- 
idea of Israel, and yet more to the credit of those abler 
men, J. von Miller, Niebuhr, Brandt, Heinrich Leo, and 
the great school of which they are part, that the Jewish 
Captive, Daniel, is regarded as the “Father of Universal 
History,’—-rather, God himself, who, by means of 
Gabriel, gave to Daniel, then to John, the true idea of 
the course of time, the place of Israel, and the destiny 
of Israel, as a People, and the Nations; unveiling their . 


198 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


times and their end. We Gentiles put the whole into 
our spiritual alembic, apply the heat of criticism, watch 
it till it comes to double-bubble-bubble, then skim the 
surface, and tasting the hot liquid, say: ‘Impossible that 
the 70 Sevens can be historic time!” The experiment 
is vain! The 70 Sevens cover the entire times of the 
Gentiles from the fall of Babylon in the past, to the 
fall of the greater Babylon in the present. They be- 
gin with Cyrus. They end with Christ at His Second 
Coming. They are zz the Times of the Gentiles, but 
not of them. They are “decreed upon” the Jews and 
Jerusalem, not upon the English and London, nor the 
Irish and Dublin, nor the Scotch and Edinboro’, nor 
the Americans and Boston, or New York. They be- 
long to Palestine alone, and involve, in their outcome, 
the solution of what politicians call the “Aastern Ques- 
tion.” Rey. vit:2. And, as the 69 Sevens have been 
literally fulfilled upon the Jews and Jerusalem, in their 
own land, so will the 7oth Seven be fulfilled upon the 
same people, in the same land, and according to the 
law of their own Sabbatic Seven. “The mouth of the 
Lord hath spoken it!” “It is the Utterance of Jeho- 
vah, Doer of these things!” That is guarantee enough 
against the Babeldom of unbelief. The books of Ezra 
and Nehemiah were written to instruct us how to in- 
terpret the 7 Sevens with the /uterval between the 3 
and the 4 Sevens. Our Lord’s Olivet-Prediction was 
written to instruct us how to interpret the /zferva/, in 
Daniel, between the 69th and 7oth Sevens, and to point 
us to the End and Israel’s redemption at His Parousia 
when Antichrist is destroyed. John’s Apocalypse was 
written to foreshadow, in the 7 Epistles, the Church- 
side of the Interval, then display the 7oth Seven, the 
Parousia, Israel's deliverance, and, unveiling the 1000 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 199 


years, and the absolute End of the Ways of God, close 
the Sacred Canon witha solemn warning that no man 
add to, or take from, it. Rev. xxi:18. His magic lan- 
tern magnifies and intensifies with light all the great 
events in that great “Day of the Lord!” Marvelous, 
to admiration, is the organic unity and progress of d1i- 
vine revelation from Moses to John, with Israel all the 
way! “It is the Lord’s doing and wondrous in our 
eyes.” The genius of a Plato, a Pascal, or a Newton, 
the clairvoyance of all angels and all men, combined 
and raised to the millionth power, would be power- 
less to construct such a book as the Bible! Nor can 
we better obey the voice of the Angel, bidding us 
“know and discriminate’ the 70 Sevens, than by passing 
at once to the holy men and our Lord Himself, in 
whose hands the true interpretation rests. And blessed 
is the “wise” man, who, in the time of the end, ruddering 


_his way on the ocean of a stormy exegesis, and, long see- 


ing no land, yet ‘eagerly reads” the prophecy of Daniel, 
and through his very: “ ervzng”’ “increases knowledge,”’ 
“understands,” and, from the lookout on the top-mast, 
hears, at last, the thrilling word, Land ahead /* 

One further word, here. It will doubtless be asked, 
how does the concession that the Cyrus date, 536, may 
be admitted, and yet the word of the Angel to Daniel 
be proved literally true, agree fully with the word 


* INTERVALS in prophecy, and even in history, are frequent. A Gap 
of more than 1800 years occurs between the first two clauses of Isa. Ixi:2: 
compare Luke iv:1g9. A Gap of 57 years, spanned by the word ‘‘a/ter” oc- 
curs in Ezra vii:1. Compare vi:15 and vii:7. This is the ii terval between 
the first 3 and the last 4 of the 7 Sevensin Dan. ix:25, and not even hinted 
there. The interval between the 69th and 7oth Weeks, expressed by ‘‘And 
unto the End” is clear, in Dan. ix:26, and covers from A. D. 70 to beyond 
the present time, i. e.. our whole Dispensation. The same Gap of 57 years, 
seeni n Ezra vii:1, is found also in Neh. xii:26, and xii:47. The interval 
between the First and- Second Advents is overleaped in the Metallic Image, 


Dan. ii:40-44, and in the 10-horned beast, vii:23-27. A Gap of 60 years 


Pes 


500 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of Matthew, who makes “14 Generations” from the car- 
rying away into Babylon unto Messiah, or 560 years? 
Our answer, here, is the same as in reference to the 
“Sevens.” The evangelist does zot say that the sum of 
the whole number of years between the “Carrying away,” 
under Nebuchadnezzar, and the Birth of Christ, is 560 
years, but that the ‘‘generations,” counted according to 
a rule governing the construction of Jewish geneal- 
ogies, and, in this case, unfolding the line of legal and 
royal succession, are “fourteen” in number. This 
must be so, for, if we consult the ¢kree periods de- 
scribed by Matthew as each consisting of ‘14 genera- 
tions,” we shall find that no two of them agree, and 
all three are different. Again, the computation varies 
from that in Luke’s genealogy,—which has a different 
end in view. There is no conflict, therefore, between 
Daniel and Matthew, for the simple reason that the 
mode of computation by “ Generations,’ is just as 
peculiar as the mode of computation by “ Sevens.” 
There is an interval in the “Sevens.” There are both 
intervals and overlappings in the “Generations.” It is 
enough to have shown that the Bible is in perfect har- 
mony with itself in this whole matter of the 70 Weeks, 
on which the Messianic demonstration depends, so far 
as the ¢zme of the Advent is concerned, and that the 


lies in between verses 5 and 6 of Dan. chapter XI, from Ptolemy Lagi to 
Ptolemy Philadelphus. In I Cor, xv:23, 24 the whole M/illennial Age is over- 
leaped between the verses; and the same overspringing and juxtaposition of 
events, in discourse, is found in John v:29. In the symbol of the sun- 
clothed Woman the entire distance from the First to the Second Advent is 
annihilated, yet seen! Rev. xiiti1-10. In like manner, in our Lord’s great 
Olivet prophecy of the End, the same wonderful feature of representation is 
displayed in the strongest light. Matth. chapter XXIV. While a large 
amount of prophecy is chronological, a large amount also is unconditioned by 
time, events being seen in sface, not in “me, as stars are seen in the sky; 
seen, also, as mountains are seen in the landscape. Hence the /xferva/s, 
revealed by further clearer revelation. ‘So, all standard interpreters of every 
school agree. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 201 


“Sevens Seven, and Sevens Sixty and Two,” precisely 
in the order in which the Angel has placed them, 7462, 
are not to be dismissed as vague “‘zdeads,” called “Sacred 
Times,” or “World-Weeks,” void of all chronological 
value, but are exact and literal measures of historic 
time. 

B. LOCATION OF THE 70TH WEEK. 


If now we pass from the consideration of the erro- 
neous method, of reckoning the 62 weeks, to that of 
reckoning the 79th or final week, we shall not fail to 
discover another source of the perplexities in which, 
for centuries, interpreters have involved themselves. 
It is that of making the 7oth week immediately scquent 
upon the 69th; and this in connection with the fore- 
gone purpose, always to bring the 62 weeks, or 69 weeks, 
up to the Baptism or Death of Christ. Yhe delusion un 
der which this effort is made, is that the 7oth week be- 
longs to the First Advent, and that the death of Christ 
occurred at its middle point. This denies to the 7oth 
week its eschatological character, and attaches all the 
events in the Hexad of Dan. ix:24, and which relate to 
Israel's final Redemption, still future, to our Lord’s 
First Advent. It identifies Christ with Antichrist. It 
interprets the words,‘ And unto the End shall be war,” 
v. 26, of the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus, whereas 
Jerusalem is represented as already destroyed, and 
the words follow, in regular progressive order, the fact 
of that destruction, as clearly as the 62 follow the 7, 
and the cutting off follows the 62. J¢ contradicts our 
Lord’s own exposition of the prophecy of the Interval fol- 
lowing Ferusalem’s Destruction, Luke xx1:24, and of I[s- 
rael’s final ‘redemption,’ Luke xx1:28, and applies the 
prophecy, at this point, to the Christian Church, and 
the removal of the Old Covenant by the establishment 


202 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of the New. The false conception, schematized, stands 
thus: 


First Advent. Second Advent, 
Times of the Gentiles 
(3%+3%) 


instead of the true conception, thus: 


First Advent. Second Advent 
Times of the Gentiles. 


(3%+3%) 
Hengstenberg, dating the MWotse Davar, or issuing of a 
word to restore and build Jerusalem, from B. C. 455, 
his 20th Artaxerxes, and allowing for the 4 years’ error 
in the Dionysian Era, demonstrates victoriously the 
Messiahship of Jesus to those who fail to see how un- 
tenable that 455 date is.* Professor Drummond, Gof 
London, declares it is his “one telling argument.” He 
brings the end of the 69 Weeks up to A. D. 28, then 
interprets the 7oth Week, divided into twice 3%, as im- 
mediately sequent on the 69th, the first 34% being our 
Lord’s ministry, the middle of the week His Cruci- 
fixion, the last 3% he knows not what! He is com- 
pelled to confess, with accustomed candor, that he 
takes the words “to anoint a holy of holies,” to mean 
the unction of Christ by the Spirit, yet assuring us, as 
is well known, that nowhere in Scripture does a “holy 
of holies” mean a person, but only a place. The last 
3% years perplex him, as they did Auberlen, and have 
done others, and he takes refuge in the invention that 
these last 3%, or 1260, in Dan. ix:27, as elsewhere, are 
“a vanishing point, more or less,” and “minute precision 
7s not to be expected” (/) Champion of “accurate chro- 


* The alleged accuracy of Hengstenberg’s date has been triumphantly 
disproved by Wieseler, Kleinert, Hofmann, Hitzig, Kliefoth, and many 
more, notwithstanding his great learning and labor to establish it. Hengst. 
Christol. A. T, I. 541. Wieseler, 70 Wochen, p. 79. Kleinert, Dorpat. 
Beitrage II. 1-232. Hofmann, 70 Jahre, p. 91. Hitzig and Kliefoth on 
the texts in their Commentaries on Daniel. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 203 


nological precision” from B. C. 455 to A. D. 28, he 
abandons “precision” at last as a “vanishing point” that 
dwindles away! Auberlen and Leathes make the last 
half of the 7oth Week equal 35 years, “sore or less,” 
just as Professor Briggs, after making the 69 weeks 
reach to Messiah’s Advent, says, ‘‘The final week is the 
time of His advent, in the middle of which He is cut 
off,” 1. e., cut off in the middle of the ¢zme of His ad- 
vent!* Stanley Leathes says, “All after the middle 
point of the 7oth week is foreshortened, and the 
time might be, so far as the language allows, thirt)-five 
fear seor even more.’ (/) +. That’ is, 3% 35! ~Drum- 
mond justly says of Hengstenberg’s “vanishing point, 
more or less,” that “It is a lame suggestion, for the 
prophet ¢loes determine the terminal point of the 7oth 
week, and with precision.” { Pusey despairs of prov- 
ing that the last 314 years cover the preaching to the 
Jews, next following the Crucifixion, and adds, “ We 
have not the chronological data to fix it.’§ The truth 
is that the last 3% is “exactly” the size of the first 3% 
of the same “One Week,” and differs from it not so 
much as the thickness of a hair’s breadth, neither more 
or less. 

And yet, mindful of our own weakness, the power 
of educational prejudice, and the long struggle needed 
to de-educate ourselves out of an error sanctioned by 
great names, we may not be too harsh in our judgment 
on others. There is some palliation, some excuse, for 
men who are born ina fog. Until recently, the Church 
has been forced (1) to carry a bad translation of the 


* Briggs. Messianic Prophecy, I. 424. 
4S. Leathes. ©. T. Prophecy, 286. 
t Drummond. Jewish Messiah, 266, 
S Pusey. Daniel, 170. 


” 


204 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Hebrew text in Daniel ix:24-27; (2) to support as bad 
an interpretation ; (3) to transmute the Israel of Proph- 
ecy into the Gentile Christian Church; (4) to expound 
the prophecy regardless of the fact that it is the Sab- 
batic law that rules and shapes the 70 Weeks and its 
subdivisions; (5) to delude itself with a false idea of 
symbolism; (6) to lack a true view of the organic 
structure, analogy, continuity, relation, and develop- 
ment, of all prophecy; (7) to sit blind to the inner con- 
nection of our Lord’s Olivet Discourse and John’s 


Apocalypse, with the “Seventy Sevens” in Daniel; (8)- 


to remain a stranger to the true laws of prophetic rep- 
resentation, and the true development of the Ages and 
the Ends. Let this be the apology for honest but mis- 
guided minds. 


C. NEW TESTAMENT DEVELOPMENT OF THE 7OTH WEEK 


What shall we then say of the 70th week, if it is not 
immediately sequent upon the 69th? Is it only zdeal ? 
It is concrete, literal, and real, as are the 62 andwiaess 
that precede it, and the Interval also, in which we are 
now living, and whose end is fast approaching. The 
development of Daniel’s prophecy in the New Testa- 
ment makes this all the more clear. Just as the Olivet 
prediction of the End, spoken by our Lord, from Fs 
advanced standpoint in history, developed the Interval 
in Dan. ix:26, so does the Apocalypse of John, from his 
own still farther advanced standpoint in history, develop 
the 7oth Week. We have the right, from what we 
know of the law of prophecy, to expect this. | History 
is the pre-condition of the further unfolding and new 
outburst of prophecy, and the great crises in Israel’s 


history are the great epochs of prophetic evolution. 
The importance of knowing this cannot be overrated. 


PHM CAUSE TOL ERROR: YO5 


1. When our Lord spake His Olivet word. con- 
cerning the End, the 69 weeks were already behind 
Him, and He stood within two days of the expiration 
of the time involved in that word “A/fter” in the ex- 
pression, “After those threescore and two weeks shall 
Messiah be cut off.” Dan. ix:26. 

‘*Two silent nights and days, 
- In calmness for His far-seen hour He stays.” * 
The destruction of Jerusalem was not yet accomplishea, 
Piiavestiil’ d¢fore Tim, at A. D. 70. He, therefore, 
must needs, when resuming Daniel’s prediction which 
covered the whole time from the return from Exile 
down to the Second Coming, of which our Lord was 
about to speak, foretell Jerusalem’s fall, as Daniel had 
told it, Dan. ix:26, and goon to open out the Interval 
following the same, precisely where the Angel speaking 
feo rmelnad placed it... Dan.1x:20;, Luke xxi:24) 91t 
behoved Him, in few words, to also touch on the End, 
of which the Angel spoke, the final week. This is pre- 
cisely what He did in Luke xxi:28, saying, “When ye 
see these things, Lift up your heads, for your re- 
demption draweth nigh!” that very redemption foretold 
forcome at: the close of the 7oth Week in: Dan. 1x:2a. 
Perspectively viewing, as one, the Jewish-Christian 
Church, or Israel, of His own time, with the Jewish 
Christian Church to be formed under the testimony of 
the Two Witnesses in the End-Time, He declared that 
this “Genea” shall not pass away till all his words be 
fulfilled, and, by that promise, secured the indestructible 
and unamalgamated continuance of the “Jewish race” 
down to His own Second Coming. Hengstenberg 
himself, as Riehm rightly observes, admits that, in the 


* Keble. Christian Year. Monday before Easter. 


i : 


206 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 

Olivet Prophecy, our Lord followed the law of pro- 
phetic representation found in the Old Testament 
prophets, and all the more so, since the disciples had 
asked a double question which needed a double answer, 
and in which the falling and rising again of Jerusalem 
and the Jewish nation were most intimately involved, 
as they were in the prophets themselves. He blended 
the near and the far horizons in one, in the same picture 
of the future. He looked, in a right line, through Jeru- 
salem here, to Jerusalem there, and both were covered 
by His Parousza. “The Olivet prediction,” says Riehm, 
“is like that in Daniel ix:24-27, in that both group together 
and represent, as continuous, events in themselves, separated 
by wide spaces of time.” * That is the very reason why ] 
the 746211, though grouped closely, are yet separated . 
in fulfilment by spaces of time between them. Ever 
since the days of Velthusen, this great law of prophetic 


perspective has been emphasized by the best inter- 
preters, and Delitzsch has summed it up ina brief but 
clear expression: ‘“Ad/l prophecy ts complex, 1. é., tt sees to- 
gether what history outrolls as separate; and All prophecy 7 
2s apotelesmatic, t. ¢., tt sees close behind the nearest-coming, 
epoch-making turn in history, the summit of the End.” + 
So did Daniel in ix:24-27, the prophecy of the Seventy 
Weeks. So did Jesus, resuming and enlarging on 
Daniel, represent his Parousia and Jerusalem’s destruc- 
tion, as one, yet also Jerusalem’s final deliverance. It 
is the wisdom of God—not to deceive,—but to preserve 
and quicken the expectation of the Second Coming of 
Jesus in every great event connected with Israel’s 
history, and make Hope “spring eternal in the human 
breast.”” Prophecy moves on progressively, the later 


* Riehm. Messianic Prophecy, 17. 


+ Delitzsch in Herzog. Real. Encyc. III, 286. 


fd 


Det OS FNL E Pea OL: 207 


— 


prophet resuming the former, and weaving into the 
web new matter at the point where the earlier had 
dropped his thread. Or, to change the figure, the 70 
Weeks of Daniel are the original frame of our Lord’s 
Olivet Discourse, onward from.the end of the clause 
beginning with “After” in Dan. ix:26, i. e., from the 
close of the “Sevens Sixty and Two.” This is enough 
of itself to refute Dr. Klefoth’s aphorism that “ Sym- 
bolical numbers don't count.” * 

2. Again, when John wrote the Apocalypse, A. D. 
96, the Destruction of Jerusalem predicted by both 
Daniel and our Lord already lay dehind him, by the 
distance of a full generation. His historic standpoint 
was more advanced than that of our Lord, for history 
had made progress. It was impossible that John’s 
Apocalypse should predict the fall of Jerusalem, as the 
higher critics and some others, fond of the Nero Fable, 
say it does. Far from his mind was the thought that 
Jerusalem should forever sink out of sight, and Rome 
arise a Christian City, the center of the world. No! 
but Rome, New Babylon, christzanized,should go down 
in the dust at the End of the Days, under Antichrist’s 
blow, and Jerusalem, long down-trodden, shall rise 
from beneath the Gentile heel, shake off her chains, be 
redeemed with judgment, and shine as the central glory 
of the coming age. De Wette saw that in 1852. Not 
only were Messiah’s death and Jerusalem’s fall, and the 
“After” and 69 Weeks, dehznd the Seer of Patmos when, 
like prophets of old, he saw the visions of God, but 
well nigh 30 years of the Great Interval itself, named 
in Dan. ix:26, and Luke xxi:24, had passed away! 


* He is compelled to refute it himself! ‘‘Moreover,” says he, ‘‘the 
One Week counts, it comes after the 62 Sevens.” Uebrigens zeh/¢t das 
Echad: es kommt zach den 62 Siebenheiten.”” Das Buch Daniel’s, 376. 


an ee ee See 
- 4 


208 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS: J 


What remained of Daniel's prophecy, unfulfilled at that 
time, was to be resumed and further unfolded by the 
beloved disciple. And what remained was (1) ‘the re- 
mainder of the Interval itself described in Daniel in the 
expression “‘And wxéo the End,” viz., the remainder of 
the ‘“‘Times of the Gentiles,” and (2) the Azd of those 
times, 1. e., the 7oth week. And this is precisely what 
he did, the same “Spirit of Prophecy” who knows all 
things, and “moved” all holy men who wrote prophecy, 
guiding John, as he had guided our Lord and Daniel. 
It is for this reason we find in the Apocalypse (1) Our 
present dispensation, drawn in the 7 Epistles to the 7 
Churches of Asia, chapters I-III, and (2) the End-Time 
itself, or 7oth Week, divided, asin Daniel, into twice 3% 
years, or twice 1260 days; the first 3% covering the 6 
Seals and 6 Trumpets, and the testimony of the Two 
Witnesses; the second 3% covering the 7th Trumpet 
or 7 Vials, and the ‘Great Tribulation,” the whole ‘One 
Week” of Daniel thus developed in John, and covering 
the contents of the Seven Sealed Scroll, closing with 
the Second Coming of Christ from “Heaven Opened,” 
chapter I1V-XIX. Itis the “Day of the Lordy a 
“Apocalypse of Jesus Christ” in judgment. And, so 
far as regards Israel, it is precisely what Moses and 
the Prophets, and our Lord and His Apostles, did say 
should come to pass. Compound myopic hypertropic 
stigmatism could hardly fail to see it, the light is so 
clear. It is bright as the all-beholding circle of the 
Sun, unflecked by a spot, and undimmed, at noon, by 
acloud. The organic unity of the Three Great Pre- 
dictions of Daniel, Christ, and John, is such as Science, 
proud of its doctrines of consanguinity, common de 
scent, embryonic development, homology, and homo- 
geneity, would be glad to hail, and to own! In all 


— —_ —S eS Tee 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 209 


these three great predictions concerning Israel, the 
Subject is the same (Israel), the Times the same (3% 
3%), the Enemy the same (Antichrist), the Place the 
same (Palestine), the Result and End the same (Israel’s 
Redemption), and, therefore, the predictions the same, 
each enlarging on the other, the last the full picture of 
which the first was the general sketch. Can any one 
doubt what our Lord meant when He said, “This Genea 


‘shall not pass away till @//7 these things be fulfilled?’, 


ites 


He meant the “ Yewish Race /* 
Peel  tILRKEE GREAT PROPHECIES SCHEMATIZED. 


The great importance of this discussion justifies our 
lingering a moment longer on the organic relations of 
these mighty predictions. First of all a preliminary 


word. 
The Prophecy in Dantel. 


The Colossus-Prediction, Dan. 11:33-35, 41-45, provides 
the first prophetic frame, or outline for the whole sub- 
sequent development of the World-Power and Israel’s 
relation thereto, down to the Second Advent, and set- 
ting up of the Kingdom of Christ in outward glory on 
the earth. The vision reaches to the tenfold divided 
state of the Roman territory, the Ten Toes, and there 
it stops, 11:24. This is far beyond the time of Augustus. 

The Beast-Prediction is the same truth under new 
forms, and from another point of view. Man’s view of 
the Gentile Kingdom and Nations, is that they are the 
concentration of all material civilization, wealth and 
power. God’s view is that they are predacious beasts, 


* So Dorner, Hofmann, Delitzsch, Stier, Auberlen, Kliefoth, Ktiper, 
Volck, Schm dt, Schultze, Grau, Zockler, Rinck, Koch, Christiani, Luthardt, 
Hebart, etc., etc., “Das Judische Volk als Solches; the Jewish People as 
such,” 

14 


210 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


devouring one another. The Ten Horns answer to the 
Ten Toes, the Horns being, however, confederate un- 
der One Horn, an 11th, the last Gentile Ruler over Is- 
rael, and who perishes under a stroke from the Son of 
Man, coming in the Clouds of Heaven. vi:7-14; 19-27. 
Israel is triumphant. 

The Prophecy of the Greek or Third Empire, and Is- 
rael’s relation to it, gives us the Syrian Antichrist, Anti- 
ochus Epiphanes, the type of the last and Roman Anti- 
christ, or Little Horn of the fourth Empire, Dan. viii:o- 
14; 19-27. Israel again, passing through the fires, comes 
out triumphant. 

The Prophecy of the Seventy Sevens, again sweeps the 
vast future, giving us the relation of Israel to the Gen- 
tile power, from the Return from Exile, under Cyrus, 
down to the Second Coming of Christ. Three separate 
and independent periods of time, measured by the law 
of the ‘‘Seven,” with fixed Intervals between the Sev- 
ens, subdivide the whole line of history, and include 
both Advents, as also Christ aud Antichrist. Again, 
Israel having been rejected, is recalled, and passing 
through the Great Tribulation under Antichrist in the 
last half of the last decreed “Sevens,” comes Gupemas 
umphant. 

The Prophecy of the Second and Third Empires,—i. e., 
Persian and Grecian, runs over these rapidly, and dis- 
plays the Wars of the Ptolemties and Seleucids, and times 
of Antiochus Epiphanes, until, at length, by a quick 
flight, overleaping all intervening time, the ¢ypfe Anti- 
ochus glides insensibly and melts into the antztype the 
last Antichrist, xi:41-45, who perishes “ without hand,” 
i. e., miraculously, while Israel’s faithful living are 
spared, and faithful dead are raised, xii:1-3. Hovering 
over the Tigris, one saint tells another that the Tribu- 


EE ACAGSE OR, ERROR. 211 


lation shall continue only during the last half of the 
7oth Week, 1260 days, or 3% times, and come to an 
end when Antichrist’s power is broken. Then the 
Blessed time will come. Again Israel is triumphant. 

And this is what Daniel gives us. Everything 
tends to, and concentrates itself in, the awful struggle, 
and the glorious issue, of the final Week. We have the 
Outline or Frame of that Week clearly before us, in its 
two equal parts, and we shall see how it is the Baszs 
for our Lord’s Olivet Discourse, and for.John’s Apoca- 
ivece., Jhis prophetic frame of the 7oth Week, in 
Daniel, is as follows: 


I. THE ONE WEEK IN DANIEL. 


(Dan. ix: 27). 
1st Half-Week = 3%. 2d Half-Week = 3%. 
3% Bs 3% 
he ae 

Ss ANTICHRIST. 7) ANTICHRIST. © 
el 
2 The unannointcd Nagid, 9: 26. 2 The Vulture Swoop of the 3 
rs} is the Desolater, 9: 27. 2 Abomination and Desolation, on | & | 
g 2 is the King, 9: 36. z: Teva land Jerusalem, 9:27. And esis! 
20 is the Horn, 7:25. 5 this, aS 
OS Se Fe For a ‘‘time, times anda half.”” S 5 
sy » | isin league with the Apostates = 12:7. 7:25: the great tribula- 25 
as 11:30. Ml) tomy aratt: wane 
7, works deceitfully, 11:23, = Antichrist’s fite, 11: 45. oa 
g invades the land, 11:45. ; Israel’s Redemption, 12:1—3. & 
oH 


SECOND ADVENT. 


Such is the general frame, or first brief outline of the 
70th week, as given by the revealing Angel to Daniel. 
ieieepiam, clear, simple. The scene is in Jerusalem. 
And “/svael” does not mean the New Testament 
Church, but Daniel’s people, and the “ Czty” does not 
mean Christendom, but Jerusalem, first destroyed A. D. 
70, then redeemed at last. 

What a misinterpretation, big as all the geometrical 
dimensions, it is to refer this 70th Week to Christ and 
the First Advent, when it belongs to Antichrist and the 


212 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Second Advent! The grammatical and logical subject — 
of the verb “shall make strong,” v. 27, is not “ Prince 
Messiah,” but the “ prince that shall come.” 


Il. THE PROPHECY OF OUR LORD. 
(Matt. xxiv, and parallels.) 
THE ONE WEEK. 


alf Week = 3%. 2d Half Week = 3%. 
iy ist Half 3% Z 3% 
be . + rs, “ j ; ” bs re 
a ‘‘The Beginning of Sorrows.” 2 The Great Tribulation, Sy 
& Matth. 24: 7, 8, and para'lels. ca Matth. 24: 15—28. a 
S.i,| These events ure figured in o& “8 
.. | Apoc. chapter VI. Six Seals, Po The Shortened Days for the | § 4 
Qe 3B elect’s sake. Matt. 24: 22. Ex 
"a * A time of tribulation. Matth. el a5 
‘@c| 24:9—-14. Thesein Apoc. VII— &&  Tokensofthe Advent. Matth. | , 
@8 | XI. 14. The Six Trumpets: m8 24: 29. aa 
aS [Sie) wo 
rv, False Messiahs and False *%™ Israel’s gathering and Re- og 
g Prophets. Wonders, Signs, De- »& OU demption. Matt. 24: 31. Luke | oo 
Ss ceivings, Persccutions, &c. "iar ATS 2B. g° 


SECOND ADVENT. 


Such the frame and filling of the 7oth Week in the 
Olivet Prophecy, a double prophecy, which looks, per- 
spectively, through Jerusalem of A. D. 70 to Jerusalem — 
of the End-Time, and covers both the near and far — 
horizons in its minute yet great and comprehensive ex- 
pressions. As in the prophetic representation in Daniel, ~ 
Antiochus insensibly glides into the last Antichrist, so 
here, Jerusalem and Israel of A. D. 70, glide into Jeru- 
salem and Israel of the End-Time. The /arousza or 
Advent of the Lord, at the End of our own Age, is seen — 
through the Judgment on Jerusalem at the End of the — 
Jewish age, A. D. 70, which was itself only the Begin- — 
ning of the War and Desolations decreed, Dan. 1x:26, © 
“unto the End.” Remembering the double reference ~ 
of the Olivet Discourse, the Tribulation for Israel, as a ~ 
nation, degzzs, in its wide sense, with the Roman de- 
struction of Jerusalem, and runs to the 7oth Week, 
swelling to its fulness, in its last and strictest sense, — 
during the last 3% years. Then, “‘ zmmedtately after 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 913 


those days,” are the tokens of the Advent. Matt. xxiv: 
fee inen. Israel is redeemed. Luke -xxi:28:. The 
Millennial Age dawns, for “‘ Summer is nigh,” and the 
“Kingdom of God is nigh.” Luke xxi:30, 31. 

Ill. THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 


(Chapter VI—XX, 7.) 
THE ONE WEEK. 


ist Half-Week = 3%. sy 2d Half-Week = 3%. 

= S Lz 
3 1,260 days, 42 months. These $ 1,260 days, 42 months. These = 
9) are in Rev. xi:3, 7. oe are in Rev. xi:2. xii6,14. xiii: o 
~ ped} - ty 
“| Chapter VI—XI, 14. The Six Gear ice 5 
= Seals and Six Teocs: The Be. Chapter XII—XX, 7. The Sev- a. 
g “ Beginning of Sorrows,” in 5 enth Trumpet with the Seven bd 
o Matt. xxiv:7, 8. The 144,000 yao Vials. aw, 
3 re : Sao ay cae A time of Dae Sout The ‘‘ Great Tribulation.” Mi-| & 9 

ws ee eI A Nev chael stands up. Conversion a. 
a a ee 4: i Pac of Israel. Rev. xiitro, 11. w® 
‘£2 | False Messiah, and False Proph- 4.2 & h : ie 
este et, Wonders, Signs, Deceiv- Yop The 144,000 safe on the earthly “4 Q 
Ss ings, Persecutions, War, Fam- 4 ** 2 Mount Zion, with their Re-| 2-5 
S| ine, Death, vi:1-17. Stas deemer. Rev. xiv:1-5. uD 
< ‘ ; Q°* Israel victorious. xv:2-4. es 
S Beast, Apollyon, Two Witnesses be . 
a slain. Jewish Church formed. &'3  Armageddon,The Slaughter,An- Pe 
a ix:t1. xi:7. The Great Earth- 3 tichrist destroyed, jerusalem a 
) quake in Jerusalem, Rev. xi:13. ao delivered. Rev. xvit16. xiv: S 
S The 1-10 of the City falls. 2 20. xixt11-21. All occurring ® 
a 7,000 perish. ia at ar 


LHe SECOND, ADVENT, WllH 
THE FIRST RESURRECTION, 
THE BINDING OF SATAN, 
followed by 
THE THOUSAND YEARS. 


Such the frame and the filling of the 7oth Week in 
John; the whole content of the Seven-Sealed Scroll. 
It is identical with that in Daniel and the Olivet dis- 
course. The filling is complete, as becomes the last 
representation of “the mystery of God” foreshown to 
the prophets. The Olivet discourse was supplementary 
to Daniel’s prediction of the 70 weeks. John’s Apoca- 
lypse, in like manner, is supplementary to both. In the 
beautiful words of Professor Van Oosterzee, when 
speaking of the contributions of the successive prophets 
to the great picture of the future, “Avery prophet adds 


914 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 4 


his own touch to tt, until, after sufficient elaboration, the 
painters all withdraw, and the curtain falls.’”* So is it — 
here; Daniel first, Christ next, John last, all work, with 
more than a Raphael’s power, on the Great Scenes of the — 
70th Week, each supplying his own touch, until it stands 
and glows complete, at last, as the Holy Spirit meant to 
leave it. One day, ere long, it will all be translated 


into actual history. What Daniel condenses in a sizgle 


verse, Dan. 1x:27, John enlarges, as by a magic lantern, 
to stxteen chapters, Rev. [V—XX. Paul embraces the 
same 70th Week in a single verse, also, in II Thess, 11: 
8, its ¢wo termintz, there, being (a) the Parousza of Anti- 
christ, and (b) the Parousza of Christ, this same week — 
bounded, in the Apocalypse, by the Mock-Messiah on 


the White Horse of the first seal, the last imperial © 


head of Rome revived, Rev. vi:2, and the diademmm 
True Messiah on the White Horse of the 7th Vial in 
Rev. xix:t11;—the former the wxanointed Nagid, in 4 
Dan. ix:26, invading the land, Isa. lix:t9, the latter the 
Anointed Nagid in Dan. ix:25, spoiling the invader! 
And so wecome to the “zd,” the long-predicted, long- | 
expectea maid. 


E.- THE, BND .OF Tit 70TH (Wihhis 


And how magnificent an End it is, not merely ideal, 
but real! It is the End of the 7oth Week, and crowded ~ 
with marvels such as could only occur in a great bisect- 
ing epoch in history, as heralds of a new and glorious 
age. It is the End of the “Seven Times” of Mosesy 
Levit. xxvi:28; the End of the Times of the Stones 
struck Colossus, Dan. 11:35 ; the End of Israel’s national 
Grave-Yard in which the Colossus still stands upon Is- 
rael’s bones, Ezek. xxxvii:1-14, Rom. xi:15, Rev. xi:1ig 


* Person of the Redeemer. 104. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 215 


the End of the Great Interval or “Times of the Gen- 
tiles,” Luke xxi:24; the End of Hosea’s “Many Days” 
of Israel’s lone abiding, Hos. 111:3-5, and of Hosea’s 
“Two Days” of Israel’s national death, Hos. vi:2; the 
End of Israel’s national apostasy, or finishing of Israel’s 
national transgression, Dan. ix:24; the End of the 
Lord’s indignation against the chosen people, Dan. viii! 
19, 26; xi1:7-13; the End of the desolation and the down- 
treading of the Holy City by Gentile power, Dan. ix: 
20,27, Luke xxi:24. Isa. lx:1; the End of the Dzasfora; 
Bile x1:11-10; xlix:22; lxvi:20; Zeph. itio, 10; Ezek. 
XXXV1i:21, 22; and Matt. xxiv;31, compared with Isa. 
Pee ii2, 13; xix:23-25, and Rev. x:7; the End of, the 
Western Papal Antichrist, the Ghetto and the Vatican, 
involved in Dan. vii:25; the End of the Eastern Islam An- 
tichrist, and his Mosques Al Aska and Kubhat-as-Sakra, 
resting on Zion, shrines of the adorers of “Allah Ma- 
huzzim” shadowed in Dan. xi:36-45; the End of the Last 
Antichrist, the “Lzttle Horn’ of the 4th Empire, in Dan. 
vil:26, the “Wagzd Habba” and “Meshomem” in Dan. ix: 
26, 27, John’s“ Beast,” “8th Head,” the Mock Messiah in the 
first Apocalyptic seal, Rev. vi:2, the “ Exemy” invading 
the land of Palestine and bent on universal! conquest, Isa. 
fo 20, Paul's “Man of sin,’ Ii Thess. 1:3; “that 
Wicked” in Isa. xi:4; ruined at the Appearing of Christ, 
Rey. xi:i1-21; the End of the @reat Tribulation, or 
second half of the final Week, Dan. x1i:1; vii:25; x1i:7; 
f@evex-7; xii:5;- the End of the 1260, 1290, 1335 days; 
G7eeend of War; Isa. 11:4; Mic. iv:3; Ps. Ixxi7; the 
End of Satan’s constant accusation of God’s people, 
Rey. xii:10, and of his world-wide perambulation, Rev. 
X11:7-11; xx:1; the End of the blinding veil on Israel’s 
heart, Rom. xi:25—31; [1 Cor. ii1:13-16; the End of the 
same veil now spread over all nations, Isa. xxvi7; Rev. 


—6©.216 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


xv:4; the End of Christ’s sojourn in heaven, Acts 111:19- 3 
21; Heb. 1x:28; the End of Death's empire over the sleep- 


ing saints, Ps. xlix:14, 15; Hos. xili:14; Isa. xxvi:19; 
Ezek. xxxvii:i2; Dan. xii:1-3 ; Rom. viii:23; I Cor. xv: 
23; I Thess. iv:12-18; Rev. x1:18; xx:4! In short? aim 
End of the 7oth Week is the End of our present Age, 


Matt. xxiv:14; a glorious End of Israel’s woes, bring. — 


ing the six great events in Dan. 1x:24; the time when 
“To Ammt” and “Lo Ruhamah’ will be said no more, 
and ‘“/shz” will be whispered, and not the ambiguous 


word “Baal,” Hos. 1:8, 9; 11:14-23; the End when Zion* 
shall no more be called “Azubah,” but “Hephzetbah;” her — 


land no more “Shemamah,” but “Beulah;’ Jerusalem’s 
names “Derushah” and “Ir-Lo-Ne’ezabah,” and her peo- 


ple,—‘‘the ones expecting Jehovah,’ —shall be dignified — 


as “Am Hakkodesh,” the “ Holy People,” and “Geudez 


Yehovah,” the “Redeemed of the Lord!” Isa. Ixii:4, 12; = 


xl:31,—Glorious End it is for Israel!—the End of di- 
vorce, and widowhood, and death, when, as a young 
man marries a virgin, so Jerusalem’s sons shall marry 
her again, and when, as a Bridegroom rejoices over his 
Bride, so the Lord will rejoice over her again; a double 
rapture, a double joy, Isa. Ixi:5, the Lord himself 
“singing,” and “silent in His love!” Zeph. 1:17. It is 
the End when the great Harlot is swathed in flame and 
sinks in the sea, and the greater Bride is arrayed in 
white and’ sits on a throne, Rev. xvii:16; 11:27; iii 
It is the End when the Wedding has come, and the 


“FHlallel” is sung; the opening of the great Sabbatic — 


Jubilee of Jubilees, along whose centuries the words go 
ringing “flallelu-Jah! for the Lord God Omnipotent 
retgneth!” Rev. xix:6. The “Kzugdom’’ has come, the Mil- 
lennial Age, for the End of the 7oth Week ts the Beginning 
of “the 1000 years /”’ 


$ 


ae 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 217 


F. THE 2300, 1290," AND 1335, DAYS: 


The 2300 evening-mornings of the Syrian Anti- 
christ’s relation to the holy people, require but a brief 


discussion. Daniel, in his vision at Shushan, while in 


the body at Babylon, beheld, under the figures of the 
Ram and Ffle-Goat, the passing away of the scepters of 
Persia and Greece, and the rise of the Diadochian 
kingdoms into which the empire of Alexander was di- 
vided, Dan. viii:g-14. Out of one of these four sprung 
from the 3d Empire, he saw a “Little Horn,” Axtzochus 
Epiphanes, waxing to greatness, southward, eastward, 
and into “the glorious land” of Palestine. Self-exalting, 
it vaunted itself against the holy people and their rulers, 
“the host and the stars.” It overthrew and stamped 
upon them, and magnified itself even against God, the 
evince of princes,” v- 25.- It abolished the Jewish 
worship, taking away the 7hamzd, or “Established,” the 
"Pay; i. e., the morning and evening sacrifice and 
offering, and the whole Jewish cult as instituted by the 
law of Moses. It “cast down the place of the Sanctu- 


-ary,” which God allowed to be trodden under foot be- 


cause of Israei’s apostasy. One of the wonders was 
that “a host was given over” into its hands, along with 
the ZThamid, by reason of apostasy, a large mass of Is-, 
rael surrendered to the power of the Syrian Anti-Mes- 
siah who abolished everything that typified the true 
Messiah, and so, with the Jews themselves at his back, 
this Ailes Gloriosus went on, like a revolutionary field- 
marshal, destroying the walls of the city, profaning 
the temple, placing in the sanctuary the statue of the 
Olympian Jove, and the Swine abomination, and, cast- 
ing down the “7ruth,”’ burning the Sacred Books, as 
well as annulling the Sacred Worship, and, setting up 


218 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. x 


old heathenism in its stead, practised and prospered, 
and did as he listed. The full account of all this we 
have in the books of the Maccabees. That this Horn 
into which the four-parted 3d empire runs out, is the 
“Melek” or “King” in Daniel, chapter XI, 29, 30, and 
type of the Horn into which the ¢en-parted 4th empire 
runs out, is undisputed. And that this zyfe, Antiochus, 
glides insensibly, by a law of prophetic representation, 
into the antitype, the last Antichrist, the end of the 3d 
empire and the end of the 4th empire melting together 
in One, and seen in one, in Dan. x1:36-45; x11:I-7, 1S ac- 
knowledged by the best expositors. The description 
of Antiochus, in x1:21-35, is only the elaboration of the 
same Antiochus in vill:g-12; 23-25. 

As Daniel went on gazing at the Horn’s progress, 
he heard a holy one speaking, a certain saint saying to 
Palimonti, the Wonderful Numberer, “How long shall be 
the vision (as to) the Thamid? How long (as tv) the 
transgression desolating ? (i. e., as to the taking away of 


the Zhamid and setting up the Abomination), azd how — 


long (as to) the giving both the people and the sanctuary a 
downtreading ?”’ viii:13, 14. The answer is, “ Unio 
evening-morning 2300. and the sanctuary shall be cleansed,” 
v.14. The aguo of the 2300 is some point anterior to 
the actual taking away of the Z7amzd, and plainly con- 
cerns its temporary continuance under the “craft and 
policy” of the Horn, in connection with the apostates, 
Vill:25 ; xi:28, 30, 32. The ad guem is not “the cleansing 
of the sanctuary,” as is generally supposed, but the end 
of the desolating transgression, or abomination, and of 
the downtreading of the people and the sanctuary, 1 e., 
of Jerusalem; in short, it is the end of the career of 
Antiochus. The word “¢hen” in both King James’ and 

the Revised English Version is an interpolation by the 


\ 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 219 


translators. It is not in the text. Palmoni does not 
say “ Unto evening-morning 2300, then shall the sanc- 
tuary be cleansed,” but “ Unto evening-morning 2300: 
and the sanctuary shall be cleansed ;”’ and the Masorites 
have put an Athnach or Colon at the end of the 2300, 
just as they put the same at the end of the 7 Sevens, in 
aes. lhe end of the career of Antiochus in his. rela: 
tion to the Sanctuary and the people, was not the time 
of the Cleansing of the sanctuary, which was a month 
later, as we shall see. 

Various have been the reckonings of the 2300 in this 
prediction, and none of the possibilities supplied by the 
history of the times of Antiochus and the Maccabees, 
have remained untried. The dispute is whether the 
expression “evening morning,” “Ereb-Boker,’ denotes a 
whole day of 24 hours, and the 2300 to be so counted, 
or whether it taakes two half days, referring to the 
evening and morning sacrifice which Antiochus was to 
take away, so that the 2300 can only be counted as 
1150 whole days. Scholarsare divided here. Delitzsch, 
Wieseler, Hitzig, Kliefoth, decide in favor of 2300 half 
_ days, i. €., 1150 whole days. Hoevernick, Gesenius, 
Maurer, Auberlen, the older Christian, and the Jewish, 
Commentators, decide for 2300 whole days, or 6 years, 
3 months, 20 days, prophetic time; the phrase “A7ed- 
Boker,” “ Evening-Morning,’ being the Jewish mode of 
designating a day of 24 hours, as when it is said, “And 
there was a mingling (Ered), and there was a bursting 
forth (Boker),”—i. e., a twilight, followed by night, and 
a sunrise, followed by day, extending to twilight again, 
pee oe. 6 Gen. 1:5, 8, 19, 23; 31. In either case, 
however, 6 years, 4 months, 20 days, or 3 years, 2 
months, to days, the 2300, and 1150, are less than “Ouxe 
Seven” of years, or “Half of that Seven,” in the one case 


Kyl ee " 
al bee 


rs > - ¢ - _ 
~ > ‘ ger Be ie 


220) SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


by 220, in the other by 110, days. We decide for the 4 


2300 whole days. 

The dates of the vision of the Evening-Mornings, and 
also of the Prophecy of the Seventy Weeks, are the 
same, Viz., 3d Belshazzar, 1. e., ist Darius the Mede as 
King over Babylon, for this was the year, viz., B. C. 
538, when Cyrus took Babylon, delegating its govern- 
ment to Darius, and consequently was the year of Bel- 
shazzar's death, Dan. vilizt; ixt1; vil, 31, 1. €. the pvegeee 
year before the Edict of Cyrus, releasing the captives 
was issued. In this year Daniel saw the vision of the— 
2300 evening-mornings, and was “astonished,” not un-’ 
derstanding it, “neither was there any one to cause him 
to understand.” vii:27. He fasted, and prayed, and 
Gabriel came to bring him understanding of the vision, 
by means of the Prophecy of the 70 Weeks. The 70 
Weeks are an explanation, however, not only of the 
2300 evening mornings, and Antiochus in his relation to 
the End-Time, but a revelation, or vision also (JZareh) 
of the whole future, of which the evening-morning 
vision is an organic part; an unfolding of the whole 
mystery of God concerning Israel and the Nations, down 
to the sounding of the 7th trumpet. The vision of the 
“Little Horn” of the 3d empire perplexed the prophet, 
for other visions had told him of righteousness, peace, | 
salvation, a kingdom and glory for Israel, at the close 
of the 4th empire, all earthly powers giving way. But 
now, the almost total ruin of Israel restored, and of re- 
built Jerusalem and the Temple, under the 3d Empire, 
in the times of Antiochus, confounded him. Must the > 
rebuilt City and Temple be assailed, and the Jewish 
Worship suspended, and restored Israel again trans- 
gress, before Messiah comes to His people? The Angel 
explains the wolfe matter now by unveiling the entire 
future, in the prophecy of the 70 Weeks. 


THE CAUSE. OF ERROR. Aa | 


It was a part of the ruddering, foretold by the Angel 
to occur in the last days, that a sainted man, Mr. Miller, 
“erring about,” and misled by crude pilots on the pro- 
phetic waters, maintained that, because, in the words of 
Gabriel, “J am now come to tell thee, therefore med- 
itate zz the matter, and understand zz the vision,’ Dan. 
ix:23, the words “tke vision” refer to the Evening- 
Morning vision which so greatly perplexed him, ¢here- 
fore the 70 Sevens, were 490 years cut off, and cut 
out, from the 2300 Evening-Mornings, which Mr. Miller’s 
“Vear-Day- Theory’ taught him to regard as 2300 
years! he fatal results of that misconception, 
and the prejudice excited against prophetic study; 
are not forgotten, nor yet obviated, while still the 
same error is repeated and republished by a certain 
class of expositors, to the great injury of the truth. 
The year-day theory is, by the best and ablest scholars, 
repudiated as an invention unsupported by the word 
of God, nor is it needed to vindicate Protestantism nor 
the sublime doctrine of the constitution of all history — 
and prophecy, under the law of proportionate cycles of 
time, larger and smaller. The 490 years are not cut off 
from any 2300 years of any kind. On the contrary, the 
2300 evening-mornings, or 6 years, 4 months, 20 days, 
of the times of Antiochus, are a solid part of the 490 
years, or 70 Sevens. They belong to the 3d, or Greek, 
empire in its four-parted condition, and are zucluded in 
the 62 Sevens from 34th Artaxerxes to Christ, as any ac- 
curate interpreter must know. They lie between B.C. 
176 and 164, the times of Antiochus, the Syrian Horn. 
They are not the times of Hildebrand or Leo. They 
fall in the 45th of the 70 Sevens, and are not cut off 
from the same. ~ 

While, however, the 2300 belong to the 45th Seven 


999 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


in the past, they point ¢ypzcally to, and foreshadow, the 
7oth Seven in the future. Their relation to the “One 
Week” in Dan. 1x:25, is direct. Seen from the prophet’s 
standpoint, they le in a right line, perspectively, with 
the times of the last Antichrist. The prophet looks 
through them in vision, into their place in the 7o 
Weeks, first of all in the times of Antiochus, and next 
in the times of the last Antichrist. In the words of 
Delitzsch, “Daniel perceives, in prophetic perspective, 
the tzme of the End together with the time of Antiochus.” 
The two visions are parts of one vast complex proph- 
ecy, which spans the ages, and looks to the Second 
Coming of Christ, and Israel’s Redemption. While it 
is of supreme importance not to identify the Little 
Horn of the 3d empire with the Little Horn of the 4th 
empire, lest the Messianic interpretation of the 7o 
Weeks be negated, it is no less important to recognize 
the organic relation of the one to the other, of Anti. 
ochus the “Melek,” viii:36, to Antichrist the ‘‘Vagid,” 
ix:27, and that the End of the 3d empire is a types 
the End of the 4th empire, all ends being oze end, and 
all ages one age, in prophecy, self-multiplying into a 
series of ends and ages, in regular advancing organism, 
and reaching to the final consummation, all persons and 
things preceding being types of all persons and things 
succeeding, and seen so, not less in Antichrist than Jin 
Christ. That the last Antichrist makes a covenant with 
the Jewish masses in their own land, and chiefly in 
Jerusalem, in the last days, is plainly revealed, Dan, 
ix:27; xi:30, and underlies the whole representation in 
John’s Apocalypse, Rev. chapter XI.* It is then the 


*It is not improper to add, here, a note in reference to Antichrist’s 
“Covenant,” or ‘* Zreaty,’’ and which should have been inserted at p. 118. 

The common view held by Ilengstenberg, Auberlen, Leathes, and all 
who regard the 70 Weeks as belonging to the time of the crucifixion, is that 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 223 


“Two Witnesses” testify. That the Sacrifices are re- 
stored in pursuance of this covenant, and administered, 
for a time, under the “policy” of Antichrist, is as clear 
as that, in the middle of the Week, he ‘“‘causes the Sac- 
rifice and Offering to cease,” and “changes times and 
laws,” Inaugurating a worship of his own, xi:31; v11:25; 
ix:27. The question that evoked Palmoni’s answer, 
settles this. It is a threefold question in one: “How 
long (as to) the Thamid? How long (as to) taking 
away of the Thamid, and existence of the Abomination? 
How long (as to) the Downtreading of Jerusalem?” It 
is a question as to Continuance and Discontinuance, un- 
der the “craft and policy” of the Horn, and the permis- 
sion of God. The Answer is “Unto evening-morning, 
2300; not Unto the Whole 7 years, or full “One Week,” 
bor “Unto 6 years, 4 months, 20 days,” i. e., ‘Unto 
2300 days.” 

It is not difficult to see the 2300 days here se¢ zz the 
frame of the 7oth Week, the One Week, or 7 years, 
being 2520 days. We know tho duration of the down- 
treading. It is 1260 days, the last half of the One 
Week, or from the taking away of the Zhamzd in the 


Christ confirms the New Covenant with many, one Week, and Isa. xxxiii:11 
is quoted to support the view. It is also asserted that there cannot be a 
‘*Berith,” —‘‘Covenant,”’—without sacrifice, that ‘“‘//iydzr Berith” means to 
confirm the covenant in Christ’s blood, and that the ‘‘mzany’’ are believers, 
Jews and Gentiles. Hofmann, Ewald, Wieseler, Bleek, Maurer, Gesenius, 
Hiivernick, Filler, all translate ‘‘wake a firm, or strong, covenant,” con- 
trary to Fuerst and Hitzig who say ‘‘wake grievous or hard,” and deny that 
“Higbir” means to “‘confirm.” So the Revisers. Some, like Auberlen, 
make the ‘‘Oxe Week” the subject of the verb. This is impossible, gram- 
matically. The Aceusative of time how long, can never be the Nominative 
toa Verb. Contrary to Auberlen and others, the subject of the verb ‘‘make 
strong’ is not Antiochus, nor Christ, but the ‘* prince that shall come.” 
Contrary to Ewald, Wieseler and Ebrard. who hold that the ‘‘ W7any”’ are 
Gentile believers, after the Crucifixion, with whom Christ makes a firm Cov- 
enant, they are the apostate Jewish masses of the End-Time in alliance with 
Antichrist. See Matt. xxiv:12; Dan. xi:30, 32, 34, 45; II Thess. ii:8—-10; 
Rev. xi:2. So Kliefoth Volck, Koch, Godet, Hofmann, Tregelles, and 


224 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. a 


middle of the week, unto the End of the Week, ix:27. _ 
It is the time of the giving of the host and sanctuary to _ 
be trodden down by the forces of Antichrist. Itis 3% 
years or 1260 days, vii:25; Rev. xiii:5; the half seven, of © 
ix:27. It is during this period he prevails to break the 
power of the Holy People. Dan. xii:7; vii:25. This 
disposes of the last 1260 days of the 2300, leaving 1040 
still, the 1260 being the period of Dzscontinuance of the 
Thamid, the 1040 being the period of its Contenuance 
under the sanction of Antichrist during a portion of 
the first 1260, or from the time of the first admziutstra- 
tion of the restored Jewish worship to the time of its 
cessation in the szddle of the week. And this dis- 


poses of the entire 2300 (126041040—=2300.) The One 


Week is 2520 days. The difference between 2520 and 
2300 is 220 days, or 7 months and _ to days are needed 
to complete the One Week. This initial part (not 
asked after in the vision, nor needed to be asked for 
in the times of Antiochus, when the Jewish worship al- 
ready was established, but required in the times of An- — 
tichrist and his covenant with the Jews when about to _ 


all who refer to the 7oth Week, the End-Time, save Christiani, etc., who 
think it may mean confirming the covenant with the /Jewish-Christian 
Church then formed, Rev. xi:1, forgetting that Christ never confirms the 
covenant merely for ‘‘ One Week.” Auberlen, Hitzig, and others, affirm 
that ‘‘ Berth” can mean nothing else than the ‘‘Covenant of God,” and not 
of man with man, and that it never means a #caty in Daniel On the con- 
trary, Jonathan made a Aez7zth with David. I Sam. xxiii:18, Ahab with Ben- 


hadad, I Kings xx:34. Ephraim with Assyria, Hos. xii:1. Jehoida with the 


Carites, II Kings xi:4, the Jews with Death, Isa. xxvii':18. And in Daniel — 
Antiochus makes a ee ith with Ptolemy Philometer, xi:22, who is plainly the — 
“Nagid Berith,’ ‘‘prince cf the covenant,’’—the formal league or tre ty 
referred to in the Sollewine verse as ‘‘hith-habber uth,” a ‘treaty concluded” 
between Antiochus and Philometer. So Gesenius, Ewald, Kliefoth, Ebrard, 
Maurer, Volck, etc., etc. In like manner, in Dan 1x22; the “Covenant” 

the Nagid enacts with the ‘ many,” is an alliance between the last Anti- 
christ and the Jewish masses by which their Worship is restored. Doubt- > 

less they will worship the Nagid as *‘Baal-Berith,” “lord of the covenant,” a 
Judges viii:33, and call him “£7 Bertth,” ** God of the Covenant,” ji ‘ 
ix:46, their covenant God ! | 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 225 


re-institute their Worship,) can only be the period be- 
tween the enactment of that covenant at the beginning 
of the 7oth Week, and the jirst celebration of the sacri- 
ficial worship in pursuance of that covenant; i.e., 7 
months and ten days are the period of the completing 
of the rebuilt temple, and the preparation for its 
formal dedication. It is not possible to think of the 
Jews returning from their dispersion and long cap- 
tivity, under the favor of some European, and _per- 
haps of some Asiatic powers, and not rebuilding their 
temple, nor re-instating Mosaism. Thus we have the 
220+1040+1260—=2520, the foreshadowing times of 
Antiochus seen in the times of Antichrist; the 7oth 
Week of the 70 Weeks filled out, and so can see the 
organism, harmony, perfection, and unity of all 
prophecy. 

_ The 2300, like the 1260, stand related to two other 
measures of literal time, viz., the 1290 and 1335 days. 
Dan. xii:11, 12.* How long after Antichrist’s power 


* The destruction of Antichrtst’s power is the ad quem of the 1260 days. 
There is a difference as to the rendering of the answer to the question in xii: 
6. Some render it, ‘‘When the Dispersion of a part of the holy people shall 
have been completed.” Others, ‘‘When the Breaking in pieces the power 
of the holy people shall have been /mzshed.” The Revisors render it, 
“‘When they have made an end of breaking in pieces the power of the holy 
people.” Hitzig, Lengerke, Gesenius, (last edition Lex.), in a Maccabean 
interest, say, ‘‘ Dispersion,” ‘‘part,” ‘‘completed.” All others say, ‘‘Break- 
ing in pieces,” “power,” ‘‘consummated.” The spiritualizers and idealizers 
say, that the ‘‘holy people’’ mean ‘‘all Christzans!” or the ‘‘ whole New 
Testament Church!” ‘The rationalists, as foolishly say, the ‘‘holy people” 
mean Israel under the Maccabees! The oppressor of Israel, here, is not 
Antiochus, but the last Antichrist, and the t7me the last half of the joth 
Week, yet future. 

The question asked, v. 6, was, ‘‘ How long,” — ‘‘ad mathat ketts happe- 
la’ oth,” —to what extent, —quousque temdem,—‘‘shall be the End of the won- 
ders?” The answer is that “wd shall be ‘‘for a time, two times, and a 
half,” or 344 years—1260 days. The culmination is charactertzed by an 
event, the critics have translated variously. The verb rendered ‘‘to break in 
pieces” means also to “‘scatter.”” The infinitive Piel (zappets) is here used 
asanoun. The verb rendered ‘‘have an end” (ca/ah) means also ‘‘to com- 
plete,” or “consummate.” The word rendered ‘‘power” means ‘‘ hand’ 


996 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


is broken by the Comingof the Son of Man, Dan. vii: 
8-27, that is, how long after the end of the last 1260 
days, or close of the 7oth Week, Dan. xii:7, shall 
be the “Cleansing of the Sanctuary,” is told in answer 
to the question, “O, my lord, and what shall be the 
A fterness of these things?” Mah Acharith Elleh? what 
more to follow? The linen-clothed, gold-cinctured 
“Ant-Hu,’ hovering over the Tigris, answers the 
prophet, that, “from the time that the Z7hamzd shall be 
taken away and the Abomination desolating put in its 
place, there shall be days 1290,” xii:11, 1. e., 30 days de. 
yond the 1260; and this by a comparison of texts, is 
clearly the terminal point of the Cleansing of the Sanc- 
tuary, viil:14; xil:11. The linen-clothed man then adds 
a further period of 45 days more, saying, “Blessed is he 
that waiteth and cometh to the 1335 days,” xii:12. And 
this point is, doubtless, the uprising of Israel’s faithful 
dead to unite with Israel's faithful living in the Great 
Sabbatic Jubilee which begins the 1000 years. 

The question of the prophet as to the A/fterness of 
these things, xii, 8, was most natural. He would 


(yad). The translations are ‘‘When the breaking in pieces the power of the 


holy people shall have reached its full measure.” —Hoffmann, ‘‘When utterly — 


shattered (ganz und gar zerschmettert) is the power of the holy people,’— 
Maurer. ‘‘When the breaking in pieces the power of the holy people shall 
have attained completion.”—Fiiller. ‘When Israel shall be like a man 
whose right hand is completely broken, powerless in the grasp of his foe.”— 
Kliefoth. ‘‘This is that complete breaking of the natural power of the holy 
people (jene vollendete Zerbrechung der naturlicher Kraft des heiligen Volks ), 
which precedes their exaltation,”—-Auberlen. That is, when Israel is driven 
to the last extremity, then the 1260 days will be finished, and the wonders 
of the End be completed. On the other hand, the literal rendering of the 
text is ‘‘And when to end the brenking in pieces the hand of the holy people, 
then shall be ended all these,” that is, when Axtichrist’s power is broken, 
then the End of the 1260 days has come. Rabbi Leser translates, ‘‘And 


when there shall be an end to the crushing of the power of the holy people.” 


So Dr, Philippson of Bonn. One would think, from reading the translation 


by the Revisers, that the Angel informed Daniel that when ‘‘they,” the f 


armies of "have made an end to their own efforts to break in pieces the 
power of the holy people !’”’—then the 1260 would close! 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 227 


penetrate the far future of I[srael’s destiny; a curiosity 
whose satisfaction is denied him, in a manner most 
tender and loving. With affectionate address, the 
Angel, pronouncing his name, softly replies, “Go thy 
way, Daniel, for the words are closed up and sealed till the 
time of the End.’ No more is now to be revealed. 
Enough has been told. When the End comes the Seals 
will be opened by a voice from the throne calling the 
events to “ Come.”’ Rev.vi:2. Many shall purify them- 
selves, make themselves white, and be tried as gold is 
tried inthe fire. In the midst of increasing apostasy, the 
wicked shall do wickedly, while the righteous shall sepa- 
rate themselves to a holy fellowship, not following “ the 
prince that shall come.” In the evening time it shall 
be light, and the wise, who eagerly peruse this book, 
shall understand. Be perplexed no more. For Israel 
redeemed, the glory shall soon follow the suffering. 
Dismiss all care. The 1260 days shall be from the 
taking away of the 7/amid and placing the Abomina- 
/tion to the destruction of Israel’s oppressor. A/ter 


The truth is, that the meaning of the text involves not only the com- 
plete breaking of the power of the oly people, but the complete breaking of 
Antichrist’s power itself. The end of Antichrist’s power is the end of his 
breaking in pieces the power of Israel. The interpretation is pregnant. 
Israel is delivered out of the Great Tribulation when He who is the 
“Breaker” breaks the breaker of His people. Mic. ii:13, Hos i:11; Isa. 
*lix:24, 25; lix:19, 20, Rev. xix.11. And this is in the last crisis when He 
who lifts his hand to heaven and swears, ‘‘seeth that their power is gone!” 
Deut. xxxii:36, 4o; Rev. x:7; Dan. xii:7. It was so foretold in the great 
Psalm that pictures the last conflict and Millennial glory. ‘‘He shall break 
in pieces the Oppressor.” Ps. Ixxiitg. Then the ‘‘Standard is lifted against 
bun, and the **Goe/-comes to Zion,’ Isa. lix:18, 19; Rom. xi:26. Then 
the “Blood” of His saints is ‘‘precious in His sight,” Ps Ixxii:12—143 cxvi: 
ee teamxxivoon, Dent. xxxii:43; Rev. vi:10;. xvi:6, for ‘‘the Day of Ven- 
geancetsin His heart, and the Year of His 1edeemed ts come,” Deut. xxx: 41-43; 
Isa. lix:16; lxiii:1-6, the Day of the ‘‘glittering swo d,” of ‘‘ slaughter,” and 
of the ‘‘wine press of the wrath of God Almighty.” Then, Antichrist’s 
mission is ended, and Israel obtains the Kingdom. The Eschatology of 
Daniel is simply the developed Eschatology of Moses. Our exegetical foun- 
dation is a rock ! 


_ 


228 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


that, shall be 30 days more, reaching to 1290 days, the 
Cleansing of the Sanctuary, and Consecration of a 
holy of holies. A/ter the 1290, shall be 45 days more, 
reaching to 1335 days, the Blessed Time when the just 
shall awake, and sing, and celebrate the Sabbath- 
Jubilee reserved for New-Born Israel, a ransomed race. 
Go, Daniel! Our communion is sweet, but be dis- — 
missed, now, for the vision is closed. Israel’s future is 
unveiled, their way and their end, their sin and their 
punishment, God’s mercy and their glorious recovery. — 
White-haired saint, a youth when carried from thy — 
home, a captive threescore years and ten, tatker with — 
the Angels, and endeared to God, retire from. the 
vision. Iemember that 70 Sevens have been decreed 
upon thy People and upen thy City, and that the End 
will speak. The lions could not harm thee. The 
satraps could not destroy thee. Go, blest prophet! 
example to the Magi! fulfil the duties of thine office! 
In what remains of life to thee, be sustained amid the 
labors that await thee, by this assurance, heaven-sent to 
comfort thee, that thou shalt rest calmly in thy grave, 
and wake in the resurrection, to shine as the firma- 
ment’s gleam. To holy sleepers, the time is short. 
Go! till the End shall be! Messiah will not only come, 
and suffer and die, and rise from the dead, but come 
again in His glory, and at His word the grave shall 
restore thy dust committed to its care. Away with all — 
doubts, anxieties, and vain interpretations. Be of good 

cheer. Believe and live. Thou shalt stand in thy lot, 

in the end of the days, when Israel, for whom thou 

hast prayed, and toiled, and wept, and whose captivity 

thou hast shared, shall be “saved with an everlasting 

salvation, never to be ashamed or confounded, world — 
without end.” : 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 229 


Schematized, these great revelations of Christ to 
Daniel stand thus 


SEVENTIETH WEEK, 


re) ee 
2 - 8 
@ Aer rey W 
a a Beginning of a 2 The Great ? ~ ra 
3 ay Sorrows. CRAY Tribulation. 8 re 2 
a nat O2he 8 Ps a 
F 3 2 n~ a > 
t ay 3 te 3 ms = 
Z ® =. SOR > < a 
im Oo. Aa A 3 5 5 Oe 5 5 Q @ 
= Continuance. “3 Discontinuance, a fo) td 
' Oo — 
4 | Prepa- et ® e 
¥ | ration. 1040 + 1200 1 = 52300 5 7 
c 
> a" Le 
5 | 220 + 1040 + 1260), =" 2520 05 r =| 
5. : 3 
> 1260 + 30 iTS i 
a 1260. ae Eel 
7) 
Te 


1260 + 30 4 


6 Seals. 6 Trumpets. “ath Trumpet. 7 Vials. 
Thus ends the series o1 Old Testament prophetic num- 
bers since the Exile and blotting out of God’s visible 
kingdom on earth; 70 years; 70 Sevens; 7 Sevens; 62 
Sevens; 1 Seven, time, times and half a time; 2300; 1260; 
1290; 1335; all real, concrete, literal time. When we 
reflect that John’s Apocalypse, from chapter VI to 
chapter XX, is a resumption of Daniel’s 7oth Week, 
and that John’s personal head of the “ Beast,” “the 8th 
head,” is the Magid of Dan. ix:26, 27, typified in the 
Melek of Daniel xi:36, who is the Horn or Qeren of 
vili:g, and that John’s numbers 1260, 1260, 3%, 3%, 3, 4, 
7, 10, 12, 144, which he multiplies and combines, are all 
taken from Israel, and the 7oth Week we shall not only 
see the organism and unity of prophecy, and Israel’s 
place in prophecy and history alike, but the insanity of 
perverting tnese sacred measures of time into mere 
vague ‘‘zdeals void of chronological value.” 

Before leaving the discussion of the 2300, it ought 
to be said, that, so far as the main interpretation of 


them goes, it is zzdzfferent whether they are taken as 


230 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. - 


whole, or half, days. In the one case they bear a cer- 
tain relation to the Onze Week (2520 days) in the other . 
to the Half Week (1260 days). What concerns us is to 
beware of the view of those who, by a forced identifi- 
cation of Antiochus, Dan. viii:9-14; xi:21-35, with the last 
Antichrist, the Magid of Dan. 1x,26, 27, and Horn of vii: 
25, seek to identify the 2300 with 2520, or the 1150 with 
1260, and so limit to the horizon of Maccabean times all the 
visions in which we find the time-measures 3%, 2300, One 
Week, Half of that Week, 2520, 1260, 1290, and 1335. 
By no possible manipulation of the numbers can the 
2300 be identified with either half or the whole of the © 
7oth Week. The times of Antiochus precede the First 
Advent; those of the Antichrist immediately precede 
the Second Advent. The Greco-Macedonian Emptre ts not 
the ultimate horizon of the Book of Daniel. By no artifice 
can we make Alexander’s Empire the 4th prophetic 
Empire, or the 4th Beast, heavy, monstrous, and of — 
iron-force, equal the leopard-footed Greek power, 
youthful and swift; nor can it be referred, as Zockler, 
and others, would have it, to the reigns of the Diadochi, 
or successors of Alexander, or made correspondent 
with the 10 toes and the 10 horns. All this Orelli, with 
many others, properly reject as a violence to the text. 
The 4th Empire is the Roman, not the Greek. The 
End of the 3d Empire, in which the 2300 are found, is 
not the End of the 4th which is described as “One 
Week.” Antiochus springs out of the four-parted 3d 
Empire. The last Antichrist springs out of the Zen- 
parted 4th Empire. Nearly half of the 69 Weeks and — 
the whole Interval between the 69th and the 7oth 
Weeks, separate the two. By no right can we annex — 
the additional 75 days to the 2300, but only to the last 
1260 or 3% times of the final Week which brings Isra- 
el’s final Redemption. 


THE CAUSE OF ERROR. 231 


Everything in the text, and context, compels us to 
see in Dan. 1x:26, 27; xil:7; vil:25, an eschatological 
scene at the close of the 4th or Roman Empire divided 
into 10 contemporaneous kingdoms, confederate under 
the last Antichrist before whom 3 of them fall. What- 
ever pre-tllustration the End of the 4th Empire receives 
from the End of the 3d, yet the two. Ends, though 
standing in right line, ave not identical. We can well 
agree with Hofmann, Delitzsch, and more, who hold 
that the vision of the 2300 Evening-Mornings, is “ doth 
time-historical and eschatologieal,” just as the Prophecy 
of our Lord on the Mount of Olives, relates to the de- 
struction of Jerusalem A. D. 70, and the final siege and 
deliverance of Jerusalem, at the End of our present 
Age; i.e., it points to Antiochus, yét points to the Anti- 
Simic aso thie “lerrible: One; Isa. xinii1, “ Phat 
mycked, Isa: xi:4,“The Enemy,” Isa. lix:19, in. short, 
to the same Antichrist, though represented by an As- 
syrian at one time, and a Chaldean at another. The 
generic and the individual, the time-historical and es- 
chatological, are here interblended. But we must avozd 
the view that the unanointed “ prince to come,” Dan. 
1x:26, 27, relates to Antiochus, or. that ‘Przxce Messiah,” 
vs. 25, 26 admit both a Messianic and non-Messianic 
interpretation, 1. e., refers to Onias, or any one else, and 
Christ, at the same time; a view no less objectionable 
than that of Auberlen and the Church in general, viz., 
that the prophecy of the 70th Week relates to Christ alone 
and the time of His First Advent! ‘srander scholars, 
or worthier defenders of the faith, never wrote upon 
prohecy. But in the points just specified, as objection- 
able, they have been in error; and the error is ever be- 
coming more recognized along with the deeper scien- 
tific study of God’s word. That the section Dan. x1: 


—_ 


SEBEL See gM 


ay * * 
t vee 


40 9 | Ae 


be 
x 


At gg 


PAPE ML wet Sis et a Ay aaa 


J oom 
Ja 


EN 


ae PONS Pe ORS eS See en a a ee a 
eX 2 - 7 at Te = ees Lo 
= es) Ee fo to By <So729 7 
239 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. | 


36-45 describes the ast Antichrist, and not Antiochus, 


(especially vs. 40-45), and is only the further develop- 
ment of Dan. x1:26, 27 has been established, in a mas- 
terly manner, by Tregelles, Rinck, Deechsel, Kliefoth, 
Keil also, Burger, Beck, Kahle, and others, and that 
Dan. ix:21-35 1s only the further development of Anti- 
ochus in Dan. viii:g-14 is made no less transparent. 
It is vital to remember these distinctions. The blend- 


ing of the End of the 3d Empire with the End of the | 


4th in one complex prophecy, Dan. xi:21-45, and the 
sudden and insensible transition from the one to the 
other (v. 36), overleaping the whole Interval between 
the Ends, is only what we find elsewhere in all pro- 
phetic study. 


‘nt 


. THE 144,000. pes 


PART IV.- 


THE 144,000. 


We come now to the “144,000, a company sealed out 
of every tribe of the children of Israel,’ Rev. vii: 4, prior 


‘to the 6 Trumpet Judgments in the first half of the 7oth 


Week, and found “standing on the Mount Sion” after 


_ these Trumpet Judgments are over, Rev. xiv:1. Is this 


number merely symbolic, ideal, abstract, representing 
“the totality of believers in all ages, Fews and Gentztles,” 
secure, at last, in heaven, or is it real and concrete, rep- 
resenting a definite number of the literal Israel in the 
End-Time, who have passed safely through the Great 
Tribulation, and survived to see the Advent? The 
idealistic and spiritualizing expositors affirm the first 
part of this question, and deny the second. We, on the 
contrary, affirm the second and deny the first. And 
we do so upon the ground of a strict exegesis based on 
the organic unity, analogy, identity, and teleology, of 
all prophecy, in both Testaments, concerning Israel. 
What we see here is the. accomplishment of Israel’s 
final redemption as foretold by Moses, the Psalms, the 
Prophets, Christ, and His Apostles. 

The inner connection between Daniel’s prediction, 
the Olivet discourse, and the Apocalypse, is alone suf- 


rats} SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. fi 


ficient to establish this. Supported by the consensus 
of all other Scripture, it is redundantly confirmed. 
When we remember that the entire Apocalypse, from 
chapter IV onward, is eschatological, and brings the 
“finishing of the mystery of God” with respect to 
Israel, as foreshown to the prophets, Rev..x:7, and, there- 
fore, as foreshown to Daniel in the 70 Weeks ;—when, 
also, we remember that, after the General Introduction 
to the Book, chapter I-III, (which covers the Great 
Interval in Dan. ix:26, and Luke xxi:24), the Special In- 


troduction and matter of the Seven-Sealed-Scroll is di- — 


vided into two equal parts, chapters IV-XI, and chap- 
ters XII-XIX, in order to correspond to the two halves 
of Daniel’s 7oth Week,—6 Seals and 6 Trumpets in the 
jirst half, the 7th Trumpet, with its 7 Vials, in the sec- 


ond half,—and that the Antichrist attains supreme — 


power in the mzddle of the week, commencing the Great 
Tribulation, Rev: xi:7; xii:17; xiii:1, 5; and when, lastly, 
we remember that the 144,000 sealed out of Israel in 
the first half of the week, Rev. vii:1-8 (dcfore the 
Trumpet Judgments break, and the Great Tribulation 
begins), are the same 144,000 who, after the Trumpet 


Judgments are over, and the Great Tribulation has — 


ended, stand, at the close of the second half, triumphant 
on the earthly Mount Sion with their Redeemer re- 
turned ; all doubt as to who the 144,000 are, ought to be 
dismissed forever. To spiritualize, or idealize, the 
prophecy, is to negate it. The scenes in Rev. xiv:I-5, 
and in Rev. xi:1-14, are, both of them, earthly scenes 


which occur during, and at, the close of Daniel’s 7oth 


Week. Already at the close of chapter II] the Inter- 
val following Jerusalem’s destruction, i. e., our Church- 
Historical period, is ended, and the yoth Week, divided 
into two halves, has come. The vision in Rev. xiv:I-5, 


-7 
y 


THE 144,000. 230 


is proleptic, and carries us by anticipation to the end of 
the second half of the week. The last trumpet has 
sounded ; the last vial been emptied, and the Antichrist 
is overthrown. The Redeemer has already come to 
Pion a)ec! 11:10; Isa. lix:et; Rom. xi:26; and. Israel; 
chaste from the harlotry of the last times, and pure in 
holiness, Rev. xiv:5, stands before Him, and around 
-Him, throned on Sion in His glory. Isa. xxiv:23 ; Micah 
iv:7. Already His feet have stood “upon the Mount 
of Olives which is before Jerusalem on the East,” Zech. 
xiv:4. It is the End-Time we have here, and Israel's 
redemption. 

Under another representation the 144,000 appear 
as the Sun-clothed woman of chapter XII; the Jewish 
Church, first, pre-Christian as the mother of Messzah, 
and, next, eschatological, as the mother of the Jewish 
Nation, in each case, of the “A/anly Child.” Here, again, 
as in the older prophets, Israel is identified with Christ 
in His offices and work; Israel as ‘a Nation born in a 
day,” and born to “rule the nations,” Isa. lxvi:8; Rev. 
11:27; xv:2-4. The pre-Christian and eschatological re- 
lations of the Sun-clothed Woman to Christ are both 
grouped in one Symbol for the sake of the organic 
unity. The woman represents the 144,000.* They are 
under the special care of Michael the guardian Angel- 
Prince of Israel-as a nation, an Angel who has “stood 
font tor israel before, Dan. x:13, 21; Jude v. 9; and:so 
stands again in Israel’s last crisis. Dan. xii:1; Rev. xii: 
7, This settles the zzme, the place, the people, and the 
event, viz., the ¢ime of Antichrist’s overthrow, Dan. xi: 
45; xliz1; the place, the Holy Land, Dan. x1:45; the peo- 


* «<The 144000, sealed out of Israel, are the Sun-clothed Woman who is 
miraculously preserved in the wilderness until the day of the Appearing of 
Gnrict och, - Das Tausend. Reich. 140. 


ay 


936 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ple, “the children of thy people,” their posterity, Dan. 
xiii; the event, Israel’s deliverance, Dan. xiis1. The 
Conversion is announced in Rev. x1i:10, 11—at the middle 
of the week, as the signal for the silencing of Satan’s 
age-long accusation against them (Compare Zech. iii:1- 
5), and as the proof that the long-predicted kingdom is 
at the door. Sheltered from the Dragon, this /ezwish- 
Christian Church of the End-Time 1s secluded in the wit- 
derness for 3% years, or 1260 days, the second half of 
the 70th Week whose first half was the time of the 
“Two Witnesses’ under whose prophetic activity the Jewish 
Church ts formed. The final deliverance of Israel’s 
surviving election, and the resurrection of Israel’s faith- 
ful dead, occur at the close of the week. Dan. xii:1-3; 
bea ORV TO; INGVs XhIG esq. 

Again, these 144,000 are the same company figured 
in true Hebrew style as Cithara-Players, triumphant 
on the glassy sea mingled with fire,—a reminder of 
the Red Sea lit with the Shekinah’s blaze; blend- 
ing in memory and voice their first and and last re- — 
demption ; singing, more gloriously than Miriam, “ the 
song of Moses, the servant of God, and of the Lamb,” 
Rev. xv:2-4; Deut. xxxii:39-43. Their Conversion and 
victory bring the conversion of the Nations. All this is 
in perfect harmony with the prophets, everywhere, 
who make the entrance of the Nations, as such, into the 
Kingdom of God, follow Israel’s national conversion. 
Deut. xxxii:43; Isa. 1x:1-22;- lxvi:5-20; Zech. xii:10-14} 
Xlv:9; even as the entrance of individual Gentiles in- 
creasing to a “fulness of the Gentiles,” followed Israel's 
individual conversion at the first, Acts xv:14-19. After 
the “fulness of the Gentiles,” Israel, as a people, “all 
Israel” is saved, Rom. xi:25, 26. After Israel, as such, — 
is saved, the Nations as Natzons, enter the Millennial — 


MeL ce 


THE 144,000. 236 


Kingdom. Rom. xi:12. So sing the 144,000 in the 
Apocalypse—the Cithara-Players on the glassy sea,— 
“Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy 
name? For thou only art holy; for All Nations shall 
come and worship before thee; for thy Fudgments are 
manifest.’ Rev. xvi:4. And these “Judgments” are 
the Trumpet-Judgments of the End-Time. Only a 
foregone conclusion, in bondage to an allegorizing, 
idealizing, or spiritualizing, exposition, can hinder any 
one from seeing this. Only such a prejudice can blind 
any one to the fact that the “Brnez Lsrael,” or “Sons of 
Israel,’ who are the 144,000, are not Gentiles, but He- 
brews, the sons of Jacob and the seed of Abraham. 
They are an election out of the national 12-tribed 
Ysrael, called the “Dodekaphulon” in Acts xxvi:7, and the 
“Diaspora” in James i:1, that “Genea,” or race, which 
should not pass away till all our Lord had spoken 
should be fulfilled. Matt. xxiv:34. They are clearly 
defined, as [srael, by the use of Israel’s covenant and 
national nuinber combined and cubed with the number 
10 raised to its third power; 10x 10x 101000; I2x12=— 
144; 144x1000—144,000, the whole election out of 
Israel ordained to survive the Great Tribulation and liv- 
ing to see the Advent. It means Israel of the End- 
Time, in their unity as one compact body. The totality 
represents a definite number of Israelites. The “Benez 
Israel” here are precisely the same as in Rev. 11:14, and 
everywhere else, in both Testaments, by unvarying 
Meaee; and: by the term “tribes” is meant here, the 
same as in the expressions “Lion of the tribe of Judah,” 
Peeves. “names of the 12.tribes of the sons of Israel,” 
Rev. xii:12; “sit on 12-thrones judging the 12 tribes of 
Israel,” Matt. xix:28; “the tribes of the land shall mourn 
Bae eit, eve 3:7; Matt: -xxiv:30; Zech. xii:10; and 


238 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


so connects this vision with that in Ezekiel, where ‘‘the 
land is divided to the 12 tribes of Israel’ in their final 
restoration. Ezek. xlvili:13; xxi:22. What gives prime 
importance to this vision is the fact that along with 
the vision of the Countless Company in vii:9-17, it 
forms the “ Episode,” as Alford and others call it, or 
“StillStanding Vision,” as Ewald names it, or “ Inter- 
Act,” as Reuss has it, defween the 6th and 7th Seals, and 
is not only an Interlude in the great Dramaof the End, 
but a Postlude, as well, following the opening of the 
Day of the Lord in the 6th Seal, and also a Prelude, or 
proleptic scene, anticipating the outcome of the Drama; 
in every way a vision given for comfort and hope, in 
the crisis where it stands. It points to the past and 
tells how much of the Drama is accomplished. It ex- 
plains the present, revealing the great tribulation, those 
preserved from it, and those who fall therein. It looks 
to the final future of the saved in victory, blessedness 
and glory. To interpret this is to interpret most of the 
Apocaly pse. 

That a Contrast, Antithests, or Distinction, exists be- 
tween the 144,000, Rev. vul:1-8, and the Countless Com- 
pany, Rev. vii:g-17, is plain and undeniable. The chief 
question is What 7s that Contrast ? It is not that the 
144.000 are figurative and the Countless Company are 
literal (Vitringa); nor that the latter company includes 
the former (Diisterdieck); nor that both are martyrs, 
the last including all the later martyrs (Parzeus); nor 
that John merely “hears” of the one but “sees” the other 
(Grotius); nor that the 144,000 are a definite election in 
contrast with others who are rejected, while the Count- 
less Company is an indefinite number without an election 
(Alcasar); nor that the two are the same company, viz., 
“the totality of believers in all ages,” ‘the organic 


THE 144,000. 239 


whole of Old and New Testament Saints,” ‘the whole 
Church,” the “People of God,” the “whole Spiritual 
Israel of God,” seen under different circumstances, first 
before death, next after death (Augustine, De Wette, 
Ebrard, Hengstenberg, Keil, Riehm, Kiiper, etc.); nor 
“the collective whole of Jews and Gentiles in the 144,000, 
as distinguished from the zzdividuals of that totality as 
seen in the Countless Company, the first on earth, and 
of the last in heaven” (Kliefoth, Milligan). None of 
these views are correct. Plainly, on the other hand, 
the Contrast is (1) That of an election ‘out of the Sons 
of Israel” standing over against an election “out of every 
nation, and of all tribes, and peoples, and tongues ;”’ and 
(2) That of a sealed and numbered company oz earth, 
preserved to pass through the Great Tribulation, un- 
harmed, and surviving to see the Advent, standing 
over against another countless company zz heaven, who 
have fallen in the Tribulation and entered into the peace 
of God. The one are still living in their bodies, here on 
earth, not tasting death. The other are disembodied in 
heaven. The one are Jews. The other are both Jews 
and Gentiles, the martyrs of the 5th Seal with their 
‘tellow-servants and their brethren,’ Rev. vi:11, over 
whom the holy benediction is pronounced, Rev. xiv:13, 
and who “live again” in the “First Resurrection,” Rev. 
xx:4. The “tribulation” out of which they are seen 
“coming” as in long procession, is not that of the trials 
of the church from age to age, throughout her history, 
(though the vision may be applied thus), but is that of 
the definite 3% years or 1260 days of the last Anti- 
christian time, the second half of Daniel’s 7oth Week, 
the “Short time” during which the Devil’s wrath is 
great, Rey. xii:12,and Antichrist’s power supreme, Rev. 
xili:5. So Delitzsch, Hofmann, Hebart, Lange, Volck, 


; : 2 4 —— ov ae 7 
al ‘ 4 4 ~ B 
-~ 7 - a ss 
- : = > “a Paeag cé * os 
. . et 


240) SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Christiani, Karsten, Steffann, Rinck, Dechsel, Starke, — 
Weiss, Oehler, Schultz, Grau, Koch, Kohler, Kliefoth ; 
the tribulation of the End-Time forecast in Deut. xxxii: 
26-43: Isa. xxvii20, 21; Jer. xxx:7; Dan: 1x:273) xia 
Matt. xxiv:21, 22, and of which the tribulation that at- 
tended the Roman destruction of Jerusalem was but 
the type, Matt. xxiv:9-21, the near and far horizons 
seen in one. 

Nothing in all the Apocalypse is more important 
than this, for, by a study of the parallels between this 
and our Lord’s Olivet discourse, we find that “the be- 
ginning of sorrows,” Matt. xxiv:7, 8,1is what we have 
in the first 6 Seals, Rev. vi:1-17, the “ End not yet;” 
and what we have in Matt. xxiv:9-14, is what occurs 
under the first 6 Trumpets, Rev. viil:1-13; 1x:1-21; xi: 


3; and what we have in Matt. xxiv:15-28, is the last 


Great Tribulation, under the 7th Trumpet, or the 7 | 
Vials, Rev. xi:2; xii:6, 14; xi11:5, the near and far horizons § 
blended by our Lord in one. It is the Jewish-Christian 
Church of his own time, and of the End-Time also, 
of which he speaks ¢here. It is the Jewish-Christian 
Church of the End-Time only, of which he speaks to — 
John, “ere. Under the “Ye” and the “Your” in Luke © 
xxi:28, Matt. xxiv:33, He sees the 144000, described in~ 
Rev. vii:1-8 and xiv:1—5;—converted Israel; Luke xxiii; 9 
39+ 
The passages of the Apocalypse that come under — 

review in the determination of the 144,000, are 

(1) Rev. vii:1-8, the 144,000 sealed. 

(2) Rev. vii:g-17, the Countless Company. 

(3) Rev. xiv:1-5, the 144,000 on Mount Zion. 

(4) Rev. xxi:g-12, 24-27, the Bride, the Nations. — 

in reference to these it has been held, diversely, 1. 


THE 144,000. 241 


(1) are Jews, while (2) are doth Jews and Gentiles, and (3) 
are part of (2). 3. That in all the four passages, (1), (2), 
(3), (4), as above, al/ are the totality of believers, the 
whole Church of Old and New Testament believers, in 
all ages, from the beginning to the end of the world, 
seen under variant circumstances. This last is an easy 
way to dispose of a great problem! In accordance 
with these different views, it has been held (1) That 
John teaches zo distinction between Jewish believers 
and Gentile believers, but that all are, without dis- 
tinction, the “ Israel of God ;”—Augustine, De Wette, 
Hengstcnberg, Keil, Riehm, Kiiper, Milligan, Fair- 
bairn, David Brown, and the spiritualizing expositors 
in general. (2) That John does teach a distinction, and a 
Preference of the Jew over the Gentile, in the Kingdom 
of God, 1. e., an Ebionite Chiliasm.' So the whole 
Tiibingen school of critics. 

3. That John does teach a distinction, but no Prefer- 
ence, Neander, Bleek, Diisterdieck, etc. 

4. That John does teach a distinction, but without 
any spiritual Preference of the Jew over the Gentile, 
yet wath an Economical Pre-eminence or Privilege, of Israel, 
as such, in the outward constitution and form of the 
Kingdom in its visible and final glory. This is 
grounded in the fact that Israel, as a nation, is the 
“choice forever,’ and the seed from whom Messiah 
came ; a people indestructible and everlasting ; and that 
this distinction between Jewish and Gentile Believers 
is indicated everywhere in the New Testament, while 
yet both are spiritually one in Christ, the contrast being 
prominently marked in the promise to the Phila- 
delphian Church, Rev. iii:o, in the difference between 
the Sun-Clothed Woman and the Remnant of her seed, 
Rev. xii:I, 17, between “the saints,’ and “them that 

16 


242 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


fear God,” Rev. xi:18, and between the Holy City, 
New Jerusalem, the Bride, and the saved Nations, out- 
side, who, in the New Heaven and Earth, are different 
from the Holy City, or the Bride, yet are enfranchised 
citizens and dwell around her, and bring their glory 
and their honor into’ her. So, Calvin in part, John, 
Owen, Ritschl, Kostlin, Volkmar, Hofmann, Auberlen, 
Baumgarten, Hess, Hahn, Roos, Rinck, Steffann, Da 
Costa, Roorda, Gebhardt, Luthardt, Koch, Kohler, 
Volck, Van Oosterzee, Saphir, etc., etc. According to 
this view, it follows that (1) the 144,000 in Rev. vi:1-8, 
and xiv:1-5 are identical. They are Jewish believers, 
and survivors of the Tribulation ; (2) that the Countless 
Company, Rev. vii,g-17, are martyrs of the End-Time, 
both Jews and Gentiles; (3) that the tribulation in 
which they fall is the last 3% years of Daniel’s 7oth 
Week, the time of the Sheltered Woman; (4) that the 
144,000, are not all the believers existing on earth when 
the Lord comes, the Gentile Church, though reduced, 
being still extant and suffering ; (5) that the 144,000 are 
not all, but only a part of the Bride in the New Heaven 
and Earth, the Bride being Israel and the adopted or 
engrafted Gentile believers ; (6) that, outside the Bride, 
or Holy City, are the saved Kings and Nations, who 
are converted during the 1000 years, and have a right 
to enter into and frequent the New Jerusalem; (7) that 
the “we who are alive and remain, unto the coming of 
the Lord,” Paul’s “ Perilezpomenoz,” | Thess. iv:15, aré 
not the 144,000, but the surviving portion of the Gen- 
tile Church, or portion of the Remnant of the Woman’s 
seed, who, next after the resurrection of the holy dead, ~ 
are “changed,” and “raptured”’ with them “to meet 
the Lord in the air,” I Thess.iv:17. In short, from first 
to last, Israel, as such, God’s “choice forever,” is the 


THE 144,000. 243 


historic Root and Laszs, not only of the “ Church,” but 
of the “ Kingdom”’ in its outward glorious form for- 
ever. As Gebhardt says, “ The distinction between 
Jewish and Gentile Believers, in the Apocalypse, is un- 
deniable. The distinction between Israel and the con- 
verted Nations cannot be questioned,’ and again, 
“What we find in the Millennium, in a temporary, lim- 
ited manner, will have place in the New World abso- 
futely.4 As there, the “Beloved City.” is the céntral 
point of the Kingdom of God, sois it here; as there, 
the true Israel is a Nation of priestly kings dwelling at 
the center, serving God, and governing the world, so 
also in the final state ; as there the Nations bring their 
offerings, their princes, and their people, so also in the 
New Jerusalem. Only after Christ’s second coming, 
are the Nations in the gross converted, and, in the final 
state, from the population of the New World around 
the City of God. Little as we are to think of an ex- 
clusion of the Gentiles from the dwelling-place of God 
and His priestly people, just as little are we to conceive 
an Identity of those living zz and those living round 
Jerusalem. The distinction between Israel and the 
Nations remains forever.”* This is certainly clear and 
true. As Israel is distinguished from the Church in 
the Millennial Age, though both are united, so is it in 
the final New Jerusalem State. The Bride is One; the 
Holy City is One, composed of Jewish and Christian 
believers glorified. Yet, evermore Israel, as such, 
forms the basis of the Church, as also of the Kingdom, 
and is preserved as such. The 144,000 are distinct, 
although not separated from the Gentile heirs. And 
because of this, the “names of the 12 tribes of the Benez 


*Doctrine of the Apocalypse. 184, 302, 303 and 304. 


244 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Israel”’ are graved on the gates of New Jerusalem, Rev. 
xx1:12, and “the names of the 12 Apostles of the Lamb” 
displayed on her foundations, Rev. xxi:14. And this is 
done, not to teach that only Jews are there, or none but 
Jews are saved, but to hang the glowing signal out, and 
let it glitter there to all eternity, that what was pledged 
to Abraham in covenant has now been realized, viz.: 
That in zm and hzs seed all the nations of the earth 
should be blessed. That is the meaning of the 144,000! 
That is the meaning of the names of “the 12 tribes-of 
Israel,” and of “the 12 Apostles of the Lamb” upon 
the groundstones and the gates of New Jerusalem! 
Such is God’s plan, and such “the End of the ways of 
God.” 

What we have before us, therefore, as the result of 
our investigation, is a series of great facts, viz., (1) 
That Israel shall be converted when the fulness of the 
Gentiles has come in, and the Times of the Gentiles 
are fulfilled; (2) That this shall be during Daniel’s 7oth 
Weck; (3) that the Apocalypse presupposes the truth 
of all the Old Testament predictions, and the New 
Testament ones, concerning Israel; (4) that, as a peo- 
ple, Israel shall repossess their fatherland; (5) that an 
election, large indeed, shall be protected in the Great 
Tribulation, and survive to see the Advent; (6) That a 
Countless Company of Jews and Gentiles, both, shall 
suffer death, and pass into the peace of God, and rise 
again in the “First Resurrection ;” (7) That Israel, as 
such, shall stand victorious with the Lamb upon the 
earthly Mount Zion, and dwell in the “ Beloved City.” 
(8) That not only in Millennial days, but in the final 
state, Israel shall be the Root and Basis, the Center, 
and the Crown, of the glorious Kingdom of God. 

These facts tell us, therefore, just what the Contrast 


THE 144,000. 948, 


is between the 144,000 and the Countless Company in 
Rey. vii:i-17.. They assure us also that the Christian 
Church will not be removed from the earth, or become 
extinct under persecution, but, reduced and suffering, 
will also live to see the Advent. They teach us also 
frat the “‘rapture” is the rapture of the Church, and 
not of the 144,000, even as the prophets teach. Isa. lxv: 
17-22; Ezek. chapters XL-XLVIII, etc., etc. Israel and 
the saved of the nations abide on earth, the nucleus of 
the Millennial Age. As to the dwelling-place of the 
risen saints this much we know, that, as Paul tells us, 
the glorification of Nature degzzs with the resurrection 
of the saints, and, as the Prophets tell us, Israel’s land 
Becomes “likes Eden.” The risen saints, moréover, 
eeeion on the earth.” Kev. -vii1t. So far from this 
view being wholly modern, it is ancient, and was the 
faith of the early church for 300 years. Even before 
the Reformers began to see a part of the true inter- 
pretation, the Jesuit Cornelius 4 Lapide, in the middle 
of the 16th century, “maintained that the 144,000 are 
elect Israel, and the Holy City, Rev. xi:1, is Jerusalem 
of the future.” (De Wette.) In the Lutheran Church 
Spener held the same view (Bengel) as did Calixtus 
(Luthardt) and in the Reformed Church, soon alter, not 
a few were of the same opinion (Steffan), Even in A. 
D. 1600, Pierre Launoy saw in Rev. chapters X-XIf Is- 
fael s conversion. ‘“‘the fas Jsrae/” of Paul, Rom. xi:26, 
as, later on, the Moravian Brethren saw it in the promise 
to the Philadelphian Church. (De Wette. Delitzsch.) 
These facts, and the blazing light of modern exegesis, 
only prove that God’s truth must rise triumphant over 
all false systems of interpretation. Cocceius, the great- 
est Hebrew scholar of his day, is perfectly clear that 
tic *bas Israel’ of Paul, Rom. chap. XI,1s the “Kol 


216 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Israel” of Daniel, chap. [X,although he is betrayed by 
a spiritualizing method of interpretation to regard the 
“Israel” of Daniel as the “whole Church!” Such is 
the organic connection of all prophecy, such the con- 
tinuity of God’s plan, such the unchanging covenant of 
God, such the unity of Scripture, and the utterances of 
Christ and His Apostles that Israel, as such, sust have 
a large place in the closing book that sums and binds 
the canon. Were Israel wanting here, the critic, versed 
in Scripture, would allege the absence as a proof 
that John’s Apocalypse is not canonical; or, believing 
it canonical, would ransack every library and mon- 
astery, East and West, to find a genuine Manuscript, if 
possible, with Israel’s final fortunes init. But this is 
not needed. The great division of the Seven-Sealed 
Scroll itself into zwo halves, corresponding to the two 
half-weeks of the 7oth Week in Dan. 1x:27; the first 34% 
years covered by the first 6 Seals and the first 6 Trum- 
pets; the second 3% years covered by the 7th Trum- 
pet, or 7 Vials, the period of the Great Tribulation; in 
short, the division of the Scroll, in its two great parts, 
each a period of 1260 days, or 42 months, with Daniel’s 
“Little Horn,’ Dan. vii:2, 5, identified as John’s Beast, 
Rev. xiii:s5, is enough to end the question whether 
Israel is found here. As truly as the 144,000 are not 
Gentiles, so truly the Jerusalem of chapter XI is not 
that of Titus A. D. 70, but the Jerusalem of the End- 
Time, whose deliverance is predicted, not less by John 
than by our Lord, with the deliverance of Israel from 
the grasp of the last Antichrist, at the end of the Gen- 
tile times. 

The 144,000 are the “Pas Israel’ of Paul in Rom. xi: 
26; the ‘“Pleroma Israel”? in xi:15, whose conversion 
brings such transcendent blessing to the nations, in the 


5! oe 


THE 144,000. 2AG 


last time. Zech. chapters XII-XIV. They are the 
“Written in the Book,’.in Dan. xii:t; the “Among the 
Living and holy in Ferusalem,’ in \sa.iv:3; the “Many” 
of Daniel’s people who have then been “turned to right- 
eousness.” Dan. xi:3. They: are the “ Our Brethren:’ 
of Rev. xii:10, identified also notably, in Matt. xxv:4o, 
where the Son of Man decides the fate of nations ac- 
cording to their conduct toward Israel in the last tribu- 
lation. They are the “Offering” or “d/incha” brought 
by the Gentiles to the Holy Land, when the Lord ap- 
pears in His glory to build up Zion, Isa. x1: 11-16; xlix: 
22 -\xvi:20; Zeph. uisio (Revised: Version); in. ‘other 
words, the unspotted Israel of the last time, the holy 
“Aparche,’ or “First-Fruits” of the Millenial Harvest of 
the Nations, Rev. xiv:4, 14-16; Matt. x111:38-43; Rom. 
x1:10; Rev. xv:4,- Still more, they are Daniel’s “People 
of the Saints of the Most High,” to whom the King- 
dom is given, when the Colossus falls, and the Little 
Horn is judged, Dan. ii:44; vii:25;* Ezekiel’s ‘“exceed- 
ing great army,” when the Dry Bones of the valley are 
quickened to life, Ezek. xxxvii:1-12, by the preaching 
of the word, and the blowing of the Spirit. They are 
NVew-Born Israel, at the Second Coming of Messiah, the 
nucleus of the Millennial Kingdom, redeemed under 


*Even Keil, in Dan. xii:1-3, is compelled to say that ‘‘by the People of 
the Saints of the Most High is meant das Volk Israel, das Volk Daniels.” 
But then he spiritualizes it into ‘‘a// peoples ! Alle Volker, who belong to the 
New Covenant!” on which Dr. Grobler sharply remarks, ‘‘ When Keil says 
this, he drags into the text what is wholly foreign to it. The prophet 
meant no such thing.” (Stud. u. A7tt, 1879, 4th Heft. 669.) So Bosan- 
quet. ‘‘They are the sons of Abraham, the very same people as in Dan. 
hie enw bs Wan ix:1t,15,20;24;x:14; of this there. can be no question,” 
(Messiah the Prince. 13, 14.) So Auberlen. ‘‘ They are the People lsrael 
in contrast with the Gentile nations which were, for a time, to exercise rule 
over them, and we have no exegetical authority, or right, to think of any 
other. They are not the Christian Church.” (Der Prophet Daniel 248.) So 
Volck. ‘‘ They are the People who have been dispersed, outcast, and op- 
pressed by the Nations, but to whom the Kingdom will be given at last, the 
people Israel.” (Chitiasmus, 87.) It is useless to multiply authorities, 


248 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCOSSIONS. 


the ‘echoes of the 7th Trumpet. “Rev. xis; xu 
Otherwise, the advancing organism of prophecy is 
broken. This, however, cannot be. 

All the scenes in the Apocalypse of John from 
chapters X to XX fall in that very epoch of time in 
which the “ Last Things” described in Ezekiel, chapter 
XXXVII; Dan. chapter XII; Hosea, chapter  Xtae 
and Isa. chapter XX VI, and in all the prophets con- 
cerning Israel, fall, viz.: after Gentile times are ended, 
and the 7oth Week has begun. Then God’s covenant 
relations with divorced dead Israel as a nation, are 
once more resumed. We ought to have no difficulty 
here. “The majority of expositors now,” says Boeh- 
mer, agree that verses 2-8, of Rev. vii, mean an election 
out of Israel, while verses 9-17 are an election of be 
lievers out of all Nations. This needs no proof, for the 
words are so clear and express, that we rather need an 
explanation how it is that any one could deny it.”* So 
Auberlen. ‘The 144,000 are none other than con- 
verted Israel redeemed, through the storms of the last 
time, into the Kingdom, to form there the nucleus of 
the new and divinely organized life of humanity.”+ 
Clear and right are the words of Professor Volck, who 
says, “ The 144,000 sealed from the 12 tribes of Israel, in 
Chapter VII, are identical with the 144,000 standing on 
Mount Zion, in Chapter XIV, and are not, as Keil and 
others teach, the whole number of believers in all 
ages. They are not, as Vitringa thinks, the sum of 
evangelical confessors; not as Ewald has it, all Chris- 
tianity ; noras De Wette and Hengstenberg hold, the 
spiritual Church; nor are they, as Diisterdieck views 
them, included in the innumerable throng, v.g. All 


*Offenbar Joham. 148. 
*Der Prophet Daniel 385. 


THE 144,000. 249 


these views break the fixed antithesis between Israel 
and the Gentiles. Whoever, without prejudice, con- 
siders the vision, will be able to discover clearly the 
express contrast between a definite number out of the 12 
tribed Israel who survive the Great Tribulation, and 
an innumerable throng, out of every nation, and of all 
tribes and tongues, who,.during the tribulation, enter 
into the peace of God. He who is familiar with Old 
Testament prophecy, and what it says of Israel in the 
last time, will find nothing strange here.’* In like 
manner, that able writer, Pastor Koch, defending Hof- 
mann against Kliefoth, says, ‘‘ The 144,000 are Israel 
of the End-Time who do not taste death, but survive to 
see the Advent of Christ, in contrast with another com- 
pany who, through death, attain to heaven. They are, 
as Hofmann rightly conceives, the Israelitish Church of 
the Future, and upon the earthly Mount Zion where 
the Redeemer has come. It is not that Gentile be- 
lievers have utterly perished in the apostasy, for Paul 
teaches the contrary. I Thess. 1v:16, 17; nor that no 
Jewish believers become martyrs, for John teaches 
otherwise, Rev. vii:o. The countless company in heaven 
is “out of every nation, and of all tribes and tongues.” 
But it is that, in the height of the apostasy, when the 
true Church is almost gone, God will restore Israel, and 
preserve of Israel an election, undestroyed by the tribulation, 
who shall live to see the Advent. Such is God’s way.” 
“ Wonderful,’ exclaims Luthardt, “are the ways of 
God! Israel ceased to be the territory of the Kingdom 
of God, that it might go to the Gentiles. But just that 
will, one day, ‘provoke’ Israel. The first made last 
shall become the last made first. While, inthe world of 


*Volck. Chiliasmus 124. 
+Koch. Uebersicht u. d. Heilsgesch. 56-64. 


250 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Nations the apostasy finds place, the Church of the End- 
Time will be kept alive and preserved through Israel 
restored—the 144,000 sealed and victorious in chapters 
VIT and XIV. When the tribulation waxes to its 
height the Lord will come and show Himself on Mount 
Zion.” “The 144,000 are the Jewish Christian Church 
of the Last Time, who have passed through the Great 
Tribulation. They stand, not on the heavenly, but on 
the earthly Mount Zion. It is the same thought that 
we find in Rom. x1:26; the fulfilment of the promise 
made to the Philadelphian Church.”* 

Is all this oly abstract, ideal, schematic, merely 
spiritual, and “of universal application to the Church, 
in allages?”’ Is it not concrete and real with an in- 
tensity under which even the symbol itself grows weak 
and staggers? Who can doubt that Daniel’s 7oth 
Week is the frame for John’s Apocalypse and Israel the 
key of its true interpretation? + 

Spiritualizing expositors, like Hengstenberg, Keil, 
R. W. Alexander, C. H. H. Wright, and idealizing 
ones, like Bertheau, Riehm, Robertson Smith, and 
others, may adhere still to the opposite view. but such 
view is unsustained by a true exegesis. When that 
eminent scholar, Dr. J. A. Alexander, still bound to the 
Church-Historical theory of interpretation, said, “The 
literal view rests upon the /falsc assumption that the 
apocalyptic prophecies are exegetical of those in the 


*Luthardt, Lehre v. d. Letzten Dingen. 123 69. 

+ The 144,000 are Jews. So Andreas, Arethas, Ribera, & Lapide, Lam- 
bert, Bullinger, Launoy, Grotius, Bossuet, Bengel, Hess, Hahn, Roos, 
Baumgarten, Heinrichs Eichhorn, Neander, Ziillig. Hofmann, Auberlen, 
Luthardt, Karsten, KOhler, Koch, Rinck, Baur, Schultz, Steffans, Dachsel, 
Starke, Lechler, Diisterdieck, Da Costa, Volck, Volkmar, etc., etc. ‘‘Most 
expositors understand Mount Zion, Rev. xiv;1, on which John saw the 
Lamb and the 144,000, in a literal sense.” Gebhardt, Doctrine of the 


Apocalypse. 44. 


. 


THE 144,000. 951 


Old Testament, from which their images and terms are 
borrowed,” * it was well replied by Henderson, Kitto, 
Davidson, Govett, and more, as now it is maintained 
by a hundred others, like Delitzsch, Hofmann, Volck, 
Luthardt and Auberlen, that there is xo assumption in 
the case, nor “borrowing,” but that the organic relation 
of the prophecies, in both Testaments, to Israel’s final 
future compels the interpretation, and that the later, 
more developed oracles upon the same subject ave ex- 
egetical of the earlier ones. We can truly say of this 
chapter in the Apocalypse (VII) what the great Chal- 
mers said of the 61st chapter of Isaiah, viz., “This chapter 
forms, altogether, a most regaling prophecy, and serves 
greatly to establish the future Restoration of Israel as 
being the common subject of both the Apocalypse and the 
older prophets.’ + We can say with Kliefoth, “The 
Apocalypse actually brings nothing more concerning 
the Last Things, than what is elsewhere found in the 
other Scriptures of the Prophets, our Lord’s words, 
and the utterances of the Apostles.” { And, with 
Delitzsch, we can say, “The New Testament Apoc- 
alypse represents the Old Testament &scha/¢a in their 
future temporal succession and order. It is, in this 
repect, the Key to the whole prophetic word. To spir- 
itualize the prophecies concerning Israel, is to distort 
and negate the prophetic word itself.” | And we can 
say with Koch, “ The Apocalypse of John not merely 
confirms the Old Testament Prophecy, but is the orm 
for its understanding, for whatever the prophets have 
said of the kingdom of glory on this present earth, is 


* Later Prophecies. 487. Scribner’s Ed. 

+ Scripture Readings III. 335. MHarper’s Ed. 
{ Christliche Eschatologie. 16. 

| Letter to the Writer, Oct. 9, 1886. 


*~ 


252 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


here repeated in the light of New Testament knowl 
edge.” * And with Reuss, that veteran scholar, from 
whom we dissent in so much else, we must yet say 
that “the Apocalypse is no fancy of some exalted and 
lazy dreamer, but responds to the felt need of the age 
in which it was born. Far from containing revelations 
new and astonishing, as almost all past commentators 
have imagined, it but gives to its readers what most of 
them have already known and believed.’+ Nor, finally, 
here, may we omit that word of Renan, so true and 
impressive, even though bound up with a false inter- 
pretation, “The Apocalypse is the Seal of Prophecy, 
the last word of Israel. Let any one read in the an- 
cient prophets,—Joel, for example,—the description of 
the ‘Day of the Lord, and herein he will find the germ 
of the vision of Patmos. Every revolution, every his- 
toric convulsion, became, for the Jewish mind, pos- 
sessed with the idea of the establishment of a kingdom 
of righteousness on earth, the prelude of a judgment 
more solemn and definitive still. At each event a 
prophet lifted up his voice and cried ‘low the trumpet 
an Zion, for the Day of the Lord ts near.’ The Apoca- 
lypse is the last consequence and crown of all this re- 
markable literature which is the glory peculiar to 
Israel. Its author is the last great prophet, inferior to 
none of his predecessors whose spirit and word he imi- 
tates. Almost his whole word is taken from the pro- 
phetic representations of the Old Testament, especially 
from Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel and Zechariah. The com- 
ing of the future reign of Christ is at hand. It must 
follow the destruction of Roman power. The martyrs 
are raised, the rest of the dead are not raised yet, and 


* Das Tausend. Reich. 142. 
+ L’Apocalypse. Introd. to. 


THE 144,000. 953 


the kingdom of Christ is upon the earth, with its 
central seat at Jerusalem, in the midst of the nations. 
It will endure 1000 years, after which Satan will at- 
tempt a new reign, which God will disappoint by a 
general and final judgment. This zs that Doctrine of 
the Millennium spread so widely in the first three centuries, 
which has reappeared constantly at different epochs, and ts 
supported by more ancient and formal texts than many other 
doctrines now universally accepted.”* Withsucha mass of 
consentient opinion, rather of profound critical judg- 
ment, in every case built on the organic unity of all 
prophecy, it must be impossible for any competent, im- 
partial and intelligent mind, to evade the conclusion 
that Israel is the key of this Book. It can only be 
evaded by the adoption of a sfirttualizing interpretation 
which makes “Israel” mean the New Testament Gentile 
“Church,” and so confounding things different, negates 
the prophetic word of both Testaments. The utter- 
ance of Luthardt, however, remains true, ‘Whoever is 
at home in the prophets, and in the Apocalypse, will 
soon find the right way which will conduct him through 
all the apparent labyrinths of this wonderful book.” t+ 
This whole combined judgment of independent scholars 
so eminent, of specialists so patient, and of writers of 
theological views so different, multiplied as it might be 
to volumes, only establishes the fact that the Apocalypse 
7s exegetical of the earlier prophets, and that as there, 
so here, /svae/is the cloud by day, and the fire by night! 
It is a Jewish-Christian Book from the pen of the 
apostle-prophet John. In the dark hour following 
Jerusalem’s second obliteration, Israel’s second disper- 
sion, and the persecution of both Israel and the Church 


* Renan. L’Antichrist. 460-468. 
} Lehre v. d. letzten Dingen. 174. 


204 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


by the Roman power, it opens up a glorious future for 
all, “the Jew, the Gentile, and the Church of God; ”— 
a future of blessedness and victory, introduced by the 
Second Coming of the Son of Man, at the end of the 
Times of the Gentiles. In this respect John is the true 
successor of Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and Zechariah, yea, 
of all the prophets. In him Christ speaks as He speaks 
in them, the “Oxe Speaking” in them all, the communi- 
cation one and consistent all the way from Moses to 
John. “ Israel,’—the literal Israel,—‘‘shall be saved 
with an everlasting salvation, not to be ashamed nor 
confounded, world without end.” Isa. xlv:17. 


> »>* 


THE 1000 VEARS. 955 


PART V. 


THE 1000 YEARS. 
(A) Proofs of their Historic Reality. 


These proofs are redundant. 

(1) The /dentity of these years with the “ Third Day” 
in Hos. vi:2, the “ Multitude of Days” in Isa. xxiv:22, 
Bie Many Days” in Ezek. xxxviii:8, and ‘the ‘His 
Days” in Psa, Ixxii:7, is of itself conclusive of their his- 
toric reality, and definite chronological measure. The 
Eschata that bound these “years” are identical with 
the Zschata that bound these “ days,” both at their open- 
ing and their close, while the differently named periods 
thus bounded, being commensurate, are identical. If 
we schematize, or throw into linear form, this concep- 
tion, the diagram will stand thus: 


: The Third Day, Hos. vi:2. ) 

§ sg 
S Multitude of Days, Isa. xxiv:22. 
12) 

n 2 2 
a Many Days, Ezek. xxxviii:8. \ a 
o0 bo 
a 

‘g His Days, Psa. lxxii:7. 3 
o ° 
a ae 
ie) The Thousand Years, Rev. xx:1-7. o 

(ay | Ste oan See E(B) 


That is, the Eschata at the opening of the 1000 years 
(A) are identical with the Zschata at the opening of all 


256 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


the other named periods; and the Lschata at the close 
of the 1000 years (B) are identical with the £schata at 
the close of all the other named periods, which makes 
the periods themselves not only commensurate but 
identical; in other words, all are ove period. 

We have but to turn to the Apocalypse of John, 
in order to see that the Old Testament Fschata, taken 
together, in one combined picture, are the same events 
that shine in the final New Testament revelation of the 
future; these events grouped in the same way at the 
opening, as also in the same way at the close, of the 
Great Interval. These events at the opening (A) which 
is the close of the 7oth week, are the Parousia of Anti- 
christ, the Gathering and Conversion of Israel, the 
Great Tribulation, the Gathering and Judgment of the 
Nations around Jerusalem, the Slaughter in the Holy 
Land and final Conflict around the Holy City, the 
the Parousia of Christ, Deliverance and Redemption 
of Israel, the Destruction of Antichrist, the overthrow 
of .the Gentile Colossus or World-Power, the Binding 
of the Dragon, the Resurrection of the Righteous 
Dead, the Resurrection of Israel’s Kingdom, and the 
establishment of Messiah’s Kingdom “over the whole 
earth,” and “ under the whole heaven.” These events, 
accompanied by great cosmic changes and convulsions, 
occur, in the Old Testament, at the opening of each ol 
the various periods, as above named; and in the New 
Testament, at the opening of the 1000 years. The 
events at the close of the 1000 years, are, in like manner, 
the events at the close of the other periods, taken to- 
gether, viz., the ‘Evil Spirit” that comes into Gog’s 
mind, the Release of Satan, the Redemption of the 
Nations remote from Palestine, the Judgment on Gog, 
the Resurrection of the rest of the dead, the Last Judg- 


THE 1000 VEARS. . 257 


ment, the final New Heaven and Earth, and the final 
New Jerusalem. The Interval between these opening 
and closing events being literal in the Old Testament, 
it must be so inthe New. Chronological there, it is 
chronological here. What was obscurely intimated 
there is eclaircised and unfolded brightly here. 

This shows clearly the direct relation of each one of 
the Eschata to the 1000 years, and provides at once the 
answers to the several questions,—each a theme in 
itself—“ What is the relation of the Church to the 1ooo 
years?r—of Israel to the 1000 years ?—of the Nations to 
the 1000 years?—of Satan ?—of the Second Coming ?>— 
of the rest of the dead ?—of the land of Palestine ?—of 
the Conflagrations?—of the Judgments?—of Anti- 
christ ?—of Gog ?—of the New Heaven and Earth, and 
New Jerusalem? Where does each Zschaton stand in 
relation to the 1000 years, and to all the other Eschata ? 
Which are on this, which on that side of the Millennial 
Age, and what the characteristics of the Age itself as 
foretold by all the prophets? The answers to these 
questions constitute no less than the clear ow¢-rolling 
from one another, in temporal order and succession of 
the total Eschata, zz-rolled and involute in one another 
in the earlier Old Testament revelation; the Ends and 
Ages there confounded, but here unconfounded, and 
separately marked as successive, literal, and historic 
parts and bounds of time. 

This argument, drawn from commensurate times, 
bounded by the same EZ schaza, is invincible. It is based 
upon the genetic unity, persistent continuity, and self- 
advancing organism, of all prophecy, from first to last 
forecasting the same future, opening the same Intervals, 
unveiling the same events, and struggling to reach the 
same end. What we see in each of the Old Testament 


208 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


germinal expressions for the 1000 years, is simply an — 


embryonic pre-formation in its various growths and 
phases; an enigmatic mention of the AM/zllennium to be 
announced at last, without enigma. It 1s with these 
germs, or types, of the final Name of the Interval, as it is 
with the early facts in Israel’s history. Everything 
anticipates, and is prophetic. The judgment on Sodom 
seems marvelously like the Judgment yet to come upon 
the world. Every circumstance appears to be a type. 
The mission of Joseph to Egypt looks much like the 
mission of Israel.to the nations. The 40 years’ wander- 
ing in the wilderness foreshadowed a longer wandering 
among the Gentiles. The return from Babylon pre- 
luded a still more glorious return, in the latter days. 
Nay more, the actual pre-announcement of the future 


under terms indefinite, reserved to be defined by later 


light, is itself an anticipation of the final fact. All goes 
to show an organism and development in prophecy, the 


ground and guide for every true interpretation. If, as _ 


Hofmann beautifully says, “ Every triumphal pro- 
cession of the Roman General through the streets of 
Rome was a prophecy of the coming Cesar Augustus,’* 
it is equally true that every detected Interval, in the 
Old Testament between the Advent of Messiah in His 
elory, and the final Judgment and Regenesis of all things, 
is a prophecy of the A/cllennium. tis the Millennium 
itself in prophetic embryo. Modern science shows de- 
signed connection in the different structure of the same 
organism, at different periods in its growth, and so 
builds its doctrine of homology and unity. “The most 
perfect being,—man,—presents himself, first, in im- 
perfect pre-formation which imperfectly prefigures 


* Weissagung u. Erftillung. I. 15, 


j 
j 
j 
F 
a 
; 
4 


wow TP 


eee ee 


+ 


oi ee 


; 
7 


THE 1,000 VEARS. 209 


the perfect final form. So is it in prophecy and _his- 
tory.” * The Z7zme-Designations in Hosea, Isaiah, Eze- 
kiel, the Psalms, and the implications in the Pentateuch, 
for the Millennial Age, are the archzology of escha- 
tology. The End is contemplated from the Beginning, 
The identity of the Intervals represented by them, and 
of the Aschata that bound them, rest, not on any mere 
external accident, or similarity in prophecy, but upon 
the inner connection, and inter-connection, of the parts 
of prophecy, and the advancing organism of the whole 
along its fixed, original, and pre-determined lines. 
What looms in the End, lurks in the Beginning. For 
this reason, as Crusius says, Delitzsch agreeing, “The 
New Testament attributes to the Old Testament time a 
far deeper knowledge of the work of Christ than we 
could conclude from the Old Testament, apart from the 
New as its key.’’+ ‘And so is it with respect to the 
Millennium. Either the whole prophetic word 1s false, 
or the 1,000 years in John are literal historic time. 
Either the pre-formative expressions in Hosea, [saiah, 
and Ezekiel, forecast the 1,000 years in John, as chrono- 
logical, or the prophetic word in both Testaments is not 
a unit, nor an organism, but a mass of isolated sentences, 
a sheaf of incoherent oracles, ambiguous as the Sibyl’s 
utterances. Thiscannot be. The proofs are “Legion” 
that the Bible is One Word which “cannot be broken,” 
One Organic Whole, to be studied as a whole, dealt with 
as a whole, expounded as a whole, each part an index 
to the whole, a complex, end-developing and one-aimed 


* Orelli. Die alttest. Weissagung. 45. This statement must not be 
taken in the Darwinian sense of ‘‘Common Descent.’’ Orelli does not mean 
itso. Manisthe immediate work of God, yet all that goes before him is but 
the herald of his Advent on the Stage. This is God’s wondrous work, and 
we may not deny it. 

+ Bibl-prophetisch-Theologie, 116. 


260 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


whole, continually expanding and unfolding from nar- 
rower to wider, and obscurer to clearer, until. at last, 
its hidden ages and ends, stand out in bold relief, dis- 
played in all their brightness. It is not that the New 
Testament is “imported” back into the Old, in order 
that there we may find ages and ends “ borrowed from 
the New,” but it is that the discovery of the 1000 years 
in the Old, is an inductive demonstration, scientific and 
sure, that the writers of the New have said nothing 
other than what Moses and the Prophets did say should 
come to pass. The denial of this involves the destruc- 
tive statement that “in every form of prediction the laws 
of prediction preclude exact and literal fulfilment.” * 
Such assertion assails as false the foremost argument 
of the early Martyr-heroes who were called of God to 
stand in the front line, “opening and alleging,” in de- 
fence of the Messiahship of Jesus, against both Jew and 
Gentile, that “the harmony between prophecy and ful- 
filment is the greatest and truest demonstration,—vse- 
giste kat alethestate apodeixis,—of Christianity.” + Nor 
has Kuenenand his Dutch school damaged this position 
in the least. Nor is Idealism needed to help Apo- 
logetics. 


B. DEVELOPMENT OF THE ‘1000 YEARS IN THE 


TESTAMENT. 


(2) But another proof comes forward to salute us. 
Nothing can be of greater interest to a student of God’s 
Word than to watch the development of the 1000 years 
in the Mew Testament. In the Old Testament, those 
years are, first of all, implied, though not mentioned, 
as introduced by Israel’s deliverance and the resurrec- 


* Briggs. Messianic Prophecy. I. 54. 
+ Orelli. Die alttest, Weissagung. 75. 


LHL, 1000 VEARS. 261 
tion of the righteous, in Moses, Deut. xxxii:39-43, and 
David, Psa. xlix:14, 15, then gradually unveiled in 
Hosea’s “ Third Day,” Hos. vi:2, more fully opened out 
in the ““ Many Days” of Isa. xxiv:22, and Ezek. xxxviii: 
8, and finally, disclosed in Dan. xii:12, 13, as the blessed 
time following the resurrection of the just. So, in the 
New Testament, we have a like development of the 
Interval between the resurrections. First of all, since 
our Lord, in the Synoptists, has xothing to say of the 
resurrection of the wicked, He refers simply to the 
blessed age following the resurrection of the righteous, 
as a time when the just shall eat bread, and the right- 
eous shine as the Sun, in the kingdom of their Father, 
Matt. x111:43, Luke xiv:14, 15. That this kingdom isa 
kingdom of glory on earth, is the common teaching of 
both Testaments. But next, when our Lord has some- 
thing to say of the resurrection of the wicked, in the 
Fourth Gospel, He employs a progressive method of 
discourse, advancing step by step, while grasping the 
total present and future in one conception, and, passing 
onward from one great thought to another, as plainly 
wakes the suspicion of an Interval between the resurrec- 
tion of the righteous and the wicked, as He does of an 
Interval between the spiritual and bodily resurrections 
themselves. And it is the very Interval Hosea, Isaiah 
and Ezekiel saw. It lies, first of all, wholly concealed, 
then gradually unveiled, by our Lord, in John v:21-29, 
the classic passage constantly yet vainly quoted, by all 
Post-millennialists, to prove that no such interval ex- 
ists. That very passage, however, proves the contrary! 
For, if we dismiss the wrong conceptions of it, taught 
by the Church, we shall discover, clearly, that in the 
exposition of His Life-Giving Power and Judicial Au- 
thority, as the Son of Man, our Lord, first of all, uses a 


262 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


most general expression covering a// kinds of resurrec- 
tion, the resurrection of the soul, and the body; and at 
different times, both now and hereafter, v. 21; next, as 
He proceeds from the general to the particular, He lim- 
its the expression to a purely spzrzfual resurrection, 
v. 24; next, He passes on to mention the dodzly resur- 
rection of those who are already spiritually raised, viz: 
the resurrection of the righteous, or of some that are in 


their graves, v. 25; then, finally, extends His thought. 
to include the dJodzly resurrection of the qwzcked as well. 


as of the righteous, z. ¢., of ‘ a// that are in their graves,” 
vs. 28, 29; the wondering crowd staring and listening, 
as His great discourse ascends to reach its climax. It 
is during the progress of His speech to this climax,— 
which sweeps His whole official work, as the Son 
of Man, at both Advents and all the way between, 
and beyond, yea, the whole future in one vast con- 
ception, both before and after His Second Coming, 
that the Interval after that Coming, viz.: that @pes 
tween the resurrection. of the righteous and the 
wicked, begins to be detected and, at last, confirmed. 
It is manifest that different events, occurring at differ- 
ent times, are grouped together, regardless of any spec- 
ification of the Intervals between. The whole time, 
present and future, is summed up in “the hour ¢hat zs 
coming and now zs,” in v. 25, and the “coming hour” in 
v. 28, and which is of /arger extent than the “coming 
hour” in v. 25; zka¢ referring only to the time of the 
righteous, z/7s to the times of doth righteous and wicked. 
Not a line exists to intimate the simultaneousness of the 
resurrection of these two classes, any more than the 
simultaneousness of the bodily and spiritual resurrec- 
tions themselves. On the contrary, the ‘‘ First Resur- 
rection,” foretold by Daniel xii:1-3, Isaiah xxvi:19, and 


ht! 


THE 1000 YEARS. 963 


Rey. xx:6, is ere, as plainly in v. 25, as the “ Last Res. 
urrection,” taught by implication in Isa. xxiv:22, and 
clearly in Rev. xx:12-15, is there inv. 29. The juxta- 
position of both, in general discourse, or im one mental con- 
ception, grasping the whole future, vs. 28, 29, does not 
necessarily involve simultaneousness of occurrence. The 
Fourth Gospel has no other eschatology than is found 
in the Apocalypse, and both none other than is found 
in the Prophets, in Peter and Paul. It is the voice of 
Christ that sounds in all. And this is of first impor- 
tance in our age, and one of the best exegetically estab- 
lished and victorious replies,—after 60 years of hottest 
conflict,—to the rationalists, and idealizers, who have 
assailed the Fourth Gospel on the one hand, and the 
Apocalypse on the other, as being uncanonical, and not 
written by the same author, because of difference of 
style, and chiefly of doctrine, and most of all in eschat- 
ology. The words of Gebhardt, familiar with the 
whole controversy, are worthy to be quoted here, at 
length. Commenting on John v:21-29, he says: ‘The 
Evangelist and Seer hold essentially the same views. 
To an unprejudiced reader there can be no doubt that 
the Evangelist, in most perfect harmony with the Seer, 
expected that, after the completion of the earthly king- 
dom of Christ and the last judgment on Satan, and the 
passing away of the present world, the final judgment 
would take place; and that “ all the dead who, until then, 
remain in the grave, would arise to be judged, in the general 
resurrection.” “Asto John v:25, there has, unnecessarily, 
been much controversy. J/¢ can mean nothing else than 
the “ First Resurrection,’ in distinction from the general 
resurrection to judgment. If the two bodily resurrec- 
tions do not come externally together, zz relation to 
time (as they do not) then the “ Last Day”’ cannot pos- 


264 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


sibly be anything else than the Great Final Catastrophe 
in its Zwofold Degree of realization, viz; (a) The Advent 
and what it brings with it; and (b) The Final Judg- 
ment and what depends upon it; doth one and the same 
im nature, but in time and degree of realization, different. 
When the Evangelist uses the name “ Last Day” for 
this Duality, he intends nothing different from Christ’s 
“ Day” which “ Abraham saw afar off, and was glad.”* 
This is certainly correct. Our Lord’s discourse here, 
even asin the Olivet Prophecy, groups separate and 
distant events in one picture, after the manner of pre- 
exile prophecy. The neglect to observe this law of 
prophetic representation, has turned prophetic theol- 
ogy into scholastic dogmatics and, blotting out the In- 
terval between the resurrections and judgments, “as 
given to the Church, since Constantine’s day, a series of 
Creeds and Confessions, aud Standards of Doctrine, wherein 
both the resurrections and judgments are made simultane- 
ous, without interval, and placed as due at one and the same 
epoch of time! And this patent and palpable error of 
interpretation is one of the chief arguments, used by 
post-millennialists, against the gre-millennial coming of 
Christ! The Church, however, has begun to see her 
error in eschatology, and in her creed-statement of the 
biblical doctrine, and to use her fresh hight in defence 
of the truth. “It is gratuitous,” says Professor Stanley 
Leathes, in his reply to Kuenen, “and contrary to 
analysis, to assume that, because events are mentioned im 
emmedtate guxtaposition, therefore they are to follow one 
auother tn tmmediate chronological sequence!” + Plainly 
so! That one clear observation overthrows, and con- 
signs to oblivion forever, the ordinary interpretation of 


* Gebhardt. Doct. of Apoc., 4° 2-404. 
+ Old Testament Prophecy. 280. 


t 
14 
; 
ro 
4 
{ 


THE 1000 VEARS. 265 


John v:21-29, by post-millenialists. Allow that one false 
assumption for one moment, and prophecy stands self- 
convicted of irreconcilable contradictions, and Kuenen 
and his Dutch school wave their flag in triumph! 


C. THE TWO PASSAGES. DAN. xl1:I-3, AND JOHN v:25-20. 


(3). Before we advance farther it is of the first im- 
portance to advert to the celebrated passage, Dan. xii: 
I-3, in connection with John v:25-29. If we open the 
theological textbooks we have been accustomed to 
study, or the ordinary commentaries, we shall find that, 
upon the question of the resurrection, ¢hese two passages 
are uniformly quoted, first of all, to prove a universal and 
stmulianeous resurrection of the dead. They are the exe- 
getical stronghold of post-millennialism, and are alleged to 
deny clearly the interval of 1,000 years between the resur- 
rections, and to affirm the contemporaneous occurrence of 
both. Nothing is more incorrect than this. The pas- 
sages cannot be equated, nor does either teach, or even 
imply, a simultaneous resurrection of the righteous 
and wicked. The points wherein these supposed par- 
allel passages agree are fewer than those in which they 
a@iier. They are only parallel-in part, z. ¢., in respect 
tothe “ #zrst Resurrection.” In Dan. xii:1-3, only the 
resurrection of the righteous is taught, z. ¢., of Israel’s 
faithful dead, contrasted with which is the non-risen 
condition of the wicked destroyed from the face of the 
earth. In John v:25-29 the resurrection of do¢h right- 
eous and wicked is taught, but not asserted as simul- 
taneous. There are no proof-texts for any such doc-. 
trine in allthe Bible. The Old Testament does not and 
cannot contradict the New, by abolishing the interval 
of the 1,000 years which separates the resurrection of 
the wicked from that of the righteous. 


266 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Were it true that “at that tome,” Dan. xii:1, when 
Antichrist comes to his end, Dan. xi:45, a simultaneous 
_ resurrection takes place, or that Dan. xii:1-3, even im- 
plies such a thing, no exegetical talent possible to angel 
or man, could reconcile this polar antagonism to other 
Scriptures. The true rendering of Dan. xii:1-3, in con- 
nection with the context, is “ And (at that time) Maz) 
(of thy people) shall awake (or be separated) out from 
among the sleepers in the earth-dust. These (who 
awake) shall be unto life everlasting, but Tose (who do 
not awake at that time) shall be unto shame and con- 
tempt everlasting.” So, the most renowned Hebrew 
Doctors render it, and the best Christian exegetes, and 
it is one of the defects of the Revised Version that—for 
reasons deemed prudent, doubtless, by the Old Testa- 
ment Company—it has allowed the wrong impression 
King James’ Version gives, to remain. A false doc- 
trine is thereby, through defective rendering, given 
color from the Word of God which repudiates it at 
every step. 

Not a// awake “at that time,” but only many. The 
“‘ These’ who awake, “at that time,” are the righteous 
of Daniel’s people, the as many as are “written in the 
Book,” Dan. xii:1; they, of whom the “imstraeteq 
many,” and they that “understand,” x1:33, are the types, 
the “Many” who are “turned to righteousness,” with 
those who have turned them, Dan. xi1:3. The “ 7hose” 
who do not awake, at that time, are the wicked dead, 


Isa. xxvi:14, whom John calls the ‘‘ rest of the dead,” = 


Rev. xx:7, and whom the pre-Christian Hebrew Teach- 
ers, the “Waskilim,” called ‘Shear Hammethim,” 2. e., the 
“Remainder of the Dead.’ Vhey include the “Slain of 
the Lord,” Isa. lxvi:16; the “carcasses” of thevants 
christian host rotting on the field of the last conflict 


eT ee a ee 


THE 1000 VEARS. 267 


with the Beast; and described as “az abhorrence’ to all 
benolders, Isa. ixvi:24 +-Dan: vii7263 Rev. xix:17-21: xiv: 
20. “Dead, they shall not live; Deceased, ¢hey shall not 
rise.” Isa. xxvi:i4. The grammatical and logical sub- 
ject of the verb “awake,” Dan. xii:1-3, is “ Many out 
Jrom among the sleepers,’—not all. The grammatical 
and logical subject of the verb “come forth,” John v: 
25-29, 18 “ All that are in their graves,’—not merely 
many. in John, the “come forth” belongs to doth the 
clauses, “they that have done good,” and “they that 
have done evil,” because fwo classes are included in the 
“Al/ that are in their graves.” In Daniel, on the-con- 
trary, the “awake” belongs to only one of the classes, 
viz., the “ These,” because only one class is the total of 
the “Many out from among the sleepers.” It cannot 
belong to the “ Zose” from whose company “7hese” 
are separated by means of the resurrection. 

In brief, “Many out from among” cannot mean “Al/ 
that are in.’ The angel who spoke to Daniel was a 
better logician than to say that a part is the whole. 
The common Church-Doctrine of a universal and sim- 
ultaneous resurrection is not the Doctrine of the Word 
of God. It rests on bad exegesis, misconception of the 
text, and disregard of the law of development in proph- 
ecy with respect tothe Ages andthe Ends. Dan. xii:1-3, 
teaches only the “frst Resurrection,” as does Isa. xxv: 
19, its Old Testament “Companion-Piece,” as Delitzsch 
eabspiteand as does. Rev. xx:4-6, its New Testament 
“Companion-Piece.” And it zs this first resurrection that 


ts taught in John v:25. Daniel sees the Second Advent, 


the Deliverance of Israel’s surviving 144,000, the resur. 
rection of Israel’s faithful dead, and the Blessed Age 
beyond; “the 1000 years,” when he stands in his lot: 


268 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


For a full discussion of the passages, see “Zhe Presby- 
terian Review. Notes. Jan. 1884.” * 


(D) THE PASSAGE 'L(COR. XV:23—-25: 


But furthermore. This same Interval between the 
resurrections in John’s Gospel, is still more clearly in- 
dicated, though not opened out fully, or named, in Paul’s 
first letter to the Corinthian Church, when discussing the 
doctrine of the resurrection, -I Cor. xv:23-28. He tells 
the Church that Christ comes (1) to assume the king- 
dom ; then, after this Messianic reign is closed, and His 
mediatorial work accomplished, (2) to deliver the King- 
dom, “that God may be all in all,” v. 28. Two horizons 
are here. T’'wo Ends are here. And one Interval is 
here, as the best interpreters all maintain. The 1000 
years, and the analogy between the quiet mode in 
which Paul assumes as well as asserts their presence, 
and the similar mode in which Isaiah xxiv:22 does the 
same, is very striking. They are the Age, to which Paul 


*Professor Briggs (Mess. Proph. I. 42), ‘‘ Some are to rise to receive 
their everlasting reward, and Some to shame and eve lasting abhorrence.”’ 
Professor Birk’s (pre millennialist), ‘ The words Zhese and Those, in 
Hebrew, seem always to distribute something named before z, e., Of the AZany 
who awake, it is said Some will rise to glory, Others toshame and contempt.” 
(Outlines Unfulfilled Prophecy 225). ‘This is intolerable! for (1) AZany 
does not mean a//. (2) The preposition ‘tow? from” is nat superfluous. (3) 
The ‘‘these’” and ‘‘those’’ do not distribute the ‘‘AZazy,’ but the whole 
mass of the s/eefers, of whom the ‘‘AZany” are only oe class. (4) Only 
“Many” awake, not a the sleepers. Excellently does Dr. Tregelles say, 
“The word rendered Some in our version is zever repeated in any passage in 
the Hebrew bible, 77 the sense of taking up distributively any general class 
previously named.” Excellently does Petri also reply, ‘So long as you 
construe the ‘ Sleepers’ with the ‘Many’ your philological acquirement can 
only be absurdly applied; for the partition is manifest.” (De usu Accent. 
S Cod. Hebr. Aphor. xiii: § 5.) Excellently Fuerst also, ‘‘In Daniel xii: 
2, the swbstantive verb, frequently omitted, is to be supplied.” So Cocceius, 
the best Hebraist of his day. ‘‘No universal resurrection is taught here. 
These who ave anto eternal life are distinguished from those who ave unto 
eternal shame and contempt. The former awake at the time specified xi:45, 
xii:I. Tocarry the verb ‘awake’ into the second member of the verse is to 
add to Scripture which I dare not do,” (On Daniel xii;2.) So Saadias 


THE 1000 VEARS. 269 


tells us, the “Creature” is looking, Rom. viii:18-23, the 
millennial age following “the redemption of the body,” 
the Sabbatic Age when Nature herself puts on her new 
dress, and wears a new smile. And, finally, this great 
Interval, suspected and implied in John v:21-29, un- 
veiled in part in I Cor. xv:23-28, and opened still more 
in Rom. vii:18-23, blooms forth revealed in full, and 
stands disclosed, by name, as “¢he 1000 years,’ in Rev. 
xx:1-7. That is the crown of the whole development. 
Thus, the mode of progressive revelation is the same 
in both Testaments, viz., organic, the one and only true 
mode of all instruction, viz., from the general to the 
particular, and from the obscure to the clear. The 
harmony is perfect, and from Moses to John, God’s 
word is without a contradiction. The 1000 years ap- 
pear everywhere, as following the Second Coming of 
Christ. 


(E) PU oink. PROOF OF Tie: HISTORIC REALITY, 


But still further reasons exist to show that the 1000 


the prince of Hebrew scholars, the two Kimchis, Abarbanel, Bechai and 
Maimonides. So Dechsel, ‘‘Some Jews and Socinians, interpreting right, 
yet argue that in the Old Testament, the resurrection of the wicked is not 
taught. This error lies in assuming that the time when Michael stands up, 
viz., the Advent, is the Absolute End which it is not, but only the /elative 
End. (Bib. Hebr. Accent. on Dan. xii:2.) Keil says he is ‘ suprised to find 
the word J/any here where the word A// might have been expected!!!” 
(Keil on Daniel, p. 481.) Professor Briggs says, *‘Daniel has not learned 
that the heathen will rise from the dead also!” (p. 427), only Israel! 7. ¢., 
he did not know, Isa. xxiv:22. 

‘“The Church idea of the resurrection is unbiblical. The resur- 
rection is zot stmultaneous but progressive, at different epochs. A plurality 
of time-points is clearly distinguished: (a) the resurrection of individual be- 
lievers out from the mass of their own number asa result of the Descensus 
adinferos. Matt. xxvii:50-53: (b) the resurrection of all believers. John 
v:25; I Cor. xv:23; (c) the resurrection of the wicked, or rest of the dead, 
Isa, xxiv:22> Rev. xx:7; Acts xxvii:15; John v:28, 29.. Church dogmatics 
have not reproduced accurately the Bible doctrine of the resurrections. In 
fact, in no other part of dogmatic study has so little been done as in 
Eschatology, because the subject matter is prophetic.” othe. Dogmatik 
Hil. 73, 98. 


270 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


years are not merely symbolic, but are a true measure 
of real and historic time still future. And here, (a) 
first of all, the merest tyro at school, if asked to con- 
strue the sentences, “laid-hold of the Dragon and bound 
him 1000 years ;”’ “they lived and reigned with Christ 
1000 years;” could only respond, if correctly, that the 
expression “tooo years” is the Accusative of Time,— 
standing absolute,—in answer to the question, How 
Long? It is not the Accusative of “Eternity,” nor of 
“Spatial Ecumenicity,’—but of Z7zme, How Long. That 
is its grammatical construction. It tells the extent of 
time to which the Binding of Satan will go, te period of 
his non-deception of the nations, the duration of the 
priestly regency of Christ and His risen saints, the par- 
allel blessedness of all who share in the “ First Resur- 
rection.” Itisthe Millennial Age; Z7me,; not Ateruzty. 
(b) Again it is the same period of time that is called 
in Ps. Ixx1:7, “/7zs Days,” i. e., Messiah’s Days of regal 
glory on earth,—the “ Vemot Meshicha,’—“Days of Mes- 
stah,’—of the Hebrew Teachers, when “the righteous 
shall flourish, and abundance of peace shall be, so long 
as the moon endures.” It is that period on earth when 
patriarchal years return, and the centennarian sports 
as an “infant of days,’ and the days of God’s people 
shall be “as the days of a tree,” and they shall long 
enjoy, (literally “sake old,”) “the work of their hands.” 
Isa. lxv:22. It is not a poetic, symbolic, or merely ideal, 
prolongation of health, but actual longevity; not 
“Christian ripeness,” nor “beauty and germinations,”’ 
but “length of days,” which are “years,” so that the 
‘infant’ will be more than “ threescore and ten,’ and 
he who dies at the age of “a hundred years,” shall be 
deemed as one signally smitten of God for his sins. It 
is a literal period of time defore which, during which 


et 


THE 1000 VEARS. OFEL 


and after which, events take place, and zz which agri- 
culture, architecture, prayer, sin and death in measure, 
all exist; therefore not eternity. It is the period which 
in the Book Henoch represents human life as attaining 
once more its pristine duration before the Flood, “the 
Days of Messiah lasting 1000 years.”* ‘We are com- 
pelled,” as both Hengstenberg and De Wette say, “to 
take these years seriously and literally, repeated, as 
they are, six times, to impress them on our understand- 
ing.’ + Glasgow’s interpretation of them as denoting 


the “Gospel Age” is falsified by the actual history of 


18 centuries of: time since the birth of Christ. His ap- 
plication of the year-day theory to the Millennial Age 
is without the slightest justification. The assertion 
that “the Millennial years, like other prophetic years, 
and the 42 months, must be taken as days, 1. €.,==360,000 
years, the standard prophetic measurement being a day 
for a year,” and, again, that “1000 are 360,000 days, like 
the days of Daniel’s weeks, each day denoting a year,’’t 
is a series of assumptions and errors, clause after clause, 
destitute of all exegetical foundation, and wholly spec- 
ulative and imaginative. _The Millennial Age is a 
“Day,” just as the Gospel Age is a “ Day,” and as the 
Wandering in the Wilderness was a “ Day,” a Day 
whose years, definite and known to God, are revealed 
as “1000 years,’ and not as 360,000 days put for years. | 


* Drummond. Jewish Messiah. 374. 

+ De Wette. Offenbar. FEinleit. 5. MHengst. Offenbar. II. 402. 

t Glasgow. Com. on Apoc. 477, 478. 

| The Hebrew Yom, Day, is cognate with the Arabic Ayan, Sanscrit 
Ayum, Greek Aion, Latin A/vum, and denotes either a longer or a shorter 
period of time, measured by Hours, Years, Epochs, Ages, a Life-Time, 
Events, or a Dispensation. Hence, ‘‘Day of Darkness,” ‘‘Day of Wrath,” 
“Day of Salvation,” ‘‘Day of Vengeance,” ‘‘Day of the Lord,” ‘‘ Day of 
Temptation.”” The Day of Messiah’s glory on earth is given us in Years, 
1000 in number, just as the Day of Temptation is given us as 4o years. It 
isan Age, an 4ivum, an Aion, of measured time, Nowhere is a ‘‘Day for 


Dic SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


But still again; the Post-millennialists themselves, 
in their unwearied effort to fix the ‘terminus a quo, 
or starting point, of these years, testify to the fact 
that they are historic, and not a mere ideal. Baffled in 
their calculations, they still renew them. Somehow or 
other, they are powerless to shake out from their con- 
science the indestructible conviction that “the r1ooo 
years” lze zn between certain events in time, one of which 
is the “Coming of the Lord,” whatever that means, and 
another the ‘“ Resurrection of the dead,’ whatever 
that means, and, moreover, that, during these years, 
Satan is bound, and the Risen Saints reign with Christ, 
whatever these mean. These seem, clearly, to be 
actual time, and of definite and measured duration. 
They hold, 

(a) That the 1000 years begin with the First Advent, 
and represent the whole Church Period down to the 
Second Advent. This was the view of Augustine, Euse- 
bius, Jerome, and the State-Church after the early 


martyr-period, the view of the Medizeval Church, the — 


Lateran and Scholastic theory, still leavening Protest- 
antism itself not yet wholly free from the traditions of 
Rome. According to this theory the 1000 years began 
with the Crucifixion, Satan being then bound by virtue 
of the Death of Christ. The “ First Resurrection ” is 
either regeneration, baptism, or the soul’s ascent at 
death to glory, the reign of the risen martyrs being 


a year’ represented in Scripture as the ‘standard of prophetic measurement.” 
Daniel’s ‘‘Weeks” are not Weeks of Days put for Years. The ‘‘SAzbim,” 
or 70 ‘‘ Sevens” are 70 Sevens of Years. The Year-Day theory has no 
place in Daniel, and none in John. ‘The fatal error with Mr, Guinness, as 
with Professor Glasgow, and all who hold the Year-Day-Theory, is that they 
assume in their premises what they profess to find in their conclusions, viz., 
that the ‘‘Shibim’”’ or ‘‘ Sevens’ in Daniel, are “ays,” which is contradicted 
by the whole prophecy. Similarly, there is not one iota to show that “ the 
1000 years” in John are 1000 times 360 Days put for Years. It is imagin- 
ation. ; 


| 
] 


THE 1000 VEARS. 9°79 


that of their disembodied spirits in heaven, and the 
promised rule of the 12 Apostles that of their spiritual 
influence over the Church. Israel was forgotten. 
Rather, the “Church” is “Israel.” The absurdity of this 
view is seen in this that it makes the Millennial reign 
on earth, which begins with our Lord’s Return, to be 
that of His Sojourn in Heaven,a Millennium during 
which the bodies of God’s saints are stiil under the em- 
pire of death, and the “Times of the Gentiles” are still 
running on; times of affliction and woe, and God-op- 
posed world-power! Israel is still nationally cast 
away, and in their national grave. The Colossus 
of Gentile power still stands erect on Israel’s_ pros- 
trate form. The Apostasy is still deepening, the 
Tares yet ripening among the Wheat. Antichrist 
is still undestroyed, the Nations, as Nations, are still 
raging, the whole tide of church-corruption, false 
philosophy, false science, swelling to its height; a mil- 
lennium of boundless ambition, avarice, and lust of mil- 
itary conquest in the name of religion and missions, 
intemperance, oppression and crime of every sort, her- 
esies and schisms of gigantic character, wars, dragon- 
nades, and inquisitions, persecutions pagan and papal; 
Satan’s own; a millennium begun by devoting the 
Apostles to the axe, Christians to the lions and the 
flame, and sending John to Patmos, as a prisoner for 
the truth and testimony of Jesus, to write his great 
Apocalypse! This whole conception, false in every 
way, rests upon an exegetical violence to God’s word, 
in sundering the strict temporal sequence of the 12th 
upon the 11th, and the 2oth upon the 19th chapters of 
the Apocalypse, so slipping backward the second half of the 
Apocalypse and the 1000 years, also, across our whole ats- 
pensation, to attach their commencing date to the hirst Ad- 
18 


rade ' SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


vent/ This is the true magic of the post-millennial 
view improved, at last, by the dictum that “ Symbolical 
numbers don’t count!” I\t is associated with the allego- 
rizing, spiritualizing, and idealizing, exposition of the 
prophecies concerning Israel and the Advent; a theory 
which taught the Church to say that, when Paul tells 
the Romans “All Israel shall be saved,’—1i. e., the 
Israel to whom “blindness” had happened,—and who 
were nationally “cast away,’—it means “ the whole 
Christian Church;” and that, when he repeats Israel’s 
prediction that “the Redeemer shall come to Zion,” for 
Israel’s deliverance from the last Antichrist, and Isra- 
el’s Redemption from Gentile power, it means “a great 
spiritual revival,” but not the Second Coming of the 
Lord! In short, we are in the Willennium Now, and 
have been so, for nearly 1900 years / 

(b) That the 1000 years date from Constantine, A. D. 
312. It is not necessary to dwell on the fact that post 
millennialism dates the 1000 years from Pentecost, from 
the Destruction of Jerusalem A. D. 70, and from the 
Death of each individual believer! It is enough,—if 
passing by these literary curiosities, we confine our- 
selves to the more prominent commencing dates. 
Plainly, it was too much to be long believed, that 300 
years of bloody persecution and pagan torture of God’s 
saints should belong to the Millennial age of righteous- 
ness and peace, and “war no more.” Accordingly, the 
commencing date, the a quo, of the 1000 years, was ad- 
vanced 300 years along the line of history, so exclud- 
ing the martyr-period. The blessed age begins with 
the accession of Constantine as the “ First Christian 
Emperor,” A. D. 312, the nominal establishment of 
Christianity, and the Union of Church and State. How 
Satan and the Church waltzed together around the 


THE 1000 VEARS. 245 


tranquility of the so-called “Christian Empire,” history 
has told us! Israel still is forgotten. The “Church” 
is “Israel.” The Colossus has come down, i. e.,’Pag- 
anism! — Antichrist has been destroyed, i. e., Nero, or 
Maxentius, or some one else! Such the theory of 
Grotius, Hammond, and even of a remnant in our own 
day; an “Idol of the Theater!’’ Weare in the Millen- 
nium zow/ The Devilis bound zow/ The First Res- 
urrection is zow/ It is essentially the Augustinian 
view, and amenable to the same objection. 

(c) That the 1000 years date from Charlemagne, 
A. D. 800; another advance of 500 years, along the line 
of history, in fixing the a guo/ Such the invention of 
that great and good man, Hengstenberg. The Beast, 
or Antichrist, is not the Pope, but God-opposed Hea- 
thenism and Barbarism, not to be destroyed under judg- 
ment, at the personal appearing of Christ, but gradu- 
ally converted and peacefully overthrown by the 
preaching of the gospel. The Christianization of the 
German peoples, or European nations, by missionaries 
like Boniface, and the establishment of the so-called 
“Christian State,” asa result therefrom, is what 1s sym- 
bolized by the Rider on the White Horse in Rev. xix: 
1i-21! The 1000 years, therefore, degan Christmas, A. 
D. 800, when Pope Leo III imposed the crown on the 
head of Charlemagne as the true successor of the 
Christian Czesars, and revived the “Holy Roman Em- 
pire.’ That was considered a great piece of work in 
those days, although it required the lapse of the whole 
millennial age before Hengstenberg rose to let the 
world know how great it was! The Nations had 


- never dreamed that Satan was chained! The Turk 


was not aware of it! It is morally certain that the 
German Emperor who stood three days barefoot, in a 


276 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


hair-cloth shirt, in the winter time, at the castle gate of 
Canossa, to do penance to an Italian priest, never sus- 
pected it! But nevertheless, the Devil was bound, 
Christmas A. D. 800, and remained in Pit till A. D. 
1789, when, loosed from his chain, he came forth and 
began his old arts in the French Revolution, and the 
Wars that followed. The 1000 years are gone forever! 
The “First Resurrection” is the saints’ passage to, and 
appearance in, glory, at death, and the reign of the 
risen saints “oz” the earth is the reign of unraised 
saints “over” the earth. Since A. D. 1800, or the 
French Revolution, is Gog’s “ Zttle season,’—not far 
now from a century,—during which Gog and Magog 
have beleaguered ‘‘the camp of the saints,’ 1. e. the 
“Church,” the “spiritual Jerusalem,” or “Belovem 
City,” called “‘ Christendom,” which is the >“ Tiga 
Land,” by a revived Orientalism and Classic Paganism, 
and by the general Heathenism of modern society. 
This fiction is the grand-daughter of Augustine’s fairy, 
and incurs the censure that lies against the view of her 
ancient sire. It belongs to the spiritualizing interpre- 
tation of the prophecies concerning Israel, and has 
given occasion for the stirring Ode by Dr. Cox, 


‘We are living, we are dwelling 
In a grand and awful time ; 
In an age on ages telling— 
To be living is sublime ;” 


a hymn, which, as the line “Gog and Magog to the 
fray,” is reached by the praising audience,—has elec- 
trified, with a nerve-thrilling enthusiasm, more crowds 
of amazed and ignorant Christians, than almost any 
other ecclesiastical war-ditty ever devised for public 
worship. Modifying this view, Keil, the last great 


—— | 


—— a | 


ry ta 4 _ 


THE 1000 VEARS. Oi 


representative of Hengstenberg, goes back to the Con- 
stantine date, and holds that “so long as the State-Re- 
ligion exists, the 1000 years exist,” which, of course, rules 
out the United States, where Church and State are in- 
dependent, from all share in the glories of the Mil- 
lennial age! According to Keil the “ First Resurrec- 
tion” is literal, indeed, like the “ Paroustia” which, how- 
ever, 1s no definite event, but a ‘continuous process 
from age to age, along the whole line of historic Chris- 
tianity ;”’ a series of unseen individual risings from the 
dead, beginning with the Destruction of Jerusalem, A. 
D. 70! the attendant change of the living, however, not 
being mentioned, for obvious reasons! 

(d) That the 1000 years date from somewhere, inde fi- 
nitely,—in the future, 2. €., from some unknown point 1000 
years next preceding the Second Advent, which may be 
Either, 500, 1,000, 2,000, 5,000, 10,000, or 365,000, accord- 
ing to the uncertainties, or necessities, of the case. 
The other theories named, show us past pre-advent 
millennialism, and present pre-advent millennialism. 
This one shows us future pre-advent millenniahsm. It 
is another advance along the line of history, the staking 
down of the commencing date of the 1000 years at some 
undiscernible point along the road, this side the Sec- 
ond Advent. It is Whitby’s “ Vew Hypothests,” as he 
named it,-unknown to the Church for 1600 years, 
broached but once before Whitby was born, and _ in- 
stantly repudiated. It is what is styled “ Chzliasmus 
subtilis,’ a ‘fine millennialism,” a “ spiritual”’ one, and 
by a French writer is humorously called a “ Chef a’ wuvre 
de Sagacité!’ and is, to-day, the most popular of 
all the post-millennial speculations, bold, to the last ex- 
treme, in putting into God’s word what God has left 
out, and leaving out what God has put in. 


278 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


According to this “ Optimist ” theory, ever hissing 
at what it calls ‘ Pessimism,’’ beguiled by a popular 
catch ignorant of what either Optimism or Pessimism 
means, the Church, by virtue of the Gospel, extension 
of missions, revivals, operations of Boards, Clubs, and 
Alliances, Moral Reforms, Societies, Contributions, Con- 
ventions, Assemblies, Circulation of the Bible, Church 
Literature, and general Church agencies and activities, 
will finally subdue Antichrist, convert the nations, bind 
Satan figuratively, allegorically conquer the world, and 
introduce the splendors of the Millennium. It forgets 
the words of the Saviour, that, the very time when the 
gospel is sent as a “testimony to all nations,” is the 
time when “iniquity abounds, and the love of many 
waxes cold,” and “brother betrays brother;” and the 
words of the Apostle that, in the Acharith Hayyamin, or 
last days “hard times” shall come. Blind to the fact that 
the inward corruption of the Church keeps pace with 


her outward expansion, as Lange, Auberlen, Klefoth, | 


Van Oosterzee, Alford, and how many godly men 
have all so solemnly shown, and all history as well as 
the reeking crime of Christendom to-day testifies, it 
remains a stranger to the truth that the End-Time will 
reveal these two contradictory facts as concurrent, viz. 
the deepening of apostasy and the extension of the 
gospel, enormous missionary activity, and enormous 
departures from the truth. Averse to confess what 
every one sees, viz., the foregone tendency to change 
the Church of Christ into an organization for the pro- 
motion of social and business relations, and mutual 
temporal benefit, under the forms of religion; the need 
of regeneration, and the ignominy and scandal of the 
cross ever disappearing before the formal profession, 
outward success, and easy triumphs, of a Christianity 


> 


THE 1,000 YEARS. 279 


made pleasing to the world by all manner of indul- 
gence, concession, and compromise; the pulpit rose- 
coloring all things under the false lure of “ Optimism,” 
and the pew transferred to the theater, the club-house, 
the euchre-room, the gay concert, and the temple of 
mammon; the kingdom of God transformed into the 
kingdom of this world, Satan disguised as an angel of 
light joining the Church, the people delighted to have 
it so, and supporting the gospel, and contributing to 
missions, all the more while it is so; the inner spiritual 
life of the Church decaying, the laws and government 
of Christ in His own house set aside for the “ wisdom,” 
eprudence,’ and “policy ’ of Church rulers, lest 
“financial interests’”’ should suffer; it still assumes a 
contract, under these conditions, to convert the world to 
Christ! Enormous in pretension, as unfathomable in 
the mystery of its way, it yet, while decking itself with 
the garments of a world-harlotry, proposes to itself a 
plan anda purpose which, already, the mouth of God 
has declared to be false. All the social end moral 
plague-spots, oppressions, and crimes, national, and 
international, which 1800 years of advancing Christian 
endeavor have been powerless to avert, and with all its 
revivals powerless to extirpate, and which still bloom 
in, fatten on, and disgrace, our “ Czvelization ;”’ and all 
the darkness and pollution of the degenerate human 
heart, ever the same from generation to generation in 
the birth of every individual, the millions multiplying 
by an increase that outstrips even the progress of 
Christianity; and all ‘the vice embedded in our 
“ Culture,” and all the wickedness of Heathendom, 
less wicked than Christendom; it proposes to _ re- 
move by “a continuous process” of the same Christian 
and Church development which for 1800 years has 


280 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


shown itself utterly incompetent to achieve the task. 
And so the victory, foreseen by the prophet shall come 
to pass, the glory foretold arise and shine, the wolf and 
the lamb peacefully dwelling together, 1. e. the wicked 
and the righteous, the leopard and the kid, the lion and 
the calf, allegorically cohabiting, and a little child, the 
Sunday school scholar, allegorically leading them. So 
long as J/atssez-faire is the law of Christian life, and 
Church-permit to free indulgence, and the sun shines 
bright, and the grass is green, and the flowers are 
beautiful, and the canary sings in its cage, and money, 
and property, and amusements, and church contribu- 
tions, and sociables, balls, orchestras, and dances, 
abound, the doctrine of an “apostasy” and a “ judg- 
ment to come,” and a“ Day of the Lord,” is incongruous 
with the situation, as Elijah at Ahab’s table, or John the 
Baptist at Herod’s banquet. Something grander than 
the Augustan “xzova ordo,” or the Jewish “ Yemot 
Meshicah,’ or Sir Thomas More's ‘“ Ufopza,” or Plato’s 
“ Republic,’ will supervene, and Malthus’ theory of 
population, which says that “men increase faster than 
their means of subsistence,” and Darwin’s theory of the 
“struggle to survive,” will be proved by Christianity, 
Culture, Commerce, Trade, Mammon, Railroads; 
Telegraphs, Telephones, Graphophones, Chambers of 
Commerce, Syndicates, Companies, and Pools, to be 
vain dreams. Legislation and benches of Justice, police 
courts and prisons, will be all right: governments all 
right; newspapers, the present main-stay of crime, 
all right; capital, labor, the social problem, corpora- 
tions, bourses, and exchanges, all right ; total abstinence 
from all fermented drinks, material, moral, social, civil, 
and religious, all right; seminaries, schools, univer- 
sities, colleges, theology, homiletics, criticism, the 


THE 1000 VEARS. 981 


pulpit and the platform, all right; alcohol, theaters, 
brothels, and breathing holes of hell, all right; the 
Church shining, the glory of the Lord risen on her; 
Buddha gone, Islam gone, Brahma gone, Pesstm gone, 
armies and navies gone, the “ Great Powers”’ at peace, 
face Vittle~ Powers -also, the ‘*Horns”’ no longer 
georing, and the knowledge of the glory of the Lord 
covering the earth as the waters do the sea. Arabian 
story will pale beside the wonders the ‘“ Woman,” 
the “Church,” will do, as she hides her leaven in the 
three measures of meal, ‘Shem, Ham, and Japhet,” and 
swells the world’s millions to the height of her own 
perfection! And all in historic time! 

Alas! it is a deep falsehood ;—a beguiling “Ze.” 
It is that “finer form of Chiliasm” which lauds the “Star- 
Spangled Banner, long may it wave!” and has taken 
possession, bodily, of what it calls our “American Chris- 
tranity,’ so much unlike the Apostolic sort !—It is the 
ordinary Millennialism of the spiritualizers, and of the 
pulpit, press, and platform, the millennialism ventilated 
in Church-Courts, Conventions, General Assemblies, 
Alliances, and Associations, and framed in special ser- 
mons, addresses, reports, and resolutions, published for 
the health of the soul. Discussion of it, there is hardly 
any, for “prudential reasons.” It is that “fine Chiliasm,” 
false as fine, which, in common with the “coarse,” or 
“Jewish,” holds to a Millennium defore the Advent and 
the Resurrection of the just ;—Swedenborg’s millen- 
nium, Robert Owen’s, Fourier’s, and St. Simon’s, a 
socialistic and humanitarian Millennium, mixed with 
Christianity, and whose central idea, viz., that it comes 
before the Advent and the Resurrection, is, as Ebrard 
called it, the “proton pseudos,” or “fundamental le,” 
through which all the Reformers, and the 17th Article 


282 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of the Augsburg Confession, clearly saw;—a mil- 
lennium sprung from Origen, a Universalist, perpet- 
uated by Rome all Arminian, fathered by Whitby, a 
Socinian, and adopted by many godly and scholarly 
Protestants, who, mistaking error for exegesis, spir- 
itualize all the prophecies concerning Israel, or end 
them in Maccabean, or early Roman times; a millen- 
nium without Christ to introduce it by judgment and 
deliverance; a millennium of saints in the flesh, and of 
the holy still in the grave; the precise Millennium of 
the “heretic”? Montanus, only wider than his Phrygian 
Pepuza!* Not a solitary text of Scripture is pro- 
duced in its support, though challenged a hundred 
times, except “Lo, lam with you always, even unto the end 
of the world !”” \t rests on a mistaken view of the pur- 
pose of God, and of the promise of the Spirit, violates 
every principle of exegesis, depends for its success 
upon the ignorance of its hearers, and the daring of its 
preachers, and is one of the chief stimuli in mass-meet- 
ings for prayer, where the leader, watch in one hand, 
gavel in the other, times the action of God’s Spirit, 
calling for petitions “two minutes prompt,” “short and 
to the point,” “next meeting this evening seven sharp!” 
The Germans call it ‘“Phantasze/”. Luther, whose 
homiletic rules were three, “Step up freshly, Open 
your mouth widely, and Get done quickly,” and who 
generally went straight to the center of his subject, 


called it “a Lze forged by Satan to blind men to the: 


truth,” and Delitzsch more urbanely styles it a “dis- 
tortion and negation of the prophetic word,” while 
Lange calls its opposite “a pearl of true doctrine,’ Van 


Oosterzee and Schaff assenting. Refuted a thousand 


* See Dr. S. R. Maitland’s ‘‘Zruvin,” p. 197. 


be 
7 
, 

a 

; 
7 


THE 1000 VEARS. 283 


times since Bengel’s day, it dies hard, the world loves 
itso! Absurd as it 1s, it remains, however, a witness 
to the truth that the 1000 years are not mere symbols 
of abstract ideas, but a measure of literal time, for 
whose coming the Church has waited 1800 years, and 
still waits in hope. : 

Thus, baffled at every step in its calculations, and 
contradicted alike by Scripture and the page of history, 
Post-millennialism has been compelled to creep slowly 
along the ages to find an a guwo for the 1000 years, now 
here, now there, starting with the First Advent, and 
ending in some undiscoverable dream-date of the 
future “somewhere,” this side the Second Coming! In 
this protracted effort it has become responsible, by its 
impatience, for three “Great Panics” in Christendom, 
as to the “End of the World;”—the panics of the 6th, 
the roth, and the 13th centuries. Had Hengstenberg 
lived sooner, to write earlier, we might have had an- 
other in the year 1800! Thus, discordant among them- 
selves, the alternatives are either (1) to abandon what 
Professor Volck calls their “A7Vopstockian Bloom-Time” * 
altogether, and return to the early faith, or (2) wed the 
“Tdeal-Theory”’ of prophetic numbers, repeating the 
dictum, “Symbolical numbers don’t count,” dissolving the 
1000 years into ideas of eternity, perfection, and ecu- 
menicity, so teaching that when eternity is finished 
“Satan shall be loosed a little season,” to play his old 
arts again, after which, ‘“ecumenicity, eternity, and per- 
fection” will begin again; the “little season” being “our 
whole Christian Dispensation;”—the words “ when” 
and “expired” having “no reference to ¢zme,” whatever! 
In presence of such an eschatology, the course for men, 


# Prof, Christiani. Uebersichtliche Darstellung.. 135. 


284 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, 


not insane, is neither doubtful nor difficult to be de- 
cided. By far the vast majority of standard inter- 
preters,—and Alford and Delitzsch said it thirty years 
ago,—have returned to the early faith of the Church, 
and emancipated themselves from the allegorizing, 
idealizing, and spiritualizing, perversion of the pro- 
phetic word. 

And nothing is more just. Let any one not en- 
slaved to a theory, open the Apocalypse of John at 
chapter xix:11-21, and xx:1-7, and say (1) that means 
the /zvst Advent and our present age, or (2) that means 
Constantine and the overthrow of Paganism, or (3) that 
means Charlemagne and the Holy Roman Empire, or 
(4) that means a Great Spiritual Revival and the con- 
version of Antichrist 1000 years before Christ comes, 
and he will see how repugnant such follies are to the 
Theme of the Book, Rev. i:7, viz., the personal and vis- 
ible Return of Christ from Heaven! And, remember- 
ing the organic connection between the Seven-Sealed 
Scroll and Daniel’s 7oth Week, (Dan. ix:27, Rev. chap- 
ters vi-x1x,) where the Antichrist is the subject of dis- 
course, he will quickly see how every false fixing of the 
starting-point, for the tooo years, makes 1260 days or 
last 3% years of the 7oth Week itself, mean either the 
whole, or a part of the entire Christian dispensation, 
and the judicial overthrow of Antichrist at the Second 
Coming, no less than his conversion 1000, or even 1800, 
years before that event! Such is the effect of following 
Augustine’s violent disruption of Rev. xx from Rey. 
xixth chapter, and s/zding back the commencing date of 
the 1000 years to the First Advent; or, as others do, 
to Constantine, or Charlemagne, or to “some point” 
1000 years this side the Second Coming ! 

Let us dismiss, forever, this “Idol of the .Theater,” 


THE 1000 VEARS. 285 


this human invention of a Church-Millennium, 1900 
years before Christ comes! It is a false conception. 
In the words of Semisch, “There is not, in the entire 
Scripture, a single trace of such a millennium. The 
Second Coming of the Lord is none other than His 
coming to Judgment at the close of the present dispen- 
sation, and this close is far from being preceded by the 
peace and the delight represented by such a doctrine. 
The Apocalypse of John certainly furnishes the out- 
lines of the Millennium. It is a manifest misinterpre- 
tation which, since the time of Augustine, has placed the 
beginning of the 1000 years, not at the Second Coming 
of the Lord, but in some point of time already past, or 
this side the Advent. This cannot be. The Millennium 
takes place after the destruction of Antichrist and his 
Host, IN€V. X1X:TI—21;:xx:1-7. The “First Resurrection, 
Rev. xx:4, 5,expressly contrasted with that of “the rest 
of the dead who live not till the 1000 years are fin- 
ished,” v.5, cannot have allegorical reference to the first 
stage of soul-bliss in heaven (Hengstenberg) nor to the 
mental process of the new birth (Augustine) nor to any 
spiritual resurrection in the Church (Whitby) in any 
sense. It can only be the “bodily resurrection of the 
bodily dead.” * 


* Chiliasmus in Herzog. Real-Encycl. I. 658. 


286 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


PART VI. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 YEARS: 
A. GENERAL VIEW. 


As to the Characteristics of the 1000 years, it is 
enough to name them briefly, as they are given us in 
the word of God. Like the New Testament, the Old 
is remarkably clear as to what shall occur at Messiah’s 
Second Coming, and give complexion to the age 
following. A reference to the Scripture passages, 
herewith subjoined, will well repay the student. 

1. Satan, the Cause of all the World’s Woe, shall, 
together with his evil Angels, be imprisoned in the 
“abyss,” chained, sealed, and locked up, beyond the 
possibility of getting out, during the whole Millennial 
reign. His power over man, and the nations, will be 
absolutely ‘broken. Isa. xxiv:21,22; xxvil:1 ; REV. 2mm 
2 <A half week of years, previously to this, he has 
been dejected from heaven. Rev. x1i:7-12. 

2. Antichrist’s kingdom, overthrown forever, and 
the kingdoms of this world with it, shall never be | 
revived, nor Antichrist and his confederates ever re- 
appear to dwell upon the earth. These, with the False 
Prophet, are cast alive into the “lake of fire.” Isa. 
RAT Vte T2324 ROY AXIXs20.5 X10. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000) VEARS. 287 


3. There shall be but One Kingdom, in that day, 
the Kingdom of Christ, to which all the nations of 
earth shall be obedient, a kingdom “under the whole 
heaven,” from sea to sea, and from the river to the 
endsof the earth. Ps. ii:1-12; Ixxii:8; Dan. 11:44 ; vii:27; 
EN UENO. XXIV:17 > REV. xi:15 ; Zech. xtv:9; 1x:I0. 

aot here- shall: be but One Religion,’ then; the 
Religion of Christ, alone. Christianity shall be co- 
extensive with the limits of the world. All false 
religious systems, and corrupt forms of Christianity, 
shall have disappeared, forever. Isa. xlv:23; lii. 1, 
eto eis Vist 7,23 ; Zech. xiv:16 ; vill:23 ;.1x:7 5 Rev. vor 
14; Zeph. i:g; Mal. u11. 

5. All Idols shall be destroyed, of whatever kind. 
A presage of this, in primary fulfilment, was given at 
ihersrirst Advent, and .is celebrated, not: only~ in 
Plutarch’s acount of the “Cessation of the Heathen 
Oracles,” but also in the choral strains of Milton’s 
“Ode on the Nativity of Christ.” Isa. ii:8; xlii:17; 
Pee excvil. 7: Zech, Xii:2. 

6. ‘ All Israel” shall be holy to the Lord ; and this 
means, not the Christian Church, nor the Nations, but 
the Jewish people as such, the natural seed of Abra- 
ham. Their apostasy will be finished, their sin sealed, 
their iniquity atoned, and everlasting righteousness and 
holiness be brought in. Dan. 1x:24; Isa. xxvi:2; Deut. 
Pee gelea, Ix-21; Jer. 11:17; l:20; Ezek. xxxvi:25-27; 
Perv sae. Zeph. 11:13; Rev. xiv:1—-5 ; Zech: xiv:20; , 
Isa. liv:13,14. 

72) ar Shall exist no more.*- This result of the 


* The Great Rebellion of 1861-1865 in the United States, in defence of 
slavery, cost the Federal Government, the first year of its existence, 
$1,3C0,000 per day, the fourth year of its existence, $3,500,000 per day, or 
$27,500,000 per week, and left the nation encumbered with a Debt of about 
$3,000,Co0,0co, The pecuniary cost of the War besides amounted to nearly 


288 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


~ 


Binding of Satan, who is the instigator of all war, and 
cause of all national and international collision, con- 
tinues throughout the whole Millennial age. The 
proof that Satan is zo¢ bound, xow, is (a) the fact of 
“ War,” in our present age, and (b) the fact that when 
loosed for a “little season,” at the end of this age, his 


first effort is to excite the nations to “ War,” and (c) to | 


war against the kingdom of Christ. In the Millennial 
age, however, all is peace, not only between man and 
man, but also between the Nations. Isa. 1:4; axis 
Mic. 1v:3, 4; Hos. 11:20; Zech, 1x:10; Ezek. xxxixogauae 
Rev. xx:1-3. 

8. Harmony shall be restored in creation, between 
man and man, and a covenant of peace be made 
between man and the lower animal world. This also 
is a result of the Binding of Satan, who first entered a 
Serpent to practice his arts on mankind. Isa. xi:6-9; 
Igoe); Hos.1:205 Ezekoxxxivi25,238 | Viernes 

g. The Land of Israel shall be transformed from 
barrenness into beauty,and made fruitful, glorious, and 
free from plague, and populated by a happy and 
blessed people; the people to whom, by right, it 
belongs. Isa. xxxv:1; xli:18, 19; Amos 1x:13-15 9 ieee 
Ixv:17—25 ; Zech. vili:3-8. 

10. Patriarchal years will return, in which a man, 


twice thissum. On the Federal side, not less than 300,000 men were slain, 
or died of their wounds, or of disease contracted in the service. On the 
Confederate side, as many more perished. To these 400,000 more of 
crippled and ruined must be added, making a total of ten hundred thousand 
men destroyed and disabled. At the close of the War the Federal Army 
amounted to 1,000 000 of men, the Navy to 50,000. The Standing Armies 
of Europe, to-day, amount to over 5,000,000 of men, with 10,000,000 of 
reserves, the cost of the armies of Great Britain, France, Germany, Italy, 
Russia, for the year 1888 being equal to $551,750,000. And these who fly 
at each other’s throats are ‘‘ Christendom,” said to be enjoying Millennial 
Glory ‘‘ ow,” while covered from head to foot with its own blood, and 
steeped in its own crimes! 


: 
4 


CHARACTERISTICS OF, THLE 1000 VEARS. 289 


100 years old, shall be esteemed a child. Instead of 
saying, as we now do, that such an one has entered his 
‘‘¢eens,” it will be said that such an one has just entered 
hiss “Zundreds.. Isa. \xv: 20-22. The risen saints 
“neither marry, nor are given in marriage.” Matt. 
xx11:30; but the unglorified are a “blessed seed, and 
their offspring with them.” Isa. lxv:23. 

11. Israel and Judah, or 12-tribed Israel, shall be 
re-united as One Nation, under One King, in their own 
land; and, enriched with spiritual gifts of wisdom, knowl- 
edge, and grace, be a blessing to all mankind. Thus, 
the promise to Abraham will be fulfilled. “In thy seed,” 
eeectc, Ezek. xxxvii:i-28; Mic. 1v:3; Joel 11:27; iii:1: 
een ie b4 3 1sa-x 1:05 Jer. xxxi:34 + Rom.sxi;12=-15. 

12. Jerusalem and Mount Zion, by means of 
physical convulsion and geological changes suddenly 
effected through disruption, depression, fissure, and 
elevation, at the Lord’s appearing, shall be “ exalted ”’ 
or “lifted high,” above the surrounding hills, and the 
adjacent region be reduced ‘‘to a plain,” like the Ara- 
bak, or Ghor, that runs from the slopes of Hermon to 
the Red Sea. “Ad the land will change itself,’ and the 
geographic center of the reconstruction will be deter- 
mined by the boundaries of the ancient territory of 
Neda. All this. the effect of: the “Presence of the 
orc, inore awtul than His ““Présence’’ at Sinai.- Isa: 
iiyi—4; Mic. i:3, 4; Judges v:4, 5; Ps. xcvii:4,5 > Exod. 
ei se24 Hab. 11:6, 10; Nah. 1:5,6; Matt. xxvii:5 1, 52: 
Perera tee iic2: Mic. iv:1; Zech. xivi4, 5, 10, 11; Jer. 
XxXx1:38—40.* 

13. The City itself shall be built again, broadened, 
enlarged, and adorned with the wealth of the nations, 


* See Physico-Prophetical Hoes ey ie W. Lister. F.G.S, 111 
160, London, Longman, Green, ete; 1861, 


19 


. 
290 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. - 


and the Temple made glorious by the “precious things” — 
of mankind. Jerusalem shall not only be “lifted up,” — 
but made “ fruitful as the Valley of the Jordan.” Ps. 
Ixxui:10; Isa. xxvi:15 (Revised Version). Zech. xiv: 10 
(Revised Version). Isa. xxxiii:17. (Revised Version.) 
Jer. xxxi:38; Isa. lx:10-18; Hagg. 11:6-9; Jer. 11:17, and 
the last nine chapters of Ezekiel. 

14. The “Outcast of Israel” and “Dispersed of 
Judah,” gathered to enter the Kingdom, will return to 
their fatherland, from the East, the West, the North, 
and the South, to sit down with Abraham, Isaac aud 
Jacob, conducted thither by Gentile hands, and pre- 
sented, as a holy Mencha or Offering, to the Lord Him- 
self, revealed in His glory. Auxiliary to this great In- 
gathering of the Hebrew people, the River of Egypt, 
the Nile, shall be divided and dried up, and the River 
Euphrates also, to make way for the march of Israel 
returning under the protection of Eastern princes. A 
high road, moreover, out of Egypt to Assyria will ac- 
celerate the movement, and ships from Tarshish, and ~ 
the Sea-Islands, will cover the Mediterranean, loaded 
with lIsrael’s sons, their silver and gold, and the wealth — 
of a world startled by the revelation of Christ in His © 
glory. With ancient valor they shall press their way to 
the plain of Esdraelon where stands the Hill of Megiddo 
(Armageddon), and under “One Head,” their Bozrah- 
Conqueror, move to possess the Holy City forever. 
“Great will be the Day of Jezreel!” Isa. xi:10-16; 
XXVi:13—-16; xXXvil:12, 13; xlix:12, 22, 23; Zechyx:tO=nas 
Zeph. iil:9; Rev. xvi:12; Isa. Ixv:19, 20; Matt. viii:11;— 
Isa. xxxv:8; x1;16; xix;23-25; Ix:9; Ixili:1-6; lix:16—21; 
Rev. xvi:16; xix:11-21; Hosea 1:11; Zech. xi1:4-9.* 


* The Valley of Jezreel or Valley of Megiddo, is the World-famed Plain 
of Esdraelon, where Barak defeated Sisera, and young Josiah and the. Hebrew 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 291 


15. Ten men, of all nations, that is, a large number, 
—in token of their recognition of what the Lord in His 
glory does for the Jew in the hour of his final deliver- 
meee, will “take hold of the skirt of a Jew,’ then 
honored beyond all others, and, detaining his step, be- 
seech his favor, as he moves to the Holy City. The 
wiping away of the rebuke and reproach of Israel, 
brings the national conversion of the Gentiles, inter- 
national concerts of prayer, and the concourse of men 
to the Throne of Jehovah, to worship before the Lord. 
Pe eomyvit-o3-< Jer: 11:17; Rev. xv:4) Isa: xxv:7, 83.182, 3; 
Mic. 1v:2; Isa. xlv:14—25. Apostolic Christianity was 
only a pledge of this. 

16. A Perennial Stream of ‘living water shall flow 
from the Temple-Rock toward the Mediterranean and 
Dead Seas, carrying life wherever it goes, and, with 
the renovation and transformation of the Holy City, 
monthly fruits shall grow upon trees on either side of 
fietiver. Ezekiel xlvii:1—12;-Zech. xiv:8; Joel iii:18. 

17. A Re-distribution and Division of the Holy 
Land shall be made according to the 12 tribes of Israel. 
Bounded, according to ancient covenant, North and 
South by the Euphrates and Nile, and East and West 
by the Sea of Oman and the Mediterrancan, thirteen 
equal spaces of 50 miles each, the “ Temple” and the 
“Holy Oblation” between seven on the North of the 
Tribes, each in their “lot,” and five on the South, will 
cover the area where Israel dwells. The Glorification 
of the Land by means of the Temple-Waters, and the 


Theocracy fell together before the might of Pharaoh-Necho. It stretches 
from Scythopolis to Mount Carmel, 30 miles long, and 20 miles broad. On 
account of the Hill of Megiddo, it is called in the Apocalypse ‘‘drmaged- 
don.”’ It will be, in the final invasion of Palestine by the last Antichrist, the 
place of Encampment and Rendezvous, fr his Western confederates, the 
ten kings, even as Bozrah will be a scene of slaughter for. his South-Eastern 
reserves and the Valley of Jehoshaphat the final and the fatal Winepress! 


SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Redistribution of the Land go together. The name of 4 
the Holy City is “/ehovah Shammah, The Lord 1s There!” 
Ezek. xlviiz1—12; xlvii:13-23; xlvili:15, 35.* . 

18. There will be a Cessation of Sorrow, Tears, and © 
Death, for God’s people in that age. Although Sin and 
Death still exist, yet nowhere do we read that God’s  — 
people are subject to the same. Elsewhere existing, 
though not reigning as now, yet among God’s people 
these things never come. Isa. xxv:6-9; XXV1:I-4; Xxxv: 
10. The universality of this exemption is reserved for 
the final New Heaven and Earth. Rev. xxi:1-4. 

19. There will be a Sevenfold Fulness and Increase 
of Light, Solar and Lunar, in that day, when parted 
Israel are reunited in ‘their fatherland. Isa. xxxi26% 
LtGy 207 Zech. 1:5; visa. ves; 

20. There shall be a Restoration of Samaria, Sodom, 
and Gomorrah, less guilty than Jerusalem, in that day, 
and an alliance between them all, in covenant holiness, _ 
humility, and knowledge of the Lord; as also between 
Israel, Egypt and Assyria. Ezek. xvi:46-63; Isa. xix: 
235 S116: 

21. A Yearly Concourse of people, from all nations, 
shall go to Jerusalem to worship. As already, in the ~ 
Holy City, ages before, a Christian Passover was 
celebrated, and a Christian Pentecost was enjoyed, 
where ‘“‘ Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and dwellers 
in Mesopotamia and in Judea and in Cappadocia, in 
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, in Egypt and 
the parts of Lybia about Cyrene, and sojourners from 
Rome, both Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians,’ 


* See Smend’s Der Prophet Ezechiel. 335-393. Balmer-Rinck, Des 
Propheten Ezekiel Gesicht vom Tempel. 44-48. Tafel V. Das Gelobte 
Land, Major J. Scott Philip's ‘‘Address read to the British Association at — 
Aberdeen.” Chicago, 1879, Thos, Wilson, Publisher. Map. : 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000. VEARS. 293 


all saw and heard ‘‘ the wonderful works of God,” soa 
Christian Feast of Tabernacles shall not only be cele- 
brated for the glorious Millennial ingathering, and 
remembrance of Desert-Life and the tribulation gone 
forever, but shall become a_ stated service.in the 
metropolis of the new kingdom. Zech. xiv:16; Acts 
Fo-12; John vil:2; 37-39 ; Rev. 22:17. 

22. Israel shall be a Priestly Nation, as well as 
Royal, in presence of all Nations, offering perpetual 
spiritual sacrifice to God through Jesus Christ, an 
example of religious devotion to the whcle world. 
Isa. Ixvi:21 ; Lx1:4-6. 

23. The Jewish people and their Land, long 
divorced and desolate, shall be remarried with grand 
solemnities, as a New Bride to the Lord, over which 
He will joy with singing, and rest in His love. Isa. 
Jxii:t-12 ; Zeph. 11:15-17; Rev. x1x:7-9 ; xx:9; Hos. iio. 

24. The faithful dead of Israel will awake to share 
the joy of living Israel’s Conversion to Messiah, and 
Restoration to the land of promise, and to celebrate the 
World’s Sabbath, and Israel’s Jubilee. Dan. xii:1-3; 
WeaexXvi:to; Ezek. xxxvii:12; Hos. xii:14; Rev. xx:4-6. 

25. Not only shall the 12 Apostles sit on their 
thrones judging the 12 tribes of Israel, and themartyrs of 
Jesus bear eminent rule, but the vast multitude of those 
who have fallen asleep in Christ, in all ages, shall wake 
to share the joy, and, with those who are “changed,” 
enter the glorious kingdom of God, and live and reign 
with Christ, 1000 years. The Church above and below 
shall be one. The Heavenly and Earthly Bride shall 
Pewene. lviatt. xix:28, 290; Rev. xx:4-6; Rev. x118; 
eon. xv-23; 1 Thess. iv:13-18; Luke xii:35—37. 

26. Around the Land ot Israel thus glorious, and 
the Holy City, now the light of the Oe because of the 


294 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


glory of Christ,, within it and on it, the Nations of 
earth shall dwell in obedient and willing submission, 
and, blessed in Abraham’s seed, and free from Satanic 
dominion, enjoy the Millennial Age of righteousness, 
peace and rest. Ps. Ixxii:6-20; Isa. |x1:11; lxvi:8=9a@ 
Zeph. iii:9; Isa. xix:18, 23-25; Ps. xcvi:7-10; XCVilgee 
XCvill: 1, 2; Ixxxix:15-17; Deut. xxxi43; Revo 


Zech. xiv:16. Here apply a vast number of them 


Messianic Psalms. 


B. THE 1290 AND 1335 DAYS. 


Such are the main features of the kingdom that comes 
at the close of the last 1260 days of the 7oth week of 
Daniel, the same 1260 days that we find in the Apoc- 
alypse of John. It is the work of Him who is “the 
Lion of the tribe of Judah,” “ the Root and Offspring of 
David,” who has “ the key of David,” and whose name 
is “the Bright and Morning Star,” the “Star out of 
Jacob,” “the Lamb,” who alone has “prevailed to open 
the Seals,” and disclose the future of Israel, the Nations, 
and the Church. In one particular, Daniel is more 
specific than John. It is in reference to thevexaum 
intervals between the Destruction of Antichrist and the 
Home-Coming of Israel, and between this and the 
Resurrection. The time-points, and spaces, are given 
with precision. In answer to the question, “O my lord 
and what shall be the afterness of these things?” the 
linen-clothed man informs him that 30 days more are 
required after the 1260 days, and 45 days more are 
required after the 1290 days, and that he 1s fa 
blessed man who waits and comes to the 1335 days. 
Doubtless, the 30 days, after Antichrist’s destruction, 
are occupied with the triumphal Home-Coming of the 


Sun-clothed Woman from her desert shelter, the return — 


“< 
+, 


Ses ee ee ee Se 


i a ae Ls - 


ee ex 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 299 


of the Daughter of Zion to keep house, once more, in 
the “ Beloved City.’’ Who shall describe the scenes of 
that joyous eventful month? “The ransomed of the 
Lord shall return with singing.” Isa. xxxv:12. “ From 
the ends of the land I hear songs; Glory to the right- 
peuce) | -lsa.° xxiv:16- “ Great. will be? the, day./ot 
Jezreel!” Hos. i:11. Lo-Ammi no more! Ammiaz for- 
ever! “betrothed in righteousness, judgment, loving 
kindness, mercies, and faithfulness.’ Hos. 11:6, 9, 19, 
20. And then, the 45 days more! What can this 
month and a half be but that “ All israel,’ now together 
in the land, a converted nation, on whom the Spirit ts 
poured, are beholding Him they have pierced, and 
mourning with bitterer tears than ever fell in the vale 
of Megiddo! It is the day of Israel’s national and 
penitential sorrow. Zech. xi:g-14. But the sorrow is 
quickly turned into joy again, greater than ever, by 
the resurrection of the holy dead. He, who knew how 
to weep at Lazarus’ grave, and to comfort Thessalonian 
mourners with his word, not only “appears in His 
glory,’ when he “ builds Jerusalem,” but “ gathers the 
outcasts, and binds up the wounds of the broken in 
eee sare Ixvi5 secs 13-22 *cexlyiiz2, 3. “ Them 
that sleep in Jesus will God bring with Him.” I Thess. 
moio-zo. here is an Interval; then, between the Des. 
struction of Antichrist and the full Redemption of 
Israel, and between this Redemption and the Resurrec. 
tion of the faithful dead; 30 days elapse for the one; 
45 days suffice for the other. Then, the 1000 years! 
David Kimchi, on Isa. Ixv:5, and Abarbanel on Isa. 
Xviil:3, say “the Resurrection will occur after the out- 
casts are gathered.”* Others say “the Resurrection 


* Weber, Syst. alt. pal. Theol. 357. 


296 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


will take place at or during, the times of Israel’s Res- 
fitution *”’ It 1s the same thing-.. From —theiiaee 
the West, the North, and the South, and from the 
empire of Death itself, “they shall come, and sing in 
the height of Zion.” There is compensation, here, for 
Ramah’s sore lament; and Rachel, to whom it was 
said, ‘‘ There is hope in thine end, thy children shall 
come to their own border,” “ refrains her voice from 
weeping, and her eyes from tears, for her work is 
rewarded, and her children return from the enemy’s 
Pace ee PCL aX KX o 6 Phair 


C.i RELATION OF THE RISEN SAINTS TO. ISRAEL 
DISCHILIASM. 


A question enters, here, of great importance. 
Among all interpreters,—save the spiritualizers who 
have an easy way of solving every problem,—the e- 
lation of the Risen Glorificd Church, to Israel, converted 
and restored, yet still in the flesh, presents matter for 
careful study and consideration. The struggle to the 
light is full of interest. This problem troubled the yaa 
great Bengel. Rejecting the definite article “¢ke” in 
Rev. xx:4, before the words “thousand years,’—and 
upon what seemed to him sufficient critical grounds, 
Bengel developed a curious Deschiliasm, or doctrine of 
two successive Millennia. Because, on critical grounds, 
the definite article was excluded from verse 4, the 1000 
years in verses 4-6 appeared to be distinct from the 
1000 years in verses 1-3. According to this view the 
First Millennium reached from the Epiphany of Christ, 
the Destruction of Antichrist, and Binding of Satan, to 
Gog’s destruction and the First Resurrection, Gog being 


*E senmenger, Eut. Jud. II. 895. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 297 


put at the end of the first t000 years. During this first 
millennium the Nations, no longer deceived by Satan, 
and taught by divine judgments, attain to the knowl- 
edge and worship of the true God. The first 1000 
_ years are the period of Satan’s Captivity. The Second 
Millennium reaches from Gog’s destruction and the 
First Resurrection to the Parousia and Judgment of the 
Great White Throne, and is the period of the Rezgn of. 
the Risen Martyrs ; not, however, oz earth, but over the 
earth, with Christ in heaven ;—the period of Israel’s 
Olessedness in their own land. In short, from the 
Epiphany to the Parousia are 2000 years, bisected by 
the First Resurrection. Vhough militant, even to the 
Last Judgment, still the Church enjoys a glorious 
etiowermne lime’ (flor der Kirche) under the out: 
poured Spirit, not indeed before the Resurrection of 
the Martyrs and Israel’s return, but before the Last 
Judgment or Parousia. And this Church of the last 1000 
years 1s Ezekiel’s Jerusalem below, while the Risen mar- 
tyrs-and the saints in glory form the Yerusalem above 
where Christ and those with Him, rule the world. 
And these ¢wo Churches, the “Upper” and the “Lower,”’ 
abide separate during the second 1000 years, yet to 
blend in one, in the final New Heaven and Earth. 
Such the first brave struggle in the line of exegesis, out 
of that medizeval darkness on this subject in which 
both Lutheran and Reformed were still held; yet not 
without previous beams of light from Spener, Vitringa 
and Joachim. Though ‘mixed and confused,” the view 
of Bengel was accepted, by many, as a relief and step 
out from that spiritualizing and allegorizing mode of 
exposition which robbed Israel of their future, negated 
the prophetic word, and still afflicted Protestantism 
itself. It is a view that, zz part, is still held to-day, by 


298 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


some, among whom are Delitzsch and Auberlen, but 
only so far as this, viz., that the Risen Saints, the Glori- 
fied Bride, “are retired into heaven, from there to rule 
over the earth during the 1000 years.’ 


D. DISCHILIASM REFUTED.—HABITAT OF THE RISEN 
SAINTS. 


Deeper study, however, has produced more light. 
No one, now, adopts Dischiliasm, and the large pre- 
ponderance of the best judgment among specialists in 
eschatology is adverse to the retirement of the Risen 
Saints into heaven, from there to rule “over’’ the world. 
Hofmann resists the conception and proves the inad- 
missibility of rendering the preposition “oz” by “‘over.”* 
A comparison of Rev. v:1o and xx:4 forbids it. The 
opinion rests, moreover, upon “the assumption that 
the Holy Land is not transfigured during the 1000 
years.”’ + As to the exclusion of the article, although 
Bengel has been followed herein by Lachman, Tischen- 
dorf, Tregelles, and others, yet De Wette regards the 
Manuscript authority for this as inadequate, the omis- 
sion being not only “utterly improbable,” but “contrary 
to the context,” viz., that the Binding of Satan is the 
pre-condition of the Reign of Christ with His Risen 
Saints. The initial point, or terminus a quo, of the 
1,000 years, in verses 1[-3, is the same as in verses 
4-6, therefore there are not ¢wo Millennia, but only 
one Millennium, dating from the Advent and the 
First Resurrection.{ Delitzsch agrees that Bengel’s 
Dischiliasm is not proved by Scripture.” | Kliefoth, 


ae ” 


* The Greek éxi with the Genitive never means ‘‘over,” but ‘‘on 
‘““upon.” Rev. v:10, érl THe ye. 

+ Hofmann. Weisssag. u. Erfiill. II. 372. 

1 De Wette. Exeget. Handb. Off. Einleit.> 273% 


|| Delitzsch. Bibl-Proph-Theol. 137. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 299 


clearer than all, on this point, concedes the omission 
of the article, v. 41, and says that, even did the manu- 
scripts justify the omission, “ yet such omission is easily 
accounted for upon internal grounds; for verses 1-3 
are one vision, while verses 4-6 are another and distinct 
vision. As in the first vision, the 1,000 years are first 
named wzthout the article, v. 2, and then wzth the article, 
v. 3,s0 in the second vision, the 1,000 years are first 
named wzthout the article, v. 4,and then wth the article, 
v.5. Then confirming De Wette’s second reason, viz.: 
That the initial point of the 1,000 years is the same in 
both visions, he adds, “ Since, however, both visions 
1-3 and 4-6, run parallel, the 1,000 years are the same 
period, in both.”* They are, as Delitzsch savs, “the 
period when Israel enjoy the possession of their land, 
and Jerusalem, the Seat of the First Christian Church 
whence the gospel went forth, becomes glorious again 
as the Mother-Church and the Mother-City of the 
Kingdom of God.’’+ 

There is no exegetical ground, therefore, whatever, 
for the doctrine of ¢wo millennia, and it is plain that the 
doctrine that the Risen Saints are vetzred into heaven 
to rule, from there “over” the world, and the Church 
below, is critically unjustified. Such a view rests en- 
tirely on dogmatic grounds, arbitrary pre-suppositions, 
apart from exegesis, and alleged ‘“ inconceivability”’ 
and “incongruity ” of the opposite view, and is there- 
fore worthless. The assumption, moreover, that there 
is no transfiguration of the Holy Land anterior to the 
final Regenesis of all things, is at variance with the ex- 
press letter of God’s word, in many most notable pas- 


miteioths (Offenb. Joh. III. - 268. 
+ Bibl.-Proph.-Theol. 136. 


~ 


300 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


sages, and avoided only by regarding such passages as _ 
mere “poetry” or “artistic ornamentation.” In oppo- 
sition to this, itis our duty to say, with Kiper, “ The 
prophets of the Old Testament, like St. John in Patmos, 
are no mere Poets, nor Phantasts, but holy men of God 
who have spoken as they were impelled by the Holy 
Ghost.”* ‘To interpret Israel’s hope in the Kingdom, 
described by Ezekiel in chapters xlLxlvii, phantas- 
tically, we have no right,” says Smend, “still less to 
interpret those visions spiritually, as is now almost 
eenerally the case.”* Nor is there any authority for 
Diisterdieck and Kliefoth, Bertheau and Riehm, to in- 
terpret them “zdeally.” Even Kuenen has convincingly 
demonstrated that, and Orelli as well. 

The Church of Christ, in the glorious Kingdom of 
Christ during the 1000 years, will be Oxe, not Two. The 
“right of judging” given to the Saints at the coming 
of Christ, is to,be explained from the word “they lived 
and reigned with Christ.” The two expressions are of 
commensurate force. The power of judging belongs 
to the kingly office of Christ, and the power of life 
belongs to the priestly office of Christ, ‘‘a priest forever, 
not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after 
the power of an endless life.”’. Heb. vii:16. And be- 
cause of this, the co-regency and co-ministry of those 
who are one with Christ, at His Appearing and King- 
dom, is not that of one part of the Church over another 
part of the Church, but that of the whole Church as 
One, “oz the earth,” and having “power over the 
nations.” As Luthardt has admirably said, “ There 
shall not be ove part of the Church, the Gentile part, 
glorified in Phe Teciat and another part, the Jewish pay 


*K tiper. Dee Prophetenthum. 539. 
¢Smend. Der Prophet Ezekiel, 385. 


CHAKACTERIST ICS OF THLE. 1000. VAARS. 301 


glorified on earth. The Church shall be oze with the 
Lord returned to earth in her midst, like the sun in the 
temple in New Jerusalem. The distinction still obtains, 
however, between the glorified church gathered 
around her Lord, in her glorified place on earth, and 
the outer unglorified humanity still liable to sin and 
death, yet freed from Satanic dominion, and subject to 
the dominion of Christ and his Church. The Earth; 
not heaven, is the place of the glorified Church. When 
the Bridegroom comes, He descends /vom heaven. 
For that reason, the Church goes out to meet him,” 
evento a meeting of the. Lord; in the air,” .asPaul 
declares. I Thess. 1v:17. By the wonderful ministry 
of angels the whole body of believers is gathered to Him 
from all places. The Bridegroom, however, is oz his 
way to the Bride-chamber, therefore urns not back, but 
continues to move in the same direction He first took. 
The Church does not remain in the air, nor 1s she retired 
into heaven, but after her ascension, accompanies the 
Bridegroom hitherward to the Holy Place where He 
will celebrate the marriage Supper of the Lamb. Of 
a journey Jackward with the Bride to heaven, the 
Scripture knows nothing. The Bride glorified, her 
Place is also glorified.* 

And thus the Bride above and the Bride below, the 
Risen Glorified Saints, and Israel in the flesh, re- 
deemed, restored and holy, shall be One Bride, One 
Glorious Church in the Millennial Age, and share a 
Mutual Jubilee and Holy Sabbath. And what Luthardt 
has said concerning Israel and the Gentile Church 
shall be likewise true concerning Israel themselves. 
There shall not be one ban of Israel in heaven, the glo- 


cot ee ee ae SaaS 


*Luthardt. Lehre. v. d. letzten Dingen, 34, 52, 56 


302 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


rified part, and another part of Israel on earth, the un- 
glorified part. Israel’s faithful dead will share with 
Israel’s faithful Zvzng, the joy of the Kingdom on earth. 
_ As Weber has said, “ The Jewish Christian Church 
shall again revive. From the Dzsfersion shall the 
living, and from their graves shall the dead be brought 
back to enjoy, zogether, in the Holy Land, the promised 
glory of the Messianic Age.”* So Filler. (“aNes 
merely those who survive to see the Advent, shall be 
delivered from the Tribulation, but also many from the 
sleepers in the dust shall be awaked, in order to enjoy 
the Redemption.’+ ‘ The confessors of Jehovah,” says 
Delitzsch, “shall be waked from their graves and form 
with the faithful living, a glorious Church. Here is 
the First Resurrection.”{ “It is at the coming of the 
Lord Jesus that Israel is delivered. It is then also that — 
the First Resurrection takes place,” adds Tregelles. | 
‘The prophets predict,” writes Koch, “that™sraem 
when Messiah comes, shall be delivered and their faith- 
ful dead shall rise. The whole great company of those 
who have fallen asleep in Christ shall be waked to share 
the glory of His Kingdom on earth. To Israel of the 
End-Time, of whom the prophets have spoken, the 
Church of all believers, gathered out from all the na- 
tions shall be added, and dogether all shall reign with 
Christ, the 1000 years.”"§ So also Kiesselbach: ‘“ The 
prophet Isaiah in xxvi:ig says more than that the 
faithful Israelites raised from the dust, shall be gath- 
ered, like the living, to their fatherland. He tells us 
that these dwellers in the dust shall szzg. They shall 


* Delitzsch. Isa. xxv:t9. 

+ Weber. Syst. alt. pal. Theol. 354. 

t Filler. Daniel der Prophet, 321. 

| Tregelles. Dan. xii:1-3. 

S$ Koch. Das tausendjahr. Reich. 144. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF ‘THE. 1000 YEARS. 303 


share the rapture of the Home-Coming ones from dis- 
tant lands, and for this very purpose the pious dead of 
‘Israel shall be waked from their graves.’* “Not 
merely,” says Cléter, “the first converts from Israel 
together with a definite number gathered out from the 
Gentiles, but also the last converted Israel and all the 
holy dead shall share, ¢ogether, the salvation in the 
Kingdom of Christ.’’+ 

So Hofmann: “ Precisely that People whom the 
Tyrant, already pictured, would have destroyed, shall 
be delivered out of the unheard of Tribulation coming 
on the world in the last time, and shall enjoy the 
changeless and imperishable salvation. The two prop- 
ositions, ‘Thy people shall be delivered,’ and ‘many 
from among thy people shall awake out from among 
the sleepers in the dust,’ are contemporaneous events. 
The Angel’s purpose was not to teach the universality 
of the resurrection, but to add to the limited number of 
those who, in the flesh, survive to see the Outcome of 
things, the many from the dead who, also, should none 
the less have part therein.”{ And Baur to the same 
effect. “In the Millennial Kingdom the Patriarchs and 
Prophets, and all the righteous shall be waked to enjoy, 
with the living, the peace of this Kingdom which, like 
the heavenly Jerusalem, is painted in colors the most 
glowing.” And this he assures us was “the faith of 
the primitive Church.” | 


E. FURTHER CONFIRMATION. 


If more were needed to confirm the view that the 
Risen Saints are zot retired into heaven to rule the 


* Kiesselbach. Isa. xxvi:Ig. 

+ Das ewige Evangel. 191,192. 
t Schriftbeweis. III, 399. 

|| Dogmengeschichte I. 320. 


304 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Church below, and the world, from there, the Scriptures. a 
will supply it. In Isa. xxvi:19, the dead are not 
awaked to be retired to heaven, but to rejoice on earth, 
and “‘sing”’ as they wake, and swell the jubilee. In 
Dan. xii:1-3, they rise to “stand” with Daniel in their 
“ Jot,” v. 13, and take the kingdom, ere, vii:27. And 
yet, they “shine as the brightness of the firmament, 
and as the stars forever.” They possess a true, real, 
yet spiritual body, not like that of Lazarus after his 
resurrection, but like that of the Lord Himself, who 
tarried therewith 40 days on the earth; a glorious body 
even then, pervaded by the Spirit, and free from all 
earthly limitations incident to His state of humiliation. 
So, in the parable, when the Son of Man has come with © 
all His holy angels, and Wheat and Chaff are parted, © 
the ‘“‘righteous shall shine in the kingdom of their 
Father.” Matt. x1:43,—the kingdom to come where 
God’s will is done ‘“‘ oz earth.” Nor does Paul contra- — 
dict this when speaking of the glory of the heavenly 
lights, he adds, ‘So also is the resurrection.” I Cor. 

xv:42. “The manifestation of the sons of God” isdue 
to the manifestation, or Apocalypse, of the “Son of God,” 
and is glorious as was the transfiguration on the Mount. 
Matt. xvu:1t-4.. To be raised and changed, and “so” to 
be caught up and “so” to be with the Lord forever, as 
risen and changed, does not require a remaining forever 
in the atr, nor a adtsappearing, backward, forever in the 
Heavens. That is not the language of Paul. I Thess. © 
iv:16. ae 
Even the Jewish teachers who saw in that far-reach- 
ing chapter,—the goth of lsaiah,—the “ Rapture of the — 
Saints” in connection with the revelation of the “Glory _ 
of the Lord” which “all flesh” shall see “ together,” 
never dreamed of a detention in the air of the risen 


CHARACTERISTICS OF (THE 1000°- VEARS, 305 


ones, or of those changed and who are described as 
“ The ones expecting Jehovah.” Isaiah xl:31, was to the 
pious in Israel, what I Thess. iv:16 is to us, but no- 
where in all their literature, biblical or post-biblical, do 
we find either the view of aerial detention, or retire- 
ment to heaven, but always and everywhere, that of an 
open, free intercourse among all, “in the land of the 
living,” where the righteous no more are entombed, 
“nor die any more.” The Gemara Sanhedrin preserves 
the tradition of the house of Elias, saying, “ The right- 
eous, whom God will raise up in the first resurrection, 
shall not return to the dust again, but zz ¢them,—during 
the 1000 years in which He restores the world,—the 
Blessed One will fulfil that word in Isaiah x1:31. They 
shall renew their strength ; they shall szount up as with 
wings of eagles; they shall zz and not be weary; they 
shall walk and not faint.”* The song of the 4 living 
creatures, and of the 24 Elders, is that the Kingdom of 
the Lion of Judah’s tribe, when He comes to reign, is 
mopetnescarti, not “over” it “Revi vito. tas “sin 
This Mountain (even the literal “ Mount Zion” where 
“ He reigns gloriously before His ancients,” Isa. xxiv: 
23) that “the Lord of Hosts will make unto all peoples 
a feast of fat things,” and here “destroy the face of the 
covering cast over all peoples, and the veil that is 
spread over all nations,’ and “swallow up death in. 
victory.”’ lsa. xxv:6,7. As Orelli beautifully says, “He 
will bring to the nations a true and divine surprise, 
when He takes away the covering that long enough 
has veiled their eyes. They shall dehold Him, then, as 
the Dispenser of all Life and Grace, and taste how good 
He is to those who bow before His majesty. By a 


* Eisenmenger Entdeckt. Juden. II, 290. Mede’s Works. 776. 
20 


306 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


second marvel, He will show His omnipotent Love, 
abolishing Death with the Woe that has wrung from 
man uncounted tears, and extinguish the curse which, 
from the very beginning, has blasted the whole human 
race!’* Such will be the character of the Millennial 
Age, unchanged, tillin mystery again its light shall fade 
a moment, only to reappear in brighter glory and shine 
eternally with the full splendor of an undimmed and 
unsetting sun. 


F. EXTENT OF THE TRANSFORMATION. 


To what extent the Glorification of our planet shall 
go, at the Second Coming of the Son of Man, is a point 
left undetermined in the Scriptures. How far, outside 
the boundariesof the holy land the glorifying energy of 


the Spirit will pass when once the resurrection has come, © 


what other cosmic convulsions and re-formations, besides 
those foretold, will occur, it is impossible to decide. 
Here, as in other respects, we “see through a glass 
darkly.” If, with Lange, Christlieb, Van Oosterzee, 
and others, we regard the‘ “Palingennesia” or “Anakat- 
nosis,’ as a mighty Cosmical “Process” begun by catas- 
trophe and convulsions in heaven and earth, at the Ap- 
pearing of Christ, and completed at the close of the 
1000 years, by similar changes, while yet the evolution 
continues between, according to the law of geologic 
ages, then of this much we are certain, that Palestine 
is not the limit of the transformation. Scientific rea- 
sons come in here to confirm this conclusion. Geology 
itself teaches us that our Planet was once a vast mass 
of water, to the eye, that, only after some time, the dry 
land appeared, that what is now land, was once sub: 
merged, and what is now sea was once land, and that 


tOrelli. Isa. xxvi:19. Kurtzgef. Komm. 92. 


; 
b 
: 
J 
‘ 
: 
‘ 
¥ 


CHARACTIERIST/ICS:( OF. TEE 1000; YEARS, 307 


all the mountains and valleys, and rivers and plains, are 
not of the same age. And Scripture teaches the same 
lesson. The earth and the world are expressly said to 
have been “formed,” and the mountains to have been 
“brought forth,’ and the seas to have been ‘‘gathered.” 
Scripture, in advance of Geology, foretold these phe- 
nomena before Science explained them, and the experi- 
ence of the past should advise us what to expect in the 
future. God’s word will prove true, and that in the 
most literal manner, precisely where reason is blind, 
and a spiritualizing interpretation seeks to bridge over 
what men choose to call a “difficulty.” We know, 
from Paul, that, at the “ redemption of the body,” “ the 
creature itself also, shall be delivered from the bondage 
of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the chil- 
dren of God.” Rom. viu:21. It, too, shall share in the 
“power of the resurrection.” We may not attempt to 
be wise above what is written. This much, however, 
is sure to faith, that He who establishes His Kingdom 
of glory on earth, and rewards the righteous with 
rule over the “cities”? and “nations” of men, will find 
a fit place of abode for His saints who, like Him, are 
conquerors over the grave. Holding this, we are, at 
the same time, also permitted to hold that the power 
of locomotion given to a “spiritual body,’—1. e.,a body 
under the perfect dominion of the spirit, a body with 
motion “equal to the angels,” and such as our Saviour 
had at His ascension and wore during 40 days, appear- 
ing and vanishing by turns, will enable the righteous, 
raised from the dead, to transcend the limits of earth, 
“mount up” toward heaven as on eagle’s wings, “run” 
without sense of fatigue, “walk, and not faint.” Even 
now, clogged and infirm as we are, the power of our 
will lifts us at once from our seats and bears us with 


308 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ease along our way. How much more obedient to the 
volition of the saint will his resurrection vesture be! 
As there is nothing to compel us to restrain the visible, 
glorious personal Presence of Christ, to an uninter- 
rupted stay upon earth during the 1000 years, so there 
is nothing to forbid the motion of His risen saints. A 
free and open intercourse between heaven and earth is 
as belevable a view,—an appearing and disappearing, 
like that of the Saviour and like that of the bodies of 
inany saints who arose and went into the Holy City, 
and there vanished away,—as is the scene of the Trans- 
figuration, or the story of the post-resurrection life of 
Christ on the earth. Angelic ministry, moreover, 
waits on both Him and the Saints, and it may be that, 
in the Millennial Age, that word of Israel’s King to 
Nathaniel will come to its full realization: “Hereafter 
ye shall sce Heaven Open, and the Angels of God ascending 
and descending on the Son of Man!” John 1:52. 


G. THREE PARTIES IN THE MILLENNIUM. THEIR Rie 
TIONS. OBJECTIONS. ISRAEL A BLESSING, 


In a subject so vast as that of the 1000 years, some 
further words are needed, in a general way. The 
Kingdom is nov composed of Rzsex Saints alone, nor 
limited, as Professor Milligan, following Kliefoth, 
would have it, to the “ prompt victory ” of Christ over 
Antichrist, the World-Power, and Satan, in the coming 
crisis.* ‘ Bastleca”’ means more than that one definite 
action, and reaches even beyond the 1000 years. It 
is Eternal as well as Millennial. In the Millennium, 
however, Israel in the flesh is there, even as we Gen- 
tiles in the flesh are yet already “translated into 


* Milligan, Revelation of St. John, 205. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 309 


the kingdom -of -God’s dear Son.” -Col. i:13:. It 
iseto “ New-Born Israel,” the “Holy People,’ the 
“People of the Saints of the Most High,” the Kingdom 
is given, at the close of the 70th week of Daniel. Dan. 
vii:27. Again, Israel and the Risen Saints, are not all. 
The Nations are summoned to rejoice with Israel in 
that hour of Israel’s redemption. Deut. xxxii:43 ; xxxiil: 
29. They all worship Israel’s king in the moment of 
Israel’s victory. Rev. xv:4. As many of them as have 
shown kindness to his “drethren,”—“these My Brethren,” 
—in the crisis of the Great Tribulation are welcomed 
to the kingdom, and inherit life eternal. Matt. xxv:31- 
40; while the wicked are destroyed, II Thess. 1:4-10, 
and-go into everlasting punishment, Matt, xxv:41-46, 
and eternal shame and contempt. Dan. xi:2. The 
Lord’s advent is not to annihilate the existence of the 
Nations, as such, but to overthrow their politics and 
rule, and scatter both like chaff, and then transfer the 
sovereignty to Israel. Dan. 11:44; vil:27; Rev. xi:15, 18; 
xiito. The 7hree Great Parties of the 1000 years, are 
therefore, (1) The Azsex Saznts, (2) New-Born Israel in the 
fresh, (3) The favored Nations in the flesh. Such is the 
clear representation of the whole Word of God. 
Earth is beginning to realize the “ Pattern shown in the 
Mount,’ and prepare for the full accomplishment in the 
final “ New Heaven and Earth,” at the close of the 1000 
years. The Nations are the Fore-Court of the Temple; 
Israel and their Holy Land, are the Holy Place; the 
Holy City and the Risen Bride are the Holiest of All, 
no Veil existing. To the perfect realization of this, all 
things are tending. The Invisible is the source of all 
Realities, and what as been in history is the Beginning 
and Type of what wf be, only in greater perfection. 
David’s kingdom shall be restored, and among the 


310 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


‘sure mercies” to David is the gathering of Israel, and 
the resurrection of the faithful to enjoy that kingdom 
together; and therein all Christians shall share, at 
Messiah’s Second Coming. So Paul taught the 
troubled Thessalonians. A new Age heaves into view, 
with Israel, the Risen Saints, and the Nations, in a new 
relation, Jerusalem the central seat and throne of the — 
earthly glory of the kingdom. Jer. i1i:16-18 ; Isa. xxiv: 
21-23. Dispute, and spiritualize as men may, yet this 
is the clear announcement of God’s word. Ewald is 
therefore correct when saying, “ Of a glorified earthly 
Jerusalem, the prophets of the Old Testament fre- 
quently speak. Pre-eminently is Ezekiel’s vision of the 
Resurrection the type of this, Ezek. xxxvii:1-14. As, 
there, /srae/ rises anew, so, here, in the Apocalypse, by 
means of the Messianic Judgment, and Glorification, 
shall all true Christians, living and dead, and only such, be 
gathered, and glorified, in order to reign with Christ, 
and fulfil this part of the Old Testament hope.* As to 
the alleged “incongruity of the glorified among the 
unglorified,” and “ how they will live,” and “ what they 
will do,” and “what their condition,” and “ daily 
occupation, ’— questions revived by Kliefoth, and _ re- 
peated by others, though raised and answered ages 
ago; and, further, ‘‘ will there be flies, and bees, and 
mosquitoes, in the Millennial age,” as still others have 
sportingly asked; and, yet others again, as to “the 
habit of nature’’—they all belong to that same un- 
believing spirit, and cast of mind, that made a Socinus, 
some Schoolmen, and later profane wits, inquire 
“whether our Lord rose from the grave with His 


digestive organs?” “whether,” as Cleopatra wanted 


* Ewald, Joh. Schrift. II. 327. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF, THE: 1000 YEARS. 311 


to know, “the Saints will rise with raiment’? and 
“whence came the raiment our Lord wore when He 
rose ?”’ and so, conclude, from all, to a denzal of the 
literal resurrection of the body. Such inquisition, it 
becomes us to repel, with force, and rebuke into 
silence, holding, in spite of a thousand questions all 
men can ask and none can answer, in reference to every 
doctrine of Scripture, that it is far more Christian to 
believe what God has spoken, and give him the glory, 
as “ Doer of wondrous things,” than it is to idealize the 
prophecy, to suit our vain thoughts, and land ourselves 
at last into open rejection of the Word of God. 

The Lord knoweth the thoughts of the wise that they are 
vain. Painful to the last degree is the ever-recurring 
style of objection we meet with in certain writers, as 
“Ts 2t reasonable?” “How remote from reasonable proba- 
Giry!  \t 1s“ inconcezvable,’ “ incredible,’ and “far 
from probable,’ and everything the mere natural man 
can object to the supernatural. We dismiss it all with 
the divine words, “O man, who art thou that repliest 
against God?” “Should it be a marvelous thing in 
my eyes, saith the Lord?” ‘The zeal of the Lord of 
Hosts will perform this.” ‘“ The mouth of the Lord 
hath spoken it!”’ “It is the utterance of Jehovah, 
Doer of these things!” It must be so, as God has 
said. As to the Risen Saints, we know what their 
perfection is, and how near they are to Christ. It is 
the righteous man raised from the dead, who is the 
perfect man, ordained to dominion, in the Age to come. 
So Paul taught the Hebrews. Next to the Risen 
Saints, stands Israel, a New-Born Overcomer, with the 
right to rule the nations. The Kingdom of God must 
have its objective local center, on the earth, when 
Gentile supremacy is gone, and Israel’s times have 


: see ee 


312 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. ae 


come. And that center will be Jerusalem; Jerusalem, _ 
that former “spiritual Sodom and Egypt, where our 
Lord was crucified;” where He finished His atoning 
work, over which He thundered His woes ‘and 
showered His holy tears; outside whose gate His cross 
was erected ; where He proved Himself the Prince of 
Life by rising from the dead; where He poured His 
Spirit and commissioned the Apostles to proclaim His_ 
gospel to the Nations; even Jerusalem, the seat of all 
grace for mankind, shall be the seat of all glory, too, 
the sustaining center of the kingdom of the 1000 years. 
Nor is there a“ carnal Chilasm” here. “ Israel shall 
be among the nations as the Dew from Jehovah and as 
dropping Razz on the grass that waits for no one, nor 
tarriés for the sons of men.” Mic. iv:8: (Of ‘supem 
earthly origin, like “ Dew” and “ Razn,” shall Israel’s 
influence be, dispensing spiritual blessing everywhere. 
When Jehovah is “as the Dew to Israel,’ Hos. xiv:5, 
then Israel is as the Dew to the Nations. When Israel 
“takes root,’ again, and “buds and blossoms,” it is 
then he “fills the world with fruit.” Isay=xxyvar 
And, when he “ blossoms like the lily, casts forth his 
roots as Lebanon, and his branches spread, and _ his 
beauty is like the olive-tree, and his smell as Lebanon,” 
then it is that “ ¢4ey who dwell under his shadow shall 
return,” and “ ¢#ey shall revive as the corn, and blossom. 
as the vine.” Hos. xiv:5—7. And that is Israel’s resur- 
rection hour, at the coming of Messiah, in His kingdom. 
Hos. xiii:14.. Everywhere it is foretold that the “ Spirit 
of Life from God” shall be given to living Israel 
in the flesh, as well as to dead Israel in the grave, when | 
Messiah comes. The resurrection is the result of the 
“Dew!” “Life from the dead” is what God’s “ Dew” 
effects. A baptism of divine grace, an enduement from 


z = ~*~ 
jaa J 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. are 


on high, when “ Jacob’s Heavens drop Dew,” and com- 
pared with which the First Christian Pentecost will 
seem as nothing, yea, a “pouring out” upon the 
Jewish nation of all heavenly blessing, in measure 
mightier than ever, will be a“ refreshing ” and “ anoint- 
ing” that can never pass away. When Messiah 
“comes down like Rain on the mown grass, and as 
Showers that water the earth,” then Israel “comes up 
like willows by the water courses.” Ps. Ixxu:6; Isa. 
xliv:3, 4. When he lifts upon them the lght of His 
open face, then, sunlit, and wet with divine grace, they 
sing tugether, as, with unveiled eyes they behold their 
Redeemer, absent so long from their sight. And their 
Land shares in the blessing. “J wll remember the 
eae? Ylevit: xxvia2- Where “thorns-and briars 
have grown, and the populous city, deserted, has 
become “a joy of wild asses,’ even there, ‘ when the 
Spirit is poured from on high,” shall fruitfulness, 
plenty, and peace, and safety, be found. Isa. xxxii:13, 
14. The metamorphosis of the Holy Land moves 
pari passu with that of the Holy People, the desert 
becoming an orchard, and the waste a garden. The 
spiritual and physical shall be interblended. The 
entire physiognomy shall be that where the curse has 
been lifted, and the blessing has descended. “On 
every high mountain, and on every high hill, shall be 
brooks of gushing water,” and “the moonlight shall 
be as the light of the sun, and the hght of the sun 
sevenfold, in the day when Jehovah binds up the breach 
of His people, and heals their scars.” Isa. xxx:18-26, 
In the reunion of Israel and Judah, and the re-erection 
of David’s storm-struck Tent, and repairing of the 
breach in David’s kingdom, and restoring the same “as 
in days of old,” that is, as a visible dominion, with the 


- re 


314 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


nations subject to the Lord’s Anointed,—all these 
blessings shall be fulfilled. 


H. THE EFFECT ON THE NATIONS. 


The effect upon the Nations, when Jacob walks in the 
light of the Lord, and the Lord Himself reigns glori- 
ously before His ancients, is impressively told by 
Isaiah and Micah, in a picture, twenty-five centuries 
long have failed to translate into practical life. Jeru- 
salem, the Christocratic center of the future, no longer 
“Desolate” as now, becomes the object of attraction for 
the world, the world-wide miracle, mystery, and magnet, 
more potent than the Burning Bush which Moses saw, 
One wonderful effect is produced. The gazing Na- 
tions, influenced by the Messianic Judgment, the Sign, 
the Glory, and what the Lord has wrought for His 
people, combine to “go up” to the Mount where the 
Temple stands, exalted above the hills and crowned 
with the Glory-Flame. Isa. 11:2; 1v:'6; Mic. iv:2. No 
idle curiosity directs their march. The Judgment has 
impressed them. The deep Deszre to win Salvation, the 
resolve to bless themselves in Abraham’s seed, inspires — 
their motion. Clear rings their Watchword, “Up / to 
the mountain of the Lord /”—the Design as clear, even 
“to lea:n of Hts way /’’—and the Purpose as strong, 
namely, “to walk in His paths!” Tired of their own 
ways, and sick of their own paths, people and states- 
men alike, yea “all nations” will seek to know the ways 
of Christ, the King of the New Age. The new code 
that proceeds “out of Zion,” so different from all other 
codes,—the code Justinian, or the code Napoleon,— 
viz., the code of Israel’s King, and better than all codes, 
national or international, is what arrests their mind. 
Not “Culture,” nor “Civilization,” not the worn out 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 315 


cry of the “Progress of Nations,” is what they want, 
but the Zionite Law and the Zionite life ;—a divine. 
knowledge and a holy obedience to Christ. Not Puf- 
fendorf and Grotius, nor Vattel, Burlamaqui, or Whea- 
ton, but Christ, the “One Lawgiver,” is what they long 
for,—Christ in His grace, Christ in His Power, Christ 
in His Kingdom, Christ in His glory. And, “like a 
flowing stream,” Isa. Ixvi:12, they “flow to the moun- 
tain of the Lord’s House, set in the head of the moun- 
tains, and lifted above the hills, in the last days.” Isa. 
1i:1. As from Babel the nations were “scattered” into 
all the world, so, reversely now, to Jerusalem all shall 
“flow to be reunited. The ‘veil taken away” at Mes- 
siah’s coming, they will adopt new Maxims, Policies 
and Customs, new Principles and Legislation. Not the 
Sermon on the Mount and the Ten Commandments 
will be incorporated in a Theodosian Code, but the 
whole Word of God, will be the “Law.” The partial 
fulfilment of this great oracle at the First Coming of 
Christ, in an inward spiritual sense, to a portion of 
mankind, awaits, like Joel’s oracle of the Outpoured 
Spirit, and Zechariah’s oracle of the Pierced One, and 
the oracle of Amos concerning David’s Tent, and all 
Messianic oracles of glory, a grander accomplishment. 
Not the wars of centuries and ages gone, and which 
have steeped the earth in human gore, not a new con- 
flict with Antichrist ; no Armageddon scenes, nor wine- 
press of God’s wrath, with blood deep up to the horses’ 
bridles, but ‘“‘zwar xo more /” the coulter for the sword, 
and for the spear the pruning-knife. Religion and 
Peace shall go together. What Kant declared a “pos- 
sibility,” and Charles Sumner lived to call “impossible,” 
shall be a fact. In that day all the glory of man shall 
be brought low, his flags and forts, his iron-clads and 


316 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 

standing armies, his commerce and exchequer, his sci- 
ence, falsely so called, and vain philosophy, and “the 
Lord alone shall be exalted.” Isa. ii:r1-22. Faithfully 
does Orelli say, “Certainly, the realization of this teaching 
remains to-day far short of what the prophet predicts. The 
‘Christian Powers still engage in strife, and the learning 
of war exhausts the forces of civilized States. But a Di 
vine Power, proclaimed from Zion to the world, will yet dic- 
tate universal peace. And it can only heighten our rev- 
erence for the prophetic word when we find that, to-day, 
after all our boasted advances in Culture and Humanity, 
mankind has not yet risen to the height of the goal that — 
stood before the eyes of God’s holy seers, more than two 
and a half millennia ago!’* We need no further 
comment to assure us that the fulfilment of the oracle 
of Isaiah and Micah concerning the Peace and Glory 
of the Nations, can only come in the Millennial Age 
that follows Israel’s restoration at the Second Coming 
of Messiah. 

And the Holiness of the 1000-years’ Kingdom will be 
as remarkable as is the Sin of our present dispensation. 
It is a blessed Chiliasm that is appointed for the Na- 
tions, a Sacred Sabbatism. Satan deceives the nations 
no more, and the proof that Satan is bound, is that they 
“war no more,” nor stand in the way of the Kingdom of 
Christ. Death holds empire no more over the sleep- 
ing saints of God. It is not, indeed, that Sin and 
Death are unknown in the Millennial Age. Both exist 
among the unglorified. Hengstenberg’s thought that 
“the continuance of sin is impossible because Satan is — 
bound,” is not only adverse to the Scriptures, but to — 
the fact that the sinful quality in man must ever inhere — 


* Orelli. Die Alttest. Weissag. 289, 290. 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. Fa La 


so long as man, in his whole person, has not passed 
through death, or been transformed while living. And 
this must be the case even under the highest culture 
and highest grace known to mortals this side the grave. 
Biblical Anthropology never treats the “ Body, Soul 
and Spirit” as three separate and independent entities, 
but as integrated and mutually affecting parts of one 
organism. “from Death to Life’ is the royal road, for 
the whole man, to perfection. He who, though in- 
nocent, was charged with human sin, has shown us 
this. And, therefore, though sinful in our best estate, 
we may not despair. The unregenerate body must 
pass through the grave, or be changed, before man’s 
entire perfection is achieved, and he who sighs not for 
his resurrection, knows little of himself or of Christ. 
And here Hofmann’s word 1s excellent, viz., that “the 
sinfulness of man would still remain in man, evex though 
Satan himself were dead!” 

On the other hand, however, not only will Satan be 
bound, but the fower of Sin in men, and over men, not 
glorified as yet, will be broken, the fellowship of Sin 
will be gone, and, as a rule, the temptation to Sin be 
over-mastered, even though the possibility of Sin will 
not be removed, nor the existence of Sin be prevented. 
“Nothing,” says Hofmann, “shall occur to undo the 
victory Christ has won over Antichrist.” ‘ Associated 
Sin,” says Luthardt, “ will exist no more during the 
1000 years.” ‘Sin has no more a universal might,” 
(Delitzsch). ‘The first distinguishing feature of these 
times of requickening and restitution by the Holy 
Spirit, is freedom from all Satanic influence, the next is 
decadence of the power of sin.” (Christiani). And 
though Sin and Death exist among the unglorified, yet 
Death will be rare because Sin is restrained and Satan’s 


318 SUOPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


temptations destroyed. It will be a “ Deutero-Adamite 
Life,’ as Ebrard calls it, if not absolutely so, yet prox- 
imately so. The enhanced energy of the new life of 
humanity will be such that, sharing in Israel’s blessing, 
no mother among the Nations shall mourn the un- 
timely loss of her babe a few days old, nor shall the 
old man fail to fill out his days, though they be “as the 
days of a tree,” while he who, a hundred years old, is 
a “sinner”’ still, under such floods of light and of grace, 
will be counted as specially cursed of God, Isa. Ixv:20. 
There can hardly be a doubt that the “blessed off- 
spring’ promised to Israel, in that day, and the 
‘blessed seed’ in whom “all Nations shall be blessed,” 
implies a blessed offspring also among the Nations 


themselves. Christianity will then celebrate its © 


greatest triumph this side eternity. The State will 
be the Church, and the Church the State, in a holy 
union, now that the Dragon is bound. All places will 
be sacred, all hours canonical, the distinction between 
“sacred and secular,” gone forever. No strifes will 
exist, nor divisions, nor jarring religious sects. Art, 
Science and Philosophy will then be consecrate, and 
mottoes graved on the doors and walls of institutions, 
—“ Christo et Eccleste,’—will not be mocked by creeds 
that crucify both. No violence of climate will induce 
disease, nor recklessness of man drive to an unexpected 
grave. In Israel’s land, “the inhabitant shall not say 
I am sick, for the people that dwell therein shall be for- 
given their iniquity.” Isa. xxxii:21. With Sin’s des- 
truction in the glorified, disease will be destroyed, and 
with Nature’s smile the world will bloom again, and 
halcyon days return, 


CHAKACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 319 


I. MODE OF LIFE AMONG THE RISEN. 


As to the mode of intercourse between the glorified 
and unglorified, there are many vain speculations. We 
only “ know in part,” and time will bring the answer 
to our various askings. The whole discussion binds 
itself to our conceptions of the Resurrection-Body,— 
what its needs, and what its functions, are. From the 
very first, the Jewish teachers were embarrassed here, 
and much divided in their views. The later Jews are 
not more clear. Saadias and Maimonides maintained 
that “they who rise in the resurrection, eaz, drink and 
marry, and their bodily members serve them, for these 
are not in vain and they de again.”* It was an ancient 
view, and founded on the cases of the resurrection of 
the son of the Shunamite, and the son of the widow of 
Zarepta, ‘both whom,” says Saadias, “ate and drank 
~ and doubtless took wives.’ On the other hand, Bechai 
and Abarbanel maintained that “they who rise in the 
resurrection neither eat, nor drink, nor marry, for there 
is no further need of these, after the resurrection, 
nor do the risen righteous ones return to dust again. 
They have their bodies, in which the fleshly functions 
have ceased, as in the case of Moses, when in the 
Mount with God.’+ Our Lord corrects both these 
views when, confuting the Sadducees, He replies that- 
“they who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that 
world (Olam Habba) and the resurrection out from 
among the dead, wezther marry nor are given in mar- 
riage, neither can they die any more, for they are equal 
to the angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the 
Resurrection.” Luke xx:35,36. Saadias and Ben Mai- 


*Eisenmenger. Eut. Jud. II. 943. 
_ t Ibid 495. . 


320 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSICNS, 


mon said that the Risen “cat, drink, marry, die.” 
Bechai, Abarbanel, Talmud and Cabbala, aver they — 
“neither eat, drink, marry, nor die.’ Our Lord declares 
they “ether marry nor are given in marriage, neither can 
they die any more,’ but says nothing as to the “eating” 
or “drinking.” What he teaches is that the children 
of the resurrection are as the sexless angels. Beyond 
the fact that Lazarus ate after his resurrection, John 
xli:1,2, remains the fact that our Lord Himself, after 
His resurrection, had a tangible and visible material 
body, already free from the limitations of His former 
humiliation, and possessed of resurrection-life, and yet 
‘‘ate” food in Jerusalem and at the shore of Galilee, 
Luke xxiv:30, 41, 42, John xxi:12, and not only prom- 
ised to the Twelve to “drink of the fruit of the vine, 
new in the Kingdom of God,’ Matt. xxvi:29, but “ ap- 
pointed” them “a Kingdom,” in which, said He, “ye 
may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom, and sit 
on 12 thrones judging the 12 tribes of Israel.” Luke 
xxii:29,30. We can grossly carnalize this, on the one 
hand, and as ethereally spiritualize it on the other. — 
The fact remains that the Resurrection Kingdom is “oz 
the carth,’ and that the “children of the resurrection” 
have material bodies, adapted to spiritual uses, and free 
from certain physical functions. While we must shun 
an Ebionite Chiliasm on tne one hand, we must 
equally avoid a Gnostic Chiliasm on the other, and not — 
rob corporeity of its rights in the resurrection, or dis- 
solve, under the idea of “ glory,” the resurrection body ~ 
into a gauzy texture ballooning in the sky. Such a 
conception is foreign to the whole word of God. The — 
risen ones shall have a human body, like their Lord’s, | 
know each other, and be known, and live in relation to — 
the saints upon the earth, and to the Nations. Their 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. B21 


mode of immortality and intercourse are not revealed. 
It is enough for us to know that not more difficult is 
the faith of Christ’s companionship with His disciples 
dnring the 4o days next following His resurrection. It 
is enough to know that Death is robbed of his empire, 
and that, as Professor Milligan himself admits in his 
able work on the Resurrection, our Lord’s body was a 
true spiritual, glorified body, immediately upon His 
rising, and not first after his ascension, and that our 
bodies are to take the form and quality of His. Equal 
foe “azecls’ we shall be, in one respect. Like 
“ Flim,’ we shall be, in another. As doth, in all. “flesh 
and blood” cannot inherit God's Kingdom, because 
“corruption” cannot “inherit incorruption.” 1 Cor. 
xv:50.. And yet “ flesh and bones,” pervaded by the 
Spirit, and made incorruptible, is what our Lord’s body 
was in zs resurrection, Luke xxiv:26, a “glorious 
body,” and “ ke”? which—not “ egual” to which—ours ~ 
shall be at His coming. Phil. 1:21. In such bodies, 
the Risen Saints shall have fellowship with the unrisen 
in the Millennial Age. For the rest, our curiosity 
must be restrained, and will be, if we listen to the 
Angel’s voice to Daniel, Go thy way, Daniel, till the End 
shall be! Inquire no more. Be content with what 
is already spoken. Leave the unrevealed future to 
God. Sure we are of one thing. ‘ We shall behold 
God’s face in righteousness,” and “be satisfied when 
we awake with His likeness!’ Ps. xvii:15. Even so, 
Lord Jesus! 

| J. MILLENNIAL, NOT ETERNAL. 


That the Millennial Age is not the fiat Age is 
made clear in both Testaments. The Kingdom of the 
Iooo years stands in relation to an Age beyond its 

ai 


322 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. a 
own limits, the Exdless Age. It is a false construction — 
of the word “Unzz?” in the expression “Untel the 1000 
years are finished,” Rev. xx:3, 5, 7, to say that the end of 
these years is the end of the Kzngdom of Christ, or of the 
blessedness of Israel, or of the Risen Saints’ reign with 
Christ, or of the distinction between Israel and the 
Nations, or between the Holy City and the outside dwel- 
lers. Even after the Judgment of the “Great White 
Throne,” and the surrender of the Messianic Kingdom 
to the Father, the priestly co-regency of Christ and 
His saints still exists. There is still a dominion of 
Christ and His Bride, “ the Holy City,” over the outside 
“Nations” and the ‘‘Kzzgs’’ in the New Earth, who are 
distinguished from her, and “bring their glory and 
their honor into her.” And there is a condition of 
things transcending that which we see in Millennial 
times. In the New Jerusalem there is “no templem 
and “no night.” “They need no-light of lamp, neither 
light of sun, for the Lord God gives them light, and 
the Lamp is the Lamb.” Rev. xxii:23. It is plainly 
said, “They shall reign forever and ever,’ v.5. This és 
the last word on the whole subject. No more ts spoken. 
“FOREVER!” And it confirms Paul’s word, ‘““FOREVER,” 
inl Thess. iv:17. Their Kingdom is an “everlasting 
kingdom,’ Dan. vi1:25. Christ’s dominion has “zo end,” 
Isa.ix:5. . “To the Son He saith, Thy throne,O Gog 
is FOREVER,” Ps. xlv:6; Heb. 1:8. The Golden Age 
will disappear, Satan, let loose for a season, will cause 
to fade away the beauty of the vision from the eyes of 
all the nations girdling Israel's home and subdued so — 
long to Israel’s sway. Unmindful of the centuries — 
when Israel was trodden down by Gentile pride, they 

will become restless and averse to all divine dominion. 

Then, after a brief final test, come the closing Judg- — 


rd 


CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 1000 VEARS. 323 


ment and the farthest “ End;’—the door that brings 
the Endless Age. The last high point of the A poc- 
alypse is gained, the Absolute End of the Ways of God 
to men;—a vision of Ezernal Glory toward whose un- 
veiling all previous Revelation and all History have 
been the path, and on which the eyes of all prophets 
have been strained since the world began. 


i) ne hire ad 
a > * 
x 2 $e ane Ee 
{ ‘a 


224 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


PAh Evil 


LHE TLDEAL THEORY.OF NUS Bie. 


A. THE LAST RESORT OF POST-MILLENNIALISM. 


We have alluded to this already. Its present im- 
portance, however, demands a special notice. A fa- 
vorite view with certain German writers and their 
English-speaking copyists, it seeks to evade the induc- 
tion of apost-Advent Millennium by depriving the 1000 
years of all chronological value, regarding them as 
only a symbol of “the zdeas of ecumenicity, perfection, 
and eternity.” Three great antichiliasts have appeared 
in our generation, Hengstenberg, Keil, and Kliefoth, 
men of eminent ability, who,—had the task been pos- 
sible for any to perform,—might have been expected to 
have overthrown the chiliastic faith of the primitive 
Church, and closed the appeal of modern times to this 
ancient historic witness. But, how unsuccessful the 
undertaking! What a splendor of scholarship, match- 
less in so much that is good, and what a persistence of 
misdirected aim in so much that is baffled at every 
step! Hengstenberg’s theory,—though regarding the 
1000 years as real time,—was repudiated as soon as 
born, finding but few defenders. The view of Keil,— 
now standing alone among exegetes,—was also rejected. 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 325 


Few care to receive it. The idealistic symbolism of 
Dr. Kliefoth, supported by allegorizers, spiritualizers 
and idealizers of Old Testament Israel, changing the 
subject and contents of prophecy to suit their pre-con- 
ceived notions, now asks a suffrage everywhere, and 
wins it from such as, conscious that Post-millennialism 
is a failure in exegesis, seek for some ground on which 
to stand opposed to the Pre-millennial view. First of 
all Dr. Kliefoth rejects Post-millennialism in the strongest 
terms. He says, “So much ts certain, viz., that the 
1000 years of our prophecy begin with the visible Ap- 
pearing of Christ and His victory over Antichrist. Herein 
we agree with Bengel, Ewald, De Wette, Diuisterdieck, 
Hofmann and his school, Ebrard, Auberlen, etc. AU ex- 
positions which put the 1000 years in this our present 
time-course, whether dated from the Death of Christ, 
(Augustine), or from Constantine (Keil), or from Charle- 
magne (Hengstenberg), we must hold as a violation of 
the text.’* Pre-millennialism he also rejects. “fow,” 
continues Dr. Kliefoth, “are we to conceive of the 1000 
years which fall de¢zween the Second Advent and the 
Resurrection and Final Judgment? Two conceptions 
are possible. The first 1s that we take the 1000 years 
properly as a measure of longer or shorter duration. So 
do, not only the expositors who put the 1000 years in 
our present period, but also the Chiliasts. Ze second is 
that a symbolical number never counts, but only expresses 
an tdea. The idea expressed by the ‘1000’ is that of 
potentiated ecumenicity,—because 1000 is the potentiated 
10 number of spatzal completeness,—and, since ¢zme, zz 
years, cannot be applied to this sfartzal idea, all that is 
meant by what those years embrace, is ‘Victory,’ the 


eS Qnenpar. oh, II]. 287; 


326 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Bastleta of the Lord over Antichrist, the World-Power 
and the Devil. It is ecumenical. If we thus conceive 
the 1000 years all difficulties fall away, and the Apoc- 
alypse stands in harmony with the rest of Scripture.” * 
He repeats the same in his later work, the “Chrzstzan 
Lschatology.” Without one solitary proof that the 1000 
years of Satan’s Captivity and of the Saints’ reign with 
Christ are merely ideal, and with singular boldness 
of unsupported assertion that no place is found for 
them as a historic period, he says, “The 1000 years 
are xot to be taken literally decause the connection be- 
tween Rev. xix:11-21 and xx:11I-15 does not permit a 
real period of 1000 years, but are to be taken symbolli- 
cally, as are all numbers of the Apocalypse, that is, as 
not counting, but only expressing an idea. The number 
1000—1I0x 1010, that is, 10 raised to its third power, 
expressing: the idea of absolute all-embracing Ecumentcity, 
and, reminding us of the ‘One day with the Lord as 
1000 years, and 1000 years as one day,’ Ps. xe:4; II 
Pet. i11:8, so represents the idea of Eternity. All that 
is meant is that, after the Antichrist is destroyed, the 
reign of Christ and His Saints shall be ecumenical and 
eternal, and that Satan’s power over men is universally 
and eternally taken away.” ¢ And this “second con- 
ception” is the one Dr. Kliefoth adopts, a happy expe- 
dient whereby the 1000 years are adolished, and the mil- 
lennial problem solved. The 1000 number embodies 
the two stupendous ideas of an all-embracing /Acume- 
nicity and an inconceivable Lternity / It is the highest, 
broadest, longest and roundest ‘“otentzation,” the sym- 
bolic xe plus ultra of inspired perfection, victory and 
totality. Like Aaron’s rod, it swallows all the rest. 


* Kliefoth. Offenbar. Joh. III. 285. 
} Ibid. Christliche Eschatologie. 246. 


: 
. 
{ 
f 


* 


THE [DEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 327 


Thus Pre-millennialism and /os¢-millennialism both 
swept away at one stroke, by the same ideal broom, the 
doctrine of a M/zllenninm on this present earth, and in 
history, disappears from the Scriptures altogether! By 
this means,—the millennium gone,—xo /nterval existing, 
—Antichrist, Gog, the opening and closing Judgments, 
the Two Resurrections, the Transformation of the Holy 
Land and the final Regenesis of the whole Planet, are 
brought externally together at the Second Advent, and 
Eternity, the final New Heaven and Earth and New 
Jerusalem, are made immediately to follow Israel’s con- 
version and the Resurrection of the faithful dead. 
Thus,—anx entire age blotted out of existence, and Two 
Ends considered as One, the doctrine of the szmzltane- 
ous resurrection of all the dead, righteous and wicked, 
is zuserted in the Apocalypse through the exsertion of 
the 1000 years. The exegesis is that of the annihilation 
of the millennial age. In this way the Old Testament 
Prophets, Christ and His Apostles and “all the rest of 
Scripture,” are said to be ‘drought into harmony’ as 
though they were not already in that relation, the 
“Third Day” in Hosea, the “Multitude of Days” in 
Isaiah, and the “Many Days” in Ezekiel, answering 
each other as face answers to face in water! The 
cifted author simply puts out of God’s word what God 
has put zz, and puts zz what God has put ow/, inventing 
a contradiction between John and the Prophets, then, 
dissolving the same on one side, viz., in John, leav- 
ing it wzdissolved in the Prophets, thinks that the 
word of God has been “drought into harmony!” The 
magic is clear, and the method is easy. “Symbolische 
Zahlen nicht zehlen; Symbolical numbers dow t count!” a 
convenient way of denying that the “ 1000 years’ in 
John are the “Many Days’ in Ezekiel, and of asserting 


328 . SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


that the relative End of this age is the absolute end of 
the next; no other Millennium seen than that of the 
Eternal State! : 
According to Dr. KI. the 1000 years have nothing 
to do with ¢zme, but only with space. They represent 
“the spatial idea.” What we have, here, is a species of 
exegetical transubstantiation. The figures 1000 mean 
“ space,’ and the word years means “victory!” He 
soberly tells us “Duration is meant, but not by the number,” 
and ‘“ 7zme is meannt, but whether long or short is xot 
told us by the number!”* By what, then, may we ask, 
is it told? for, according to Dr. KI. himself, “‘ the 1000 
years begin with the visible Appearing of Christ.” 
They also end, and are said to “ expire.” If the “ num- 
ber,’ does not express “ Duration,” where shall we find 
the term that does? By what right shall we speak of 
‘“ Duration” at all? Surely not because of the word 
“ Vears”’ for that means “ Victory ;”’ and not because of 
the figures “ 1000,” for these mean “ Space /”’ How, if 
Time is out of the question, determine the uwzde and 
usque ad, both which are admitted yet both denied, and 
denied while yet admitted? Events as well as dates 
limit duration. If all that Dr. Kl. is contending for is 
that we cannot say that the 1000 years are “ exactly 10 
centuries,’ we shall not be seriously grieved. We 
might shelter ourselves behind Hengstenberg’s favorite 
“vanishing point,” and reply that ‘“ Chronological 
exactness is not to be expected,” and against which he 
could enter no demurrer! But, on such grounds, 
to enthrone the idol “Symbolical numbers don’t 
count,” and “all prophetic numbers are symbolical,” 
and then ‘“ potentiate” the argument to a denial of 


* Offenbar. Joh. III. 285. 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 329 


these numbers altogether, as measures of time, is both 
curious and sad. All the more so, since the ideas 
of “ Time,” “ Duration,” “ Beginning,” are admitted, 
while still denied! It might puzzle Palmoni himself to 
iene whence comes. the idea of “Duration” if the 
“tooo” only means “ Space” and “ years”’ only mean 
“Victory!” What wonder if the “ Woe to Ariel” 
should overtake teachers and people alike,—hungry 
but not fed, thirsty but not refreshed by such devices, 
while yet they dream the very reverse; that deep 
judgment of intoxication under which the head grows 
dizzy, “but not with wine,” while looking at God's 
truth ;—that “deep sleep” and non-discernment of the 
Book of God, when the bright prophetic word itself 
becomes dark! What wonder, if, under an exegesis, 
like this, the intellectual eyes of both ministers and 
people fail, and ‘“‘the Book” becomes as a book that is 
sealed which men deliver to one that is /earned, saying 
eiread this, | pray thee, and the Pulpit replies; I 
cannot, for it is sea/ed/” and again it is delivered to 
one that is ot learned, with the same request, “ Read 
this, I pray thee,” and the Pew answers “1! cannot for I 
am not learned /”’ and, so, from Pulpit to Pew, and Pew 
to Pulpit, the “sure word,” the “shining light,” goes 
begging for recognition! The Professor says, “It. is 
“ Oriental!” The Hearer says “I am not a graduate!” 
What wonder if God proceeds to do a marvellous thing 
in our day, even to smite /aphetzc wisdom, and bring to 
naught /aphetic understanding! It would, in no wise, 
be strange, if at last, the despised “ Jew” might yet 
speak,—as Dean Payne Smith assures us he will,—and 
the Apocalypse beam brighter than ever before! That 
day of illumination and restitution will bring a different 
interpretation from what,so many now hold. We have 


330 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


only, to wait a short time! Zex,—when Lebanon is 
turned to a fruitful field,—‘ the deaf shall hear the words 
of the Book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of 
obscurity and out of darkness, and the meek will increase 
their zoy, and Jacob shall not be ashamed, neither shall his 
face wax pale, but He shall sanctify the Holy One of 
Israel!” Then /Japhetic wisdom freed from its folly, 
will know the prophetic word, when Israel, converted 
to Christ, once more shall become our guide, and “they 
that err in spirit shall come to understanding, and they that 
murmur shall learn doetrine !” sa. xxix:18-24. 

The apostolic faith will suffer as little at the hands 
of Dr. Kliefoth, as it did at the hands of Hengstenberg, 
great and good as he was, or at the hands of Keil, great 
and good as he is, or at the hands of others, no less 
esteemed, yet to whom prophecy,—explained never so 
clearly by the Lord Himself,—appears an Egyptian 
Sphinx, or Isis, whose veil no mortal has drawn. “The 
truth is,” as Rinck observes, that “ what these great and 
good men needed, was more light,’—the need, of us all! 
What illicit assumptions! What tortuous explanations! 
What Bible-negating conclusions! Plainly, nothing is 
gained, either for Post-millenniasm, or /Vo-millenniasm, 
by hoisting the flag ““ Symbolical numbers don’t count!” 
To regard a number as symbolic does not require us to 
deny its chronological value. Yo affirm its chrono- 
logical value is not to deny its symbolic character. 
The 70 weeks are both. So are the 1000 years. Ire- 
nzeus and Lactantius, De Wette and Ebrard, Auberlen 
and Volck, Koch and Luthardt, and post-millennialists 
themselves, regard the 10X 10x 10-1000 as representing 
victory and peace, as truly as 12X12X1000—144,000 
represents a pertect election out of Israel. But the 
Victory 1s not yet absolute, nor yet eternal, as Dr. 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 331 


Kliefoth would have it. It is relative only, once more 
to be perilled, and put to the test, at the end of the 
Io00 years. To argue that the 1000 years are not 
literal because “ not exactly 1o centuries,” is a favorite 
logic with many who first assume in the premise what 
they propose to find in the conclusion; then, deducing 
the same, assert their finding as proved! It is the 
precise argument that the 70 weeks of Daniel, are not 
a literal measure of time, because “ot exactly 490 years,” 
which they exactly are! This is worse than trifling. 
The proved identity of the 1000 years with Hosea’s 
“Third Day,” Hos. vi:2; Isaiah’s ‘‘ Multitude of Days,” 
Peasy :22.;: zckiel’s*““ Many Days,” Ezek.’ xxxyvii8; 
and ‘“ His Days ” in Psal. Ixxii:7, evinces their value as 
a real measure of time; mor does the exegete live 
who can show that they are not exactly ten centurtes / 
Disterdieck, like some others, as Bertheau, Riehm, and 
Robertson Smith, has given away, just here, his great 
exegetical tact by accepting the snare of the Ideal 
Theory of Prophetic Numbers. 


B. PROFESSOR MILLIGAN’S WORK. 


The work of Professor Milligan, of Aberdeen, on 
the ‘“‘ Revelation of St. John” solicits a notice in this 
connection. Students of prophecy are aware that the 
great battle of interpretation is generally fought on the 
question of the 3% years or 1260 days. Following the 
lead of Augustine, Hengstenberg, and Kliefoth, the 
Aberdeen Professor replies to the “strong argument ” 
which holds to the literality of the 3% years or 1260 
days, by saying that “these numbers are merely sym- 
bolic’ and represent “not literal years,” or “ days,” but 
only “the zdea of trouble and distress.” That is, a 
large.sized round number represents uzbroken victory, 


332 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


glory and eternity, but a number, whose countenance 


is of less dimension, and distorted by a fraction, repre- 


sents the drokenness of sorrow and woe. And that is 


the reason why Daniel and John used the 3%. Weare 
not informed, however, why 1,000,000 was not chosen 
by John as a sign in the one case, and 5% as a sign in 
the other. For all we can see to the contrary, 1,000,000 


looks as cheerful and happy as 1,000, and 53 as hag- 


gard and sad as 3%! Besides, according to Dr. Klie- 


foth himself, the cubing of Io to 1,000, is not the — 


’ 


highest ‘‘ potentiation” of ‘“‘ecumenicity,” let alone the 
idea of ‘“ eternity.” When speaking of the Euphratean 
horseman under the 6th seal, Rev. ix:16, whose num- 


bers are given as “¢wzce ten thousand times ten thousand,” — 


10,000x% I0,O00—=100,000,000x 2 —= 200,000,000, he tells us 


that “the number stated at 200,000,000, represents the 5 


10 number fotenttated to 100,000,000 then doubled tn order 
to show that the whole world ts in war.’* If 200,000,000 
are the figures for an ecumenical War, it would be 
hard to discover why an ecumenical and eternal Peace 
should be potentiated only up to 1,000! A whole world 
in peace, and forever, scems, if the numbers are not 
literal, to require “ myriads of myriads” as a symbol to 
represent it, and not merely the minor cube of 10! But 
if there is a backlying reason for 1,000 and 3%, as solid 


as for the 70 year-weeks of Daniel ; if the zdeas expressed — 


by these numbers grow out of the relations of the same toa 


Sabbatic Law, and a System of Cycles, Ages, and Ends, — 


mnaugurated at creation, and engraved in God's whole pro- 


cedure with His people, if it is true that it has pleased — 


God to forecast the destinies of Israel, the Nations, and 


the Church, and distribute the same according to fixed — 


*Kliefoth. Offenbar. Joh. II. 153. 


’ 


THE IDEAL: THEORY OF NUMBERS. 333 


— = 


measures of time, and that the close of the whole his- 
toric development is the World’s Sabbatism, a ‘“ Day ” 
of Joy and Victory which with God, “zs 1000 years,” 
then it is clear that while these numbers are indeed 
symbolic and express geat ideas, yet they could never be 
other than exactly what they are, and are just what they 
are only because of their relation to the Law of the Seven, 
the Ages and Ends, Seasons and Times, which God has 
ordained in the march of His Kingdom on earth. 
These numbers express 7zme as well as /deas. Itis a 
fact that 10 Jubilee periods are exactly 500 years, and 
these doubled are exactly 1000 years ! 

The absurdities that result from denying a chrono- 
logical value to them, are both great and grotesque. 
We are instructed (1) that “the 332 does not mean 
time ;” (2) It means “ our whole dispensation ;”’ (3) It 
means: the “little season’ of Gog at the -end of 
tne 1000 years; (4) It is “the period of the reign- 
ing of the saints;” (5) Satan, during this 3% period 
is “bound with respect to the saints,” but “loosed, 
with respect to the nations,’ (6) the words “till,” 
fatter, | ‘finished,’ “expired,” “short season,” have 
no reference whatever to time; (7) the millennial age 
and First Resurrection are “now;” and (8) all equal 
3%, equal 1000, equal our dispensation, equal no time 
at all, but only an zdea.* The Professor frankly admits 
his “solution is not wholly free from difficulty,” but 
claims it is yet ‘“‘a fair interpretation,’ and is “in 
harmony with all other Scripture!’+ We catch the 
echoes, here, of Kliefoth, as we do, elsewhere, in 
reference to the meaning of the “ Baszleza,”’ viz., that it 
is not Christ’s reign durzmg the 1000 years, but only His 


eis ea ck - seidntegssatt ceeds 


* Revelation of St. John, Lect. VI. passim, 
+ Ibid, 223, 


334 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


complete victory over Antichrist, the World-Power, 
and the Devil. 

The answer to all this is not hard to find. The 3%, 
not less than the 1000, does mean literal time. It is 
the last 3% years of Daniel’s 7oth year-week, 69 of the 
70 weeks being “exact and literal” time, as history 
itself has proved, viz., 483 decreed or selected years 
from the Edict of Cyrus, B. C. 536, unto Messiah the 


Prince, or Birth of Christ. Though sundered from the 


69 weeks, by the long Interval, Dan. ix:26, the 7oth week 
still belongs to the same category of historic time as do the 
whole 70 of which it is pgart, and the 3¥% are the last 
half of that week, preceding the date when Daniel, 
waked from his sleep, stands in his lot. Dan. x11:13. 
In short, the 70 Weeks of Daniel are not merely and 
only symbolical, but are as literal as the 2300 Evening- 
Mornings. Either this, or zo demonstration of the 
Messiahship of Jesus of Nazareth from Dan. 1x:25, 26, 
on which, so far as the time of the Advent is concerned, 
the whole church has rested the demonstration, from 
the very beginning! To this length the Aberdeen 
Professor must go, if the Weeks of Daniel, from which 
the 3% spring, do not express ¢zme. And, because the 
Interval of our Dispensation lies detween the 69th and 
7oth weeks, as our Lord Himself, when expounding 
this prediction, shows, Luke xxi:24; Dan. ix:26, there- 
fore the 3% are zot “our present Dispensation,” as 
Professor Milligan would have it, but are the last half 
of the 7oth week, and proper Signature of the literal 
End-Time. 

And this settled, the whole argument of the Pro- 
fessor falls to the ground. That argument is that szzce 


* Revelation of St. John, 202. 


~ 


THE ADEAL PHEORY OF NUMBERS. 335 


the 3% are not literal, the 1000 are not. But the reverse 
of this assumption, as to the 3%, being proved true, it 
follows, according to the. Professor’s own method 
of reasoning, that since the 3% ave literal, the 1000 are 
literal also. Manitestly wrong is the statement, that, if 
we take the tooo years literally, “it will be the solztary ex- 
ample of a literal use of numbers in the Apocalypse, and 
this alone is fatal.”* We might as well say that John’s 
3% 1s not the last half of Daniel’s “ One Week ”’ divided 
into twice 3% years, or twice 1260 days; or that John’s 
‘“« Beast” is not the “Little Horn” of Daniel +t or that the 
69 weeks were not 483 years. And, were it not that 
we know otherwise, we might suspect that Hume, 
revived, had written the following sentence, to wit, 
“The whole conception, in short, of the chiliastic view 
of the 10co years’ reign is compassed about with so 
many difficulties and wmuprobadbtlities, with so many 
notions of which we can form xo clear conception, or 
which, when we think we understand them, are so 
ancredible in themselves, that, unless it be forced upon 
us by fairness of interpretation, there is no alternative 
except to abandon it.”t So Hume,—save what follows 
the word “ uzless” (!)—would have said! “ Dzfficult,” 
“amprobable,” “ no clear conception,” cannot “understand,” 
“so incredible,” it is Hume’s vocabulary ; the echo of 
Spinoza’s voice to Oldenberg! So the Trinity, Incar- 
nation, Inspiration, Revelation, Regeneration, Future 
Life, Resurrection, Second Coming, every super- 
natural work and truth of God, is amenable to precisely 
the same objections. 


* Revelation of St. John, 202, 

+ The ‘‘ Beast,” the last revived Empire zs the ‘‘ Little Horn,” the ‘‘ 8th 
Head” of the Beast. Both are one. ‘‘ Ubi imperator tht Roma.” “L 
Limptre, Cest Mot!” 

¢ Ibid, 202. 


336 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Wherein, if once we adopt such mode of reasoning 
about God’s word, are Hume and we of different 
schools? Why should it be thought a thing “znucredible” 
that Christ should live on earth, the Glorified among 
the unglorified, 40 days after His resurrection? Why 
“incredible,” improbable,” even if “ inconceivable,” 
that God should ordain a Time-Course after the Second 
Advent and the Resurrection of the saints? Already, 
at His First Coming, “ many bodies of the saints that 
slept arose, and went into the Holy City, and appeared 
to many,’ and History still kept on its way! Why 
“incredible” that God should gather His saints, 
restore Israel, renew their lost inheritance, and give to 
Israel and His Risen Ones, co-regent power in the | 
coming Age? Or is it only what is “ probable,” that 
‘comes to pass in the last days”? Was Noah’s 7ué 
“probable ?’’ Was the birth of Isaac “ probable?” 
Was the passage of the Red Sea, or the birth 
of Jesus, or were the three who ate with Abraham, 
then saved Lot out of Sodom, “ probable?” Does the 
Church, to-day, really believe it is “probable” that 
multitudes of the Old Testament Saints literally rose 
from their graves, and visibly marched into the Holy 
City, and showed themselves to the Sadducees of that 
time? Do ministers really believe this? Jmprobable!/ 
Incredible! Inconceivable! Absurd! Surely this too 
is “/deal!” if not “mythical!” It was Augustine 
himself who said, ‘‘I do not seek to understand in 
order that I may believe, but I believe in order that I 
may understand.” It was Tertullian who spoke that 
deep word, so paradoxical and yet so true, “Credo, quia 
tmpossibile!” “J believe, decause it is impossible!” 
Where Reason fails, Faith conquers. It was “ Abra- 
ham’s faith whereat Sarah laughed,’—as Lord Bacon 


Pie ADE ALI THEORY OF MNOMBE RS. Oot 


finely says,—‘‘and who, therein, was an image of 
natural reason!” Splendid faith is this, a faith that 
is beyond philosophy, and throws some sand on the 
slippery slide-board of a spiritualizing exegesis which 
lands so many of our hearers into infidelity, and 
denial of the Resurrection itself! Man’s impossibilities 
are God’s actualities. And such faith, in face of all 
improbability and impossibility, is just what the 
prophetic word requires. Nothing less will answer. 
Just where every one says Wo, God says Yes. “ Neum 
Vehovah!” wt ts the utterance of Jehovah, Doer of these 
things /’’ Amos 1x:12, a solemn asseveration, guaran- 
teeing fact, and supporting faith in what natural reason 
rejects as improbable, incredible, impossible. That is 
‘the sole force of the expression, “ Meum Yehovah!” 
And so Augustine grandly said, “ It matters not what / 
say, what you say, what ke says, but what satth the 
Lord!” *Neum Yehovah!/ it is the Utterance of Jeho- 
vah!” And that’s what’s the matter in this case, as in 
so many others. A “fair interpretation ” is demanded, 
and what Professor Milligan deems a “fair interpreta- 
tion” we have already seen; a compound of contra- 
dictions impossible to be defended, and resting on 
conjectures and imaginations so palpable that the 
Professor’s candor is obliged to allude to them in 
anticipation of their criticism.* Are not Bengel, Hof- 
mann, Delitzsch, Ebrard, Auberlen, Olshausen, Riggen- 
bach, Rothe, Schmid, Van Oosterzee, Nigelsbach, 
Weber, Orelli, Volck, Luthardt, Oehler, Kohler, Chris- 
tiani, Burger, Rinck, Stier, Godet, Alford, Ellicott, and 
a hundred more like them, “ /azr znterpreters ?” 

All persons will cordially agree that symbolical 

* Revelation of St. John, pp. 223-220, 

22 


338 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


numbers are not to be “tossed about at our pleasure, | 
or shuffled like a pack of cards, and that the 1000 years 
are not to be made 2,000, 10,000, 20,000, Or 365,000; as 
the necessities of the case may require.”* But itis not 
we for whom such necessities exist. The “ necessities” 
belong to others who have made an indelible record 
varying the length of the 1000 years according to the 
“necessities” of their own nomadic starting-point, 
restless, wandering, and weary; dating from (a) the 
Death of Christ, (b) Pentecost, (c) the Death of thie 
Believer, (d) the Destruction of Jerusalem, (e) Constan- 
tine, (f) Charlemagne, (g¢) the Reformation, (h) the 
Great Unknown Foint 1000 years this side of the 
Advent, the whole period being 1,000, 10,000, 100,000; or 
365,000 ; ‘as the necessities of the case may require, ’— 
even as the 3% may be either the half, or the whole, of 
our present dispensation, Gog’s little season! 

Most persons will, moreover, question the genius 
which for the sake of symbolism robs the prophetic 
time-words of their temporal significance. This is 
what that able and devout man, Professor Fairbairn, 
attempted, decades ago, when toiling to prove that the 
“Furst Resurrection” means only the “greatest in 
moral importance,’ but “ not the first tn temporal order /” 
The “ necessities of the case”’ required that! As well 
plead that the “last” must mean the “ dast.” The 
Angel’s answers to the various questions, “ When?” 
“Flow Long?” cannot be divested of their literality. 
The time-words “ Until,” “Unto, “From, “Goes 
“ After,” ‘ For a time, two times, and the dividing of a 
time,’ have temporal importance. ‘“ /rom the going 
forth of a word to restore and build Jerusalem, Unto 


* Ibid, 203. 


THE IDEAL THEORY OP NUMBERS. 339 


Prince Messiah,” the selected 69 Sevens mean “ exactly” 
483 literal years. The answer to the question “ How long 
shall be the Vision?” viz, Unto 2300 evening-mornings, 
means a fixed term of years, from one given point to 
another. The reply ofa linen-clothed man, hovering 
over the Tigris, to the man this side the river, inquiring 
“To what extent shall be the End of these wonders?” 
viz, ‘“‘ For a time, two times, and a half,” and then “ an 
End will be put to Antichrist’s power,” means that, at 
the close of 3% years, dated from the middle of the 
70th week, Israel’s faithful remnant will be delivered 
and Israel’s faithful dead be raised. And so of all the 
other numbers, the 1000 years not excepted. 


C- ORGANIC RELATION OF PROPHETIC NUMBERS. 


But still further. It is not enough to content our- 
selves with saying that no exegete can show that the 
1000 years are not exactly Io centuries. We assert 
their literality upon the ground of their organic rela- 
tion to, and connection with, the whole system of Bib- 
lical Chronology, both Historic and Prophetic, and 
from first to last. We have spoken of the “Ages” and 
the “Ends” as ordained of God, and the same is true of 
the “Times and the Seasons.” All are established, 
firm as the ordinances of the heavens, and the dominion 
of the Sun and Moon, by whose motions they are meas- 
ured, and whose offspring they are. Science, the boast 
‘of modern times, has nothing more fixed, nor more 
exact. Commissioned to “divide” the day from the night, 
and to be for “Szguzs, for Seasons, and for Days and 
fee eens 1:14, and -“to.ryz/e,' v. 17, these regent 
luminaries measure off, in silent revolution, the various 
stadia in the progress of God’s Kingdom. The hie- 
rarchy of the Sun, Moon and Stars, in their rising and 


340 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


setting, and in their stately movement, mute yet elo- 
quent, perform imperial offices. They have their 
Signiorities and Principalities, no mortals, nor angels, 
may invade. They “raze.” The motions of the Heav- 
ens are an administration. The Planet Earth also be- 
longs to their order. They are “Lzghts” that reveal. 
They measure Time, being given for Seasons, and for 
Days, and for Months, and for Years. They zzdicate 
Events, also, being ordained for “Szgns” as well as ‘“‘Sea- 
sons.” It is from these alone we get the “ 7zmes”’ and 
the ‘‘Szgus,” the “Signs of the Times,” and the “7imes of 
the Signs; solar, lunar, sidereal,telluric. Their march 
is historic, their motion 1s measured, their meaning 
prophetic. They are hermeneutical. They move and 
shine, rise and fall, and put on their various phenomena 
subservient to the will of God, rulers, significators, 
_ measurers, and interpreters of His holy word. They 
stand in organized connection with the whole structure 
of prophecy, and are themselves a page of prophecy 
and of history, declaring the glory of God, and the 
wonders of His Way. In the combination of their 
offices as measurers of time and indicators of events in 
connection with the word of God predicting the Times 
and the Signs of the Times, they are a species of Holy 
Writ in bodily form, a living symbolism read, known, 
and deciphered, by God’s servants, in all ages, from the 
beginning of the world. Evermore their study has 
been connected with the knowledge of futurity, and the 
approach of impending catastrophe. They have an 
interest in Judgment and Salvation. What knowledge 
the wise men of ancient times possessed concerning the 
prognostication of events, Babylonian or Egyptian, was 
derived from holy men who, taught from the first, as 
Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Joseph and Daniel, were 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 341 


taught by divine instruction, transmitted the same to 
coming generations. It was in the Symbolism of Sun, 
Moon and Stars, Joseph learned his destiny. It was 
by a “Star” rising out of Jacob Balaam visioned Israel’s 
distant ascendancy. The Sun standing still on Gibeon, 
and the Moon in the Valley of Ajalon, were for “Signs” 
of Victory to Joshua, even as the retrogression of the 
Shadow on the Dial of Ahaz was to Hezekiah a “Sign” 
of his recovery. It was by a‘“Sign” in the Heavens, 
the Eastern Magi discovered the Birth of Christ, and so 
brought the News to Jerusalem. The Sign in the 
Heavens and the knowledge of the Times the Chaldean 
Astrologers had gained from Daniel’s 70 Weeks, and 
from Balaam’s prophecy, was a revelation that did not 
disappoint their expectation. The horoscope of the 
Nativity was sure. Caspar, Melchior and Balthazzar 
never dreamed of “/dea/ls,” nor an a guo of the 70 Weeks 
dated from 20th Artaxerxes! The “Sign” of the flam- 
ing sword in the sky over doomed Jerusalem, told only 
too plainly that the ‘“‘Day of Vengeance” had come for 
that Christ-rejecting City. Our Lord Himself and His 
Apostles, like the Prophets of old, ever referred to the 
“Times” foretold as measured “Times,” having a literal 
fulfilment, and to the “Signs of the Times,” as signs in 
the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, in the Earth also, and in 
the Sea, and declared that, asthen and before, so would 
ipeinthe “Axzd of this age,’ adding other “Signs” * 


* Tf we are to credit Josephus, Origen and Diodorus Siculus, the Greeks 
learned all their Science of Arithmetic, the Mysteries of Numbers, Geometry, 
Astronomy and Astrology, from the Egyptians who were taught these and 
the art of foretelling events, by the Patriarchs, as the Babylonians and Per- 
sians were taught the same by the Hebrews. Moses learned in the Wisdom 
of Egypt, and Daniel, Master of the Magi, both reckoned the 7¢mes and the 
Siens of the Times. Nebuchadnezzar learned that ‘‘the Heavens do rile.” 
See Origen Tom. in Gen. Caps 37-50. Whiston’s Josephus. Antig, ook 
I, Cap. VIII, p. 50. Booth’s Diodorus Siculus, Lib. f. Cap. LV, pp. 24, 
weer tne ar, lib, Il, Cap. Wil, p.-€9.- Dan. i:4,.5,.11, 17, 18+ 
ZOE > VILE. 


~ 


342 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


also, such as the days of Noah and of Lot. “ds zt was” 
before, “So shall it be again! Sun and Moon, ruling and 
measuring the ‘times fore-appointed,” and giving 
“Signs” of their approach, or presence, strange phe- 
nomena in all, Eclipses, Discolorations, Convulsions in 
the Earth, the Sea and the Waves roaring, high-tidal 
attraction, “the treasures of the Snow and Hail hid 
against the day of battle and of War,’ as Napoleon 
learned to his sorrow, even as Sisera found the “Stars” 
against him; the storm-lashed sea roused at the “blast 
of Jehovah’s breath” to whelm an Armada, or Lisbon 
shuddered into disappearance by a shock violent as in 
the days of Uzzah; al/ things in the Cosmic System, 
above, around and below, with all the forces of Nature, 
are woven into prophecy to remind us that the face of 
Nature, not less than the page of Scripture, is designed 
to teach us the literality and reality of divine prediction 
in reference to the Vumbers and Times, as well as in ref- 
erence to the Seasons and Signs. The combination is 
perfect. The “Days,” the “Months” and the “ Years,” 
the “Times” and the ‘‘ Seasons,” the “Ages” and the 
“Ends,” all are measured to the moment, and the 
“Signs” appointed to their places by that unerring One 
whose Works are “known to Him from the beginning,” 
who “sits on the circle of the Earth,” is “curtained by 
the Heavens,” and to whose eyes past, present and to 
come, are as one. His Immensity and Knowledge, His 
Holiness and Majesty, should impress us! He smiles 
at our ‘‘/dea/ls,” and mocks at our ‘“‘potentzations!” He 
tells us that a mutual sympathy exists between the 
moral and material in His plan of Working, an intere 
dependence of all phenomena in the evolution of His 
Kingdom, that “there is a ¢zme for every purpose under 
heaven,” that the End-Time itself is fixed, and that, ‘2 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 343 


that day,” when Israel’s crisis is come, and all things 
seem to fail, even then ‘‘God will answer the Heavens, 
and they shall answer the Earth, and the Earth shall ' 
answer the Corn, and the Wine, and the Oil, and they 
Paeleanswer Jezreel!’” Hos. i1:21,.22.. And’ so, in, the 
Age following, the tooo years of Israel’s glory in the 
Kingdom,—not too long a period of earthly compen- 
sation for their sore Captivities and wide Dispersions,— 
Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Dry Land, all Nations and 
all Things, will answer the Power that makes for 
Righteousness, and Resurrection, for Judgment and 
Millennial Glory ;—that high-point toward which all 
things have been tending, that Saddatism toward which 
all previous Sabbaths, and all Times, and all Seasons, 
ruled by the “Law of the Seven,’ have, for centuries, 
been marching; Sun, Moon and Stars, flaming in the 
van. To what other conclusion can we come than 
that Sun and Moon, the regent lights in the heavens, 
are God’s complex Chronometer, the believers’ Time- 
Piece, swung on the sky, to tell us what o’clock it is, 
in the march of the ages on to the 1000 years ? 

It*is by the study of this fact we attain the clear 
conception that the Periodology of Bible-Chronology is 
a measured system of Cycles, of smaller or larger di- 
mension, yet always symmetrical, proportionate, and 
true; all organized in one complex movement for the 
preparation, progress, and completion of Redemption. 
The “ Law of the Seven” and of “periodicity ruled by 
the Seven,” is as much a literal law of God in Chronol- 
ogy governed by Sun, Moon and Stars, as are the laws 
of motion and gravitation, in Astronomy, which Kepler 
and Newton discovered, or the law of division and in- 
tegration in intellectual and material processes which 
gave to the systems of Hegel and Spencer all their 


344 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


vitality. Ideler, Wieseler, Coleman, and Browne, have 
demonstrated this. The lterality of the 1000 years, 
hereby, becomes an irresistible conclusion. What we 
see in the Scriptures, as well as in Nature, is a law of 
Seven everywhere in the ascendant, and grounded in 
God’s creative Week, even as that week was grounded 
in Himself. What we have is (1) a Seven of Days, and 
in the Ritual; (2)a Passover Week; (3) a Seven of Weeks 
from Passover to Pentecost; (4) a Seven of Months the 
Sacred Year of the Jews; (5) a Seven of Years,in the 
last of which the “Land” must keep Sabbath, even as 
“Creation” was meant to keep Sabbath on the 7th, the 
hallowed, Day; (6) a Seven of Sevens of Years or 
Jubilee-Period, bringing the trumpet of ransom, release 
from bondage, freedom from debt, and return to lost 
possessions; (7) a Seven of Decades of Years or the 70 
years of Judah’s Captivity ; (8) a Seven of Septuagint- 
Years, or 490 years decreed upon Daniel’s people and 
city; a Seven of Centurial Years, thrice taken, with 
added decades of 6; or 7 times 360 years, the Great 
Seven of the Times of the Gentiles, foreseen in the 7 
times of Moses; and (g) a Seven of Millennaries, or 7 
times 1000 years, the Great World-Week, or, better, 
the Week of God, whose 7th thousand is the Sabbatism 
of mankind, the Day that precedes the Last Judgment 
after which is the Eternal State, or Seventy times seven 
thousand, and seven hundred thousands of thousands, 
the law of the 7 ruling without cessation, on to, and 
into, and unto, and over, in ever-recurring and ever- 
increasing cycles of time, eternal, rolling forever and 
ever, world without end, never to end forevermore! 
And to show how exact and literal God’s time is, as 
well as symbolical, each of these Sevens ends in a 
“Rest” appropriate to each,a Day of measured duration. 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 345 


The first brings the Weekly Sabbath, the second brings 
Passover, the third brings Pentecost, the fourth brings 
the Feast of Tabernacles, the fifth brings the Land- 
Rest, the sixth brings Jubilee, the seventh brings 
Judah’s rest from Exile, the eighth brings Israel’s rest 
from the final Antichrist and Gentile power, and the 
ninth brings, not only Israel’s, but the World’s, rest 
from the wars, calamities, plagues and wiles, of Satan, 
and unrestrained dominion of sin, and sore temptation, 
by which God’s saints are tried and tormented in the 
present age, and in place of which they then enjoy the 
undisturbed communion, light, and life, and love, of 
God in Jesus Christ. Lztera/, from first to last, is every 
measure of time, every Season, Epoch and Age; hteral 
as the Clock’s tick, the Sun’s brightness, or the Moon’s 
motion, the days multiplying to a Week, the Week to 
a Month, the Month toa Year, the Year to a Period, a 
Time, a Season, Epoch,Age, the different measures all 
expanding, enlarging, and marching, all keeping step 
with the law of the Seven, revolving and swelling to 
reach the last great Octave of praise through ages of 
ages, giving glory to God and the Lamb. This genetic 
and organic relation of all Chronology to the develop- 
ment of the kingdom of God Jdetrays design. There isa 
teleology in it. And the nexus between the 1000 years 
and these different measures of time, all alike ruled by 
the same law, and part of the one scheme so literal every- 
where, makes it impossible to maintain that the “1000 
years mean “Space, “ Victory,’ “Ecumenicity,” and 
“Eternity,” or deny to them a literality as intense as be- 
longs to any of the rest of the prophetic numbers, ruled 
as they are by the same persistent law of the Seven. 
Immersed deep in the truth were those Scripture- 
loving souls who not only saw in the 1000 years a 


8346 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


measure of time, but in the 7 days of Creation, the Form 
and Type for the distribution of all the Times and Ages 
succeeding. And well instructed were they who saw 
in the Sun “a light to rule by day,” and in “the Moon 
a faithful Witness in the heavens” to God’s great pur 

pose of Redemption, both unfailing servants, measuring 
off in axial and orbital rotation those very “Times 
and Seasons” of which all prophecy had spoken, and 
bearing a commission to make “Szgus” of their ex- 
haustion or approach. To “search what time and what 
manner of time’ could not be a matter of indifference to 
such. /Palmonz taught them better. The agi knew 
it. And well were they indoctrinated who saw in heay- 
en’s ordinances an unfailing testimony to God’s faith- 
fulness, and understood the value of that soul-uplifting, 
cheering, word, sent to assure their faltering faith, and 
thrill new courage to their fainting heart ;—‘‘Thus saith 
Jehovah which giveth the Swxz fora light by day, and 
the Ordinances of the J/7oon and Stars for a light by 
night, which divideth the Sea when the Waters thereof 
roar,—/ehovah Zebaoth is His name!—lf those ordi- 
nances depart from before me, saith Jehovah, ¢hen the 
seed of Israel shall cease from being a nation before Me, for- 
ever! If Heaven above can be measured, and the 
foundations of the Earth beneath be explored, then will 
LT cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have done !” 
jer, Xxx1:35-37. No! No! it. cannot bel iiew ae 
will sooner lose his splendor, and the Moon and Stars 
abate their shining, Arcturus and Orion pale away, and 
Mazzaroth and Pleiades be lost forever, the Himalayas 
reel, and Alps go plunging headlong to strike the 
Apennines, than God forget His covenant with Israel, 
or cease to watch the motions of the Spheres, or fail to 
count the number of their revolutions appointed to 


‘- 


THE IDEAL THEORY OF NUMBERS. 347 


bring that 7oth Week when Israel will be saved, and 
Israel’s land redeemed; and that 7th thousand Day, 
whose Sun and Moon with sevenfold light, still circling 
the Sky, will measure again the Kingdom’s years, 
till Sun and Moon exist no more! Solar, Lunar, 
Astral, are God’s Times, so long as Sun, and Moon and 
Stars abide, and governed by them are the 1000 years 
not less than were the 70 years’ Captivity, or were the 
Sevens Seven and Sevens Sixty and Two that brought 
the Birth of Christ. 


D. GENERAL SUMMING UP. 


What we have to say, then, upon the whole question 
is this. When Isaiah said that 65 years should elapse 
till the end of the kingdom of to-tribed Israel, by 
means of Assyrian invasion, Isa. vii:8, he meant literal 
years. That was his “dea.” When Jeremiah foretold 
the 70 years’ Captivity of 2-tribed Israel, by means of 
Chaldean conquest, he meant literal years. That was 
his “‘ zdea.” And when Daniel speaks of the 70 years’ 
Captivity, Dan. 1x:2; of the 70 Sevens decreed upon “All 
Israel” and their City, ix:24; and again, of the 7 and the 62 
weeks, unto Prince Messiah; and again, of the 1 week, 
for the prince to come, the Antichrist, a week divided 
into twice 3% years, or twice 1260 days; and again, of 
the % Week, ix:27; when he speaks of 2300 evening- © 
mornings, vili:14; of a time, times, and dividing of a 
time; or 3% or 1260, again, vil:25 ; xii:7; then of 1290 and 
1335 “days” or 75 days added to the 1260, so bringing 
the blessed time of promised glory in the land; his 
“dea,” or rather, the Angel’s “ zdea,” is, that the literal 
Sabbatic Seven dominates Israel's whole history, ends in a 
Sabbath Jubilee,—the righteous dead and living sharing 
in the joy. And when John speaks of the Smyrna-perse- 


a 


348 SUPPLEMENTARY. DISCOSSIOUNS: 


cution, 10 days, Rev. 11:10; of the “little season” for the 
altar-martyrs, vi:11; of the % hour preparation of the 
Trumpet-Angels, vili:t; of the Scorpion-torment of 5 
months, ix:5 ; of the attitude of the Euphratean horse- | 
men punctual to the very “hour, and day, and month, | 
and year,” ix:15 ; of the “ Days of the Voice” of the 7th 
Angel, x:7; of the 42 months’ down-treading of Jeru- 
salem, and the domination of the Beast, xi:2 ; x1it:5 ; of © 
the 1260 days of the Sackloth-Witnesses, and next, of © 
the Sun-clothed Woman in the wilderness, xi:3; xii:6; of 
the 3% Days of the Witnesses unburied, xi:9, 11; of the 
“time, times, and half a time,” xii:14; and, laseae 
all, of “ the 1000 years”’ of Satan’s Captivity, the Saints’ — 
reign with Christ, and non-deception of the Nations, 
xx:I-7; when, furthermore, he says that, “ ¢z/7” the 1000 
years are fulfilled, *‘ Satan shall be sealed ;” that, “after | 
that he shall be loosed a little season,” xx:3, “ when the 
1000 years are expired,” xx:7 ; and that, “‘ wzz¢z2 the 1000 
years are finished, the rest of the dead live not again,” xx: 
5; his “‘ zdea,” or, rather the Angel’s “zdea,” is, that, ove 
against all other literal and inferior time.distinctions, in 
this prophecy, stand ‘‘ ¢he 1000 years”’ as the one, unique, 
distinguishing, and characteristic number of the Apocalypse, 

six times zzfentionally repeated in the conclusion of the 
Canon ; and that it is the definite interpretation of those 
other indefinite yet, equivalent expressions in the prophets, 
viz., ‘ Multitude of Days,” and“ Many Days,” the special 
measure of the Great Sabbatic Age that next ensues the 
Advent of the Lord! One law governs the construc- 
tion of all these numbers, and the same rule of inter- 
pretation applies to all. They are alike literal and 
symbolical. 


TESTIMONY-OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 349 


Peay Vy EIT, 


BS EIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 


Eom tat the-tooo years are merely “ideal,” 1s cons 
tradicted by the testimony of the Hebrew Doctors both 
before and since the Birth of Christ. The voice of the 
Synagogue is against it, from first to last. Targum, 
Talmud and Midrash, alike, upon the basis of Ps. Ixxii: 
7, have denominated the “ Yemot Meshicah” or “Days of 
Messiah,” as the period following His Advent in glory. 

As to the Duration of the Kingdom the Psalm de- 
elaresmt to be “forever, v,-17, even while the sun ‘en- 
dures, and “long as the moon, throughout all gene- 
fous ey. 5 30 Dantel i:44, and viri4. It isan 
“everlasting kingdom,’ a kingdom having “no end.” 
fea-1x:7, It is the Biblical doctrine everywhere. «In 
the genuine Hebrew Sibyl (the Alexandrian) the same 
continuity and universality are ascribed to the king- 
dom, in the words, ‘‘Then shall He establish a kingdom 
Overeaemen, forever.’ *~- In like manner the Book 
Enoch, yet not without limitation on the other hand, 
teaches the same “eternal” or “olamic” duration, extend- 


* Oracula Sibyllina ad fidem, etc., etc. III. 771, 776, 777, ed. Fried- 
lieb. Leipsic. 1852. This portion of the Oracles, Book III was written 
about B, C, 160, or in Maccabean times, the second century before Christ, 


350 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ing Messiah’s reign to the “beasts of the field and fowls _ 
of heaven.” * The Psalms of Solomon, so full of spirit- 
uality and true devotion, written either in the times of 
the Maccabees, or subsequently in the times of Pompey 
and Ceesar, pray imploringly for the “gathering of elect 
Israel,” the establishment of the kingdom in mercy and 
kindness,” Messiah’s “smiting the earth with the word 
of His mouth forever,” and “the coming of a King to 
subdue the scepters of all the earth, wxto all ages.” + 
The Book of Jubilees, written before the Roman des- 
truction of Jerusalem, emphasizes the same view, pre- 
dicting a “king who shall reign on Mount Zion, from 
eternity to eternity,’ and Israel’s “dominion over the 
whole earth, inheriting the same forever and ever.” t In 
like manner, yet not without qualification, the Apoc- 
alypse of Baruch, written while the Apostle John was 
still living, proclaims the Messianic Kingdom as ‘“Jor- 
ever.’ | This pre-Christian Jewish doctrine of the 
Eternal Duration of Messiah’s Kingdom, was also the 
doctrine of the Jews in the time of Christ. It was 
during the last passover of His life, when “certain 
Greeks came to see Jesus,’ He spoke of the “corn of 
wheat” that falls into the earth and dies in order to 
bring forth much fruit, and predicted the glorious har- 
vest to follow His own crucifixion. “And J, if I be 
lifted up, will draw all men unto me! This He spake, 
signifying what death He should die.” John x1i:20-33. 
The announcement astounded the people, taught, as 
they were, to believe that Messiah’s person and throne 


* Das Buch Henoch. Dillmann’s ed. XC, 30-37. XCI,17. 
+ Der Psalter Salomo, in Hilgenfeld’s ‘‘Messias Judeorum.” VIII, 33- — 
Airs ely 10. : 
¢t Das Buch der Jubilaen. (Dillman’s ed, in Ewald’s Jahrbiicher, etc., 
ge50, 1851.) 41, 22. XAXI, 42, 
|| Baruch. LXXIII, 


~ 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 351 


are eternal, and shook their faith, to no small degree, 
in the Messianic claims of Jesus of Nazareth. They 
replied, promptly, to his words, “We have heard out 
of the law that Messzah abides forever! And how sayest 
thou, the Son of Man must be “Zfted up? Who is this 
pou.or Man?” john x11:34. They appealed to the 
Torah, by which they meant the whole revelation of 
God found in Moses, the Psalms and the Prophets, in 
support of their Jewish faith. Moses, David, Isaiah, 
Daniel, Ezekiel, Zechariah, all declare that Messiah 
“abides!”» When He comes, He comes to stay. When 
He reigns, He reigns “forever.” His throne is eternal. 
His Days are “VYamim YVamim,’ “Olammim Olammim,” 
His Kingdom is “Aznz—Keztz,” ‘‘without end,” and He, 
Price, 1s. “Ae Ad, the “Father of Unto, a. “Zsa 
Olammim,” a “Rock of Ages!” Who is this Son of 
Man, to be lifted up? Surely this Son of Man is not 
“Messiah!’’ So thought the people. Messiah cannot 
be mortal and die like other monarchs, for (Blessed be 
itevye ite asked lite. of -[hee, Jehovah, and Thou 
gavest it Him, even length of days forever and ever.” 
Ps. xxi:gz. There is something in this most serious and 
-earnest paschal debate that not only engages the head, 
but touches the heart.* What intense anxiety! Mes- 
Pee avies. . Liow then can He “die?” >And so 
spake the Rabbis of later times, represented by the 
judgment of Abarbanel, saying, “As respects the future 
kingdom of Messiah our Righteousness, and of which 


* This is a clear illustration of the confusion that arises from not dis- 
criminating the Ages and Ends in prophecy, and the work of Messiah in 
each. The Jews quoted the Scriptures rightly, but interpreted wrongly, not 
seeing two Comings of Christ, and expecting at His First Advent what is 
due only at His Second. ‘The like confusion exists, to-day, in the Gentile 
Church, many expecting at the Second Advent what is due only at the close 
of the ro00 years. Our eschatology is built on this error, 


352 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCOS ON 


~ 


the prophet Daniel informs us, in chapter vii, he says, 
not that Messiah shall ascend from the Sea, but that 
He comes in the clouds of Heaven; that is, His do- 
minion comes not from the princes of earth, or spirits 
beneath the heavens, who rule this world, but comes by 
the special providence of God, and on that account 
shall stand forever /” It was the view of Rabbi Akiva 
whom Rabbi Meir quotes and then adds, ‘‘Of the Cup 
of Life the Holy Blessed God will give the Righteous 
Messiah to drink in the future Age. In the World to 
come the Holy Blessed God has said, I will cause My 
Glory to shine over all Israel, and they shall behold de 
and live forever. Then shall they visibly see it when 
the Lord shall bring again Zion. Our Rabbis, of 
blessed memory, have taught us, that Messiah the Son 
of David, already exists in Paradise, and have a tradi- 
tion that, in the Coming Age, there is no death for the 
righteous.” “Peace be to Him!” exclaimed Rati 
Isaac, “for Psalm xlv speaks of King Messiah of whose 
government there shall be no end, as Isaiah says, but 
He shall reign eternally.” 

All these expressions of the Hebrew faith, as to the 
duration of Messiah’s kingdom, are unlimited, and in 
perfect accord with the uniform teaching of the Scrip- 
tures. 

But, if Messiah’s kingdom is “ Eternal,” it is also 
“ Temporal.” If it is of unmeasured duration, not 
merely indefinite but absolute, transcending all tem- 
poral limits, it is no less a kingdom of measured 
duration, restricted to temporal limits, and bounded by 
great historic events. Ovze in essence, it 1s many in 
forms. Its organic growth, from a seed to a tree, 
necessitates this. And this was the Hebrew faith, no 
less than the previous view. It is the biblical view also. 


eed 


TESTIMONV OF THE SYNAGOGUE... 353 


The word “ Olam,” “ Ever,” does not, of itself, and by 
fixed necessity, always denote the annihilation of time, 
but as frequently, in Hebrew usage, denotes simply 
unbroken continuance up to a special epoch in history, 
or to a certain natural termination. It has a relative 
as well as an absolute sense, a finite as well as an 
infinite length. It means“ Here” as well as “ Beyond,” 
and applies toa kingdom that comes to “an End,” as 
well as to one that has “no End.” For this reason, a 
great World-Period, or Age, is called an “ Olam,” and 
W orld-Periods, or Ages, are called “ Olammim,” and in 
order to express infinite time, the reduplication is used, 
“ Ages of Ages,’ “ Olammim Olammim.” It is therefore 
a false conclusion to say that because the term “ Le 
Olam,” “ Forever,” is applied to the Messianic kingdom, 
therefore the Hebrews contradicted themselves, when 
they assigned to it limits at the same time. Messiah’s 
kingdom is Temporal and also Eternal, and zz doth 
senses, Olamic. The bondsman’s free covenant to serve 
his master lasted “forever,” but that only meant “ till 
Jubilee.” The Levitical economy was established to be 
forever, but that only-meant -till “the time. of- ré 
formation.” The Christian Church ts “forever,” in its 
present form, but that only means “till He comes.” 
True to this view, the Jewish Teachers ever held to a 
Temporal Kingdom of glory on earth, in the “ World to 
Come,” ¢his side the Eternal State in the final New 
Heaven and Earth. Therefore, we read in Fourth 
Ezra (Second Esdras in the English Apocrypha) that 
Messiah’s kingdom is restrained ‘“ to 400 years,”* while 
in the Apocalypse of Baruch—both these productions 
written in the time of the Apostle John,—it is said to 


* ath Ezra, VII. 48. 
23 


354 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


‘stand forever,” yet only “ until the corruptible world 
is ended.”* All this instructs us in the flexible, as well 
as fixed, character of the term “ forever.” 

As to the Precise Duration of this limited kingdom 
of Messiah, various computations exist, based upon a 
literal interpretation of various passages of Scripture, 
and nearly all of them on the principle of exact compen- 
sation for Isracl’s various time of previous distress and 
misery. The one uppermost thought is that the 
kingdom will bring a reward of happiness proportioned 
to that of their past sorrow. If one Rabbi teaches 
differently from another, it is not that the one is to be 
deemed false and the other true, but all are entitled 
to the same religious respect. 

According to Rabbi Eliezar, the time of Messiah’s 
kingdom on earth is lmited to 4o years, that is, it 
equals the period of Israel’s wandering in the Wilder- 
ness. This computation was based upon Ps. xcv:10, 
‘Forty Years long was I grieved with this generation,” 
and upon the prayer in Ps. xc:15, ‘Make us glae 
according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, 
and the years wherein we have seen evil.” We may 
smile, perhaps, at the computation as a puerile conceit, 
but we may not smile at the deep devotion of the pious 
Hebrew, and his deep regard for the Word of God, 
apart from which he cared for no computation. We 
may think that, if the temporal measure of man’s 
reward is that of his transgression, then, not merely 40 
years but immensely more must be Messiah’s Days. 
The Rabbis knew that as well as we. Therefore, R. ~ 
Azaryah held that Messiah’s Days are 70 years. And ~ 
this was based upon the time of Israel’s Captivity. — 


* Baruch, XL; XLVITII. 


TESTIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 355 


Webe xxv te xxix:10-§4. © The«term of Israel's enjoy- 
ment will, at least, equal that of their Exile. 

But R. Dosa said, Messiah’s Days are 400 years; 
and so says 4th Esdras,—a computation based upon 
Gen. xv:13, which defines the times of Israel’s Bond- 
age to the Pharaohs. Messiah’s Kingdom must, at 
least, equal the days of Israel's servitude in Egypt. 
R. Chiyya said, however, that Messiah’s Days are 
boo years, for tt. is written, “As the days of. a_ tree 
shall be the days of my people,” Isa. Ixv:22. Surely 
not less than the life of the Olive, the Sedan and the 
Sycamine shall be the years of God’s redeemed. 
Gentile scorn may curl the lip at these attempts, but 
could Gentile genius do better? Yet R. Eleasar said, 
Messiah’s Days shall be 1000 years, for it is written, 
that when Messiah comes to save Israel the “Day of 
Vengeance is in His heart,” and (Blessed be He!) “the 
Year of His redeemed has come!” Isa. Ixii:4, “a year 
of Remission and Return;” and it is written, “a day 
Paeou.s sieht is 1000 years.” Ps... xciq... Pherefore 
Messiah’s Days will be a Mzllennial Time. And Elias, 
a Doctor of the Second Temple, and the School of 
Elias, both say Messiah’s Kingdom is tooo years for 
“the world’s Ages are distributed upon the type of the 
creative week at whose close is the Sabbatic Rest.” 
“The world shall last 6000 years from its creation, or 
85 Jubilees from the time of Elias, then the Son of 
David will come and begin the World’s Sabbatism.” 
And R. Qatina and R. Jose say the same, adding that 
‘“Messiah’s Days are the Days of Restitution for Israel, 
and are 1000 years.” Israel’s enemies shall be de- 
stroyed, for it is written, “The haughtiness of man shall 
be bowed down, and the Lord alone exalted in that 
Gayeer Isa. iit. And in that day, it is. said, “the 


356 ° SOPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS, ia 


Lord’s House will be exalted above the hills, and all 
nations stream to it, and Jacob will walk in the light of 
the Lord.” Isa. 11:2-5. And R. Moses Maimonides, 
than whom ‘‘from Moses to Moses no greater than 
Moses has lived,” said, “Messiah’s Days will be a long 
time, and it must not be thought strange if the King- 
dom endures some 1000 years.” And R. Bechai, great 
rival of Maimonides, said, ‘“‘When Messiah comes the 
6000 years will have been completed. Then the 7th day 
shall go on, a genuine Sabbath and Eternal Life.” The 
great Rabbi Jehcshua agreed but thought nevertheless 
that Messiah’s Days must be 2000 years, for it is writ- 
ten, “Make us glad according to the Days (plural), 
therefore at least 2000 years or ¢wo days, for 1000 years 
are one day.” Abimi, however, went higher still, say- 
ing, “Messiah’s Days will be 7000 years, for it is written 
of Jerusalem, As a young man marricth a virgin so 
shall thy sons marry thee, and as a Bridegroom re- 
joiceth over the Bride, so shall thy God .rejoice over 
thee,” Isa. 1x1i:5, and the marriage festivity lasts 7 days, 
and with God a day is 1000 years.” Higher than all in 
calculation mounts Rabbi Nachman who says, “ Mes- 
siah’s days are from Noah’s time till now, for it is 
written, ‘This is as the Waters of Noah unto Me, for as 
I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no more 
vo over the earth,so have I sworn I would not be 
wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee.’” Isa. lv:o. The 
principle upon which these different computations were 
made is manifest. It is evermore that God’s compassion 
is, at least, equal to his justice. Onemoreremains. The 
highest estimate of limited time is that of Rabbi Je _ 
huda, who says, ‘‘Messiah’s days are as long as from 
the Creation till now, for it is written, ‘ Bind these 
words for a sign on your hand that your days may be | 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 357 


multiplied in the land as long as the days of Heaven 
peu barns | Deut. xi:21;* 

Such is a specimen of the views of the Great Syn- 
agogue,—views perpetuated by the Maskilim, or 
teachers of the people, and afterward incorporated in 
the Targums, Talmuds, and later Jewish Books, and 
found in the Jewish Apocalypses, and pseudepigraphi- 
cal writings. Hamburger tells us that the smaller 
computations appeared among the earlier, and soon 
gave way to the larger. Wiinsche remarks that a 1000 
years came, at last, to be regarded as the measure of 
the Messianic time. So Gebhardt, saying, “ Eminent 
Rabbis fixed the duration of the Messianic Kingdom 
for 1000 years according to a combination of Isa. Lxin: 
4; Ps. xc:4; (compare II Peter 11:8) in union with the 
reason that, as God created the world in six days, and 
rested on the seventh, so in 6000 years, as in six world- 
days, all will be finished, and the 7th thousand the 
@reaty W.orld-Sabbath. will be celebrated.” ;.. lt 1s 
plain that abstract idealism had nothing to do with 
these calculations. Along with this, also, was de- 
veloped the strange idea of ¢wo Messiahs, grounded in 
the concession that Messiah, indeed, must be mortaz 
like other kings, and ave, if the Scriptures are true; 
nevertheless His Kingdom is ‘“forever;”’ it is “eternal.”’ 
So Rabbi Moses ben Maimon (Maimonides) said: 


* To spare wearisome repetition of reference, I refer here, once for all, 
to the sources whence the foregoing quotations are taken, viz., Eisenmenger, 
Entdecktes Judenthum. II. g12-920. Hamburger, Real Encycl. I. 
775. Weber, System alttest. palest. Theologie, 373. _ Wiinsche, Neue 
Beitrage, etc. 280. Castelli, I1 Messia Secondo gli Ebrai, Appendice, 
297-335. Bertholdt, Christologia Judzeorum, s. v. Messias. Drammond, 
Jewish Messiah, 315-318. Rabbi Isaacs Chizzuk Emuneh, or Munimen 
Fidei. 473. A vast amount of like literature is also found in Lightfoot, 
Scheettgen, his continuator, and Hilgenfeld’s Messias Judzorum. 

+ Gebhardt. Doctr. Apoc. 277. 


358 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“Know this that Messiah must necessarily be mortal 
and ae, but in His stead his son, or uncle, shall reign.” 
And Rabbi Isaac, and others, speak in a like way. 
There is a “Messiah the son of Joseph,” and a “Messiah 
the son of David.” The apparent conflict of Scripture 
was not understood. The Mystery, the Incarnation and 
the Scandal of the Cross were, alike, a “‘stone of Stum- 
bling and rock of offence.” Messiah “/zfted up” on the 
tree, yet “living forever,” they could not understand. 
Yet as to the Doctrine of the Messianic Kingdon, it 
was to be first of all of limited time and extent. All 
the numbers used, and calculations given, are of the 
most /:¢eral character. They speak in realistic terms. 
The idea of “ potentiated ecumenicity”” never entered 
their thought. As little did Moses dream of “po- 
tentiated space and victory” when he wrote the xcth 
Psalm, and said, “A thousand years in Thy sight, are 
but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the 
night,” Ps. xc:4. And as little did Peter dream=oiim 
when writing to the Dispersed of his people, who still 
waited for the fulfilment of Israel’s hope and the com- 
ing of the Lord, “Beloved, forget not this one thing, that 
one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thou- 
sand years as one day,” II Pet. 1:8. The “one day” was 
in Peter’s mind 24 hours. The “1000 years” were alike 


literal. 
B. THE TERMINUS A QUO. 


But the 1ooo years are not only a definite measure 
of time, in Hebrew account; they have also a definite 
_ terminus a guo, marked by definite contemporary events. 
The Commencement of these years is 

(2) Dated from the close of the 70th Week of Daniel 
2x:27; a week divided into two equal parts, or halves, 
3% and 3% years, the first half being the “Beginning of 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 359 


Sorrows,” the second half being the “ Great Tribu- 
lation,” the close of the second the “ End,” the Middle- 
Point of the Week marked by the “Abomination of 
Desolation,” and the whole denominated the “ Dolors 
of Messiah,” or Birth-Pains of the Daughter of Zion 
becoming the Mother of the Manly Child, and the Mes- 
sianic Nation and Kingdom. All this was founded on 
the prophets, and how thoroughly it was verified by our 
Lord in His great eschatological discourse, Winsche 
has shown in the clearest manner. Blind to how 
many things in reference to the First Advent and the 
true Messianic Hope, which our Lord found it neces- 
sary to re-instate, in His conversation with Nicodemus, 
yet both pre and post-Christian Judaism were open-eyed 
as to many other things in reference to the Second Ad- 
vent, but which they deemed due at the One and Only 
Advent they admitted, an Advent for Judgment, Vic- 
tory and Glory. They saw clearly enough that the 
Messianic Days, the Kingdom of the 1000 years, the 
Millennium of their prophets, followed the Great Tribu- 
lation. Attaching that 7oth week, however, to the 69th 
in immediate sequence, and history failing to bring the 
fulfilment, they concluded that Jesus of Nazareth was 
not the Messiah foretold by the prophets. The relation 
of the 7oth weck, however, to the Advent of Messiah 
as a victorious and judging Prince, sent to restore the 
Kingdom. of Israel, they understood. The Jewish lite- 
rature is crowded with evidences of this. In the words 
of Dr. August Wiinsche, whose “Mew Contributions from 
Talmud and Midrash toward the explanation of the Gos- 
pels” is of standard authority, to-day, “The Rabbis 
divided the Year-Week preceding Messiah’s Advent 
into its several days, each day a year, and specified the 
calamities that would mark this sevenfold period, viz., 


360 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


War, Famine, Pestilence, Betrayal, Oblivion of the ~ 
Law, Oppression, Persecution and Death, at whose 
end the Son of David shall come. This they learned 
from the prophetic books. One of the most celebrated 
Baraithas* informs us that, 2 the time when Messiah — 
comes, the House of God shall be a house of shame, the 
teachers of the law shall go begging and none befriend 
them, the Creed of the Sadducee shall prevail, the wts- 
dom of the rulers shall stink, the godly shall be despised, 
aud the faces of the people be like that of the dog, and truth 
shall fatl, and whoever avoids wickedness shall make himself 
a prey.’ * With what emphasis the teachings of Jesus, — 
confirming to them their own interpretation, must have 
fallen.on the ears of His contemporaries! Was it pos- 
sible that the best Jewish teachers of His day, disciples 
of the school of Hillel, a lineal descendant of David and 
grandfather of Gamaliel tlre teacher of Paul, should fail 
to feel the force of His words? It proves to us Gen- 
tiles, at least, that Yews may sometimes be right in their 
interpretation of their own prophets, while Chrzstzan 
Gentiles may sometimes be wrong. The prophets, Hillel, 
Gamaliel, Jesus and John, were all one as to the 7oth 
Week of Daniel. Not once did our Lord, not once did 
His Apostles, ever refer to Daniel ix:27, as accom- 
plished at His First Coming. Among the Rabbis, as 
wellasin Daniel, Christ and John, the 1000 years follow 
tne 7oth Week. a 
(6) Dated from the Overthrow of the fourth prophetic — 
empire, Dan. 11:35, 44, 45. By way of eminence, the x 
“End” of that ten-toed political power was called “The | 
End, Hakkets,” in accordance with Dan. ix:26. It is 4 


* The Baraithas are an independent collection of opinions, traditions p 
and interpretations, external to the Talmud. a 
+ Neue Beitrage, etc. 302. 


~ 


“TESTIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 361 


what the Apocalypse teaches. As for John, so for the 
Rabbis, Rome is the arsenal of Antichrist, the new 
Babylon that must be destroyed if ever Jerusalem 
shines again, and Messiah’s Kingdom comes. As for 
John, so for the Rabbis, the thought of Rome’s becoming 
a throne of Messiah, and Jerusalem a heap of eternal 
rlins, is the. farthest possible: from their -muinds. 
“Roma,” “Duma,” must be destroyed. The proud Co- 
lossus of Gentile supremacy over Israel must be 
broken. According to their twofold division of the 
Ages, based on the prophetic books, and according to 
the predictions concerning Israel and the Gentiles, 
were their constant proverbs, “The Most High did not 
make one age but ¢wo,”’* and “Esau is the End of This 
Age (Olam FHazzch), but Jacob is the Beginning of the 
HWeceia come (Olam Habba). +-. The.“ Time:-of: the 
End,” the “Time to possess the Kingdom,” the “End of 
the Days, the “ End,” «they interpreted: to mean the 
End of the Colossus in Dan. 11:44, the End in Dan. 1x:26, 
the End of the ten-toed Roman Empire. And they 
were right, just where so many Christian interpreters 
are wrong. The Judgment described in Daniel chap- 
ter vil, they regarded not as the last Judgment closing 
the 1000 years or Days of Messiah, but as the Messianic 
Judgment, or part of the “Dolors” preceding those years; 
a Judgment connected with the “Gathering of the Na- 
tions” described by Isaiah, Zephaniah and Zechariah, 
and which Hamburger, Wiinsche, Weber, and Gfroérer 
equate with the Judgment described in Matt. xxv:31-46. 
Eisenmenger quotes Abarbanel at length, as giving the 
view of the Hebrew Doctors, thus, “Rabbi Isaac Abar- 
banel in his book Majene Feshua, folio 48, col. 3, writes, 


* 4 Esdras VI, 25. + 4 Esdras VII, 43. 


362  § SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


—— 


When Daniel Cap. vii:10, says “the Judgment was set, 
and the Books were opened,” he was not describing the 
Resurrection of the dead, for this was explained to him 
afterward in his fourth vision, xi1:1-3. But the Judg- 
ment of which he here speaks, is that punishment with 
which the Holy Blessed God shall visit the “ving Na- 
tions at the time of the Coming of our Messiah, when He 
shall annihilate their sovereignty and restore the Kingdom 
to the Jewish people; for all this 1s conceived of under 
the figure of Judgment. Therefore, he says, ‘Until the 
Ancient-One came and the Judgment was given to the 
Saints of the Most High.’ The word ‘/udgment,’ there- 
fore, is here used in the sense of dominion, or right of 
judging, or ruling, the honor God will give to Israel, 
and is proof that it signifies the Reward of the Jewish 
people, and the Punishment of the Gentiles, their ene- 
mies, according to their works. For this reason it is 
said, ‘The Judgment was set, and the Books were 
opened.’’”’* In hke manner Rabbi Saadias Haggaon, 
chief prince and glory of all Hebrew scholars, wrote 
“Because Israel has rebelled against God, their King- 
dom was taken from them and given to those four mon- 
archies who shall possess the Kingdom in this present 
Age,—(be-Olam-Hazzeh)—and shall lead captive and 
subdue Israel to themselves, even until the Comng 
Age—(ad-Olam-Habba)—when Messiah shall appear and 
reign.’ + Nothing is clearer than that the “xd of the 
fourth Gentile Monarchy,” after its development into its- 
last ten-kingdomed divisons, is the Commencing Date 
of the 1000 years. And here again, the prophets, the 
Rabbis, Christ, Paul and John, all agree. Or, if Edom 


* Eisenm. Entdeckt. Judenthum. II. 965. 
+ See Mede’s Works. 536. 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 263 


be taken, as some take it, to mean Ishmael, or Islam, 
then when Mohammedanism and Rome go down, and 
the central seats of both fall, Israel’s times in the King- 
dom of the 1000 years shall come. 

(c) Dated from the destruction of Armullus, the Last 
Leader and Last Antichrist. All Jewish literature 
speaks of a combined assault upon, and siege of, Jeru- 
salem under the leadership of one Great Enemy of 
Israel, the embodiment of the world’s hatred to God 
and His people. In the pre-Christian Sibylline Oracles, 
Book III, lines 63-74, genuine lines of the old Hebrew 
er Prythrean Sibyl, B. C. 170 or 140, this Leader is 
ealcde “bear.” \In «Baruch he is called. the ““Last 
Leader” in the “Time of Tribulation” which is divided 
into “two parts,” or 3% and 3% in plain allusion to 
Dan. ix:27, and after which “Messiah shall be revealed,” 
ethesixesurrection take place,” “the Kingdom come,” 
and ‘men of all nations be subject to Israel’s King.” * 
In the Targum of Ben Uzziel, on Isa. xi:4, which Paul 
interprets in II Thess. 11:8, the “ Last Leader” is called 
“Armilaus,”’ plainly not derived from ‘“ Romulus,” as 
Weber thinks, but from the Greek “ Aremolaos,” the 
“Desolator of the People,” which again is only another 
name for the ‘“‘Wagzd Habba,” the “Meshomem” or “ Des- 
C77 ihe Dan. 1x:27,.a true“Apollyon. + In the.pre- 
Christian Book Enoch the slaughter of Antichrist and 
his hosts will be appalling, Israel sharing in the ven- 
geance, as Zechariah predicts.{ It is a day when “sin 
is ready for a ceaseless bloodshed,” and ‘when, from 
the blush of morning till sunset, they will kill one an- 
other, and the horse shall walk up to his breast in 
blood, and the chariot sink to its top.” | The point of 


*See Drummond. Jewish Messiah. 121-129. + Ibid. 
¢ Book Enoch XC, 17-109. Plibide x © PX. 15.-°C.° 3: 


364 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


contact here with the fearful Armageddon and Bozrah 
conflicts, and the last siege of Jerusalem and Valley of 
Jehoshaphat, as pictured by John, are unmistakable. 
Rev. xix:11-21; xiv:19, 20. Compare Deut. xxxii:39-43; 
Joel i11:13, 14; Zech. xui:1-9. Here, again, the prophets, 
the Rabbis, Christ and John are all one. The Psalms 
of Solomon, written a half century before Christ, speak 
of “the Word of Messiah’s mouth as the weapon in that 
day.” * The 4th Esdras pictures the Jewish triumph 
which it ascribes to Messiah as the “Lion of Judah, ”% 
and “standing on the summit of Mount Sion,” destroy- 
ing with flame the “Eagle” that swoops with “wing of 
abomination” upon His people. + In Baruch the “Last | 
Leader” is slain by Messiah Himself on Mount Sion, 
who thereupon in the End-Time erects “a dominion 
that shall never be destroyed.” { He who delivered 
Israel from Pharaoh, Sennacherib, and Antiochus, will 
deliver also from Israel’s last oppressor. The “Last 
Leader” of the Gentile force against Israel perishes 
under a Messianic judgment, and then the Days of 
Messiah, the 1000 years, begin. 

(2) Dated from the Resurrection of the Faithful dead. 
False, in every way, is the modern assertion, by many, 
that the Pentateuch does not teach the resurreetion of 
the body, and the Prophets only a political and civil 
resurrection of Israel, or that the notion of a literal res- - 
urrection of the body as held by the Prophets of the 
Captivity, by the Rabbis, and by Christ and His 
Apostles, was derived from the Persian eschatology. 
In the admirable words of Hofmann, “There never was 
a time when faith in a Redeemer to come existed apart 


* Pealapal. Vil, 25-27, 37,36, 
+ 4th Esdras. » XII, 6-11. 
¢ Baruch XXXV-XL, 


PESLINMON VO ORPSTHICSYNAGOGOL. 365 


from this Hope, nor has there been a time in history 
when this Hope could have made its appearance or 
first entrance later than the Furst Promise in Eden. 
Wherever the knowledge of death by sin went among 
the descendants of Adam, the knowledge of redemption 
from death by sin went by necessity also, involving the 
resurrection of the body.” * These words are golden. 
False the assertion that the Rabbis herein followed 
Heathen ideas. Later Parsism, misapprehending the 
Hebrew doctrine, and borrowing from it, taught 1n- 
deed a resurrection of the body, yet only at the time of 
the final re-creation of the Cosmos. Buddhism taught 
a resurrection, yet only as a soul-absorption, at death, 
into the absolute being whence it sprang. Mosaism, 
in opposition to both, taught the Resurrection of the 
righteous at the Coming of Messiah, the covenant Re- 
deemer of “Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,” and their be- 
lieving seed, and taught it in connection with the gift 
of Canaan to the three great stem-fathers of the Hebrew 
race, personally; and Targum, Talmud and Midrash 
perpetually assert and emphasize the same. The Mid- 
dle-Age Hebrew Doctors differed, indeed, as to the 
precise meaning of the expression “at that time’ in 
Dan. xui:1-3.. Maimonides on Isa. Ixvi:5, Abarbanel on 
Isa. xvili:3, and others, like Saadias, Kimchi and Aben- 
Ezra, put the time of the resurrection of the righteous 
at the Advent of Messiah for victory and glory, as in 
Isa. xxviI-9; xxvi:I9. On the other hand, Bechai, 
Naphtah, the Book Enoch Hammelek, and others, put 
it at the “End of the Days,” meaning thereby the close 
of the Messianic Days of glory on earth, the close of 
the 1000 years. Perplexity existed, and great debate 


* Schriftbeweis. III, 490. 


366 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


arose as to whether the ““Heathen” should rise in the 
resurrection, or only “Israel,” and whether all or only 
part of Israel should rise, and, if so, when? it was, in 
fact, a pre and fost-millennialist discussion, and embar- 
rassed greatly by the fact that only oxe Advent of Mes- 
siah was admitted. The truth came to light, the Last 
Resurrection, however, being assigned, not to Messiah, 
but to God the Father. The great body of Jewish 
scholars decided for the resurrection of the righteous 
at the Advent of Messiah, to establish the 1000 years’ 
Kingdom And herein again, so far as this point goes, ~ 
they were right, and vastly superior to a thousand 
modern Gentile commentators. They agreed with the 
prophets, and by consequence their doctrine is that of 
the New Testament, also, as Meyer, Olshausen, Stier, 
Bertholdt, Weber, Wiinsche, and others, have triumph- 
antly shown. There is no better or clearer statement, 
anywhere, of the Rabbinical Doctrine as to the resur- 
rection than is found in Hamburger. Summing up the 
results of his searching investigation, he says, ‘‘Accord- 
ing to my judgment the Talmud Doctrine of the resur- 
rection is that of a resurrection of the body occurring 
at ¢wo different times; first for the righteous at Mes- 
siah’s Advent, and then, afterward, a long time, at a 
General Judgment.” Two Ends are asserted here, the 
one a relative End at the Coming of Messiah to assume 
and enter on His Kingdom at the close of this present 
Age, the other, after that, the final, absolute End at the 
close of the Messianic Days, or 1000 years, when the 
Kingdom passes into Eternity. It looks immensely 
like Paul’s view and mode of expression in I Cor. xv: 
23-28. To object to it as “Fewzsh,” is an ad captandum 
appeal to an ambiguous phrase, prejudice and igno. 
rance, and ought to be repelled. The prophets, the 


LESLTIMONV OF, LHEASYNAGOGUE. Ot 


— i _ 


Rabbis, Paul and John are in perfect harmony here, 
on this point. Hamburger continues: ‘The Talmud 
speaks sometimes of the one, sometimes of the other, 
resurrection, and it is not to be wondered that this dif- 
ference easily led to different conceptions. Even in the 
Gospels the resurrection to General Judgment is dis- 
tinguished from that at the Advent of Messiah, this 
latter being only for the righteous, as in | Cor. xv:24, 
and Rev. xx:5. It is the Resurrection out from the dead 
and not the resurrection of al/ the dead. We give the 
sum of Jewish thought. Some teachers say that after 
a battle with Gog and Magog the dead shall arise. 
Others say, against these, that Gog and Magog, the 
Days of Messiah and the Resurrection-Time for the 
righteous are to be distinguished. The Gathering of 
the Outcasts will occur Jéefore the MResurrection. 
Again, the Gathering of the Outcasts will precede the 
Resurrection from the dead. So the Midrash on Psal. 
cxlvi:2, ‘The Eternal builds Jerusalem, gathers the 
Outcasts, heals the broken in heart, and binds their 
wounds;’ (1) the Building, (2) the Gathering, (3) the 
Refreshing, (4) the Resurrection. And with these 
views agree the Talmudic representation of the olt- 
mentioned “Olam Habba’ or “World to Come,” a period 
of time after the resurrection of the righteous, and for 
the Risen ones. So Maimonides, Alphasi, Tract San- 
hedrin 92, Pirke of Rabbi Eliezar, 34, and the Pales- 
tinian doctrine, all make the resurrection from the dead, 
Dan. xi1:2, ‘at that time,’ to be at Messiah’s Coming 
prior to the Messianic Days and World to come. The 
doctrine of the Jewish Teachers is two resurrections at 
different times. So Rabbis, Saadias, Kimchi, Maimo- 
nides, Mannaseh ben Israel, Abarbanel, Nachmanides, 


368 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Chasdai, Albo, Abuhab, Chiyya, Eliezer, etc., etc.” * 
This is sufficiently clear. In Rabbinic terms the Res- 
urrection out from (Min) the dead, is called “ Techiyyath 
Tsadikim,” “the Making alive of the Righteous,” or 
“Techiyyath Hammethim,” the “Making alive of the dead,” 
and differs from the “Amdath Hammethim” or mere 
“ Standing up of the Dead,’ which has no reference 
whatever to “life” that is eternal. The former expres- 
sion, derived from the verb to ‘“‘dve,” to “make alive,” 
denotes a resurrection in which the sharers of it partic- 
ipate in the new life of the reunited body and soul, and © 
the continuous existence of the risen herein, to die no 
more. The latter expression, derived from the verb to 
“stand,” denotes simply, and in general, a resurrection 
of the dead, without regard to eternal life, or specially 
a resurrection to Judgment and the Second Death. 
For him who ozly “stands” before God, there is no 
“making alive,” no rising to a new and eternal life. The 
body may live again, but not the soul. It is dead. The 
“Making alive from the dead” is the “First Resur- 
rection.” The Standing up of the dead is either specially 
the “Second Resurrection,” or a general expression in- 
different in itself to the destiny of the two classes who 
arise. All goes to show how the Hebrew scholars, ° 
studying their own prophets, regarded the Resurrec- 
tions as ¢wo, and occurring at different times, the first 
at Messiah’s Coming, the second at the End of the 
Messianic Days; in short, ¢wo Resurrections, and ‘zo 
Judgments, with the 1000 years, the “Many Days” of 
Isaiah and Ezekiel, and the “Third Day” of Hosea, 
lying in between. In the words of Hamburger, again, 
“Among the Hebrew Doctors the propositions which 


* Hamburger. Real, Encyc. fur Bibel u. Talmud. Theil I, 1052, — 
etc.; etc. 


TESTIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. 369 


assert the resurrection of a// mankind, employ the ex- 
pression ‘stand,’ and refer to the last resurrection at 
the final Judgment of the World, while those which 
assert that the rzghtcous alone share the resurrection, em- 
ploy the different expression ‘Make alive.’” * This is 
important and reconciles the whole dispute among the 
Rabbis, as to Who rise in the resurrection. Those who 
Ue not rise inthe “ First Resurrection,’ Dan. xii:2; are 
called by the Rabbis, as by the earliest Hebrew teachers 
of the Synagogue, “Shear Hammethim,” the “Rest of the 
Dead,” which is, beyond all controversy, the source of 
John’s expression “The Rest of the Dead lived not until 
the 1000 years were finished,” Rev. xx:5, 1. e., came not 
to dodily life; a resurrection which he further qualifies 
by saying that he saw the dead “sand” before God and 
come into judgment; a resurrection to the “Second 
Wea, sev. Xx-12, 14, And “this atthe’ close of the 
1000 years. 

We know, therefore, what the Rabbis mean when 
they say,—employing the word “ Techzyyath,’—that 
“the Resurrection,” i. e. the “ making alive,’ “ belongs 
alone to Israel,” i. e. to the faithful dead, raised at 
Messiah’s coming; a resurrection extended to all pros- 
elytes who trust in Israel’s Redeemer. And this was 
not, as Oehler inadvertently remarks, only “individual 
Opinion, ’+ but was, and is, as Weber shows, in his 
System of the Old Palestinian theology, ‘‘ ot an tndt- 
vidual opinion, but general doctrine.’t And Professor 
Castelli confirms the same, giving, as the result of his 
own study of the question, these words, “ The Gentiles 


= Ubid.< 1055. Note. 
+ Oehler, Art. Messias in Herzog R. Encyc. IX 439. 
t Weber, Syst. alt synag. paleest. Theol. 372. 


24 


370 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


are not, in general, excluded from this blessedness.’* 
» Nothing is better established than that the Rabbis and 
John alike, even as the Old Testament Prophets, and 
Christ, and all His Apostles, make the resurrection ou 
Jrom the dead a terminus a quo for the 1000 years. 

Precisely as Paul gets his Greek preposition “ek,” 
“out from,’ from the Hebrew “min,” “ out from,” in 
Dan. xii:2, and from the Jewish belief of his time, so 
John gets his “ Zocpoz ton nekron,” “ the Rest of the Dead,” 
from the “Shear Hammethim” of the Synagogue, 
founded on Dan. xii:2, and Isa. xxvi:14, 19, compared 
with Isa. xxiv:22. The Millennial Age /ollows the 
Second Advent and the Resurrection of the faithful 
dead. 

(e) Dated from Israel's Repentance. The 1000 years 
cannot begin till Israel is ready to say “ Hosanna,” and 
hail their own Messiah. The doctrine of the Rabbis, 
here, is that of all the prophets, of Christ Himself, of 
Peter in Acts i1:19-21, of Paul in Rom. x1:26, and is one 
of the two great burdens of John’s Apocalypse. The 
proverb of the Rabbis is universal, ‘When Israel repents 
Messiah comes!” In Hosea, the beautiful picture of 
the Days of Messiah and Israel’s blessedness in the 
kingdom, Hos. xiv:5-9 follows Israel’s repentance, Hos. 
xiv:I—4, and is accompanied by Israel’s resurrection, 
Hos. vi:2; xui:14, which occurs at Messiah’s Coming. 
So, in Zechariah, the day of Israel’s penitential sorrow 
under the outpoured Spirit of Grace, Zech. xii:10-14, 
precedes, most closely, the Coming of Messiah to the — 
Mount of Olives with His Holy Angels, Zech. xiv:4, — 
and the Days of Messiah’s glorious kingdom on earth, _ 
Zech. xiv:g. It 1s the common docrine of the prophets, 


1“ 


* Castelli, Il Messia, etc., Append. 297-355. 


TESTIMNONAIC OK THES VNAGOGUE: Su 


and the Rabbis well know it. The Targum of Jon- 
athan ben Uzziel, on Micah iv:8, written before the 
destruction of Jerusalem, and based upon traditional 
interpretation, assigns Israel’s sins toward Messiah as 
the reason of His absence and concealment from them, 
and the hindrance to the coming of the kingdom. 
“And Thou, Messiah of Israel, who art hidden on 
account of the sins of the congregation of Zion, to Thee 
the kingdom shall come.” ‘“ The coming of Messiah,” 
said David Kimchi, awaits Israel's “ 7eshuvah, Repent- 
ance. Messiah will not come while I[srael is impen- 
itent.” Rabbi Levi said, in commenting on Solomon’s 
Song, “If Israel shall ¢ruly repent, but for one day, 
then shall they be redeemed, and the Son of David shall 
suddenly come.” So Rabbi Bechai in his commentary 
on the Five Books of Moses: “ The future redemption 
of Israel is conditioned on Israel’s 7eshuvah. For so 
did our forefathers, in their deliverance from Egypt, 
repent and pray to God who heard their prayer in 
their time of trouble and then the deliverer, Moses, 
came.” Impressive are the words of the Tract San- 
hedrin folio 97, column 2: “ All our calculations as to 
when Messiah shall come have failed, and the whole 
matter of His coming depends on nothing else than our 
Teshuvah and works meet for this.” And the words of 
Rabbi Jehoshua, so full of truth, are not less striking, 
“Where there is no Repentance there 1s no Redemp- 
tion. The Holy Blessed God will yet subject Israel to 
a prince whose decrees will be cruel like the counsel of 
Haman. Then Israel will repent, Messiah will come to 
them, and they will be godly.’’* 

How firmly this doctrine was believed the opening 


* Eisenmenger, Entdekt, Jud. II, 672,073; 


oie SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of the 16th century testifies. How sincerely, blindly 
and disastrously it was acted upon, not dreaming that 
a true Repentance involved the believing recognition 
of Jesus of Nazareth as the already Heaven-Sent Mes- 
siah, history has chronicled. Messiah, once already 
come, despised, rejected and crucified by His own 
nation, will not appear to them so long as He is re- 
garded as a Pretender to the throne, a Blasphemer and 
Impostor. In A. D. 1500,in the very throes of the Ref- 
ormation, Rabbi Asher Lemle,a German Jew, sought 
in Europe to call Israel to Repentance, proclaiming 
that when Israel repents Messiah comes and restores 
the Kingdom, proving, as well he might, his doctrine 
from the Scriptures. “He was,” says Eisenmenger, “a 
John the Baptist in the wilderness, but without the 
Baptist’s witness to the Son of Mary.” His mission 
awoke the Jews of Austria and of Italy, then groaning 
under Church-Pessecution. Like the Ninevites of old, 
they fasted, they wept, they prayed. Vain worship! 
Messiah did zot come! Lemle died in despair, and A. 
D. 1500 is known in Jewish history as the “Vazn Repen- 
tance Year.’ Disastrous was the moral effect. Doubly 
disastrous to the truth, for it sought to build Chiliasm 
on the denial of the Messiahship of Jesus!  Israel’s 
pretended Repentance was nothing but a public act of 
unbelief and repetition of their forefathers’ crime! The © 
“Blindness in part” had not been removed. The teach- 
ing of the prophets, the doctrine of the Talmud, the 
best tradition of the Jews, all was remanded to the lum- 
ber-room of dead superstition, and the Hope of the 
Coming of Messiah exchanged for sullen submission to 
a hard and relentless fate for which no cure could be 
found. The apostasy deepened. And yet, in spite of 
all such vain and blind experiments, scarce better than 


ae 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 393 


the work of Theudas, Judas, or Bar-Cochba, the 
doctrine still remains, and is insisted on among the 
orthodox, to this day. The one great postulate, the 
one thine needful for Messiah’s Coming, is Israel’s 
“Teshuvah.” Not till then do the 1000 years begin. 
Impossible that the Millennial Age should lie this side 
the pre-condition of its possibility! And here, again, 
the Rabbis and Peter are at one, while they differ as to 
“Fesus’ whom heaven has received till Israel repents, 
believing on His name. Acts ii:1g-21. 

(f) Dated from the Advent of Messiah in the Clouds of 
Fleaven, not to die, but live eternally. Perplexing was 
the problem here, some saying Messiah must ae, in- 
venting two Messiahs; others holding that Messiah 
shall never die, but /zve eternally. But, in any case, the 
Kingdom comes only with the King from Heaven. 
Says Rabbi Bechai, “The Son of David, the Messiah, 
shall never die, but live eternally, when He comes. The 
6oooth year from the creation shall have passed away. 
Then the 7oooth shall go on,a genuine Sabbath and 
Eternal Life. Of Messiah, King David (Peace be to 
Him!) has said, ‘He asked Life of Thee, and Thou 
gavest to Him length of days, forever and ever!’” Ps, 
xxi:5. Perplexing! Insoluble! the problem of Messiah’s 
coming “¢o die,” and coming “xot to dte,’—one Advent 
alone admitted! The solution of the perplexity we 
know. Messiah comes at His First Advent, ‘‘to die,”— 
but also to rise again and live forever. He comes at 
His Second Advent “ot to die,’—but to fave and reign 
eternally. The one point clear, amid all the confusion, 
is that the Advent of Messiah to set up His King- 
dom of glory on earth and live and reign eternally, //zs 
Advent in the Clouds, ts the pre-condition of the 1000 
years. 


374 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


And it is the faith of orthodox Israel, to-day, waiting 
for Messiah’s Coming, though still blind to Messiah 
already come. It is one of the “Roots of Faith,” “Shar- 
shei Emunah,” taught in all their schools, “ We believe 
in the Coming of Messiah,” “Szyath Mashiah,” the Re- 
deemer, at the time appointed, known to God alone, 
and who will gather the dispersed of Israel, and restore 
the government to the House of David. We believe 
in the Resurrection from the dead, “ Techzyyath Hamme- 
thim.’ We live in hope and expectation of the Com- 
ing of Messiah and our Return to our fatherland, the 
land of Judah. As long as our Goel is not come, we 
are bound to seek the peace, and obey the government of 
the nation under which we live,as directed by the prophet, 
Jer. xxix:7, and “abide,” waiting for David our King. 
Hos. i1i:5, 6.* “ We believe that the real reward and 
punishment will be distributed only at the period of the 
Life Eternal in the World to come, Olam Habba, the 
World of the Messiah. For the wicked there is no 
rest, no part in the World to Come. Dead, they shall 
not rise. Their memory is consigned to darkness. 
Isa. xxvi:14.”t How touching the Confession! What 
blindness! What light! The eyes see out of ob- 
scurity! ‘“ Blindness in part!” But one thing shines 
with noon-day effulgence: Wo Millennial time for Israel, 
no 1000 years of blessedness and glory, before the Second 
Advent and the Resurrection from the dead, 

Such the doctrine of the Rabbis, such the faith of 
the Synagogue, as to the Terminus a quo, or starting- 
point of the 1000 years, or Days of Messiah in triumph 


* It was this religious sentiment that made the Jews loyal to the Na- 
tional government during the ‘‘Great Rebellion” of the Southern States 1861- 
1865. 

+ Sharshei Emunah (Elements of Faith), London, A. M. 5575. S, 
I. Cohen, pp. 6, 10, 11, 37, 51, 53. 


TESTIMONY OF THE SVNAGOGUE. 375 


and glory on earth. The Millennial Age dates from 
(a) the Close of Daniel’s 7oth Week, (0) the Overthrow 
of the 4th prophetic empire, (c) the Destruction of 
Antichrist, (d) the Resurrection of the faithful dead, (e) 
Israel’s Repentance, (f) the Coming of Messiah in vic- 
tory and glory. These are the pre-conditions of it, and 
the prophets, the Rabbis, Christ and his Apostles, are 
one in reference to this one great fact, viz., there zs no 
Millennium until Christ comes in the clouds of Heaven. 


C. “THE TERMINUS: AD QUEM. 


But the doctrine of the Rabbis fixes also a terminus 
ad quem, or closing point, to the 1000 years. Here 
again, however, perplexity arises as to “Gog and 
Magog,” even as among ourselves. From the reading 
of Ezekiel, chapters xxxvill and xxxix, it would seem 
that Gog is gre-millennial, and only after Gog’s destruc- 
tion, does God pour His Spirit on the House of Israel, 
bring again Jacob’s captivity, and hide His face no 
more from them. Ezek. xxxix:29. On the other hand, 
from the reading of chapter xxxvii, and chapter 
XXXV111:8-12, 14, it is clearer still that Gog’s invasion and 
destruction are “many days after” Israel has been re- 
born by the Spirit, gathered out from the nations, 
politically restored and established as a converted peo- 
ple, and dwelling safely in their land, unprotected by 
the means of warfare and defence, and trusting in God 
alone. Naturally enough, two views exist among the 
Rabbis, as among the Christians, in reference to the 
relation of Gog and Magog to the 1000 years, or Mes- 
sianic Days of earthly glory. Weber gives them both. 

(1). The war-march of Gog and Magog is defore the 
beginning of the Days of Messiah on earth. The “d/any 
Days” xxxviii:8, “after”? which Gog invades, and is 


oN . i i 
376 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. a 


judged, are regarded by a few as the days intervening © 
between the prophet Ezekiel and the Advent of Mes- 
siah. The “ End of the Days”’ is interpreted to mean 
the End of this present Age, Olam Hazzeh, Israel having 
been regathered to their land, and having dwelt safely 
there a ‘long time.” Sothe Jerusalem Targum says. 
“ At the End of the days Gog and Magog shall march 
against Jerusalem, but perish by the hand of Messiah. 
They shall gather the Kings and Princes of the earth, 
and muster all nations for slaughter in the land 
of Israel, and in war against the Exiles returned 
to their home, but already, long time, the judg- 
ment has been prepared for them, and they shall 
be consumed by flame from the Throne of Divine 
Glory, and their dead bodies be given as a banquet to 
the birds of prey. Then the dead of Israel shall arise 
and receive the Reward of Works. All the nations are 
annihilated.”* This conception of the relation of Gog 
and Magog to the 1000 years is a mixture of error and 
truth. That the Northern powers from beyond the 
Caucasus, aided by the extra-Palestinian nations hostile 
to Israel’s re-possession of their land, will dispute that 
possession, before the 1000 years, or at the time of © 
Israel’s Home-Coming, is most likely, and apparently 
predicted. But that the nations will be annihilated and 
Israel alone survive, no people remaining for the Mes- 
sianic sway, is in face of the whole Palestinian the- 
ology, and of the prophecy itself. Hence, 

(2). The view that Gog’s march and destruction 
occur at the End of the Messianic Days of Israel's glory in 
the Kingdom restored to Israel, that is, at the End of the 
1000 years, the “Many Days” of xxxviii:8. And such 


*Weber Syst. alt. pal. Theol. 370, 371. 


TESTIMONY OF THE SYNAGOGUE. By; 


is the force of the combined prophetic representation 
in Israel, Daniel, and Ezekiel. Such the special force 
of the strangely sudden, isolated, internosed, and en- 
tirely independent prediction of the post-millennial vis- 
itation of Gog. “After Many Days thou shalt be visited.” 
Ezek. xxxvui:8. And thisis the terminus ad quem of the 
1000 years, the judgment on Gog which expands itself 
into the Last Judgment, when the Messianic kingdom 
is surrendered to “ God,” who appears on the scene for 
the final assize. 

It is true that among the Rabbis there is much con- 
fusion, even as among Christians, confounding Gog 
with the Antichrist, and the End of the present Age with 
the End of the “ Many Days,” or 1000 years, and ascrib- 
ing to Messianic activity what the prophecy ascribes 
directly to the activity of God Himself. Hence the 
words of the Jerusalem Targum on Numb. xi:27, “In 
the End of the Days, Gog, Magog, and their armies, 
shall march against Jerusalem, and fall by the hand of 
Messiah Himself, and seven years of days shall the 
children of Israel make fuel of their weapons.” Still it 
remains a fact that the Rabbis distinguished between 
Antichrist’s destruction at the Beginning of the 1000 
_years, and Gog’s destruction at the Azd of the same. 
“In Wayytkra Rabba, c. xxx,” says Weber, “ the time of 
Messiah and of Gog and Magog, are so discriminated 
that the latter follows the former, and not the contrary. 
The march, and judgment on Gog, are at the End of 
the Messianic Age. In Tanchuma, Sophetim, 19, it is 
clearly stated that the Nations of the earth shall 
first serve, as tributary States, the King Messiah. 
Then, at last, an Evil Spirit shall possess and impel 
them (Ezek. xxxvili:10) (Satan let loose), and they shall 
rebel against Messiah, and be destroyed by him. This 


378 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


is the last decisive conflict between Israel and the 
World of Nations.”* The mixture here, of accurac y 
and inaccuracy is evident, and yet the doctrine remains 
that Gog’s destruction is at the close of the Messianic 
Days or 1000 years, whose commencing date is the 
Advent of Messiah for Israel’s final deliverance and 
redemption. Such the ¢ermznus ad quem of the Millen- 
nial Age. The Apocalypse of John has shed upon the: 
whole subject, as Professor Volck remarks, “a clea — 
and indubitable light.”+ Fixing his eyes upon the re-— 
lation of Israel restored, to the strangely isolated pre- _ 
diction concerning Gog, in Ezek. xxxvili:8, John has 
cleared up the hele perplexity and asserted a fost. | 
millennial judgment on Gog as the transition step from — 
the Messianic earthly aeahits of glory into the Eternal - 
State. From first to last, all is literal. 


* Weber. Syst. alt. pal. Theol. 370. 
+ Volck. Der Chiliasmus. 74. 


2 4 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 379 


lewa and Bi bee 


Paar OC AY SEAOr ON: 


It must be clear now, from the testimony borne by 
the Hebrew Doctors to the Designation of the 1000 
years as the Messianic Days following the Advent of 
Messiah in His glory, that these years were not re- 
garded as mere symbolism void of all chronological 
value, but were esteemed as a real measure of definite 
time. Gentile prejudice, construing Israel as_ the 
“Church” and negating the facts foretold concerning 
Israel, may indeed condemn, as “Jewish,” the judg- 
ment of the Synagogue, among whose first lights were 
a Haggai, Zechariah, Joshua, Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehe- 
miah and Malachi, and repudiate, as “Judaizing,” the lit- 
eral exposition of both Old and New Testament proph- 
ecy in reference to the coming Kingdom and Israel’s 
place therein. It is with some the customary criticism. 
The fact remains, however, that the best Biblical inter- 
preters, of our time, do not share the prejudice that 
blinds to truth because a “Jewish” mouth has spoken it. 
As Gentiles are not always true, Jews are not always 
false, and a study of the manner of their labor on the 
Word of God, and their reverence for it, might, not- 
withstanding “Jewish fables,” ‘‘ Rabbinical conceits,” 


380 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


and even their unbelief in Jesus, instruct some Gentiles 
in an attitude toward that word with which they are 
not now apparently familiar. “Blindness in part” has 
happened to some of ws in reference to the Second 
Coming of Messiah, even as “Blindness in part” has 
happened to many of ¢hem in reference to the First 
Coming. And yet the day may not be distant when 
literal Israel will be for us a light as brilliant on the 
Eleventh chapter of John’s Apocalypse, as they are now 
upon the Eleventh chapter of Paul's letter to the Romans / 
Even now, “Biblical Theology,” “Old Testament Theol- 
ogy,’ “New Testament Theology,” “Prophetic Theol- 
ogy,” all cut loose from medizeval trammels, have vin- 
dicated for ‘/svacl’ a hundred texts in eschatology, 
which the Church rejected a half century ago. It may 
be but “a little while’ and Jew and Gentile shall see 
eye to eye, the Watchmen singing together when the 
Lord “brings again Zion.” 


A. STHE JEWISH BOOK, 


From what has been cited it must be plain to every 
one, just what is the relation of that “/ezw7sh Book,” the 
Apocalypse of John, written A. D. 96, to the post-Bib-. 
lical and pre-Christian Apocalypses of the “Jews,” and 
what the relation of the “Jewish 1000 years” in John to 
those Apocalypses and to the “Jewish” prophets on 
which they were founded, as also the “Jewish-Christian 
Church” of which John was no unimportant part. The 
discovered ‘‘J/udaism” of the book, and what it has in 
common with the “Jewish” faith defore the time of 
Christ, and with Jewish writings after Christ, may lead 
us to do what the Laodicean Council did in ancient 
times ;—extrude the Apocalypse altogether from the 
Canon. Recent efforts in this direction are not want- 


THE APOCALYPSE. OF JOHN. dsl 


ing. The offense of the book-is said to be that it is 
“saturated with ideas born upon the soil of Palestine ante- 
rior to the publication of the gospel,’* as though this 
were not the case also with Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, 
Zechariah, almost every prophetic book of the Old 
Testament, and even the words of the Baptist ! 

In face of the 7Zztle of the Apocalypse which de- 
clares that its author is “God,” that He gave it by an 
“Angel’ to John, and that John, as “His Servant,” bore 
record of this “7estimony of Sesus Christ,” Rev. 1:1, 2; 
and in face of the Curse on “any man’’ who shall “add 
fo Or ‘take from, its content, alter, amend, or redact 
ieany way, Rev. xxii:18, to, certain critics, “blinking,” 
as Lord Bacon would say, “in the noon-day, but clear- 
sighted in the night of their own notions,” have dis- 
covered that it is either a patch-work by several, or at 
least, two, different uninspired authors, jointed and 
redacted, now by a Jew, and then by a Christian, either 
in different parts of the first, or of the first and second 
centuries, a non-Christian Jewish original vamped to 
a Judaizing-Christian copy, the whole fit only to be 
ranked with books like Henoch, Baruch, Esdras and 
the Sibylline Oracles. To such base uses have Vilter, 
Vischer, Schirer, Dillman, like others before them, 
come! The conclusion that “the 1000 years” are a 
Mere, conceit because derived from a “Jewish, non- 
Christian source,” and have been retained by a “Judaiz- 
ing Christian redactor” of the carnal sort, is as dis- 
creditable to the reputation of the critics, as the meth- 
ods by which they reached it, are offensive even to the 
Higher criticism itself. ¢ 


b 


* “Tl est tout saturé d’idees nees sur le sol de la Palestine anterieurement 
ala predication de |’Evangile.” Reuss. L’ Apocalypse. Introd. p. 32. 

{+ One of the best things Prof. Briggs has done of late, is to repel this 
last assault upon the Apocalypse in a masterly way. His words will be 


382 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Not less strong is the case against the Idealists, 
whose favorite maxim is that “Symbolical numbers 
don’t count,” and that “the 1000 years” mean only 
“ecumenical potentiality,” “ potentiated ecumenicity,” 
and “spatial victory!” By such device, dissolving 
the 1000 years out of time, in order to make the Apoc- 
alypse canonical, the genius of the Greek Fathers is 
rivaled, who adopted the “ system of allegories in order 
to escape Chiliasm,’ and so retain, as apostolic, a book 
which otherwise must be rejected, but which resulted 
in the expulsion of the book altogether!* Let the 
Idealism charm as it may, the historic evidence is com- 


welcomed by all. ‘“‘/tzs a premature birth. Nothing justifies the theory. 
The dependence of the Apocalypse upon the Gospels of Matthew and Luke, 
is clear. The eschatological discourse of Jesus is to our mind the Key to 
the Apocalypse. The Apocalypse of John and the discourse of Jesus agree 
in their pure and genuine development of Old Testament Prophecy, and 
contain none of those conceits and extravagances that is characteristic of 
the extra-canonical Apocalypses. We freely admit all that is common be- 
tween the Jewish Apocalypses and the Apocalypse of John. There is so 
much of genuine prophecy in them, we are not surprised that the early 
Christians esteemed many of them as inspired;—apocalypses that followed 
the lines drawn by the Old Testament prophets, and thus reached many of 
the same conclusions that we find in the inspired prophecy of the New 
Testament. Grant all that can fairly be demanded in this regard, yet we 
find a simplicity, a power, a grandeur, in the Apocalypse of John, which 
exalts it above all the extra-canonical pseudepigraphs and zanges zt with the 
Old Testament Prophets, the discourses of Jesus, and the Epistles of Peter and 
Paul. tis the work of a Jew saturated with Old Testament Prophecy, 
under the guidance of the word of Jesus and the inspiration of God. Lt is 
the climax of the prophecy of the Old and New Testaments.” Speaking of 
the Zizzle, Rev. i:t, and the Curse, xxii:18, 19, and the theory of two 
authors, one a Jew. the other a Christian, one writing A. D. 66, the other 
A. D. 95, he says impressively: *‘ If these belonged to the /ewish original 
the Christian editor would hardly have vecained this curse upon Aimself for 
everything Ze had done! If they belonged to the CAzistian author, what 
sort of a conscience must he have had ¢o pronounce a curse upon any one else 
who should do with #zs work precisely what he himself had done with the 
work of another?” This is a Damascus blade, and every lover of God’s 
word will feel grateful to Dr. Briggs for this problem handed over to the 
Higher Critics to digest. Presbyterian Review, Jan, 1858, pp. 1Og-115. 

* “Tes Peres grecs a se jeter dans le systémedes allegories pour échapper 
au Chiliasme, et qui out fini par leur faire éliminer tout-a-fait |’ Apocalypse 
du Canon de !eurs E’glises.” Reuss. Ibid. 36, 


a 


THE APOCALVPSE-OF JOHN, 383 


plete that no such view beguiled the mind of John, 
when the Patmos Visions passed before him. The 
1000 years were but one of several time-designations, 
already current in the speech of Jews and Gentzles, both, 
not as symbols only, but as terms of literal time. They 
were the “ Vemot Meshicah,” the “ Days of Messtah,” in 
which “the righteous flourish,” the one designation 
chosen, above all others, to represent that period. 
“They mean,” says Keim, “the Golden Days of the 
terrestrial kingdom of Messiah between two Resurrec- 
tions and two Judgments; an introductory and 
transient kind of stage, in the sovereign reign and rule 
of God; a view which with noteworthy Christian altera- 
tions was followed even in the Apocalypse of John, and by 
St. Paul, a period in any case to continue until the 
final New Heaven and Earth.”* Professor Drummond’s 
statement is loose and insufficient, when he says that 
“this particular view was adopted by the writer of the 
Revelation, and, which, no doubt, under his influence, 
became the prevailing opinion among those Christians 
who looked forward to a temporal reign of Christ.’’+ 
For, first of all, it was not a “particular” view in any 
sense, but the common faith of the flower of the whole 
pre-Christian Jewish and Jewish-Christian, as well as 
Gentile-Christian, Churches. Therefore, it was not 
“adopted” by John as a special theory, nor was the 
Christian Church indebted to John’s “ zzfluence”’ for its 
prevalence, nor was it a mere “‘ ofznzon,” but a chief 
article of faith. Nor, once more, were “those Chris- 
tians’’ who held it any others than whom Justin calls 
Ementminded, or “ orthodox,” people; in short, the 


* Keim. Jesu von Nazara. IV. 295-297. 
+ Jewish Messiah, 318, 


384 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


apostolic and sub-apostolic Church, for 300 years. 
Nor did they believe that the reign of Christ was 
merely “a temporal reign,” but like the great Hillel, 
ancestor of the great Gamaliel, Paul’s teacher, held 
that Messiah’s kingdom 1s ‘‘ zot only for a time, but for- 
’ Far better are the words of Ewald, who says, 
‘“The hope of the 1000 years’ kingdom add not originate 
with John. Plainly enough, it appears as an already 
given, steadfast, and of itself a well-grounded, matter of 
expectation, familiar and needing only to be named, some- 
thing peculiar and of the highest tmportance, and woven as 
closely as possible into the whole web of the Christian life.” * 
That statement is just to the facts of history and the 
circumstances of the times. And, with this, Gebhardt 
agrees, saying, “The 1ooo years with John, were ¢he 
grand interval between this present age, and the final one, 
an interval in which Christ would reign in an earthly 
kingdom, at least within the sphere of the Roman empire, 
and upon its ruins, the reformed earthly Jerusalem being 
‘ats central point where the kingdom of the glorified would 
begin in a narrowcr compass, and as the prelude of the 
universal and eternal glory.’+ “The Seer,” says Bleek, 
“found this term, the 1000 years, already extant, and 
assumed that his readers were not unacquainted with tt. 
He retained an expression already tn common use.”’t+ And 
Dorner recognizes the facts of history, when he says, 
“A point undoubtedly common to both Jewish and Christian 
apocalyptics, 1s the period of blessedness on earth, called the 
1000 years.’’ | 

Not, therefore, from any such schematism as 10x10 


CUEr. 


* Ewald, Johan. Schriften, II. 324. 

+ Gebhardt, Doct. of Apoc. 284. 

t Bleek, Einleit. N. T. 225. 

|| Dorner, Person of Christ, Div, I, vol. I. 409. 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 385 


x 10—1000 did the doctrine of the 1000 years spring in 
the Christian Church. Nor to such schematism was 
the pre-Christian Jewish faith indebted. Believing 
Jews and Gentiles found it in the Psalms and in the 
Prophets as they “searched What Time and what Man- 
ner of Time” Messiah’s Kingdom should be, and to ¢hat 
period of time, when reaching it at the close of the 7- 
sealed scroll, or end of the 7oth week, ke gave the name, 
already known, “the 1000 years.’ No voice told him 
the number. Every Jew and Christian, every reader 
of both Testaments, knew full well that the 1000 years 
of Messianic glory in the Kingdom on earth, could not, 
and did not, lie in the Times of the Gentiles, or Times 
of the Beast, or Times of Israel’s national rejection of 
Messiah, but followed the Beast’s destruction, Anti- 
christ’s overthrow,-.Israel’s conversion. It is one of 
the lights of the Apocalypse thrown back upon the 
Old Testament predictions. It proves that the period 
following the 7cth week, when the six things named in 
Dan. ix:24, shall be realized to Israel and Jerusalem, 
and the Kingdom following the overthrow of the Co- 
lossus, Dan. 11:44, 45, and following the destruction of the 
Little Horn, Dan. vii:27, and the Blessed Time /ollow- 
ang the resurrection from the dead, Dan. x1i:2, are one 
and the same period, “the 1000 years” of John; and that 
this was the faith of the pre-Christian Jewish Church, 
and of the Christian Church itself, and was sealed, as 
true, by John, under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost. 
As De Wette observes, ‘The faith of the Church was 
grounded in the Great Time-Reckoning of 7000 years for 
the World’s course.’ What John did was, not to imi- 
tate the Babylonians, or the Persians, or build his 
Apocalypse upon the pre-Christian Jewish writings, or 
on any “fancies” of the Rabbis, or on the “Platonic 


386 SUPPLEMENTARY. DISCUSSIONS. 


Cycle,” but, guided by the Spirit, sketch our present 


Age, in the 7 Epistles to the Asiatic Churches, coming — 


down to the proper End-Time in their Philadelphian 


and Laodicean states, then open out the And-Time 


itself in a series of gorgeous symbols, covering the whole 
time from John to the End, and unveiling the End 
itself with the utmost particularity. That the Scarlet 
Woman, who rides the Beast, is not merely Rome 
Pagan, but Rome Ecclesiastical, and all her daughter 
hierarchies, and, last of all, apostate Christendom, 
“Babylon the Great,” there is no doubt. The symbols 
of “ Beast” and “Woman” cover all, first by “applica- 
tion,” last by “interpretation.” So also as to Israel. 
The Sun-Clothed Woman is the Jewish Church, first 
pre-Christian as the Mother of Christ, next Christian, 
then in her eschatological attire, the Mother of the 
“Manly Child,” the Jewish-Christian “ Nation” of the 
End-Time, born to rule the nations, the glory of God 
risen upon her, her light being come. The complex 
symbol embraces all, and looks to the End. What John 
does is to give an Apocalypse of Israel’s future and 
glory in the Kingdom, and of the glory of the Nations 
after Messianic Judgment; and, last of all, portray the 
final glory of Israel, the Church, the Nations in the 
New Heaven and Earth, following the Final Resur- 


rection and Judgment at the end of the 1000 years. 


What was true in the pre-Christian Jewish faith, he has 
preserved, as matter of necessity, not because the Rab- 
bis said it, but because the Prophets taught it, and our 
Lord foretold it, and the Spirit moved it. What was 
false, he rejected. \n the words of Boehmer, “Whether 
in the 1000 years we find a reference to Ps. xc:4, or to 
the Jewish theology, or to the distribution of the 
world’s course into 7 periods of a 1000 years each, as in 


eS 

= 

MIS 

var cae 
geet 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 387 


the Book Enoch, is a matter of indifference. In the 
latter case our Book would only prove how well it ap- 
propriated the popular faith without adhering to its errors. 
It winnowed the chaff from the wheat. And, for this 
reason, we are compelled to regard the ¢wo Resur- 
rections, between which lic the 1000 years, and the ¢wo 
phases of the Kingdom of God begun by them, as a 
doctrine which, like almost all others, finds its more 
definite expression now in the last time. The eschatol- 
ogy of the Evangelist and Seer is one.”* So Wiinsche, 


-with the admirable word appended, “The Apocalypse of 


John settled what the Jews disputed, as to the Duration 
of the Messtanic earthly Kingdom.” + 

Such is the “/ewzsh” origin of our Christian faith, 
the faith of the early Jewish-Christian Church, the faith 
of the pre-Christian Rabbis, the faith of God’s people 
under the Old Covenant, the faith of the Prophets, a 
Chiliastic faith in a Chiliastic Kingdom of glory on 
earth, the Vestibule and Prelude to Eternal Blessed- 
ness. Itis from Jerome, chiefly, we get the sounding 
reproach that, to believe in a Pre-Millennial Coming of 
the Lord Jesus to restore Israel, raise His sleeping 
saints and establish on earth His Kingdom as _ pre- 
dicted by the prophets, is to “‘/udazze.” And it goes 
sounding through Protestantism to-day, as it has gone 
sounding, since Jerome’s time, through the medizval 
Church, and is sounding in the modern Church, still. 

No better answer has been made, none more 
deserved, to‘this assault upon the martyr-faith than is 
given in the earnest words of that eloquent and learned 
man, Dr. S. R. Maitland, published thirty years ago. 


* Boehmer. Offenb. Johann. 277, 
+ Wiinsche. Neue Beitrage. 204. 


399 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Speaking of this accusation of “/udaizing,” he says, 
“St. Jerome tells us repeatedly, and with mistaken 
triumph, that to hold the Millennial doctrine was to 
‘Judaize. This is certainly true, and one is glad to 
have St. Jerome’s testimony to the fact. It is im- 
portant. Papias, Irenzeus, Justin, Tertullian and others, 
were only maintaining that interpretation of the prophecies 
which had been, as far as I can find, always held in the 
Church of God before the incarnation of Christ, and they 
did this at a period when, I believe, nobody maintained, 
or even had heard of any adverse opinion, or any other 
interpretation of those passages of Scripture on which 
they grounded their opinion. To be sure, this was 
‘Judaising, and so it was to adopt exclusively ‘the 
Jewish doctrine of a Messiah,’ and the sacred books of 
the ‘Jewish Church.’ Jamunot frightened at words, and 
do not see that I am to renounce a doctrine because it has 
been held by the Jews! And | must again say that lam 
glad of such unexceptional testimony as Jerome’s to 
the fact that this was the judgment of the ‘/ewzsh 
Church, and that to hold the Millennarian doctrine was 
to ‘ Judaize!’ It would not be difficult to show that 
this ancient doctrine of the Church was maintained, 
and unimpugned, wzzt7l the Christian Church began to 
HEATHENIZE.”* Well said, and—a splendid ten-strike, 
righteous as it is brilliant! true! And the conclusion 
that the Apocalypse, in its doctrine of ¢wo Resur- 
rections, and ¢wo Judgments, separated by “the 1000 
years,” cannot be understood apart from a recognition 
of the pre-Christian Jewish faith which holds the same 
doctrine, 1s, to-day the verdict of all scholars, not 


* Eruivin, by Rev. S. R. Maitland, D. D.> F. BR. S. 22.8) 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 389 


swayed by a false spiritualizing interpretation which 
negates and destroys the prophetic word itself. * 


Pooh CATION OF THE 1000 YEARS TO; THE APOCALYPSE, 
AND CHIE EY. TO. LT SsSECONDLPART, 


To understand the relation of the 1000 years to. the 
whole and chiefly to the Second Part of the Apocalypse 


is indispensable to a clear conception of the folly that 


would date these years from any point this side the 
End of the 7zoth Week, and the Second Coming of 
Christ. And here, we must take our time, and move 
cautiously. The General Division of the Apocalypse 
into ¢wo chief parts, analagous to the division of the 
Book of Isaiah, and the Book of Daniel, is already well 
understood, viz.: Chapters I—XI, and chapters XII— 
XXII. The relation of chapters I—III to the Juterval 
between Jerusalem’s destruction, A. D. 70, and the 
porn Week in Daniel; Dan. ix:26, 27, viz: that they 
cover this Interval, disclosed on its Christian side as the 
Church-Period of development, is also understood. This 
brings us at once to the Azd-Time, or 7oth Week. 
Just as the 7 Trumpets preside over the 7 vials which 
issue from the 7th trumpet, and just.as the 7 Seals pre- 
side over the 7 trumpets’ which issue from the 7th 


*See Bertholdt. Christol. Judzeorum, 35, 39, 176, 203. Eisenmenger, 
Eutdekt, Judenthum. II, go1, 902. Lightfoot. Works XI. 296. Ham- 
burger. R. Encyc. I. 1052. ‘Weber. altsyag. pal. Theol. 354. Wiinsche, 
Neue Beitrage, 204, 3+1—3°6. Meyer, Komm, Luke xiv:14 15. Joh. 
v:29. Acts xxiv:15. Olshausen, Matt. xxii:29, 30; xxiv:31.. John v:24-29. 
uke xiv-r2-14,. 1 Cor. xv:23 Acts xxiv:15. Stier, Reden J , Matt. 
Xxli:Ig Joh. v:26. Luke xiv:12-14. Matt. xaii:30. Rothe, Dogmatik 
II 73. foot. Tholuck. Joh. v:29. Heb. vi:2. Rom. viii:18-22. Van Oors- 
terzee, N. T. Theol. 53. Immer, Hermen. 294. John Owen; Epistle to 
HebrewsI 541, Carter. Mede, Works 472, 776, 892, S93. Bleek, Lect, 
Apoc, 78, 79, 336. Stuart Apoc. I. 177. Elliott, Horae Apoc. IV. 147, 150, 
165, 183, 155. Note. Besides scores of others, as Delitzsch, Schmid, Volck, 
Grau, Godet, Luthardt, etc., ete. 


390 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


seal, so the 7 Epistles to the Churches preside over the 
7 Seals which issue from the 7th Epistle, Christ presid- 
ing over all, Rev. 1:12-16. 

This is the organic connection. All the Epistles have 
an eschatological reference. The Laodicean condition 
of the Church, boasting of its wealth, culture and great- 
ness, while yet Christ is exiled to the outside, and stand- 
ing in its influence over against the Philadelphian 
Church oppressed, yet faithful, small, yet looking for the 
Coming of the Lord, and to whom the promise of Israel's 
conversion 7s made, and preservation in the Great Tribula- 
tzon, is the full picture of the state of things in Christen- 
dom at the close of the INTERVAL, Rev. 111:7-21. Wecome, 
therefore, tothe 7oth Week, the End-Time following the 
Interval, and, naturally enough, just what we should ex- 
pect, we find, viz., that John’s Apocalypse ts the resump- 
tion and development of what Daniel and the Prophets 
have all spoken concerning this 70th week and tts con- 
nection with Israew’s Restoration at the Coming of the Lord. 
It is impossible to break this organic unity of Old and 
New Testament prophecy. Therefore chapters iv and 
v arc General Introdution to the Opening of the Seals 
and the solemn events of the End-Time. And, now, 
we come to chapters vi-xi:14, which cover the first 3%, 
or 1260 days, of the 7oth Weck, and include the 6 Seals 
and the 6 Trumpets. In vi we have the 6 Seals, and 
clear announcement in the.6th that “YomM YEHOVAH” 
or “DAY OF THE LORD” has come.* The time is fear 


*« The 6th Seal is the crucial point in Apocalyptic exegesis.” —A Jord. 
“‘The 6th Seal determines for us the whole question as to the entering of 


the Day of the Lord.”—L/uicott. ‘‘ The 4 Seals are acommon ground, the 
5th rises out of them and is the special crisis, the 6th is the culmination, the 
7th is the consummation.”-——Zanve. ‘The first four Seals are the pre-signs 


of the Advent as pictured by our Lord in His Prophecy on the Mount of 
Olives, Matt. xxiv:6, etc., the 5th follows in strict connection with Matt. 
xxiv:g; the 6th represents especially the Signs which mark the immediate 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 391 


fulindeed! “Who sha be able to stand?” Mal. iii:2; 
Rey. vi:17. In answer to this question and for com- 
fort to all believers whose hope is fixed on the victory 


of God’s Kingdom, we get the Doudle Episode in chap- 


ter vii, between the 6th and 7th Seals, viz., (1) the 144,- 
ooo sealed out of Israel, and (2) the Countless Company, 
who, as martyrs of Jesus, have entered into the peace 
of God; the one a transaction on earth, the other a 
Scene. in heaven. What it teaches us is that,1n- that 
awful day of tribulation to come upon the earth, blessed 
are (1) the sealed out of Israel and all other servants of 
God who shall survive to see the Advent, and blessed 
are (2) the martyrs of Jesus, whether Jews or Gentiles, 
who fallinthat hour! Their appearance in heaven is 
the pledge of their rising again. In that day some will 
find a shelter under the Eagle-Wings of God, others 
will pass through blood to glory. Like their fellow- 
martyrs, in all ages, they have been cruelly “ judged 
according to men in the flesh, but live according to 
God, in the spirit.” I Pet. iv:6. Partakers of Christ’s 
sufferings, they are expectants of -His glory, waiting 
fomeres inst Iesurrection.” Rev. xx4- It is om. thei 


entrance of the Day of Judgment.” —/isterdieck. ‘*‘ The 4 Seals are the 
ground of the 5th; the 5th precipitates the 6th which is the cv7szs, the 7th is 
the nexus (Kvoten-ort) of the preceding with the following series.” —/wald. 
““The 4 Seals bring the ‘ Beginning of Sorrows,’ the 5th brings the ‘Great 
Tribulation,’ the 6th brings the sidereal and telluric signs of Judgment, or 
beginning of the proper ‘End.’”—A“efoth. ‘‘In these 6 visions of the 
Seals we have just the same phenomena presented as in Matt. xxiv:6-9.”’— 
Gebhardt. ‘The 6th Seal brings thetelluric and sidereal commotions which 
announce the last revolution and shaking of heaven, earth, sea, dry land and . 
piehnations: sekieb, x11:26; Hage. ii:6; Isa, xxxiv:4; Matt. xxiv:29:... It 
points backward and forward; backward, being the answer to the martyr-cry 
under the 5th*Seal; forward driving affrighted men to cry Who shall be able 
to stand? It opens the Day of Judgment.”—AXddel. *‘As Rev. vi:4, 6-8, 
‘Sword, Famine, Pestilence,’ answer to Matt, xxiv:6, 7; and Rev. vi:9, 19, 
answers to Matt. xxiv:9,10, so Rev. vi:12-17, the Szxthk Seal, answers to 
Matt. xxiv:29,30, the. Portents of the immediate presence of the Day of the 
Lord: not the Advent itself. until the Judgments invoked by the martyrs, 


392 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


graves the Holy Benediction falls, “Blessed are the 
dead who die in the Lord, from henceforth,” Rev. xiv: 
13. The Countless Company before the throne, are 
the souls of those whose altar moan, “How long, O 
Lord ?”’ we hear in the 5th Seal. 

And now, in chapters vill and ix we find ourselves 
under the 6 Trumpet-Judgments, let loose against 
apostatizing Christendom still impenitent notwithstand- 
ing the “Day of the Lord” has become a fact observ- 
able by all! This shows the power of sin! “Sudden 
destruction” seems to avail nothing! Signs in heaven 
and earth are mocked at by the wicked! As it was in 
the days of Noah,so now. Even under new judgments 
redoubling with intensity, judgments of “fire and 
blood,” the world still perseveres to blaspheme! Such 
is the condition of the “Chrzstzan State’ at the close of 
the first 332 years, or 1260 days, of the 7oths Week 
Rev. 1x:20, 21. What ts now left for God to do, accord- 
ing to His plan for the development of His Kingdom 
on earth, when Europe, Asia, Africa and America are 


descend on the earth, etc., etc. <A/ver these the Lord shall come. Matt. 
xxivth chapter forms a complete parallel to the 6 Seals, not only in events, 
but inorder. The S¢xth Seal brings us close to the Advent. Before the 
final blow is inflicted, the ‘elect’ must be gathered, chapter vii.” —/azsset. 
“All after the 6th Seal ts but the expansion of that Seal, and develop- 
ment of the Day of the Lord. The Trumpets and the Vials, and Char- 
acters described, from chapter vi—xix, only unfold the events that belong to 
the Day of the Lord.”—Volck. ‘‘ The 6th Seal gives the general view of 
the cosmic scenes of the Last Day.”—Luthardt. ‘‘The Day of the Lord is 
here. The overthrow of Babylon, the Destruction of Antichrist, the Judg- 
ment of the Nations, all cosmic, civil, political and religious events, are in- 
volved here, only to be further unfolded under the Trumpets and the Vials.” 
—Hofmann. “Every allegorizing interpretation is excluded from Lyra to 
Ifengstenberg. The 6th Seal brings the literal ‘End,’ the ‘Day of the 
Lord.’ The Pavousia is not described “ere, but is descriked further on. 
The view of Hofmann, Bengel, Diisterdieck, Ebrard, that this is the real 
‘End’ foretold in oar Lord’s prediction in Matthew xxiv:14, is the alone 
correct view. The éotal -nd is here, the Dissolution which, in the further 
development of the prophecy, parts itself into two great Acts, Rev. xix:11- 
21 and Rey. xx:1I-15. Between these are the 1000 years,” —Christiani, 


Wines 


7 RS es or ana 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 393 


in such condition—what can He do according to the 
sure word of prophecy ;—in this closing period 
of the Times of the Gentiles, this acme of aposta- 
tizing Christendom ;—éuz call Israel into the field by 
f[is almighty grace, resume Flis covenant mercy to that 
people, let the apostasy ripen to its head, Satan do his best, 
then put in the sickle, tread the winepress, and reveal Him- 
self from Heaven? \tisall! There ts nothing else to be 
done! The Crisis has come! The middle of the 7oth 
Week has been reached ! : 
And this is precisely what we have in the Second 
marie 01 Ythe. Apocalypse: At the close: of the. 6th 
Trumpet, and as if to prevent all misunderstanding, 
and to throw our minds back, once more, upon the 
page of Daniel, Chapter XT hangs out the Programme, 
presents, in full-view, the entire 70th week, in order to 
prepare the way for the scenes of the last 3% years, or 
1260 days of Antichrist’s supreme power. Nowhere is 
light more clear than just here, if only we had the eyes 
to see it. The darkest Chapter in all the Apocalypse, 
the place where more Apocalyptic systems have been 
wrecked than anywhere else, becomes the brightest, if 
only we dismiss our pre-conceptions of what it is, or 
ought to be, and, with finger on the text, follow its 
sun-clear, unclouded statements. /¢ zzterprets itself ! 
What we have is (1) Zhe first 3% years tor the Two 
Witnesses, during which they exercise their reforming 
and prophetic activity, vs. 3,7; (2) The Middle of the 
Week when the Antichrist, the Beast from the pit, 
Daniel’s Nagid, ix:27, and Horn, vi:25, slays the 
witnesses v.7; (3). Zhe Second 3% years, or the Great 
Tribulation and down-treading of the holy city by the 


’ Beast and his armies, v. 2, also x1ii:5 ; the period during 


which the sunclothed Woman, or Jewish-Christian 


~~ bee! -— ~ . a | Sell tw “Se ph (fen ~ 
394. SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 
Church of the End-Time, formed under the preaching 3 


of the Witnesses, is sheltered by the Eagle-Wings of 
God, xi1:6,14, and the “ Dragon makes war with the 
remnant of her seed,” entering into the Antichrist him- 
self, and giving him his ‘“ power, seat, and great 
authority,” xil:go, 17; xui:1,2. (4) Then comes the End 
of the 70th Week, in the sounding of the 7th Trumpet, 
bringing the /udgment on the raging Nations, the des- 
truction of the Destroyer, the Resurrection of the dead, 
the Reward of the righteous, and the revoking of 
the Suspension of God’s covenant relations with Israel, 
symbolized in the opening of the Temple and the vision of - 
the “ Ark of the Covenant,” vs. 15-19. It is at the 
middle-point of the week, that the scenes of the Resur- 
rection and Ascension of the Witnesses in presence of — - 
Israel who denied the Resurrection of Christ, because 
unseen, are openly displayed, amid attending earthquake, 
as both Ezekiel and Zechariah foretold should occur in 
this Valley of Vision, at this time, and that one-tenth 
part of the City falls, and 7,000 perish, and the rest, af- 
frighted, “give glory to God,” the sign of their conver- 
sion. The entire Programme of the whole Foth Week ts 
here, the whole Conflict between Christ and Antichrist, 
presented in outline, first of all, in order to pass, 
intelligently, to the last 3% years, which embrace 
the entire time coming after, from Chapter XII to XX.* 4 
It is the merit of Kliefoth,—apart from his idealizing : 
interpretation,—that he has demonstrated the existence 


* The period of 314 years’ downtreading of Jerusalem, xi:2, is eschato- 
logical, and different from the period of downtreading in Luke xxi:24, which 
is church-historical, ‘This, in Rev. xi:2, dates from the Slaughter of the 
Witnesses, and is the Jast half of the 7oth Week. ‘That, in Luke xxi:24, 
dates from the Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus A. D. 70, and is the whole 
Interval between the 69th and 7oth Weeks. Nothing can be more ridiculous 
than to identify the 3% here, with the Interval there, and Jo0¢h, with the 
1000 years, as Professor Milligan and others, have done. 


ei 
q 
“4 
7 
4 
» 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 395 


of the 7oth Week here, and identified in the clearest 
manner, the “ Beast,” of John, with the “ Magid,” or 
“prince that shall come,” in Daniel ix:27, the “ Little 
florn,” of Dan. vii:25, and by so many others, most 
clearly by Cloter, as the Mock-Messiah, the Rider in 
the first apocalyptic seal, at the opening of the Week. 
And it is the merit of Prof. Kiibel, in the light, not only 
of older writers on Eschatology, but of more recent 
ones within the last decade, Burger, Ittamaier, Bis- 
ping:and others, that he asserts, as incontrovertible, 
“the presence of the 7oth Week, in two halves of 3% 
years each, in which we see the downtreading of the 
holy city, and the Jewish-Christian Church as the 
proper Church of the End-Time; the end announced 
under the 7th Trumpet.’* The whole tragedy of the 
day of the Lord is here, the Apostasy of Christendom, 
the Antichrist, the preaching of the Witnesses, their 
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, the Conversion 
of Israel, the Anger of the Nations, the Revelation of 
the Wrath of God, the World-Judgment, the Resur- 
rection from the Dead, the Reward of the righteous, and 
the Destruction of the Destroyer, all that is subsequent 
in the Apocalypse, down to Chapter XX, being but the 
exhibition of the Dramatrs Persone, the Beast, the 
Dragon, the Two Women, the 144,000, the Cithara- 
Players on the sea, Christ, and the development of these 
great events under the sounding of the 7th Trumpet, 
or pouring of the 7 Vials, during the last 3% years, or 
1260 days. 

It is important to observe that this introductory 
scene of Chapter XI, while in part retrospective, is also 
proleptic. It anticipates. Just as between the 6th and 


* Dr. Ktibel, in Strack-ZGckler. Offenbar. 364. (1888). 


396 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


7th Seals we had the Double Episode of Chapter VII, 
so here, between the 6th and 7th Trumpets, we have 
the Double Episode of Chapters X and XI, the one the 
viston of the Ratinbow-Crowned Angel, the other the 
vision of Jerusalem during the 7oth Week. As, inthe Old 
Testament, the Lord Himself is personated by an 
Angel, called the “‘ Angel of the Covenant,” “ Malakh 
Habberith,’ so is He personated here, in Chapter X, 
when coming to resume relations with lost Israel, and 
fulfil on Daniel’s people and city, the Herad of Blessing 
in Dan. ix:24. Chapter XT 1s a vision of Jerusalem of the 
Future and the scenes there occurring, when the Jewrtsh- 


Christian Church 1s formed, amtd wonders mightier than 


at Sinaz or at Pentecost. Like Joshua and Zerubbabel, 
the Restorers of the Jewish Church and State, after the 
Return from Babylonian Exile, so do these Two Wit- 
nesses, the two “Sons of oil, standing before the Lord 
of the whole earth,” labor for the Restoration of Israel 
returned from a longer captivity. Like Moses and 
Elias, one the founder of the Jewish nation, the other 
the reformer in the hour of its apostasy, so do these 
two Witnesses labor to the same end. Like John the 
Baptist preaching repentance and faith in the Messiah 
about to be revealed in His /zvst Coming, so do these 
Witnesses preach repentance and faith, and prepare 
Israel for the Second Coming of Messiah. And, as op- 
position met all these men of God, in their work of 
reform and_ re-establishment, so do Antichrist and 
Satan exert their utmost endeavor to defeat, in this 
crisis, the purpose of God with respect to the chosen 
people, and, if possible, not only prevent the building 
of the Temple and the City, and the establishment o 
the Millennial kingdom, but show to the world that the 
Word of God is a lie. That is the object. It is the 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 397 


old trick and the old tactic, but with augmented 
malignity. What must ever be observed here for our 
interpretation, is that chapters X, XI, XII, are al homo- 
geneous, and that the action or movement of the drama is 
not cyclical, curling back upon the past, repeating the 
same events over again, in new forms, so retrogressing 
to the opening of the Week, but is strictly chronological, 
no regress of time existing in the progress of the 


Drama.* 

Chapters X, XI, XII, are chronologically sequent, 
unsunderable, and have to do with Israel under the 6th 
andeAta-lrumpets.. The)crisis is. present. “The last 
ealhoi the sospel has sone to the Gentiles. The ful 
ness of the Gentiles has come in. Gentile Times 
are expiring. Apostasy has reached its height. The 
masses have rejected the gospel; Genuine Judaism 
longs for Restoration. Apostate Judaism seeks its 


*The ‘‘Cychcal,” or ‘‘ Parallel” theory is the ‘‘ Recapitulation and 
Repetition Theory” of Augustine, holding that the Seals, Trumpets, and 
Vials are Parallel. each series starting from the First Advent and running on 
to the Second ; therefore a ‘‘ Returning to the beginning,” at Chapters viii, 
the Trumpets, xii the Sun-Clothed Woman, xvi the Vials, and xx the 1000 
years; anda ‘‘ Repeating of the same things” in different ways ; ‘‘ otherwise 
and otherwise ;” ‘‘ now this way, then that way;” no chronological succession 
of series possible. Of John, he says, ‘‘ Hadem mutitis modis repetit, ut alia 
atgue alia dicere videatur,’ and again, “‘aliter atguealiter,” So Bede, com- 
menting at Apoc Cap vili, says of the Apostle, ‘‘ Vunce recapitulat ab 
origine,” i, e. here at the Trumpets, he goes back to the beginning. In 
short, the Apostle is like a carpenter planing a board, or a musician drawing 
the musical staff, or a boy skating in a series of concentric circles, the motion 
is ever self-returning, repeating the same things (eadem). The result is 
that at Cap. xii also we are put back to the First Advent, merely because 
the complex symbol of the Woman shows the past and future of the Jewish 
Church, combined, for the sake of unity of representation, and genetic inter- 
pretation. Zhe inference was fatal, In like manner at Cap xx, we are 
forced back to the First Advent. Thatis, the 1C0o years begin with the First 
Advent and run on all the way tothe Second! We have been in the A/72/en- 
nium more than 18 centuries!/! This stupendous error of Augustine, 
coupled with the /igurative interpretation; in short, this Pre-Advent 
Millennialism dominated down to the Reformation. The Symdolism of 
the Apocalypse is indeed cyclical in several places, conspicuously so at 
Cap, xii, but the action, or Dramatic movement, not retiogressive but pro- 


398 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


opportunity to reject Moses and the Prophets and 
follow a new heathenism, under the last Antichrist. 
Lawlessness everywhere prevails. The Nations are 
raging in tumult of the last conflict, and the center of 
the struggle is Jerusalem. So all the prophets picture 
it. Antichrist isin the saddle. The world is now to 
change front, Israel in the lead as ever, sought to be 
destroyed, but yet redeemed. Judah’s lion, Judah’s 
banner, Judah’s tribe, bear the brunt of the final action. 
They become “like David,” and as “the Angel of the 
Lord.” It is the one prophetic picture. To them God 
calls in the darkest hour Christendom ever saw,—the 
Gethsemane, the Calvary of God’s true people, every- 
where,—the time of the Cross in earnest, the time of 
martyrdom! On an “election out of Israel,’ armed by 
his grace, and inspired with a valor all divine, God 
relies. Against them Satan rages. for them Michel 
stands firm. Through them, come “the Kingdom, the 


gressive, or chronological. The 6th Seal opens the Day of the Lord. All 
after that, is simply the development of events, partly contemporaneous, 
partly successive, but in chronological order up to Cap xx. There is One 
Parousia. ‘Vhere is more than One “piphany. The One Parousia covers 
all the Epiphanies. For the sake of distinction, Critics have called the 
Scene in xix:II, etc., the Parousia or Advent. Itis the great “‘Lpiphany of 
the Parousia.” The Cyclic, or Circle-forming Theory (‘‘planetary motion;” 
Grau) is held by Hengstenberg, Ebrard, Hofmann, Luthardt, Thiersch, Bur- 
ger, Steffann, etc., etc,, in connection with the ‘‘Group Theory.” But this is 
not Augustine’s Repetition Theory. On the other hand, the strict Chrono- 
logical is held, yet not without some circling, by Bengel, De Wette, Ewald, 
Bleek, Keuss, Diisterdieck, Koch, Christiani, Volck. Filler, Rinck, Van 
Oosterzee, Nagelsbach, Weber, Ziillig, etc., etc., in connection with the 
** Group- Theory,” also. Kiibel says, properly, that a ‘*‘ Dilemma must be 
rejected.” It is not ‘‘ ether one or the other ;” and Boehmer’s remark is 
correct, ‘‘ There is truth in both views.” In fact, all recent expositors are 
substantially one. There is partial retrogression in the Symbols, but con- 
stant progress in the action. The truth is, the motion is that of Divine 
providence and History. It isthat of Ezekiel’s ‘‘Wheels.” We are riding 
in the Cherubim-Wagon, or “ Merkaba,” of the prophet. Ezek. i:1-28. 
The peta tavra, in John, is always chronological, and is the Achazith 
£lleh of Daniel. Bengel’s word is important: ‘‘ Many separate the natural 
sequence of viii on vii; xi on x; xii on xi; xx on xix, but each case vindicates 
itself.” 


PHI APOCALYRP SE OLSON. 399 


Power, and the Glory.” Our reckoning is clear. We 
know just where we are; even in the Valley of Vision, 
and in the 7oth Weck. We stand precisely where 
Ezekiel stood when he saw the Dry Bones move; 
where Zachariah stood when he foretold the last crisis 
and the splitting of the Mount of Olives ; where Isaiah 
stood when he saw the Enemy invading like a flood, 


-and Israel’s Goel coming to Zion; and where Jeremiah 


and Daniel stood when they predicted Israel’s “time 
of trouble,” and great deliverance. It is a violence to 
God’s word to spiritualize all this away, and refer it to 
the Gentile Church. That the Jews are already in their 
land and city, in large numbers, and even with a Temple 
in process of erection, notwithstanding Lange’s incon- 
siderate word, that such a view is a “ misapprehensive 
literal conception,’* zs “the one grand presupposition of 
the whole Apocalypse,and apart from which we cannot 
understand the Book.’+ What we see here in Chapter 
XI, is the beginning of the last conflict with Antichrist, — 
Israel’s last oppressor, and hater of the Church of God, 
and out of which Israel comes victorious, standing on 
“Mount Zion” with their own Redeemer,—their 
“Goel come.to them., Rev. xiv:i—-5. Rom. xi:26. The 
great Crusius, the greatest theologian of his day, saw 
this in the last century, and decided upon the ground 
of Chapter xi:1, 2 alone, against the perpetuation of 
bloody sacrifices in the future Israelitish Church, as do 
also Delitzsch, Luthardt, Orelli, Smend, Volck, Koch, 
Christiani, and the vast majority on the same and other 
grounds. The Israel of the End-Time is NEw-Born- 
ISRAEL, “ serving God in newness of spirit, and not in 
the oldness of the letter.” The Altar of Burnt-Offering - 


m Langel Rev, 223. 
+ Rinck. Zeichen 131. 


ANO SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


is “cast out’’ with the outer-court where it stood. 
The Vail of the Temple is now unknown to the 
Sanctuary. The Holiest of all and the Holiest Place 
are one. Only the Altar of Incense, the emblem of a 
true spiritual worship, is seen. The true Israel are 
“worshipers” in the “ Maos” where only the priests 
might go, and therefore a priestly spiritual people unto 
Ged. It is also, after patient study, that Gebhardt 
writes, saying, “Jerusalem, the Holy City; omega 
here, the local /crusalem, and is, at the same time, the 
representative of the Jewish people.’ Matt. xxi:5; xx1i1:37. 
John has the future of Israel before him. The action 
in xl:I is symbolic, and imports exemption of the 
measured worshipers, who are Jewish-Christians, from 
destruction, and the exposure of the non-Christian 
Jews, the not-measured, the outer-court, to the treading 
down by the Gentiles. Once more, the Law and the 
Prophecy, in their highest form of personality, Moses 
and Ehas, will personally appear as two witnesses, clothed 
with sackloth, to prepare the Jewish people for the 
coming of the Lord in glory, heralding His approach, 
testifying of Him, and laboring for Him, in word and 
deed. They will publish the gospel to the Jewish Nation 
for their repentance, prophesying 3% years, or 1260 days, 
at whose close Antichrist shall slay them. \n miraculous 
attestation of His servants, God smites Jerusalem, and 
thereby the City and the Jewish people, in the gross, 
finally become converted. If Weiss thinks that “the 
Seer no longer ventures to hope, with Paul, for the 
final general conversion of Israel, but that only a rem- 
nant shall be saved,’ \ think much rather that ancient 
prophecy about the remnant, Isa. 1:9; x:22, 23 ; 1x:27-29, 
is fulfilled in the portion of the Jewish-Christian 
Church intended in Rev. xi:1, while in xi:13 is meant 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 401 


essentially what is predicted in Rom. x1:25-27.”* This 
is manifest, and the best eschatologists admit it. 
Chapters X—XII are undoubtedly connected with scenes in 
Jerusalem during the 3% years testimony of the two 
witnesses, and the formation of the Jewtsh-Christian 
Church. In the words of Rinck, “ The land of Israel 
shall become once more, the theater of great events. Once 
more, Jerusalem shall be the mtiddle-point of the history of 
the kingdom of God on earth, when Gentile times are 
ended. A Sanctuary shall be built, and preserved from 
Gentile profanation. There will be a mighty movement tn 
the valley of dry bones, connected with the return of the 
Jews to thetr fatherland, in the time of the Oth Trumpet. 
And this we have in Chap. XT.”+ This is correct. It is 
the time of wide international wars and Christian 
apostasy, the time of the “grafting in again” of the 
natural branches into their “own olive tree,” the time 
facie Allsisracl’.is saved: Rom, x1:25,20 : the send 
Piemic limes of the Gentiles. - Cap. xii:10, 1s, beyond 
all question, the time of the Conversion of “ All Israel,” 
whose first instalment 1s announced, Cap. x1:13. The 
‘“ Measured-Worshipers,” the ‘“ Sun-clothed Woman,” 
fie Our brethren,, the ‘144,000, and: the  Cithara: 
Players’’ on the glassy sea, all represent /svael of the 
Lind-Time seen under different aspects, and in different 
relations, as the events of the 70th Week are developed. 
ficmimes.ol° Caps.) X_ X11 vis) the time: when. ‘the 
Prophet speaks, then prays, and the Spirit blows, and 
dead Israel awakes; the time when Michael stands firm, 
and Israel is delivered, bringing soon the resurrection 
of the faithful dead ; the time which also brings the fall 


* Gebhardt, Doct. of Apoc. 258-262. 
t+ Rinck. Zeichen v. d. Letzten Zeit, 133. 


26 


402 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of the Colossus, the near destruction of the Antichrist, 
Israel’s “taking root again, blossoming and _ bearing 
fruit ;” the time that brings “tne Kingdom, Power and 
Glory.” It is announced in Cap. xii:10, as “now 
come” by a strong Prolepsis; the 3%2 years or “ short 
time”’ of Satan’s rage, deemed as nothing. 

The vast importance of Chapters x, xi fully excuse 
our protracted explanation, inasmuch as the under- 
standing of these involves the understanding of all. To 
a well-disciplined mind, and skiiled in God’s word, 
nothing is more absolutely certain than that it is the 
literal Israeland the geographical Jerusalem we are here 
dealing with, and that the specific time before us, is 
the woth Week of Daniel. The Angel who lifts his 
hands to heaven and swears,—one foot on the land and 
one on the sea,—in Rev. x:7,—is the Same Person who 
swears, in the same way, in Dan. xi1:7, and Deut. xxxu: 
40, the Creator of earth and sea, and now to assume 
rule over both; no other than ‘““ANI-Hu” (see page 73) 


the “Linen-clothed Man” on the banks of the Tigris,’ 


Dan. x:5, 6; and xii:7 ;-the “One like a Son oi iam 
Rev. i:13-16, Jesus Christ Himself, who is personated by 
His Angel. Rev. xxii:8, 12, 13, 16. ( The*Oa7ect ye 
Oath is the same in every one of these passages, and 
expressly declared to be (1) the “jizeshing of the mystery 
of God foreshown to the prophets,’ and clearly to Daniel, 
even the finishing of the 70 Weeks decreed, upon 
Israel, Rev. x:7; (2) the “brznging to an end the time, times 
and half a time,” i.e., the 3% years, or last 1260 days, 
of the 7oth Week, Dan. xii:7; (3) the “making an end of 
breaking in pieces the power of the holy people,” a victory 
to be accomplished at the close of these 3% times; 
Dan. xii:7, and (4) the “avenging the blood of His ser- 
vants,’ the “resurrection of the faithful dead, the over- 


| 
: 


. 
; 


THE APOCALVPSE OF JOHN. 403 


throw of the Antichrist, [sracl’s deliverance, and the Joy 
of the Nations,’ Deut. xxxii:39-43; Dan. xii: 1-7. All 
these are the one Object of the same Oath, repeated by the 
Same Person speaking in Moses, Dantel and John, concern- 
ing the same People, the Jews, and the same Time, the last 
1260 days of Dantel’s 7oth Week. And these “Days” 
are called the “Days of the Voice of the 7th Angel,” dur- 
ing which the “dZystery of God shall be completed,” Rev. 
x7. What else can these “Days of the Voice of the 
7th Angel,” which are the 3% years of the 7th Trumpet, 
be but “the 1260 Days” or last half of the “One Week” 
in Dan. ix:27? What else can “God’s Mystery” be but 
the Mystery of Israel’s blindness during the Times of the 
Gentiles, and final conversion, Rom, xi:25,—the Mystery 
of Babylon the Great overthrown, Rev. xvii:5, 16,—the 
Mystery of tong-working Inigutty at last destroyed as the 
Man of Sin ts revealed, WV Thess. 11:7-10,—the Mystery of 
the resurrection of the faithful dead, Dan. xii:1-3; I Cor. 
Xv:51,—the Mystery of the Restoration of the Kingdom to 
Israel at the end of Gentile Times, with Christ revealed in 
flis glory,—the Mystery of the regrafting of the Jew 
into his own olive-tree, Rom. x1:24, and now, the Mystery 
of the conversion of the Nations, as such, and their 
engrafting into Israel in order to the formation of the 
visible “Kingdom” at Messiah’s Second Coming? Eph. 
fipeOreney. XV-4; xi:to, ‘it-is nothing else, forihese 
are the great events that occur during, and at, the close 
Oltne. Days of the Voice of the 7th Angel,” which, 
beyond all successful denial, are hereby proved to be 
the last 1260 days of the 7oth Week. The events of 
these 3% years of the 7th Trumpet, are the Contents 
of the “Bzdlaridion” or Open Booklet in the protesting 
Angel’s hand, sweet to know because of the glorious 
end they reveal, bitter to feel because of the painful 


404 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


way thereto ;—a Booklet, like to Ezekiel’s scroll, full of a 
“mourning, lamentation and woe,” the prophet com- 
missioned to preach concerning (not “over’’) Israel, and 
many nations beside. Rev. x:8-11: Ezek. iii:1-11. 
There is no other interpretation. The “What with- 
holdeth” is “taken out of the way.” The Man of Sin ts 
revealed. lis last 3% are come. “There shall be no more 
delay.” Terrific will be the judgment of God, fearful 
and rapid the strokes in the last Great Tribulation, 
extreme the rage of Satan, and, sounding, the 7th é 
trumpet shall prolong its blast, the vials discharging their 


wrath all over our ‘“‘wodern culture and Christian civsliza- 
tion,’ until “the Mystery of God ts finished,” and the 70 | 
Weeks decreed upon Daniel’s people and city expire, ‘ 


and the Hexad of Blessing be fulfilled as the Angel 4 
foretold it. Dan. 1x:24. Whatever else is involved, 
this much is sure. 7 
The position, then, of Cap. xi is clearly defined. It 
belongs to the Episode between the 6th and 7th Trum- 
pets. The events are in the time of the Antichrist, and 
in Jerusalem. It unveils the two halves of the 7oth | : 
Week, and what occurs therein. The moment Israel’s i 
Conversion begins, the 7th Angel begins to sound, Rev. < 
x:7, and during that sounding the finishing of the Mystery , 
concerning Israel takes place. The chronological con- ; 
nection between Caps. x, xi, xli 1s as perfect as the = 
sequence of the 7th upon the 6th trumpet, and we must : 
not forget this. Itis Israel we have here. Wo new ? 
subject is introduced. No new time different from that 
of the 6th and 7th trumpets. There is xo retrogresston ; 
to the time of the First Advent. The circumstance Be 
that the plastic symbol of the Woman, or Jewish 
Church, combines in the fulness of its representation, 
the Birth of Christ, “the Manly Child,” with the Bzrth 


ES 6a EI 


LAE AROCAL YE SE: OF) JOHN, 405 


of National Israel, “the Manly Child,” is in perfect har- 
mony with Old Testament prophecy which zdentzjies 
Christ and Israel in their work on the Nations, and 
gives to both the same names, offices, victory and 
glory. The unity of the Jewish Church as the Mother 
of “Messiah” and Mother of the “Manly Child,” the 
National Israel, is already asserted by the prophets, 
whom John follows, in the clearest manner, (See Hos. 
xii:13;-[sa. Ixvi:7-9; Rev. 1:27.) This linking of past 
and future horizons in Israel’s history, this overleap- 
ing the interval between the two Advents in order to 


_ present the total likeness of the Woman in one picture, 


does not justify the “Recapitulation theory” of Augus- 
tine, which retracts the time of chapter x11 to the First 
Advent. Such Recapitulation has been the bane of all 
Apocalyptic exposition since the day Augustine first 
devised it. Chapters x, xi, xii are all eschatological ; 
under the 6th and 7th trumpets. The connection be- 
tween the ‘“ Measured Worshipers ” in x1:1, the “Rest” 
minor cive- God. the glory, xi:13, the “Sun-Clothed 
W oman, =xu:0, the “Our Brethren,” xii:to,1s' perfect. 
And these together are no other than the “ 144,000,” 
and the ‘“Cithara-Players” on the Glassy Sea ;—Israel 
of the End-Time. All goes to show that J/srael’s Con- 
version must precede the Kingdom of the 1000 years, and 
herewith, as Godet remarks, a world-wide revolution 
changing the: whole face of Christendom in the midst 
of national convulsions and agonies, compared with 
which all others have been as nothing.” The com- 
bined exegesis of all the prophets, and the allusions in 
the Apocalypse, not only to the plagues that attended 
the deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, but also to the 
times of the Restoration of Israel under Joshua and 
Zerubbabel, and re-establishment of Israel in their own 


406 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


land, drive us to this; both these epochs being figures 
of epochs greater to come; the Exodus-epoch leaving 
a whole generation dead in the wilderness, and found- 
ing a Kingdom soon to be broken; the Restoration- 
epoch a paltry affair compared with what the sublime 
predictions foretold ; the Madzous still remaining in un- 
belief. But this final epoch 1s crowned with grander 
results. It occurs in the midst of the last siege of Jeru- 
salem, of the shaking of the Nations, Heaven, Earth, 
Sea and Dry Land, the Redemption of Israel, and 
the Advent of Christ. A new order appears. In the 
impressive words of Orelli, “A mighty revolution ts 
soon to take place in the whole state of the world, the effect 
of which will be totransfer the Center of the World’s power 
and glory to Ferusalem, a new evolution in the world’s his- 
tory, and new direction to the aspiration of the Nations.” 
We shall be able to go on, now, more rapidly. 
Chapter xiii tells us what the Beast is doing during the 
Second Half of the 7oth Week. He is working up the 
“ Great Tribulation,” while the 144,000 are sheltered in 
the wilderness, and Satan, bodied in the Antichrist, 
expends his rage upon the “remnant of the Woman’s 
seed.” . In Cap. xvi:1-5, we see Israel, redeemed from 
the wilderness, and secure with their Redeemer come 
to Sion. The trumpet storms are over, including the 
7th trumpet and 7 Vials. Jz the Vision of the 144,000, 
here we have reached the close of the last 3% years, or 1,260 
days, for the vision itself ts proleptic, like the other stilt- 
standing visions of the Apocalypse. The connection of 
the 144,000 with the preceding 13th Chapter is unmis- 
takable. It shows us elect Israel, now safe, after the 
Antichrist’s 1260 days are over, and the Trumpet-Judg- 
ments are gone. Contrasted with another company in 
Heaven, they stand on the earthly Mount Ae’ sing- 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 407 


ing a “ New Song.” They come to Zion with songs poured 
OVER their heads, and learn the music they hear 
FROM ABOVE, and which only the redeemed of the 
Lord can sing. They area holy people now. See Isa. 
xxxv:8-10. Rev. xiv:1-5—the “AZ Israel saved,’ of 
Rom. xi:25—the pleromatised last reserve, and new 
born bearers of grace and glory to the Nations, the 
“elder brother’ ‘brought into his father’s house, amid 
music and dancing, such as the younger never has 
known. The rest of the Chapter is a brief Programme 
of the scenes under the Vials, a preparation for the 
resumption of the dramatic progress now moving swift 
to the End. 

Chapter xv is the Introduction to the Vials, there- 
fore proleptic also, forecasting the great result to the 
Nations. The Host on the Glassy Sea, with harps in 
their hands, sing zwo songs, the one decisive that the 
harp-bearing singers are they whose Mediator, in olden 
time was Moses, and who saw overwhelmed in the sea, 
flamed with the anger-blaze from the Pillar of Fire, 
their ancient foe, the other that now their Goel, or 
Kinsman-Redeemer is Christ, the Lam, in whose blood 
they trust. The Moses-song recalls the deliverance 
from Egypt; the Lamb-song the greater deliverance 
from sin and Satan’s power. 

And now come Chapters xvi-xix, giving us the 
Vials poured on the earth, intensely upon the seat or 
“throne” of the Antichrist, an account of the Harlot, 
the Armageddon scenes, the slaughter in the valley of 
Jehoshaphat, the great world-shaking earthquake, “the 
shock that splits the Mount of Olives,” and shatters the 
“cities of the Nations,” in that “day unique and only 
known to the Lord,” Zech. xiv:4-7. But not before Rome, 
head of the New Babylon, has already been destroyed by 


408 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. Se 


Antichrist himself and his confederates. A description of 
this and of the world’s commercial wail because of it, 
we have in Chapters xvii and xviii. Already, the whole 
world is in arms, ‘‘ 200 millions” of men moving in the 
East, apart from the Western forces in the field, 
Chapter ix:16. It is after Rome’s fall, the Antichrist, 
inflated with his victory, returns to the East, under the 
6th Vial, with all his forces, to annihilate the Jew, 
regain possession of the holy city, and exult in uni- 
versal empire. It is his last march, his one supreme, 
self-confident effort, his fatal campaign! Meanwhile, 
ecclesia pressa presses through the tribulation to a 
martyr’s crown! ‘ Here ws the faith and patience of the 
saints!” Rev. xni:io. From the rendezvous at Arm- 
ageddon, a united march is made upon the holy City. 
The moment of Israel’s last crisis has come! The 
““ Beast” stakes all upon the siege of Jerusalem, with 
Israel driven to the wall. Satanic madness rules the 
hour. History has never seen such a time! nor will 
again! Demonic rage is driving its last blow! 

Then, after Heaven’s arches have rung with the 
‘Hallel” * over the’ Harlot’s “overthrow, dane 


* At the great Jewish solemnities, the ‘‘ //ad/e/,” or cycle of Psalms, 
beginning or ending with ‘‘ Hallel-u-Jah,” ‘‘ Praise-ye-Jehovah,” was sung 
with thrilling effect. The Singers were a large company. Psalteries and 
Timbrels were used. The Cithara-Players, or ‘‘ Harpers harping with 
their harps,” were the dass accompaniment, the ‘‘ loud-sounding cymbals ” 
being struck by the priests to regulate the time. At the close of each 
section of Psalms, 200 trumpets blew together their exciting ¢ava-tan-tara, 
the whole combination, vocal and instrumental, swelling to the octave and 
making, not only the temple-courts, but earth and heaven, ring with the 
‘“joyful noise.” Delitesch, Der Psalter II, 400. Lightfoot I. 958. A 
Binnie, Psalms, 369. The Hallel was in memory of God’s ‘‘ mighly acts,” 

‘the wonders he had done.” It includes the ‘‘ mention of His mercies,” 


and ‘‘ of Lis power.” It celebrates, (1) redeemed Israel’s deliverance from 4 
Egypt, (2) the dividing of the Sea, (3) the giving of the Law, (4) the : 
possession of the Land, (5) the Resurrection from the dead, (6) Messiah in x 


His kingdom. It also includes (7) the triumph-song over fallen Babylon, 
(8) Israel’s song in the land of Judah, at the End of the Days, (9) Israel’s 


ia ipl oS a 


ox 
a 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 409 


7 


Jewish Bride, below, is ready for the Wedding, xix: 
I-IO, comes a scene that beggars description, and 
mocks the loftiest genius of man to give it expression. 
It is the Glorious Advent of the Warrior-Bridegroom to 
fall, his words to Israel, xix:11-21. John~ sees 
“ fleaven Opened” and crowded with “ white horses,” 
indicative of victory, the King Himself in front of all, 
superbly mounted on his charger, white as the spotless 
snow. The “armies of heaven,’ the Hosts of Jehovah, 
follow Him, “ clothed in fine linen, clean and white,” the 
emblem of their sanctity. A vivid contrast now ap- 
pears. As He who leads them,—the “ Fazthful and 
True,’ comes nearer, His eyes gleam like a flame of 
fire, the sign not only of discernment and omniscience, 
but of anger also, telling that “72 righteousness He doth 
make war.’ Since, moreover, He comes as “ Prince 
of the Kings of the Earth,” to take to Himself His 
mighty power and reign, so ‘on Hs head are many 
crowns,’ emblems of the fulness of royalty that sat, 
usurpingly, upon the crowned horns of the Beast, 
and now to be wrested from him. As, once more, 
the Beast had a mystic name which wisdom 
alone could count, so the conqueror wears “a name 
written that no man knows but He FHlimself,” a name 
divine. As He approaches closer to us, the sky now far 
behind Him, we detect Him as ‘the Sozrah-Hero, 
descending over Edom, and moving toward Jerusalem, 
arrayed in crimson vesture “dipped in blood,” in strik- 


pardon in the Last Days, (10) Israel’s song for their restored Jerusalem ; 
and, in the Apocalypse, ascends (11) from the 144,000 standing with their 
returned Redeemer, on Mount Zion, (12) is the song of the Cithara-Players 
on the sea of glass, and (13) is the five-fold rolling and thundering reverbe- 
ration of the heavenly multitude, above, and Israel below, over the Harlot’s 
ruin, the destruction of Antichrist, the marriage of the Bride, the Resur- 
rection from the dead, and Millennial glory with Messiah in His Kingdom ! 


410 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ing contrast with the whzte uniform in which His 
armies ride. It means that the “ day of vengeance” ts 
in His heart, and the“ year of Hts redeemed has come!” 
He comes “ ¢o tread the winepress of the fierceness and 
wrath of Almighty God,” “to sprinkle His garments with 
blood, and stain all His raiment!’ It means that He 
comes to “avenge” the altar-moan of His martyred 
ones and confirm the solemn word of the Angel of 
the waters, ‘“ Righteous art Thou, O Lord, which wast, 
and art, because thou hast thus judged ; for they have shed 
the blood of saints and prophets, and Thou hast given them 
blood to drink, for they are worthy.” Rev. xvi:5, 6. 
John tells us His mystic name. It is the “ Word of 
God.” ‘“ Out of His mouth proceeds a two-edged sword,” 
the symbol of judicial breath with which He “ suzztes 
that Wicked.” As He descends still lower, coming still 
nearer the earth, and passing the blue horizon line, 
close followed by His crowding and flanking hosts, we 
see a quivering, a glittering, of something bright as 
gold upon His crimson breast. What we see is a series 
of blazoned words upon His military baldric, diago- 
nally drawn across His vesture, reaching from 
shoulder to thigh, and dazzling in characters bright 
and large that all His enemies may read them. It is 
His glorious title, “ KinG or KINGS, AND LORD OF 
Lorps!” Moment of intense impression! Moment of 
awful answer to Israel’s prayer, “ O that thou wouldst 
rend the heavens, and come down!” Isa. \xiii:t ; Ixiv:1, 
In words of brevity, befitting a scene and crisis like 
these, the one so replete with majesty, the other so full 
of Woe,—the great result is stated.“ And the BEAST was 
taken!” Rev. xix:20. Hallelujah! He and the False 
Prophet, “ ¢hey ¢wazn,” individualized, yet undivided in 
doom, go headlong and alive to the “Lake of Fire,” 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 411 
while Israel, plucked as a brand from the burning, shines 
as a pillar in the temple of God! The armies of the 
Beast perish beneath the sword of Israel’s Great 
Deliverer, and their carcasses furnish a banquet for the 
eagles and the vultures invited to their supper by an 
Angel standing in the sun! Rev. xix:20, 21. 

And now, Babylon gone, Antichrist gone, the False 
Prophet gone, and Israel delivered, Chapter xx:1-7 intro- 
duces us to the Arrest and Imprisonment of him who was 
the cause of all the mischief. With visions, such as Ori- 
ental drugs produce, the Church has dreamt for cen- 
turies, that to “er was decreed the power to dzud Satan 
and bring in the days of Millennial glory on earth. 
The Object-Lesson here given, is to instruct her inno- 
Peucce- that, to the Redeemer alone,. in His proper 
person, belongs the prerogative to ‘“ did,” at His 
Second Coming, the body of him whose head He 
“bruised” at His First. In other passages of Scripture 
the conflict with Satan is represented as being a per- 
sonal hand to hand encounter, as when He speaks of 
Himself “ entering the house of the strong man armed” 
“binding the man,” and “spoiling his house,” Matt. 
xi1:28, 29; “through death destroying him that has 
the power of death, that is the Devil,’”’ Heb. n:14; 
“making a show of principalities and powers openly 
triumphing over them in His own person,” Col. 1:15. 
In the same personal way, at the very outset of His 
career, He encountered this Evil One, in the time of 
His fleshly temptation, Matt. iv:1-11, and, after 40 days 
of protracted struggle, repelled him with victorious 
power, a prelude of greater victory yet to come. The 
Apocalypse reveals the Conqueror engaged in His last 
conflict, His last personal hand to hand grapple with 
His great antagonist. John watches the action in the 


412 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


viston, with intensest gaze, riveted, motionless, and with 
supremest, breathless, and almost panting, suspense, 
his pulse-beat quickening every instant. He seems to 
forget, for the moment, his usual calm contemplation, 
and snatches the opportunity,—as the coil of omnip- 
otence circles and binds the limbs of that old ambulant 
monster who, 6,000 years long, had “ walked up and 
down,’ promenaded, paraded, glittered, deceived, 
tempted, led captive, and roared, and did as he pleased, 
—to indulge the luxury of flinging at his head a string 
of academic epithets and pictorial titles the most unique 
and best befitting he could find. He confers all the 
degrees at once! He tells us that “the Dragon” — 
“that Old. Serpent,’—“the Devil,’—and “ Satan,’—four 
devils in one,—the ‘“ Dragon” with his crowns off, the 
“Serpent” with his head bruised, the “ Devil” with his 
clamps on, and “ Satan” with his mouth stopped,— was 
first “seized,” next “chained,” then “ cast into the pit,” 
after that “shut up,” and finally “sealed. The Seed 
of the Woman has given him a sore head, tight wrists, 


close ankles, a long plunge, a dismal hole, a sure lock- 


up, and reasonable time for reflection ;—the period of 
“1000 years,” not merely “three days,” in which, asa 
“Stated Supply,” in his own “ Dark Dungeon,” to 
gnaw his chain and study the quesfion, as Dr. Kliefoth 
would call it, of “ potentiated ecumenicity,” and 
“spatial victory!” John scems perfectly delighted! 
It is an eternal satisfaction to him to watch not only 
the chaining, but the slinging, and hear the shutting of 
the iron bars, as they fall on the top of the Pit, and see 
the Seal superadded, massive, rocky, heavy, over-cov- 
ering, and large asthe Mount of Temptation! “Amen!” 
The world is now free from his wiles. Anarchy and 
Antichristianity are now perished from the earth. Be- 


THE APOCALYPSE OF JOHN. 413 


reft of his old companions, the Beast and the False 
Prophet in the lake of fire, Satan in the Pit, and alone, 
he sighs out his solitude, prostrate in a corner, wonder- 
ing how long “1000 years” may be, or if again the 
time will come when one more missionary privilege 
will be given him to overturn, if he can, the kingdom 
of Christ! Upon this great event, comes the announce- 
ment of a still greater and more solemn—the Resurrec- 
tion of the righteous dead, the “ first Resurrection” in 
which the Apostles, Martyrs and Confessors of Jesus 
made co-assessors and regents with Christ, live and 
reign with Him “the 1000 years.” ° 

Thus have we come to the close of the Second Half, or 
last 3% years of the 70th Week of Daniel. The 7th 
trumpet has sounded, the last vial has been poured, the 
Advent is a fact, ‘‘the mystery of God ts finished.” A 
New Age is before us. The high point of the whole de- 
velopment, after Chapter xt, 1s the Kingdom of the 1000 
years, introduced by the Second Coming of Messiah. Old 
Testament Prophecy is fulfilled. The Beast is given 
to tne flame. The Colossus is scattered like chaff. 
Gentile supremacy over Israel has ceased. The bones 
in the Valley of Vision have stood up, an exceeding 
great army. Leviathan is bound. The Kingdom is 
given to the “ People of the Saints of the Most High.” 
Tie “Days of Messiah,’ have come, in which the 
righteous flourish in a kingdom “under the whole 
heaven,” and in which the “ Beloved City ” is the mid- 
dle-point, and Israel, restored to nationality, is en- 
throned as the “ Manly Child,” ordained with Christ to 
rule the world. 

In the light of this organic relation of the 1000 years 
to the previous dramatic action of the second part of 
the Apocalypse, we see the folly that would date these 


414 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


years from any point this side the Second Coming of 
the Lord. Never was a violence, so monstrous to the 
word of God, committed until the Church, as Mait- 
land says, began to “ Heathenize,” and Origen and 
Jerome, and Augustine, great, good and _ beguiled, 
evaporated Israel’s right to future recognition; and, 
breaking as with hammer stroke the chronological con- 
nection, first between Chapters vii and viii, then be- 
tween Chapters xi and xu, and next between Chapters 
x1x and xx, applied the symbols, concerning “ Israel,” 
to the “ Church,” slzading backward the 1000 years, across 
the whole dispensation covered by the 7 Epistles, and dating 
these 1000 years from the death of Christ! That is the 
way it was done! That is the magic, mischief, and 
monstrosity, of pre-advent Millennialism, which now, 
abandoning its old arguments, raises the banner, “Sym- 
bolical numbers don’t count!” 


CG. - RELATIVE AND ABSOLUTE ENDS: 


But the Relative End, or End of “ This Present Age” 
is not the Adsolute End, or End of Time and History. 
The Millennial Age is not the Endless Age. The 1000 
years, therefore, sustain a relation to the Eternal State 
in the final New Heaven and Earth, like that of a ves- 
tibule to the Grand Temple to which it is the Entrance. 
Such is the scope and order of the Ages. At the close 
of the 1000 years, we encounter the Last Judgment— 
and the Last Resurrection, followed by the final Regen- 
esis of all things, the surrender of the Messianic King- 
dom to God the Father, “the Son Himself subjected 
to Him that did subject all things to Him, that God 
may be-all im all.” Rev. xx:11-15..) 1 Core 
Viewed in the light of a future scope, so great, Chapter 
Xx:I-7, seems itself an Episode, like Chapter vii, and 


a _ 


LHECAROCADY EE SE OP fOH Ne AI5 


Chapters x, xi, in the vast evolution. Ever wider 
grows the view as we advance, expanding as we are 
carried along with the flow of time, till, hike a minnow, 
borne by the stream and swept into the sunlit ocean, 
we are lost in depths and heights, and widths of space 
beyond our comprehension; expanses, bewildering, 
immeasurable, filled with glory ever shining ; enlarging 
circles of the future ever opening out before us and 
vanishing as they recede to distances we cannot grasp; 
horizons swelling, breaking by distension, outreaching 
to the infinite, until imagination droops, and thought 
returns exhausted. Still, what we cau learn, and do 
know, is this, that as the ultimate glory is not the 
result of human endeavor, so neither is the glory of 
the 1000 years. It, too, is the work of God, not by 
means of ordinary processes, nor by Church activities, 
nor by any merely natural laws of development, but 
the outcome of Judgment and Salvation which alone 
arrests the downward tendency of man, and alone 
defeats the arts and power of Satan. Not philosophy, 
Science or Education, nor Culture of any kind; not 
schools, colleges, universities or seminaries ; not Chris- 
tian civilization can restrain Israel’s dark apostasy, 
convert Christendom (not to speak of Heathendom) 
destroy Antichrist, expel Satan, raise the dead, anni- 
hilate our Gentile politics, and establish the Kingdom 
of Christ in its glory. The Millennial blessedness is 
something sore than Christian civilization, or Church 
and State Religion; something more than the progress 
of nations, or suppression by law of gigantic evils hurt- 
ful to human society ; something more than glorified 
Judaism, or bettered Christendom. It is a new crea- 
tion, as relatively great compared with Christendom, 
as Christendom is relatively great compared with 


416 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


Jewdom; a state where divisions and sects exist no 
more; where Mosque, Pagoda and proud Cathedral 
find no place ; but where “we all come tn the unity of the 
fatth and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a per- 
fect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of 
Christ,” Eph. iv:13 ;—a state where we see no longer 
“as ina mirror, darkly, but face to face, and know as 
we are known,” I Cor. xii:12; a time when Jew and 
Gentile, though distinguished in the plan of God, shall 
yet be one in Christ, dwelling in communion of life and 
love, and risen saints, all glorified, have constant fellow- 
ship with saints unglorified, who yet are nearer glory 
than the saintliest of us now. Heaven and Earth will 
have come closer together in that 1000 years of peer- 
less privilege and blessing. That is one lesson we 
learn from the study of John’s Apocalypse, as also from 
the prophets of the grey fore-time. It is the doctrine 
of God’s entire word, and any “vzew” which makes it 
impossible to preach that word as the apostles and the 
prophets preached it, or leave on the minds of hearers 
the impression they left, stands self-condemned at the 
bar of eternal truth. Not “codes,” nor “ confessions,” 
nor “evangelical alliances,” nor ‘large conventions of 
our leading men,” nor “Conferences,” nor ‘Associa- 
tions,” nor “Assemblies,” can accomplish this. Not 
“ Boards,” nor “Clubs,” nor “ Syndicates,” nor “ Ser- 
mons,” nor “ Review Articles,” can give it birth. It 
comes by Judgment and Catastrophe, as well as by the 
outpoured Spirit. It comes by the Coming of the 
“Lord Himself from Heaven.” Then, and then only, be- 
gin the World’s Great Sabbath, Israel’s Great Jubilee 
and the Saints’ Great Reign. 


. 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 417 


PAE X. 


THE 1000 YEARS IN EZEKIEL. 


A. A preliminary word is needed as to Ezekiel 
Chapter xxxvii, before discussing chapter xl-xlviii, the 
favorite retreat of post-millennarians. The vast body 
of exegetes agree that the sublime symbol of the re- 
animated Bones in the Valley of Vision, prefigures the 
literal re-establishment of Israel as a nation, and organ- 
ized body politic, in their own land, at the Second 
Coming of Christ. ‘The symbol,” says Professor 
Briggs, “is a symbol of the resurrection of Israel asa 
nation, and their restoration to the holy land. It be- 
comes associated in subsequent prophecy with the 
doctrine of a universal resurrection, because the resto- 
ration of Israel, that the prophet had in view, can be 
accomplished only in the resurrection of all mankind 
in the last great day, and their establishment in the 
New Jerusalem upon the New Earth.”* It is perfectly 
correct that the civil, political, national and religious 
restoration of the “Whole House of Israel’ in their 
fatherland, is here predicted. But it is contrary to the 
text and the whole word of God, to say that this 


* Briggs. Messianic Prophecy. 277. 


27 


418 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


is “associated with the doctrine of a wuiversal resur- 
rection,’ either at the Second Coming of Christ, or at 
the Last Judgment, or that Israel’s political rehabili- 
tation ‘“‘can be accomplished only zn the resurrection of all 
mankind in the last great day ; or that this political re- 
establishment takes place “zz the New Ferusalem upon 
the New Earth;’ or that this view of the restoration 
(the view of Kliefoth followed by Professor Briggs) is 
“what the prophet had in view!” The eternal continuity 
of the Jewish Nation, existing politically as a separate 
entity, distinct from other nations zx the final New Earth, 
with Mew Ferusalem as the Metropolis of the Eternal State, 
may be true, but it is not taught here, since Ezekiel 
clearly tells us that, “ many days after” Israel’s resto- 
ration, Gog’s expedition shall march against the “Be- 
loved City” and fire from heaven consume the 
invaders ;—a military promenade and divine judgment 
being scarcely appropriate in eternity, and on the New 
Earth, after the “first earth” has “ passed away ” and 
“no place is found” for either Satan, Gog, or their 
encircling swarms. Ezek.xxxvii:8-13. And the apostle 
John, who was somewhat skilled in the prophets, con- 
firms this criticism, showing that Gog’s march is 
against Israel restored, on the o/d earth, and Jdefore the 
old earth has vanished away. Rev. xx:7-I0. 

The view that this “ Zocus classicus”’ is not a “ proof- 
text,’ for the doctrine of a resurrection of the body, as 
Jerome and others taught, is incorrect. While the 
symbol prefigures Israel’s political recovery in Pales- 
tine, it involves also a literal resurrection of Israel’s 
faithful dead from their individual graves. <A large 
number of the ablest scholars insist upon this. The 
epoch of occurrence is that of the literal resurrection 
of God’s saints. Hos. xiii:14; Isa. xxv:8; xxvi:19; Dan, 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 419 


mil:2, 3°; compare Matt: xi:43 ; | Cor. xv:24; Rev: xx: 
4-6. The Hebrew term “MWikkiverotheichem,”’ rendered 
“out from your graves,” Ezek. xxxvii:12, has, for its 
root, “‘ ever’ (cover) which never means death, nor the 
state of the dead, nor Hades or Sheol, but always an 
dividual grave.* Employed as a symbol of the 
nations, or the field of slaughter, where dead Israel 
nationally sleeps, it yet imports the place of literal 
sepulture, and its use, in connection with the resur- 
rection here predicted, involves the literal resurrection 
of Israel’s faithful dead, and harmonizes with Paul’s 
all-comprehending word when, referring to this very 
event, he says, “ What shall the receiving of them be, 
but Life\out from the dead?” Rom. xi:15; one of the 
frequent and strong antitheses in which he delights. It 
is great error to deprive God’s word of its whole 
significance. 

The xzatzonal resurrection of Israel is accomplshed 
in connection with the /¢eral resurrection of Israel’s 
faithful dead, at the time of the Second Coming of 
Christ. Then He will appear in His glory and build 
up Zion, gather the outcasts, heal the broken in heart, 
and bind up the wounds of His people. Ps. cxlvii:2-4; 
Isa. Ixvi:5 ; Ps. ci:13-22. They shall come from the 
East, and the West, and the North, and the South, and 
sit down with risen Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, not in 
the ‘“ New Earth,” after the 1000 years have expired, 
but 22 Canaan made glorious on the old Earth. 

Time was, in Jerome's day, when the “ Church”’ 
having swerved from her first faith, spiritualized this 
““atst0 famossissima,’ as he justly calls it, and it became 
a constant “ /ectzo,” or “ reading,’ in all the Churches. 


* Kahle Bibl. Eschatol. 136-140, Craven, in Lange’s Commentary, 
Revelation, Excurs, 366. I. 


42() SUPPLEMENTARY, DISCUSSIONS: 


Israel was the “ Church,” Constantine was “ Michael” 
standing up for Israel, the temporal supremacy of 
Christianity in the Roman Empire was the “ First 
Resurrection.” Even then the 12 Apostles sat on their 
promised thrones, and ruled the Kingdom by their 
various Epistles. With the cessation of the martyr- 
flame, and the erection of the State-Church, and her 
nurture by imperial patronage, the tooo years, had 
dawned! ‘famous,’ indeed, was the vision of Ezekiel, 
a mirror in which the “ Church” of the 4th century 
dreamed she saw her own face. Israel was snuffed out, 
as an offensive wick, by Origen, Augustine, Jerome, 
and Eusebius, a smoking flax quenched by Gentile 
hands, a ight extinguished, impossible to be relumed. 
That time, through the mercy of God, and that notion 
too, have passed forever away, and Jerome’s canon of 
interpretation, —‘‘ What things the Jews, and our 
people,—yea, zot our people,—/udazzing carnally, main- 
tain as events still future, let us (orthodox) teach, 
spiritually, as already past,” *—has been remanded to the 
age that gave it birth, save by some who still play the 
Alexandrian music, with the 4th century accompa- 
niment, telling us that we are living in the millennium 
“ now,’ when the Devil is bound, and War is no more! 
So sang the Sibyl preluding the glory of the Augustan 
age, followed by the scenes under a Caligula, and 
Nero, a Vitellius and Caracalla! 

Notwithstanding this, God’s truth,—as a /ew once 
said, “is mighty and will prevail,” and, as another /ezw 
said, ‘“‘ God's word is not bound.” Dead Israel shall rise 
again as truly as did dead Lazarus. The“ House of 


* Que Judai, et nostrt,—immo NON nostri, judaizantes carnaliter, futura 
contendunt, nos, spiritualiter, jam transacta, doceamus.” Jerome, in Ezek, 
XXXVIi. 


le lee Fe ee Tn Ve & a! 

wees a oe) , 
are ec : 

ery of 

i 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 421 


Peraele = Daneix 7711 +All Israel” Dan. 1x:7, 01; Rom: 
aasoe staciadas av People,’ Rom: xi:t..> Israel.as.a 
“Nation,” Jer. xxxi:36, shall yet reappear in history, 
more glorious thanever. Their Dry Bones shall flourish 
like the grass of the field, even in the Holy City, and 
the dew-gemmed verdure of their resurrection will 
adorn the now sad Valley of Vision. Isa. Ixvi:14; xxvi: 
fOr x xil-10.: 6x33; ELOs. Xivi5. 

This is the place, by way of a moment’s digression, 
to speak of that great “ Change of interpretation,’ which, 
teecie Ath century,-came: with the: “ Change of the 
Church's condition” inthe Roman Empire. It was a total 
revolution, and signal departure of the whole Church, 
from the early faith as to prophecy, led by men who 
partook of the “spirit of the age,” fixing the canon of 
interpretation for Israel in Old Testament prediction, 
and in the Apocalypse of John. No sooner was the 
martyr-flame extinguished by the first imperial law of 
toleration, and the Church protected by the State, than 
laws most cruel were enacted against Pagans, Heretics, 
and Fews. By the Church, which assumed to “ ¢ake 
Israel's place in the Kingdom of God,’ the Jews were con- 
signed to an irreversible curse; ostracised, hated, per- 
secuted, their Synagogues burned to the ground. 
Whatever cruelty the Inquisition and the Papal Empire 
afterward practiced was begun here. It contributed 
to make Julian “apostate,” enlisted his favor for the 
Jews, and roused him to dare the attempt of rebuilding 
the Temple at Jerusalem and to seek to restore Pagan- 
ism and Judaism alike.* Ambrose of Milan, good, great, 
bold, and eloquent, and who moulded Augustine’s view, 


*Jortin. Eccl. Hist. II. 266. Du Pin, Eccl. Hist. IJ. 285. Basnage, 
Hist, des Juifs vi:14. p. 1266. Baronius, Annal. iii:irg, Alzog, Chh. Hist 
i. 336, Sozomen, Eccl. Hist. 138, 240 Bohn’s ed, 


422 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


and cherished the spirit that formed the new canon of 
interpretation, was a zealot against the Jews, encour- 
aging the conflagration of their synagogues, and rebuk- 
ing Theodosius for insisting on restitution by the incen- 
diaries. He wrote to the Emperor, saying: “ / declare 
that [ would burn a Synagogue myself, lest a place should 
exist where Christ was denied,’* and avowed that he 
would have “set fire” to the synagogue at Milan, if 
God had not already applied the torch with His own 
hand! The Globt Flammarum, or balls of fire, that frus- 
trated Julian’s impious desigua to countervail the Oracle 
of Christ concerning the Temple, were deemed a divine 
invitation to consume all Jewish places of worship, for 
Christianity was now supreme! ft In the heat of such 
hatred, the Church-Teachers of the 4th century, 
zealous for Christ, and robed in imperial toilet fur- 
nished at State expense, and believing the Millennial 
Age was born, and the Devil was bound, rejected the 


*“ Declaro quod ego ipse synagogam incenderim, ne esset locus in quo 
Christus negaretur.’’ Ambrose Epist.ad. ‘Theod. Neander. 1i:67-69. 

+ One would think that ‘‘ when the Church began to heathenize” in the 
4th century, and take to Roman philosophy and literature, she drank a 
full cup of the Roman spirit in reference to the /ew. How hated the Jew 
was, and how despised his religion, by the ‘‘ Civilization”’ of the times, 
every classic student well knows. Even Cicero, the polished, had called 
their religion a “darbara superstitio,” (Orat, pro Flacco, 28) and Horace 
had sported his ‘‘ Credat Judeus Apella” (Sat. I. 5. 100.) Tacitus calls 
them the “odium humant generis” (Hist. v:13) and Pliny, the elegant, 
declared their worship a “contumelia deorum”’ (Uist. Nat. xili:g.) The 
Pagan implacability seemed to float everywhere, like a baleful contagion in 
the atmosphere of the christianized empire. The Church, just escaped from 
the flames, herself began to afflict and oppress both Pagan and Jew, for the 
sake of the glory of God! And only by wrecking the true interpretation of 
‘‘Tsrael” in the Apocalypse was the Apocalypse itself saved from the ban ! 
Guilty and blind indeed, was the Jew. Yet even under the curse, he kept up 
the old Maccabean shout, ‘‘ Ze Kingdom of God forever! 1% Baatheia tow 
Ozov é1¢ Tov didva!” just as the French say Vive 2’? Empereur! and the Ger- 
mans ‘‘ Ls leben Konig Wilhelm!’ Wence the hatred of the Jew. See 
Hilgenfeld, AZessta’s Judworum xvti:33-26, Not till later times did the 
anger of Rome to the afflicted Israelite in any measure, abate, and only then 
as a matter of humanity; not because her interpretation was changed. 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 423 


Chiliasm of the Ante-Nicene fathers and first apologists 
of Christianity, and formulating the new canon con- 
cerning “ Israel,” applied to themselves the Old Testa- 
ment prophecies, and voted Israel nationally dead for- 
ever! It was the doctrine of the Middle-Age, and is 
Rome's doctrine to-day. The “ Church” is the “ King- 
dom,” and the “ Church” is “Israel.” In such times as 
these, Post-Millennialism came to the throne. The tem- 
poral splendor of the Church was the climate of the 
“First Resurrection,” and the dining hall of Con- 
_ stantine yet unbaptized, was deemed by Eusebius pos- 
sible to be the fulfilment of John’s Apocalypse concern- 
ing the “ New Jerusalem,” and of Ezekiel’s Vision con- 
cerning the “Holy Oblation!” The tooo years had 
come! The Dry Bones in the Valley had stood up, an 
exceeding great Christian army, the adult population of 
the Roman Empire! A “feast of fat things” smoked 
on the Emperor’s table, and Christian Bishops and 
Post-Nicene Fathers were experts to tell what was 
meant by “ wines on the lees well refined!” It was a 
part of pre-Advent Millennialism! Ail the Apocalypses 
of both Testaments clearly foreshadowed, as Eusebius 
said, ‘“‘ The Splendor of our Affairs!” The sunlight of 
prosperity, and dream of the “ Conversion of the Em- 
pire,” intoxicated with brilliant delirium, the souls of 
men who had survived the Diocletian persecution. 
Under the edict of Licinius and Constantine, and ‘again 
under the Code of Theodosius, which embodied the Ten 
Commandments, the New Song was sung, in Cathedral 
Chant, and the “ Vzszo Famossissima,’ in Ezekiel, was 
read every Sabbath-Day to delighted hearers ;—Am- 
brose, Eusebius, Licinius, Constantine, Augustine, 
Jerome, Theodosius, and the whole “Church” waltz- 
ing “in the splendor of our affairs,’ and being no 


424 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


other than ‘“ /svael”’ restored to their fatherland, and 
converted to Christ! * 

But to return to Chapters xl-xlvili,—so long per- 
plexing to so many,—the favorite retreat of post- 
millennialists, and the ready refuge when pressed by 
Chiliastic argument. Intrenched here, they deem 
themselves secure. How interpret these Chapters? 
Do they belong to the 1000 years of Fohn? Are these also 
a Millennial picture? We answer, Yes. They cannot 
be literalized into the times of the Restoration under 
Zerubbabel, nor spiritualized into the times of the New 
Testament Church, nor celestialized into the heavenly 
state, nor allegorized into the final New Heaven and 
Earth, nor idealized into an oriental phantasmagorial 
abstraction. Whatever difficulties attend the interpre- 
tation which regards them simply as the expansion of 
Chapter xxxviith, a picture of Israel’s dwelling safely in 
their own land glorified, with the temple shining on 
exalted Zion, as the prophets have predicted it, more 
and greater difficulties attend any other exposition. 
Into a discussion of these it is impossible to enter here, 
as every student knows. It 1s enough, for our present 
purpose, to state where we fully believe these Chapters 


*Adverting to this great change of interpretation that came over the 
Church, by her union to the State, Professor Orelli says: ‘‘ The ational 
element in prophecy was more and more ignored, and everything received a 
Christian coloring. Israel is always now to be sfzsztually interpreted. 
After the age of persecution was past, the attitude of the Church toward 
prophecy was remarkably changed, zs fulfllment being no longer anxiously 
looked for, Old ‘Testament prophecy was regarded as finally fulfilled and 
done with, and where the words of prophecy were not responded to, by 
the actual history, all was sfiv¢twalized. _ This spiritualistic interpretation 
did not scruple to refer the promises pertaining to /srae/’s future, to the 
Christian Church as the spiritual posterity of Abraham, according to Gal. 
iii:7. The view opened up by the same Apostle, viz.: That one day yet, 
Israel, as a whole, will be converted, and the prophecies concerning Israel 
be entirely fulfilled, Rom. xi:1-36, was allowed, by the Church, to fall to 
he ground.” Die alttest. Weissagung 75, 76. 


‘ 
gered 


oe ee eng) hte 
a 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 425 


belong, and their connection with the “first resur- 
rection,” even as John has briefly stated the connection 
of the 1000 years, in the same way. The organic unity 
of prophecy determines this, the analogy, the progress 
in development, the continuity, the relation of the 
parts, and the connection of the whole. The focus of 
the whole scene of the New Israel, in their New Land, 
redistributed and transfigured, their New Temple, New 
City, and New Cult, is between the Second Coming of 
Christ and the Last Judgment at the end of Ezekiel’s 
“Many Days,” xxxviii:8, Isaiah’s “ Multitude of Days,” 
Beciv:22,- t1osea’s-* Third. Day,” vi:2, and John’s “1000 
years,’ xx:i-7. That is the region where they belong. 
That dloody sacrifices seem a stumbling block, never can 
avail to dislodge the section from its place in prophecy 
or history. The picture isa picture of restored [srael 
from an Exile-point of view, when the Temple was des- 
troyed, the City laid waste by the king of Babylon, 
Israel's instituted worship wrecked, and the prophet- 
priest, Ezekiel, was moved by “the hand of God” to 
comfort the exiles of the Gola!* It covers, perspec- 
tively, the whole temporal future of the people, and 
blends the Restoration, the Non-Restcration, the 
Abolition, the future Restitution, all_in one. Isaiah 
had chiefly dwelt upon the prophetic side of the king- 
dom, in thrilling terms, Daniel dwells upon the kzxgly 
side and, to Ezekiel it is given to paint the przestly side 


* Ezekiel, and the Aristocracy of Israel, lived in the Gola, during their 
exile, a locality in Tel Abib, by the river Chebar (Chedoras) iii:11, 15, 24; 
viii:1; xii:3, and near the plain, or Va//ey which is called, in his prophecy, 
the ‘‘ Valley of Dry Bones,” iii:22; xxxvii:!, 2. Ezekiel saw the Vision of 
the Temple and New Jerusalem, on the very day of the overthrow of Jeru- 
salem, 14 years after the fall of the Temple. As to the dates of his 
prophecies, Chapters xxxvi-xxxix were B. C. §85. Chapters xl-xlviii were 
B. C. Oct. 572. To inspire the wretched survivors with Hope of a glorious 
future, in their own land, was the design of these predictions. 


426 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


of it. And, as all the rest speak, so does he, in Old 
Testament terms, and paints in Old Testament colors, 
yet not without the most startling modifications of the 
Mosaic worship ;—not legislating the ‘“ rudiments of 
the Pentateuchal priest-code,”—as Kuenen and _ his 
school would have it, but amending, abolishing, and 
adding to it, changing it,—a sign of fading, not advanc- 
ing, Mosaism. One thing we know, beyond dispute, 
viz., that “ /svael” of the Millennial Age, is a converted 
people, ‘serving God in newness of the Spirit, and not 
in the oldness of the letter.’ How much of Ezekiel’s 
typical picture will fade in the fulfilment, how much 
brighten to intenser glory, we may not decide. Nor 
does this impinge upon ‘the doctrine of ‘exact ac- 
complishment.” It neither asserts nor denies. It 
leaves, to the future, problems the future only can 
solve. It refuses to reconcile apparent contradictions 
by the adoption of a principle of interpretation which, 
if logically carried out, would end in the denial of 
Christianity itself. It waits. The early Jewish Chris- 
tians adhered to their Jewish rites long after their 
conversion on the day of Pentecost. They worshiped 
stillin the Temple. At any rate, the future will bring 
the solution. We can agree with Van Oosterzee, that 
‘It is impossible to say with infallible certainty what 
is mere imagery, and what is more than imagery,’* and 
with Kahle, feel sure, that ‘‘it isnot for us to deter 
mine how much of these closing predictions of Ezekiel will 
be literally fulfilled, how much not, when Israel has turned 
to the Lord with all their heart.’+ We may not go to 
the length of Baumgarten and Hess who, perhaps, 


* Person and Work of the Redeemer, 451. 
+ Kahle. Bibl, Eschatol. I. 156. 


4 
4 
4 
‘ 
. 
‘ 


QE 


‘ ‘ . " 
see ee ee ee ee ee 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 427 


press the literal, in some respects, to the quick, but we 
may follow men of scholarship and greatness in the 
knowledge of God’s word, like Crusius, Delitzsch, 
Nigelsbach, Hofmann, Neumann, and agree, even 
with Kuenen and Graf, in this, that “it is vain, either 
to «wealize, or seek to spirttualize, the many and minute 
details of these Chapters,” as Hengstenberg, Hiwver- 
nick, Keil, and others do, and feel perfectly justified in 
saying, with Smend, that “we have no right to distort 
into the spirttual, or pronounce fantastic, the hope of Israel's 
actual glorification in their land.’* So speaks Orelli. 
“Clearly as the transformed physiognomy points to a 
new spiritual creation, yet we ought not to spiritualize the 
facts, and least of all allegorize the particular traits, $0 as 
to understand the ‘ fishers’ as fishers of men (Hengs- 
tenberg) or as angels (Kliefoth) or the ‘trees’ on the 
banks of the Temple-Stream, as of righteous men (Klie- 
foth). Rather the image stands before the eyes of the 
Seer zz concrete reality, apart from all interpretation. 
The land of Israel, endowed of God, with altogether 
new forces of blessing, will be a very ‘ Garden of 
God.”+ And as to the whole picture, we shall, perhaps’ 
find it easy to agree with the same gifted and devout 
scholar when he asks and answers, “ What picture 
is thisin Ezekiel, Chapters xl-xlvin? Ls zt the Jerusalem 
of the Restoration that has here presented itself to his 
prophetic vision, with historic fidelity? The form is 
too perfect for this. The relations described are too 
perfect to allow us to see in this picture a representa- 
tion, beforehand, of the restored Church of Zerubbabel 
and Joshua, of Ezra and Nehemiah, such as was after- 


* Smend. Der Prophet Ezekiel, 355. 
+ Orelli, Die alttest. Weissag. 421, 422. 


428 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ward realized historically. Or, zs 7 the consummated 
Jerusalem, the Eternal City of God? For this, again, the 
relations are too limited, too specifically Jewish. And 
yet there are elements, even.in the oracles of Ezekiel, 
that do not find expression in the architectural plan 
framed after the Mosaic pattern. The Temple is seen 
standing on a high mountain. This feature, and the 
Temple-River swelling as it goes, show that the whole 
is more than a new architectonic for the building of 
God’s house, or a new revision of the Law, or the 
Restoration of the State. It is a prophetic vision in 
which the Church of God and the Temple, are 
presented in glorified form. And yet the detailed 
descriptions are of such a kind, the walls, the chambers, 
and the doors, that they yield a real architectonic of 
which a plan may be drawn, complete as that of the 
temple of Herod or Solomon. The Mosaic cultus 
here, is ¢ypfical prophecy. Attempts have been made to 
crane up this picture, and its separate features, by 
artificial means, to the height of the New Testament 
revelation, dy putting a spiritual meaning into everything, 
or an outward fulfilment has been claimed by which 
even the dloody sacrifices must be logically ascribed to 
converted Israel. Really neither the one nor the other 
view accords with New Testament teaching.’”’* 

The sublime picture, therefore, that. Ezekiel has 
drawn in Chapters xl-xlviii, isa picture of the Wzl/ennial 
Age. Ofthat period many pictures abound in the Old 
Testament, al/ perspectively covering, in front, the brighter 
glories of the Eternal State, and into which not a few rays 
Jrom the splendor of the last and highest glorification are 
thrown forward and upon them. We are not, however, 


* Ibid, 418, 419. . 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 429 


to confound the two ages, because of this. If light from 
the final New Jerusalem shines in the Millennial picture, 
or if features common to the two ages are mingled in 
one, it 1s only because of that peculiar mode of the 
Spirit’s unveiling, whereby we are enabled to see one 
thing pictured tn another,—‘in re una cernere tmaginem 
altertus,’—and by a comparison of Scripture, and dis- 
tinction of ages, attain to certainty in our interpretation. 
Hence the old maxim, “ Destzngue tempora, et concordabit 
Scriptura,’ —“ Distinguish the times, and the Scriptures 
will agree.” Each prophet, moreover, paints from his 
own standpoint, and at best gives only a partial view. 
It is Ezekiel’s office to describe from a preestly point of 
view. Therefore he says nothing politically, or of the 
subject zations outside the Holy Land, as the other 
prophets do, but dwells on Israel, and Israel’s land, 
and City alone. If the Szwzlaritzes between his portrait 
of the ‘‘ Many Days” of Israel in the Kingdom, and 
Israel’s former Old Testament life, their ritual and laws 
are remarkable, still more remarkable are the vast and 
important Differences noted by Jews and Christians 
alike; differences so great as to make the former, at one 
time, almost extrude the book from the sacred canon, 
as uninspired. It is plain that these Differences imply 
an entire revolution from the Old order of things, and 
intimate strongly the “vanishing away” of the Law, to 
make room for the “ Mew Covenant’ he has elsewhere, 
like Jeremiah, Hosea, Isaiah, proclaimed with such 
spiritual force. There are Changes in the dimensions 
of the Temple so that it is neither the temple of Sol- 
omon, nor that of Zerubbabel, nor that of Herod; 
changes in the measures of the outer court, the gates, 
the wails, the grounds, and the locality of the temple 
itself, raised on a high mountain, and even separate 


430 SUPPIEMENTARY DTSCOSSTONS. 


from the City. The Holy Places have hardly anything 
like the furniture that stood in the Tabernacle of Moses, 
or the Temple of Solomon. There are Subtractions also. 
There is no Ark of the Covenant, no Pot of Manna, no 
Aaron’s rod to bud, no Tables of the Law, no Cherubim, 
no Mercy-Seat, no Golden Candlestick, no Shew-bread, 
no Veil, no unapproachable Holy of Holies where the 
High-Priest alone might enter, nor is there any High- 
Priest to offer atonement to take away sin, or to make 
intercession for the people. None ofthis. The Levites 
have passed away asa sacred order. The priesthood 
is confined to the sons of Zadok, and only for a special 
purpose. There is no evening sacrifice. The measures 
of the Altar of Burnt-Offering differ from those of the 
Mosaic altar, and the offerings are themselves but 


barely named. The preparation for the Singers is. 


different from what it was. The social, moral, and 
civil prescriptions enforced by Moses with such 
emphasis, are all wanting. The Additions too are won- 
dérful. The entrance of the “Glory” into Ezekiens 
temple to dwell there, forever; the Living Waters that 
flow, enlarging from beneath the Altar; the Suburbs, 
the wonderful trees of healing, the new distribution of 
the land according to the 12 tribes, their equal portion 
therein, the re-adjustment of the tribes themselves, the 
Prince’s portion and, the City’s new name, “ Fehovah- 
Shammah,” all go to prove that New Israel restored is 
a converted people, worshiping God “in Spirit and in 


Truth.” The laws and ordinances relating to the . 


“ Prince,’ all show that it is of a priestly-kingdom 
Ezekiel is speaking, and of which Israel is the center; the 
same kingdom Daniel speaks about, and that Chapters 
xl-xlviii are but the expansion of Chapter xxxviith. 
It is a development in which the Old passes out and the 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 431 


New comes in, for the chosen people—a development 
that carries abolition along with it,—a development 
which began at the first Coming of Christ, and shall be 
completed at his Second Coming; one in which the 
Better Sacrifice of the Servant of Jehovah supplants 
the old sacrifices, and the sprinkling with clean water, 
by the Spirit, takes the place of vain ablutions. 
Zerubbabel never dreamed of erecting such a temple, 
nor receiving Ezekiel’s ‘““ New Torah.” as a “ mandatory 
code for returning exiles.” The prophets of the Exile 
and Restoration well knew that this wonderful picture 
was no “imperfect memory” of Solomon’s dilapidated 
House, nor “ model for the Restoration,” nor “Utopia,” 
DOG. 1 iatonic scheme, nor ‘“Pancy sketch,” invented 
to beguile the weary hours of the e/te in the Gola; 
much less the “raw rudiment of the Pentateuchal 
biiest-code,’. as the Grai-Wellhausen, and 'Colenso- 
Kuenen-Duhm, and Robertson Smith-School, upturn- 
ingly teach. One thing was fixed as the “ Hills of 
Olam, viz.: That Ezekiel’s tableau of Israel’s future 
could not be realized uutil the close of Daniel’s 7oth 
week, and that ¢hzs fulfilment was conditioned absolutely 
on Israel's repentance as a people, and the finishing of [srael’s 
apostasy. Ezek. xliv:7-12. 

Once more. If, notwithstanding the Szmzlarztzes 
between Ezekiel’s picture and the Mosaic worship, the 
Differences are so great as to prove that Mosaism was 
then “waxing old”; and, furthermore, these Differences 
so great as also to prove that the picture was neither 
intended for, nor could be realized in, the times of the 
Restoration under Zerubbabel; and, yet more, that the 
picture is not that of the New Testament Church drawn 
in Old Testament colors, since its realization could 
only occur after the close of Daniel’s 7oth week, still 


432 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


future; it is equally clear that, notwithstanding some 
Similarities between it and John’s picture of the New 
Jerusalem, the Differences are so great as to prove that 
Ezckiel’s vision of the Temple and Jerusalem does not 
belong to the final glorified New Earth, although it 
adumbrates the same. The Temple Ezekiel describes 
is that of the Millennial Age, “ the 1000 years” of John; 
located in historic Palestine regenerate and recon.- 


structed at Christ’s Appearing. The transformation of ~ 


the Holy Land is not the final new creation which 
extends to the entire Planet, but only the first step in 
the great cosmical process of renewal which culmi- 
nates through a last catastrophe, in that remotest End. 
So Crusius, Lange, Christlieb, Rothe, Grau, Volck, 
Koch, Christiani, Ewald, Rinck, Karsten, Van Ooster- 
zee, Delitzsch, Orelli, and many more. Strongly real- 
istic, the prophet locates the realities zhzs szde the final 
glorified New Heaven and Earth. This is clear from 
the geographical points named in Chapters xlvii:10, 15, 19, 
20 .and xlvinz1, and from*the references to-the’ Dead 
“Sea,” xlvii:8, the Mediterranean “ Sea,” xlvii:10, 15-20, 
the “river Jordan” xlvi:18, the “Desert” xlviceeaane 
“ mountain,’ 1.e. Zion xliv:12, and to the “ borders of 
the land of Israel”’ given to the patriarchs in covenant, 
xl:2; xlv:4, 8; xlwi:13, 14. Such designations find no 
place in John’s picture of the glorified New Earth. TVhe 
marked Differences between the two pictures of Ezekiel 
and John show clearly that Ezekiel’s vision is that of 
the kingdom of the 1000 years ¢hzs sede the final New 
Jerusalem. Ezekiel describes a Temple. John says, 
‘I saw no Temple therein.” Rev. xx22>) Hzekieke 
land is bounded by the ‘‘sea.” In John’s territory there 
is “no more sea,’ xxt:1. Ezekiel speaks of thes amcaas 
Israel,” John speaks of a “New Earth,” xxit. In 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 433 


Ezekiel, the “ Holy City” is built up from the ground 
and, ited high.” In John, the “Holy City” is seen 
“descending from God out of Heaven,” xxi:2, 10, and 
is the redeemed “ Bride.” Furthermore, the measures 
in Ezekiel are insignificant, diminutive, compared with 
the colossal magnitudes in John. In Ezekiel, the 
SGlory’ dwellsin the Temple. In John it “lightens” 
the whole City with its over-streaming splendor. Yet 
more. The vision of the “living waters,”in Ezekiel, 
xlvil:I-12, is precisely that in Zechariah, xiv:8, and Joel 
11:18, realized at Messiah’s Second Coming, and con- 
nected with the physical changes in the territory of 
Judah, Zech. xiv:4-13; Jer. xxxii:38-4o. They flow East 
and West, summer and winter, out from Jerusalem ele- 
vated, and pass through the Acacia-Valley, Joel 11:18, 
imparting life everywhere, and empty into the Dead 
and Mediterranean seas. It is, evidently, the com- 
mencement of that cosmical regeneration and glorif- 
cation of which Paul speaks, when “the creature itself is 
freed from the bondage of corruption,” and passes, 
under the glorifying Spirit, “into the liberty of the glory 
of the sons of God,” Rom. viii:21, and embraces the 
whole land of Palestine, and Judah especially, in whose 
midst “the mountain of the Lord’s house” stands “ex- 
mec wer lea i:2 Mic. 1vi1';. Zech: xiv.t6." This, how- 
ever, is not the universal regenesis of the Planet, but 
the preparation of its theocratic middle-point for the 
glorious kingdom of the 1000 years, in which Israel 
stands pre-eminent. The moral process of development 
has already passed over into the material, through the 
resurrection from the dead, and where the children of 
the resurrection are, there nature shares their liberty 
and glory. Even the neighboring “Desert shall rejoice 
and blossom as the rose,” Isa. xxxv:1, and “be like Eden, 
28 


434 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 

the Garden of the Lord,” Isa. li:3, while above the City 
and “over all, the Glory shall be a covering,” Isa. iv:5. 
But, entrancing as this vision is, it is zo¢ John’s vision 
of the ‘Bride,’ the “Holy City” after the Close iii 
1000 years, but the vision of a state of things defore that 
close, and in which the “Beloved City,” Rev. xx:o, 
appears as the metropolis of an earthly kingdom whose 
overthrow is sought by Satan let loose, and by Gog 
and Magog, an expedition zmpossible on the final New 
Earth. 

The argument, therefore, of the post-millennialists, 
that because /sazah introduces his picture of the Mil- | 
lennial Age with the announcement of a “New Heavens 
and Earth,” Isa. Ixv:17, therefore, his description follow- 
ing that must be that of John’s New Jerusalem, or else 
John's New Jerusalem must be that of the Millennial Age, 
and Joel, Hosea, Isaiah, Micah, Daniel, Ezekiel, and 
John picture only oxe Age, the 1000 years being the 
time of the final New Heaven and Earth,— falls to the 
ground, We cannot identify the 1000 years with the Eter- 
nal State. This is set aside (1) By the manifold Differ- 
ences between the pictures themselves; (2) By the law of 
prophetic perspective; (3) By the common use of the same 
termes to cxpress different stages of the one great development 
of the one Kingdom of God, and in its different aspects, 
moral and material, spiritual and cosmical, down to the” 
final consummation. All this, Hofmann, Delitzsch, ~ 
Rothe, Luthardt, Lange, Volck, and Koch, have set 
forth in the most convincing manner. The Millennial 
Age, and the final New Heaven and Earth, are the 7wo — 
Great Phases of the wide and Zotal End, as seen, far off, © 
by the prophets, and undiscriminated, because blended 
in perspective, yet clearly out-rolled, and separated in — 
John’s Apocalypse, intimations of which are, however, | 


ier 
ba 


THE 1000 VEARS IN. EZEKIEL. 435 


already given, even in the prophets themselves, and in 
the Apostles. And thus the problem is resolved, and 
presented to faith and hope, precisely as the consum- 
mation will declare it. The Order of the Eschata is the 
same in both Ezekiel and John; (1) Israel in their land, 
sealed, and delivered from the rage of their last oppres- 
sor, [srael brought back from the sword. (2) The Res- 
urrection from the dead. (3) The “Many Days,” or 
1000 ‘years, of the priestly Kingdom. (4) Gog’s des- 
truction. And, if we supplement the Lschata, from 
Isaiah, we shall find the Order still the same, (1) Israel 
restored and ‘Antichrist destroyed; (2) The Resurrec- 
tion from the dead; (3) The Multitude of Days, or 
1000 years; (4) Satan and his hosts let loose, for final 
Judgment; (5) The New Heaven and Earth, of which 
the Millennial Age was the mirror and the type tran- 
sient and imperfect. On the basis of the Szzlartties 
John develops the final glorious picture of the New 
Jerusalem, and heightens it to special clearness and 
particularity, free from all temporal limitations. 

The “Symbolical Interpretation” of Chapters xl-xlvin, 
and in fact of Ezekiel’s whole Apocalypse, Chapters 
XXXVil—xl vill, is the name given, to their favorite mode of 
exposition, by the allegorizers and spiritualizers of these 
sections. As already said, these chapters are apoca- 
lyptic and eschatological, like the visions of Daniel, Zech- 
ariah, and Isaiah. They area “Vision.” But to assert 
that it is only a Symbol, and “One Vast Symbol of the 
Church,’ is simply to assume the “spiritualistic inter- 
pretation,” and deg the whole question. Moreover, what 
a symbolical vision is, we know. It is like the vision 
of the 4 Beasts in Daniel, or of the Monarchy-Image 
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream. How, also, to in- 


_ terpret these we know, But what the “symbolical tnter- 


436 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. . 


pretation of a symbol” is, what the ‘figure of a figure’ is, : 
it might be interesting to inquire, if, the evaporation — 
did not too soon elude our grasp. It seems to be some- — 
thing “volatile and airy,” like the idea of the “Absolute” 
which has no “existence,” but only “being,” and gets 
into being somehow, by its “self-becoming.” At best 
it is merely an abstraction, or “ guzd zgnotum’’ which 
Agnostics might admire, and reminds one seriously of 
Cicero’s famed definition of God, “aliquid tmmensum 
injinitumaque!’’ Such is ideal and symbolic Israel, their 
Temple, City, and Land. It is something in which the 
concrete real has disappeared. This view goes back to 
the days of the platonizing Origenand Augustine, both 
men of grandeur and renown, who, confounding the 
“Church” with the ‘‘Kingdom,” idealized Israel out of 
his rights and place in future history. It became the 
mediaeval creed, and, naturally enough, influenced the 
Reformers, not wholly escaped from Rome’s traditions, 
and lacking the time to study Eschatology, yet rebuk- — 
ing a false Chiliasm, and opening the door to thé true. — 
It is held by many noble men who see in the “Psalms ~ 
of David” only the “Church” whenever “ Israeljaam 
“Jacob,” “Zion,” or ‘“ Jerusalem” are named. QOUlam 
Christian Hymnology, so beautiful, also supports the 
same exegesis as 1t stands on “Jordan’s stormy banks.” 
The habit of allegorizing becomes a part of devotion, — 
and the result is that “Ideal Israel” emerges in the con- ~ 
sciousness of believers as the only Israel known to faith — 
and prophecy! In addition to this, the Higher Criti- 
cism helps the same cogitation. The main thing in — 
prophecy is said to be “the inner thought,” the “Idea — 
underneath”; not the words. There is no verbal inspi- — 
ration. The words of God are human, the chaff to the © 
wheat, the waist-bands and ruffles, or the outer-cloth- — 


af 


THE 1000 VEARS IN EZEKIEL. 434 


ing on the body, the “non-essential details,” “generous 
mexvression,’-“Oriental ficure,’ in.“short, -the “rough 
rind of a sacred bulb,” to be peeled and thrown away, 
or an “old bottle” into which “new wine,” when poured 
—the wine of spiritual interpretation,—explodes the 
leathern flask. The only remark, necessary here, is 
this, viz.: That the whole trouble with this mode of 
interpretation is, that every interpreter fixes the amount 
of “details” to suit himself, either rejecting them as 
“mere form,” or sublimating them into absurdities so 
grotesque as to destroy respect for both the interpreter 
and the interpretation, if not for the thing interpreted. 
It retains or remits, binds or looses, ad “bztum, until 
most, if not all, of the vision has faded away. 

In opposition to all this, the Bible speaks with a 
clear-ringing sound. Israel “abides” Israel, and the 
Millennial Kingdom, of which Israel restored is the 
sustaining center, and of which these Chapters of Eze- 
kiel are a glowing picture, fo//ows \srael’s national and 
personal resurrection at the Second Coming of the 
Lord. To that glorious End the eyes of the exiles were 
directed, a Redemption they deemed due, indeed, at 
their return from Babylonian Exile, but which the 
prophet Daniel was assured could only accrue at the 
end of the 7oth week. And in this we rest, our own 
eyes turned thither also. What Ezekiel did was to 
impress upon despairing Israel, scattered everywhere, 
and dead, like the bones in the valley, the absolute cer- 
tainty of God’s omnzpotence, faithfulness, and compassion, 
in the End of the Days, and that nothing could ever cause 
Him to forget His covenant, or alter the thing that had 
gone out of His lips. Dead Israel shall yet awake. 
Broken Israel shall be reunited. Down-trodden Jeru- 
salem shall yet arise. The Temple, laid in ruins, shall 


ree was rata ee “ ay * Bi Res - air a : cs ' ee 2 ct 
ont. = 
> a wey . ‘+. a PE ~) 
A438 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. ae 


be rebuilt. The Outcasts shall be gathered to thei 
home. The blindness shall be taken from their eyes, — 
and reproach no more afflict their name. A new, a — 
holy, royal, priestly, nation they shall be. Asonce [srael _ 
formed the nucleus of the “Church,” so again Israenm 
shall form the nucleus of the “Kingdom.” In that, © 
kingdom, and its glory, we Gentiles shall have a share; _ 
and, with Abraham and the patriarchs, Ezekiel and the _ 
prophets, David and the pious kings of Judah; and yet 
more, with Christ and His Apostles, with Martyrs, a 
Confessors, Reformers, and saints of all ages, enter in, 
recount the conflict and the victory, the danger and the 
faith, renew our study of God's word, hold converse — 
with the Lord Himself, and, blended in one fellowship, 
unite to sing one song — the “song of Moses and the — 
Lamb.” Does this appear too wonderful? “Meum — 
Yehovah! It ts the Utterance of Jehovah, Doer of these — 
hings!” re 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE. 439 


PART XY, 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN | 
SPATE: 


Connected with the delusion of a Millennium in this 
_present age, is the Idea of the so-called “Chrzstian-State” 
—an idea gotten somewhere, but neither from the 
Prophets, Christ, or His Apostles. It is one of the false 
‘lures of the age. Forgetful of the law of deterioration 
in the march of empires, seen in the Monarchy- 
Colossus, and of the succession of the 4 Beasts, each 
later one inferior to the former, and of the continued 
Beastly and Metallic character of Gentile government, 
politics and power, till the Lord come, the admirers of 
human perfectibility, and priests of optimist progress, 
still boast of our “ Christianized civilization”’ as the van- 
courier of millennial glory ready to burst over all the 
world. This isa part of the fine arts of “ Satan trans- 
formed into an Angel of Light,” teaching, as he first 
did, in the Garden, an improvement to man’s condition 
by doubting the Word of God, then denying it,—a 
science of progress by means of Knowledge gained 
through transgression, and of Unbelief usurping the 
piace of faiths “Yea; “ath God said?’ ‘“ Ye shall be 
as God!” Gen. ii:1, 5. Subtle Beast,—he always 


< 


44() | SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


talks so! He dazzles and deceives. He seems right- 
eous and philanthropic. ‘“Zherefore it is no great thing 
af his ministers also fashion themselves as ministers of 
righteousness, ’— deceitful workers,’—“as apostles of 
Christ,” I\ Cor. xi:13-15. -Professedly Christian men 
shall do the Devil’s work teaching this same method of 
“ progress,’ and women, too, shall assist to spread the 
fascination. The very best thing God has given us, — 
flis own Word, they will denounce as ‘ Pessimism,” 
teaching an “Optimism” born from its perversion. 
Corruptio optim pessima, the Corruption of the best ts the 
worst corruption.” ‘‘Huabetur optima pessima,; the worst ts 
esteemed the best.’ Itis the old story, from the Gates 
of Eden downward, along with the curse, through all 
history. A varnished lie is worse than naked poison. 
“Great Babylon,” bearing the Christian namejiiae 
church at every corner, a preacher on every street, is 
worse than the Chaldean City whose king was God’s 
rod to “ destroy, and make a hissing, and desolation, of 
Judah” the Messzanic State of the old civilization. And 
worse than Gold-headed Babylon was _ Iron-legged 
Rome, though more “ advanced” by 600 years. Men 
seem oblivious of the fact that z¢ was at the very time of 
the birth of the ath Beast Christ was born, that it was 
under the “Hmpire”’ of Rome, in its first imperial head, 
claiming divine honors, “Devas Augustus,’ and enrolling 
Judea as a tributary province, that Messiah’s manger 
was made at Bethlehem, and that, down to the present 
hour, Jerusalem still sits in the dust, trodden and 
stamped by the Gentile power, the scepter departed 
from Judah. They scem intent to forget, that though 
this “ Beast” has been christianized full 1500 years, 
with a wound in its head, it still “ives,” and has poured a 3 
out the blood of God’s saints, with more inexcusable _ 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE, 441 


guilt than even in its old pagan condition, and that 
Christendom, to-day, is sinking beneath a weight of 
transgression unknown to heathen lands. They forget, 
that the “ Times of the Gentiles,” in which we are liv- 
mo our, Church-Period, are: the Times: of. the: ath 
Beast or Roman World-Power, divided into various 
kingdoms; a Beastly and Metallic power, whose es- 
sential character, in spite of Christianity, remains 
unchanged down to the time of its destruction ; a ma- 
terialistic civilization of iron force and will, yet with 
the weakness of clay in it, pervaded by a spirit of sens- 
uality, and crowned with a false science, and false 
philosophy, over which Christianity has little or no 
control. 

If we seek for the “ Chrzstzan State’ in Prophecy, 
we shall seek long, and travel far, before our quest 
is satisfied. It certainly will not appear in pre-Chris- 
Handaimes > not in the Gold, the Silver, or’ Brass; of the 
Colossus; not in the Lion, Bear, Leopard, Ram, or He- 
Goat, among the Beasts. Shall we find it in the Iron 
and Clay, or in the 4th Beast, the anonymous monster ? 
What prophet, what apostle, speaks to us about the 
“Christian State ?” 

With just emphasis, Professor Ktibel asks, “ Where 
shall we find, in the Prophets, in Christ, in Paul, or in 
John, the idea of the Chrzstzan Szate, in this age, as that 
of the realization of the Kingdom of God?’* With 
equal emphasis, Professor Bleek asserts that “nowhere 
in prophecy is the idea of a Priucipatus Christianorum, 
sprung from the Gentiles, known to the Times of the 
Gentiles.’ + And with what unanswerable power has 


* Offenbaung, in Strack-Z6ckler. pp. 453, 454. 
+ Erklasung d. drei erst. Evang. II. 372. 


442 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. - . 


Auberlen shown that the “external Christianization of 
the World-Power is only the temporary wound of the 
Beast still unchanged in its heart, anti-christian still, not- 
withstanding its Christian order, culture, and civiliza- 
tion ; a civil structure accepting Christianity externally, 
the Church accepting the World internally, both 
parties meeting half-way, the Church and the World 
making mutual concessions, the Beast Christianized, the 
Church Bestialized, she the loser, it the gainer, the 
Beast carrying the Harlot, the bestiality, proud intel- 
lectual culture, science, and wealth, of Christendom, 
leading thousands away from, and preventing others 
from coming to, the knowledge of Christ !”* How for- 
cibly true those words which smite our idol of modern 
Christian civilization! Herein consists the gzgantic Mie 
and narrow mindedness of our generation, that our czvzlz- 
zation 1s thought to be the highest thing, accepted as a 
surrogate for grace, and for regeneration by the Spirit 
of the living God. “Ut zs the idol of the modern world.’ + 
How true the words of Hahn, indorsed by Weber, 
Gebhardt, Auberlen, Kliefoth, and how many more! 
that, in-the time of the so-called Christian State" itie 
professing Christian Church becomes Babylon, (Con- 
Jusion) the Harlot being not merely the City of Rome, 
nor the Roman Church alone, but all Churches in 
Christendom, without the Spirit and Life of our Lord 


Jesus, apostate from moral righteousness, corrupt, life-— 


less, worldly, seeking the pleasures of the flesh, open to 
the influence of all false spirits and false teachers, hav- 
ing a name to live, yet governed by the spirit, maxims, 
policies, and principles, of nature and the world.’ 

ase gia mie eee seter S k 


* Der Prophet Daniel 313-360, 
+ Ibid 234. 
t{Hahn. Briefe u. Leid. ub. d. Offenbar. Johan. Band v. §6. 1820, 


=. ee 


a en ae re a eS 


OUR PRESEML ACE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE, 443 


“The time comes,” says Professor Milligan, ‘“ when 
the Church as a whole will be more carnal than spirit- 
ual, more worldly than heavenly. The true members 
of Christ’s flock will be fewer in number than the false. 
The world will penetrate into the very sanctuary of God, 
and will not be rooted out until the Fudge of all takes to 
Himself His great power, and reigns. The longer the 
Church lasts as an outward institution in the world, the 
more does she naturally tend to realize the picture of 
‘Babylon’ in the Apocalypse, ‘that Great City,’ the 
emblem of the degenerate Church. Sadylon ts not the 
Church of Rome in particular. Deeply, no doubt, that 
church has sinned, and because.of this we interpret 
Babylon as Christian Rome. Yet, the interpretation is: 
false. The Harlot is wholly what she seems. Christian 
Rome was never wholly, what, on one side of her char- 
acter she was so largely. She has maintained the truth 
of Christ as against idolatry, and preferred poverty to 
splendor in a way Protestantism has never done, and 
nurtured the noblest types of devotion the world hasever 
seen. Above all, if at times, she has allied herself with 
kings, at other times she has the rather trampled kings 
- beneath her feet, as when, in the interests of the poor 
and oppressed she has taught proud barons and impe- 
rial tyrants to quail before her. For deeds like these, 
her record is not with the Beast but with the Lamb. 
Babylon cannot be Christian Rome; and nothing has 
been more injurious to Protestant Churches than the 
impression that the two were identical, and that, by 
withdrawing from communion with the Pope, they 
wholly freed themselves from alliance with the spiritual 
harlot. Babylon embraces much more than Rome, and 
illustrations of what she ts, lies nearer our own door. 
Wherever professedly Christian men have thought the 


= 


- me oe 


444 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


world’s favor better than its reproach, esteemed its 
honors a more desirable possession than its shame, 
courted ease rather than suffering, self-indulgence 
rather than self-sacrifice, and substituted covetousness 
in grasping for generosity in distributing what they 
had, there the spirit of Babylon has been manifested. 
In short, we have in the great Harlot-City, neither the 
Church as a whole nor the Romish Church in particular, 
but all who profess to be Christ's flock and are not, deny- 
ing intheir lives the main characteristic by which they ought 
to be distingutshed,—viz., that they follow Christ.”* Such 
is Christendom apostate from Christ. Such the Church 
under the so-called “ Christian State.” Civil govern- 
ment is, indeed, an ordinance of God for the preser- 
vation of natural right and social order, and Paul made 
use of it as such, counseling obedience to Cesar and 
the ‘Powers that be,’ when one was a Nero, both 
pagan, and the “Christzan State” unknown.> The 
“Christian Empire” of Constantine, and the “ Holy 
Roman Empire” of later times, are simply the “ Beast” 
with a wound in his head by means of Christianity, yet 
alive, while still seemzng to be slain. It is part of the 
Colossus, and no part of the Kingdom of Christ. So is 
it with the so-called “Christianized World-Power” every- 
where, whether that of Kaiser, Czar, King, Queen, or 
His Majesty, the ‘‘People.” Its place is in the lower 
part of the Iron-legs, and in the Clay and Iron Toes. 
It is precisely where the Mountain-Stone will smite it 
one day in order to clear the world of its presence, 
and introduce the Kingdom of Christ. It belongs to 
the “Ten Horns” out of which the Antichrist will come. 
It lives and moves, and has its being, in the Interval 


*Professor W. Milligan, D. D., University of Aberdeen. Revelation 
of St. John, 179, 183, 184. (1886). 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE-CHRISTIAN STATE:,.° 445 


, between the 69th and 7oth Weeks of Daniel, and is 
doomed to destruction. It is that institution of Gentile . 
Sovereignty which, in its most Christian pretension, 
refuses to recognize God in its Constitution, and glories 
in the fact that it stands xeutral and indifferent, in law, 
toward the religion of Jesus Christ, protecting equally 
the most corrupt forms of Christianity and religious 
Heathenism, with the purest and the best; a State not 
daring to recognize Jesus Christ, by law, yet boasting 
of its peerless Christian institutions, licensing brothels, 
gambling dens, and saloons, by its Christian State Leg- 
islation as one of the prudent ways, approved by God, 
to “reform the world” and “ promote the Kingdom of 
Christ,”’— the ad majorem gloriam Dect doctrine. which 
does evil that good may come, “whose damnation is 
just.” In its most Christian portion, the United States, 
it spends the sum of $900,000,000 per annum, for whzsky 
alone, chief staple in the national revenue, while, on 
the breast of Europe to-day, no less than 28,000,000 of 
woman-born, enrolled and armed to the teeth, stand 
ready to imbrue their hands in each other’s blood;— 
officered, led, inspired, and paid by the “ Chrzstian 
State.”* The appalling corruption, venality, drunken- 


**“Burope, to-day, is an avmed camp, Over 28,000,0c0 of men, all in 
the prime of manhood, stand enrolled, to expose their lives in the next great 
war. The annual cost of this force exceeds 150,000,000 pounds sterling 
($750,000,000), Since the Franco-Prussian war, seventeen years ago, 
1,500,000 000 pounds sterling ($7,500,000,000) have been spent in prepa- 
ration for the coming war. In one week, Germany can set 750.000 men in 
French territory, and France bring $50,000 to her frontier.” —London Daily 
News, Jan. 14, 1889. “The British fleet, to-day, is inadequate for England’s 
defense. France has everything to gain and nothing to lose in a war with 
3ritain in the near future. I have no words strong enough to convey what 
I believe would be the judgment of the peoples of our magnificent Empire 
if we lost our great heritage, as we undoubtedly should. were we caught un- 
prepared, through want of a sufficient navy.” Lord Charles Beresford in 
the Nineteenth Century, Jan., 1889. While thus preparing for war, 233 
members of the British Parliament have memorialized the President of the 
United States, and Congress, to take steps to conclude a ¢veaty with Great 


‘ ? ‘ 7 
-~% 4 a ton 


446 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


ness, perjury, betting, pooling, purchase and sale of 
votes, detraction, libel, and violence, seen in municipal, 
state, and national elections, and in all Gentile politics ; 
the base and degrading arts and devices employed by 
Christian men to win office and power, with expecta- 
tion of plunder besides ; the whole spirit and temper of 
the times; the proverbial dishonesty in all business and 
all professions; the lust for war in order to make 
money; the Pudlic Press advertising every hole of vice 
on earth, pouring out, as from a wide and _ stenchful 
sewer, its endless stream of daily filth, into the bosom 
of every home, and dumping, daily, at every man’s 
door, its endless car-loads of obscene incident and lewd 
inuendo, scavengered up fromall the highways, gutters, 
slums and palaces, of all lands, until society wades 
knee-deep in a cesspool of infamy whose atmosphere 
asphyxiates its life; the prodigious millions invested by 
Christian men in Sabbath-breaking and crime-increasing 
corporations; the Titanic schemes of self-aggrandize- 
ment; the oppression of the poor; the amounts spent in 


Britain to settle, by a court of arbitration, all disputes Jdetween the two 
governments which cannot be settled by diplomacy. Fear alone dictates the 
policy. Statesmen seem, however, not to know that, only after the last great 
anti-christian conflict, such a thing is possible, and that the frst ivh C ourt 
of Arbitration for National Differences, will be setup in Jerusalem, bringing 
universal peace, when men, weary Of their sanguinary game, will flock to 
Zion, for “ Light and Right,” and ‘‘learn war no more,” a consummation to 
be realized only at the ‘End of the Days,” when “Christ [Timself shall judge 
among the Nations.” Isa. ii:2-4; Micah iv:1-3; Psa. xlvi:8-11. 

As a result chiefly due to the whisky Traffic, and licensing of Lust 
by the ‘‘ Christian State,” is the appalling prostitution of the marziage rela- 
tion. February 20, 1889, Commissioner Carroll ID. Wright, had reported to 
Congress that, in 1867, the number of Divorces granted was 9,937 ; in 1886, 
the number was 25,535, and for the periods between these dates 328,716. 
The ‘‘Christian Church” has ceased to punish the guilty parties, or hold 
responsible those who are instrumental in the destruction of the family and 
the home. She retains in full communion, and in good standing, men and 
women openly convicted by the State, of crimes against the laws of both God 
and man. And she does this of set purpose: a “‘vespecter of persons” in her 
administration, making Christ and the Church the shield and minister of sin. 


ne a ~ 


OUR PRESENT AGH PHE CHRISTIAN STATE, 44 


a gorgeous architecture, a luxurious living, and un- 
stinted pleasures; the heaping up of riches for the last 
times, and the rage and rush for more; all these have 
already made even the mention of the name of “ Chrzs- 
ttan-State,” a theme for scurrility, scorn, and contempt. 
After 1800 years, in spite of all that is good, this is its 
latest physiognomy, and is but a meager feature of its 
unspeakable enormity.* No! Christendom is not a 
* Christian-State,’ albeit there are Christians init. Its 
names in God’s word, are “ Babylon the Great,” the 
“rother-Harlot,. and the “ Dwellers on the Earth. 
Our “politeuma”’ is not here. Our “czvitas” is one 
whose “Builder and Maker is God.” We are “ pilgrims 
and strangers,” in this “Christian-State,” if we are 
Christ’s. Our one and only object in praying “for all 
in authority ” is that we may be allowed to lead a godly 
life, resist the Devil wherever we find him, whether in 
Church or State, pay the penalty due to true fidelity, 
labor, suffer, and do God’s Will, and “ wait for His Son 


*Crime Increasing. “The police authorities of more than 100 cities in 
the United States furnish statistics to the Mew York papers, as to the 
astounding increase of crime. These statistics show that Crime is more 
than keeping pace with the population, on the average. It is in advance of 
it, in spite of all legislation, moral influence, and punitive or reformatory 
measures. Burglaries, robberies, assassinations, the recklessness of human 
life, drunkenness, infanticides, prostitution, and the general corruption of 
young and old, male and female, have become alarming. Among women, 
left to provide for themselves, especially the young, the criminals, and de- 
bauchees are the worst. The sources of crime in our public play-houses, 
gilded saloons, private resorts of pleasure and places of amusement, the lax 
_ morals of our social life, and the example of many prominent in our com- 
munity, are making a Sodom and Gomorrah of the land. The picture is not 
an inviting one but full of material for grave consideration and anxious 
inquiry.’—MNew York Times, March 21, 1889. 

A dispatch from London, March 20, 1889, to the New York Herata, 
says, ‘‘ The increase in capfz/al crimes is attracting much attention. No less 
than 22 men and women, within a short period, are now under sentence of 
death in the United Kingdom, and will be executed within the next six 
weeks. This, however, is only what might be expected, for the chief cities 
of Christendom are reeking in crime.” 


448 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


from Heaven.” Gigantic is the misconception, to 
dream that God has given the Church, unable to reform 
herself, to build the Christian State up to a Kingdom 
of Christ, or to reform the world. God’s wisdom is 
not so foolish. Neither in the Times decreed upon the 
Gentiles, nor the Weeks decreed upon the Jews, is the 
idea of a “Christian State” found anywhere in 
prophecy. What prophecy aims at is the Kingdom of 
Christ, first of all in the heart by the power of the 
Spirit, and next, the Kingdom of Christ as an outward 
Polity built upon the ruins of Gentile Sovereignty and 
Gentile Empire, at His Second Coming. Until then, 
the “ Beast” lives! and what we are pleased to call the 
Christian State, is simply the Chrzstcan-Beast, either the 
Horns of the Beast, or the Zoes of the Colossusi-a 
Beast whose power is zz check for the present, but soon 
to be unchecked* and drive Christianity back to the 
wall. Its wound will then be healed, in proportion as 


Christianity dies out of Christendom, and Heathenism 


revives. 

The picture of the times of the Church and the 
State, whether independent of each other, or in union, 
and of the concurrent operations of the servants of 
Christ, and of Satan, is given us too vividly in God’s 


*Whatever the ‘* What withholdeth”” may be, whether the Civil Power, 
social order, the true church, the State or the Gospel, the “ //e who now 
withholds,” 11 Thess ii: 6, 7, can only be the “valted Redeemer, Christ 
Himself, to whom ‘‘all power” is given, not only to make the wrath of man 
praise Him, but “‘to restrain the rem ainder.” Ps. Ixxvi: 10, The Antichrist 
will be evented “‘in his own time.” That time, we know, is the 7oth 
Week of Daniel, Dan. ix:27, the last 1260 days of which are his persecuting 
supremacy, Dan. vii:25, xii:7, Rev. xiii:5. His Parousta ts obstructed, now, 
by the purpose of God and the'*‘ Times of the Gentiles” in which the gospel 
goes to the Gentiles, between the 6gth and 7oth weeks. Then, when the full 
number of God’s elect is ** daken out,” and the gospel has been preached as 
a witness to all the world, the Odstruction will be “taken out of the way,” 
the flood-tide of lawlessness inundate Christendom, and the ‘‘ Man of Sin be 
revealed,” - 


- 


OUK PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN-STATE,. 449 


word to be misunderstood by any who care to know 
the truth. It is under the FParadle of the Sower, the 
Missionary activity of the Church is represented, in 
this present age. It is under the Parable of the Tares the 
Missionary activity of the Devil, during the same period, 
is set forth ; and the Christian scholar who will give the 
world a treatise, with full statistics of the Devil’s mis- 
sions, and stations, their progress and expenditures, in 
the Christian-State, will do more to set the Word of 
God, concerning this present age, in its true light, than 
has yet been done by the one-sided views so constantly 
presented. It is under the Paradle of the Mustard 
Seed we see the outward extension of the Church to a 
tree so large and overspreading that even the fowls of 
the air build convenient nests in its branches, and vul- 
tures make its forks their home. It is in the Parable 
of the Leaven we learn the inward corruption of 
-the Church, by her own act, the Woman secreting 
false doctrine in the pure truth designed for the chil- 
dren’s bread. It is in the Parable of the Nobleman we 
learn the attitude of the great majority who, during the 
time of the “Christian State,” exultin rebellion against 
Christ, refusing to acknowledge Him. Wherever mil- 
lennial glory is, it certainly is xot here, in this age! The 
conversion of the world to Christ 1s xot 7x this present 
time! Side by side, the servants of Christ and those of 
the Devil work on, every handful of wheat accom- 
panied by a hundred handfuls of cockle sown even 
more widely. The statistics of 1,000,000 Christians, 
mean the statistics of 10,000,000 not Christians. A hand- 
ful of wheat scattered on the earth, means three-fourths 
of it picked up by Satan himself, or scorched by the 
heat, or choked by the thorns. Tares everywhere, and 
so abundant and intermingled with the wheat, and so 


29 


450 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


resembling the wheat, that it is perilous to undertake a 
separation. Surprise indeed! “Ax Enemy hath done 
this!” Itisthe Devil’s sleepless missionary enterprise, 
supported by trade, commerce, agriculture, distilleries, 
breweries, railroads, politics, science, philosophy, art ; 
a Zizanian Christianity interpreted to mean a J/1llennial 
Glory, under the fostering care of the “Christian State!” 
The picture of the Christian State, on its trading side, 
is that of a Chamber of Commerce revolting against an 
absent King. On its agricultural side, it is that of a 
Wheat Field crowded with cockle. In both it is a vast 
Area, the “ World,” under the “god of thts world,” filled 
with growing grain, good and bad, in the midst of 
which is a Colossus, and then a “Beast” having seven 
heads and ten horns, stamping and goring everywhere, 
a false prophet at his side preaching lies, the Devil 
loose and roaring like a lion, ravening wolves prowling 
for their prey, unclean spirits, “like frogs,” repeating 
their unending croak, the days of Lot and of Noah, 
millions of men butchering each other, millions more 
staggering drunk to the ground, palaces of lust and 
temples of mammon, far as the eye can see, churches 
also everywhere, and some preachers and pamphleteers 
applauding the glories of the Millennium! o/ The 
rhetoric of a Millennium of righteousness and peace, in 
this age, before Christ comes, is the eloquence of false- 
hood, pleasing to Satan, and offensive to God. Down 
to the “End,” it shall be as it is, until “all things that 
offend,” “panta ta skandala,” the bundled crimes of the 


Christian Church shall be removed, by judgment, from ~ . 


the kingdom, and the polluted “ Christzan State” be 
heard of no more! The words of Christ are plain. 
Upon the World-Acre stands, now, the seed of the 
Kingdom of Heaven while, side by side, grow the 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE. 45] 


Devil’s tares, numerous as they are surprising ; nor 
ever will the glory of the Kingdom come,—be the 
Christian-State what it may,— until the sickles and the 
angels have done their work! It is the double-work of 
Church-missions, and Devil-missions, which, for a time, 
procrastinates the Advent and the Harvest. 

The Holy Spirit, as if anxious to guide us aright, 
has multiplied pictures of our present age, and of the 
condition of the Church and times of the Christian 
State, together. Conquest, territorial acquisition, vast 
commercial enterprises, immense riches suddenly 
amassed, mammon-worship, harlotry, libertinism, 
world philosophy, science, education, culture, iniquity, 
formalism, love waxing cold, treacheries, infidelity, 
apostasy, demonic spiritism, missions, revolutions, 
blind Laodicean optimism, and final judgment. It is the 
same elsewhere; “false teachers” “ seducers, waxing 
worse and worse,” “Satan transformed into an angel of 
light,” “all seeking their own, and not the things that 
are Christ’s,” “many walking who are enemies of the 
cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose God 
is their belly, who glory in their shame, who mind 
earthly things,” a “persecution” for the godly, “false 
brethren,” “brother betraying brother,” intolerance of 
“sound doctrine,” “itching ears,” “building, planting, 
marrying and giving in marriage,” “lies,” “perjuries,” 
“covenant-breaking,” “thefts,” “robberies” and “slan- 
ders,” “‘perilous times,” “gangrene,” moral “rottenness,” 
“the wages of unrighteousness,’ “the way of Cain,” 
“love of self,” spiritual ‘“‘decay,” a “name to live yet 
dead,” love of “pre-eminence” in the church, “love 
of the world,’ dominion of “the world, the flesh 
gacetpes devi, “the lust of the. eye, of. the flesh, 
and the pride of life,’—-while God’s true saints, in the 


452 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


“Christian State,” are a jeweled “few” like to 7,000 out 
of 4,000,000, in Elijah’s time, or the “remnant” in Isaiah’s 
day, but for whom Israel had been “ as Sodom and Go- 
morrah !” 
3 Already, by hyperbole of expression, we say the 
gospel has gone to all lands, the Bible been translated 
into all tongues, and Christianity achieved a substantial 
victory over Satan’s empire. Our vouchers for this, 
are Paris, London, Berlin, St. Petersburg, Vienna, 
Edinboro’, Glasgow, Dublin, Boston, New York, Chi- 
cago, St. Louis, Cincinnati, New Orleans, Washington, 
etc:; cic: the paragons of Christendom, hke which, if 
the whole planet were, it would be ripe for the sickle 
of judgment! Blood-shedding, adulterous, intemperate and 
maminon-loving, Christendom! Sabbath-breaking too! And 
this, after 18 centuries, the paraded boast of pre-advent 
Millennialism! Blow the trumpet in Bethhaven! 
What a phalanx of able and scholarly men challenge 
attention to the fact that, “/Vot one nation yet, in its gen- 
eral mass, has accepted Christianity, but only individuals, 
and, relatively to the population, few!’ (Thiersch.) If we 
ask what the prophets looked for, what the Apostles 
expected, and what John saw in vision, in this state of 
things, there is but one answer, and that is, not the con- 
version of the world, but the waxing of Antt-christianity 
to its height, in the very midst of Christendom, the crisis, 
the conversion of Israel, and Advent of the Lord to Judg- 
ment. It is the one answer, everywhere. Only after 
Israel has become a Christzan Nation, worthy of the 
name, not before, will the Nations, as such, become 
Christian. Rev. xv:4; Deut. xxxii:43. It is the some 
uniform doctrine in Moses, in the Prophets, in Jesus, in 
the Apostles. In manner, the most vivid, John distin- 
guishes between those converted defore the Advent, i.e. 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE. 453 


individuals, Jews and Gentiles, and those converted 
ayer the Advent, 1. e., “vations,” Rev. 111:5,.8, 20; Rev. 
XV:4. 

Most striking, in thts respect, is the difference of repre- 
sentation in the 7 Epistles, from that in the later part of 
the Apocalypse; the difference between the Times of the 
Gentiles and the Times that follow Israel's conversion when 
Gentile Times are no more! Wow different the picture 
Oine. “Churches” iromthat of the “ Kingdom! In 
these Epistles, adumbrating the whole history of Chris- 
tendom, or the Church-Period, between the 69th and 
70th Weeks, we see, even in the first group of 3, Ephesus 
“fallen from her first love’; Smyrna alone unblamed 
because still faithful in the fire, and in the prison, Satan 
still raging, foes blaspheming, and Pergamos, though 
holding her faith, yet fellowshiping mammon-loving 
Balaamites, Nicolaitans, and dwelling “in Satan’s seat.” 
Inthe second group of 4, darker still is the scene. The 
world has penetrated the Churches, all which have become 
secular. In Thyatira, it is only a “remnant” we find 
maintaining the faith. The crowd still fellowship those 
who “seduce” the servants of Christ to heathenish 
ways. In Sardis a “few names” are worthy to walk in 
white. Philadelphia has only a “little power,” and is 
urged to) “hold fast.” In Laodicea, the. world is 
supreme. Surely, this is not a M/clennzal picture! And, 
when come to the 7oth Week, it is “Babylon” we see, sym- 
bol of the false professing church, ripe for the judg- 
ments of God, as it will be when Christ shall come! 

But how different the scene in the Age that follows 
the Advent! How different after Babylon’s fall, and 
Antichrist’s doom, and the passing away of Gentile 
supremacy over the Jew! It is Israel converted, now, 
all Nations acknowledging Christ, Jerusalem lifted to 


454 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


glory, the Saints awaked from their beds, the Kingdom 
come, and the Lord, Himself, enthroned over all! And 
» what is made clear as the sun is the fact that this won- 
drous Accession of the Nations, as such, ts the result of the 
. Conversion of Israel, as such, at the second coming of Christ.* 
And, herein, John is in perfect harmony with all other 
Scripture which affirms the same thing. It is when the , 
“Set Time to favor Zion’ has come, and Israel’s"sonm 
reclaimed to Christ, “take pleasure in her stones,” and 
“pity hér dust,” and the Lord shall appear in His glory, 
“to build up Zion,” that, then, “the Watsons shall fear the 
name of the Lord, and all Kings of the earth Hts glory,” 
Ps. cui:13-18. It is when He “breaks in pieces the 
oppressor,” at the close of the 7oth Week, and “judges 
among the poor of the people,” that, then, “Al Nations 
fall down and serve Him,” Psa. |xxii:4-13. It is when 
His “Wondrous works” and “Mighty acts,” are known, 
and His “arm made bare,” that, then, ‘“4// Nations shall 
come and worship before Him,” Ps. \xxxvi:g. So sounds 
the harp of David.t Most emphatic is the form and 
/ the repetition of this testimony that the JVazzons 
of the Planet, as such shall never be Christian 


* °° The entrance of the Nations into the Kingdom of God FOLLOWS 
Lsrael’s conversion, ‘They are prepared for it by jzdictal displays of Jeho- 
‘vah’s majesty in the destruction of the enemies of His Kingdom. ‘Those 
who are spared are filled with fear and trembling at His presence. It is the 
deliverance of Israel effected by these judgments, and the Messianic Salva- 
tion thus brought to her people, which first awake in the Nations the desire 
to belong to God whom they have thus learned to know as the only Helper, 
There is a full recognition of the egualty of the Gentiles with the Jews in 
their relation to Christ and the blessings of salvation, yet this does not ex- 
clude the idea that, without prejudice to this eguality, Israel as a Nation 
may take a high position in the perfected Kingdom of Christ. The entry of 
the Nations in the Kingdom of God and their natural fellowship with 
Israel are realized through /srael as the special possessor of these blessings.” 
—Prof. Riehm. Mess. Proph. pp. 208, 785. 
+ Christendom embraces already the whole living civilization of the Globe. 
But, if the matter be carefully looked into it will be found thet not seldom, 
when men speak about the spread of Christianity, God and His Christ have 


OUR PRESENT AGE—THE CHRISTIAN STATE. 455 


Nations in any true sense of the term, acknowl- 
edging Christ as their Lawgiver and their Prince, 
until after Israel as a nation has done the same. 
When Israel is a “nation born in a day,” then “the Lord 
will gather all Nations and they shall come and see His 
glory in Jerusalem.” Isa. Ixvi:18-21. Then “Kings 
shall be nursing fathers and Queens shall be nursing 
mothers” to that people, and “all Nations shall say, 
Come, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and 
to the House of the God of Jacob, and He will 
teach us His ways and we will walk in His paths,” 
Isa. xlix:12-23; i:1-4. It is when the Lord “brings 
again Zion” that “all the ends of the earth shall 
see the Salvation of God,” and “together,” and “Nations 
shall come to her light, and kings to her Sunrise,” Isa. 
XXX11:7—10; xl:4; Ix:1. And all this only upon the des- 
truction of the last Antichrist and the deliverance of 
Israel, at the Coming of Israel’s Goe/ to Zion at the end 
of Gentile times. Isa. lix:19-21. It is precisely what 
the Czthara-Players on the Glassy Sea tell us in Rev. 
xv:4. The whole Bible from Moses to John is a unit 


no place in their thoughts. It is the natural growth of a Reign of Justice 
they are dreaming of, as if the Truth could prevail and conquer the world 
apart altogether from the supernatural power and grace of Christ. The 
progress of Christianity is the progress of a@ A/ighty Prince, who ‘having 
girded His sword upon His thigh rides forth prosperously in behalf of truth, 
and meckness and righteousness.” ‘The conversion of ‘‘the peoples” is to be 
accomplished by the ‘‘declaration of His AZighty-Acts.” The Presence o7 
Chvist is that alone which can secure the victory. /¢7s quite unwarrantable 
to explain this by saying that the blessing ts to be wrought out by the pacific 
doctrine and institutions with which Christ endowed the Church eighteen cen- 
turiesago. * * * Jtis when He comes to judge the earth, that, then, He 
will, by some storm of controversy, or of revolution, sweep away the institu- 
tions in which injustice has entrenched itself, even when the storms that agi- 
tate the Nations are the Chariot in which He rides to take possession of the 
Earth and make it an abode of righteousness and peace. <Avise, O God, 
judge the Earth; for thou shaltinherit All Nations! “Even so; Come Lord 
Jesus! Come quickly!’—Prof, Binnie, Aberdeen. The Psalms, pp. 314- 
3206. 


* 


456 SUPPLEMENTARY DISCUSSIONS. 


on this question, every prophet, and apostle, and our 
Lord Himself, denying, point-blank, any World-con- 
version, or any Millennial Kingdom before the Second 
Advent. Paul’s description and distribution of the 
Dispensations in Romans [X-XI, viz., the Patriarchal, 
before the distinction between Jew and Gentile existed, 
the /ewzsh, then the Pre-Millennial Christian, during 
which the Jewish people, as such, abide in their 
unbelief, then the Glorious Millennial Age follow- 
ing Israel’s Conversion and the Redeemer’s coming 
to Zion, refute this patent folly. The ‘‘Watzons” of 
the Earth, whose Register was chronicled when 
God chose Abraham to be the father of the Jewish 
people, and “suffered the Gentiles to walk in their 
own ways,” cherishing Israel as his “first born” national 
son, are now, by Abraham’s Seed, reclaimed, and 
“bless themselves” in the same. Genesis, Chapters X- 
XI1. To place this consummation in the present time is 
to pervert God’s word. John, David, Moses, all the 
Prophets and Apostles are in harmony here, and the 
Apocalypse is the combined light of all. The idea of 
the conversion of the world to Christ, before the Lord’s 
appearing, is unknown to this great book which covers 
the whole present as well as the future. On the con- 
trary, the masses in this present age, reject the gospel. The 
field ts filled with tares. ven under divine judgments, 
they only the more “blaspheme,” and refuse to “re- 
pent,” Rev. 1x:20, 21; xvi:io, 11. And this im the “Cie | 
tian State!” So-called “Culture” and “Civilization” are 
powerless to teach even decent respect for God! The 
“Church” becomes a ‘‘savorless salt.” More and more, 
the “Christian State” is a tool of Satan. “At the House 
of God judgment must begin;’—a house trampling the 
divine ordinance of a godly discipline under foot and 


POSTSCRIPT. Aad 


preferring respect of persons, numbers, wealth, undis- 
turbed social relations, outward prosperity, peace, 
business-thrift and corruption, to fidelity, suffering, 
trial, righteous contention, and loss. We need no Brad- 
laugh, nor Ingersoll, now, to tell us this. And what, 
the “Aud” shall be of a Christendom dechristianized, we 
already know. An impenitent, world-loving Christian, 
is worse than a Christless pagan, harlot, or publican. 
Gomorrah and Sodom were “xot half” as guilty as the 
Jerusalem Nebuchadnezzar burned. Ezek. xvi:48-51. 
Ninevites, Tyre and Sidon, Chorazin, Bethsaida, shall 
meet a milder fate than ¢he “Christian State’ which, 
like Capernaum, “exalted to heaven shall yet be thrust 
down to hell!” 


POSTSCRIPT: 


‘“ With Augustine arose the idea that the Church is the Kingdom, and 
this, with the changed political condition, and the position of the Church, 
under Constantine, led to the downfall of the CAzfastic doctrine. The vigor 
of its life departed, as persecutions ceased, and when Christianity began to 
sway the Civil Power, this was regarded as the ‘ Victory’ the Millenntum 
had promised. The Middle Age perpetuated this great error.” Semisch. 
flerzog. Real-Encyc. 1, 659. 

‘“The view that Christianity will expand in this age to a World-Religion, 
and bring the Golden Time, as the product of its historical development, is 
fundamentally false, and opposed to the Word of God. It rests upon a 
false ground, the identification of the inner life of the Church with her out- 
ward extension. Its consequences are the struggle after Secular Power, 
National Churches, Vational Creeds, National Confessions, National Pat- 
ronage, WVational Legislation, Propagandism, and passion for Union, fatal 
to the true life and mission of the Church. We need only remember Con- 
stantine’s time and the nominal conversion of the masses, mere zame-Chris- 
tians. The hope of a Christian-State ending in a Millennium is deceiving. 
According to the Word of God, the outcome of the development of the Chris- 


: ‘ og . 
(r- - ae 
458 | POSTSCRIPT. = 


tian Church, in this age, is a great apostasy through which Christianity itself 
is forced back into the Great Tribulation.” A vefoth. Christliche, Eschat- 
olog te, 196, 197. 

‘“Let us guard against the idea that it is either possible or destined, that 
Christianity will Christianize, in a real spiritual sense, the world in this pres- 
ent age. The kingdoms of this world must first be destroyed. Then only 
is it possible that, rising in a new form, they will become the Kingdom of 
our Lord and His Christ. This view of the world, and of our times, is 
founded on the Word of God.” <Auberlen, Daniel, 288. 

‘“ The Church may succeed in making a worldly caricature of the King- 
dom, but let us never allow ourselves to dream that, by thus forming herself 
according to her model in the midst of the world, the secret and continuing 
increase of the World-Kingdom and power, with its fatal influence, is inter- 
rupted. This interruption is effected, according to Scripture, in a totally 
different way, even by the binding of Satan, and casting him into the Under- 
world, at the Second Coming of Christ. Antichrist must first be destroyed, 
and the Nations judged, before Christianity can ever become a World- 
Religion.” Hofmann, Wetsagg u. Er full, 1 295. 

“Tt isa real apostasy of which the Apostle speaks, and not a mere Ttesem- 
blance. Such is the future now impending, and whose beginnings are all 
around us. Some resign themselves to a vain hope, and dream that Chris- 
tianity will, more and more, become a power in human thought and action, 
and finally complete itself in the synthesis of these two fields of natural and — 
Christian life, so becoming a World-Religion embracing in its bounds the 
utmost barbarous tribes. On the contrary, the future we go to meetis the 
complete alienation of the masses from the Christian faith, and finally an 
open apostasy from the same. Not unity, but the sundering and separation 
of the religious and natural consciousness; not the union but the disruption 
of the Church and Civil Society, is the outcome before us. The Christ- 
opposed consciousness of the age demands a Zeader in whom it shall be 
concentrated, and personally represented, and, in this sense, the Apostle 
Paul connects with the last apostasy the ‘Man of Sin.” Luthardt Lehre. — 
v. a, letzten Dingen, 150. , 

‘« The question before us is not a vain one. It forbids us making any alli- 
ance with State-Omnipotence, for this would be only worshiping the Beast, 
Just as earnestly does it forbid what so many would exact of us, on all sides, 
viz.: That we should stand shoulder to shoulder with the Great Harlot, in — 
order to contend the more energetically against the anti-christianity of mod- | 
ern culture, for this alliance with the Harlot would only be to hinder the — 
making of her ‘naked and desolate by the Kings of the earth,’ and the ~ 
‘eating of her flesh with fire,’ an event in which we should go hand in ~ 


hand with God, On the other side, it teaches us the right answer in refer- 
‘ \d ¥ 


POSTSCRIPT. 459 


ence to the appearing of the Antichrist in the last times, viz., that the sign 
of his presence is not to be expected first only at the Appearing of the Lord, 
but on the contrary, that the sigus of his presence are even now among us, 
whereby we know it is ‘the last time.” Dr. Ferdinand Philippi Lehre v. 
Antichr. 79. 

“It is decidedly and plainly foretold, in the Scriptures, that evil mzst 
attain to its supreme manifestation upon earth, before the Lord comes. In 
the last times, a great and widespread apostasy from Christianity will take 
place, and Christendom become acomplete Babylon. The Chuzches will be 
in a state of corruption because false doctrines and unchristian government 
will have got the upper hand. Worldly luxury, combined with wealth, 
trade, and extensive commerce, will exercise a widespread dominion, and 
ungodliness and debauchery accompany it. But in ‘one hour,’ i. e., sud- 
denly, Babylon will fall, a sudden catastrophe will ensue, and overthrow of 
the social condition of this whole world, culture and civilization, with its 
sham Christianity. Zhe will the Antichrist and the anti-christian kingdom 
be manifested, even the climax of apostasy, the consummation of evil on the 
earth, Then will great tribulation befal believers. Aztichitst will form a 
new religion, by ‘strong deluston,’ into which the Lord will suffer all to fall 
who have not received ‘the love of the truth,’ a Cesaropapy of the worst 
kind, a World-Religion which ends in the worship of the Image of the Beast, 
i. e., of the human spirit which has apostatized from God, a Beast whose 
boast is Culture and Civilization, more and more tending to Bestiality, to 
rude force, and carnal lust. And all who have any degree of skill in plac- 
ing the ‘Signs of the Times’ in the light of God’s Word, will not mistake 
’ the fact that those elements are more and more showing themselves from 
which the False Prophet is to be developed, atheistic and materialistic sys- 
tems, denying God and the existence of spirit, and based upon a purely 
physical view of existence; an esthetic literature which, by its poetry, 
fictions, and romances, diffuses the Gospel of the Flesh among the masses, 
and upsets all moral relations; a daily Journalism which is a prelude of 
what is predicted in Rev. xvi:13, viz., that, out of the mouth of the Dragon, 
and of the False Prophet, shall proceed three unclean spirits, ‘’he frogs,’ 
creatures of the swamp, the morass, and the mire, whose croaking produces 
a sound that penetrates toa distance, repeating the same thing, day after day, 
and well adapted to delude men, such as they are, and bring them into the 
right disposition, or state of mind, for the service of Antichrist. Nor can 
the Political State of the times be misunderstood, especially ¢he prevathiing 
tendency to banish Christianity from public life, to undermine all authority, 
to break with all historical tradition, as furnishing elements from which 
Antichrist may, one day, emerge. No false Democracy, or Red Republic 
will be the last of historical events to precede the Coming of the Lord. Zhe 


460 POSTSCRIPT, 


last development will be Casarism, Absolute Despotism, a Scarlet Cesarism, — 
and Revolution, the necessary pre supposition of the Antichrist. ‘ Hereis — 
the patience and faith of the saints.’” Bishop Martensen of Seeland; Chris- 
tian Ethics, 352-356. 

‘“ As the First Coming of Christ could only take place when the fulness 
of the time had come (the end of the 69th Week, Dan. ix:26) and the world, © 
in its need of salvation had reached that point with which that salvation — 
could, and must, connect itself, so also can the Second Coming of Christ, _ 
bringing judgment with it, only occur when the world has become ripe for — F 
judgment, and wickedness has increased to such a height as to draw down 
upon itself the judgment of God. Apostolic prophecy expects, prior to the 
Second Coming, no Millennium, but the highest developmcnt of antichris- 
 tianity. And this is before us. The whole essence of New Testament 
prophecy is this, that it seeks, from the ‘Signs of the Times,’ to recognize 
the events of the antichristian development, and to stake off the remaining 
Stadia through which it has to run, then look for the inbreaking of the full 
salvation with the personal Appearing of Christ.” Ds, Wetss. Theol. 
Stud, u. Kritik, 1869, pp. 8, 9. 


Perspective of New Testament Prophecy. 


LOS SCRIPT, 


461 


AGES OF AGES. 


\ New Jerusale™ 
es New Heaven and Earth. 
Last Judgment. 


aa Sores! Oe ae 

FS) FE ees | 

iS) a nen 5% fe) 

© ve IS Sales oO 

op fo) Bas (jo) 

=| D Saes ~ 
om oO (aay Gay ye 

ea} a Or i) 

ort Ate ee] 4 

a H ak i) 

H L OUD S 

LOG se rab) 

Q a] 

H 


<1) :2nd End. Matt. 


A.D, 
”) 


“This World 


Mt. of Olives. 
Sight - Point 
A, D. 38. 


Ss, 
34: 41 


3 


Christ's Standpoint was the Mountof Olives, A. D.3 


Ale 


John’s Standpoint was the Isle of Patmos. A. D. 96. 


ee i conte eo 


‘What can be more absurd than to explain the prophecies, which fore- _ 
tell the calamity to befall the Jews, in a literal sense, and then those which 
bespeak their future felicity, in a mystic and spiritual sense.” 

Davip LEvI. 

‘‘Who gives us the right by arbitrary exegesis, to refer the predictions 
made to Israel, to the Christian Church, when the judgments upon the | 
same Israel evidently could not have been meant for the Church.” 

ISAAC DA COSTA. 


“‘T hold it for a most infallible rule, that where a literal construction 
will stand, the farthest from the letter is commonly the worst. Nothing is 
more dangerous than this licentious deluding art which changes the meaning 
of words as Alchemy does, or would do, the substance of metals, makes of 
anything what it lists, and brings in the end all truth to nothing.” 

BisHop HOOKER. 


‘“‘We must never depart from the literal meaning of the subject men- — 
tioned, if all, or its principal, attributes square with the subject of the proph- 
ecy. The unalterable wisdom of God has shown itself in this, that the — 
predictions of Scripture concerning the Jews are only in part fulfilled, the 
rest still waiting a future accomplishment.” VITRINGA. 


“‘God has regulated the whole visible world according to number, 
measure, and weight, in the most perfect proportion and manner, applying 
Arithmetic and Geometry to inanimate things with infinite wisdom. What, 


sons, measured and numbered, according to His counsel, but one of com- — 
plete order, a Divine Mathematics? Are not the prophetic numbers a part 


turn their attention tothe prophecies, and insist upon their literal interpre- 
tation in the midst of much clamor and opposition.” i 
Sir IsAAc NEWTON. 


462 . 


fue N EEX 


‘«'The prophet promises a New Age in which the patriarchal measure of 
human life will return, in which death will no more break off the life that is 
just beginning to bloom, and in which the war of man with the animal world 
will be exchanged for peace without danger. And when ts all this to occur? 
Certainly not in the blessed life beyond the grave, since these promises pre- 
suppose a mixture of sinners with the righteous, and only a limitation of the 
power of death, not its entire destruction. When then? This question 
ought to be answered by the antichiliasts,—the post-millennarians. They 
carry back the interpretation of prophecy to a time when commentators were 
in the habit of lowering the concrete substance of the prophecies into mere 
doctrinal ‘ Zoct Communes.’ They take refuge behind the enigmatical 
character of the Apocalypse, without acknowledging that what the Apoc- 
alypse predicts under the definite form of ‘the 1000 years’ is the substance 
of all prophecy, and that no interpretation of prophecy, on sound principles, 
is any longer possible from the standpoint of antichiliasm, inasmuch as the 
antichiliasts twist the word in the mouths of the prophets, and, through 
their perversion of Scripture, shake the foundation of all doctrines, everyone _ 
of which rests on the simple interpretation of the words of revelation. In 
the prophecies of the Old Testament, the eschatological idea of the New 
Cosmos does unquestionably ddend with the Millennium. The Old Testa- — 
ment prophet was not yet able to distinguish from one another what the 
Apocalypse of John separates into distinct periods. It is in the New Testa- 
ment this distinction is clearly made.” Fr. DELITZSCH. 


ave. 
> 


APPENDIX. 465 


SST SS a a SU TUR Tak Sea TT 7a SS SST 


EXTRACTS FROM EMINENT AUTHORS. 


I 


mow [URRY OF SCHOLARS ON REV, XX:5, ‘THE - FIRST 


RESURRECTION.” 


The spiritualizing, allegorizing, and idealizing, expositors seek to evade 
the doctrine of the pre-millennial Advent of Christ, by teaching that the 
“ First Resurrection,” Rev. xx:5, is not a literal Resurrection of the Body, 
but means something else. In like manner, they seek also to evade the fact 
that the sublime scene of the Diademed Warrior on the White Horse, Rev. 
xix:11-16, is not that of the Second Advent itself, but means something else. 
Thus, the literal Resurrection denied here, the literal Second Advent is 
denied also. But if the ‘‘ First Resurrection” is literal here, it must be 
coincident with the literal Second Coming of Christ. That the ‘‘ Azrs¢ Res- 
urrection”’ here announced 7s literal, the following testimony is adduced to 
prove. It might have been multiplied to a volume: 

1. Volek. ‘‘ The view of Dr. Keil concerning the ‘ First Resurrection’ 
is contrary to the Scriptures. The ‘ First Resurrection’ is literal and occurs 
at the end of the present world-period, at the visible personal Advent of 
Christ. It is the same as that described by Paul, I Cor. xv:22, etc, and 
I Thess. iv:14, etc. 4 /ftes this are the 1000 years.” Volck, Der Chilias- 
mus, LII-113. 

2. Rinck.. *‘ As to the Resurrection, it is two-fold; the general resur- 
rection at the final judgment, and, previously to that, the ‘ First Resurrec- 
tion’ of Priests and Kings unto God, which finds place at the Advent of 
Christ followed by the 1000 years’ kingdom.” Rinck. Zustand, etc., 223. 

3. filler. ‘‘ That a literal resurrection is here represented is evident 
from v. 5, which informs us that the ‘ Rest of the dead’ lived not till the 
Tooo years were finished, This ‘ First Resurrection’ is nothing new. It is 
only what Paul had already taught in I Cor. xv:23, and I Thess, iv:16.” 
Filler. Offend. Johan. 351. 

4. De Wette. ‘‘ Paul’s Basilica is here called the 1000 years’ Kingdem, 
and is placed between the Pavousta and the absolute 7¢os or End, named 


30 


—_ 


466 APPENDIX. 


d ' e ¥ 


in I Cor. xv:24. There is no contradiction between Paul and John, but uaa a q 
fect harmony. anes End’ in I Cor. xv:24 is not the End of this Age, but 4 
of the 1000 years.” Lxegetisch. Handbuch on Rev, xx-I-Il. , 
5. Ldmmert. ‘This is the First Resurrection in the true and proper Ss 
sense of the word, as the preceding verse shows. What Paul in I Cor. xv: 
23, calls the Resurrection of ‘those who are Christ’s,’ is here called the 
. ‘First Resurrection.’ The ‘ Rest of the dead’ are not raised until the close 
of the earthly kingdom.” Ldmmert. Offenb. Johan. Rev. xx-1-4. 
6. Bengel. ‘‘ The 1000 years come in between Cap. xix:11-21, and Cap. 
xx:11-15. He must deny the perspicuity of the Scriptures, altogether, who 
persists in denying this, or seeks to refute it. The ‘ First Resurrection’ is a 
corporeal one. The dead ‘became alive’ in that part in which they were 
dead or mortal, consequently in their body.” Bengel. Gnomon V, p. 365. 
7. Kliefoth, ‘The word ‘Resurrection’ must here not be explained — 
by the word ‘lived,’ but the latter, by the former which is added by way of 
exposition. So Ewald and DeWette. It certainly means a return to life by 
a bodily resurrection. It is the same word as in Rev. ii:8. In the same 
way Christ Himself says He ‘lived’ again. This much is certain, that the 
1000 years begin with the Visible Advent of Christ. Here all agree, Bengel, 
Ewald, DeWette, Diisterdieck, Hofmann, Ebrard, Luthardt, Auberlen, etc.” 
Khefoth, Offenb. Johan, 267. 
8) Chrstied. ‘This is the“ First: Resurrection.“ See ior wall 
John v:25-29; Rev. xx:1-6. In the succeeding resurrection, Rev. xx:11-13, he 
which introduces the great mundane catastrophe, and new heaven and earth, — 
the grand process of the world’s renewal has its fitting consummation.” 
Mod. Doubt, 452. 
9. Lange. ‘*The Spirit of Glory is the Resurrection-Germ in thea 
believer, Rom. viii:11; I Pet. iv:tqg. This Resurrection-Seed will become a 
Harvest in the ‘First Resurrection,’ I Cor. xv:23, which belongs to the — 
beginning of the cosmical consummation. The ‘End,’ I Cor. xv:24, is the — 
conclusion of the ‘One Day’ which is with the Lord ‘as 1000 years.’” Bree 
men Lectures, p. 244 : | 
10. Steffann ‘‘ The words ‘they lived,’ can mean nothing else than 
what is expressed in the explanatory clause, ‘ This is the First Resurrection; — 
the possession again of their bodily life in that glorification which the resur-_ 
rection brings with it, to the saints. It is what Paul says in I Cor. xv:23, — 
occurring at the Parousia of Christ. Either this ‘First Resurrection’ is a 
bodily one, or that of the ‘ Rest of the dead,’ Rev. xx:11-15, is not a bodily 
resurrection, and the Apocalypse shows no resurrection of the dead at the 
close of our age, or of the world’s history!’ Whatever ‘they lived’ means — 
in the one case, it means in the other.” Steffann. Das Ende, 312. : 
11. Rothe. ‘‘The Apocalypse distinguishes a First and Second Res- — 


APPENDIX. 467 


urrection. The ‘First,’ which ensues at the same time with the Advent, 
Rey. xix:11-21, is expressly described as the ‘ First’ in Rev. xx:4-6. In it, 
the martyrs, and those who have remained pure from contamination of the 
world-power, have a share. Only these reign with Christ 1000 years, while 
the ‘Rest of the dead’ awake not to life. After the expiration of these 
years, and victory over Satan let loose, then the ‘ Rest of the dead’ arise for 
Judgment.” Rothe. Dogmatik, Part II, p. 77. 

12. Gebhardt. ‘‘ This resurrection is called the ‘First,’ in distinction 
from the general resurrection of the dead to judgment, described in xx:12, 
13. That the Seer means by it what Luke xiv:1q calls ‘the resurrection of 
the just,’ and what Paul speaks of as the ‘ resurrection from the dead,’ Phil. 
iii:11; I Cor. xv:23; I Thess. iv:16, in which is included the change of the 
living, there can be no doubt, The remaining dead, remain dead, during 
the 1000 years’ reign, until the general resurrection, the sleeping saints, or 
Christians ‘live,’ i. e., rise from the dead, and are glorified with Christ.” 
Gebhardt. Doct. of Apoc. 280, 281. 

13. Gresswell. ‘* This resurrection is called the ‘ First,’ and opposed to 
it is another, the second. A portion of the dead rise in that ‘ First,’ the 
remainder in that Second. ‘The subjects of these different resurrections, at 
two different times, are opposed as a part of a certain whole to the remain- 
der of that whole. That whole is the aggregate or complex of the dead. 
On every principle of division, the parts must be numerically distinct, and 
each exclude the other. Unless a fart of the dead do actually rise on the 
former occasion, they must a// rise on the second. But if they who rise on 
the second include those who rise on the first, ‘hes one part includes the other, 
and the remainder is equal to the whole! ‘These are absurdities we cannot 
avoid, except by allowing, in the plain sense of the book itself, that part of 
the dead do actually rise on one and a former occasion, and the rest on an- 
other and later; which reconciles everything, and makes what is otherwise a 
flat contradiction and impossible, perfectly consistent and possible.” Gyvess- 
well on-the Parables I, 327. 

14. L£itiott. ‘* The Resurrection spoken of corresponds in every case, to 
the Death out of which it was a revival. So constant and stringent is this 
rule that, in any doubtfully expressed case of Resurrection, there needs but 
to ascertain the nature of the Death revived from, to find an explanation of 
the Resurrection conformable thereto. Inthe present case the Death is 
that of those who had been beheaded for the witnessing of Christ; a form of 
expression which identifies them with those John had seen on the 5th Seal’s 
opening—a literal bodily Death. The expression, the ‘Rest of the dead,’ 
absolutely and necessarily connects this remainder of the dead, later raised to 
life, with the other dead, just before said to have been earlier raised to life; 
as having been originally (i. e., prior to the abstraction of the dead first 


468. APPENDIX. ae 


- 


taken} part and parcel of the same community of the dead. The Resuat ec 
tion in both cases, therefore, is a literal one of the body, the death having 
been literal, the righteous dead, at the opening of the millennium, having 
then adjudged them an abundant entrance into Christ’s kingdom; the wicked 
dead being excluded from it prior to their other and final judgment.” Z7/- — 
ott Hore IV, 140. - 
15. Stuart. ‘‘ They lived means they revived, came to life, returned © 

to a life like the former one, viz., a union of soul and body. So does the 
word mean in Rev. i:8, and in many other passages. Any other exegesis ; 
here would seem to be incongruous. ‘ 7hey Aived’ must mean, here, reviv- 
ing, or rising from the dead. Thus the Saviour spoke of Himself in Rey. ii: ; i: 
8 as being He who was ‘ dead and ahve again,’ after the death of the body. _ 
Thus too, it is said of the Beast, Rev. xiii:t4, that had the deadly wound of _ 
the sword, that he ‘dd Hive.’ Thus, in our context, also, it is said, the rest at. 
of the dead ‘ved not’ until, etc. The point of antithesis, which decides 5 
the whole case, is the distinction of order, or succession, not of kind, ae 
exigencies of the passage absolutely demand the sense of a bodily resurrec- — 
tion. Indeed, if this be not a position in the interpretation of Scripture, — 
which is fully and suid made out by philology, I should be at a loss to des- 
ignate one which is.” ~Steart Apoc. II, 360, 475, etc., etc. 3 
16. Alford. ‘‘Vf, ina passage where two vecurreotogs are mentioned, 
—where certain souls lived, at first, and the ‘ Rest of the dead’ lived only Me. 
at the end of a specified period, after that first,—the ‘ First Resurrection’ 
may be understood to mean a sfzvitual rising with Christ, while the second — 
means a /iferal rising from the grave, then there is an end of all significance — 
in language, and Scripture is wiped out as a definite testimony to anything. a 
If the ‘First Resurrection’ is sfizétwal, then so is the second,—which I sup- 
pose none will be hardy enough to maintain. But, if the second is “feral, — 
then so is the first, which, in common with the whole primitive church, and | 
many of the best modern expositors, I do maintain, and receive as an 
article of faith and hope. * * I have ventured to speak strongly, because 
my conviction is strong, founded on the rules of fair and consistent interpre- 
tation. It is a strange sight, in these days, to see expositors who are among 
the first, in reverence of antiquity, complacently casting aside the most | 
cogent instance of unanimity which primitive antiquity presents, * * I 
have again and again raised my earnest protest against evading the plain 
sense of the words, and sfivitualizing in the midst of plain declarations « of 
facts. That the Lord wiil come in person to this our earth; that His risen © 
elect will reign with Him here, and judge; that, during that blessed reign : 
the power of evil will be bound, and the glorious prophecies of peace and 
truth on earth find their accomplishment; this is my firm persuasion, and 
not mine alone, but that of multitudes of Christ’s waiting people, as it was x 


APPENDIX. | 469 


‘that of His primitive apostolic Church, before controversy blinded the eyes 
of the fathers to the light of prophecy.” dJlford. N. T. Vol. Ll, Part II, 
335, 336, 1088, 1089. . 

' 197. Starke. ‘‘ The First Resurrection is a literal resurrection of the 
body; for, although John saw only ‘ sowds’ yet this was for the reason that 
the souls which hitherto had been in a certain degree of heavenly joy, are 
now united with their bodies and are, by such union to be transplanted into 
still greater joy and glory. Moreover, he does not say that the ‘ sozdls’ 
lived and reigned, but speaks of the whole person. ‘ They,’ who were 
beheaded, and ‘¢hey’ who had not received the mark of the Beast, became 
alive by union of the soul with the body, and reigned with Christ tooo years. 
That the word ‘ved’ means they came to life, is clearly seen from Rev. 
ii:8, xiii:14, John v:25, Rom. viii:13. Again, it is not said ‘ Blessed and 
Holy is the sow/ that has part in the First Resurrection,’ but speaks of the 
whole person, (f7e) consisting of soul and body, which has part therein. 
For, if the First Resurrection and Reigning with Christ were to be under- 
stood of the soul alone, then John must have said, verse 5, the rest of the 
souls lived not again—which he does not. As, moreover, he here speaks 
of the whole person, so in like manner, the ‘ rest of the dead’ lived not again 
until the 1000 years were finished. Therefore, we must explain the living 
and reigning with Christ, verse 4, of the whole person.” Starke. Synopsis. 

Pols tl 132; 

; 18. irks. “* We are told in the plainest terms that there are two resur- 
rections which include all the dead;—that there is an interval of more than 

1000 years between them; that all who rise in the first are blessed and holy; 
that the martyrs of earlier and later times have this privilege; and that every 
one whose name is not found in the ‘book of life’ appears and is judged 
‘in the second resurrection. When fart of the dead are raised it is self- 
evident that the ‘ Rest of the dead’ remain unraised. After the mention 
of those who live and reign with Christ ‘in the First Resurrection,’ we 
are told that the ‘ Rest of the dead’ live not again till the 1000 years are 
finished. After this negative statement, we naturally look for tidings of 
their later resurrection, under their own proper title,—‘ ¢#e dead.’ We find 
it in the exact place, where it might have been expected, from the order of 
the prophecy. Four marks are given that the Millennium is degw,; (1) the 
Binding of Satan; (2) the Cessation of His deceits; (3) the Reign of the 
saints; (4) the Delay in the Resurrection of the ‘ Rest of the dead.’ Four 
events are revealed in the very same order, to mark its close, (1) the Loosing 
of Satan; (2) the Deceiving of the nations; (3) the Compassing of the camp 
of the saints; (4) the Appearance of ‘the dead,’ small and great, before the 
Throne for judgment. It is perfectly clear that this judgment corresponds, 
by strict parallelism, to the previous mention of the ‘Rest of the dead’ 


A470 APPENDIX. 


whose resurrection was delayed till the 1ooo years were finished. It is the 
judgment of the unfaithful dead, alone, and follows the Millennium.” 
Birks. Unfulfilled Prophecy. 1414, 174. D 

19. Mede. ‘‘The ‘second death’ is that of dodies not less than of 
souls, and, this conceded, it is sufficiently evident that the ‘ First Resurrec- 
tion’ isa corporeal one. Since the second Resurrection is a corporeal one, 
similarly so is the ‘ First’ as is proved by the adversative participle ‘ dwt.’ 
John says, he saw ‘the souls of those who were struck with the axe for the 
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and they lived and reigned with 
Christ 1000 years. But ¢he rest of the dead lived not until the 1000 years 
were finished.’ Who does not gather at once from this that both Resurrec- 
tions are of the same kind? The use of the adversative requires this. 
And, as to the ‘ scz/s,’ it is so well known as to need no proof that, in the 
Scriptures this word is used to denote not only persons, Lut dead bodies; 
cadavera, Psal, xvitt®. Acts ti:2r. Ezek. xliv:25. Levitaggineaee 
Apoc. vig, etc. All the righteous shall rise in the Millennial Kingdom, yet 
in a certain order, as the Apostle tells us, I Cor. xv:23; the Martyrs first, 
indeed, and at the beginning, Rev. xx:4-6; after that, the remaining right- 
eous who have not borne the mark of the Beast; some sooner, some later, as 
shall seem good to Christ the Judge. And this is called the ‘ First Resur- 
rection;’ in Luke xiv:14, the ‘ Resurrection of the Just.’ Then, 1000 
years having passed away, the wicked also shall rise, and, at the same time, 
the last and universal Judgment be accomplished.” J/ede. Works. 572, 
573. | 

20. Hebart. ‘‘The Aorist tense of the verb ‘ Zved,’ indicates one 
definite Act, a coming to life again, and finds its explanation in the added 
words, ‘ 72s is Resurrection the /77s?,’ so that by reason of the contrasted 
and corresponding Act, verses 5 and 12, it can only be a literal resurrection 
of the body that is meant, and no other. It can be understood here only in 
a literal sense, the sense ‘they lived again.’ If, by the ‘ Rest of the dead’ 
we understand Believers, who died either a natural or martyr death, the 
idea that ‘they’ should, first of all, come to a blessed life only after the 
1000 years are expired, is contrary to Scripture. If we understand Un- 
believers, the idea that ‘ zkese’ should come to a blessed life, after the 1000 
years, is equally contrary to Scripture. The same is the case if we take both 
at the same time, either way. It is, therefore, incorrect to hold that the 
words ‘ This is Resurrection the First’ indicate any other resurrection than 
a proper and literal one. Hebart. Zweite Zukunft. pp. 188, 194. 

21. Van Oosterzee. ‘‘ The Scripture, in the dim distance, opens up the 
prospect of more than one resurrection ; first a partial one, and then an abso- 
lutely universal one. Of the former, not only does the Apocalypse speak, 
Rev. xx:4-6, but also the Lord, Luke xiv:14, and Paul, I Thess, iv:16, and 


APPENDIX. ue | 


I Cor. xv:23, as compared with verse 26, without, however, its connection 
with and difference from, the other one being more nearly indicated. Thus 
much is evident that the Gospel teaches a resurrection not only of the just 
but of the unjust also.” Van Oosterzee. Dogmatik II 786. 

22, Gill, ‘It does not mean that they lived spiritually, for so they did 
before, and whilst they bore their testimony to Christ and against Antichrist, 
previous to their death ; nor zz their successors, for it would not be just and 
reasonable that ¢Aey should be beheaded for their witness of Christ and His 
word, and others live and reign in their stead. Nor is this to be understood 
of their living in their sows, for so they live in their separate state ; the soul 
never dies. But the sense is they “ved again, as in verse 5,—they lived 
corporeally, their souls lived again in their bodies, their bodies being raised 
and reunited to their souls. Their whole persons lived; and this is called 
the First Resurrection in the next verse.” Dr. John Gill, in toca. 

23. Setss. ‘‘My conviction is clear and positive that the resurrection 
here spoken of is the resurrection of the saints from their gvaves, in the sense 
of the Nicene Creed, where it is confessed, ‘I look for the Resurrection of 
the dead, and the life of the worldto come.’ The placing of it as the ‘ first’ in 
a category of two resurrections, the second of which is specifically stated to be 
the literal rising again of such as were zo? raised in the first, fixes the sense 
to be a literal resurrection of the body. It is a resurrection of saints only. 
It is a resurrection from among the dead ones, necessarily eclectic, raising 
some and leaving others, and so interposing a difference as to @me, which 
distinguishes the resurrection of the some in advance of the resurrection of 
the rest. The First Resurrection is one that takes place in different stages. 
It is a resurrection which, asa whole, is nowhere pictorially described.” Dr 
meas. Lect, on Apoc. Vol. I1T,, p. 316,. etc. 

24. Lechler. ‘‘ That this First Resurrection must be understood in the 
literal sense is clear from the context, v. 5, where the ‘ Rest of the Dead’ 
live not until the 1000 years are expired. We should do great violence to the 
words if, with Hengstenberg, we interpreted the First Resurrection figu- 
ratively, and understood by it, the first step of a blessedness and rest in the 
invisible world. Independently of all other considerations, it would remain 
inexplicable why this Resurrection, v. 5, must first begin with the beginning 
of the 1000 years. The word ‘lived’ has the same sense, here, as in ii:8, i.e. 
‘came to life,’ or as Bengelsays, ‘ returned to life.’ The passage teaches, 
as Liicke, Hofmann, Delitzsch, and others unanimously agree, a resurrection 
of saints and martyrs from bodily death to the full enjoyment of dominion 
with Christ, during the 1000 years ; a condition pictured, purely and grandly, 
without any carnal traits whatever.” Lechler. Apost. Zettalter, 203, 204, 


AR- | APPENDIX. 7 “© "= Ais 


Il 


THE 1000 YEARS IN THE APOCALYPSE. , 


BY PROFESSOR FREDERICK BLEEK, D. D. = 


Chapters i-iii of the Apocalypse contain the Epistles to the 7 Asiatic ~~ 
Churches, while Chapters iv, v, are an Introduction to what follows. In 4 ; 
Chapters vi-xi, the Seals are successively loosed, and the Trumpets blown. © 
In Chapter xi:7, the first mention is made of the “ Beast” ascending from 
the Abyss, i. e. the Antichrist. What now follows, from this point, is closely — 
connected, the visions describing the Conflict with the powers of the world — 
and of darkness, till the complete victory is won over Antichrist, and Satan 
is bound, Chapter xx:1,2. The final struggle of Satan, after his temporary se 
release, is described in Chapter xx:7-10. To this is annexed a description of © a 
the general resurrection, the last judgment, the everlasting glory of the — 
faithful in a New Heaven and Earth. Chapters xx:11—15,—xx:5. 

We come now, specially to consider the Section Chapter xx:1-6. The ~ 
Seer behoids the Devil, bound for 1000 years, and thrown into the abyss and — 
so deprived of his destructive influence over the Kingdom of Godand its ~ 
members. Further. he sces that the souls of the faithful who suffered death — 


_ in confessing their Lord, and did not give themselves up to the wicked one, ~ zs 


live again, in order to reign 1000 years with Christ, whose victorious advent 
was already described in Chap. xix:11—21, to reign as priests of God and of ~ 
Christ, and as such not to die any more. Here, it is asked, (a) whether the 
1000 years are meant as proper years, according to men’s usual mode of — 
reckoning, or merely as a symbolical way of counting, and in what sense, 
and (b) when the period begins. Many interpreters, in opposition to millen- 
narianism, have been of the opinion that, by the 1000 years’ reign of Christ, 
none other can be understood than that which He established on earth at the ~ 
time of His Incarnation, and which had already begun even before the Apoc- ~ 
alypse was composed. This is the view which has prevailed in the Catholic 
Church since the fourth century, and which is found in most Protestant inter- 7 
preters, as well asin Bossuet, etc. Others date the beginning of the rooo 
years’ kingdom later, but yet consider_it as having not merely begun, long © 
since, but as already expired. Thus, Grotius and those who follow him, 
who reckon the 1000 years from Constantine the Great, on to the beginning 
of the fourteenth century ; and lately, Hengstenberg, who refers them to the — 
time from the christianizing of the Germanic nations to the expiration of the 
German empire. But here, first of all, the former assumption that the 1000 — 


*From Bleek’s Vorlesungen. ub. Offenber. Johan. 75-82. 101-104. 3278-356. 


4 


APPENDIX. ATS 


years begin with the Incarnation of Christ, is unmistakably against the mean- 
ing of our Book. A time of undisturbed" peace belonging to the Kingdom 
of God is clearly represented, in opposition to the preceding one of affliction 
and conflict, a time when the Devil and his instruments would be powerless 
to exercise any disturbing influence over it, either in general or over indi- 
vidual members. Now, the time when the Book was written, whether early 
or late, could not well be described in such a way, in contrast with any earlier 
one. There can be no doubt that this 1000 years’ kingdom alludes to a time 
which had not begun when the Book was written, and to one in which the 
Lord should ve¢zv2 to unite His own people with Himself in His Kingdom. 
Accordingly, we find this hope almost in the whole Christian Church of the 
First Age, the hope that the Lord would return, and that soon, no longer in 
the lowly form of a servant which he had assumed at His first appearance on 
earth, but in the complete glory and majesty belonging to Him ; and that He 
would then join His own people to Himself in a Kingdom of peace and 
undisturbed happiness, giving them a share in His glory and power. It is 
grounded in the essence of the historical manifestation of Christ at His incar- 
nation, that prophecy revived with new power in His Church, pointing to the 
fulfilment of the Kingdom of God and its complete victory over the world. 
Old Testament prophecy had already directed attention to this ; but as the 
Messianic salvation, expected at the First Coming of Christ upon earth, was 
not fully realized by His own ministry, or that of His disciples, Christian 
prophecy was directed, very soon, in a special manner, to a SECOND COMING 
of the Son of Man, to His glorious re-appearing. This is found even in the 
sayings of Christ Himself, as they were apprehended and communicated 
by the disciples, especially in the first three Gospels, chiefly in Matt. xxiv, 
xxv. In like manner, the same hope is found in most of the New Testa- 
ment writings, if not always expressly stated, yet clearly lying at the 
foundation. 

The raising of the deceased or faithful dead, in order to participate in this 
Kingdom, beginning with the return of the Lord, zs not peculiar to the Apoc- 
alypse. Already in Daniel xii:2, we meet with the promise that, at the time 
of Israel’s redemption (the Messianic salvation) there would be a resur- 
rection out from the dead. In the Jewish theology, this was developed with 
a two-fold resurrection (a) of the pious, the true people of God, at the ap- 
pearing of the Messiah when they should be re-awaked to take part with 
Him in His Kingdom ; (b) of a later general one, at the last day, for un- 
versal judgement. ‘The believers of the First Age seem to have adopted the 
distinction, and to put the ‘‘ First Resurrection,” that of believers, at the 
time of Christ’s glorious return. So we find it particularly in the Apostle 
Paul, I Thess. iv:14, and following verses, and in I Cor, xv:22, and following 
_ verses and verse 51, and following. 


474 APPENDIX. 


Paul, indeed, does not speak expressly of the Second Resurrection, the 
general one, since he had no particular motive for doing so according to the 
object he there pursues. Yet it is zmplied unmistakably. Nere, in the 
Apocalypse, the idea occurs in a most definite shape, according to which 
true believers rise again that they may participate in the 1000.years’ king- 
dom, and which is expressly designated as the ‘‘ first resurrection,” whilst 
the general judgment of the dead is placed after the expiration of the 1000 
years. Accordingly, we find @ double resurrection, that of believers at the 
return of the Lord, and the second general one at the last judgment, distin- 
guished by different Church-teachers of the early centuries, particularly by 
Tertullian, Methodius, Lactantius, etc., etc. 

As to the ‘‘1000 years,” we find opinions about the duration of the Mes- 
sianic kingdom among the later Jews very different. The idea that seems to 
have prevailed among some, at the time of Christ, was that it would be of 
eternal duration. Compare John xii:34, and Eisenmenger Entd. Judenthum, 
Konigsberg I71I, 4, ii. pp. 813 segg. This idea might also have been 
founded on express utterances of the Bible. Yet other ideas prevailed also 
which made the Messiah subject to mortality, and assigned only a finite 
duration to his sovereignty, with all its splendor. These we find expressly 
in later times ; among others, that of a duration of 40 years, of 70 years, of 
400 years, and also, detinitely, of 1000 years. See Eisenmenger pp. 809 
sege, and Wetstein ad Apoc. xx:2. It cannot indeed be maintained, cer- 
tainly,* but it is not unlikely, that the idea, in this form, was known to the 
Jews even in the apostolic age, whence it was transferred, in the Chris- 
tian Church, to the duration of the kingdom beginning with the return of 
the Lord. Yet it is also possible that it assumed this form in the Christian 
Church itself. The combination of that passage in the Psalms, Ps. xe:4, 
‘‘A thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday,” with the narrative of 
the creation of the world might have had some influence, from persons con- 
sidering the latter as a type of the destinies of the world, and therefore con- 
cluding that, as God created the world in six days, and afterward rested the 
seventh day, so the world should be completed in six days, that is, in 6000 
years ; and the seventh day, that is the seventh Millennium, should become 
a time of undisturbed rest and Messianic bliss. So Barnabas speaks, Epis- 
tles Chap. xxv. It is manifest that the same idea is found here, in sub- 
stance, as in the Apocalypse, viz., that the kingdom of the Messiah should 
last 1000 years after the Second Advent of the Lord, and the renewal of the 
world be annexed to it. When this Epistle of Barnabas was written cannot 
with certainty be determined. In any case, it is later than the Apocalypse. 
Yet the relation of both writings upon this point is not of the kind that would 


* This statement falls below the full truth of the case, as later critical investigations 
have shown.—N. W. 


<——_-% 


APPENDIX. AND 


make it probable that the author of that Epistle has borrowed his whole con- 
ception from the Apocalypse. The brief manner also in which it is stated 
in the Apocalypse, indicates that the idea is not one newly expressed, but 
such as the author found already, and not entirely unknown to his readers, 
whether, as already mentioned, it had first taken this shape in the Christian 
church itself, or had been found by the latter in the Jewish church. 

As to the real significance of the 1000 years, it is most unlikely, from the 
probable form of the conception, that any other definite period of time could 
be meant than that denoted by the common use of language. Still, on the 
other hand, it may be that the number should not be too strictly pressed, in 
the sense of our Book, as a measured period of exactly 1000 solar or lunar 
years ; but certainly it must be assumed, especially since the idea was 
already developed, that tue number here is retained as a general expression 
to denote a very long period of undisturbed repose and happiness for 
believers, beginning at the return of the Lord. 

We ask, further, what does our Book teach about the time when the glo- 
rious appearing of the Lord will take place and the 1000 years’ kingdom 
begin, as well as the relations under which this will happen ? what is to pre- 
cede the catastrophe ? and how is the Apocalypse related to the other writ- 
ings of the New Testament? The Lord had expressly stated, Matt. 
mxiv.20; Mark xiii:32, and, according to Acts 1:7, even referred to it 
after His resurrection, that to ‘‘know the times and the seasons,” 
with regard to the coming of the kingdom, in its consummation, the Father 
had reserved to Himself. And, in Matt. xxiv:14, Mark xiii:10, the 
announcement of the gospel throughout the whole world is specified by Him 
as something which must precede. But, on the other hand, He exhorted the 
disciples to be always ready to receive Him worthily. To this the apostles 
directed their attention, primarily, and sought to direct that of other 
believers, so that their looking forward to the Coming of the Lord might be 
of use to them all, as an ever living incentive, urging them to dedicate all 
their powers to the Lord and to the furtherance of His Kingdom, that they 
might be found faithful stewards of the talents He had intrusted to them. 
It cannot be denied that they generally cherished the hope that the glorious 
appearing of the Lord was near, so that they themselves, or many of their 
contemporaries, might perhaps live to see it. This may be recognized by the 
way in which several discourses of the Lord respecting the future, in the 
Synoptica! Gospels, are reproduced and brought into connection with one 
another. We cannot but see that, with the apostle Paul, especially in some 
of his earliest Epistles, this point of time to his mind appeared quite near, 
so that he hoped to live to see the future advent of the Lord. See I Thess, 
iv:t5-17; I Cor. xv:51, 52. Yet the expectation of his own survival seems 
to have receded into the background with him at a later period. In James 


tp y Sen ee p eee ee iy 
a ~ ~ hs 
476 APPENDIX. 


v:7-11, also, the Coming of the Lord (Parousia) is specified as near. So in 
the Epistles to the Hebrews, especially x:37. The same hope may also be 
discerned in our Book, even in the first part of it. For when the Lord Him- 
self, Rev. iii:11, says to the Angel of the Church of Laodicea, ‘‘I come 
quickly,” there can be no doubt, according to the New Testament usage, that 
this is meant of the glorious re-appearing of the Lord. See also, i:17. So, 
too, when it is said immediately at the beginning, i:3, ‘‘The time isat hand,” 
there can be no doubt that this refers to the nearness of the time to which 
the hope of the believer was directed, when the complete inauguration of the 
Kingdom of God should begin, with the return of the Lord. See Luke xxi: 
8; Mark xiii:33 ; Rev. x:6, and following. 

Our Book not merely specifies the catastrophe, in general, but endeavors 
to indicate in a still more definite manner, ¢he point of tts commencement, 


In what way this is done depends upon the apprehension of the vistons pre-- 


ceding the announcement of the 1000 years’ reign. In general, especially 
in the closely connected visions (Chap. xii-xix) we find the sense easily dis- 
cernible; that defore the beginning of this reign, the adversaries of Christ 
and His Kingdom, the Devil and his associates, should be conquered by 
Christ and made powerless with respect to the continuance of that kingdom, 
deprived of all influence to disturb its peace and happiness, after they had 
previously made the most violent efforts against it. Zhe general idea lying 
at the foundation and confirmed by the whole history is that an extreme effort 
of the opposing spirit of evil, falsehood, and darkness, precedes ENERY more 
important development of good, and of the Kingdom of Christ, the kingdom 
of truth, of light, of peace, and would, therefore, all the more precede 
the COMPLETION of Christ’s Kingdom, Thus, we find already, in the 
prophets of the Old Testament, that the announcement of the Messianic 
salvation zs usually appended to the most lamentable condition of the people of 
God, and their most violent oppression by their enemies. The discourses 
of the Redeemer also, communicated in the Synoptical Gospels, make it 
obvious that his reappearing will not take place unless the greatest measure 
of suffering of all kinds for the people of God shall have previously been 
filled up. But it may be asked, 77 what manner, in what particular form, 
this general idea ts individualized in the Apocalypse? Here, the determi- 
nation mainly depends upon the view taken of the powers which are introduced 
as the adversaries and combatants of Messiah and of God's Kingdom. 
These powers are designated as different ‘‘ Beasts’’ presented to the eye of 
the Seer, so that the question arises, ‘‘/or what are we to take these Beasts 2” 

With reference to the 1000 years’ reign. ‘This appears in the Apoca- 
lypse, sot as the ultimate completion of the kingdom of God, which, according 


to our Book, takes place in the ‘‘ New Jerusalem,” dat as a preliminary 


close of the conflicts of God’s Kingdom with the world and its powers;—a 


r 


APPENDIX. AVY 


period of time denoted as 1000 years, when the faithful and pious, particu- 
larly those who had fallen asleep before, and were awakened for that pur- 
pose, should seven with Christ upon earth in undisturbed peace and happi- 
ness, after the destruction of all earthly hostile powers and the binding of 
Satan. We may view every epoch of the Christian Church, in which an 
important progress of the Kingdom of God, with the conquest of hostile 
powers, takes place, asa partial fulfilment of the utterances of Scripture, 
especially those about the Lord’s Coming; but in everything which the his- 
tory of the Church presents, only a partial and preliminary fulfilment, not 
a complete one, is perceptible. As it is decidedly contrary to the meaning of 
the Apocalypse to make the 1c0o years’ kingdom begin with the Incarna- 
tion of Christ, so that the author considered the time already present; every 
‘ view is inadmissible, according to the purport of our book, which supposes the 
1000 years’ kingdom as already expired or only begun. ‘The interpretation 
of Hengstenberg, in modern times, belongs to this category, making it ex- 
tend from the Christianizing of the Germanic nations to the end of the 
German empire. Thus, the times of the Middle Age, with the greatest 
splendor of the Papacy, and the Age of the Reformation, as well 
as that after the Reformation, are supposed, indiscriminately, to be 
the 1000 years’ kingdom, including times when the most _ horrible 
deeds were perpetrated by the Romish Church, and other ruling 
powers, against the true confessors of the Lord, as in the wars against 
the Albigenses and Waldenses, against the Huguenots, in the Inquisition, 
and the night of St. Bartholomew, as well as many others. Auberlen (pp. 
415 segg.) refers to these, very appropriately, against Hengstenberg. It is 
certain that we decide in accordance with the sense of the Book itself, when 
we consider the 1000 years’ kingdom as a state of development belonging to 
the Church or the Kingdom of God which has not yet appeared, no more 
than has the glorious return of the Lord in close connection with it, and the 
first resurrection of believers awakened to participate in it. All this, ac- 
cording to the meaning of our book, must certainly be taken literally; not as . 
Hengstenberg does, in relation to the happiness of believers beginning at 
their death. 

With reference to Antichrist. In the past history of the Church, it may 
be pointed out that to every epoch, which reveals a special progress of the 
Kingdom of God, precedes a time in which the antichristian element comes 
forth with peculiar power; and every time of the kind may be considered as 
a partial and preliminary fulfilment of the prophecies of Scripture respect- 
ing destruction and mischief in the last time, and so respecting the appear- 
ance and activity of Antichrist. But, it may be said, on the other hand, 
that these prophecies have not yet found their complete fulflment, and that 
the author of the Apocalypse himself would have seen in none of the phe- 


478 ! APPENDIX. 


nomena, since the establishment of the Christian church an entire fulfilment 
of the visions in question. On the contrary, if we consider them according 
to their essential meaning, we are led to think of a person’s appearance be- 
fore the glorious coming of the Lord, armed as an instrument of Satan, 
with Satanic powers. We must think of a personal manifestation still 
future. 

The Apocalypse considers and represents as quite near, both the glorious 
Coming of the Lord and the Coming of Antichrist. The thing is not 
peculiar to the Apocalypse. As already remarked, it cannot be denied that 
the Christians of the first time generally, and also the New Testament 
writers, cherished the hope that the glorious appearing of the Lord would 
not be very distant, would take place, perhaps, in their own lifetime. Such 
form of hope was necessary to believers of the time to sustain them against 
the manifold struggles and sorrows with which they had to contend both out- 
wardly and inwardly; and we shall do well if, after their example we con- 
tinually keep in mind that future as near; like them, finding in it an incentive 
to direct all our energies to this, viz., to be found by the Lord, watchful and 
true, any time He may come. Many exhortations of the Lord Himself, as 
well as of His disciples, refer us to it; and also the Apocalypse most certainly. 
This view of the nearness of the glorious appearing of the Lord supposes 
that the utmost exertions of the hostile powers, or coming of Antichrist, are 
impending. 

The reference to the approach of the glorious Coming of the Lord, 
(Chap. xix) as Conqueror of the hostile powers, and for the inauguration of 
the kingdom of God upon earth, forms the central and leading point in the 
contents of the Apocalypse. Though the kingdom itself (Chap. xx) the 
1000 years, is but briefly described, yet all that precedes only serves as a 
preparation for it, just as what follows appears its farther completion, In 
Chap. xix:I-10 voices of heaven resound, praising God for His righteous 
judgment on Great Babylon, and singing to Him because the marriage of 
the Lamb is come, the time of His union with His Church, and the 
complete inauguration of His Kingdom which is connected with the fall of 
anti-christian Babylon. In Chap. xix:11 to Chap. xx:1-3, the Appearing of 
Messiah, the Logos, is depicted in His triumphant glory; the defeat and 
destruction of all adversaries of the Kingdom of God, the casting of the 
Beast and False Prophet into the lake of fire, and the binding of Satan for 
1000 years. Chap. xx:4-6, is the First Resurrection, or awaking of the 
believers who shall reign with Christ in the 1000 years’ kingdom; verses 7-10 
the final contest of Satan with the kingdom of God which issues in his com- 
plete destruction, he being thrust into hell forever after it. The prophecy 
in Ezekiel xxxviii, xxxix lies here at the foundation, where a Gog, the prince 
of Magog, is spoken of who, ‘‘ at the End of the days,” when Israel have 


APPENDIX. 479 


strengthened themselves in their land after return from their last captivity, 
will march out against them with numerous hosts, but will meet with 
complete defeat. Then the time of the trial of the people of God will be 
properly at anend. They will inherit the land in perfect safety, forever, 
and forget all afflictions they suffered. So also, here, the subject is of a last 
struggle, which, even after the expiration of the 1000 years’ kingdom, the 
people of God shall have to encounter * with the nations of the world which 
Satan will summon from the uttermost parts of the earth. Only, here, 
contrary to the manner in Ezekiel, Gog is treated in the same manner as 
Magog, as a collective designation of those who had their dwelling at the 
farthest extremities of the earth; nations outside the pale of Israel’s king- 
dom.t| Among the later Jews, also, Gog and Magog are mostly named 
together as nations who will march against Jerusalem, and the land of 
Israel, at the world’s end, and shall then perish by the Messiah or by fire 
from heaven. See Westein, ad loc, The “‘ camp of the saints,” the place 
where the citizens of the 1c09 years’ kingdom were united is described as the 
“* Beloved City,” beloved of God, a city to Him precious, namely ‘‘Jerusa- 
lem,’ as after its purification it is represented to be the seat of Christ, and His 
kingdom. In verses 11-15 is the general resurrection of the dead, namely of 
all those who have not had part in the 1000 years’ kingdom, when all, who are 
not in the “* Book of Life,” arte cast into hell, the lake of fire, after Death 
and Hades have been previously hurled into it, so that it is called the 
*“second death.” ‘The Great White Throne is called ‘‘ Great” in reference 
to’ the several “‘thrones” mentioned, verse 4.. Chap. xxi:1. to xxiizs, 
describes, at large, the formation of the new world, and in it specially the 
New Jerusalem as the abode of believers and the blessed, in images which 
are borrowed mostly from, or follow, Old Testament representations, 
particularly the Mosaic description of Paradise, the Tabernacle of Testi- 
mony, and Ezekiel on the New Jerusalem, in Chapters xl, etc. But 
individual features must not all be pressed, according to the genius of our 
Book, neither in a literal nor an allegorical way. For representations of 
the New Jerusalem among the later Jews, see Hisenmenger’s Entd. Juden- 
thum II. 839, etc. The revelation of the future kingdom of God is now at 
anend. What follows forms only the conclusion to the book, in which the 
truth and reliability of these disclosures is especially affirmed, and it is 
repeatedly asserted that the time for the fulfilling of the Lord’s coming is at 
hand. Meanwhile, until the glorious Advent of the Lord, each one may 
continue in his usual way of acting, corresponding to his inward character, 
“filthy” or “holy.” The sinner is free to continue in his viciousness till 
then, as it is the part of the just and pious to increase in righteousness and 


* No. It never comes toa battle! N. W. 
+ Designated by Kliefoth, as the “* per7pheral nations.” N.W. 


f 

> 
\ 
: 
y 
3 
% 
yu 
ee 
q 

- 


480 : APPENDIX. 


holiness. ‘‘ Zhe Lord comes quickly,” He comes to reward every man in 
accordance with his entire conduct. ‘‘ Blessed are they that do His com- | 
mandments” (according to the Received Text, De Wette, Ziillig, Tischen- 
dorf.) or ‘‘ who wash their robes,” i. e. ‘‘ who are cleansed in the blood of 
the Lamb” (according to Lachman, Bentley, Mill, Ewald, A. 2 cursives, 
Eth. Arm. Vulg. Prim. Comment, and others).* The wicked and unclean 
shall find no access to the Holy City. The ‘‘ Spirit”’ of Prophecy which 
had descended on John, and the ‘‘ Bride,” are saying, Come, O Lord, delay 
no longer Thy appearing. Each one who hears this call of the Spirit and the 
Bride, to the Lord, may join in it and make known his desire. Also, who- 
ever has true longing for the treasures of the Lord,—let Azz come and take; 
the Lord will not withhold them from him. In reference to the entire 
prophetic contents of this Book, whoever makes additions to this prophecy, 
God will add to him the plagues that are written in this Book, and whoever 
subtracts aught God will subtract his part out of the Book of life, out of 
the Holy City, and the things written in this Book. The Lord, the Testi- 
fier, says, ‘‘ Surely, [ come quickly!” ‘‘Amen; Come Lord Jesus!” 


If 
THE 1000 YEARS IN THE APOCALYPSE. 


BY PROFESSOR HEINRICH VON EWALD, D. D.+ 


The last 7 Visions of the Apocalypse disclose to the eye of the Seer an 
altogether new Outlook into the farther, and then farthest, future, which, 
endless as it is, must embrace events so much transcending all hitherto wit- 
nessed, that, just because of their remoteness, they can only be seen the | 
more clearly when presented in mere outline. In this wide future, the ; 
glance of the Seer lingers with supreme satisfaction on the blessedness of 
Two Great Ends yet to be realized in history, the one at the Appearing of 
Christ in His glory, the other, more distant still, at the Ultimate Consumma- _ 
tion of all things. For the Seer, these Ends were, from the very beginning, __ 
the most certain and blessed. For the purpose of filling up the wide and — 
far spaces of the future, Old Testament prophecy offered itself to his hand. 
And just as the WHOLE Messianic End divides itself into Three Great Ends 
of destruction and overthrow, each succeeding greater than the one preced- “a 


«ae 


* The old Received Text is to my mind, beyond all question, the correct one. The w 
‘“reward ’’ is a reward of ‘‘ Works,”’ the reward of obedience the fruit of faith. It is ~ 

measured by works all which have been wrought in us of God. Grace chee to us, 
even in the Judgment Day! ‘\ Well done!” N.W. “fi 
+ From Ewald’s Yohan. Schrift. or FYohannean Writings, LI, 321, etc. : i 


APPENDIX. 48] 


ing, so does the Whole Messianic Activity, for re-establishment and glorifi- 
cation, divide itself into 7’ree ever higher Degrees of advancement, of which 
the Last Two are certainly before us. It is of the very first importance to 
recognize this. 

Indisputable is that most correct idea, viz., that the Ed of every great 
earthly*Dispensation or Established Condition of things,—when, by its ever- 
increasing perversities and sins, its destruction becomes a divine necessity, — 
brings, only first of all, sad disaster and ruin, and enduringly so, were it not 
that the divine power of recovery, mightier still, has ever exerted itself to 
counteract the existing condition, and restrain, for the time, the ultimate 
consummation, hid in the will of God. Along with this truth, this other 
truth is coincident, viz., that, in the slow development of human things, this 
divine power of recovery, the more violently it is hemmed in, and resisted, 
by the wickedness brought to oppose it, rouses itself at times, the more pow- 
erfully, making a Mew Condition of things necessary out of the midst of the 
ruins of the Old, and by definite steps,—so that brief moments are obliged 
to still the long sighing of centuries,—yet such as let it be seen how, even for 
all the widest and farthest conceivable spaces in future times, a progress 
corresponding in ever-widening extension, and larger degree, has already 
been pledged, and revealed itself, even in the smaller and more unimportant 
relations of the past.* And thus it is, that the Oxe Great Complex Move- 
ment is found in the divine word, to separate itself into 7hree Individual 
Movements at Lach Epoch in the Great Development: 

(1.) The Approaching End, with the dissolution of the previous Bad 
condition of things, though coming through many intermediate movements. 

(2.) The Last and Mightiest Struggle of Evil to maintain itself against 
the Better incoming condition. 

(3.) The Complete Victory of the New and th. Better, on the ruins of 
the Old and Worse condition. 

As, moreover, it is the Christian view and presentiment, in general, so is 
it especially that of our Seer, that Chvis¢ only can create a new world (or 
age) upon the ruins of the old, that He has done it already, that He will do 
it again, and in ever-widening extent and degree, until the last Consumma- 
tion comes. And if we only observe how, on a large scale, all this moved 
onward before the eyes of the Seer, in definite outline, in reference as well 
to the past as the future, we shall also see the whole developing itself into 
Three Great Stages, according to what has been said. At the Dissolution 
and End of the Jewish Age or Old Covenant, Christ came (First Advent) in 


* The Student of Modern History will not fail to see the working of these two great 
truths and Jaws, in the Times of the Reformation, the French Revolution, the American 
Revolution, the Slavery times in the United States, and now, once more in the Temper- 
ance movement in Christendom, We battle our Way tothe End! N. W, ; 


3! 


A82 APPENDIX. 


the restricted form of an earthly life and work, yet at the same time awaking 
the Vew order of things in imperishable germ, and even then, by virtue of 
His life and death, judging the world;—Nothing less than Christ as the 
““Crucified One” introduced the victory, whereby He now rules, at /east 
invisibly, in His own. If now ¢his first New order of things is crushed, by 
means of the Roman power, and only Rome’s overthrow can introduce the 
next great End, then only can Christ as the ‘‘ Glorified One,” reappearing 
from heaven (Second Advent), and overcoming the Antichristian Trinity of 
our time (Dragon, Beast, False Prophet), erect anew, upon the ruins, His 
visible kingdom, and secure for His people a higher salvation. Finally if 
even this second New order of things, wide and glorious, is dissolved, at 
length, again, by the irruption of the farthest and outside nations of the 
earth (Gog and Magog), so introducing the ¢hird time, another great End, 
then must also the re-establishment and glorification become, on this point, 
the very greatest possible, so that nothing else can follow but the absolute 
perfection of all things. This is that which now becomes the widest and 
ultimate outlook of our Seer; and thus it is that not only Dissolution but 
Judgment also, and a Regenesis, step forth continually before his eyes, in 
ever-widening circles, until, at last, all is attained that lay hid in the divine 
purpose and will. 7 
Of these great Ends in the development of Christianity, only the last two 
are future ; yea, already their possibility is conceivable only after Rome’s 
overthrow. In order to show how these remote spaces may be conceived of 
as yet nearer, a special idea presented itself to our Seer which seemed to him 
most appropriate to determine their wide extension according to a divine meas- 
ure. This is the idea of ‘‘the 1000 years” preceding tue final consummation, 
and which shall be more glorious and happy than our present period, but not 
yet the period of the consummation itself. The hope of such a Millennium is, 
in itself, one that is most important, and if not too slavishly understood, pre- 
serves the correct view. For it only represents, in a sensible manner, the 
great truth that the ultimate perfection of all things cannot arrive as swiftly 
as the glowing hope of man too oft desires it, and that, only from a better 
beginning, attained in a future day, and never to be shaken, can this perfec- 
tion come, and even gradually then. It is, therefore, altogether good, and 
fit, that this Hope of ‘‘the 1000 years” has been incorporated into the great 
society of all other Christian Hopes, and woven into the web as closely as 
possible. When our Seer foresaw so certainly, the overthrow of Rome and 
Rome’s kingdom, and the victory of Christianity, it was only a proof of the’ d 
clearness of his glance into the future that he, nevertheless, saw the final . 
Consummation as not immediately following this, but, in view of the many ’ 
remote nations not yet brought into near contact with Christianity, referred } 
that Consummation to the still more distant future. And yet, were we to 


~ 


APPENDIX. 483 


conclude that this Hope of Millennial Glory rose, first of all, on the mind of 
our Seer in the definite form in which he here beheld it, we should greatly 
mistake the fact. We do not, indeed, find as yet the fact quite so definitely 
expressed in any writing earlier than the Apocalypse, yet, even here, the 
1000 years’ Kingdom appears plainly enough as an already existing, pre- 
viously established, and almost self-interpreting Hope,—a Hope in the high- 
est degree peculiar and important, and which, by no possibility could, 
through mere chance have intruded itself, anywhere, into the circle of the 
Hopes cherished by the church. Had the Seer now received this special 
view of the 1000 years’ Kingdom, only for the first time, like that concern- 
ing Rome and Christ, how much more prominently would he have put it for- 
ward, as something altogether newly revealed of God or Christ, to men, and 
have grounded, even still more deeply, its inner necessity !_ But it appears, 
here, as something already given and well-known, something the mere mention 
of which is regarded as sufficient, and is only presented in Christian colors. 
The original vividness and holy longing of the universal Christian Flope are 
here. If we inquire more closely after the origin and meaning of ‘‘the 1000 
years,” we shall come to the same conclusion. For it was intended, origin- 
ally, to denote that the Seventh Thousand of our present creation, is the 
last, when God will prepare a higher rest, ina Millennial Sabbath, for His 
people, inasmuch as the creative week was the model of the whole period of 
history, and because, according to Ps. xc:4, God could easily make a Sab- 
bath ‘‘Day” to be a Sabbath of 1000 years. ‘There is no reference, here, 
however, to this particular interpretation. The Sabbath itself, with all that 
depends upon it, was already lost. If we even do not know, accurately, in 
what production the representation of ‘‘the 1000 years” was first announced 
and diffused, still we must accept as most certain that, fora long time, it 
had already been firmly established, and that our Seer received it, and arrayed 
it in Christian colors and dress, and that, as appears from other intimations 
in the apostolic writings, it remained no stranger to primitive Christianity. 

In the application to his own circle of hearers of the new anticipations, 
‘the 1000 years’”’ become, for our Seer, the beautiful intermediate period, 
when, on the wide field of the Roman Empire, and on its final ruins, an 
earthly Kingdom of Christ shall rise and rule, with the restored earthly 
Jerusalem as its central-seat, and where under the strong protection of the 
returned and Glorified Messiah it shall begin, in narrower circumference, as 
a prelude, to the universal and eternal glorification of all things. Readily 
enough, to the eyes of the Seer, came the illustrations of this, from the Old 
Testament, running to meet him. Of a glorified earthly Jerusalem, even in 
the Old Testament, the discourse is most frequent. Pre-eminent, herein, is 
Ezekiel’s vision of the Resurrection of Israel. As there, Israel rises anew, 
so only first, through the Messianic Judgment and Glorification, shall all 


A84 APPENDIX. 


true Christians, the dead as well as the living, and only such, first be glo- — 
rified and gathered together, to reign with Christ, and so fulfill this part of 
the Old Testament Hope. From this it also results how closely the ‘‘Ap- 
pearing” of Christ in His glory, which here stands as the beginning of all 
wider glorification, connects itself, backward, with all that went before it, 
This development is only the complete overcoming of the deepest spiritual — 
devastation of former times, the conclusive judgment upon the whole former 
age, and strong grounding of a Better Order of things, victorious on the 
ruins of the past ;— the necessary complement, therefore, of the overthrow 
of Rome’s power. It cannot, consequently be the last End, nor ground of 
the Consummation itself ; for Rome, more strictly taken, did not rule all the 
nations of the earth, and much of mankind still remains outside the circle of 
her power. But an enormous progress it is, from the destruction of Rome, 
nevertheless, as it is surely the beginning to every still wider glorification. 
It might, indeed, seem to come, of itself. But, rather, just as toward the 
end of the former manifestation of Christ, the Crucifixion was obliged to 
come, in order to introduce the full End of that time and the transition to 
our new period, precisely so there lies between Rome’s destruction and the 
‘‘Appearing” of Christ, as Conqueror over the Satanic Trinity and their 
friends, a great event of the most terrible character. It is impossible not to 
recognize it, and of it, there can be no doubt. Antichrist, with his allies 7‘ 
from the East, will overthrow Rome, and think to have subjected the whole 
World-Power to his control in such degree, that he will now attempt to 
strike the stroke he has been harboring in his heart, from the very begin- 
ning of his career. His aim will be Jerusalem, not to destroy it, for already 
it has been laid waste, but, after the death of the ‘‘two witnesses”’ of Christ, 
to annihilate the Temple and all Christianity itself. Apoc. xi:1-13 ; xiv:14- 
20. And, when in this way, that is fulfilled which is spoken in Matt. xxiv: 
15, and II Thess. ii:3-10, then is the supreme moment of the Epiphany of 
Christ in his glory ! 

Apoc. xix:1—10 is the Vision of Heaven’s joy which the impending event 
—the final fulfilment of all the longing of God’s servants both earthly and 
heavenly,—calls forth, just before the event itself steps up into visible history 
on earth ;—a high joy of redoubling ‘‘Allellujahs,” the Marriage-Supper of 
the Lamb announced as at hand. Apoc. xix.11-16, is the Vision of the 
Visible Appearing of Christ, revealing the all-conquering King of Kings, 
Himself descending with His armies, from the ‘‘Opened Heaven.” He is 
represented, now, not as a ‘‘Lamb” (which would be incongruous) but as a : a 
Warrior on His horse, Apoc. xix:17 to xx:15. Here enter —in the briefest — 
manner,—the events and decisive issues of the most distant and longest — 
period of the remaining development of divine human things. If, from a 


APPENDIX. 485 


judgments, because of their great significance, become the proper objects of 
the Seer’s beholding, at the two sides of the great intermediate period of 
“the 1000 years” between these judgments, and before the final Consum- 
mation. Therefore, this whole section, xix.17—xx:15, falls, like the previous 
corresponding one, into three parts, viz.: (1) the Vision of the First Judg- 
ment and First Resurrection, and ‘‘the 1000 years,” xix:17—xx:5 ; (2) the 
Vision of the End of the 1000 years’ Kingdom, Gog and Magog ;—xx:7- 
10; (3) the Vision of the Universal Resurrection and Judgment, xx:11-15. 
The Two Grand Visions of the Consummation are (a) the Vision of the 
Glorification, xxi:1-8 ; and (b) the Vision of the New Jerusalem, xxi:g to 
xs. 

As to the Vision of the First Judgment, First Resurrection, and the 1000 
years’ kingdom, Satan is now bound, by an Angel who has the key of the 
Abyss, and is cast into the Abyss,— not yet into the Lake of Fire, xx:10— 
and carefully secured, as if under bar and bolt, that he should deceive the 
nations no more, as he had deceived the Koman world into hostility against 
Christianity. By this banishment to the Under-world there has happened to 
the Prince of Demons just what formerly happened to the individual demons 
themselves. After the 1000 years are expired, however, he shall, according to 
verse 2, be loosed for a brief period. Sucha privilege has even Satan, before 
God, and the forelight of this is found in Isa. xxiv:22. The three Visions, viz.: 
%x217, 18, Xix:19Q-21, xx:1=3, taken together, form the ground of the last 
one. These three accomplished, then follows, xx:4—6, which, according to 
ieake xiv-14, is‘called the ‘‘Restirrection of the just,’’ or what our Seer, 
verse 5, calls the ‘First Resurrection,” set over in contrast with the yet 
more significant second one, in verse 13. That it isa real Judgment of 
God, in which the judges take their seats, solemnly, is already depicted in 
Dan. vii:g. Moreover, who these judges are is foreshadowed in Matt. 
xix:28, and from Apoc. iv:4. The power of these judges goes only to this 
extent, to summon true Christians to the new lifé, and, therefore, first of all, 
(1) those who have been beheaded with the axe,—a symbol referring to the 
well-known Roman mode of capital punishment, as Paul had experienced it, 
then (2) so many as had, in no one of the ways described, sworn allegiance 
to the ‘‘Beast.” What number there shall be, of genuine Christians, actually 
living on the earth, at the time of these mightiest of all changes, is, in the 
glowing haste of these visions, not narrated, but we can clearly enough con- 
clude it from what has been earlier said of John, in Apoc. xiv:1-5: xix:14, 
Ig. The risen saints, ‘‘caught up to meet the Lord in the air,” according to 
Paul, just after the First Resurrection, II Thess. ii:1, 1 Thess. iv:17, appear 
here as fellow comrades with Christ, against the Antichristian host. The 
condition of the glorified in the Millennial Kingdom is only briefly pictured. 
‘They shall be priests of God and of Christ.” Then will first be fulfilled, 


486 APPENDIX. 


completely, what was promised in Exodus xix:6, and in Isaiah Ixi:6, 9, and 
they ‘‘shall reign with Christ,” instead of sigh under Antichrist, as is so 
often promised in the Old Testament. The exalted station to which they 
have attained is expressed in these words, ‘’ Blessed and holy is he who hath 
part in the First Resurrection. Over such the Second Death has no power ; 
but they shall be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with Him 
1000 years!” Rev. xx:6. 

The prophecy of the 1000 years carries us swiftly over from the first 
Messianic judgment to the Final Judgment, without a full description of the 
Millennial Age which, in the purpose of the Seer, could only be impossible. 
Satan must yet be-free, once more, because the old creation still exists. 
And, because he finds no opportunity to practice his favorite art among 
genuine Christians, he turns himself to seduce the nations in the four corners 
of the earth, Gog and Magog, dwelling outside the boundaries of the King- 
dom of which Jerusalem, made better, is the middle point, and so he leads 
them against the ‘‘ Beloved City.” Rev. xx:7-9. Here, as Ezekiel’s 
vision, in Chapter xxxvii, had swept before the Seer, in reference to the First 
Resurrection, so now Chapter xxxviii sweeps before him in reference to Gog 
and Magog, while the special reason for Gog’s march, as given in Ezekiel, 
here falls away. The march of Gog’s conglomerate hordes is the sign that 
the time for the Last and General Judgment has now come; this final assault 
upon the blameless City being the last and highest abomination of wicked- 
ness; the sign that ¢za¢ End, which brings eternal Victory over ever-increas- 
ing evil, and the full consummation of all the glorified, must now follow. 
Thus, Satan is foiled at every step. As the Crucifixion was, in the first of 
the Three Great Circles of ever-widening Glorifications, ¢Aaf out of which 
came Christ the Glorifier; and as secondly, the assault of Antichrist and the 
antichristian Roman World-Power upon Jerusalem made better, is ¢/a/, out 
of which comes the Glorification of all Christians around the Glorified One, 
in the Kingdom of the 1000 years; so, now, in the third stage of develop- 
ment, Gog’s assault, the last and highest abomination of wickedness, and 
Satanic enmity, is ¢2u¢ out of which comes the final victory, and the last and 
highest consummation of glory for the Glorifier and the Glorified, in a King- 
dom that has noend. In the first instance, the assault went only against 
‘The One Man” that He might be put out of the way, and lo! He is 
glorified! In the second instance. it goes against 4// those inwardly glori- 
fied, and A// who, like Him, shall be glorified outwardly and lo! both He, 
and They that are His, are openly ‘‘ glorified together,’’ and on the earth! 
And, now, in the third instance, it goes against this sure and great begin- 
ning of the Kingdom of the Resurrection, in order to make all the previous 
steps of progress in the glorification amount to nothing. Zen, must 
either ‘‘ ALL THINGS” be annihilated and return to Chaos; absolute, 


APPENDIX. A487 


or ‘‘ALL THINGS” must be glorified, and the longing after the Final Con- 
summation be completely satisfied. The result is not doubtful. The End, 
the Final End, has come which brings with it the Final New Creation, the 
Final New Heaven and Earth, and Final New Jerusalem, a Glorified World, 
in which the Glorifier and the Glorified reign to all eternities, and the last 
outlook of all things is Glory Everlasting ! 


IV 


DELITZSCH, ORELLI, AND LISTER, ON EXALTED ZION. 
DELITZSCH ON ISA. 11:2, 


Bevuremexpression, the Last, Days, ~i. ¢. the ‘End of the’ Days? 
‘ Achanith Hayyamim,’ which does not occur anywhere else in Isaiah, is 
always used in an eschatological sense. It never refers to the course of 
history immediately following the time being, but invariably indicates the 
farthest point in the history of this life ;—the point that lies on the outer- 
most limit of the speaker’s horizon. This horizon was a very fluctuating 
one. The history of prophecy is just the history of the gradual extension of 
this horizon, and of the filling up of the intermediate spaces. In Jacob’s 
blessing (Gen. xlix) the Conquest of Canaan stood in the foreground of the 
Acharith Hayyamim and the perspective was regulated accordingly. But, 
here, in Isaiah, the Acharith contained no such mixing together of events 
belonging to the more immediate and most distant future. It was, therefore, 
the Last Time, in its most literal and purest sense, commencing with the 
beginning of the New Testament Age, and terminating atits close. Com- 
PareesieD. ict, 1 Pet: i:20. ‘The prophet here® predicted. that. the 
‘Mountain’ which bore the temple of Jehovah, and therefore, was 
already 27 dignity, the most exalted of all mountains, would, one day, 
tower in actual height above all the high places of the land. The basaltic 
mountains of Bashan which rose up in bold peaks and columns might now 
indeed look down with scorn and contempt upon the small limestone hill 
which Jehovah had chosen (Ps. Ixviii:16, 17), but this was an incongruity 
which the Zas¢ Days would remove, by making the outward correspond to 
the inward, the appearance to the reality and intrinsic worth. That this is 
the prophet’s meaning is confirmed by Ezekiel xl:2, where the Temple- 
Mountain stands gigantic to the prophet, and also by Zechariah xiv:10, 
where all Jerusalem is described as towering above the country round about, 
which would, one day, become a plain. The question Zow this can possibly 
take place, 7 time, since it presupposes a complete subversion of the whole 


488 APPENDIX. 


of the existing order of the earth’s surface, is easily answered. The prophet 
saw the New Jerusalem of the Last Days on this side, and the New Jerusalem 
of the New Earth on the other side of the End, blended together, as it were, f 
in one. Whilst, however, we thus avoid all unwarrantable spiritualizing, it 
still remains a question what meaning the prophet attached to the word, 
‘Brosh, ‘at the Top. Did he mean that Moriah would one day stand 
‘ «pon the top’ of the mountains that surrounded it (as in Ps, Ixxii:16), or 
that it would stand ‘a¢ the head’ of them (as in I Kings xxi:g, 12. Amos 
vi:7. Jer. xxxi:7)? The former is Hofmann’s view, who says * the prophet 
does not mean that the mountains would be piled up, one upon another, and 
the temple mountain ‘ pon the top,’ but that the temple mountain would 
‘appear to float upon the summit of the others.’ But inasmuch as the 
expression ‘will be se¢’ does not favor this apparently romantic exaltation, 
and since ‘ A’vosh’ occurs oftener in the sense of ‘a¢ the head’ than of 
‘ wpon the top,’ I decide, for my own part, in favor of the second view,* 
although I agree with Hofmann so far, viz., That it is not merely an exal- 
tation of the Temple Mountain in the meve esteem of the nations that is pre- 
dicted, but a physical and external elevation also. And when thus outwardly 
exalted, the divinely chosen mountain would become the rendezvous and 
center of unity for all nations. They would ‘flow unto it’ asariver. It 
is Jehovah’s Temple which, being thus rendered wiszble to nations afar off, 
exerts such magnetic attraction, and with such success. Just as, at a former 
period, men had been separated and estranged from each other in the plains 
of Shinar, and thus different nations had arisen, so, at a future period, would 
the nations assemble together on the Mountain of the Lord’s House, and 
there, as members of one family, live together in unity again Compare Isa. 
xxv:6-g. xxiv:23. Isa. xl:4.’ 


Ce eee ee Ce 


vv 


he 


eee fee ee 


ORELLI ON ISAIAH II:2. 


‘‘The question whether Isa. ii:2 is to be understood physically and 
topographically, so that the territory itself and its relations shall undergo a 
mighty transformation, in order that Zion, now encircled by mountains 
higher than itself, may tower above them all,—or, whether it is meant only 
in a spiritual sense —is an idle one. The Seer actually saw Mount Zion, 
the site of the Temple, standing higher than all the rest, just as he saw, in 
fact, the nations journeying to this middle-point of the world under divine 
rule, and beheld Zion over-decked with the fiery Glory-Cloud of God. Isa. 
iv:5, 6. It was not his business to twist such concrete intuitions into 
abstract thoughts. Aware of the spiritual import which is the essential 
thing according to our Christian consciousness, yet the Revelation of God 


* So Orelli, Drechsler, Charnes Van Oosterzee, Caspari, Riehm, Hitzig, Nigelsbach, 
efc,. etc., “az the head.” N. W. 


APPENDIX. 489 


dwelling on Mount Zion must be acknowledged by all nations, and the 
world’s whole physiognomy, even in its literal outward aspect, be trans- 
figured into harmony with its subjection to Jehovah,” * 


LISTER ON ISAIAH ii:2. 


“In this passage, as in others,—Zech. xiv:3—5, 10; Jer. xxxi:38-40; Joel 
qiict6—21+ Ezek. xlvii:1—12; Ps; xcvii;5; Isa. lxiv:3; Judges v:5; Exod. xixt1$3 
Ps. cxiv:7; Isa. lxiv:1; Hagg. ii:6; Heb. xii:26, etc., there is nothing what- 
ever to favor an allegorical interpretation, but everything to support a 
literal one. The prophet looks forward to the Last Days and points to 
great changes to be wrought in the land of Palestine, at the time of the 
Second Coming of the Lord. The events predicted in this, and other 
cognate passages are all physical phenomena. They may, indeed, for the 
most part be termed geological phenomena. ‘They are matters with which 
Geologists are perfectly familiar, There is not a region on the globe in 
which they have not occurred again and again. ‘They will consist in the 
upheaval of some parts of the land, and the depression and dislocation of 
others. ‘There is nothing with which that science has made us acquainted 
that comes more frequently under our notice than phenomena of this kind. 
The terms, even, by which they are expressed have become as familiar as 
household words. Compare Isa. ii:2, with Zech. xiv:ro. What we have 
here is called ‘ Hlevation,’ or an * Upheaval’ of the strata below, by 
some cosmic force. Every mountain, and mountain chain, throughout the 
world, owe their origin to it. All lands and continents of the present day 
have been again and again subjected to an action of the kind, and also, on 
the other hand, to one of ‘ Depression,’ or ‘ Subsidence,’ as they have success- 
ively become ‘sea and dry land,’ (Hagg. ii:6), which has been the case again 
and again. And the process is still going on. Instances of Elevation and 
Depression are perpetually occurring. Three times, in the course of the 
present century, 1822, 1535, 1837, the coast of Chili has been permanently 
elevated, the last time the bottom of the sea being raised more than 8 feet, the 
area over which the elevation extended being more than 100,000 square 
miles. In the destruction of Lisbon, 1755, we have a case of depression or 
subsidence, during the six minutes of whose action the new quay, built of 
marble, at enormous expense, sank beneath the waters, ove hundred fathoms, 
These are cases of sudden and convulsive action. ‘There are other cases of 
gradual action, such as the coast of Sweden raised four feet in the present 
century, and the coast of Greenland now sinking gradually, for a space of 
more than 600 miles. If we apply to the text referred to, the facts thus 
ascertained, there is not the slightest reason, from the nature of the case, 


* Orelli Die alttest. Weisag. 287. 


490 APPENDIX. 


why the things foretold in them should not be literally fulfilled. What is pre- 
dicted is neither impossible nor improbable. It is only what has occurred again 
and again. The Mount of Olives, and indeed the whole of Palestine have been 
already ‘exalted,’ and ‘lifted up.’ They consist, for the most part, of 
aqueous or stratified rocks, which were originally deposited at the bottom 
of the sea, and have since been raised to their present level. The phe- 
nomena have been those of ‘ Hlevation.’ Why, then, seeing that this has 
occurred before, should we think it strange, if told that it shall occur again ? 
Is it more improbable in the Future than it was in the Past? The process 
now going on is gradual, but it seems that when the things foretold occur, it 
will be convulsive. Still this is nothing new, for this also has occurred 
within our own time. Why should it not occur again? All the passages 
referred to have the character of literality about them. We must, therefore, 
receive them as the Lord has set them before us ‘He hath said it, and 
shall He not bring it to pass?’ ‘ The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will per- 
form this.’ ”’ . 

The passage in Isa. ii:2, is a case of Elevation. In Zech. xiv:10 it is a 
case of both Elevation and Depression. In Zech. xiv:4, 5, it is a case of 
what is called ‘° Disruption,” ‘‘ Fissure,” or ‘‘ Fault.” Without pretending 
to indicate the exact mode by which the Mount of Olives will be divided, 
and a Valley formed through the midst of it, it is enough to know that the 
phenomenon foretold is one that is fully understood as a fact of frequent 
occurrence in the history of our globe. We have cases innumerable of Ele- 
vation, Subsidence, and Lateral Pressure, the strata fractured in the process 
of the movement, and what is cailed a ‘‘ Fault” has been produced. The 
disruption of the- Mount of Olives may be produced by any of the above 
processes; and it would seem more than probable that by the ‘‘ Mountains” 
in Isa. Ixiv:1-4, and Mic. i:3, 4, Isa. xl:4, we are to understand those 
in the immediate neighborhood of Jerusalem, and the Mount of Olives, 
especially, This is rendered the more probable from a comparison of Mic. 
i:3, with verse 5, the latter being explanatory of the former. In verse 3 
we read of the *‘ High Places of the Land,” and, in reference to these it is 
asked in verse 5, ‘‘ What are the High Places of Judah? Are they not 
Jerusalem?” Again, verse 4, ‘‘the Valleys shall be cleft,” pointing, no 
doubt, to the convulsion foretold by Zechariah, where lie the valleys of 
Jehoshaphat and Hinnom, ‘‘And, again, it must be remembered that Isa. 
ii:2, distinctly shows that a great disturbance and dislocation of the strata 
must necessarily take place in the immediate neighborhood of Jerusalem at 
this period, viz., the Second Advent. We have, therefore, good grounds 
for connecting a@// passages above referred to together, and for regarding 
them as all relating to the same period, and most of them, to the same 
locality. Isa, Ixiv:1-3, and Mic. i:3, 4, are undoubtedly connected, and 


APPENDIX. 491 


relate to the same great event, viz., the Descent of the Lord Jesus Christ to 
Earth at His Second Advent. In the former there is a prayer that He 
would do this; in the latter there is a prediction that he will do this.” 

It is clear, from a comparison of the Scripture passages, that the event 
predicted in Isa. ii:2, and Mic. iv:1, viz., the ‘‘ Elevation”? of Mount Zion, 
the Temple-Mountain, is the same event as that predicted in Zech. 
xiv:I0. viz., the Depressions of the hills of Judah, and the ‘‘ Ele- 
vation” of Jerusalem; and which Ezekiel sees accomplished, Ezek. xl:2; 
and with which the transformations in Jer. xxxi:38-40; Joel. iii:17, 18, 
Ezek. xlvii:1-12, are associated, viz., the Temple-Waters streaming through 
the Acacia-Vale, and emptying into the Mediterranean and Dead Seas; as 
also producing monthly fruit-bearing trees. It is utter folly to spiritualize 
this as Hengstenberg, Keil, Wright, Alexander, (W. L.) and others do. 
The objections to the literal interpretation, such as that ‘‘natural waters 
could not flow in all directions at once, from the same point,” (R. W. Alex- 
ander) and ‘‘the whole land would be submerged by the waters of the Med- 
iterranean, were such a depression literal,” (Wright, C. H. H.) are mis- 
understandings of the text, and afford only too open a flank to keen critics 
like Kuenen and Graf. We hold with Hofmann, Smend, Neumann, 
Delitzsch, and many more, that the predictions will be literally accomplished, 
notwithstanding the unbelief of believers. What Isaiah says is that 
““Mount Zion shall be exalted above the hills.””. What Zechariah says is that 
““the whole /and (not earth, but land of Judah. So Ewald, Umbreit, 
Hitzig, Kohler, Kliefoth, Pressel, and even R. W. Alexander and C, H. H. 
Wright) shall become as a Plain (not ¢e plain, as Kliefoth, R. W. Alex- 
ander, etc.; but @ plain, as Ewald, Bunsen, Wright, Maurer, Lange, Keil, 
notwithstanding Baer’s retention of the definite article) from Geba to Rim- 
mon, south of Jerusalem, and SHE (Jerusalem) SHALL BE LIFTED /igh, and 
shall abide in her place, from the gate of Benjamin to the place of the 
outermost gate, even the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananeel to 
the King’s wine-presses.” And all this in connection with the cleaving of 
**the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the. East.” And what 
Joel and Ezekiel say is, that perennial waters shall flow, both sides, from 
the Temple Rock, and immortalize the land and sea together. Keil thinks 
this is ‘‘a figurative representation of the spiritual elevation and glory the 
City will receive by the gospel,” and Hengstenberg imagines it means “the 
spiritual elevation and transformation of the church,” while Wright is con- 
vinced that ‘‘high dignity” and ‘‘rivers of grace” are here signified. 
Others think the splitting of Olivet means, spirttually, “‘a broken and con- 
trite heart,” which Bunyan keenly corrects by saying ‘‘ The prophet saith 
that the mountain is ‘ before Jerusalem, on the East !’”’ Still others idealize 
the prophecy, counting out the ‘‘husk” as ‘‘mere external,” and the 
** details” as ‘““non-essential !” 


492 , PPENDIX. 


Against such liberties, we hold to the text, as it reads. What we are 
told is that Palestine will be transfigured when the Lord comes. When He 
renovates Israel for Himself, He renovates their City and their Land. The 
New-Born Tenant has a New-Built Home. When the Daughter of Zion 
is married to her Lord, it is not in the old ruin they keep house! Exalted 
above the hills and crowned with the streaming light of the Glory-Cloud, 
will be her special dwelling-place. The territory of Judah will become like 
the ‘‘ Arabah,” or Ghor, which stretches from the slopes of Hermon or Sea 
of Tiberias, to the Red Sea or Elanitic Gulf. It is a case of ‘‘ Depression” 
of the mountains and fills, an ‘‘ Elevation” of the vad/eys, but not a sink- 
ing of the territory itself; certainly not of Jerusalem. The land is elevated 
while yet its irregularities and inequalities are smoothed, and it becomes a 
plain. The errors of the commentators here, are many. It is not said that 
Judah’s territory shall be depressed, but only that its mountainous region 
shall be leveled like the Ghor, while the City and the Temple are exalted. 
Isaiah has taught the same truth. ‘‘ Every Valley shall be exalted, and 
every mountain and hill be brought low, the crooked place be made straight 
and the rough place plain, and the Glory of the Lord shall be revealed and 
all flesh shall see it together, for Jehovah's mouth hath spoken it.” Isa. xl: 
4. The delimitation of the boundary of the territory is sufficiently clear. 
It is that of the voyal tribe and kingdom of Judah, the central glory of mil- 
lennial times. It is from Geba (old Gibeah, modern /eéa) in the territory of 
Benjamin, the northern boundary line, to Rimmon (modern Umer-Rumanim) 
” the whole 
extent of Judah’s domain (II Kings xxiii:8), The entire hilly region shall 
become like the ‘‘Great Plain,” and ‘‘ Jerusalem shall be lifted high.” ‘The 
total City shall be elevated. If we trace the delimitation of the City itself, 
it is even more precise. Irom East to West, the boundary line runs from 
Benjamin’s Gate to the Corner Gate, while it stretches North and South, 
from the Tower of Hananeel to the royal gardens at the junction of the val- 


the southern boundary line, i. e., ‘“‘ from Geba ta Beersheba, 


leys of Jehoshaphat and Hinnom, Zech. xiv:10; Jer. xxxi:38-40. This 
particularity is intentional, on the part of the Spirit of Prophecy. But, it is 
a false inference, from this, to conclude that omly this portion of the Land of 
Canaan is the subject of cosmical transformation. Dr. Robertson Smith’s 
sneer at the idea of “‘ the Aingdom of God reduced to the petty limits of the 
erritory of Judah,” rests upon his own ignorance of the prophetic word, 
and is a sneer at the prophetic word itself. Elsewhere we read, clearly,— 
and long ago, as Justin Martyr emphasized it,—that the entire land, and the 
city, will be ‘‘ érvoadened, enlarged and adorned,” according to the prophets. 
It has been a misfortune that our English Version, like others equally defect- 
ive, has obscured for us the sense in many passages. In the clearest man- 
ner, the prophet Isaiah, looking forward to Israel’s glory accomplished at 


APE ENIVLX. 493 


Messiah’s Coming, says, ‘‘ Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, thou art 
glorified; ¢how hast extended wide the borders of the land.” Isa. xxvi:15. 
It is a prediction of increased population, both by restoration, and resurrec- 
tion, and an enlargement of the limits of the land. So the promise is given, 
“Thine eyes shail see the King in His beauty, and the land of breadths,” 
or “‘far-stretching land.” The same is true as to the enlargement of the 
City, in future times. The magnificence of the Kingdom is elsewhere fore- 
told in terms unmistakable. Inthe 72d Psalm, it is described as ‘‘ from 
Sea to Sea, and from the River to the ends of the Earth.” Ps. \xxii:7. Does 
all this seem too marvelous? ‘‘ Meum Yehovah!” “It ts the utterance of 
Jehovah, Deer of these things!” Wow blessed this Planet of ours one day 
will be, by reason of the Coming of the Lord from Heaven! How blessed 
the Holy Land! And Jerusalem lifted up! And Zion exalted! And Israel 
redeemed! And the Nations converted! And the holy sleepers waked into 
the image of Christ! How stupendous the change! What a different Age 
from ours! Come, Lord Jesus! 


Solt Deo Gloria. 


FINIS. 


) 
4 
7 
( 


' 


PRE-MILLENNIAL 


AND OTHER 


PROPHETIC WORKS. 


THE THOUSAND YEARS IN BOTH TESTAMENTS. With 
Supplementary Discussions upon Symbolic Numbers, the Development 
of Prophecy and its Interpretation concerning Israel, the Nations, the 
Church and the Kingdom, as seen in the Apocalypses of Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
Daniel, Christ, and John. By RrEv. NATHANIEL WEsT, D.D. 12mo. 
515 pages, cloth, $2.00. 

Without doubt this is the most searching study in Eschatology that has been published 


for many years. It is the result of a lifetime of most careful and diligent study on the 
part of the author, and will be appreciated by all students of Prophecy. 


SECOND EDITION. 


THE LORD’S RETURN, and Kindred Truths. By Dr. L. W. 
MUNHALL. 16mo, 192 pp. cloth $1.09, 


““ There is much prophetic truth set forth in this book, and in a very forcible manner.”’ 
—The Christian, London. 

‘** No person can read it and then say truthfully that a belief in a pre-millennial return 
of our Lord is calculated to decrease missionary zeal. Dr. Munhall writes with great 
sobriety and much more logic than many writers on prophetical S-riptures.”—W.. Y. 
Observer. 

; ‘‘ A book which every lover of the truth should purchase. The style is peculiarly 
adapted to interest the great mass of readers.’’—Hazth/ful Witness. 


FORTIETH THOUSAND. 
JESUS IS COMING. By W. E. Brackxstonge. Giving seven argu- 


ments in favor of the pre-millennial coming—stating the distinction 
between the Rapture and the Revelation, and between the Church and 
the Kingdom, and containing a diagram with explanations. New en- 
larged edition, 160 pp. Cloth, 50c.; paper covers, I5c. 


NEW CHEAP EDITION. 
PRE-MILLENNIAL ESSAYS of the Prophetic Conference. The 


full and authorized edition of the essays and addresses of the Prophetic 
Conference held in New York City. To which is added an appendix 
of Critical Testimonies, translated from the first scholarship of Ger- 
many and other countries, and a textual index of passages of Scripture 
referring to pre-millennial subjects. Large, r2mo., 528 pp. $1.00. 


‘** Certainly the ablest work that has appeared on the subject.’’—Canada Presbyterian. 

‘* For the student who desires to know the arguments by which the doctrine of a pre- 
millennial coming are maintained, there is no better book.” —Czristian Union. 

‘** It is a work for the best minds.”’—Methodist Recorder. 


SEVENTH EDITION. 


PROPHETIC STUDIES of the International Prophetic Conference, 
(held in Chicago) upon the near Coming of the Lord, and kindred 
Topics and Events; together with their practical application as an in- 
centive to Evangelistic and Mission Work and personal consecration. 
224 pp., I12mo. Paper, et, 50c.; cloth, me/, 75¢. 


CHICAGO: : H NEW YORK: 
148 & 150 Madison St. Figming ji. Revell, 12 Bible House, Astor PI. 


WORKS ON PROPHECY—Continued. 


PLAIN PAPERS ON PROPHETIC SUBJECTS. By Wi tram 
TROTTER, Cloth, Lomi, 582 pp., $1.25. 


** Trotter’s Plain Papers’’ have long been considered among the very best, if not the 
best, popular presentation of Prophetic Truth in print, either in England or America, 
The price alone has prevented the widespread circulation of the English edition. Being 
now reprinted at a very low price, this objection is removed. 


FORTY-FIFTH THOUSAND. 
SECOND COMING OF CHRIST (The). By D. L. Moopy. Re- 


vised. ‘‘Clear, pointed, and intensely yer ea "* 32 pp. and cover. 
Price 10c. 


BLESSED HOPE (The); or, The Glorious Coming of the Lord. By 
Wituis Lorp, D. D. New and cheaper edition. A practical treatise; 
not dealing with obscure and doubtful theories, but presenting the sub- 
ject in the light of devotion. 250 pp. Cloth, $1.00; cheap edition, 
paper cover, only 25c. 


SECOND COMING OF CHRIST. By GreorcE MULLER, of Bristol, 
Eng. A neat little tract of 32 pp., suitable for circulation. Per doz. 
40c. 100 copies, $2.50. 


SECOND EDITION. 
WHAT IS MARANATHA? In this popular little work, first issued 


in Australia, the subject is taken up in the form of a series of conver- 
sations between a father and his son and daughter. This method of 
presentation is particularly interesting. 146 pp. Paper cover, 20c, 


LECTURES ON THE BOOK OF REVELATION. By Wo. 
LINCOLN. ‘Two vols. in one, 450 pp. Paper, 50c.; cloth, $1.00. 


Asin Genesis is seen the germ, so in Revelation is found the ending or summing up of 
all things. Pre-eminently a book of judgment, showing us things that must shortly come 
to pass, “the only book to the reading and hearing of which a blessing of promise is 
attached.” These lectures are worthy of an extended and very, ful study. Much 
food for reflection will be found in them, and not a little incentive Csi eeper research after 
Biblical truths. 


MARANATHA; or, The Lord Cometh. By Rev. J. H. BRooxes. 
545 pp. Cloth, $1.25; paper, 50c. 


COMING OF THE LORD (The). Sixteen addresses on the Biessed 
Hope by such untiring students as WM. LINCOLN, J. D. Smiru, T. 
NeEwpesuky and others. Paper, 30c.; cloth, 60c. 


THINGS TO COME. A short outline of some of the great events of 
prophecy. By J. R. CALDWELL. Paper, 25c.; cloth, 55c. 


CHICAGO: 7 NEW YORK: 
148 & 150 Madison St. Flemins H. Revell, 12 Bible House, Astor Pl. 


i 


7 ere Cae | ae ee 


-y -e 


a 


iy 2 WY 


re, , 
8 te ei a 


The “Northfield Books.” 


COLLEGE STUDENTS AT NORTHFIELD; or, A College of 
Colleges, No. 2. Conducted during July, 1888: Containing addresses 
by Mr. D. L. Moody, Rev. J. Hudson Taylor, M. D., Bishop Hendrix, 
Rev. Alex. McKenzie, D.D., Rev. Henry Clay Trumbull, D. D., Prof. 
~W. B. Harper, and others. 


The ‘‘ Practical Talks”’ as given in report of last year’s gathering, the demand fot 
which has called for a seventh edition, has induced us to publish an account of this year’s 
proceedings, none the less ‘‘ practica!,’’ and we feel sure will be as fully appreciated. 


12mo, 296 Pages, Cloth, $1.00 net. 


Dr. A. T. Prerson writes: ‘* Admirable book. I deem it one of the best of all the 
practical helps issued by the press.”’ 


Dr. Joseph Cook.—' It is well edited, well printed, and well inspired from on High. 
Is full of a Holy Fire of spiritual zeal, which I hope to see spread far and wide.”’ 


President M, E. Gates, of Rutgers College, writes: ‘* The influence which has 
gone out on the College Life of this country, from the summer meetings at Northfield, isso 
potent for good, that I welcome the extension and perpetuation of that influence through 
this book. 


SEVENTH THOUSAND, 

A COLLEGE OF COLLEGES; or, Practical Talks to College 
Students. Given in July, 1887, by Prof. Henry Drummond, F.R.S.S., 
Rey. |. A. Broadus, D.D., Prof. Townsend, Rev. A.'T. Pierson,D.D,, 
Mr. D. L. Moody, and others. 


12mo, 288 Pages, Cloth, $1.00 net. 


“ Of signal value.’’—Chautauqua Herald. 

‘“ We commend this volume very cordially.”’—Presbyterian Witness. 

“The volume closes with a chapter of ‘nuggets’ from Northfield, which is no excepe 
tion, however, as the other chapters are equally rich in ‘nuggets,’”"—Tke /ndependent. 


D. L. MOODY AT HOME. His Home and Home Work. 


Embracing a description of the educational institutions established at 
Northfield, Mass., together with an account of the various noted gath- 
erings of Christian workers at the place, and the most helpful and sug- 
gestive lectures, and the best thoughts there exchanged ; adding, also, 
many helpful and practical hints. 


12mo, 288 Pages, Cloth, Eight Illustrations, $1.00. 


The New York /udependent says: ‘* There is nothing in the career of this remark- 
able man more striking than his work at Northfield.”’ 

The New York Avangelist spoke most truly when it said: ‘‘ The public is unaware 
of Mr. Moody’s enormous investments at Northfield, that will pay him abundant intecest 
long after he reaches heaven,”’ 


NEW YORK: i CHICAGO: 
42 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flemi Ne } ‘ Revel | 148 & 150 Madison St. 


New Books for -- 
— Thinking Minds. 


WHAT ARE WE TO BELIEVE? or, The Testimony of Ful- 
filled Prophecy. By Rev. JOHN URQUHART. tI6mo., 230 pages, 
cloth, 75 cents. 


“ This book, so small in bulk but so large in thought, sets forth a great mass of such tes- 
timony in lines so clear and powerful that we pity the man who could read it without 
amazement and awe. It is the very book to put into the hands of an intelligent Agnostic,’’ 
— The Christian, London. 


MANY INFALLIBLE PROOFS. By Rev. ARTHUR T. PIERSON, 
Deb.) 317 pp.ar2mo., Cloth, $1.25. 


“Tt is not an exercise in mental gymnastics, but an earnest inquiry after the truth.”’— 
Daily Telegram, Troy, N.Y. 

“He does not believe that the primary end of the Bible is to teach science ; but he 
argues with force and full conviction that nothing in the Bible has been shaken by scientific 
research.’ —/ndependent. 


HOW I REACHED THE MASSES; Together with twenty-two 
lectures delivered in the Birmingham Town Hall on Sunday after- 
noons. By Rev. CHARLES LEACH, F.G. S. 16mo., cloth, $1.00. 

There is much of very welcome good sense and practical illustration in these addresses. 

Pithy and pointed in admonishment, and wholesome in their didactic tone, they ought to 

exercise a good influence. 

ENDLESS BEING; or, Man Made for Eternity. By Rev. J. L. 
BARLOW. Introduction by the Rev. P. S. Henson, D. D. Cloth, 
16mo., 165 pages, 75 cents. 


An unanswerable work ; meeting the so-called annihilation and kindred theories most 
satisfactorily. The author held for years these errors, and writes as one fully conversant 
with the ground he covers. It isa work which should be widely circulated, 


PAPERS ON PREACHING. By the Right Rev. Bishop BALDWIN, 
Rev. Principal Rainy, D. D., Rev. J. R. VERNON, M. A., and others. 
Crown, 8vo, cloth, 75 cents. 

“Preachers of all denominations wili do well to read these practical and instructive 
disquisitions. The essay on ‘‘ Expression in Preaching ”’ is especially good.— Christian. 
THE SABBATH; its Permanence, Promise, and Defence. 

By Rev. W. W. Everts, D. D. I2mo., 278 pages, cloth, $1.00. 


No phase of the Sabbath question is left undiscussed, while every topic is treated in the 
briefest manner, and every touch of light shows the hand of a master. 

“* An incisive and effective discussion of the subject.’-—V. VY. Observer. 

** A thoughtful Christian defence of that divine institution.” —Christian Advocate. 


QUESTIONS OF THE AGES. By Rev. MosEs SMITH. 
Cloth 12mo, 132 pages, 75 cents. 


What is the Almighty? Is there Common Sense in Religion? 
What is man? What ts Faith ? 

What ts the Trinity ? Is there a Larger Hope? 

Which zs the Great Commandment. ls Life Worth Living? 


What Mean these Stones ? 


‘Discusses certain of the deep things of the Gospel in such a wise and suggestive 
fashion that they are helpful. One, answers negatively and conclusively the question, Is 
there a larger hope? ’~—Zkhe Congregationalist. 


NEW YORK: I CHICAGO: 
12 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flem N@ } 3 Revell 148 & 150 Madison St. 


s : i: 
, ee ee ee 


edHAND BOOKS FOR BIBLE STUDENTSDe 


ome LIFE OF CHRIST. -Rev. Jas. Sratxer, M. A. . A new 
edition, with introduction by Rev. Gro. C. Lorimer, D. D.  12mo. 
cloth, 166 pages, 60 cents. 


This work is in truth ‘‘Afaltum 2x Parvo,” containing within small compass a vast 
amount of most helpful teaching, so admirably arranged that the reader gathers with re- 
markable definiteness the whole revealed record of the life work of our Lord in a nutshell 
of space and with a minimum of study. 


mHeE LIFR OF ST. PAUL. By Rev. Jas. Sratker, M. Av 12mo. 


cloth, 184 pages, 60 cents. 


As admirable a work as the exceedingly popular volume by this author on ‘‘ The Life 
of Christ.’’ 

‘‘An exceedingly compact life of the Apostle to the Gentiles. It is bristling with 
information, and is brief, yet clear. Asan outline of Paul’s life it cannot be surpassed.’’— 
N.Y. Christian Inquirer. 


THE BIBLE STUDENTS’ HANDBOOK. 12mo cloth, 288 pages, 
50 cents. 


One of those helpful works, worth its price, multiplied by several scores. It con- 
tains an introduction to the study of the Scriptures, with a brief account of the books of 
the Bible, their writers, etc., also a synopsis of the life and work of our Lord, and complete 
history of the manners and customs of the times, etc. 


THE TOPICAL TEXT BOOK. 16mo. cloth, 292 pages, 60 cents. 


A remarkably complete and helpful Scripture text book for the topical study of the 
Bible. Usefulin preparing Bible readings, addresses, etc. 


THE BIBLE REMEMBRANCER,. 24mo. cloth, 198 pages, 50 cts. 


A complete analyses of the Bible is here given, in small compass, in addition to a 
large amount of valuable Biblical information, and twelve colored maps. 


BIBLE LESSONS ON JOSHUA AND JUDGES. By Rev. J. 
GURNEY Hoare, M.A. 16mo cloth, 124 pages, 50 cents. 


FIFTY-TWO LESSONS ON (1) The Works of Our Lord; (2) Claims 
of Our Lord. Forming a year’s course of instruction for Bible classes, 
Sunday schools and lectures. . By FLAVEL 8. Cook, M.A., D. D. 
16mo. cloth, 104 pages, 50 cents. 


FIFTY-TWO LESSONS ON (1) The Names and Titles cf Our 
Lord; (2) Prophesies Concerning Our Lord and their Fulfillment. 
By FLAVEL S, Cook, M. A., D. D. 16mo. cloth, 104 pages, 50 cents. 


Extremely full in the matter of reference and explanation, and likely to make the 
user ‘‘search the Scriptures.” 


OUTLINE OF THE BOOKS OF THE BIBLE. By Rev. J. H. 
BrooKEs, D. D. Invaluable to the young student of the Bible as a 
‘First Lesson ” in the study of the Book. 180 pages. Cloth, 50 cents; 
paper covers, 25 cents. 


CHRIST AND THE SCRIPTURES. By Rev. ADoLpH SAPHER. 


16mo. cloth, 160 pages, 75 cents. 


To all disciples of Christ this work commends itself at once by its grasp of truth, 
its insight, the life in it, and its spiritual force.—Christian Work, 


NEW YORK: I CHICAGO: 
72 Bible House, Astor Pl. FI emi N@ H ‘ Revel | 748 & 150 Madison St. 


REFERENCE BOOKS 


FOR 


BIBLE STUDENTS. 


JAMIESON, FAUSSET & BROWN’S Popular Portable Con:- 


mentary. Critical, Practical, Explanatory. Four volumns in nezt 


box, fine cloth, $8.00; half bound, $10.00. 


A new edition, containing the complete unabridged notes in clear type on good paper, 
in four handsome 12 mo. volumes of about 1.000 pages each, with copious index, numerous 
illustrations and maps, anda Bible Dictionary compiled from Dr. Wm. Smith’s standard 
work, 

Bishop Vincent of Chautauqua fame says: ‘* The des¢ condensed commentary on the 
whole Bible is Jamieson, Fausset & Brown.” 


CRUDEN’S UNABRIDGED CONCORDANCE TO THE 
HOLY SCRIPTURES. With life of the author. 864 pp., 8vo., 
cloth (net), $1.00; half roan, sprinkled edges (net), 2.00; half roan, 
full gilt edges (net), $2.50. 


SMITH’S BIBLE DICTIONARY, comprising its Antiquities, Biog- 
raphy, Geography and Natural History, with numerous maps and illus- 
trations. Edited and condensed from his great work by WILLIAM 
SmiTH, LL. D. 776 pages, 8vo, many illustrations, cloth, $1.50. 


THE BIBLE TEXT CYCLOPEDIA. A complete classification of 
Scripture Texts in the form of an alphabetical list of subjects. By 


Rev. JAMES INGLIs. Large 8vo, 524 pages, cloth, $1.75. 


The plan is much the same as the ‘‘ Bible Text Book’’ with the valuable additional 
help in that the texts referred to are quoted in full. Thus the student is saved the time and 
labor of turning to numerous passages, which, when found, may not be pertinent to the 
subject he has in hand. 


THE TREASURY OF SCRIPTURE KNOWLEDGE; consist- 
ing of 500,000 scripture references and parallel passages, with numer- 


ous notes. 8vo, 778 pages. cloth, $2.00. 


A single examination of this remarkable compilation of references will convince the 
reader of the fact that ‘* the Bible is its own best interpreter.”’ 


THE WORKS OF FLAVIUS JOSEPHUS, translated by WiLL1Am 
WHISTON, A. M., with Life, Portrait, Notes and Index. <A new cheap 
edition in clear type. Large 8vo, 684 pages, cloth, $2.00. 


100.000 SYNONYMS AND ANTONYMS. By Rt. Rev. SAMUEL 
FatLows, A. M., D. D. 512 pages, cloth, $1.00. 


A complete Dictionary of synonyms axd words of opposite meanings, with an appen- 
dix of Briticisms, Americanisms, Colioquialisms, Homonims, Homophonous words, Foreign 
Phrases, etc., etc. 
‘* This is one of the best books of its kind we have seen, and probably there is nothing 
published in the country that is equal to it.’—Y. M. C. A. Watchman, 


NEW YORK: 1 CHICAGO: 
12 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flem Ne H. Revel 748 & 150 Madison St 


SUGGESTIVE BOOKS =- 
= - FOR BIBLE READERS. 


NEW NOTES FOR BIBLE READINGS. By the late S. R. Brices, 
with brief Memoir of the author by Rev. JAs. H. Brookes, D. D., 
Crown 8vo, cloth, $1.00; flexible, 75 cents. 


‘“New Nores”’ is not a reprint, and contains Bzble Readings to be found in no other 
similar work, and, itis confidently believed, will be found more carefully prepared, and 
therefore more helpful and suggestive. 

Everyone of the 60,000 readers of ‘‘ Notes and Suggestions for Bible Readings’’ will 
welcome this entirely new collection containing selections from D. L. Moody, Major Whittle, 
J. H. Brookes, D. D., Prof. W. G. Moorehead, Rev. E. P. Marvin, Jno. Currie, Rev. W. J. 
Erdman, Rev. F. E. Marsh, Dr. L. W. Munhall, etc. 


NOTES AND SUGGESTIONS FOR BIBLE READINGS. By 
S. R. Briccs and J. H. Evuiorr. 


Containing, in addition to twelve introductory chapters on plans and method of Bible 
study and Bible readings, over six hundred outlines of Bible readings, by many of the 
most eminent Bible students of the day. Crown 8vo, 202 pp, Cloth, library style, $1.00; 
flexible cloth, .75; paper covers, .50. 

THE OPEN SECRET; or, The Bible Explaining Itself. A series 
of intensely practical Bible readings. By HANNAH WHITALL SMITH. 
320 pp. Fine cloth, $1.00. 

That the author of this work has a faculty of presenting the ‘‘ Secret Things’’ that are 
revealed in the Word of God is apparent to all who have read the exceedingly popular work, 
“*The Christian’s Secret of a Happy Life.” 

BIBLE BRIEFS; or, Outline Themes for Scripture Students. By 
G. C. & E. A. NEEDHAM. 16mo., 224 pages, cloth, $1.00. 


The plan of these expositions is suggestive rather than exhaustive, and these suggestions 
are designed to aid Evangelists at home and missionaries abroad, Bible School Teachers, and 
Christian Association Secretaries and Workers. 


BIBLE HELPS FOR BUSY MEN. By A.C. P. Coore. 


Contains over 200 Scripture subjects, clearly worked out and printed in good legiktle 
type, with an alphabetical index. 140 pages, 16mo.; paper, 49c.; cloth flex., 60c. 

‘‘ Likely to be of use to overworked brethren.’’—C, H. SPURGEON. 

** Given in aclear and remarkably telling form.” — Christian Leader. 


RUTH, THE MOABITESS; or Gleaning in the Book of Ruth. 
By HENRY MoOoORHOUSE. 16mo., paper covers, 20c.; cloth, goc. 
A characteristic series of Bible readings, full of suggestion and instruction. 


BIBLE READINGS. By HENRY MoorHOUSE. 16mo., paper covers, 


30 cents; cloth, 60 cents. 


A series by one pre-eminently the man of one book, an incessant, intense, prayerful 
student of the Bible. 


SYMBOLS AND SYSTEMS IN BIBLE READINGS. 
Rev. W. F. CrAFTs. 64 pages and cover, 25 cents. 


Giving a plan of Bible reading, with fifty verses definitely assigned for each day, the 
Bible being arranged in the order of its events. The entire symbolism of the Bible ex- 
- plained concisely and clearly, 


NEW YORK: 1 CHICAGO: 
72 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flemi Ne H . Revel | 748 & 150 Madison St. 


’ 


“MISSIONARY PUBLICATIONS: 


——_—____.¢-- 


REPORT OF THE CENTENARY CONFERENCE on the 
Protestant Missions of the World. Held in London, June, 1888. 
Edited by the Rev. JAMEs JOHNSTON, F. S. S., Secretary of the Con- 
ference. Two large 8vo. vols., 1200 pages, $2.00 net per set. 

An important feature in this report, lack of which has prejudiced many against reports 
in general, is the special care taken by the Editor, who has succeeded in making the work 
an interesting and accurate reproduction of the most important accumulation of facts from 
the Mission Fields of the World, as given by the representatives of all the Evangelical 
Societies of Christendom. ; 

And another: The exceptionally complete and helpful indexing of the entire work in 
such a thorough manner as to make it of the greatest value asa Reference Encyclopedia on 
mission topics for years to come. 


THE MISSIONARY YEAR BOOK FOR 1889-90. Containing 
Historical and Statistical accounts of the Principle Protestant Missionary 
Societies in America, Great Britain and the Continent of Europe. 


The American edition, edited by Rev. J. T. Gracry, D.D., of Buffalo, embraces 
about 450 pages, one-fourth being devoted to the work of American Societies, and will 
contain Maps of India, China Japan, Burmah, and Siam; also a language Map of India 
and comparative diagrams illustrating areas, population and progress of Mission work. 
This compilation will be the best presentation of the work of the American Societies in 
Pagan Lands that has yet been given to the public. The book is strongly recommended by 
Rev. Jas. JounsTon, F.S.S., as a companion volume to the Report of the Century Con- 
ference on Missions. Cloth, 12mo. $1.25. 


GARENGANZE: or, Seven Years’ Pioneer Missionary Work 
in Central Africa. By Frep. S. ARNOT, with introduction by Rev. 
A. T. Pierson, D.D. Twenty Illustrations and an original Map. 


The author’s two trips across Africa, entirely unarmed and unattended except by the 
local and constantly changing carriers, and in such marked contrast with many modern ad- 
venturers, strongly impress one to ask if another Livingstone has not appeared among us, 
Traversing where no white man had ever been seen before and meeting kings and chiefs 
accustomed only to absolute power, he demanded and received attention in the name of his 
God. Cloth 8vo, 290 pages, $1.25. 


IN THE FAR EAST: China Illustrated. Letters from Gerald- 
ine Guinness. Edited by her sister, with Introduction by Rev. A. J. 
Gorpon, D. D. A characteristic Chinese cover. Cloth 4to, 138 pages, 


$1.00. 
CONTENTS. 

** Good-Bye!”’ Ten Days on a Chinese Canal. 
Second Class. At Home in our Chinese ‘‘ Haddon Hall,” 
On the Way to China. By Wheelbarrow to Antong, 
Hong-Kong and Shanghai. Life on a Chinese Farm. 
First days in the Flowery Land A Visit to the ‘‘Shun”’ City. 
Opium Suicides amongst Women. Blessing—and Need of Blessing— 


In the Far East, 
Rev. C. H. SpurGEON, writes: 
‘*T have greatly enjoyed ‘Inthe Far East.’ God blessing it, the book should send 
armies of believers to invade the Flowry Land.”’ 
The author is to be congratulated fo, the taste and beauty with which these letters 
are now put into permanent form. A full page colored map of China enhances this ad- 
mirable gift book. 


NEW YORK: ' CHICAGO: 
12 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flem I N@ } . Revel | 748 & 150 Madison St. 


Missionary Publications 
(Continued. ) 


A CENTURY OF CHRISTIAN PROGRESS, and its Lesson. 
By the Rev. JAMES JOHNSTON, F.S.S., editor of ‘‘Report of the Mis- 
sionary Conference.” Crown 8vo, 214 pages, cloth, $1.00. 


Dr. A. T. Pierson, in December number of ‘‘Missionary Review,’’ mentions this as 
being one of the five most valuable books on the history of Mission work. 

Pastor Spurgeon says: ‘‘It is no common-place generalization, but real fact; and 
much of that fact was known to few of us. Buy the book.”’ 


FOREIGN MISSIONS OF PROTESTANT CHURCHES. Their 
State and their Prospects. By Dr. J. Murray MITCHELL, M. A. 
16mo, cloth, 50 cents. 5 


This timely little work presents a wide general view of the field of Missions. Having 
shown what Missions have done, the author sets forth the state of the chief Pagan religions, 
the different modes of missionary action, and then, in an eminently practical way, discusses 
the actual situation, both as to the needs of the heathen and the mind and attitude of the 
Christian public. 


THE EVANGELIZATION OF THE WORLD. By B. BromuHatt, 
Secretary of the China Inland Mission. Large quarto, 242 pages, 10 
portraits and three maps. Bound in boards, net, $1.00. Bound in 
cloth, with handsome dies, net, $1.50. By mail, postage extra, 18 cts. 


“‘ This is a most remarkable book. . . Itis one of the most powerful appeals for 
Foreign Missions issued in our time, and altogether perhaps the best hand-book that exists 
for preachers and speakers in their behalf.” —-7he Church Missionary Intelligencer. 


OUTLINE MISSIONARY SERIES. 


By Rev. J. T. Gracey, D.D., editor of the American edition of 
‘“The Missionary Year Book,”’ 


INDIA. 212 pages, paper 50 cents; cloth $1.00. 


This volume contains an excellent colored Map of India, showing railroads and promi- 
nent mission stations ; also a map of Burmah and mission stations ; also a Map showing the 
distribution of Languages of India; also diagrams illustrating populations and areas as 
compared with other countries. 


CHINA. 64 pages, price 15 cents. 


Rev. R. G. Wilder, says :—‘‘ Your ‘China’ isa gem. It must do great good.” 

Rev. D. W. C. Huntington, D.D., says :—‘‘ I began to mark passages, but soon found 
that I should have to mark the whole book. It is all cream. The information is worth ten 
times its cost. 

Miss Isabeila Hart, of Baltimore, says :—‘‘I could hardly have believed that so much 
could have been put, and put so expressively and strongly in so small a space. I can not 
express my appreciation of it.”’ 

: “‘In its general account of Chinese life and history, it condenses the substance of 
hundreds of pages into a few graphic and eloquent paragraphs.”—7he Gospel in all 
Lands, New York. 


OPEN DOORS. 64 pages, price 15 cents. 


Those who are interested in missionary topics, as all ought to be, will find this little 
pamphlet affords a great deal of valuable information as to Christian opportunity in Africa, 
pepen, Burmah, Mexico, South America, Korea, and the islands of the sea. Dr. Gracey is 

imself a former missionary, and is an authority upon the subjects upon which he writes. 
We strongly commend it to all. It shows with a clearness, almost startling, the present op- 
portunities for Christian work. 


NEW YORK: I CHICAGO; 
12 Bible House, Astor Pl. Flemi N@ } ¥ Revell 148 & 150 Madison St. 


Popular Missionary Biographies. 


I2mo, 160 pages. 


Rev. C. H. SpurGEON, 
writes : 

‘““Crowded with facts 
that both interest and in- 
spire, we can conceive of 
no better plan to spread 


Grurrt Roaceames Wasantfloneet Bswop 


Fully illustrated; cloth extra, 75 cents each. 


From The Missionary 
Herald: 

“We commended this 
series in our last issue, 
and a further examina- 
tion leads us to renew our 
commendation, and to 
urge the placing of this 


the Missionary spiritthan [RARy MorrxtCharme CanctlonsoParres 
the multiplying of such Peggy, ae 
biographies; and we 
would specially commend 
this series to those who 
have the management of 
libraries and selection of 
prizes in our Sunday 
Schools,’’ 


ip series of missionary books 
yi, rf) in ail our Sabbath-school 
Pa ‘ libraries. 

These books are hand- 
somely printed and bound 
and are beautifully illus- 
trated, and we are confi- 
dent that they will prove 
attractive to all young 
people.”’ 


SAMUEL CROWTHER, the Slave Boy who became Bishop of 
the Niger. By JEssE PAGE, author of ‘‘ Bishop Patterson.” 
THOMAS J. COMBER, Missionary Pioneer to the Congo. By 
Rey. J. B. Myers, Association Secretary Baptist Missionary Society. 
BISHOP PATTESON, the Martyr of Melanesia. By JessE PAGE. 
GRIFFITH JOHN, Founder of the Hankow Mission, Central 
China. By Wm. Rosson, of the London Missionary Society. 
ROBERT MORRISON, the Pioneer of Chinese Missions. By 
Wm. J. TOWNSEND, Sec. Methodist New Connexion Missionary Soc’y. 
ROBERT MOFFAT, the Missionary Hero of Kuruman. By Davip 
J. DEANE, author of ‘‘ Martin Luther, the Reformer,” etc. 
WILLIAM CAREY, the Shoemaker who became a Missionary. 
By Rev. J. B. Myers, Association Secretary Baptist Missionary Society. 
JAMES CHALMERS, Missionary and Explorer of Rarotonga 
and New Guinea. By WM. Rosson, of the London Missionary Soc’y. 
MISSIONARY LADIES IN FOREIGN LANDS. By Mrs. E. R. 
PILMAN, author of ‘‘ Heroines of the Mission Fields,” etc. 
JAMES CALVERT; or, From Dark to Dawn in Fiji. 


JOHN WILLIAMS, the Martyr of Erromanga. By Rev. JAMEs 
i, SOuLTS: 


UNIFORM WITH THE ABOVE, 
JOHN BRIGHT, the Man of the People. By Jesse PAGE, author of 
‘‘ Bishop Patteson,”’ ‘‘ Samuel Crowther,” etc. 
HENRY M. STANLEY, the African Explorer. By ARTHUR MONTE- 
FIORE, F.R.G.S. Brought down to 188g. 
BAINBRIDGE, EDWIN, Memoirs of. 


The subject of this memoir is the young English tourist who met his death at the 
dreadful volcanic eruption of Tarawera, New Zealand, on the 10th of June, 1886. 


NEW YORK: 


| ~ CHICAGO; 
72 Bible House, Astor FI, Fleming H. Revell 748 & 150 Madison St. 


2 i 


~ 


1012 01048 4972 


DATE DUE 


° 
© 

= 

is) 

ie) 

ig 

NO 

fe) | 
+ 


| 


= eee 


Fare Mere ETP 
a ly SE as 


we 
4 


¢ i 

ane sent dat ny ‘i 

tA ft ht ith eh Me 
re) 


. She Re Wn x hetae a 
ie i A Peunaas ato i B i ‘t, “nt 
yin aa SHR sata 
a oe tit 


CoO IA 
iytgtal 
iF nity i ie 


Miata 

bt tite i RG ete: rf 
‘lity yk Ap ee eye! 

aie abide tat iu 


4a 
hit’ 


ret ; 
iV 
t it 
1 in Hh 


inet { 
Oe 


ae 


Oy 


f tabs ( it 
ee ee ve oe it 


i 

4 iT 

a eae ra ith if ale 

i He rat oe ts 

ttad nat tfatlit tat aiatabet if Matt eg 
Canean an 1H) Aer aN i |! ( (ic OKA i 
A Hrialesaitely CEN A RR RC DOCH EPCS 
AP etal lt bite Ce RNA AN) 
Cad tate 

fa F 


bs 
if Mj mM, eas 


Af hp 9: 
Pa eh UP Ea 
ee f eh ere a 


: ie 
ve 


Rey gee 
WH 


og) ite gtiti's 
Hite gil peat BPs 
" pe 


