THE 


WORKS 

OF  THE 


Rev.  JOHN  WESLEY,  M.  A.  • 

Late  Fellow  of  Lincoln-College,  Oxford. 


Volume  XXV. 


BRISTOL: 

Printed  by  WILLIAM  PINE,  in  Wine-Street . 

MDCCLXXIII. 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2016  with  funding  from 
Duke  University  Libraries 


https://archive.org/details/worksofrevjohnwe25wesl 


[ 3 ] 


£~C8 
CO  5)  3^ 
V.aiT 

i 


PRIMITIVE 

PHYSIC  : 

O R, 

An  EASY  and  NA 

TUR  AL 

M E 

T H 

O D 

OF  CDRI 

N G 

Moft  D 

I S E 

A S E S. 

Homo  fum  ; 

humani  nihil  a 

me  alienum  puto. 

The  PREFACE. 

WHEN  man  came  fir  ft  out  of  the  hands  of 
the  great  Creator,  cloathed  in  body  as 
well  as  in  foul,  with  immortality  and  incorrup- 
tion, there  was  no  place  for  phyfic,  or  the  art 
of  healing.  As  he  knew  no  fin,  fo  he  knew  no 
A 2 pain. 


[ 4 3 

pain,  no  ficknefs,  weaknefs,  or  bodily  difordcr. 
The  habitation  wherein  the  angelic  mind,  the 
Divince  Particula  Aura  abode,  although  origi- 
nally formed  out  ol  the  dull  of  the  earth,  was 
liable  to  no  decat'-  It  had  no  feeds  of  corrup- 
tion or  diffolution  within  ltfelf.  And  there  was 
nothing  without  to  injure  it : heaven  and  earth 
and  all  the  holts  of  them  Were  mild,  benign  and 
friendly  to  human  nature.  The  entire  creation 
was  at  peace  with  man,  fo  long  as  man  was  at 
peace  with  his  Creator.  So  that  well  might 
the  morning  flars  Jmg  together , and  all  the  Jons  of 
God fiout  jor  joy. 

9.  But  fnce  man  rebelled  againft  the  Sove- 
reign of  heaven  and  earth,  how  entirely  is  the 
f'rene  changed  ! The  incorruptible  frame  hath 
put  on  corruption,  the  immortal  has  put  on  mor- 
tality. The  feeds  of  weaknefs  and  pain,  of 
ficknefs  and  death,  are  now  lodged  in  our  inmoft 
fubfiance  ; whence  a thoufand  diforders  conti- 
nually fpring,  even  without  the  aid  of  external 
violence.  And  how  is  the  number  of  thefe  in- 
creafed  by  every  thing  round  about  us?  The 
heavens,  the  earth,  and  all  things  contained 
therein,  cctnfpire  to  punifh  the  rebels  againft 
.'teir  Creator.  The  fun  and  moon  filed  un- 
wholefome  influences  from  above  ; the  earth  ex- 
iia'es  poifonous  damps  from  beneath  : the  beafls 
of  the  field,  the  birds  of  the  air,  the  fifties  of  the 
fea,  are  in  a flate  of  hoftility  : the  air  itfelf  that 
furrounds  us  on  every  fide,  is  replete  with  the 

fhafts 


[ 5 ] 


fliafts  of  death  : yea,  the  food  we  eat,  daily  faps 
the  foundation  of  the  life,  which  cannot  be  fuf-  r 
tained  without  it.  So  has  the  Lord  of  all  fecured 
the  execution  of  his  decree, — “ Dujl  thou  art, 
and  unto  du ft Jhalt  thou  return .” 

3.  But  can  there  nothing  be  found  to  lefTen 
thofe  inconveniences,  which  cannot  be  wholly 
removed  ? To  foften  the  evils  of  life,  and  pre- 
vent in  part  the  ficknefs  and  pain  to  which  we 
are  continually  expofed  ? Without  queftion 
there  may.  One  grand  preventive  of  pain  and 
ficknefs  of  various  kinds,  feems  intimated  by  the 
great  Author  of  nature  in  the  very  fentence  that 
intails  death  upon  us  : “ In  the  fweat  of  thy  face 

Jhalt  thou  eat  bread,  till  thou  return  to  the  ground'’' 

The  power  of  exercife,  both  to  preferve  and  re- 
ffore  health,  is  greater  than  can  well  be  con- 
ceived : efpecially  in  thofe  who  add  temperance 
thereto  ; who  if  they  do  not  confine  themfelves 
altogether  to  eat  either  “ bread,  or  the  herb  oi 
the  field,”  (which  God  does  not  require  them 
to  do)  yet  ifeaddy  obferve  both  that  kind  and 
meafure  of  food,  which  experience  (hews  to  be 
moll  friendly  to  health  and  ftrength. 

4.  It  is  probable,  phyfic,  as  well  as  religion, 
was  in  the  firft  ages  chiefly  traditional  : every 
father  deli\  ering  down  to  his  fons,  what  he  had 
himfelf  in  like  manner  received,  concerning  the 
manner  of  healing  both  outward  hurts,  with  the 
difeafes  incident  to  each  feafon  and  climate,  and 
the  medicines  which  were  ofthegreatell  efficacy 

A 3 for 


[ 6 ] 

for  the  cure  of  each  diforder.  It  is  certain,  this 
is  the  method  wherein  the  art  of  healing  is  pre- 
ferved  among  the  Americans  to  this  day.  Their 
difeafes  indeed  are  exceeding  few  ; nor  do  they 
often  occur,  by  reafon  of  their  continual  exer- 
cife,  and  (till  of  late,  univerfal]  temperance. 
But  if  any  ate  fick,  or  bit  by  a ferpent,  or  torn 
by  a wild  bead,  the  fathers  immediately  tell  their 
children  what  remedy  to  apply.  And  it  is  rare, 
that  the  patient  fuffers  long ; thofe  medicines 
being  quick,  as  well  as  generally  infallible. 

5.  Hence  it  was,  perhaps,  that,  the  ancients, 
not  only  of  Greece  and  Rome,  but  even  of  bar- 
barous nations,  ufually  afligned  phyfic  a divine 
original.  And  indeed  it  was  a natural  thought, 
That  He  who  had  taught  it  to  the  very  beads 
and  birds,  the  Cretan  flag,  the  Egyptian  ibis, 
could  not  be  wanting  to  teach  man, 

t C'b 

Sanclius  las  Animal,  mentifque  capaaus  alia: 

Yea  fometimes  even  by  thofe  meaner  creatures : 
for  it  was  eafy  to  infer,  “ If  this  will  heal  that 
creature,  whofe  flefh  is  nearly  of  the  fame  tex- 
ture with  mine,  then  in  a parallel  cafe  it  will 
heal  me.”  The  trial  was  made.  The  cure  was 
wrought.  And  experience  and  phyfic  grew  up 
together. 

6.  And  has  not  the  Author  of  nature  taught 
us  the  ufe  of  many  other  medicines,  by  what  is 
vulgarly  termed  accident?  Thus  one  walking 

fome 


[ 7 1 


fome  years  fince  in  a grove  of  pines,  at  a time 
when  many  in  the  neighbouring  town  were  af- 
flifled  with  a kind  of  new  diftemper,  little  fores 
in  the  infide  of  the  mouth,  a drop  of  natural  gum 
fell  from  one  of  the  trees  on  the  book  which  he 
was  reading.  This  he  took  up,  and  thought- 
lefly  applied  to  one  of  thofe  fore  places.  Finding 
the  pain  immediately  ceafe,  he  applied  it  to 
another,  which  was  alfo  prefently  healed.  The 
fame  remedy  he  afterwards  imparted  to  others, 
and  it  did  not  fail  to  heal  any  that  applied  it. 
And  doubtlefs  numberlefs  remedies  have  been 
thus  cafually  difcovered  in  every  age  and  nation. 

7.  Thus  far  phyfic  was  wholly  founded  on 
experiment.  The  European,  as  well  as  the 
American,  faid  to  his  neighbour.  Are  you  lick  ? 
Drink  the  juice  of  this  herb,  and  your  ficknefs 
will  be  at  an  end.  Are  you  in  a burning  heat  ? 
Leap  into  that  river,  and  then  fweat  till  you  are 
well.  Has  the  fnake  bitten  you  P Chew  and 
apply  that  root,  and  the  poifon  will  not  hurt  you. 
Thus  ancient  men,  having  a little  experience 
joined  with  common  fenfe,  and  common  huma- 
nity, cured  both  themfelves  and  their  neighbours 
of  moft  of  the  dillempers,  to  which  every  nation 
was  fubjeft. 

8.  But  in  procefs  of  time,  men  of  a philofo- 
phical  turn  were  not  fatisfied  with  this.  They 
began  to  enquire  how  they  might  account  for 
thefe  things  ? How  fuch  medicines  wrought  fuch 
effefts  ? They  examined  the  human  body,  and 

A 4 / all 


[ 3 ] 

all  its  parts ; the  nature  of  the  flefh,  veins,  arte- 
ries, nerves  ; the  flru&ure  of  the  brain,  heart, 
lungs,  flomach,  bowels  : with  the  fprings  of  the 
feveral  kinds  of  animal  futl&ions.  They  explored 
the  feveral  kinds  of  animal  and  mineral,  as  well 
as  vegetable  fubftances.  And  hence  the  whole 
order  of  phyfic,  which  bad  obtained  to  that  time, 
came  gradually  to  be  inverted.  Men  of  learn- 
ing began  to  fet  experience  afide  ; to  build  phy- 
fic upon  hypothefes  ; to  form  theories  of  dif- 
eafes  and  their  cure,  and  to  fubflitute  thefe  in  the 
place  of  experiments. 

9.  As  theories  increafed,  fimple  medicines 
were  more  and  more  difregarded  and  difufed  ; 
till  in  a courfe  of  years,  the  greater  part  of 
them  were  forgotten,  at  lead  in  the  politer  na- 
tions. In  the  room  of  thefe,  abundance  of  new 
ones  were  introduced,  by  reafoning  fpeculative 
men  ; and  thofe  more  and  more  difficult  to  be 
applied,  as  being  more  remote  from  common 
obfervation.  Hence  rules  for  the  application  of 
thefe,  and  medical  books  were  immenfely  multi- 
plied ; till  at  length  phyfic  became  an  abftrufe 
fcience,  quite  out  of  the  reach  of  ordinary 
men. 

10.  Phvficians  now  besran  to  be  had  in-  ad- 

J O 

miration,  as  perfons  who  were  fomething  more 
than  human.  And  profit  attended  their  employ, 
as  well  as  honour  ; fo  that  they  had  now  two 
weighty  reafons  for  keeping  the  bulk  of  mankind 
at  a iiftance,  that  they  might  not  prv  into  the 

mylleiies 


r 

L 


9 1 

myfieries  of  the  profefhon.  To  this  end,  they 
increafed  thofe  difficulties  by  defign,  which  be- 
gan in  a manner  by  accident.  They  filled  their 
writings  with  abundance  of  technical  terms, 

O 

utterly  unintelligible  to  plain  men.  They  affefled 
to  deliver  their  rules,  and  to  reafon  upon  them 
in  an  abfirufe  and  philofophical  manner.  'I  hey 
reprefented  the  critical  knowledge  of  anatomy, 
natual  pTiilofophy  (and  what  not  ? Some  of  them 
infilling  on  that  of  alironomy  and  affrology  too) 
as  neceffarily  previous  to  the  underfianding  the 
art  of  healing.  Thofe  who  underftood  onhr, 
how  to  refiore  the  fick  to  health,  they  branded 
with  the  name  of  empirics.  They  introduced 
into  practice  abundance  of  compound  medicines, 
confilling  of  fo  many-  ingredients,  that  it  was 
fcarce  poffible  for  common  people  to  know 
which  it  was  that  wrought  the  cure  : abund- 

O 

ance  of  exotics,  neither  the  nature  nor  names 
of  which  their  own  countrymen  underfiood  : 
of  chymicals,  fuch  as  they  neither  had  fkili,  nor 
fortune  nor  time  to  prepare  : yea,  and  of  dan- 
gerous ones,  fuch  as  they  could  not  ufe,  without 
hazarding  life,  hut  by  the  advice  of  a phyfician; 
And  thus  both  their  honour  and  main  were  fe- 

O 

cured  ; a vail  majority  ol  mankind  being  utterly 
cut  off  from  helping  either  theinfeives  or  their 
neighbours,  or  once  daring  to  attempt  it. 

11.  Yet  there  have  not  been  wanting  from 
time  to  time,  fome  lovers  of  mankind,  who  have 
endeavoured  (even  contrary  to  their  own  imeaefi) 
A 5 


.o 


[ 10  ] 


to  reduce  phyfic  to  its  antient  flandard  : who 
have  laboured  to  explode  out  of  it  all  hpothe- 
fes,  and  fine  fpun  theories,  and  to  make  it  a 
plain  intelligible  thing,  as  it  rvas  in  the  beginning  : 
having  no  more  my  fiery  in  it  than' this,  “Such 
a medicine  removes  fuch  a pain.”  Thefe  have 
demonftrably  fhewn,  that  neither  the  knowledge 
ol  aftrologv,  aftronomy,  natural  philofophy, 
nor  even  anatomy  itfelf,  is  abfolutely  riecelfary 
to  the  quick  and  effectual  cure  of  moff  difeafes 
incident  to  human  bodies  : nor  vet  any  chymical, 
or  exotic,  or  compound  medicine,  but  a fingle 
plant  or  fruit  duly  applied.  So  that  every  man 
of  common  fenfe  (unlefs  in  fome  rare  cafes)  may 
prefcribe  erher  to  himfelf  or  his  neighbour  ; and 
may  be  very  fecure  from  doing  harm,  even 
where  he  can  do  no  good. 

12.  Even  in  the  lafl  age  there  was  fomething 
of  this  kind  done,  particularly  by  the  great  and 
good  Dr.  Sydenham  : and  in  the  prefent,  by 
his  pupil  Dr.  Dover,  who  has  pointed  out  fnnple 
medicines  for  many  difeafes-  And  fome  fuch  may 
be  found  in  the  writings  ot  the  learned  and  in- 
genious Dr.  Chevne  : who  doubtlefs  would 
have  communicated  many  more  to  the  world, 
but  for  the  melancholy  reafon  he  gave  one  of 
his  friends,  that  prefl:  him  with  fome  paffages  in 
his  works,  which  too  much  countenanced  the 
modern  practice,.-  “ O Sir,  we  rnulf  do  fome- 
thing to  oblige  the.  faculty , or  they  will  tear  us  in 
pieces.” 

13.  Without  any  regard  to  this,  without  any 

concern 


[ *1  ] 

concern  about  the  obliging  or  difobliging  any  man 
living,  a mean  hand  has  made  here  home  little 
attempt,  toward  a plain  and  eafv  way  ol  curing 
moll  difeafes.  I have  onlv  confulted  herein 
experience,  common  fenfe,  and  the  common 
intereft  of  mankind.  And  fuppofmg  they  can 
be  cured  this  eafy  way',  who  would  defire  to 
ufe  any  other  ? Who  would  not  wifh  to 
have  a phyfician  always  in  Iris  houfe,  and  one 
that  attends  without  fee  or  reward  ? To  be  able 
(unlefs  in  feme  few  complicated  cafes)  to  pre- 
feribe  to  his  family,  as  well  as  himfelf  ? 

14.  If  it  be  faid,  but  what  need  is  there  of  fuch 
an  attempt?  I arifwer,  The  greaieft  that  can  pof- 
ftbly  be  conceived.  Is  it  not  needful  in  the 
high  eft  degree,  to  refeue  men  from  the  jaws  of 
deftruftion  ? From  wafting  their  fortunes,  as 
thoufands  have  done,  and  continue  to  do  daily  ? 
From  pining  away  in  ficknefs  and  pain,  either 
tht  ough  the  ignorance  or  difhonefty  of  phvficians? 
Yea,  and  many  times  throwing  away  their  lives, 
after  them  health,  and  time,  and  fubftance. 

Is  it  enquired,  but  are  there  not  books  enough 
already,  on  every  part  of  the  art  of  medicine  ? 

'k  es,  too  many,  ten  times  over,  conftdering  how 
little  to-  the  purpofe  the  lar  greater  part  of  them 
fpeak.  But  beftde  this,  they  are  too  dear  for 
poor  men  to  buy,  and  too  hard  for  plain  men  to 
underftand.  Do  you  fav,  “■  But  there  are  enough 
ol  theie  ccileftions  of  receipts  ?”  Where  ? I 
have  not  feen  one  yet,  either  in  onr  own  or  any 
other  tongue,  which  contains  onlv  fafe  and  cheap 
and  eafy  medicines.  In  all  that  have  yet  fallen 
A 6 into 


[ >2  ] 

into  my  hand,  I find  many  dear  and  many  far- 
fetched medicines:  befides  many  of  fo  dangerous 
a kind,  as  a prudent  man  would  never  meddle 
with.  And  againft  the  greater  part  of  tliofe  me- 
dicines there  is  a further  objetlion  : thev  confifl 
of  too  many  ingredients.  The  common  method 
of  compounding  and  de-compounding  medicines, 
can  never  be  reconciled  to  common  fenfe.  Ex- 
perience flrews,  that  one  thing  will  cure  mod 
diforders,  at  leaft  as  well  as 'twenty  put  together. 
Then  why  do  you  add  the  other  nineteen? 
Only  to  fwell  the  Apothecary’s  bill  : nay,  pof- 
fibly,  on  purpofe  to  prolong  the  difiemper,  that 
the  doflor  and  he  may  divide  the  fpoil. 

But  admitting  there  is  fome  quality  in  the  me- 
dicine propofed,  which  has  need  to  be  correct- 
ed : will  not  one  thing  correCl  it  as  well  as  twen- 
ty ? It  is  probable,  much  better.  And  if  not, 
there  is  a fufficiency  of  other  medicines,  which 
need  no  fuch  correction. 

How  often,  by  this  compounding  medicines 
of  oppofite  qualities,  is  the  virtue  of  both  utterly 
deftroyed  ? Nay,  how  often  do  tliofe  joined  to- 
gether deftroy  life,  which  fingle  might  have  pre- 
ferved  it  ? This  occafioned  that  caution  of  the 
great  Boerhaave,  againlt  mixing  things  without 
evident  neceffity,  and  without  full  proof  of  the 
effeft  they  will  produce  when  joined  together, 
as  well  as  of  that  they  produced  when  afunder  ; 
feeing  (as  he  oblerves)  feveral  things,  which  fe- 
parately  taken,  are  fafe  and  powerful  medicines, 

when 


[ 13  ]; 

when  componnded,  not  [only  lofe  their  former 
powers,  but  commence  a ftrong  and  deadly  poi- 
fon. 

15.  As  to  the  manner  of  ufing  the  medicines 
here  fet  down,  I fhould  advife,  as  foon  as  you 
know  your.dillemper,  (which  is  very  eafy,  unlefs 
in  a complication  of  diforders,  and  then  you 
would  do  well  to  apply  to  a phyfician  that  fears 
God)  firj l,  Ufe  the  fit  It  of  the  remedies  for  that 
difeafe,  which  occurs  in  the  enfuing  collection  ; 
(unlefs  fome  other  of  them  be  eafier  to  be  had, 
and  then  it  may  do  juft  as  well.)  Secondly , After 
a competent  time,  if  it  takes  no  eftetf,  ufe  the 
fecond,  the  third,  and  foon.  I have  purpofely 
fet  down  (in  moft  cafes)  feveral  remedies  for 
each  diforder;  not  only  becattfe  all  are  not  equal- 
ly eafy  to  be  procured  at  all  times  and  in  all 
places : but  likewife  becaufe  the  medicine  which 
cures  one  man,  will  not  always  cure  another  of 
the  fame  diftemper.  Nor  will  it  cure  the  fame 
man  at  all  times.  Therefore  it  was  neceffary  to 
have  a variety.  However,  I have  fubjoined  the 
letter  (I)  to  thofe  medicines  which  are  thought 
to  be  infallible. — Thirdly , Obferve  all  the  time 
the  greateft  exaftnefs  in  your  regimen,  or  man- 
ner of  living.  Abftain  from  all  mixt,  all  high- 
feafoned  food.  Ufe  plain  diet,  eafy  ofdigeftion  : 
and  this  as  fparingly  as  you  can,  confiftent  with 
eafe  and  ftrength.  Drink  only  water,  if  it 
agrees  with  your  ftomach  ; if  not,  good,  clear, 
fmall  beer.  Ufe  as  much  exercife  daily  in  the 
open  air,  as  you  can  without  wearinefs.  Sup  at 

fix 


[ H ] 

fix  or  feven  on  the  lighteft  food  : go  to  bed  early, 
and  rife  betimes.  To  perfevere  with  ft eadinefs 
in  this  courfe,  is  often  more  than  half  the  cure. 
Above  all,  add  to  the  ref,  (for  it  is  not  labour 
loft)  that  old,  unfafbionable  medicine,  prayer. 
And  have  faith  in  God,  who  “ iille/h  and  mak- 
eth  alive,  who  bringeth  down  to  the  grave  and 
bringeth  up.” 

j6.  For  the  fake  of  thofe  who  defire,  ihrough 
the  bleffing  of  God,  to  retain  the  health  which 
they  have  recovered,  I have  added  a few  plain, 
eafy  rules,  chiefly  tranfcnbed  from  Dr.  Cheyne. 

1.  x.  The  air  we  breathe  is  of  great  confe- 
quence  to  our  health.  Thofe  who  have  been 
long  abroad  in  eallerlv  and  northerly  winds, 
fhould  drink  feme  thin  and  warm  liquor  going  to 
bed.  or  a draught  of  toall  ami  water. 

O 

2.  Tender  people  fhould  have  thofe  who  lie 
with  them,  or  are  much  about  them,  found, 
fweet,  and  healthy. 

3.  Every  one  that  would  preferve  health, 
fhould  be  as  clean  and  five.et  as  poffible  in  their 
houfes,  clothes  and  furniture. 

II.  1.  The  great  rule  of  eating  and  drinking 
is,  To -fe.it  the  quality  and  quantity  of  the  food 
to  the  firength  of  our  digefiion  ; to  take  always 
fuch  a fort  and  fuch  a meafure  of  food,  as  fits 
light  and  eafy  on  the  flomach. 

2.  All  pickled,  or  fmoaked,  or  falted  food, 
and  all  high-feafoned,  is  unwholefome. 

3.  Nothing 


[ *5  J 

g.  Nothing  conduces  more  to  health,  than  ab- 
itinence  and  plain  food  with  due  labour. 

4.  For  ftudious  perfons,  about  eight  ounces 
of  animal  food,  and  twelve  of  vegetable  in  twen- 
ty-four hours,  is  ufualh  fufficient. 

5.  Water  is  the  wholefomeft  of  all  drinks, 
quickens  the  appetite,  and  Strengthens  the  di- 
gellion  molt. 

6.  Strong  and  more  especially  fpirituous  li- 
quors, are  a certain,  though  flow,  poifon. 

7.  Experience  Ihews,  there  is  very  feldom  any 
danger  in  leaving  them  off  ail  at  once. 

8.  Strong  liquors  do  not  prevent  the  mifchiefs 
of  a furfeir,  nor  carry  it  off  fo  fafelv  as  wafer. 

g.  Malt  liquors  (except  clear,  fmall  beer,  of  a 
due  age)  are  hurtful  to  tender  perfons. 

10.  Coffee  and  tea  are  extremely  hurtful  to 
perfons  who  have  weak  nerves. 

HE  1.  Tender  perfons  fhould  eat  very  light 
fuppers  ; and  that  two  or  three  hours  before  go- 
ing to  bed. 

2.  The)  ought  conflantly  to  go  to  bed  about 
nine,  and  rife  at  four  or  five. 

V 

IV.  1.  A due  degree  of  exercife  is  indifpen- 
fably  neceffary  to  heahh  and  long  life. 

2.  Walking  is  the  belt  exercife  for  thofe  who 
are  able  to  bear  it  ; riding  for  thofe  who  are  not. 
The  open  air,  when  the  weather  is  fair,  contri- 
butes much  to  the  benefit  of  exercife. 

3.  We  may  ftrengthen  any  weak  part  of  the 

body 


[ ><•'  ] 

body  bv  conftant  exercife.  Thus  the  lungs  may 
be  ftrengthened  by  loud  fpeaking,  or  walking  up 
an  eafy  afcent;  the  digeflion  and  the  nerves,  by, 
riding:  the  arms  and  hands  by  flrongly  rubbing 
them  daily. 

4.  The  ftudious  ought  to  have  Rated  times  for 
exercife,  at  leaR  two  or  three  hours  a day  : the 
one  half  of  this  before  dinner,  the  other  before 
going  to  bed. 

5.  They  fhould  frequently  fhave,  and  fre- 
quently walk  their  feet. 

6.  Thofe  who  read  or  write  much,  fhould 
•earn  to  do  it  Handing;  otherwife  it  will  impair 
their  health. 

7.  1 he  fewer  clothes  any  one  ufes,  bv  day  or 
night,  the  hardier  he  will  be. 

8.  Exercife,  firR,  Rtould  be  alwavs  on  an 
empty  Rotnach  ; lecondlv,  Rrould  never  be  con- 
tinued to  wearinefs  ; thirdly,  after  it,  we  fhould 
take  care  to  cool  by  degrees:  otherwife  we  fhall. 
catch  cold. 

9.  The  flefh-brufh  is  a moR  ufeful  exer- 
cife. efpecially  to  Rrengthen  any  part  that  is 
weak. 

10.  Cpld-Bathing,  or  rather,  fwimming  in  a 
river,  is  of  great  advantage  to  health.  It  prevents 
abundance  of  difeafes.  It  promotes  perfpiration, 
helps  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  and  prevents 
the  danger  of  catching  cold.  Tender  people 
fhould  pour  water  upon  the  head  before  they  go 

in 


[ *7  J 

in,  and  walk  in  fwiftly.  To  jump  in  with 
the  head  foremoft,  is  too  great  a fliock  to- 
nature. 

V,  1.  Coftivenefs  cannot  long  con  fill  with 
health.  Therefore  care  ihould  be  taken  to  re- 
move it  at  the  beginning:  and  when  it  is  remov- 
ed, to  prevent  its  return,  by  foft,  cool,  opening 
diet. 

2.  Obflrucled  perfpiration  (vulgarly  called 
catching  cold)  is  one  great  fource  of  difeafes. 
Whenever  there  appears  the  leaft  fign  of  this, 
let  it  be  removed  by  gentle  fweats. 

VI.  1.  The  paffions  have  a greater  inffir- 
ence  on  health,  than  moll  people  are  aware 
of. 

2.  All  violent  and  fudden  paffions  difpofe 
to,  or  actually  throw  people  into  acute  dif- 
eafes. 

3.  The  flow  and  lalling  paffions,  fuch  as 
grief  and  hopelefs  love,  bring  on  chronical 
difeafes. 

4.  Till  the  paffion  which  caufed  the  dif- 
eafe,  is  calmed,  medicine  is  applied  in 
vain. 

5.  The  love  of  God,  as  it  is  the  fovereign 
remedy  of  all  miferies,  fo  in  particular  it 
effeftually  prevents  all  the  bodily  diforders 
the  paffions  introduce,  by  keeping  the  paf- 
fions 


[ 18  ] 


fions  themfelves  within  due  bounds.  And 
by  the  unfpeakable  joy  and  perfect  calm,  fere- 
nity,  and  tranquillity  it  gives  the  mind,  it  be- 
comes the  moll  powerful  of  all  the  means  of 
health  and  lons[  life. 

D 

London,  June  n, 

*747* 


POSTSCRIPT. 

i.  JT  u as  a great  fur prize  to  the  editor  of  the  fol- 
lowing colle&ion,  that  there  was  fo  fwift  and 
large  a demand for  it ; that  three  imprejjions  were 
called for  in  four  or  fee  years ; and  that  it  was  net 
only  re-pul'nfed  by  the  boo  If  Hers  of  a neighbouring 
nation  ; but  alfo  infer  ted  by  parts  in  their  public 
papers , and fo  propagated  through  the  whole  king- 
dom. This  encouraged  him  carefully  to  revife  the 
whole,  and  to  publifh  it  again,  with  fever al  altera- 
tions, which  it  is  hoped  may  make  it  of  greater  uft 
to  thofe  who  love  common  fenfe  and  common 
honejly. 

2.  Thofe  alterations  are  fill  in  pufuance  of  my 
frf  defgn,  to  Jet  down  cheap,  fafe,  and  eafy  medi- 
cines ; eafy  to  be  known,  eafy  to  be  procured,  and 
eafy  to  be  applied  by  plain,  unlettered  men.  Ac- 
cordingly, I have  omitted  a confer  able  number, 

which 


C 19  1 


which,  though  cheap  and  fafe,  were  not  Jo  common 
cr  well  known  ; and  have  added  at  leaf  an  equal 
number,  to  which  that  objedlion  cannot  be  made: 
which  are  not  only  oj  Jmall  price,  and  extremely 
fafe,  but  tvkewife  eajdy  to  be  found,  if  not  in  every 
houfe  or  yard,  yet  in  every  town,  and  abnojt  every 
village  throughout  the  kingdom . 

3.  It  is  becaufe  they  are  not  fafe,  but  extremely 
dangerous , that  I have  omitted  ( together  with  anti- 
mony) the  four  Herculean  medicines,  opium,  the 
bark,  feel,  and  meft  of  the  pr  eparaiions  of  quick- 

fi her.  + Herculean  indeed!  Far  too  ftrong  for 
common  men  to  grapple  with.  How  many  fatal 
effects  have  tliefe  produced,  even  in  the  hands  of 
no  ordinary  phyficians ! With  regard  to  four  of 
thefe  the  inflate.  :s  are  glaring  and  undeniable. 
And  whereas  quickfilver , the  fifth,  is  in  its  native 
form,  as  innocent  as  bread  or  water  : has  not  the 
art  been  dfcovered,  fo  to  prepare  it,  as  to  make  it 
the  mofl  deadly  of  all  poifons  ? Thefe  phyficians 
have  jufly  termed  edged  tools.  But  they  have  not 
yet  taught  them  to  wound  at  a di jinnee:  andhonejl 
men  are  under  no  necefty  of  touching  them,  or 
conning  within  their  reach. 

4.  Inflead  of  thefe,  I have  once  more  ventured 
to  recommend  to  men  of  plain  and  unbiaffed  reafon, 
fuch  remedies  as  air , water,  milk,  whey,  honey, 
treacle,  fait,  vinegar , and  common  Englijh  herbs, 
with  a jew  foreign  medicines,  almojl  equally  cheap y 
fife  and  common.  And  this  I have  done  on  that 

principle , 

t Except  in  a very  few  cafes. 


[ 20  ] 

principle,  whereby  1 defire  to  be  governed  in 
all  my  allions , “ Whatsoever  you  would  that 
men  fhould  do  unto  you,  the  fame  do  unto 
them.” 

5.  At  the  requejl  of  many  perfons , I have  like - 
wife  added  plain  definitions  oj  mof  diflemptrs  ; not 
indeed  accurate  or  philofophical  definitions , but 
fuck  as  are  failed  to  men  of  ordinary  capacities,  and 
as  may  qv.fl  enable  than,  in  common  Jim  pie  cafes,  to 
diflinguyh  one  difeafe  from  another.  In  uncom- 
mon or  complicated  difeafes,  where  life  is  ■ more 
immediately  in  danger,  I again  advife  every  man 
without  delay  to  apply  to  a phyfician  that  fears 
God. 

Bristol,  Od.  16,  1755. 


London,  Kcv.  10.  1760. 


fj  UR  I KG  the  cbft)  nation  and  cep  a urceof  r, 
than  five  years,  which  have pc/fed f nee  the 


more 

7 five  years,  which  have peffed fnce  thelajl 
imp  ref  ion  of  tins  track,  I have  had  many  opportu- 
nities of  trying  the  virtues  of  the  enfuing  remedies. 
And  / have  now  added  the  word  tried  to  thofe, 
which  I have  found  to  be  of  the  greatefi  efficacy.  I 
believe  many  ethers  to  be  of  equal  virtue  : but  it  has 
not  lain  in  my  way  to  make  the  trial. 

hi  this  courfe  of  time  I have  Hkewifc  had  occa- 

fon 


C -1  1 

fion  to  colled,  feveral  other  remedies , tried  either  by 
myfelf  or  others,  which  are  infected  under  their 
proper  heads.  Some  of  thefe  I have  found  to  be  of 
uncommon  virtue,  equal  to  any  ofthofe  which  were 
before  publif led : and  one,  I muft  aver , from  per- 
fonal  knowledge,  grounded  on  a thoufand  experi- 
ments, to  be  far  fuperior  to  all  the  other  medicines 
I have  known\  I mean  EleQxicity.  I cannot  but 
intreat  all  thofe  who  are  well-wifhers  to  mankind , 
to  make  full  proof  of  this.  Certainly  it  comes  the 
nearef  an  univerfal  medicine  of  any  yet  known  in  the 
world. 

One  grand  advantage  which  mofl  of  t hefe  medi- 
cines have  above  thofe  commonly  ufed,  is  this : you 
may  be  fur  e of having  than  good  in  their  kind; 
pure,  genuine,  unfopkifiicate.  But  who  can  be  fur  e 
of  this,  when  the  medicines  he  ufts  are  compounded 
by  an  apothecary  ? Perhaps  he  has  not  the  drug 
prefc  ribed  by  the phyfcian,  and fo  puts  in  its  place 
“ what  will  do  as  well."  Perhaps  he  has  it ; 
but  it  is  foie  and  perfhed:  yet  “you  would  not 
“ have  him  throw  it  away.  Indeed  he  cannot 
“ afford  it."  Perhaps  he  cannot  afford  to  make 
up  the  medicine  as  the  difpenfatory  direcls,  and fell 
it  at  the  common  price.  So  he  puts  in  cheaper 
ingredients  : and  you  take  neither  you  nor  the  phy- 
fician  knows  what!  How  many  inconveniences 
muf  this  occafion ! How  many  confitutions  are 
ruined  hereby ! How  many  valuable  lives  are 
lof!  Whereas  all  thefe  inconveniences  may  be 

prevented. 


[ 22  ] 


prevented,  by  a little  care  and  common  fenfe,  in  the 
ufe  of  thofe  plain,  fmple  remedies , which  are  lure 
colic  died. 


Mofl  of  thofe  Medicines  which  I 
prefer  to  the  reft,  are  now  marked 
with  an  Afterilk. 


Aug.  10,  1773. 


A COL- 


C '*3  ] 


A 

COLL  ECTION 

O F 

RECEIPTS. 


i.  Abortion , (to  prevent.) 

l.  T TSE  daily  a decoftion  of  lignum  guaiacum  ; 

' boiling  an  ounce  of  it  in  a quart  of  wa- 
ter. 

2.  Or,  in  a fanguine  habit,  let  blood. 

2.  For  an  Ague,  t 

3.  Go  into  the  cold-bath  juft  before  the  cold 
fit. 

4.  Or, 

+ An  ague  is,  an  intermitting  fever,  each  fit  of  which  is  pre- 
ceded by  a cold  fhivering,  and  goes  off  in  a fweat. 


[ 2 4 ] 

A*  Or,  take  a handful  of  groundftll , fhrecl  it 
fmall,  put  it  into  a paper  bag,  lour  inches  fquare, 
pricking  that  fide  which  is  to  be  next  the  Ikin 
full  of  holes.  Cover  this  with  a thin  linen, 
and  wear  it  on  the  pit  of  the  ftomach,  renewing 
it  two  hours  before  the  fit. — Tried. 

g.  Or,  apply  a handful  of  yarrozu  in  like 
manner : 

6.  Or,  a large  onion  flit : 

* 7.  Or,  melt  two-penny  worth  of frankincenfe, 
fpread  it  on  linen,  grate  a nutmeg  upon  it, 
cover  it  with  linen,  and  hang  this  bag  on  the 
pit  of  the  ftotnach. — I have  never  yet  known  it 
fail : 

8.  Or,  boil  yarrow  in  new  milk,  till  it  is  ten- 
.der  enough  to  fpread  as  a plaifter.  An  hour 
before  the  cold  fir,  apply  this  to  the  wrifls,  and 
let  it  be  on  till  the  hot  fit  is  over.  If  another  fit 
comes,  ufe  a frefh  plaifter. — This  often  cures  a 
quartan  : 

9.  Or,  drink  a quart  of  cold  water , juft 
before  the  cold  fit.  1 hen  go  to  bed  and  fweat  ; 

* 10.  Or,  make  fix  middling  pills  of  cobwebs. 
Take  one  a little  before  the  cold  fit;  two  a 
little  before  the  next  fit;  (Tuppofe  the  next 
day :)  the  other  three,  if  need  be,  a little  before 
the  third  fit.— This  feldotn  fails  : t 

* xi. 

+ Butobfcrve.  They  nuift  be  jrtjh  cobwebs  ; not  tbofe  that 
are  fome  years  old,  which  are  little  better  than  a lump  of 
dirt.  And  you  Ihould  neither  eat  nor  drink  for  an  hour  cr 
two  after. 


C 25  ] 


*11,  Or,  two  fcea-fpoonfuls  of  fal prunella  an 

hour  before  the  fit. It  commonly  cures  in 

thrice  taking  : 

*i2.  Or,  a tea-fpoonful  of /pints  of  hartjhom , 
in  a giafs  of  water,  an  hour  before  the  fit. 

13.  Or,  a large  fpoonful  of  brimflonc  potvder- 
ed,  in  a cup  of  hot  white  wine.  Then  lie  down 
in  bed  and  fwe3t  : 

14.  Or,  eat  a lemon,  rhind  and  all  : 

15.  Or,  drink  a pint  of  decoftion  at  camomile, 
fweetened  with  treacle.  Take  it  warm  in  bed, 
and  fweat  two  hours. 

16.  Or,  in  the  hot  fit,  if  violent,  take  ten,  twelve, 
or  fifteen  drops  of  laudanum : if  coffive,  in 
hierapicra. 

gdr"  It  is  proper  to  take  a gentle  vomit , and 
fometimes  a purge , before  you  ufe  any  of  thefe  me- 
dicines. If  a vomit  is  taken  two  hours  before  the  ft 
is  expelled , it  generally  prevents  that  fit , and fome- 
times cures  an  ague  ; efpecially  in  children. — It  is 
alfo  proper  to  repeat  the  medicine  ( whatever  it  be) 
about  a week  after , in  order  to  prevent  a relapfe. 
Do  not  take  any  purge  foon  after. — The  daily  ufe 
of  the  JLefk-brufh , and  frequent  cold  bathing  are  of 
great  ufe  to  prevent  reiapfes. 

3.  A Tertian  Ague  * 

17.  Is  often  cured  by  taking  a purge  one  dars 

Vol.  XXV.  B and 

* That  is,  an  Ague  which  returns  every  other  day.— In  this 
ufe  light  and  {paring  diet  on  the  day  between. 


[ 26  ] 

and  the  next,  bleeding  in  the  beginning  ol  the 
fit : 

18.  Or,  boil  a handful  of  ribv>ort  in  wheys 
drink  this  warm  an  hour  before  the  fit  comes, 
and  lie  down  and  fweat  : 

* ig.  Or,  a tea-fpoonful  of  fait  of  tartar  in 
fpring  water.  This  alfo  cures  double  tertians, 
triple  quartans,  long-lalling  fevers,  and  mod  diT 
eafes  rifing  from  obdrufttons  : efpecially  if fer.a 
be  premifed  twice  or  thrice  : 

20.  Or,  before,  yea  in  the  midd  of  the  fit, 
take  twenty  drops  of  fpirit  of  fulphur,  in  a pint 
of  cold  water : 

21.  Or,  after  purging,  vomitting,  or  bleeding, 
take  a dram  of  treacle  in  planlane  water,  three 
mornings  : 

* 22.  Or,  apply  to  each  wrift,  a plaifter  of 
treacle  and  foot. — Tried. 

23.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath.  (Unlefs  you  are  of 
an  advanced  age,  or  extremely  weak.)  But  when 
vou  ufe  this,  on  any  account  whatever,  it  is  pro- 
per, 

1.  To  bleed  or  purge,  before  vou  begin  : 

2.  To  go  in  cool  ; vnot  verv  cold)  to  immerge 
at  once,  but  not  head  foremod  ; today  in  only 
two  or  three  minutes,  (orlefs,  at  fil'd;) 

3 Never  to  bathe  on  a full  domach  : 

4.  To  bathe  twice  or  thrice  a week  at  lead, 
till  you  have  bathed  nine  or  ten  times: 

g.  To  fweat  immediately  after  it  (going  to 

bed) 


[ V ] 


bed)  in  palfies,  rickets,  ancl  all  difeafes  wherein 
the  nerves  are  obftrufted  : 

6.  You  may  life  yourfelf  to  it,  without  any 
danger,  by  beginning  in  May,  and  at  fil'd  juft 
plunging  in,  and  coming  out  immediately  but 
many  have  begun  in  winter,  without  any  incon- 
venience. 

4.  A Double  Tertian . 

24,  Take  before  the  fit,  (after  a purge  or  two) 
three  ounces  of  cichory-water , half  a dram  of 

fait  of  wormwood,  and  fifteen  drops  of  fpirit  of 
fulphur. 

25.  To  perfefl  the  cure,  on  the  fourth  day 
after  you  mils- the  fit,  take  two  drains  of  fnar 
half  a dram  of fait  of  tartar,  infufed  all  night  in 
four  ounces  of  cichory-water » Strain  it  and 
drink  it. 

5.  A Quartan  Ague,  t 

* 2 6.  Apply  to  the  future  of  the  head,  when 
the  fit  is  coming,  Wall  July  Flowers,  beating  to- 
gether leaves  and  flowers  with  a little  fiilt.  Keep 
it  on  till  the  hot  fit  is  over.  Repeat  this,  if  need 
be. 

27'.  Ufe  Jlrong  exercife,  (as  riding  or  walking, 
as  far  as  you  can  bear  it)  an  hour  or  two  before 
R 2 the 

+ That  is,  An  ague  which  miflcs'two  days ; coming  on  Mon- 
day (fuppofe)  and  again  on  Thurjday. 


c 28  ] 

the  fit.  If  poflible,  continue  it  till  the  fit  begins 
This  alone  will  frequently  cure  : — Tried. 

28.  Or,  apply  to  the  wrifts  a plaifter  of  tur- 
pentine : 

29.  Or,  of  bruifed  gar/ic  : 

30.  Or,  of  bruifed  pepper,  mixt  with  treacle: 

31.  Or,  apply  oil  of  turpentine  to  the  fmall  of 
the  back,  before  the  fit : 

*32.  For  a Tertian  or  Quartan,  vomit  an  hour 
after  the  cold  fit  begins.  Then  go  to  bed,  and 
continue  a large  fweat  by  lemonade,  (that  is,  le- 
mon, fugar,  and  water)  for  fix  or  eight  hours. 
This  ufually  cures  in  three  or  four  times.  If  it 
does  not,  ufe  the  co'd  bath  between  the  fits. 

33.  Or,  drink  every  morning  a gill  of  white 
wine,  wherein  half  a fliced  Seville  orange  is 
boiled : 

34.  Or,  take  for  feven  mornings,  an  infufion 
of  Jena,  with  a tea-fpoonful  of  cream  0 f tartar. 

35.  Or,  take  ten  grains  of  powdered  f.ijfron 
before  the  fit,  in  a glals  of  white  wine. 

36.  Or,  take  fugar  candy,  three  drams,  gin- 
ger, two  drams,  camphne , one  dram.  Mix 
them  into  a powder,  and  take  a dram  in  warm 
water. 

6.  St.  Anthony  s Fire.  + 

*37.  Take  a glafs  of  tar-water  warm,  iu  bed, 
evert'  hour,  walking  the  part  with  the  fame. 

{£f  Tar- water 

+ St.  Anthony's  Fire  is  a fever  attended  with  a ted  and  painful 
■{welling,  full  of  pimples,  whick  afterwards  turn  into /tv  H-fters. , 


[ 29  ] 

ftS*  Tar- water  is  made  thus. — Put  a gallon  of 
cold  water  to  a quart  of  Norway  tar , f ir  them  to- 
gether with  a fat fick for fve  or fix  minutes.  Af- 
ter it  has  food  covered  for  three  days,  pour  of  the 
water  clear,  bottle  and  cork  it. 

38.  Or,  drink  juft  fo  much  fa-water  as  does 
not  vomit  or  purge,  every  morning  for  feven 
days : this  is  the  proper  meafure,  in  whatever 
cafe  it  is  taken.  It  feldom  fails. 

*39.  Or,  take  a decoftion  of  elder  leaves,  as 
a fweat,  applying  to  the  part  a cloth  dipt  in 
lime-water,  mixed  with  a little  camphorated /pints 
of  wine. 

fcN  Lime-Water  is  made  thus. — Infufe  apound 
of  good  quick  lime  in  fx  quarts  of  fpring,  water for 
twenty-four  hour s.  Decant  and  keep  itforufe. 

40.  Or,  take  two  or  three  gentle  purges. — No 
acute  fever  hears  repeated  purges  better  than 
this,  efpecially  when  it  affefts  the  head  : 

41.  Or,  (ufing  the  internal  medicine  at  the 
fame  time)  apply  a plaider  of  Venice  treacle  : 

*42.  Or,  wafh  it  with  water  wherein  bran  is 
boiled. 

43.  Or,  boil  a handful  of  fage,  two  handfuls 
of  elder  leaves  (or  bark ) and  an  ounce  of  alluni 
in  two  quarts  of  forge  water,  to  a pint.  Anoint 
with  this  every  night. 

B 3 7.  The 

on  the  face  or  fome  other  part  of  the  body.  The  fooner  the  erup- 
tion is,  the  lefs  danger.— —Let  your  diet  be  only  uatcr-gruil,  or 
barley  troth,  with  roafted  apples. 


[ 3°  1 

7.  The  Apoplexy.  + 

44.  To  prevent,  ufe  the  cold  bath,  and  drink 
only  water. 

*45.  In  the  fit,  put  a handful  of  fait  into  a 
pint  of  cold  water,  and  if  polfible,  pour  it  down 
the  throat  of  the  patient.  He  will  immediately 
come  to  himfelf.  So  will  one  who  feems  dead 
by  a fall  : 

46.  Or,  fill  the  mouth  with  fait  : 

47.  Or,  blow  powder  of  white,  hellebore  up  the 
nofe,  and  fix  a cupping-glafs,  without  fcarifying, 
to  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  another  to  each 
{boulder.  But  fend  for  a good  phyfician  imme- 
diately : 

# 48.  If  the  fit  be  foon  after  a meal,  do  not 
bleed,  but  vomit/ 

* 49.  Rub  the  head,  feet,  and  hands  Ihongly 
and  let  two  flrong  men  carry  the  patient  upright, 
backward  and  forward  about  the  room. 

50.  A feton  in  the  neck,  with  low  diet,  has 
often  prevented  a relapfe. 

8.  Canine  Appetite.  ~ 

51.  “ If  it  be  without  vomitting,  is  often  cured 
by  a fmall  bit  of  bread  dipt  in  wine,  and  applied 
to  the  norilrils/'5  Dr.  Schomberg. 

9.  The 

+ An  Apoplexy  is,  a total  lots  of  all  fenfe,  and  voluntary  motion, 
commonly  attended  with  a ftrong  pulfc,  hard  breathing  and 
i'norting. 

4 An  iufa*iable  defire  of  eating. 


[ 31  ] 

g.  The  Ajlhnia . § 


52.  Take  a pint  of  cold  water  every  nighty  as 
you  lie  down  in  bed  : 

53.  Or,  a pint  of  cold  water  every  morning, 
wajlang  the  head  therein  immediately  after,  and 

• ufing  the  co/r/  bath  once  a fortnight: 

* 54.  Or,  cut  an  ounce  (T flick  liquorice  into 
dices.  Steep  this  in  a quart  of  water,  four  and 
twenty  hours  and  ufe  it,  when  you  are  worfe 
than  ufual,  as  common  drink.  I have  known 
this  give  much  eafe  : 

^^.Or,  half  a pint  of  tar  water , twice  a 
day  : 

56.  Or,  live  a fortnight  on  boiled  carrots  only. 
It  feldom  fails  : 

■ 57.  Or,  take  two  fpoonfulsof  nettle-juice,  mixt 
with  clarified  honey , every  night  and  morn- 
ing : 

* 58.  Or,  take  an  ounce  of  quickfiloer  every 
morning,  and  a fpoonful  of  aqua  fulpliuraia, 
in  a large  glafs  of  fpnng-water  at  five  in  the 
evening.  — This  has  cured  an  inveterate  ajlhma. 

59.  For  prefent  relief,  vomit  with  a quart  or 
more  of  warm  zuater.  The  more  you  drink  of  it 
the  better.  • 

&-$T  Do  this  whenever  you  find  any  motion  to 
vomit , and  take  care  alvoays  to  keep  your  body  open. 

B 4 10.  A 

i)  An  / l[!hma  is  a difficulty  of  breathing,  from  a diford'er  in 
the  lungs.  In  the  common  (or  moift)  Ajlhma. , the  patient  fpits 
much, 


[ 32  J 

10.  A Dry  or  Convulfwe  Ajlhma. 


60.  Juice  of  radiffhts  relieves  much  : fo  does 

61.  A cup  offtrong  coffee: 

62.  Or,  garlick,  either  raw,  or  preferred,  or 
in  fyrup  : 

63.  Or,  tea  made  with  k) ffop,  or  ground-ivy.  or 
daify-Jlowcr s and  liquorice: 

64.  Or,  drink  a pint  of  new  milk  morning  and 
evening. — This  has  cured  an  inveterate  ajlhma  : 

65.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath  thrice  a week  : 

*66.  Or,  beat  fine fajfron  final),  and  take  eight 

or  ten  grains  every  night  : tried. 

*67.  Take  from  three  to  five  grains  of  ipecacu- 
anha every  morning;  or  from  five  to  ten  grains 
every  other  evening.  Do  this  if  need  be,  fora 
month  or  fix  weeks.  Five  grains  ufuallv  vomit. 
In  a violent  fit,  take  a fcruple  inftantly. 

68.  In  any  ajlhma,  the  beft  drink  is  apple-wa- 
ter ,•  that  is,  boiling  water  poured  on  diced  ap- 
ples. 

11.  To  cure  Baldntjs, 

69.  Rub  the  part  morning  and  evening,  with 
onions,  till  it  is  red  ; and  rub  it  afterwards  with 
honey.  Or,  wafh  it  with  a decodlion  of  boxwood. 
Or,  eleftrify  it  daily. 

12.  Bleeding  at  ihe  Noffe  (to  prevent .) 

*70.  Drink  whey  largely  every  morning,  and 
tat  much  of  raifins . 


71.  To 


r 33  ] 


71.  To  cure  if,  apply  to  the  neck  behind  and 
on  each  fide,  a cloth  dipt  in  cold  water  ; 

*72.  Or,  wafh  the  temples,  nofe,  and  neck 
with  vinegar  ’ 

73.  Or,  fnuff  up  vinegar  and  water  : 

74.  Or,  deep  a linen  rag  in  Jliarp  vinegar, 
burn  it,  and  blow  it  up  the  nofe  with  a quill. 

75.  In  a violent  cafe,  go  into  a pond  or  river. 
— Tried.  See  the  extratf  from  Dr.  Tiffot. 

ig.  Bleeding  of  a Wound. 

76.  Make  tight  ligatures  on  the  arms: 

77.  Or,  apply  tops  of  nettles  bruifed  : 

78.  Or,  leaves  of  all-heal,  bruifed:  /. 

*79 . Or,  fpread  the  ajlies  of  a linen  cloth 
thick  on  another  linen  cloth,  and  apply  it : 

80.  Or,  ftrew  on  it  the  ajhes  of  a linen  rag, 
dipt  in  fharp  vinegar  and  burnt : 

*81.  Or,  take  ripe  puff-balls.  Break  them 
warily,  and  fave  the  powder.  Strew  this  on  the 
wound  and  bind  it  on.  I. — This  will  flop  the 
bleeding  of  an  amputed  limb  without  any  cau- 
tery. 

82.  Or,  take  of  brandy,  two  ounces,  Caflile 
foap,  two  drams,  pot-ajk  one  dram.  Scrape  the 
foap  fine,  and  diffolve  it  in  the  brandy  ; then  add 
the  pot-afh.  Mix  them  well  together  and  keep 
them  clofe  ftopt  in  a phial.  Apply  a little  of 
B £ this 


[ 34  ] 

this  wanned  to  a bleeding  veffel,  and  the  blood 
immediately  congeals. 

14.  Spitting  Blood. 

*83.  Take  a tea-cup  full  of  dewed  prunes,  at 
lying  down,  for  two  or  three  nights : tried. 

*84.  Or,  two  fpoonfuls  of  juice  of  nettles  every 
morning,  and  a large  cup  of  decodtion  of  nettles 
at  nisjht,  for  a week:  tried. 

85.  Or,  three  fpoonfuls  of  [age  juice  in  a little 
honey.  This  prefently  flops  either  fpitting  or 
vomitiing.  blood : tried 

*86.  Or,  half  a tea  fpoonful  of  Barbaa’oes  tar 
on  a lump  of  loaf  fugar  at  night.  It  commonly 
cures  at  once. 

15.  Vomitling  Blood. 

*87.  Take  two  fpoonfuls  of  ne/tle-ju’ce — 
(gf  This  alfo'diflolves  blood  coagulated  in  the 
flomach.)— T tied.  , 

88.  Or,  one  fpoonful  of  the  juice  of  quinces  : 

89.  Or,  a quarter  ol  a pint  of  decodlion  ot 
nettles  and  pla/.tane,  two  or  three  times  a day. 

16.  To  dijfolve  coagulated  B.ood. 

c.o.  Bind  on  the  part  for  fome  hours  a pafle 
made  of  black  foap , and  cru/m  1 oj white  bread : 

91.  Or,  grated  root  of  burdock  fpread  on  a 
rag  : renew  this  twice  a day. 


17.  BUJlers. 


C 35  J 

17.  Blijlers 

92.  On  the  feet,  occafioned  by  walking,  are 
cured  by  drawing  a needle  full  of  worjled  through 
them.  Clip  it  off  at  both  ends,  and  leave  it  till 
the  fkin  peels  off. 

1 8.  Boils. 

93.  Apply  a little  Venice  turpentine  : 

94.  Or,  a plaifler  of  honey  and  wheat  jlour  : 

95 • °r>  of fgs ; 

96.  Or,  a little  fajfron  in  a white  bread  poul- 
tis. — It  is  proper  to  purge  alfo. 

19.  Hard  Breajls. 

. 97.  Apply  turnips  roamed  till  foft,  then  mafhed 
and  mixed  with  a little  oil  oj  rofes.  Change  this 
twice  a day,  keeping  the  breaft  warm  with 
flannel. 

20.  Sore  Breajls  and fwelled. 

* 98.  Boil  a handful  of  camomile  and  as  much 
mallows  in  milk  and  water.  Foment  with  it  be- 
tween two  flannels  as  hot  as  can  be  borne  every 
twelve  hours.  It  alfo  diffolves  any  knot  or 
fwelling  in  any  part. 

B 6 


21.  A 


C 36  ] 

si.  A Bruije. 


* gg.  Immediately  apply  treacle  fpread  on 
brown  paper. — Tried. 

100.  Or,  clarified  honey'. 

101.  Or,  apply  a plaifler  of  chopt  parjley  raixt 
with  butter : 

* 102.  Or,  eleclrify  the  part.  This  is  the 
quickeft  cure  of  all. 

22.  To  prevent  Swelling  from  a Bruije. 

103.  Immediately  apply  a cloth,  five  or  fix 
times  double,  dipt  in  cold  water , and  new  dipt 
when  it  grows  warm. — Tried. 

23.  To  cure  a Swelling  from  a Bruife. 

104.  Foment  it  half  an  hour,  morning  and 
evening,  with  cloths  dipped  in  water , as  hot  as 
you  can  bear. 

24.  A Burn  or  Scald. 

105.  Immediately  plunge  the  part  into  cold 
water.  Keep  it  in  an  hour,  if  not  well  before. 
Perhaps  for  four  or  five  hours. — Tried. 

* 106.  Or,  tkBrify  it.  If  this  can  be  done 
prefently,  it  totally  cures  the  mod  defperate 
burn. 

107.  Or,  if  the  part  cannot  be  dipt,  apply  a 

cloth 


[ 37  ] 

cloth  four  times  doubled,  dipt  in  cold  water , 
changing  it  when  it  grows  warm  : 

* 108.  Or,  a bruifed  onion  : 
log.  Or,  oil  and  pnrjky  ftampt  together: 
no.  Or,  apply  oil,  and  ftrew  on  it  powdered 
ginger. 

25.  A deep  Burn  or  Scald. 

111.  Apply  black  varnijh  with  a feather,  till  it 
is  well: 

112.  Or.  inner  rhind  of  elder  well  mixt  with 
frelh  butter.  When  this  is  bound  on  with  a 
rag,  plunge  the  part  into  cold  water.  This  will 
fufpendthe  pain,  till  the  medicine  heals.. 

26.  A Cancer  in  the  Breafl  + 

*113.  Of  thirteen  years  Handing,  was  cured 
bv  frequently  applying  red  poppy  water , plantane 
and  rofe  water , mixt  with  honey  of  rofes.  Af- 
terwards the  waters  ufed  alone  perfected  the 
cure. 

114.  Ufe  the  cold  bath.  (This  has  cured 
many.)  This  cured  Mrs.  Bates  of  Leicefter- 
fliire,  of  a cancer  in  her  breaft,  a confumption,  a 
fciatica,  and  rheumatifm,  which  (he  had  near 
twenty  years. — She  bathed  daily  for  a month, 
and  drank  only  water. 

pt  Generally  where  cold  bathing  is  necejfary  to 

cure 

+ A cancer  is  an  hard,  round,  uneven,  painful  fwelling,  of  a 
bluckilh  or  leaden  colour,  the  veins  round  which  feem  ready  to 
burl'r.  It  comes  commonly  with  a fwelling  about  as  bigas  a 
pea,  which  does- not  at  ftrlt  give  much  pain,  nor  change  ths 
colour  of  the  Ikin. 


[ 3*  ] 

cure  any  difeafe,  water-drinking  is  Jo,  to  prevent  a 
relapfe. 

115.  Or,  rub  the  whole  bread,  morning  and 
evening,  with  /pints  of  hartjiorn  mixt  with  oil : 

116.  Or,  keep  it  continually  moiit  with  ho- 
ney : 

117.  Or,  take  a mellow  apple,  cut  off  the  top, 
take  out  the  core,  fill  the  hole  with  hog\s  greajk, 
then  cover  it  with  the  top,  and  ioaft  the  apple 
thoroughly,  take  off  the  paring,  beat  the  pap 
well,  fpread  it  thick  on  linen,  and  lay  it  warm 
on  the  fore,  putting  a bladder  over  it. — Change 
this  every  twelve  or  twenty-four  hours  : 

* 1 18.  Or,  take  liorfejpurs  + and  dry  them  by 
the  fire,  till  they  will  beat  to  powder.  Sift 
and  infufe  two  drams  in  two  quarts  of  ale;  drink 
half  a pint  every  fix  hours,  new  milk  warm. — It 
has  cured  many.  Tried. 

119.  Or,  apply  goofe  dung  and  celandine  heat 
well  together  and  fpread  on  a fine  rag.  It  will 
both  clean  fe  and  heal  the  fore  : 

* mo.  Or,  a poultis  of  wild  parfmps,  flowers* 
leaves  and  flalks,  changing  it  morning  and  even- 
ing : or,  fcraped  carrots  : 

121.  Or,  live  three  months  'on  apples  and 
apple-water. 

122.  Or,  take  brim/lone  and  aqua  fulphurata , 
(as  Art.  58.) — This  has  cured  one  far  advanced 
in  years. — Dr.  Cheyne  fays,  a total  afs-milk 

diet, 

+ Thefe  are  a kind  of  warts,  that  grow  on  the  infide  of  a 
horfe’s  fore-legs, 


[ 39  j 

diet,  about  two  quarts  a day,  without  a try 
other  food  or  drink,  will  cure  a confirmed 
cancer. 

£ jdT  -Three  inveterate  cancers,  which  adhered 
to  the  bones,  were  totally  cured  at  Paris,  by 
anointing  the  u'cers  thrice  a day  with  infufion  of 
leaves  of  plumqago  in  olive  oil.  The  pain  which 
the  application  at  firft  occasioned  was  over  in 
about  a fortnight. 

27.  A Cancer  in  any  other  part. 

123.  Apply  red  onions  bruifed  : 

124.  Or,  make  a plaifler  of  rock-aHurn,  vine- 
gar, deaSi  honey,  equal  quantities,  with  wheat-flour. 
Change  it  every  twelve  hours. — It  often  cures  in 
three  or  four  days  : 

*125.  Or,  flamp  the  flowers,  leaves  and  flalks 
of  wild  parjhips,  and  apply  them  as  a plaifler, 
changing  it  every  twelve  hours.  It  ufually 
cures  in  a few  days. 

28.  A Cancer  in  the  Mouth. 

126.  Boil  a few  leaves  of  fuccory,  plantane  and 
rue  with  a fpoonful  of  honey,  for  a quarter 
of  an  hour.  Gargle  with  this  often  in  an 
hour:  I. 

127.  Or,  with  vinegar  and  honey  wherein  half 
an  ounce  of  roch-allum  is  boiled  : 

128.  Or,  mix  as  much  burnt  allum  and  as 

much 


[ 40  ] 

much  black  pepper  as  lies  on  a fixpence  with 
an  ounce  of  honey,  and  frequently  touch  the 
part  : 

129.  Or,  with  a little  Roman  vitriol  diflolved 
in  a pint  of  water  ; then  apply  cream.  This  alfo 
fpeedily  cures  the  fhingles.— Tried. 

* 130.  Or,  take  an  ounce  of  Jlour  of fulphur, 
rock-alum  finely  powdered.  Mix  thefe  well  to- 
gether with  pure  honey  and  apply  often. 

131,  Or,  blow  the  ajhes  offcarlet  cloth  into 
the  mouth  or  throat.  It  feldom  fails. 

29.  Chilblains  (to  prevent.) 

* 132.  Wear  fannel focks : ox,  focks  of  chamois 
leather : 

133.  Or,  wafh  the  hands  with  four  of 
mujlard. 


30.  Chilblains  (to  cure.) 

134.  Apply  fait  and  onions  pounded  together  : 
* 13J.  Or,  a poultis  of  roafed  onions  hot. 
Keep  it  on  two  or  three  days,  if  not  cured 
fooner : 

136.  Wafh  them  (if  broke)  with  tinfture  of 
■myrrh  in  a little  water.  (See  extrafl  from 
Tiffot.) " 


31.  Children 


[ 4*  ] 

3 1 . Children. 

137.  To  prevent  the  rickets,  tendernels  and 
tveaknefs,  dip  them  in  cold  water  even'  morn- 
ing, till  they  are  eight  or  nine  months  old  ; after- 
wards their  hands  and  feet. 

No  roller  fhould  ever  be  put  round  their  bodies 
nor  any  Hays  ufed.  Inflead  of  them,  when  they 
are  put  into  (hort  petticoats,  put  a waiftcoat  un- 
der their  frocks. 

Let  them  go  bare-footed  and  bare-headed  till 
they  are  three  or  four  years  old  at  lead. 

It  is  bell  to  wean  a child  when  feven  months 
old.  It  fhould  lie  in  the  cradle  at  leaf!  a year. 

No  child  fhould  touch  any  fpirituous  or  fer- 
mented liquor,  nor  animal  food,  before  two  years 
old.  Their  drink  fhould  be  water.  Tea  they 
fhould  never  tafle,  till  ten  or  twelve  years  old. 
Milk,  milk-porridge,  and  water-gruel,  are  the 
proper  breakfafls  for  children.  But  what  mo- 
ther has  fenfe  enough  and  grace  enough  to  mind 
this  ? 

32.  Chin-Cough,  or  Hooping-Cough . 

138.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  daily: 

* 139.  Or,  rub  the  feet  thoroughly  with  hog  s- 
lard,  before  the  fire  at  going  to  bed,  and  keep 
the  child  warm  therein.  Tried. 

140.  Or,  rub  the  back  at  lying  down  with  old 
rum.  It  feldom  fails: 

141.  Or, 


[ 42  ] 

141.  Or,  give  half  a pint  of  milk,  warm  from 
the  cow,  with  the  quantity  of  a nutmeg  of 
co\iferve  of  rofes  diffolved  in  it  every  morning. 

* 142.  Or,  dilfolve  a fcruple  of  fait  of  worm- 
wood, in  a quarter  of  a pint  of  clear  water  : add 
to  it  ten  grains  of  finely  powdered  cochineal,  and 
fweeten  it  with  loaf-fugar. 

Give  a child  within  the  year,  the  fourth  part 
of  a fpoonful  of  this  four  times  a day,  with  a 
fpoonful  of  barley-water  after  it.  Give  a child 
two  years  old,  half  a fpoonful : a child  above 
four  years  old,  a fpoonful.  Boiled  apples  put 
into  warm  milk  may  be  his  chief  food.  This 
relieves  in  twenty-four  hours,  and  cures  in  five 
or  fix  days. 

143.  Or,  from  three  to  five  grains  of  gum 
gamboge. — It  vomits  and  purges  : and.  Dr.  Cook 
fays,  always  cures. 

144.  In  defperate  cafes,  change  of  air  alone  has 
cured. 

33.  Cholera  Morbus  : i.  e.  Flux  and  l omitting. 

143.  Drink  two  or  three  quarts  of  cold  water, 
if  ftrong  ; of  warm  water,  if  weak. 

146.  Or,  drink  a draught  of  vinegar  and 
water  : 

147.  Or,  boil  a chicken  an  hour  in  two  gal- 
lons of  water,  and  drink  of  this  till  the  vomitting 
ceafes. 


148,  Or, 


C 43  3 


148.  Or,  take  fix  grains  of  laudanum , and  ap- 
ply a flit  onion  to  the  ftomach. 

34.  Chops  in  Womens  Nipples . 

149.  Apply  balfam  of  [agar. 

35.  Chopt  Hands  (to prevent.) 

150.  Wafh  them  with  four  of  mufard\ 

131.  Or,  in  bran  and  water  boiled  together. 
J32.  To  cure,  wafh  with  foftfoap,  mixt  with 

red fand\  I find  nothing  equal  to  this. 

36.  Chopt  Lips. 

1 33.  Apply  a little  fal pruntllce. 

37.  A frefh  Cold. 

* 134.  Drink  a pint  of  cold  water  lying  down 
in  bed.  Tried. 

133.  Or,  a fpoonful  of  treacle  in  half  a pint  of 
water.  Tried. 

38.  A Cold  in  the  Head. 

136.  Pare  very  thin  the  yellow  rhind  of  an 
orange.  ' Roll  it  up  infide  out,  and  thruft  a roll 
into  each  noftril. 


39.  The 


[ 44  ] 

39*  The  Co  lie  fin  the  Fit.) 

*157.  Drink  a pint  of  cold  water : tried. 

158.  Or,  a quart  of  warm  water  : tried. 

1,5 9.  Or,  drink  largely  of  camomile  tea  : 

160.  Or,  take  thirty  drops  of  fpirits  of  turpen- 
tine, in  a glafs  of  water: 

161.  Or,  from  two  fcruples  to  half  a dram  of 
yellow  peel  of  oranges  powdered,  in  a glafs  of  water. 

162.  Or,  take  from  thirty  to  fixty  drops  of  oil 
of  anife-feed  on  a lump  of  fugar  : 

163.  Or,  apply  outwardly  a bag  of  hot  oats  • 

164.  Or,  hot  water  in  a bladder  : 

40.  Colic  in  Children. 

165.  Give  a fcruple  of  powdered  anifefeed  in 
their  meat : tried. 

41.  Bilious  Colic.  § 

1 66.  Give  a fpoonful  of  fweet  oil  every  hour. — 
This  has  cured  one  judged  to  be  at  the  point  of 
death. 

167.  In  half  a pint  of  water  infufe  an  ounce  of 
manna,  and  four  drams  of  Glauber's  falts.  Drink 
it  direclly.  Tried. 

42.  An  Habitual  Colic. 

168.  W ear  a thin,  foft  flannel  on  the  part. 

43.  An 

^ This  is  generally  attended  with  vomilting  a greenifh  or  a 
frothy  matter,  with  fererith  heat,  violent  third,  a bitter  tadc  in 
the  mouth,  and  little  and  high  coloured  urine. 


C 45  ] 

43.  An  Hyjiaic  Colic.  | 


169.  Mrs.  Wails,  by  ufing  the  cold  balk  two 
and  twenty  times  in  a month,  was  entirely  cured 
of  an  hyfteric  colic,  fits,  and  convulfive  mo. 
tions,  continual  fweatings  and  vomitting,  wander- 
ing pains  in  her  limbs  and  head,  with  total  lots 
of  appetite. 

170.  In  the  fit,  drink  half  apint  o'iwaUr  with 
a little  wheat  four  in  it  and  a fpoonful  ol  vine- 
gar. 

*171.  Or,  of  warm  lemonade:  tried. 

172.  Or,  a glafs  full  of  vinegar  : 

173.  Or,  in  extremity,  boil  three  ounces  of 
burdock-feed  in  water,  which  give  as  a clyf- 
ter  ; 

174.  Or,  twenty  drops  of  laudanum,  in  any 
proper  clyfter,  which  gives  inftant  eafe. 

44.  A Nervous  Colic.  + 

175.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  daily  for  a month  : 

176.  Or,  take  quickjilver  and  aqua  fulphurata 
daily  for  a month  : (as  Art.  58.) 

45.  Colic 

+ Is  attended  with  a violent  pain  about  the  pit  of  the  ftomach, 
with  great  finking  of  the  fpirits,  and  often  with  greenifh  vomit- 
tingi. 

+ This  is  frequently  termed  the  dry  belly-ach.  It  often  continues 
feveral  days,  with  little  urine,  and  oblhnate  coftivcnefs. 

A colic  with  purging,  fome  teim  the  loatry  gripes. 


[ 4*  ] 


45-  Colic  from  the  Fumes  of  Lead,  or  White - 
Lead,  Verdigreafe,  idc. 

177.  In  the  fit,  drink  frefh  melted  butter,  and 
then  vomit  with  warm  water  ; 

178.  Or,  give  clyflers  of  oil  or  fat  broth  ; 

179.  To  prevent  or  cure.  Breakfaft  daily  on 
fat  broth  and  ufe  oil  of fweet  almonds  frequently 

and  largely. 

180.  Smelters  of  metals,  plumbers,  & c.  may 
be  in  a good  meafure  preferved  from  the  poifon- 
ous  fumes  that  furround  them,  by  breathing  thro’ 
cloth  or  flannel  mufflers  twice  or  thrice  dou- 
bled, dipt  in  a folulion  oi fea- fait, or  fait  of  tartar, 
and  then  dried.  Thefe  mufflers  might  alfo  be  of 
great  ufe  in  many  fimilar  cafes:  Even  though  dipt 
in  nothing. 

46.  To  prevent  the  ill  eft  els  of  cold. 

\ 

181.  The  moment  a perfon  gets  into  an  houfe 
with  his  hands  or  feet  quite  chilled,  let  him 
put  them  into  a vefiel  of  water,  as  cold  as  can 
be  got,  and  hold  them  there  till  they  begin  to 
glow.  This  they  will  do  in  a minute  or  two. 
This  method  likewife  effefitually  prevents  chil- 
blains. 

47.  A Conjumption. 

182.  A beginning  confumpiion  was  cured  by 
drinking  decoction  of  suaiacum  morning  and 

O ,0  O 

evening 


[ 47  3 

evening  for  .fifteen  days  (without  fweating)  with 
a light  diet. 

183  . Cold  bathing  has  cured  many  deep  con- 
fumptions : tried. 

184.  One  in  a deep  confumption  was  advifed 
to  drink  nothing  but  water,  and  eat  nothing  but 
zuater-grue/,  without  fait  or  fugar.  In  three 
months  time  he  was  perfectly  well. 

1 85.  Take  no  food  but  new  butter-milk,  churn- 
ed in  a bottle  and  white  bread. — I have  known 
this  fuccefsful  : 

186.  Beat  up  the  yolk  of  a new-laid  egg  in 
half  a p nt  of  fprmg-water  : fweeten  it  with 
fine  fugar.  Take  this  every  morning. 

187.  Or,  ufe  as  common  drink,  fpring  water, 
and  new  milk,  each  a quart  ; Jugar  candy  two 
-ounces. 

188.  Or,  boil  two  handfuls  of  for  rel  in  a pint 
of  whey.  Strain  it  and  drink  a glafs  thrice  a 
day.  Tried. 

189.  Or,  take  a fpoonful  of  fyrup  of  fox- 
glove, morning  and  evening':  tried. 

*190.  Or,  turn  a pint  of  flammed  milk  with 
half  a pint  of  finall  beer.  Boil  in  this  whey, 
about  twenty  ivy-leaves,  and  two  or  three,  fprigs 
of  hyjfop,  drink  half  over  night,  the  reft  in  the 
morning.  Do  this,  if  needful,  for  two  months 
daily. — This  has  cured  in  a defperate  cafe: 
tried. 

191.  Or,  take  a cow-heel  from  the  tripe-houfe 
-ready  dreft,  two  quarts  of  new  milk , two  ounces 

of 


[ 48  J 


of  hartjhorv  Jhavings,  two  ounces  of  ifinglafs , a 
quarter  of  a pound  of  fugar-candy,  and  a race  of 
ginger.  Put  all  thefe  in  a pot ; and  fet  them  in 
an  oven  after  the  bread  is  drawn.  Let  it  con- 
tinue there  till  the  oven  is  near  cold;  and  let  the 
patient  live  on  this. — I have  known  this  cure  a 
deep  confumption  more  than  once. 

192’  Or,  every  morning  cut  up  a little  turf 
-of  frefh  earth,  and  lying  down,  breathe  into  the 
hole  for  a quarter  of  an  hour.  I have  known  a 
deep  confumption  cured  thus. 

193.  “ Mr.  Majlers  of  Evefliam , was  fo 
far  gone  in  a confump'ion,  that  he  could  not 
{land  alone.  I advifed  him  to  lofe  fix  ounces  of 
blood  every  day  for  a fortnight,  if  he  lived  fo 
long:  and  then  every  other  day  ; then  every  third 
day  ; then  every  fifth  day,  for  the  fame  tune. 
In  three  months  he  was  well.” — "Dr.  Dover.) 
Tried. 

194.  Or,  throw  frankincenfe  on  burning  coals, 
and  receive  th ofmoke  daily  through  a proper  tube 
into  the  lungs.  Tried. 

195.  Or,  hoil  an  handful  of  refemary , and  in- 
fpire  the  flream  a quarter  of  an  hour,  morning 
and  evening. 

*196.  Or,  take  in  for  a quarter  of  an  hour, 
morning  and  evening,  the  fleam  of  zviuie  ro/iti 
and  bees-u.'ux,  boiling  in  an  hot  fire- (hovel.  This 
has  cured  one  who  was  in  the  lall  flage  of  a con- 
fumption. 

*197.  Or,  take  morning  and  evening,  a tea- 

fpoonful 


[ 49  ] 

fpoonful  of  white  rojin  powdered  and  mixed  with 
honey. — This  cured  one  in  lefs  than  a month, 
who  was  very  near  death. 

^ipB.Or,  drink  thrice  a day  two  fpoonfuls  of 
juice  of  water-crejfes. — This  has  cured  a deep 
confumption. 

*199.  In  the  laft  ftage,  fuck  an  healthy  woman 
daily.  Tried  by  my  father. 

For  diet,  ufe  milk  and  apples,  or  water-gruel, 
made  with  line  flour.  Drink  Qyder-whey,  barley- 
water,  fharpened  with  lemon-juice,  or  apple- 
water. 

So  long  as  the  tickling  cough  continues,  chew 
well  and  fwallow  a mouthful  or  two,  of  a bifcuit 
01'  cruft  of  bread.  If  you  cannot  fwallow  it, 
fpit  it  out.  This  will  always  flioiien  the  fit,  and 
would  often  prevent  a confumption. 

200.  I lately  knew  a confumption  cured  in 
two  or  three  weeks,  by  drinking  a pint  of  de- 
cofiion  of  nettles,  morning  and  evening. 

48.  Convul/ions. 

201.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  : 

202.  Or,  take  a tea-fpoonful  of  valenan-r«oi\ 
powdered,  in  a cup  of  water,  every  evening  : 

203.  Or,  half  a dram  of  mijfelto  powdered 
every  fix  hours,  drinking  after  it  a draught  of 
ftrong  infufion  thereof. 

49.  Convul/ions  in  Children. 

204.  Scrape  piony  roots  frefh  digged.  Apply 

Vol.  XXV.  C what 

+ If  Valerian  root  {links,  touch  it  not ; but  prepare  it  for  your- 
feif,  by  drying  it  where  no  cat  can  get  near  it. 


[ 50  ] 

what  you  have  fcraped  off  to  the  foies  of  tho 
feet.  It  helps  Immediately.  Tried. 

50.  Convuljions  in  the  bowels  oj  Children . 

205.  Give  a child  a quarter  ol(J,  a fpoonful  of 
the  juice  of  pellitory  of  the  wall , two  or  three 
times  a day.  It  goes  through  at  once,  but  purges 
no  more.  Ufe  fyrup,  if  juice  cannot  be  had. 

51.  Corns  (to  prevent .) 

206.  Wadi  the  feet  often  in  cold  water. 

32.  Corns  (to  cure.) 

207.  Apply  frefh  every  morning  the  yeajl  oF 
fmall  beer,  fpread  on  a rag : 

208.  Or,  boil  the  juice  of  radifies,  till  it  is 
thick  enough  to  fpread  as  a plaifter.  Shift  it  as 
it  grows  dry : 

209.  Or,  cleanfe  from  earth  the  root  and  herb 
of  hoifeieek  : crulh  it  with  your  fingers  and  ap- 
ply it.  Renew  it  every  three  hours,  for  twenty- 
four  hours:  /. 

210.  Or,  after  paring  them  clofe,  apply  bruif- 
ed  ivy-leaves  daily,  and  in  fifteen  days  thev  will 
drop  out. 

2 1 x.  Some  corns  are  cured  by  a pitch  plaifter. 

212.  All  are  greatly  eafed  by  fteeping  the  feet 
in  hot  water,  wherein  oatmeal  is  boiled.  This  alfo 
helps  dry  and  hot  feet. 


53.  Co/live nefs. 


{ fit  ] 

53.  Cofiivenefs, 

213.  Rife  early  every  morning: 

214.  Or,  boil  in  a pint  and  half  of  broth,  half 
a handful  of  mallow-leaves  chopt : drain  this  and 
drink  it,  before  you  eat  any  thing  elfe.  Do  this 
frequently,  if  needful  : 

*215.  Or,  breakfaft  twice  a week,  or  oftner, 
on  water-gruel  with  currants . Tried. 

*216.  Or,  take  the  bignefs  of  a large  nutmeg 
of  cream  of  tartar , mixt  with  honey , as  often 
as  you  need. 

217.  Or,  take  daily  two  hours  before  dinner  a 
final!  tea-cup  of  Hewed  prunes , and  a glafs  of 
wine  and  water  before  and  after  it : 

218.  Or,  boil  an  ounce  and  a half  of  tamarinds 
in  three  pints  of  water  to  a quart.  In  this  drain- 
when  cold,  infufe  all  night  two  drams  of  Jena, 
and  one  dram  of  red  rofe  leaves . Drink  a cup 
every  morning.  (See  Dr.  Tijfot). 

54.  A Cough . 

sig.  Every  cough  is  a dry  cough  at  firft.  As 
long  as  it  continues  fo,  it  may  be  cured  by  chew- 
ing immediately  after  you  cough,  the  quantity 
of  a pepper  corn  of  Peruvian  bark . Swallow 
your  fpittle  as  long  as  it  is  bitter,  and  then  fpit 
•out  the  wood.  Ifyou  cough  again,  do  this  again. 
It  very  feldom  fails  to  cure  any  dry  cough.  I 
earneftly  advife  every  one  who  has  any  regard 
C 2 for 


for  his  health  to  try  this  within  24  hours,  after 
he  firft  perceives  a cough. 

220.  Or,  drink  a pint  of  cold  water  lying 
down  in  bed  : tried. 

221.  Or,  mix  an  ounce  of  linfeed  oil,  with  an 
ounce  of  white  Jugar. candy  powdered,  and  take 
a tea-fpoonful  whenever  the  cough  comes: 

222.  Or,  make  a hole  through  a lemon , and 
fill  it  with  honey.  Roalf  it  and  catch  the  juice. 
Take  a tea-fpoonful  ol  this  frequently  : tried. 

gg.  An  Ajlhnatic  Cough. 

*223.  Take  Sponijh  liquorice  two  ounces, 
fait  of  tartar  half  an  ounce:  boil  the  liquorice  in 
three  pints  of  water  to  a quart.  Add  the  fait  to 
it  when  it  is  blood-warm.  Drink  two  fpoonfuls 
of  this  every  two  hours. — It  feldom  fails  : tried.. 

56.  A Covfumptive  Cough. 

*224.  To  flop  it  for  a time,  at  lving  down, 
keep  alittl ejlick  liquorice  fhaved  like  horf'e-radijh, 
between  the  cheek  and  the  gums. — I believe  this 
never  fails. 

57.  A Convulfive  Cough. 

22g.  Eat  preferved  walnuts  : 

2.2 6.  Or,  boil  a handful  of  bay-leaves  in  milk, 
turn  this  with  while  wine  and  drink  of  the  whey 
often. 


C 53  3 


58.  An  inveterate  Cough. 

227.  Wafh  the  head  in  cold  water , every 
morning  : 

228.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath. — Itfeldom  fails: 

229.  Or,  peel  and  flice  a large  turnip,  fpread 
coarfe fugar  between  the  dices,  and  let  it  Hand 
in  a difh  till  all  the  juice  drains  down.  Take  a 
fpoonful  of  this  whenever  you  cough  : 

230.  Or,  mix-  the  juice  of  boiled  turnips 
with  fine  powdered  fugar-candy,  till  it  is  a kind 
of  fyrup,  fwallow  a little  of  it  drop  by  drop  from 
time  to  time  : 

231.  Or,  taka  a fpoonful  of  fyrup  of  hore- 
kound  morning  and  evening:  tried. 

39.  A Pleuritic  Cough. 

232.  Powder  an  ounce  of  fperma-ceti  fine, 
work  it  in  a marble  mortar  with  the  yolk  of  a 
new-laid  egg.  Mix  them  in  a pint  of  white  wine, 
and  take  a fmall  glafs  every  three  hours. 

60.  Tickling  Cough. 

233.  Drink  water  whitened  with  oatmeal  four 
times  a day  : 

234.  Or,  keep  a piece  of  barley  fugar  or  fugar- 
candy  conlfantly  in  the  mouth. 


c 3 


61.  Violent 


6l.  Violent  Coughing,  from  a Jharp  thin  Rheum. 

23 5.  Work  into  old  conftrve  of  rofes,  as  much 
-as  you  can  oF  pure frankincenfe  powdered  as  fine 
-as  pofiible.  Take  a bolus  of  this  twice  or  thrice 
a day.  It  eafes  p relent ly,  and  cures  in  two  off 
three  weeks : 

236.  Or,  Ufe  milk  diet  as  much  as  pofiible. 

62.  The  Cramp  [to prevent.') 

* 237.  Tie  your  garter  fmoothand  tight  unde» 
your  knee  at  going  to  bed : I never  knew  this 
fail. 

238.  Or,  take  half  a pint  of  tar-water,  morning 
and  evening: 

239.  Or,  be  eleftrifed  through  the  part  which 
ufes  to  be  aflefted.  This  generally  prevents 
it  for  a month  : fometimes  fora  twelvemonth. 

63.  The  Cramp  [to  cure.) 

240.  Stretch  out  the  limb  immediately  : 

241.  Or,  chafe  the  part  with  Hungary  water  : 

* 242.  Or,  hold  a roll  of  brimjlone  in  your 
hand.  I have  frequently  done  this  with  fuccefs. 

64.  A Cut. 

243.  Keep  it  clofed  with  your  thumb  a quar- 
ter of  an  hour.  Then  double  a rag  five  or  fix 

times  ■, 


[ 55  ] 


times;  dip  it  in  cold  water,  and  bind  it  on. 
Tried. 

244.  Or,  bind  on  toajled  cheefe.  This  will  cure 
a deep  cut. 

245.  Or,  pounded  grafs.  Shake  it  off  after 
twelve  hours,  and  if  need  be,  apply  frelh. 

65.  Deafnefs. 

246.  Be  eleBrifed  through  the  ear.  Tried. 

247.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath  : 

248.  Or,  put  a little  fait  into  the  ear; 

249.  Or,  drop  into  it  a tea-fpoonful  of  fait 
water : 

250.  Or,  of fpring  water , in  a pint  of  which  a 
fpoonful  of  bay  fait  has  been  diffolved  for  four 
and  twenty  hours.  Do  this,  if  need  be,  feven 
or  eight  nights,  lying  on  the  oppofite  fide  : 

251.  Or,  three  or  four  drops  of  onion-juice,  at 
lying  down,  and  ftop  it  with  a little  wool. 

66.  Deafnefs from  Wax. 

252.  Syringe  the  ear  with  warm  fage  tea. 
Tried. 

253.  Or,  put  in  wild  mint  bruifed,  with  the 
juice,  changing  it  often. 


67.  Deafnefs  with  a dry  Ear. 

254.  Mix  brandy  and  fweet  oil'.  Dip  blade 
wool  in  this,  and  put  it  into  the  ear.  When  it 
C 4 grows 


[ 56  ] 

grows  dry,  wafh  it  well  in  brandy  ; dip  it  and 
put  it  in  again. 

€8.  Deafnefs  with  Head-ach  and  Buzzing  in  tht 
Head. 


255-  3 cl°ve  of  garhck;  dip  it  in  honey , 

and  put  it  into  your  ear  at  night  with  a littl* 
black  wool.  Lie  with  that  ear  uppermoft.  Put 
the  fame  in  the  other  ear  next  night.  Do  this, 
if  need  be,  eight  or  ten  days. 

69.  A fettled  Deafnefs. 

2 56.  Take  a red  onion , pick  out  the  core  ; fill 
up  the  place  with  oil  of  roafed  almonds.  Let  it 
Hand  a night;  then  bruife  and  drain  it.  Drop 
three  or  four  drops  into  the  ear,  morning  and 
evening,  and  flop  it  with  black  wool. 

70.  To  caufe  an  eafy  Delivery. 

257.  Peel,  flice  and  fry  a large  white  onion  in 
two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  the  bed  oil,  till  it  is 
tender.  Boil  this  with  half  a glafs  of  water  : 
drain  and  drink  it  in  the  morning  fading, 
for  two  or  three  weeks  before  the  time  of  child- 
birth. 

N.  B.  The  mother’s frjl  milk  is  the  only  pro- 
per purge  for  the  child.  Let  it  begin  to  fuck 
ten  or  twelve  hours  after  the  birth. 


71.  A 


[ 57  ] 

71.  A Diabetes.  § 

258.  Drink  wine  boiled  with  ginger,  as  much 
and  as  often  as  your  ftrength  will  bear.  Let  your 
drink  be  milk  and  water.  All  milk  meats  are  good, 

*259.  Or,  drink  three  or  four  times  a day  a 
quarter  of  a pint  of  alhnn  polfet,  putting  three 
drams  of  all  am  to  four  pints  of  milk. — It  feldom 
fails  to  cure  in  eight  or  ten  days.  (Dr.  Mead.) 

260.  Or,  Infufe  half  an  ounce  of  cardharides 
in  a pound  of  elixir  of  vitriol.  Give  from  1^  to 
30  or  even  40  drops  in  Brijlal  water , twice,  or 
thrice  a day. 

72.  The  Dropjy.  t 

261.  Life  the  cold  bath  daily, -after  purging  : 

262.  Or,  rub  the  fwelled  parts  with  Jallad  oil 
by  a warm  hand,  at  lead  an  hour  a day.  This 
has  done  wonders  in  feme  cafes. 

* 263.  Or,  cover  the  whole  belly  with  a 
a large  new  fponge  dipt  in  flrong  lime-water,  and 
then  fqueezed  out.  This  bound  on  often  cures, 
even  without  any  fenfible  evacuation  of  water. 

264.  Or,  apply  green  dock-leaves  to  the 
joints  and  foies  of  the  feet,  changing  them  once 
a day. 

C 5 *265.  Or, 

§ A diabetes  is  a frequent  and  large  difeharge  of  pale  and  fweet- 
ifh  urine,  attended  with  a conftant  third,  and  a wafting  of  the 
whole  body. 

+ A dropfy  is  a preternatural  colle£tion  of  water  in  the  head, 
bread,  belly,  or  all  over  the  body.  It  is  attended  with  a con* 
tinual  thirft.  The  part  fwelled  pits,  if  you  prefsit  with  your  Gtv- 
5 ers.  The  urine  is  pale  and  little. 


I 5 8 ] 

* 265.  Or,  mix  half  an  ounce  of  amber  ■with 
a quart  of  wine  vinegar.  Heat  a brick  (only  not 
red  hot)  and  put  it  into  a tub.  Pour  them  upon 
it,  hold  the  parts  fwelled  over  the  fmoke,  cover- 
ing the  tub  clofe,  to  keep  in  the  fmoke.  The 
water  will  come  out  incredibly,  and  the  patient 
be  cured  : tried. 

2 66.  Or,  eat  a crufl  of  bread  every7  morning 
fading  ; tried. 

2 67.  Or,  take  as  much  as  lies  on  a fix-pence 
of  powdered  laureal  leaves , every7  fecond  or 
third  day.  It  works  both  ways  : tried. 

* 268.  Or,  mix  a pound  of  the  coarfeft 
fugar  with  a pint  of  juice  of  pellitory  of  the  wall 
bruifed  in  a marble  mortar.  Boil  it  as  long  as 
any  fcum  rifes.  When  cool,  bottle  and  cork  it. 
If  very  bad,  take  three  fpoonfuls  at  night,  and 
two  in  the  morning. — It  feldom  fails  : tried. 

* 269.  Or  make  tea  of  roots  of  dwarf-elder. 
It  works  by  urine.  Everv  twelve  or  fourteen 
minutes,  (that  is,  after  every  difcharge)  drink 
a tea-cup  full. — I have  known  a dropfv  cured 
by  this  in  twelve  hours  time. 

270.  Tar -water  drank  twice  a day  has  cured 

many  : fo  has  an  infufion  of  juniper  berries 

roafted,  and  made  into  a liquor  like  coffee  : 

271.  Or,  take  a fpoonful  of  the  juice  of  arli - 
ckoak-leaves,  morning  and  evening : 

272.  Or,  three  fpoonfuls  of  thejuice  of  leeks 
and  elder -leaves  : tried. 

273.  Or  half  a pint  of  deco&ion  of  butcher's 

broom 


C 59  1 

broom  (intermixing  purges  twice  or  thrice  a week) 
The  proper  purge  is  ten  grains  of  jalap  with  fix 
of  powdered  ginger.  It  may  be  increafed  or  lef- 
fened  according  to  the  ftrength  of  the  pati- 
ent : 

274.  Or,  of  the  deco£lion  of  the  tops  of  oak- 
boughs.  This  cured  an  inveterate  dropfy  in  fif- 
teen days  : 

275*  Or,  ufe  fal  prunella  in  your  common 
drink  thirty  days  : 

. 276.  Or,  take  ftna,  cream  of  iartar  and  jalap, 
half  an  ounce  each.  Mix  them  and  take  a dram 
every  morning  in  broth.  It  ufually  cures  in 
twenty  days.  This  is  nearly  the  fame,  with  Dr. 
Ward' s powder.  He  fays,  it  feldom  fails,  either 
in  the  watry  or  windy  dropfy. 

277.  Or,  abflain  from  all  drink  for  thirty  days. 
To  eafe  your  thirft  hold  often  on  your  tongue,  a 
thin  fmall  flice  of  toafled  bread  dipt  in  brandy  ; 
or  walh  the  mouth  with  juice  of  lemons  : 
tried. 

* 278.  Or,  be  eleOxified  : this  cures  dropfies 
fuppofed  incurable. 

279.  How  amazingly  little  is  yet  known, 
even  of  the  human  body  ! Have  not  dropfical 
perfons  been  continually  advifed  to  abftain  from 
drink  as  much  as  poffible  ? But  how  can  we  re- 
concile this  with  the  following  undeniable  fafts, 
publilhed  in  the  late  medical  tranf addons  ? 

Jane  Roberts,  aged  twenty,  was  at  length  con- 
tained to  take  her  bed  by  a confirmed  aj'cites 
C 6 and- 


[ 6o  ] 

and  anafarca.  In  this  defperate  cafe  fhedrank 
as  much  as  fhe  would,  firft  of  J mall  beer,  and 
when  that  failed,  of  thin  milk.  After  a while  her 
fkin  cracked  in  many  places  : and  fhe  continued 
drinking  and  leaking  till  fhe  was  quite  well. 

A middle-aged  man  in  the  weft  of  England, 
drank  every  day  five  or  fix  quarts  of  cyder  : and 
without  any  other  medicine,  was  totally  cured 
in  a few  weeks  time  of  a dropfy  long  fuppofed 
to  be  incurable. 

* A farmer  aged  feventy,  in  a confirmed  af- 
cites,  was  given  over  for  death.  Being  defper- 
ate, he  drank  three  quarts  of  cold  water  every 
four  and  twenty  hours.  His  whole  food  mean 
time  was  fea-bifcuit,  fometimes  with  a little  but- 
ter. For  fixteen  days  he  feemed  worfe.  Then 
he  difcharged  for  near  a week  a vaft  quanti;\  of 
water,  and  was  foon  free  from  Iris  difeafe,  which 
never  returned.  This  is  well  worth  trying. 

73.  Drowned. 

280.  Rub  the  trunk  of  the  bodv  all  over  with 
Jalt,  it  frequently  recovers  them  that  feem  dead. 

(See  Dr.  Tijfot.) 

yq.  The  Ear-Ach. 

281.  Rub  the  ear  hard  for  a quarter  of  an 
hour:  tried. 

282.  Or,  be  cletlrified ; 

283.  Or,  apply  to  it  a hot  roll: 


s8q.  Or. 


[ «■  ] 

284-  Or,  put  in  a roafted  fig,  or  onion,  as  hoi 
as  may  be  : tried. 

285.  Or,  blow  the  fmoak  oj  tobacco  flrongly  in- 
to it. 

75.  Ear-Ach  from  Cold. 

286.  Boil  rue , or  rofemary , or  garlic,  and 
let  the  fleam  go  into  the  ear  through  a funnel. 

76.  Ear-Ach  from  Heat. 

287.  Apply  cloths  four  times  doubled  and 
dipt  in  cold  water,  changing  them  when  warm 
for  hah  an  hour. 

77.  Ear-Ach  from  TVorms. 

288.  Drop  in  warm  milk,  and  it  brings  them 
out : 

289.  Or,  juice  of  wormwood,  which  kills 
them : 

290.  Or,  oil  of  bitter  almonds. 

78.  Noife  in  the  Ears. 

291.  Drop  in  juice  of  onions  : 

292.  Or,  fill  them  with  bruifed  h)ffiop. 


80.  Eyes 


79.  Hard  IVax  in  the  Ear 

293.  Is  b eft  diffolved  by  warm  water . 


C 62  ] 

80.  Eyes  blear'd, 

294.  Drop  into  them  juice  of  crab-apples. 

81.  A Blood-Jhot  Eye. 

295.  Apply  linen  mgs  dipt  in  cold  water  for 
two  or  three  hours : 

296.  Or,  blow  in  white  fugar-candy  finely 
powdered  : 

297.  Or,  apply  boiled  hyffop  as  a poultice  — 
This  has  a wonderful  efficacy. 

82.  A Bruife  in  the  Eye. 

298.  Apply  as  a plaifter,  conferve  of  rofes. 

83.  Clouds  flying  before  the  Eye. 

299.  Take  a dram  of  powdered  betor.y  every 
morning. 

84.  Blindnefs 

300.  Is  often  cured  by  cold  bathing: 

301.  Or,  by  eledrifying : tried.  This  has 
cured  even  a gutta  ferena  of  twenty-four  years 
ftandiner. 


85,  Eyes  dim  or  decayed. 

302.  Ufe  eye-bright  tea  dailv  : 

303.  Or,  powdered  eye-bright , both  in  mear 
and  drink. 


86.  Dull 


C 63  ] 

86.  Dull  Sight. 

304.  Drop  in  two  or  three  drops  of  juice  of 
rotten  apples  often. 

87.  Films. 

305.  Dry  ziebethum  occidental,  i.  e.  flercus 
humanum,  (lowly ; powder  it  fine,  and  blow  it 
into  the  eye  twice  or  thrice  a day  : 

306.  Or,  mix  juice  of  ground-ivy,  with  a lit- 
tle honey,  and  two  or  three  grains  of  bay-Jalt. 
Drop  it  in,  morning  and  evening. 

88.  Hot  or  Jharp  Humours. 

307.  Beat  the  white  of  an  egg  into  water,  in 
which  mix  fine Jugar,  and  drop  it  into  the  eye: 

308.  Or,  apply  a few  drops  of  a fyrup  made 
with  double-refined  fugar,  melted  in  brandy: 
tried. 

309.  Or,  drop  in  juice  of  dai/ies,  morning  and 
evening. 

310.  Or,  boil  a handful  of  bramble-leaves  with 
a little  allum  in  a quart  of  fpring  water  to  a pint. 
Drop  this  frequently  into  the  eye.  This  like- 
wife  fpeedily  cures  cankers  or  any  fores. 

311.  Or,  lay  a thin  (lice  of  raw  beef  on  th« 
nape  of  the  neck : tried. 


89.  Eyes 


[ 64  ] 


89 .  Eyes  inflamed. 

*312.  Apply  as  a poultice,  boiled , roajled , or 
rotten  apples  warm. 

313.  Or,  a thick  apple-paring  lying  down  in 
bed : 

314.  Or,  wormwood  tops  with  the  yolk  of  an 
egg; — This  will  hardly  fail. 

315.  Or,  beat  up  the  white  of  an  egg  with 
two  fpoonfuls  of  white  rofe  water  into  a white 
froth.  Apply  this  on  a fine  rag,  changing  it  fo 
that  it  may  not  grow  dry,  till  the  eye  is  well  : 
tried. 

90.  A Lachrymal  FiflulaA 

316.  Apply  a poultice  of  fine  leaves  of  rue  : 

317.  Or,  wafh  the  eye  morning  and  evening 
with  dccottion  of  quinch- leaves. 


91.  Pearl  in  the  Eye. 

318.  Applv  a drop  of  juice  of  celandine  with  a 
feather  thrice  a day  ; 

319.  Oi,  the  juice  of  rue  ; 

320.  Or,  ol  three-leaved  grafs.  It  commonly 
cures  in  feven  days: 

321.  Or,  dilTolve  a little  fal  ammoniac  in 
rofe-water.  Keep  this  three  days  in  a copper  vef- 
fel.  Drop  it  twice  a day  into  the  eye. 

92.  Sore 

+ This  cTiforder  in  the  inner  corner  of  the  eye,  caufcs  the  tears 
to  flow  involuntarily. 


[ «5  ] 

92.  Sore  Eyes. 

322.  Drink  eye-bright  tea,  and  wafh  the  eyes 
'with  it. 

93.  White  Specks  in  the  Eye,. 

* 323.  Going  to  bed,  put  a little  e ar-zuax  o® 
the  fpeck.  This  has  cured  many. 

324.  Or*  a drop  of  the  juice  of  fennel : 

323.  Or,  of  ivy-juice : afterwards  blow  in  & 
little  powdered  loaffugar. 

94.  An  excellent  Eye  Water. 

* 326.  Heat  half  an-ounce  of  lapis  calaminaris 
red  hot,  and  quench  it  in  half  a pint  of  French 
white  wine , and  as  much  white  rofe  water  : then 
pound  it  final!  and  infufe  it ; dropping  a drop  or 
two  into  the  coiner  of  the  eye.  It  cures  fore- 
nefs,  weaknefs,  and  mod  difeafes  of  the  eye.  I 
have  known  it  cure  total  blindnefs.  It  takes 
effect,  even  if  you  ufe  the  lapis  calaminaris 
ready  powdered* 

95.  Another . 

327.  Boil  very  lightly  one  fpoonful  of  white 
copperas  fcraped,  and  three  fpoonfuls  of  white 
fait , in  three  pints  of fpring  water.  When  cold, 
bottle  it  in  large  vials  without  draining*  Take 


C 66  ] 

up  the  vial  foftly,  and  put  a drop  or  two  in  tb< 
eye  morning  and  evening. 

CdT  It  anfwtrs  the  intention  of  almoji  all  the  pre- 
ceding medicines : it  takes  azuay  rednefs,  or  any 
forenefs  whatever : it  cures  pearls,  rheums,  and 
often  bhndnefs  itfelj. 

9 6.  Another. 

328.  Stamp  and  ftrain  ground-ivy,  celandine 
and  daifies  an  equal  quantity  : add  a little  rofe- 
water  and  loaffugar.  Drop  a drop  or  two  at  a 
time  into  the  eye,  and  it  takes  awav  all  manner  of 
inflammation,  fmarting,  itching,  fpots,  webs,  or 
any  other  diforder  whatfoever,  yea,  though  the 
fight  were  almoft  gone. 

* 97.  An  Eye  Water  which  was  ufed  ly  Sir 
Stephen  Fox,  when  he  was  fixty  years  of  age, 
and  could  hardly  fee  with  the  help  of  fpetda- 
cles ; but  hereby  in  fome  time  he  recovered  his 
fight,  and  could  fee  to  read  the  fmallejl  print 
without  glafs  or  fpe&acles , till  above  eighty. 

329.  Take  fix  ounces  of  re&ified  fpirits  of 
wine , difiolve  in  it  one  dram  of  camphire ; then 
add  two  pugils  of  dried  elder  fowers.  In  twenty- 
four  hours  after  it  is  infufed  it  is  ready  for  ufe. 
Take  out  a little  in  a tea-fpoon  ; dip  your  finger 
in  it,  and  bathe  your  forehead,  over  your  eyes, 

and 


r % 3 

an<i  each  temple  with  it  feveral  times,  morning' 
and  night,  and  twice  more  in  the  day  conffantly. 
Mean  time  dip  a foft  rag  in  dead  fmall  beer,  new 
milk  warm,  and  dab  each  eye  a dozen  times 
gently,  morning  and  evening. 

If  it  is  a watry  humour,  you  may  with  your 
finger  wet  the  eyelids  two  or  three  times  a piece; 
but  be  fure  to  fhut  your  eyes,  or  it  makes  them 
fmart  and  burn  exceffively.  If  you  have  the 
tooth-ach  or  fwelled  face  rub  it  well  in  on  the 
part,  and  it  will  take  away  the  pain.  It  will 
cure  any  bruife  alfo  if  ufed  immediately.  T ried. 

It  will  cure  any  inflammation  in  the  eyes,  by 
a long  courfe  of  ufing. 

98.  Weak  Ryes. 

330.  Moiflen  the  eyelids  morning  and  even- 
ing with  camphorated fpirits  oj  wine,  keeping  the 
eye  fhut. 

331.  Wafhthe  head  daily  with  cold  water'. 
Tried. 

99.  Fainting  on  letting  Blood 

332.  Is  prevented  by  taking  before  it  fome 
good  .broth. 


ioo.  The 


C 68  1 


roo.  The  Falling  Sicknefs.  + 


333.  Be  eleclrified : Tried. 

334.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath  for  a month 
daily  : 

335.  Or,  take  a tea-fpoonfu!  of  pioriy  root 
dried  and  grated  fine,  morning  and  evening  for 
three  months  : 

336.  Or,  two  tea-fpoonfuls  of  valerian  root 
powdered. — It  often  cures  in  twice  taking: 

337.  Or,  drink  a draught  of  vinegar  and  water, 
every  morning,  and  a fpoonlul  of  vinegar  befoie 
the  fit : 

338.  Or,  half  a pint  of  decoflion  of  lignum 
guaiacum , morning  and  evening:  /. 

339.  Or,  of  tar-water,  for  three  months  : 

*340.  Or,  take  five  drops  of  laudanum  falling, 

for  fix  or  feven  mornings. -This  has  cured 

many : 

341.  Or,  ufe  an  entire  milk  diet  for  three 
months : it  feldom  fails : 

342.  Or,  take  half  a dram  of  powdered  ruiffelto, 
every  fix  hours,  drinking  after  it  a flrong  infu- 
fion  of  mijfeltb  : I. 

343.  In  the  fit,  blow  up  the  nofe  a little  pow- 
dered ginger : 

* 344.  Or,  leaves  of  garden  Jcurvyrgrafs 

powdered. 

t In  the  falling  fcknefs,  the  patient  falls  to  the  ground,  cither 
quite  ftiff,  or  convulfed  all  over,  utterly  feDfelefs,  gnathing  his 
teeth,  and  foaming  at  the  mouth* 


[ % ] 


powdered. (j^T  This  is  the  famous  Major's 

fnuff. 

343.  One  who  is  fubjeft  to  the  falling  fick- 
nefs,  may  prevent  a fit  if  he  feels  it  coming,  by 
this  fimple  experiment.  Let  him  always  carry 
with  him  a piece  of  metal  as  broad  as  he  is  able 
to  hold  between  his  teeth,  when  his  jaws  are 
flretched  to  the  utmofl.  When  he  feels  the  fit 
approaching,  let  him  immediately  put  this  be- 
tween his  teeth,  fo  as  to  keep  his  jaws  at  the  ut- 
mofi  flretch.  In  about  a minute  this  will  bring 
him  quite  to  lumfelf,  and  prevent  the  fit  for  that 
time. 

* If  one  put  this  metal  between  the  teeth  of 
one  that  is  in  the  fit,  and  force  them  open,  till 
his  jaws  are  at  the  Utmofl:  flretch,  the  fit  will 
immediately  go  off  and  the  patient  very  foon 
.recover. 


101.  The  falling  of  the  Fundament . 


* 346.  Apply  a cloth  covered  thick  with  brick- 

dufl : 

* 347.  Or,  boil  a handful  of  red  rofe  leaves  in  a 
quarter  of  a pint  of  red  wine ; dip  a cloth  in  it, 
and  apply  it  as  hot  as  can  be  borne  : do  this  till 
all  is  ufed. 


102.  A 


C 70  ] 

102,  A falling  down  of  the  Womb 

348.  May  be  cured  in  the  manner  laft  men- 
tioned. 

103.  A Fever . 

349.  Drink  a pint  and  a half  of  cold  water 
lying  down  in  bed : I never  knew  it  do  hurt : 

350.  Or,  a large  glafs  of  tar-water  warm,  every 
hour. 

351.  The  bell  of  all  juleps  in  a fever  is 
this: — Toalt  a large  thin  flice  of  bread,  without 
burning  ; put  it  hot  into  a pint  of  cold  water  ; 
then  fet  it  on  the  fire  till  it  ;s  pretty  hot.  In  a 
dry  heat  it  may  be  given  cold;  in  a moift 
heat  warm  ; the  more  largelv  the  better  : Tried. 

352.  Or,  put  an  ounce  of  nee  in  a pint  of 
water : fet  it  near  the  fire  till  it  is  fealding 
hot ; then  pour  it  off  clear. 

353-  f°r  a change,  ufe  pippin  or  wood- 
fond  tea:  or,  pippin-poffet  drink  : or,  woodforrel 
poffet  drink : 

354.  Or,  of  flrawberry  leaves* . 

355,  To  prevent  catching  any  infectious 
fever,  do  not  breathe  near  the  face  of  the 
fick  perfon  ; neither  fwallow  your  fpittle  while 
in  the  room.  Infe&ion  feizes  the  ftomach 
firft. 


104.  A 


[ 7i  ] 

104-  A burning  Fever. 


356.  Stamp  a handful  of  leaves  of  wood-bin? ; 
put  fair  water  to  it,  and  ufe  it  cold  as  a clyfter. 
It  commonly  cures  in  an  hour: 

* 0,57-  Of.  fmear  the  wrifts,  five  or  fix  inches 
long  with  warm  treacle , and  cover  it  with  brown 
paper.  (See  Dr.  Tiflot.) 

10,5.  An  acute  Fever. 

# 358.  Apply  treacle  plaifters  to  the  foies  of 
♦he  feet,  changing  them  every  twelve  hours. 

% 

106.  A continual  Fever. 

359.  If  not  very  violent,  take  a dram  of  fal 
prunella  every  four  hours  in  warm  water. 

107.  An  HeFlic  Fever. 

360.  Drink  only  thin  water-gruel , or  boiled 

milk  and  water.  The  more  you  drink  the 
better.  * 

108.  A High  Fever , 

361.  Attended  with  a delirium  and  a vigilia, 
has  been  cured  by  plunging  into  cold  water ; 
which  is  a fafe  and  a fure  remedy  in  the  begin- 
ning of  any  fever. 


* 362. 


C 72  J 


362.  Such  a delirium  is  often  cured  by  ap- 
plying a treacle  piaifer  to  the  top  of  the  head. — ■ 
This  has  all,  and  more  than  all  the  effedt  of  a 
blifter. 


109.  An  intermitting  Fever. 

363.  Drink  warm  lemonade  in  the  beginning 
of  every  fit  : it  cures  in  a few  days:  tried. 

364.  Or,  take  a tea-fpoonful  of  oil  of  fulphur 
in  a cup  of  balm  tea , once  or  twice  a daw 

365.  Or,  half  a dram  of  powdered  cochineal,  an 
hour  before  each  fit. 

366.  Or,  fix  grains  of  powdered fnake-rooty 
=every  hour  during  the  intermiffiom 

367.  Or,  a quarter  of  a pint  of  burdock  tea: 
ufing  either  the  leaf  or  root. 

110.  A Fever  toith  Pains  in  the  Limbs. 

368.  Take  twenty  drops  of fpirits  cf  hartficrn 
in  a cup  of  water  twice  or  thrice  in  twenty- four 
hours. 

369.  Or,  drink  largely  of  cinquefoil  tea. 

111.  A Nervous  Fever. 

370.  Drink  every  night  a tea-fpoonful  of 
cream  of  tartar  boiled  in  half  a pint  of  milk. 

112.  A 


[ 73  ] 

ns.  A Rajh  Fever. 


* 371.  Drink  every  hour  a fpoonful  cf  juice 
of  ground-ivy.  It  cures  in  twenty-four  hours. — 
Ufe  the  decoftion  when  you  have  not  the 
juice. 

113.  A Jlozc  Fever. 

372.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  for  two  or  three  weeks, 
daily. 

114.  A Fijlula. 

373.  Grind  an  ounce  of  mercury  fublimate,  in  a 
glafs  mortar,  with  a glafs  peftle,  as  fine  as  poffi- 
ble.  Put  it  into  a glafs  bottle,  and  pour  on  it 
two  quarts  of  pure  fpring  water.  Cork  it  clofe, 
and  for  fix  days  fhake  it  well  every  hour.  Then 
let  it  fettle  for  twenty-four  hours.  PoUr  it  off 
dear  ; filter  it  in  a glafs  funnel  ; and  keep  it  for 
ufe  clofe  ftopt.  Put  half  a fpooniul  of  this  water 
in  a vial,  and  add  two  fpoonfuls  of  pure  fpring 
water  : fhake  them  well  together,  and  drink  it 
faffing.  It  works  both  by  vomit  and  by  Pool, 

■it  very  fafely.  Keep  yourfelf  very  warm,  and 
walk  as  much  as  you  can.  The  firft  time  nei- 
ther eat  nor  drink  till  two  hours  after  it  has  done 
working.  Take  this  every  other  day.  In  forty 
days  this  will  alfo  cure  any  cancer , any  old  fore. 
or  kings  evil,  broken  or  unbroken. — After  the 
Vol.  XXV.  D firft 


[ 74  ] 

firftorfecond  vomit,  you  may  ufe  water-gruel, 
as  in.  other  vomits. 

(jtf  Very  weak  per  fons  Jhould  not  ufe  this.  But 
1 have  known  it  ufed fafely  and ' fuccrjs fully. 

* 374.  Or,  have  a veflel  fo  contrived,  that  you 
may  fit  with  the  part  in  cold  water  a quarter  of  an 
hour  every  morning.  I have  known  a gcntle- 
nmn  of  feventy  cured  hereby. 

115.  To  defray  Fleas  or  Bugs . 

373.  Cover  the  floor  of  the  room  with  the 
leaves  of  alder,  gathered  while  the  dew  hangs 
upon  them;  adhering  to  thefe  they  are  killed 
thereby. 

376.  Or,  powder  Jlavefacre , and  fprinkle  it  on 
the  body,  or  on  the  bed. 

1 1 6.  Ftegrn. 

377.  To  prevent  or  cure,  take  a fpoonful  of 
war m water  the  firfl  thing  in  the  morning. 

117.  Flooding  (in  Lying-in.) 

378.  Cover  the  body  with  clothes  dipt  in  oxy- 
crale,  (i.  e.  vinegar  and  water)  changing  them 
as  they  grow  wafm.  Drink  cooling,  acid  li- 
quors. 

379-  Or,  take  four  ounces  of  juice  of  nettles, 
morning  and  evening  for  two  days ; apply 


mean 


[ 75  ] 

mean  time  a fponge  dipt  in  vinegar  and  red 
wine. 

118.  A Flux , 

380.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  daily,  and  drink  a 
draught  of  water  from  the  fpringi 

381.  Or,  fit  over  camomile-flowers  boiled  in 

milk  : 

382.  Or,  receive  the  fmoke  of  turpentine  caff 
on  burning  coals.  This  cures  alfo  the  bloody- 

Jlux,  and  the  falling  of  the  fundament. 

383.  Or,  drink  two  or  three  quarts  of  warm 
water  : 

* 384.  Or,  put  a large  brown  loaf  into  three 
quarts  ol  water , with  a dram  of  cochineal  pow- 
dered, and  a dram  of  Ja'lt  of  wormwood.  Drink 
it  all  in  as  lhort  time  as  you  conveniently  can. 

grT  This  rarely  fails  to  cure  all  jinxes,  cho- 
lera morbus,  yea  and  inflammations  cj  the  bowels : 
tried. 

385.  Or,  take  a fpoonful  of  plantant-fted 
bruifed,  morning  and  evening,  till  it  flops: 

386.  Or,  a fmall  nutmeg  powdered  in  the  yolk 
of  an  egg  : 

387.  Or,  a dram  of  the  powdered  feed  of 
fix-zueed  in  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  broth  : ]. 

388.  Or,  ten  grains  of  ipecacuanha,  three 
mornings  fuccdfively.  It  is  likewife  excellent 
as  a fudorific. 

* 389.  Or,  boil  the  fat  of  a breaf  of  mutton 

D 2 


m 


[ 7^  ] 

in  a quart  of  water  for  an  hour.  Drink  the  hrotir 
as  foon  as  you  can  conveniently.  This  will  cure 
the  moll  inveterate  flux  : tried. 

119.  A Bloody  Flux. 

390.  Apply  a fuppofitory  of  linen  dipt  in  aqua 

vita  .* 

391.  Or,  drink  cold  water,  as  largelv  as  pofli- 
ble,  taking  nothing  elfe  till  the  flux  flops : 

392.  Or,  take  a large  apple , and  at  the  top  pick 
out  the  core,  and  fill  up  the  place  with  a piece 
of  honeycomb ; (the  honey  being  drained  out]  roaft 
the  apple  in  embers,  and  eat  it,  and  this  will  flop 
the  flux  immediately: 

393.  Or,  thirty  grains  of  powdered  root  of 
glad  win,  at  night,  twice  or  thrice  a week  : it  is 
lull  as  good  as  rhubarb  in  moll  cafes  : 

394.  Or,  decoclion  of pnmr oft  leaves,  morning 
and  evening : 

Or,  of  millet-feed: 

395.  Or,  take  an  ounce  of  plantar, e-feed,  boil 
it  in  a quart  of  fprir.g  water,  to  a pint  and  a 
■half:  drain  and  fweeten  it  with  loaf-fugar. 
Take  a quarter  of  a pint  warm,  night  and  mom- 
nun  if  need  be,  for  feven  or  eight  davs  : 

306.  Or,  grated  rhubarb,  as  much  as  lies' on  a 
fhillirig,  with  half  as  much  of  grated  nutmeg,  in  a 
glafs  of  white  wine,  at  lying  down,  every  other 
night  : tried. 

397.  Or,  take  four  drops  of  laudanum,  and 

apply 


C 77  J 

■apply  to  the  belly  a poultice  of  wormwood  and  red 
rofls  boiied  in  milk  : 

398.  Or,  apint  of  decofHonof  burnef,  with  a 
lump  ot  butter  in  it,  morning  and  evening. — It 
ufually  cures  in  three  days. 

399.  (bf”  A perfon  was  cured  in  one  day,  by 
feeding  on  rice  milk , and  fitting  a quarter  of  an 
hour  in  a fliallow  tub , having  in  it  warm  water 
three  Inches  deep. 

120.  To  prevent  ( or  flop  a beginning)  Gangrene . 

400.  Foment  continuallv  with  vinegar , in 
which  drofls  of  iron  (either /parks  or  clinkers)  has 
been  boiled. 

121;  The  Gout  in  the  Stomach. 

401.  “ Diffolve  two  drams  of  Venice  treacle 
in  a glafs  of  mountain.  After  drinking  it,  go  to 
bed  you  will  be  eafier  in  two  hours,  and  well  in 
fixteen.”  Dr.  Dover. 

402.  Or,  boil  a pugil  of  tanfley  in  a quarter  of 
a pint  of  mountain.  Drink  it  in  bed,  I believe 
this  never  fails. 

403.  I have  known  the  gout  driven  from  the 
ftomach  into  the  feet  in  half  a minute,  (and  that 
over  and  over)  by  drinking  a large  draught  of 
cold  water. 

404.  To  prevent  its  return,  diffolve  half  an 
ounce  of  gum  guaiacum,  in  two  ounces  of flal 

D 3 volatile. 


[ 78  ] 


volatile.  Take  a tea-fpoonful  of  this  every  morn- 
ing in  a glafs  of  fpring  water. 

This  helps  any  (harp  pain  in  the  flomach. 

Dr.  Boerhaave. 

122.  Tke  Gout  in  the  Foot  or  Hand » 

40^.  Apply  a raw,  lean  becf-Jiake.  Change  it 
once  in  twelve  hoars,  till  cured. 

123.  The  gout  in  any  limb.  § 

406.  Rub  the  part  with  warm  treacle,  and  then 
bind  on  a flannel  fmeared  therewith.  Repeat 
this,  if  need  be  once  in  twelve  hours. 

fjcT  This  has  cured  an  inveterate  gout  in  thirty 
fix  hours. 

407.  Or,  drink  a pint  ofafirong  infufionof 
elderbuds,  drv  or  green,  morning  and  evening. 
— This  has  cured  inveterate  gouts. 

408.  Or,  dry  fage  in  the  fun  for  a day.  Apply 
this,  and  in  one  night  it  will  eafe  the  pain. 

409.  Or,  apply  bruifed  nettles. 

* 410.  Or,  at  fix  in  the  evening,  undrefs  and 
wrap  yourfelf  up  in  blankets. — Then  put  your 
legs  up  to  the  knees  in  water,  as  hot  as  you  can 
bear  it.  As  it  cools,  let  hot  water  be  poured  in 

fo 

§ Regard  not  them  who  fay>  The  gout  ought  not  to  be  cured. 
They  mean,  It  cannot.  I know  it  cannot  by  their  ? igular  f rep ■ : fi- 
lms. But  I have  known  it  cured  in  many  cafes,  without  any  111 
effefts  following. 


[ 79  3 

fo  as  to  keep  you  in  a ftrong  fweat  till  ten.  Then 
go  into  a bed  well  warmed,  and  fweat  ’till  morn- 
ings— I have  know  this  cure  an  inveterate  gout, 
in  a perfon  above  fixtv,  who  lived  eleven  years 
after. 

The  very  matter  of  the  gout  is  furelv  deRroyed 
by  a Ready  ufe  of  Mynjicht's  elixir  oj  vitriol. 

124,  The  Gravel. 

4 11.  Eat  largely  of  fpinach  : 

412.  Or,  drink  largely  of  warm  water,  fweet- 
ened  with  honey  • 

413.  Or,  of  peach-leave  tea  : 

414.  Otytof  peUitory  of  the  wall  tea,  fo  fweet- 
ned  : 

415.  Or,  of  decoflion  of  the  u’nfpotted  arf- 
fmart.  : 

416.  Or,  infufean  ounce  of  wild  par  [ley  feeds 
in  a pint  of  white  wine  lor  twelve  days.  Drink 
a glafs  of  it  falling,  three  months.  To  .prevent 
its  retut  n,  breakfaft  for  three  months  on  agrimony 
tea.  It  entirely  cured  me  twenty  years  ago,  nor 
have  I had  the  leaR  fymptom  of  it  fince. 

123.  The  Green  Suknef. 

417.  Take  an  ounce,  ol  /juicl-flver , every 
morning. 

418.  Or,  a cup  of  decoflion  of  lignum  g uaia- 
cum . 

D4 


419.  Or, 


[ 8°  ] 


419.0,  grind  together  into  a fine  powder, 
three  ounces  of  the  fined  feel-flings,  and  two 
ounces  of  red  fugar  candy.  Take  from  a fcruple 
to  half  a dram  every  morning  ? /. — (See  Dr. 

Tiffet.) 

126.  To  kill  Animalcula  that  caufe  the  Gums  ta 
ivajle  away  Jrom  the  Teeth. 

320  Gargle  thrice  a day  with fait  and  xvater. 

12 7.  The  Head-ach. 

421.  Rub  the  head  for  a quarter  of  an  hour. 
Tried  : 

422.  Or,  be  eleElrified : 

423.  Or,  pour  upon  the  palm  of  the  hand  a 
little  brandy , with  fome  zed  of  lemon , and  hold 
it  to  the  forehead  : 

424.  Or  if  you  have  catched  cold,  boila  hand- 
ful of  rofemary  in  a quart  of  water.  Put  this  in 
a mug,  and  hold  your  head  (covered  with  a nap- 
kin) over  the  fleam,  as  hot  as  you  can  bear. — 
Repeat  this  till  the  pain  ceafes  : Tried  : 

425.  Or,  fnuflf  up  the  nofe  juice  of  ground- 
ivy  : 

426.  Or,  alittle  juice  of  horfe-radifi  : 

427.  Or,  drink  half  a pint  of  flrong  decofticn 
of  groan  d-ivy  morning  and  evening. 


129.  A 


[ 8!  ] 

128.  A Chronical  Head-Ach. 

428.  Keep  your  feet  in  zvarfn  water,  a quar- 
ter of  an  hour  before  you  go  to  bed  ; for  two  or 
three  weeks  : tried. 

429.  Or,  wear  tender  hemlock-leaves,  under 
the  feet,  changing  them  daily. 

430.  Or,  order  a tea-kettle  of  cold  water  to  be 
poured  on  your  head  every  morning  in  a {lender 
dream : 

431.  Or,  take  a tea-cup  full  of  carduus  tea, 
without  fugar,  fading,  for  fix  or  feven  mornings  ; 
tried. 


129.  Head-ach  from  Heat . 

432.  Apply  to  the  forehead,  cloths  dipt  in 
cold  water  for  an  hour  : tried. 

433.  Or,  beat  white  poppy-feed  to  powder; 
mix  this  with  yolks  of  eggs,  and  apply  it  to  the 
temples  and  forehead  : 

434.  Or,  dry  and  powder  primrcfe-leaves. 
Take  a pinch  of  this  twice  or  thrice,  a day. 

130.  A Nervous  Head-ach. 

43.5.  Dry  and  powder  an  ounce  of  marjarom, 
and  half  an  ounce  of  fjtrvy.  fpraJs  ; mix 

them,  and  take  them  as  fluff,  keeping  the  ears 
and  throat  warm.  This  is  of  great  Life  even  in. 


neap.- 


[ 82  3 


a cancer  • but  it  will  fuffice  to  take  a {mail  pinch* 
every  other  night,  lying  down  in  bed. 

131.  An  Hemicrania.  ^ 

436.  U [a  cold  bathing  : 

437.  Or,  apply  to  that  part  of  the  head  fhav- 
ed,  a plaifter  that  will  hick,  with  a hole  cut  in 
the  middle  of  it,  as  big  as  an  half-penny  : place 
over  that  hole  leaves  of  ranunculus , bruifed  and 
very  moift.  It  is  a gentle  bliiler. 

438.  Or,  {huff  up  fmoke  of  amber,  for  half  an 
hour. 


132.  Stoppage  in  the  head. 

439.  Snuff  up  juice  of  primroje,  keeping  the 
head  warm. 

133.  The  Heart-Burning,  t 

440.  Drink  a pint  of  cold  water  ; 

441.  Or,  drink  {lowly  of  deco&ion  of  camo- 
mileflowers  ; 

442.  Or,  chew  five  or  fix  pepper-corns  a lit- 
, tie  ; then  fwallow  them  : 

443.  Or,  chew  fennel  or  parflty , and  fwallow 
your  fpittle  : 

444.  Sometimes  a vomit  is  needful. 

445.  In 

§ This  is  an  Htad-ach  which  aflefis  but  one  fide  of  the  head. 

1 A tharp  gnawing  pain  in  the  orifice  of  the  ftomach. 


[ 83  ] 


" 443.  In  the  fit,  take  a fcruple.of fall  of  worm- 

wood, in  a fpoonful  of  lemon-juice, 

446.  Or,  a tea-fpoonful  of  crab's  eyes,  ground 
to  an  impalpable  powder. 

134.  The  Hiccup. 

447.  Swallow  a mouthful  of  water,  flopping 
the  mouth  and  ears  : tried. 

448.  Or,  take  any  thing  that  makes  you 
fneeze : 

449.  Or,  a little  candied  ginger  : 

450.  Or,  three  drops  of  oil  oj  cinnamon,  on  a 
lump  of fug  a r.  T ried. 

135.  Hoarfenefs. 

431.  Rub  the  foies  of  the  feet  before  the  fire, 
u ith  garlic  and  lard  well  beaten  together,  over 
night.  The  hoarfenefs  will  be  gone  the  next 
day. 

452.  Or,  take  a pint  of  cold  water,  lying 
down. 

453.  Or,  inftead  of  flipper,.  eat  an  apple,  and 
drink  half  a pint  of  water  : 

434.  Or,  fwaiiow  [lowly  the  juice  of  radifhes  :~ 

4 35.  Or,  take  a fpoonfi.il  of  /age-juice  morn- 
ing and  evening  : 

436.  Or,  half,  a pint  of  mufard  whey,  lying 
down  : 

* 437.  Or,  a tqa-fpoonful  o l.eonferue  of  rcfs% 
every  night  : Tried. 

If  6. 


448..  Or* 


C 84  3 


458.  Or,  boil  a large  handful  of  bran,  and  a 
a few  raifins  in  a quart  of  water.  Strain  and 
fweeten  it  with fugar-candy,  and  ufe  it  for  com- 
mon drink  : 

* 459.  Or,  dry  nettle-roots  in  an  oven.  Then 
powder  them  finely,  and  mix  with  an  equal 
quanity  of  treacle.  Take  a tea-fpoonful  of  this 
twice  a day. 

136.  Hunger  (to  prevent.) 

460.  Chew  liquorifh : 

461.  Or,  roll  a piece  of  album  in  your  mouth. 
Some  have  been  kept  alive  hereby  fourteen  davs. 

137.  Hypochondriac  and  Hyjlenc  Disorders. 

462.  Ufe  cold  bathing: 

463.  Or,  take  an  ounce  of  quick-Jilver  every 
morning. 

138.  The  Jaundice. 

464.  Wear  leaves  of  celandine  upon  and  un- 
der the  feet : 

* 463.  Or,  take  a fmall  pill  of  Ca/lile  foap  every 
morning  for  eight  or  ten  davs  : tried. 

iD  O s 

* 466.  Or,  beat  the  while  of  an  egg  thin  : take 
it  morning  and  evening  in  a glafs  of  water : I. 

467.  Or,  half  a pint  of  ftrong  decodlion  of 
nettles : 

468.  Or, 


[ 8*5  j 

468.  Or,  boil  a large  burdock-root  in  two  quarts 
of  water  to  three  pints.  Drink  a tea- cup  of  this 
every  morning. 

139.  The  Jaundice  in  Children. 

469.  Take  half  an  ounce  of  fine  rhubarb , pow- 
dered. Mix  with  it  thoroughly,  by  long  beat- 
ing, two  handfuls  of  good  well-cleanfed  currants . 
Of  this  give  a tea-fpoonful  every  morning. 

140.  The  [Iliac  Pajfion.  t 

470.  Apply  warm  flannels  foaked  in  fpirits  of 
wine : 

471.  Or,  hold  a live  puppy  condantly  on  the 
belly.  (Dr.  Sydenham.) 

472.  Or,  immerge  up  to  the  bread  in  a warm 
bath: 

473.  Or,  take  adecoftion  of  the  feed  of  dill  in 
oil  and  water,  and  then  a bit  of  bread  dipt  in  water  t 

474.  Or,  ounce  by  ounce,  a pound,  or  apound 
and  a half  of  quickfilver. — (See  Dr.  TiJfot.J 

141.  An  Lnpojhirie. 

475.  Put  the  white  of  two  leeks  in  a wet  cloth'* 
and  fo  road  them  in  afhes,  but  not  too  much. 
Stamp  them  in  a mortar  with  a little  hogs-greafe _ 
Spread  it  thick,  plaider-wife,  and  apply,  chang- 
ing 

4 In  this  violent  kind  of  cholic  the  excrements  are  thrown  np 
by  the  mouth  in  vomiting. 


r 86  ] 


irrg  it  every  hour,  till  all  the  matter  be  come  out, 
which  it  will  be  in  three  times.  I. 

142-.  Pain  in  the  Joints. 

476.  Drink  decociion  of  kerb  robert,  and  ap- 
ply it  as  a poultice. 

143.  The  Itch,  t 

4 77.  Walh  the  parts  affe£ied  with Jlron*  rum  : 
tried. 

478.  Or,  with  ftrong  decoftion  of  lock  root, 
for  nineor  ten  days  : 

479.  Or,  of  h)JJop , for  four  or  five  days  r 

480.  Or,  with  water  in  which  quick-filyer  has 
been  boild  : 

481.  Or,  anoint  them  with  black- [cap  .*■ 

* 482.  Or,  fieep  a Ihirt  half  ail  hour  in  a 
quart  of  water,  mixed  with  halt  an  ounce  of  pow- 
der’d brimflone.  Dry  it  flowlv,  and  wear  it  five  or 
(Lx  days.  Sometimes  it  needs  repeating  : Tried. 

483.  Or,  mix  powder  of  white  hellebore  with, 
cream  for  three  days.  Anoint  the  joints  three 
mornings  and  evenings. — It feldovu  fails  : 

484.  Or,  mix  a little  fme bay-fall,  and  asmuch 
jlau r oj  bri.njionCy  with  a little  J'weet  oil.  Rub 

if 

+ This  diltemper  is  nothing  hut  a kind  of  very  fmall  lice, 
which  burrow  under  the  Ikin  Therefore  inward  medicines  are. 
abfolutely  needlefs. — J 4 it  pollibie  any  phyfician  fhouid  be  igno- 
rant of  this  ? 


[ s7  ] 

it  well  in  the  palms  o f the  hands,  and  dry  it  in. 
It  commonly  cures  in  three  days. 

485.  Or,  beat  together  the  juice  of  two  or 
three  Unions,  v;kh  the  fame  quantity  on  oil  of 
rofes.  Anoint  the  parts  affe&ed.  It  cures  in  two 
or  three  times  ufing  : 

486.  Or,  mix  an  ounce  of  ginger  finely  pow- 
dered with  a quarter  of  a pound  of  jrtjh  butler, 
ufe  it  morning  and  evening.— It  cures  in  four  or 
five  days. 

344.  The  King's  Em!,  y 

487.  Take  as  much  cream  of  tartar  as  lies  on 
a fix-pence,  every  morning  anc]  evening  : 

488.  Or,  drink  for  fix  weeks  half  a pint  of  a 
iirong  decoction  of  devil  s -kit  : 1 ried. 

489.  Or,  of  dead  nettles  r 

490.  Or,  of  colds  foot  : mean  time  apply  the 
herb  beaten  up  with  powdered  linfeed  and  hogs- 
lard,  to  ihe  fores  ; renewingit  twice  a day  ; 

* 491.  Or,  the  diet-drink,  in  the  article  Scor- 
butic fores.  1 have  known  this  cure  one  whofe 
bread  was  as  full  of  holes  as  an  honey-comb, 

492.  Or,  fet  a quart  of  honey  by  the  fire  to 
melt.  When  it  is  cold,  ftrew  into  it  a pound 
and  half  of  quick-lime  beat  very  fine,  and  fearfed 
through  a hair  fieve.  Stir  this  about,  ’till  it  boil 
up  of  itfelf  into  a hard  lump.  Beat  this  when 

cold, 

it  commonly  appears  firfl,  by  the  thicknefs  of  the  lips;  or 
a ftubborn  humour  in  the  eyes;  then  come  hard  fwellings,  in  tfcfi 
neck  chiefly  ; then  running  fores, 


r ss  ] 

cold,  very  fine,  and  fearfe  it  as  before.  Take  of 
this  as  much  as  lies  on  a fhilling  in  a glafs  of  water 
eveiy  morning  faffing:  an  hour  before  breakfaft, 
at  four  in  the  afternoon,  and  at  going  to 
bed. 

493.  Or,  take  two  fpoonfuls  of  the  juice  of 
■water -parjmps,  with  two  fpoonfuls  of  milk,  every 
morning  faffing,  for  the  fix  fummer  months. 
Two  hours  after,  breakfaft  on  water  gruel  with  a 
little  bread. 

Qgt  This  cures  the  fcnrvy  in  three  months. 

145.  Lamcnefs , 

From  a fixt  Contraffion  of  the  Parts, 

494.  Beat  the  \oke  of  a new-laid  egg  very 
thin,  and  by  a fpoonful  at  a time,  add  and  beat 
up  with  it  three  ounces  of  water.  Rub  this 
gently  into  the  parts  for  a few  minutes,  three  or 
four  times  a day. 

146.  The  Legs  inflamed. 

495.  Apply  fuller  s earth  fpread  on  browa 
paper:  itfeldom  fails. 

406.  Or,  bruifed  turnips  : 

407.  Or,  boiled  turnips  mixed  with  mutton - 
fuet: 

498.  Or,  rub  them  with  warm  juice  of  plan- 

iaiK. 

148.  Legs 


[ §9  ] 


1 47-  Legs  fore,  and  running. 

499.  Wafh  them  in  brandy,  and  apply-  elder  - 
leaves,  changing  them  twice  a day.  This  will 
dry  up  all  the  lores,  though  the  leg  were  like  art 
honeycomb : tried. 

500.  Or,  poultice  them  with  rotten  apples : 
tried. 

148.  The  Leprofy.  r 

501.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  : 

502.  Or,  apply  nettles  bruifed  in  a mortar: 

503.  Or,  wafh  in  the  fea,  often  and  long  : 

,504.  Or,  wafh  the  parts  -with  the  juice  of 

calami  nt: 

305.  Or,  mix  w’ell  an  ounce  of  pomatum,  a 
dram  of  powrdered  brimjlone,  and  half  an  ounce 
of fal prunella  ; and  anoint  the  parts  fo  long  as 
there  is  need : 

* 30  6.  Or,  add  a pint  of  juice  of  houfeleel^  and 
half  a pint  of  verjuice,  to  a pint  and  a half  of 
pojjet-drinh .'  Drink  this  in  twenty-four  hours  ; 
it  cures  alfo  the  q unify,  and  all  forts  of  w’hite 
dwellings  on  the  joints : 

507.  Or,  drink  half  a pint  of  cellery-whey, 
morning  and  evening.  This  has  cured  in  a moll 
defperate  cafe : 

508.  Or, 

+ In  this  clifeafe,  the  flc.in  in  many  parts  is  covered  with 
rough,  whitifh  fcaly  puftules  ; and  if  thefe  are  tubed  off,  with  a 
kind  of  fc  aly  feurf. 


f 9°  ] 

508.  Or,  drink  for  a month,  a decoftion  of 
elm  bark,  morning  and  evening: 

go  9.  Or,  of  bur  dock-leaves  : tried. 

149.  The  Lethargy. 

510.  Snuff  flrong  vinegar  up  the  nofe: 

511.  Or,  powder  of  white  hellebore : 

512.  Or,  take  half  a pint  of  decoftion  of 
Javory,  morning  and  evening: 

g lSL*  Or,  of  iniufioti  ol  water-cryjes. 

1,50.  Lice  f: to  kill.) 

514.  Sprinkle  Spanifh  fnujf  over  the  head  : 

gig.  Or,  wafh  it  with  a decoction  of  ama- 
1 anlh. 

15  1.  For  one  [ ennrgl > killed  with  Lightning , 
a Damp,  or  Suffocated. 

g 16.  Plunge  him  immediately  into  cold  water'. 

giy.  Or,  blow  tiro  ugly  with  bellows  down  his 
throat.  This  may  recover  a perfon  Seemingly 
drowned.  It  is  flill  better,  if  a flrong  man 
blows  into  his  mouth. 

152.  Lues  Venerea*. 

518.  Take  an  ounce  of  quickf'ver  every 
morning,  and  a fpoonful  ol  aqua Jidphurata  in  a 

glafs 


L 9*  ] 


glafs  of  water  at  five  in  the  afternoon.  I have 
known  a per.fon  cured  by  this,  when  fuppofed 
to  be  at  the  point  of  death,  who  had  been 
inftftej  by  a foul  nurfe,  before  (he  was  a year 
old. — 

( I infect  this  for  the  fake  of  fuch  innocent 
fufferers. 


1J3.  Lunacy , 

519.  Give  deco&ion  of  agrimony  four  times  a 
day  : 

c2o.  Or.  rub  the  head  feveral  times  a day 
with  vinegar  in  which  ground-ivy  Laves  have 
been  infufed : 

£2i.  Or,  boil  juice  of  giound-ivy  with  fiweet 
vil  and  white  wine  into  311  ointment.  Shave  the 
head,  anoint  it  therewith,  and  chafe  it  in  warm, 
every  other  day  ior  three  weeks.  Bruife  alfo 
the  leaves  and  bind  them  on  the  head,  ani 
give  three  fpoonfuls  of  the  juice  warm  every 
morning. 

frdr  '1  his  generally  cures  melancholy. 

522.  Or,  be  electrified  r tried. 

lgg.  Raging  Madnejs.  t 

523.  Apply  to  the  head  cloths  dipt  in  cold 
water : 

524.  Or, 

+ It  is  a fure  rule,  that  all  madmen  are  cowards,  and  may 

be  compered  by  binding  only,  without  beating. Bs«- 

Mcad,  , 


[ 92  ] 

524.  Or,  fet  the  patient  with  his  head  under  a 
great  water -fall,  as  long  as  his  (trength  will 
bear : or  pour  water  on  his  head  out  of  a tea- 
kettle : 

525.  Oi,  let  him  eat  nothing  but  apples  for  a 
month  : 

526.  Or,  nothing  but  bread  and  milk  : tried. 

i55‘  The  Bite  of  a mad  Dog. 

527.  Plunge  into  cold  water  daily  for  twenty 
days,  and  keep  as  long  under  it  as  poflible. 
This  has  cured,  even  after  the  hydrophobia  was 
begun,  i 

528.  Or,  mix  allies  of  trefoil  with  hog's  Iardy 
and  anoint  the  part  as  foon  as  poflible.  Repeat 
twice  or  thrice  at  fix  hours  diltance. — This 
has  cured  manv,  and  particularly,  a dog  bit  on 
the  tiofe  by  a mad  dot*. 

J O 

529.  Or,  as  foon  as  bitten,  moifien  a fpoonful 
or  two  of  fait  with  water  ; but  do  not  make  it 
quite  fluid.  Rub  fome  ol  it  into  the  wound, 
and  repeat  this  three  or  four  times  a day  for 
ten  days,  binding  hkewife  part  of  it  on  the 
wound. 

* 530.  Or,  mix  a pound  of  fait  with  a quart  of 
water.  Squeeze,  bathe  and  wafli  the  wound 

with 

b If  this  is  really  a nervous  ditordcr,  what  wonder,  if  it 
fhould  be  cured  by  cold  balking  ? Yet  Dr.  Nugent  doubts,  if  this 
v ever  cured  any  one  ? 


[ 93  ] 

with  this  for  an  hour.  Then  bind  fome  fait  upon 
it  for  twelve  hours. 

N.  B.  The  author  of  this  receipt  was  bit  fix 
times  by  mad  dogs,  and  always  cured  himfell  by 
this  means. 

531.  Galen  favs,  None  ever  failed  of  a cure 
who  took  two  fpoonfuls  of  ajhes  of  a azv-jjh 
daily  for  forty  days. 

532.  Or, mix  powdered  liverwort,  four  drams; 
black  pepper  two  drams.  Divide  this  into  four 
parts,  and  take  one  in  warm  milk  for  four  morn- 
ings falling.  Dr.  Mead  affirms  he  never  knew 
this  fail  : but  it  has  fometimes  failed. 

533.  Or,  take  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  the 
juice  of  ribwort,  morning  and  evening,  as  foon 
as  poffible  after  the  bite.  Repeat  this  for  two  dr 
three  changes  of  the  moon.  It  has  not  been 
known  to  fail. 

156.  The  MeaJlcsA 

534.  Drink  only  thin  water-gruel,  or  milk  and 
water.  The  more  the  better;  or  toajl  and 
water. 

535.  If  the  cough  be  very  troublefome,  take 
frequently  a fpoonlul  ol  barley-water  fweetened 
-with  oil  of  Jweet  almonds , newly  drawn,  mixed 
with  fyrup  of  maiden  hair. 

536.  After  the  mealies,  for  fome  weeks,  take 

care 

+ This  diftemper  is  always  preceded  by  a violent  cough, 
often  fourteen  days  before  the  red  fpots  come  out. 


[ 94  ] 


Care  of  catching  cold,  life  light  diet,  and  drink 
barley  water,  inflead  of  malt  drink. 

157.  Menjes  objlr lifted. 

I % 

537.  Be  eleftrijud : tried. 

538.  Or,  take  half  a pint  of  ftrong  decoction  of 
penny-royal,  every  night  at  going  to  bed  : 

539.  Or,  three  or  four  fpoonfuls  of  nettle-juice 
every  morning.  A dram  of  the  feed  powdered 
has  the  fame  effect  : 

540.  Or,  boil  five  large  heads  of  kemp,  in  a 
pint  of  water  to  half.  Strain  it  and  drink  it  at 
going  to  bed,  two  or  three  nights.  It  feldorn 
fails : — Tried. 

5-41.  Or,  take  from  eight  to  twelves  grains  of 
calomel,  in  a pill,  for  two  or  three  nights,  taking 
care  not  to  catch  cold.  It  vomits  and  purges  : 
tried. 

542.  Or,  pour  twelve  ounces  of  rectified 
Spirits  of  wine  on  four  ounces  of  roots  olblack 
hellebore,  and  let  it  Hand  in  a warm  place  twenty- 
four  hours.  Pour  it  off,  and  take  from  thirty  to 
forty  drops  in  anv  liquid,  faffing  .; 

It  is  good  likewife  in  the  green  ficknefs;  in 
all  hypochondriacal  cafes,  and  in  obllinate  mad- 
nefs. 

543.  Or,  burn  a littl efulphur  cf  antimony  on 
achafing-difh  of  coals,  and  receive  the  fnroke  by 
a funnel.  In  a few  minutes  it  will  take  effect. 

(dr  Let 


[ 95  ] 

(hT  Let  any  bf'thefe  medicines  be  ufed  at  the  re- 
gular  times  as  near  as  can  be  judged.  (See  Dr. 
Tijfu.) 

358.  Menfts  Nimii , 

..544.  Drink  nothing  but  cold  water , with  a 
fpoonful  of  fine  flour  ftirred  in  it.  At  that  time 
drink  a glafs  of  the  coldejl  water  vou  can  get,  and 
applv  a thick  cloth  dipt  in  cold  water  : 

545.  Or,  put  the  feet  into  cold  water: 

546.  Or,  apply  a fponge  dipt  in  red  wine 
and  vinegar  : 

54 7.  Or,  bleed  in  the  arm.  Stop  the  orifice 
often  with  the  finger,  and  then  let  it  bleed 
again  : 

548.  Or,  boil  four  or  five  leaves  of  the  red 
holy-oak  in  a pint  of  milk,  withafmall  quantity 
ef.fugar.  Drink  this  in  the  morning;  if  the 
perfon  can  afford  it,  fire  mav  add  a tea- fpoonful 
of  balm  of  gUead. — This  does  not  often  fail  : 

£49.  Or,  niter  a fin  a 11  rubarb  purge  boil  the 
peel  of  feven  Seville  oranges  in  three  pints  of 
fpring  water  to  a quart.  Take  ten  fpoonfuls 
fweetned  with  white  fugar,  four  times  a day. 

5,50.  Or,  ufe  daily,  decoftion,  fyrup,  or  pow- 
der ol  hor/e-tail,  nettles , or  plantane  : 

* 551.  Or,  reduce  to  a fine  powder,  half  an 
ounce  of  al/um,  with  a quarter  ol  an  ounce  of 
dragon's  blood.  In  a violent  cafe,  take  a quar- 
ter of  a dram  every  half  hour.  It  fcarce  ever 

fails 


C 96  ] 

fails  to  flop  the  flux,  before  half  an  ounce  is 
taken. 

This  alfo  frequently  cures  the  whites. 

552.  Or,  take  about  fix  in  the  evening,  five 
or  fix  ounces  of  the  juice  of  nettles,  and  apply 

■below  the  navel,  a poultice  of  the  fame  juice  and 
wheat-flour.  If  need  he,  repeat  both  at  mid- 
night. . 

159.  To  refolve  coagulated  milk . 

553.  Cover  the  woman  with  a table-cloth,  and 
hold  a pan  of  hot  water  juft  under  her  bread  ; 
ftioke  it  three  or  four  minutes.  Do  this  twice 
a -day,  till  it  is  cured. 

160.  To  increaje  Milk. 

354.  Drink  a pint  of  water,  going  tobedt 
55q.  Or,  drink  largely  of  pottage  made  with 
lentil es  : 

/ 

161.  To  make  Milk  agree  with  the  Stomach. 

556.  If  it  lie  heavy,  put  a little  fait  in  it  ; if  it 
curdle,  Jugar.  For  bilious  perfons,  mix.  it  with 
water. 


162.  Nervous 


[ 97  ] 


162.  Nervous  Disorders* 


557.  Are  of  two  kinds  : i.Thofe  which  proceed 
from  the  nerves  being  compreffed  by  the  fwelling 
of  the  mufcular  flefh  : or,  2.  When  the  nerves 
themfelves  are  difordered.  In  the  former  cafe, 
temperance  and  abflemioufnefs  will  generally 
cure  : in  the  latter,  when  the  nerves  perform 
their  office  too  languidly,  a good  air  is  the  firfl 
requifite.  The  patient  alfofhould  rife  early,  and 
as  foon  as  the  dew  is  off  the  ground  walk  : let  his 
breakfaft  be  mother  of  thyme  tea,  gathered  in 
June,  ufing  half  as  much  as  we  do  of  common 
tea.  It  fhould  be  drank  with  the  fineft  fucrar : 

O 

and  cream  may  be  added  if  he  pleale  : coffee 
mull  be  avoided.  When  the  nerves  are  too  fen- 
fible,  let  the  perfon  breathe  a proper  air.  Let 
him  eat  veal,  chickens,  or  mutton.  Vegetables 
fhould  be  eat  fparingly  ; the  moll  innocent  is 
the  French  bean  whillt  young,  and  the  bed  root, 
the  turnip.  Wine  fhould  be  avoided  carefully  : fo 
fhould  all  fauces.  Sometimes  he  may  breakfaft 
upon  a quarter  of  an  ounce  of  the  powder  of  va- 
lerian-root infufed  in  hot  water,  to  which  he 
may  add  cream  and  fugar.  Tea  is  not  proper. 
When  the  perfon  finds  an  uncommon  oppreftion, 
let  him  take  a large  fpoonful  of  the  tinclure  of 
valerian-root. 

(£T  This  tinclure  fhould  be  made  thus.  Cut  to 
pieces  fix  ounces  of  wild  valerian-root  gathered  in  • 

Vol.  XXV.  E June, 


r 98  ] 

June,  and  frefli  dried . Bruife  it  by  a few  frokes 
in  a mortar , that  the  pieces  may  be  fplit , but  it 
Jhould  not  be  beat  into  powder : put  this  into  a 
quart  of  Jlrong  white  wine  ; cork  the  bottle  and  let 
it  J land  three  weeks,  faking  it  every  day  ; then  prefs 
it  out  and fltre  the  tindure  through  paper. 


558.  Take  alfo  as  much  as  will  lie  on  a (hil- 
ling of  the  powder  of  mfletoe,  twice  a day,  when 
the  domach  is  mod  empty,  fading  two  hours 
after  it  ; then  once  a day,  and  afterwards  every 
other,  or  every  third  day,  till  there  is  no  more 
need  of  medicines. 

( 'ft"  Let  this  plant  be  gathered  in  May,  and  the 
leaves  and  bark  dried  carefully  in  the free  air,  with- 
out fun,  till  they  are  brittle.  Let  them  then  be  re- 
duced to  a fine  powder , and  kept  in  that  form. 

Dr.  Hill. 

N.B.  The  true,  wild  valerian  lias  no  bad 
fmell.  If  it  has,  cats  have  urined  upon  it, 
which  they  will  do,  if  they  can  come  at  it. 

ge q.  But  1 am  firmly  perfuaded,  there  is  no 
remedy  in  nature,  for  nervou£  diforders  of  every 
kind,  comparable  to  the  proper  and  condant  ufe 
of  the  eleclrical  machine. 


163.  Nettie  Rajh.  J 
560.  Rub  the  parts  drongly  with 
Internals  profit  nothing. 


parfiev- 
164.  Old 


J A flight  fever  (which  fometimes  lafts  for  weeks  or  months) 
attended  with  itching  or  finarting,  and  au  eruption  juft  like  that 
which  is  occasioned  by  nettles. 


[ 99  ] 

164.  Old  Age. 

,561.  Take  tar-water  morning  and  evening  : 
Tried. 

562.  Or,  deco&ion  of  nettles',  either  of  thefe 
will  probably  renew  the  ftrength  for  forne 
years. 

563.  Or,  be  electrified  daily.  But  remember  ! 
The  only  radical  cure  is  wrought  by  death. 

163.  An  old Jlubhorn  Pain  in  the  Back . 

564.  Steep  root  of  water  -fern  in  water,  till  the 
water  become  thick  and  clammy.  Then  rub  the 
parts  therewith  morning  and  evening. 

^65.  Or,  drink  largely  of  tea  made  of  black 
currant  leaves. 

166.  The  Pal/)1,  t 

366.  Be  electrified  daily  for  three  months,  from 
the  place  where  the  nerves  fpring,  which  are 
brought  to  the  paralytic  part. — If  the  parts  be- 
neath the  head  are  affefted,  the  fault  is  in  the  fpi- 
nal  marrow.  If  half  the  body,  half  the  marrow 
is  touched. 

(S^tT  A palfy  may  be  cured  in  fpring  or  fum- 
nter,  but  rarely  in  winter. 

367.  Or,  ule  the  cold  bath,  if  you  are  under 
fifty,  rubbing  and  fweating  after  it : 

E 2 568.  Or, 

+ A palfy  is  the  lots  of  motion  or  feeling,  or  both,  in  any  parti- 
cular part  of  the  body. 


[ too  ] 


568.  Or,  fhred  onions,  and  bake  them  gently 
in  an  earthen  pot,  till  they  are  foft;  fpread  a 
thick  plainer  of  this,  and  apply  it  to  the  be- 
numbed part,  all  over  the  fide  if  need  be.  I 
have  known  this  cure  a perfon  of  feventy-five 
years  old. 

,569.  Or,  take  tar-water , morning  and  even- 
ing. 

570.  Or,  boil  white  and  red  fage,  a handful  of 
each  in  a quart  of  white  wine.  Strain  and  bottle 
it.  Take  a fmall  glafs  morning  and  evening. — 
£dT  This  helps  all  nervous  diforders. 

57 1.  Or,  apply  to  the  parts,  boiled  fage-leaves 
hot:  and  drink  decottion  of  fage,  morning  and 
evening. 

572.  Or,  take  a tea-fpoonful  of  powdered  fage 
lying  down  in  bed. 

167.  P alfy  of  the  Hanes . 

57 3-  Wafh  them  often  in  deco&ion  of fage  as 
hot  as  you  can  bear  : 

<5  74*  Or,  boil  a handful  of  elder- leaves,  or  two 
or  three  fpoonfuls  of  mujlardfecd  in  a quart 
of  water.  Wafh  as  often  in  this  and  as  hot  as 
may  be. 

168.  Pal/y  of  the  Mouth. 

575.  After  purging  well,  chew  mujlard feted 
often : 


576.  Or, 


[ 1°*  ] 

576.  Or,  liold  in  your  mouth,  half  an  ounce 

offpirits  of  lavender  ; 

£77.  Or,  gargle  with  juice  of  V'ood-fage. 

169.  Palfy  from  working  with  white  Leador 

Yerdigreafe. 

578.  Uf e warm  baths  and  a milk  diet. 

170.  The  Palpitation, or  Beating  of  the  Heart • 

579.  Drink  a pint  oil  cold  water  : 

580.  Or,  apply  outwardly  a rag  dipt  in  vi- 
negar : 

581.  Or,  be  eleftrifed : tried. 

582.  Or,  take  a decoftion  of  mother-wort  every 

night. 

171.  The  Piles  ( to  prevent.) 

583.  Wafh  the  parts  often  with  cold  water  : 

172.  The  Piles  (to  cure.) 

* 584.  Apply  warm  treacle  : 

585.  Or,  a tobacco  leaf  lleeped  in  water  twenty- 
four  hours  : 

586.  Or,  a poultice  of  boiled  brook-lime.  It 
feldom  fails : 

587.  Or,  a bruifed  onion  fkined  ; or  roafted  in 
afhes.  It  perfeflly  cures  the  drv  piles : 

e3  588. 

4 m 


[ 102  ] 


* 588.  Or,  varnijh.  It  perfectly  cures  both 
the  blind  and  bleeding  piles  : tried. 

589.  Or,  fumigate  wine  with  vinegar , wherein 
red  hot  Jlints  have  been  quenched.  This  foftens 
even  fcurrhous  tumours. 

173.  The  inward  Piles. 

590.  Drink  largely  of  treacle  and  water: 

* 391.  Or,  fwallow  a pill  of  pitch  fading.  One 
pill  ufually  cures  the  bleeding  piles  : 

592.  Or,  drink  a fpoonful  of  juice  of  yarrow , 
or  of  leeks , three  or  four  mornings  : tried. 

593.  Or,  take  from  one  to  two  drams  of  flour 
of  brimjlone , twice  a day,  in  a cup  of  water- 
gruel  : 

394.  Or,  as  much  fulphur  vivum  as  lies  on 
a (hilling:  it  fhould  open  the  body  a little  : /. 

595.  If  they  be  outward,  apply  with  a feather 
juniper  oil  every  fourth  hour  : if  inward,  fyringe 
with  a quarter  of  a fpoonful  of  it.  The  pain  will 
ceafe  in  lefs  than  two  hours,  and  the  piles  will 
wither  away. 

174.  Violent  Bleeding  Piles. 

596.  Lightly  boil  juice  of  nettles,  with  a little 
fugar : take  two  ounces.  It  feldora  needs  re- 
peating. 


175.  The 


[ 103  1 

173.  The  Plague  (to  prevent.) 

5^7.  Eat  marigold  flowers  daily,  as  a fallao, 
with  </z7and  vinegar  : 

598.  Cr,  a little  of  the  tops  of  rue,  with  bread 
and  butter,  every  morning  : 

599.  Or,  infufe  rue,  fage,  mint,  rofmary , 
wormwood,  of  each  a handful,  in  two  quarts  of  the 
{harp eft  vinegar , over  warm  embers  for  eight 
days.  Then  ftrain  it  through  a flannel,  and  add 
half  an  ounce  of  camphire , diffolved  in  three 
ounces  of  rectified  fpimts  of  zcine.  W ith  this 
wadi  the  loins,  face  and  mouth,  and  fnuff  a little 
up  the  nofe  when  you  go  abroad.  Smell  to  a 
fpunge  dipt  therein  when  you  approach  infected 
perfons  or  places. 

176.  The  Plague  {to  cure.) 

600.  Cold  water  alone,  drank  largely?  has  cured 

it : _ 

601.  Or,  an  ounce  or  two  of  the  juice  of 

marygolds  : 

602.  Or,  take  a dram  of  angelica  powdered, 
every  fix  hours.  It  is  a ftrong  fweat : 

603.  Or,  after  bleeding  fifty  or  fixty  ounces, 
drink  very  largely  of  water  fharpened  with  fpirlt 
of  vitriol  : 

604.  Or,  a draught  of  brine  as  foon  as  feized  : 
fweat  in  bed  : take  no  other  drink  for  fome 
hours. 

E4 


605.  Ufe 


[ io4  ] 

# 

605.  Ufe  lemon  juice  largely  in  every  thing. 

177.  The  Pleurify.  T 

606.  Apply  to  the  fide  onions  roafted  in  em- 
bers, mixed  with  cream  : 

607.  Or,  take  half  a dram  of foot : 

608.  Or,  a glafs  of  tar-water, warm,  every  half 
hour : 

* 609.  Or,  of  decobtion  of  nettles  ; and  apply 
the  boiled  herb  hot,  as  a poultice.  I never  knew 
it  fail. 

* 610.  Or,  a plaifier  of  flour  of  hrimjlone  and 
while  of  an  egg  : tried. — (See  Dr.  Tiffotd 

6 1 1.  In  diforders  of  this  kind,  Dr.  Huxham 
advifes,  “ Sip  almoft:  continually  thin  whey , bar. 
ley-water,  or  hyffop-tea,  lharpened  with  lemon  or 
vinegar  and  water.  If  the  fpitting  flop  fuddenly, 
take  a little  vomit.  To  appeafe  the  cough,  take 
often,  a little  at  a time,  of  roafled  apples,  yea, 
Itrawberries,  rafberries,  or  currants. 

178.  To  one  Pcifoned. 

612.  Give  one  or  two  drams  of  dif  tiled  verdi- 
greafe\  it  vomits  in  an  inflant : 

613.  Let  one  poifoned  bv  arfenic  difTolve  a 
quarter  of  an  ounce  of  fcdt  of  tartar  in  a pint  of 

water, 

+ A pkurify  is  a fevtr  attended  with  a violent  pain  in  the  fide, 
and  a pulfe  remarkably  hard. 


t i°5  ] 


water,  and  drink  every  quarter  of  an  hour  as 
much  as  he  can,  till  he  is  well. 

614.  Let  one  poifoned  by  opium,  take  thirty 
drops  of  elixir  of  vitriol  every  quarter  of  an 
hour,  till  the  drowfinefs  or  wildnefs  ceafes. 

615.  Let  one  poifoned  with  mercury [ultimate, 
diffolve  an  ounce  of  [alt  oj  wormwood  in  a gallon 
of  water,  and  drink  largely  of  it. — ftS"  This  will 
entirely  deftroy  the  force  of  the  poifon,  if  it  be 
ufed  foon. 

616.  Nothing  cures  the  African  poifon,  but  a 
decoftion  of  the  roots  of  the  Jenfitive  plant. 

1 79.  Polypus  in  the  No/e. 

1-/6.  Powder  a lump  of  allum  and  fnuffit  up 
frequently.  Then  dilTolve  powdered  allum  in 
brandy  ; dip  lint  therein,  and  apply  it  at  going 
to  bed. 


180.  A Prick  or  Cut  that fe/lers, 

618.  Apply  turpentine. 

181.  Ptyalifm.  t 

6ig.  A very  violent  and  ftubborn  diforder  of 
this  kind  was  cured  by  chewing  perpetually  a 
little  dry  bread  and  fwallowing  it  with  the 
fpittle. 

182.  An 


E 5 

i A continual  f itting. 


[ 106  ] 

182.  An  eafy  Purge. 

620.  Drink  a pint  of  warmifh  water  falling, 
walking  after  it : 

621.  Or,  infufe  from  half  a dram  to  two  drams 
of  damafk  rofe  leaves  dried,  in  half  a pint  of 
warm  water,  for  twelve  hours : 

622.  Or,  infufe  three  drams  of  Jena , and  a 
fcruple  of  Jalt  of  tartar,  in  half  a pint  of  river 
water  for  twelve  hours.  Then  llrain  and  take 
it  in  the  morning  : 

623.  Wild-ajh  or  quick-bean , is  a plant  of  the 
very  fame  nature  with  Jena,  but  of  greater  virtue. 
Its  leaves  taken  in  the  fame  quantity,  purge  full 
as  well,  and  do  not  gripe  as  fcna  does.  It  is 
therefore  far  preferable  to  that  which  is  brought 
from  Turkey  or  Italy. 

183.  A ' f longer  Purge . 

624.  Drink  half  a pint  of  llrong  deeoftion  of 
dock-root  : 

62,5.  Or,  two  drams  of  the  powdered  root  of 
Monk’s  rhubarb , with  a fcruple  of  ginger. 

184.  The  OuinJy.\ 

626.  Apply  a large  white-bread  toall,  half  an 
inch  thick,  dipt  in  brandy , to  the  crown  of  the 
head  till  it  dries : 

627.  Or, 

+ The  quinfy  is  a fever  attended  with  difficulty  of  f wallowing, 
and  often  of  breathing. 


[ 107  ] 

627.  Or,  drink  a quart  of  cold  water  lying 
down  in  bed : 

* 628.  Or,  fwallow  {lowly  white  roje-water, 
mixed  with  fyrup  of  mulberries:  tried. 

629.  Or,  juice  or  jelly  of  black  currants , or 
decoftion  of  the  leaves  or  bark. 

630.  Or,  draw  in,  as  hot  as  you  can  bear,  the 
fumes  of  red-rofe  leaves,  or  camomile  Jlowers 
boiled  in  vinegar. 

185.  A Quinfy  of  the  Breajl.  j; 

631.  Take  eight  or  ten  drops  of  laudanum 
lying  down  in  bed. 

186.  The  Rheumatifm.  + 

632.  Ufe  the  cold  bath , with  rubbing  and 
fweating : 

* 633,  Or,  rub  in  warm  treacle,  and  apply  to 
the  part  brown  paper  fmeared  therewith  : change 
it  in  twelve  hours  : tried. 

634.  Or,  drink  largely  of  lavender-cotton , or, 
elder-top  tea  r. 

635.  Or,  drink  half  a pint  (si tar-water,  morn- 
ing and.  evening: 

E 6 636.  Or, 

$ This  is  known  by  a ladder,  unaccountable  difficulty  of 
breathing,  feizing.  a perfon  in.  the  night,  or  on  any  violent, 
motion. 

+ Rheumatical  pains  are  generally  raoft  violent  aa  Icon  as  von. 
are  viarroinbed. 


[ 108  ] 

636^0^  fteep  fix  or  feven  cloves  of  garlick. 
in  half  a pint  of  white  wine.  Drink  it  king 
down.  Itfweats,  and  frequently  cures  at  once  : 

* 637.  Or,  mix  flour  oj  brimjlone  with  honey , 
equal  quantities.  Take  three  tea  fpoonfuls  at 
night,  two  in  the  morning,  and  one  afterwards 
morning  and  evening,  till  cured.  This  fucceeds 
ofteher  than  any  remedy  I have  found : 

638.  Or,  take  morning  and  evening,  as  much 
lignum guaiacum  powdered  as  lies  on  a {hilling: 

639.  Or,  as  much  flour  of Julphur,  wafhing  it 
down  with  decoftion  of  lignum  guaiacum  : 

640.  Or,  live  on  new  milk-whey  and  white- 
bread  for  fourteen  days.  This  has  cured  in  a 
defperate  cafe : 

* 641.  Or, .pound  the  green  {talks  of  Englifh 
rhubarb  in  May,  with  an  equal  quantity  of 
lumpfugar . Take  a nutmeg  of  this  three  or 
four  times  a day.  This  feldom  fails. 

187.  To  ref  ore  the  Strength  after  a Rheu- 
matifm. 

642.  Make  a ftrong  broth  of  cow-heels  and 
wafli  the  parts  with  it  warm  twice  a day.  It  has 
reftored  one  who  was  quite  a cripple,  having 
no  ftrength  left  either  in  his  leg,  thigh,  or 
loins, 

643.  Or,  drink  every  morning,  half  a pint 

of 


[ 109  J 

of  buckbane  tea,  with  a tea  fpoonful  of  fpirits  of 
karts-ktrn  : 

188.  The  Rickets  [to  prevent  or  cure.) 

644.  Wafh  the  child  every  morning  in  cold 
water. 

189.  Ring  Worms,  t 

64,5.  Apply  rotten  Apples  : 

646.  Or,  rub  them  with  the  juice  of  houfeleek  ; 

647.  Or,  apply  garlic  pounded  : 

-648.  Or,  wafh  them  with  Hungary  water  cam- 
phorated. 

190.  Running  at  the  Nofe. 

649.  Snuff  up  a tea-fpoonful  of  fpirits  of  harts- 
horn. 

191.  A Rupture. 

65 0.  Foment  with  hot  aqua  vitcc  for  two  hours : 

651.  Or,  take  agrimony , fpleen-vuort,  Solo- 
mon’s feal,  Jlrawberry-roots,  ahandful  each;  pick 
and  wafh  them  well;  flarnp  and  boil  them  two 
hours,  in  two  quarts  of  white  wine  in  a veffel 
clofe  flopt.  Strain  and  drink  a large  glafs  of  this 
every  morning,  and  an  hour  after  drink  another. 
It  commonly  cures  in  a fortnight.  A good  trufs 
mean  time  is  of  great  ufe. 


\ Vulgarly  called  Utters-, 


65 2.  “ I 


[ 110  ] 

652.  “ I place,  fays  Dr.  Riviere,  a broad  plank 
Hoping  from  the  fide  of  the  bed  to  the  ground. 
On  this  I lay  the  patient  upon  pillows,  with  his 
head  downward.  Then  I foment  the  part  for 
half  an  hour,  with  cloths  four  times  doubled  lteep- 
ed  in  cold  water,  gently  touching  it  with  my  fin- 
gers. Afterwards  I bind  on  it,  many  times  doubl- 
ed, a cloth  draped  like  a triangle,  wet  in  cold 
water. — The  gut  is  generally  refiored  to  its  place 
in  a few  hours.  If  not,  I repeat  the  operation 
twice  a day,  and  in  two  or  three  days  the  difeafe 
is  cured.” 

19 2.  A frejh  Rupture* 

653.  Take  decotlion  of plantane-leaves,  morn- 
ing and  evening  : 

654.  Or,  dry  a fpoonful  of  pUnlane-feed  by 
the  fire  ; boil  it  in  milk,  and  take  half  a pint 
every  morning, 

193.  A Rupture  in  Children . 

655.  Boil  a fpoonful  of  egg-Jhells  dried  in  an 
oven  and  powdered,  in  a pint  of  milk,  or  three 
quarters  of  a pint.  Feed  the  child  conltantly 
with  bread  boiled,  in  this  milk. 

194..  A Windy  Rupture. 

656.  Warm  coro-dUng  well.  Spread  it  thick 
on  leather,  firewing  fome  cummin-feeds  on  it,  and 
apply  it  hot-  When  cold,  put-  on  a new  one. 

It 


[ ] 

It  commonly  cures  a child  (keeping  his  bed]  in 
two  days. 

195.  A Scald  Head. 

657.  Anoint  it  with  Earbadoes  tar  • 

658.  Or,  with  yellow  ointment  made  with  goofe- 

greafa  _ . ' 7 r ■ 

639.  Or,  apply  daily  white-wine  vinegar  ; 

Tried  : 

196.  The  Sciatica.  §- 

660.  Is  certainly  cured  by  a purge  taken  in  a 
few  hours  after  it  begins  : 

661.  Or,  ufe  cold  bathing,  and  fweat,  together 
with  the  fielh-hrulh  twice  a day  : 

662.  Or,  apply  leaves  ol  ranunculus  bruifed, 
for'fix  hours  : 

663.  “ Many  have  been  cured  in  four  or  five 
days,  only  bv  drinking  hall  a pint  of  cold  water 
daily  in  the  morning,  and  at  four  in  the  after- 
noon.” 

664.  Or,  apply  pounded  roots  of  burdock,  and 
of  elecampane  cold.  This  ufoally  cures,  if  kept 
on  twehty-four  hours;  but  it  gives  pain: 

* 665.  Or,  boil  nettles  four  or  five  minutes.  Fo- 
ment with  the  liquor,  then  apply  the  herb  as  a 
poultice.— 1 have  known  this  cure  a fciatica  of 
forty-five  y'ears  Handing : 

Or,  apply  netf/tt-bruifed  in  a mortar  b 

666.  Or* 

The  fciatica  it  a violent  p»in  ia  the  hip,  cbieity  in  the  joirsjr 
♦f  the  thigh-bone. 


[ 112  ] 


666.  Or,  apply  flannels  dipt  in  Jlale  lie , boiled 
with  fait  as  hot  as  you  can  bear,  for  an  hour: 

* 66 7.  Or,  a mud  made  of  finely  powdered 
pitcoal  and  warm  water.  This  alfo  cures  palfies, 
weaknefs  of  the  limbs,  mod  diforders  of  the  legs, 
and  fwellings  and  ffifinefs  of  the  joints.  It  cur- 
ed a fwelling  of  the  elbow  joint,  though  accom- 
panied with  a fiflula,  arifing  from  a caries  of  the 
-bone. 

197.  Inflammations,  or  Swelling  of  the  Scrotum. 

668.  Wafh  it  thrice  a day  with  flrong  decoc- 
tion of  agrimony. 

198.  A Scorbutic  Atrophy.  + 

669.  U cold  bathing  : — Which  alfo  cures  all 

199.  Scorbutic  Pains. 

200.  Scorbutic  Sores. 

670.  Put  half  a pound  of  frefh  fhaved  lignum 
guaiacum,  and  half  an  ounce  of  fena  into  an 
earthen  pot  that  holds  fix  quarts.  Add  five 
quarts  of  foft  water,  and  lute  the  pot  clofe.  Set 
this  in  a kettle  of  cold  water,  and  put  it  over  a 
fire,  till  it  has  boiled  three  hours.  Let  it  Hand 
in  the  kettle  ’till  cold.  When  it  has  flood  one 

night, 

+ Such  a degree  of  fcurvy,  ae  caufej  the  flefli  to  vafte  away 
like  a cwfumpim. 


[ ^3  ] 

night,  drink  daily  half  a pint,  new  milk-warm, 
faflincr,  and  at  four  in  the  afternoon.  Walh  with 
a little  of  it.  In  three  months  all  the  fores  will 
be  dried  up.  Tried. 

201.  The  Scurvy.  f 

671.  Live  on  turnips  for  a month: 

672.  Or,  an  entire  milk  diet  for  fix  months : 

673.  Or,  take  tar-water,  morning  and  even- 
ing, for  three  months  : 

674.  Or,  three  fpoonfuls  of  nettle-juice  every 
morning:  Tried. 

675.  Or,  deco&ion  of  burdock.  Boil  three 
ounces  of  the  dried  root  in  two  quarts  of  water 
to  three  pints.  Take  half  a pint  daily  ; unlefs  it 
purges  too  much,  if  fo  take  lefs.  A decodtion 
of  the  leaves  (boiling  one  leaf  four  minutes  in  a 
quart  of  water)  has  the  fame  effeft. 

676.  Or,  take  (from  the  fmall  branches  in 
fpring,  from  the  branching  roots  in  autumn)  four 
ounces  of  the  frefh  inner  elm-bark : boil  them  in 
two  quarts  of  water  to  three  pints,  and  take  half 
a pint  morning  and  evening.  In  a month  or 
two  this  cures  likewife  almoft  any  leprofy  or  for- 
feit : as  does  deco&ion  of  burdock. 

* 677.  Or,  pound  into  a pulp,  of  Seville 

oranges. 

The  fcurvy  is  known  by  heavinefs  of  body,  wearinefs,  rottcn- 
nefs  of  gums,  and  yellow,  lead,  or  violent-coloured  fpots  on  the 
legs. 

N.B.  A fcurvy  attended  with  cojlivenefs,  (which  is  moll  com- 
mon) is  termed  a hoi  fcurvy  : one  attended  with  loofmfs , a cdd 
fcurvy. 


C 1 J4  ] 


oranges,  diced,  rind  and  all,  and  powder  fugar, 
etjnal  quantities.  Take  a tea-fpoonful  three  or 
four  times  a day  : Tried: 

678.  Or,  fqueeze  the  juice  of  half  a Seville 
orange  .into  a pint  of  milk  over  the  fire.  Sweeten 
the  whey  with  Foaf  fugar,  and  drink  it  every 
morning,  new  milk-warm.  To  make  any  whey, 
milk  (liould  be  ikimmed,  after  it  is  boiled. 

* 67 y.  Or,  pour  three  quarts  of  boiling  water 
on  a quart  of  ground  malt : ftir  them  well,  and 
let  the  mixture  hand  covered  clofe,  for  four 
hours:  drain  it  off',  and  ufe  as  common  drink. : 
in  hot  weather,  brew  this  frefh  every  day.  It 
will  hardly  fail. 

* 680.  Or,  take  morning  and  evening  a fpoon* 
ful  or  two  of  lemon-juice  and  fugar.  “ It  is  a 
precious  remedy,  and  well  tried.’ — Dr.  Mac - 
bride. 

681.  Or,  boil  feurvy-gr  afs  and  frrel  in  broth, 
and  feed  upon  it  daily. 

682.  Water  and  garden  crefics,  muftard,  and 
juice  of  feurvy-grafs  help  in  a cold  feurvy  : 

683.  When  there  is  a continual  fait  tafte  in 
the  mouth,  take  a pint  of  lime-water  morning 
and  evening  : 


202.  A Broken  Shin. 

68q.  Bind  a dry  oak-leaf  upon  it. 

aog.  The 


C 1 *<5  3 

203.  The  Shingles,  f 

683.  Apply  pounded  garlic. 

204.  SickiJhneJ's  in  the  Morning. 

686.  Eat  nothing  after  fix  in  the  evening : 

205.  Sinews  Jlirunk. 

68 7.  Rub  the  part  every  morning  with  ffajl- 
ing/pittle.  Tried. 

688.  Or,  beat  the  yolk  of  a new-laid  egg, 
mix  it  with  a fpoonful  of  water,  and  rub  the  part 
with  it  before  the  fire  three  or  four  times  a day. 

206.  Skin  rub’ d off. 

689.  Apply  pounded  all-heal. — It  feldom  needs 
repeating. 

207.  Sleep  [to  procure.) 

690.  Anoint  the  temples  with  milk,  next  with 
campkire. 

691.  Or,  with  oil  of  rojts  (an  ounce)  well  mixt 
with  three  diams  of  vinegar. 

692.  Or,  finilh  your  fupper  with  boild  lettucei 
Galen. 

208.  Small  Pox. 

693.  Drink  largely  of  toa/l  and  water. 

* 694.  Or, 

+ A kind  of  Ring-worm,  which  incircles  the  body,  like  a belt, 
of  an  hand’s  breadth1 


[ n6  ] 

* 694.  Or,  let  your  whole  food  be  milk  and 
water , mixt  with  a little  white  bread  : Tried. 

695.  Or,  milk  and  apples  : 

696.  Take  care  to  have  a free,  pure,  and  cool 
air.  Therefore  open  the  cafement  every  day  ; 
only  do  not  let  it  chill  the  patient: 

* 697.  If  they  ftrike  in,  and  convulfions  fol- 
low, drink  a pint  of  cold  water  immediately. 
This  inflantly  flops  the  convulfions,  and  drives 
out  the  pock  : Tried. 

“ There  may  be  puflules  a fecond  time,  com- 
ing out  and  ripening  like  the  fmall  pox  ; but  it 
is  barely  a cutaneous  diforder. 

“ In  violent  cafes,  bleed  in  the  foot : bathe 
the  legs  in  warm  water  twice  or  thrice  a day, 
before  and  at  the  eruption;  and  apply  boiled 
turnips  to  the  feet.  Never  keep  the  head  too 
hot. 

“ In  very  low  deprefled  cafes,  wine  may  be 
given:  and  if  the  puflules  lie  buried  in  the  Ikin, 
a gentle  vomit.  In  many  cafes,  a gentle  purge 
of  manna , cream  of  tartar , or  rhubarb. 

“ In  the  crude  ichorofe  fmall  pox,  a difh  of 
coffee  now  and  then  with  a little  thick  milk  in 
it,  has  often  quieted  the  vexatious  cough.” 

“ After  the  incruftation  is  formed,  change  the 
fick  : but  let  it  be  with  very  dry,  warm  linen.” 
—Dr.  Huxham. 

209.  A long  running  Sore  in  the  Back . 


698.  Was 


[ “7  ] 

698.  Was  entirely  cured  by  eating  betony  in 
every  thing: 

699  Or,  take  every  morning  two  or  three 
fpoonfuls  of  nettle-juice,  and  apply  nettles  bruif- 
ed  in  a mortar  to  the  part.  This  cures  any  old 
fore  or  ulcer.  /. 

210.  A Sore  Mouth. 

700.  Apply  the  white  of  an  egg,  beat  up  with 
loaf fu gar ; 

701.  Or,  gargle  with  the  juice  of  cinquefoil : 

702.  Or,' boil  together  a pound  of  treacle,  three 
yolks  of  eggs,  an  ounce  of  bole  armoniac  and  a 
nutmeg  of  allum  a quarter  of  an  hour.  Apply" 
this  to  the  fore  part,  or  to  an  aching  tooth. 
Tried. 

211.  A Sore  Throat . 

703.  Take  a pint  of  cold  neater  lying  down  in 
bed : tried. 

7 04.  Or,  boiled  nettles  : 

705.  Or,  apply  a chin-ftay  of  roofed  figs  : 

706.  Or,  a flannel  fprinkled  with  fpirits  of 
harts-horn  to  the  throat,  rubbing  hungary 
water  on  the  top  of  the  head  : tried. 

707.  Or,  fnuff  a little  honey  up  the  nofe. 

708.  An  old  fore  throat  was  cured  by  living 
wholly  on  apples  and  apple-water. 


2t2.  I 


[ '>8  ] 

212,  A Sprain « 

709.  Hold  the  part  in  very  cold  water  for 
two  hours:  Tried. 

710.  Or,  apply  cloths  dipt  therein,  four 
times  doubled,  lor  two  hours,  changing  them  as 
they  grow  warm  : 

711.  Or,  bathe  it  in  good  crab-verjuice  : 

712.  Or,  ftoop  it  with  one  fpoonful  of  brandy , 
two  of  vinegar , and  four  of  water  : 

713.  Or,  boil  bran  in  wine  vinegar  to  a poul- 
tice. Apply  this  warm,  and  renew  it  once  in 
twelve  hours  : 

714.  Or,  mix  a little  turpentine  with  flour 
and  the  yolk  of  ail  egg,  and  apply  it  as  a plaifter : 
This  cures  in  a defperate  cafe  : 

715.  Or,  boil  eight  ounces  of  Cajlile  foap , 
and  as  much  bay-falt  in  four  quarts  of  water. 
Put  the  part  fprained  into  this  for  half  an  hour  : 
or  foment  with  it : 

716.  Heaknejs  remaining  after  a fprain,  is  cured 
by  fomenting  the  part  daily  with  beef-brine. 

717.  Suppofe  the  ankle  fprained.  1.  Foment  it 
with  warm  vinegar,  four  or  five  minutes  every 
four  hours.  2.  Stand,  if  you  can,  three  or  four 
minutes  at  a tune  on  both  your  feet,  and  fre- 
quently move  the  fprained  loot.  Sometimes  alfo 
while  fitting  with  your  foot  on  a low  flool,  move 
it  to  and  fro.  3.  Let  it  be  gently  rubbed  with 
a warm  hand,  at  lead  thrice  a day.  4.  Two  hours 
after  every  application  of  the  vinegar,  let  it  be 

juft 


I ll9  ] 

juft  wetted  with  fpirits  of  wine,  and  then  gently 
rubbed. 

213.  A venomous  Jiing. 

718.  Apply  the  juice  of  honey-fuckle  leaves' 

719.  Or,  a poultice  ofbruifed  plantane  and 
honey  : 

720.  Or,  take  inwardly,  one  dram  of  black 
currant  leaves  powdered.  It  is  an  excellent  coun- 
terpoifon. 

-214.  The  Jiing  of  a Bee., 

721.  Apply  honey. 

215.  The  Jiing  oj  a Nettle. 

722.  Rub  the  part  with  juice  of  nettles. 

216.  The  fing  oj  a Jlfafp. 

723.  Rub  the  part  with  bruifed  leaves  of 
h ouf deck  : 

724.  Or,  of  water -crejfes 

725.  Or,  of  rue  : 

726.  Or,  apply  treacle  •' 

727.  Or,  bruifed  onions  or  garlicT: 

* 

217.  The  Jiing  of  a Bee  or  Wafp  in  the  Eye. 

728.  Apply  carduus  bruifed  with  the  white  of 
an  egg  : renew  it  if  it  grows  dry. 


21&  A 


[ 120  ] 

21 8.  A fitch  in  the  fide. 

729.  Apply  treacle  fpread  on  a hot  toad. 
Tried. 

219.  Frequent  or  violent  Jltiches. 

730.  Drink  decoftion  of  nettles,  and  apply  the 
herbs  hot : Tried. 

✓ 

220,  Accidental  ficknefs , or  pain  in  thefomach. 

731.  Vomit  with  a quart  of  warm  water.  Do 
this  twice  or  thrice,  omitting  a day  between, 

221.  A weak  Stomach. 

732.  About  eleven  every  morning,  drink  a 
glafsof  water,  in  which  a leaf  of  carduus  has  been 
infufed  twelve  hours. 

222.  Pain  in  the  Stomach  from  bad  Digefion. 

733.  Take  fading,  or  in  the  fit,  half  a pint  of 
camomile  tea.  Do  this  five  or  fix  mornings  : 

734.  Or,  drink  the  juice  of  half  a large  lemon 
immediately  after  dinner  everv  dav. — Dr  Mead. 

' 735-  'Or>  from  twenty  to  forty  drops  of  elixir 

of  vitriol  in  [age  tea , twice  or  thrice  a day  : 

736.  Or,  in  the  fit,  a glafs  full  of  vinegar. 


223.  Choleric 


[ 121  ] 

223.  Choleric  Hot  Pains , in  the  Stomach. 

737.  Take  half  a pint  of  decoffion  of  ground- 
ivy,  with  a tea-fpoonful  of  the  powder  of  it,  five 
or  fix  mornings.  I. 

224.  Coldnefs  of  the  Stomach. 

738.  Take  a fpoonful  of  the  fyrup  or  the  juice 
of carduus  benedittus , fading,  for  three  or  four 
mornings  : I. 

739.  Or,  chew  a leaf  of  carduus  every  morn- 
ing and  fwallow  the  fpittie. 

225.  Pain  in  the  Jlomach,  with  Coldnefs  and 
Wind. 

740.  Swallow  five  or  fix  corns  of  white  pepper , 
for  fix  or  feven  mornings  : tried. 

226.  The  jlone  [to  prevent.) 

741.  Eat  a cruft  of  dry  bread  every  morning: 
Tried. 

742.  Or  drink  a pint  of  warm  water  daily  juft 
before  dinner.  After  difcharging  one  ftone,  this 
will  prevent  the  generating  of  another. 

• 743.  Stoop  down  and  raife  yourfelf  up  again. 
If  you  feel  pain  as  if  cut  thro’  the  middle,  the 
pain  is  not  from  the  /tone,  but  rheumatifm. 

744.  Beware  of  coftivenefs.  Ufe  no  violent 
diuretics.  Mead  is  a proper  drink. 

VOL.  XXV.  P 


745.  In 


[ 122  ] 


745-  ln  the  fit*  Slice  a large  onion  ; pour 
half  a pint  of  warm  water  upon  it.  After  it  has 
flood  twelve  hours,  drink  the  water.  Do  this 
every  morning  ’till  you  are  well. 

22 7.  In  a raging  Fit. 

746.  Beat  onions  into  a pulp  and  apply  them 
as  a poultice,  part  to  the  back,  and  part  to  each 
groin.  It  gives  fpeedy  eafe  in  the  moil  racking 
pain  : Tried. 

747.  Or,  apply  heated  parjley. 

228.  The  Jlone  (to  eafe  or  cure.) 

748.  Take  decoSlion  of  agrimony , morning 
and  evening:  Tried. 

749.  Or,  of  camomile : 

750.  Or,  boil  half  a pound  of  par/nips  in  a 
quart  of  water.  Drink  a glafs  of  this  morning 
and  evening,  and  ufe  no  other  drink  all  ihe  dav. 
It  ufually  cures  in  fix  weeks. 

751.  Or.  take  daily  four  pints  oi  lime  water. 
made  by  pouring  four  quarts  of  water  on  a pound 
offrefh  calcined  t oyjter-Jhcll  and  cockle  -/hells  : 

752.  Or,  rake  morning  and  evening,  a tea- 
fpoonful  of  1 ns  calcined  in  a fire- fhovel  into 
white  allies,  in  white  wine.  An  ounce  will  of- 
ten dillplve  the  flone.” 

752>'  tal<e  a tea-fpoonf  u]  cf  violet-feed 

powdered 

t i.  e.  Heated  red  hot,  and  afterwards  powdered. 


[ “3  ] 


powdered,  morning  and  evening.  It  both  waftcs 
the  ilone,  and  brings  it  away. 

229.  The  Jlone  in  the  Kidneys. 

754.  Ufe  the  cold  bath  • 

755.  Or,  drink  half  a pint  of  water  every  morn- 
ing : 

756.  Or,  decoftion  of  fpeedwell , largely  : 

757.  Or,  boil  an  ounce  of  common  thiftle-root, 
and  four  drams  of  liquorice  in  a pint  of  water. 
Drink  half  of  it  every  morning. 

230.  Stoppage  in  the  Kidneys. 

758.  Take  decoclion,  or  juice,  or  fyrnp  of 
ground-ivy,  morning  and  evening  : 

739.  Or,  of  pellitory  of  the  wall : 

760.  Or,  of  juice  of  radijhes  : 

761.  Or,  half  a pint  of  tar-water  : 

762.  Or,  twelve  grains  of Jalt  of  amber  in  a lit- 
tle water. 


231.  The  Strangury . 

763.  Ufe  the  cold  bath: 

764.  Or,  drink  largely  of  decoflion  of  turnips 
fweetened  with  honey. 

* 765.  Or,  of  warm  lemonade : tried. 

766.  Or,  of  decoclion  of  rid  nettle-feed ; 


F 2 


232,  Sun~ 


[ 124  ] 

232.  Sunburn , (fmarting.) 

767.  Wal  the  face  with  fage-tea  : 

768.  Take  about  a nutmeg  of  the  green  tops  of 

wormwood. 

233.  To  flop  profufe  Sweating. 

769.  Drink  largely  of  cold  water. 

234.  To  prevent  it. 

770.  Mix  an  ounce  of  tincture  of  Peruvian 

bark , with  half  an  ounce  of fpirit  of  vitriol.  Take 
a tea-fpoonful  morning  and  niglit,  in  a glafs  of 
water.  . 

235.  To  cure  Night  fweats. 

771.  Drink  a gill  of  warm  milk,  at  lying  down. 

236.  Swelled  Glands  in  the  Neck. 

772.  Take  fea-water,  every  other  day. 

237.  Swelled  Legs. 

773.  Bathe  them  every  morning  in  cold  water, 
and  take  an  eafy  purge  twice  a week. 

774.  Or,  take  wormwood,  J outkernti'ood , and 
rue,  ftamp  them  together,  and  fry  them  in  honey, 
till  they  grow  dry:  then  apply  them  as  hot  as 
you  can  bear. 


238.  A. 


[ 125  ] 

fig8.  A Swelled  Throat . 


775.  Gargle  with  deco&ion  of  nettles : 

776.  Or,  of  primrofe  leaves  : 

239.  A white  Swelling  fen  the  Joints.) 

777.  Hold  the  part  half  an  hour  every  morn- 
ing, under  the  ftream  that  falls  from  a mill  ; or 
under  a pump  or  cock.  This  cures  alfo  any  pains 
in  the  joints.  It  feldom  fails.  Tried. 

778.  Or,  pour  on  it'  daily  a ftream  of  war  m 
water  ; 

779.  Or,  a ftream  of  cold  water  one  day,  and 
warm  the  next,  and  fo  on  by  turns  : 

780.  Or,  apply  daily  a bladder  filled  with  warm 
water. — Ufethefe  remedies  at  firft,  if  poftible.  It 
is  likewife  proper  ' to  intermix  gentle  purges,  to 
prevent  a relapfe  : 

781.  Or,  apply  a poultis  of  boiled  nettles. 

240.  To  clijfolve  white  or  hard  Swellings. 

782.  Take  white  rofes , elder  flowers , leaves  of 
fox-glove , and  of  St.  John  s-wort,  a handful  of 

each:  mix  with  hog’s-lard , and  make  an  oint- 
ment : 

* 783.  Or,  a green  cole-wort  leaf,  having  the 
veins  bruifed  with  the  haft  of  a knife.  Renew 
it  twice  a day. 

784.  Or,  hold  them  morning  and  evening  in 
the  fleam  of  vinegar  poured  on  red  hot  fints. 

F 3 241.  To 


[ 12  6 ] 

■241.  To  fajhn  the  Teeth. 


785.  Chew  often  roots  of  brook-lime  ; 

786.  Or,  put  powdered  atlum  the  quantity  of 
a nutmeg,  in  a quart  ol /firing  zvater,  for  twen- 
ty-four hours.  Then  drain  the  water  and  gargle 
with  it : 

787  Or,  gargle  often  with  phyllyrea-leavesboil- 
ed  with  a little  allum  in fo>  gc-watcr. 

242.  To  dean  the  Teeth . 

788.  Rub  them  with  ajhes  of  burnt  bread. 

243.  To  prevent  the  Tocth-ach. 

789.  Wafh  the  mouth  with  cold  mater  every 
morning,  and  rinfe  them  after  every  meal  : 

244.  To  cure  the  Tocth-ach. 

790.  Be  e ledrified  through  the  tooth  : Tried. 

791.  Or,  apply  to  the  aching  tooth  an  artifi- 
cial magnet  • 

792.  Or,  rub  the  cheek  a quarter  of  an  hour  : 

793.  Or,  put  a clove  of  garlick  into  the  ear: 

794.  Or,  parjlty  much  bruifed,  with  a little 
hay  fait  : 

ygg.  Or,  lay  roafled  parings  of  turnips,  as  hot 
as  may  be,  behind  the  ear  : 

796.  Or,  put  a leaf  of  belony,  bruifed,  up  the 
nofe. 


* 797.  Or, 


* 797-  Or>  lay  bruifedor  boiled  nettles  to  the 
cheek  : tried 

798.  Or,  lay  a clove  of  garlick  on  the 
tooth  : 

799.  Or,  hold  a (lice  of  apple  {lightly  boiled 
between  the  teeth  : tied. 

800.  Or,  * put  into  the  hollow  tooth,  a little 
cotton,  dipt  in  Lucatelu's  balfa/n  : 

8ox.  Or,  a drop  or  two  of  oil-  of  cloves  on  cot- 
ton : 

802.  Or,  apply  to  the  cheek  gum  tacamahac 
fpread  on  filk : 

803.  Or,  keep  the  feet  in  warm  water , and 
rub  them  well  with  bran,  juft  before  bed-time: 
Tried. 

The  firft  twenty  teeth  generally  laft  till  the  fixth 
or  feventh  year.  After  that,  till  the  fourteenth 
or  fifteenth  year,  they  fall  out  one  by  one,  and 
are  fucceeded  by  others. 

The  ftiedding  of  the  teeth  is  wifely  intended, 
and  brought  about  in  a fingular  manner.  Their 
hardnefs  will  not  admit  of  diftenfion  like  other 
parts  of  the  body.  Hence  after  an  inlargement 
of  the  jaw-bone,  the  original  teeth  are  no  longer 
able  to  fill  up  the  cavities  ofit.  They  mull  ftand 
unfupported  by  each  other,  and  leave  fpaces  be- 
tween them.  Under  the  firft  teeth  therefore  is 
placed  a new  fet,  which  by  conftantly  preffing 
upon  their  roots,  rob  them  of  their  nourifhment 
and  hold,  and  finally  pufh  them  out  of  their 
fockets. 

F 4 


24,5.  Tooth 


[ 128  ] 

245*  Tooth-ach J'rom  cold  Air. 

804.  Keep  the  mouth  full  of  warm  wattr. 


246.  Teeth-  Jit  on  Edge. 

805.  Rub  the  tops  of  the  teeth  with  a dry  towel-: 

806.  Or,  chew  Jorrel-leaves. 

There  is  no  fuch  thing  as  worms  in  the  teeth. 
children’s  ufing  coral,  is  always  ufelefs,  often 
hurtful. 

Forcing  the  teeth  into  order  is  always  dangerous. 
Filing  is  generally  hurtful. 

All  rough  and  cutting  powders  deftroy  the 
teeth  : fo  do  all  common  tinctures. 

Sweet-meals  are  apt  to  hurt  the  teeth,  if  the 
mouth  be  not  rinfed  after  them.  Cracking  nuts 
often  breaks  off  the  enamel : fo  does  biting  thread 
in  two. 

Cendant  life  of  tooth-picks  is  a bad  pra£f  ice ; 
condant  fmoakingof  tobacco,  deftroys  many  good 
fets  of  teeth.” — Mr.  Bcardmore. 

247.  Pain  in  the  Tejlicles. 

807.  Apply  pellitory  of  the  wall  beaten  up 
into  a poultice,  changing  it  morning  and  even- 
ing. 

248.  Tejlicles  inflamed. 

808.  Boil  bean  Jlour,  in  three  parts  water,  one' 
part  vinegar.  .Apply  it  as  a poultis. 

249.  Thirjl 


[ 12  9 ] 

2^9-  Thirji  ( to  prevent  or  quench. ) 

809.  Capt.  Edwards  with  thirteen  men  got 
into  the  boat,  juft  as  the  (hip  funk.  Having  nei- 
ther meat  nor  drink,  in  a week  half  of  them  died. 
Being  parched  with  heat,  he  dipped  his  fliirt  in. 
the  fea,  and  put  it  on  again  : and  fo  did  the  reft. 
And  this  they  repeated  feveral  times  a day. 
Their  flefh  was  foon  candied  over  with  fait:  but 
their  thirft  was  at  an  end.  Neither  were  they 

. faint,  or  ravenoufly  hungry,  till  in  five  or  fix 
days  more,  they  rowed  themfelves  to  land.  Here 
is  an  important  difcoverv  ! Sea-water  externally 
applied,  was  to  them  both  meat  and  drink! 

250.  Extreme  thirjl. 

810.  Drink  fpring-water,  in  which  a little 
ful prunella  isdilfolved. 

251.  To  draw  cut  thorns,  Jplinters,  and  bones, 

811.  Apply  nettle-roots  and  fait  : 

812.  Or,  turpentine  fpread  on  leather. 

252.  Thrujh.  t 

813.  Mix  juice  of  celandine  with  honey,  to  the 
thicknefs  of  cream.  Infufe  a little  powdered 
ajfron  •;  let  this  fimmer  a while  and  fcum  it  : 

F 5 apply ' 

+ Lit.le  white  ulcers  in  the  rnouthj 


C -13°  ] 


apply  it  (where  needed)  with  a feather.  At  the 
fame  time  give  eight  or  ten  grains  of  rhubarb  : 
To  a grown  perfon  twenty. 

814.  Or,  bum  fear  let  cloth ho  afhes,  and  blow 
them  into  the  mouth.  This  feldom  fails. 

233.  Torpor  (or  numbnefs)  of  the  Limbs. 

815.  Ufe  the  cold  batlivcbb  rubbing  and  fw7eat- 
ing. 

254.  T 'wiping  of  the  Guts. 

816.  Many  at  the  point  of  death  have  been 

cured  by  taking  one,  twro  or  three  pounds  of 
(juiclf/ver,  ounce  bv  ounce. -Pareus. 

255‘  The  Tympany  or  windy  Dropfy. 

817.  Ufe  the  cold  bath,  with  purges  intermixt: 

818.  Or,  mix  the  juice  of  leeks  and  of  elder. 
Take  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  this  morning  and- 
evening : Tried. 

2 56.  A Vein  or  Sinew  cut. 

819.  Apply  the  inner  green  rind  of  hazel  frefh 
feraped. 

257.  The  Vertigo  or  fwimmin gin  the  head, 

&20.  Take  a vomit  or  two  : 

82  n Orr 


C *3!  1 


821,  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath  for  a month : 

822,  Or,  dropjuice  of  pimpernel  into  the  ear 
morhing  and  evening  : 

823,  Or,  in  a May  morning  about  fun  rife, 
fnuff  up  daily  the  dew  that  is  on  mallow- 
leaves : 

* 824.  Or,  apply  to  the  top  of  the  head, 
fhaven,  a plaifler  of  fiour  of  brimftone,  and 
whites  of  eggs  : Tried. 

825.  Or  take  a tea  fpoonful  of fpirit  oj  harts- 
horn in  a glafs  of  water  : 

826.  Or,  drink  morning  and  evening  half  a 
pint  of  decoftion  oi-primroje  root : I. 

827.  Or,  of  fagev  walking  alfo  the  head  there- 
with : 

828.  Or,  take  every  morning  half  a dram  o£ 
mujlard-feed, 

238.  Vigilia,  inability  to  Jleep - 

829.  Apply  to  the  forehead  for  two  horn's, 
cloths  four  times  doubled  and  dipt  in  cold  water .. 
I have  known  this  applied  to  a lying-in  woman 
and  her  life  faved  thereby  : 

830.  Or,  ufe  the  cold  bath. — It  cures  even  im 
defperate  cafes  : 

831.  Or,  apply  to  the  head  leaves  of  water 
lillies : 

E 6 832,  0,% 


[ *32  ] 

833.  a poultice  of  henbane  and  poppy  feed , 
beaten  together  : 

834.  Or,  a few  grains  of  camphire . It  is  both, 
fafer  and  furer  than  opium  : 

835.  AJfafcetida , from  ten  to  thirty  grains, 
likewife  will  in  mod  cafes  have  as  much  effect 
as  opium. 

259.  Bite  of  a viper  or  a rattle  fnake. 

836.  Apply  bruifed  garlick  : 

837.  Or,  powder  common  pit-coal  fine,  and 
fearce  it.  Mix  it  into  a pafle  with  a little  water. 
Apply  it  daily.  This  cures  even  foul  bones  : 

838  Or,  rub  the  place  immediately'  with  com- 
mon oil.  Oiiere , would  not  the  fame  cure  the 
bite  of  a mad  dog  ? Would  it  not  be  worth  while, 
to  make  the  trial  on  a dog  ? 

260.  To  prevent  the  Bite  of  a viper. 

839.  Rub  the  hands  with  the  juice  of  radfnts . 

261.  An  Ulcer. 

840.  Dry  and  powder  a walnut-leaf  and  ftrew 
it  on  and  lay  another  walnut-lea/  on  that  : 

tried. 

* 841.  Or,  boil  walnut-tree  leaves  in  water 
with  a little  fugar.  Apply  a cloth  dipt  in  this, 

changing 


[ ]33  3 

changing  it  once  in  two  days.  This  has  done 
wonders.* 

* 842.  Or,  foment  morning  and  evening  with 
a decodlion  of  walnut-tree  leaves,  and  bind  the 
leaves  on.  This  has  cured  ford  bones  : yea,  and 
a leprofy.  Tided. 

262.  An  inward  Ulcer . 

843.  Drink  tar-water  morning  and  evening  : 

844.  Or,  decoflion  of  pimpernel. 

263.  Ulcer  in  the  Bladder  or  Kidneys. 

845.  Take  decodlion  of  agrimony,  thrice  a day  : 

846.  Or,  decodtion,  powder,  or  fyrup  of 
horfetail. 

264.  Ulcer  in  the  Gum  or  Jaw. 

847.  Apply  honey  of rojes  fharpened  with  f pur  it 
of  vitriol : 

848.  Or,  fill  lhe  whites  of  eggs  boiled  hard  and 
flit,  with  myrrh  and  fugar  candy  powdered.  Tie 
them  up,  and  hang  them  on  flicks  lying  acrofs  a 
glafs.  A liquid  diflils,  with  which  anoint  the 
fores  often  in  a day. 

265.  A Fijlulous  Ulcer. 

849.  Apply  Wood  betony  bruifed,  changing  it 
daily. 


830.  Gr, 


[-  *34  ] 

850.  Or,  leaves  of  water-dock  bruifed. 

266.  A Bleeding  Varicous  Ulcer  in  the  Leg, 

8,51.  Was  cured  only  by  conftantly  cold 
lathing. 

267.  A Malignant  Ulcer. 

852.  Foment  morning  and  evening  with  a de- 
coftion  of  mint.  Then  fprinkle  on  it  finely 
powdered  rue. 

268.  A Jlubborn  Ulcer. 

853.  Burn  to  afhes  (but  not  too  long)  thegrofs 
ftalks  on  which  the  red  coleworts  grow.  Make  a 
plailfer  with  this  and  frefh  butter.  Change  it 
once  a day  : 

854.  Or,  apply  a poultice  of  boiled  parjhips. 
This  will  cure  even  when  the  bone  is  foul. 

855.  Or,  be "eleftrijied  daily  : tried. 

269.  An  Ulcer  in  the  Urethra. 

856.  Take  a clove  of  garlick,  morning  and 
evening : 

270.  An  eafy  and fafe  Vomit. 

857.  Boil  half  a handful  of  artichoke  leaves  in 

a quart 


[ 1 35  ] 

a quart  of  water.  The  more  you  drink  of  warm 
water  after  it  the  better  : 

8^8.  Or,  a dram  and  a half  of  primrofe-root 
powdered  : it  is  bed  if  gathered  in  Auguft. 

859.  Or,  infufe  three  drams  of  r adijh  feed  in  a 
quart  of  warm  water  for  twelve  hours.  Squeeze 
off  the  water  and  take  it : 

860.  Or,  pour  a difh  of  tea  on  twenty  grains 
of  ipecacuanha.  You  may  fweeten  it  if  you 
pleafe.  When  it  has  flood  four  or  five  ml’ 
notes,  pour  the  tea  off  clear  and  drink  it. 

271;  To flop  Vomiting. 

861.  If  the  vomiting  be  not  the  effedl  of  a 
medicine;  after  even7  vomit  drink  a pint  of  warm 
water : 

* 852.  Or,  apply  a large  onion  flit,  to  the  pit 
of  the  ftomach  : tried. 

S* 

86d.  Or,  take  a fpoonful  of  lemon-juice  and  fix 
grains  of  fait  of  wormvjood  • 

864.  Or,  infufe  an  ounce  of  quickfilver  in  a 

large  glafs  full  of  water  : /. 

272.  Bloody  Urine. 

865.  Take  a quarter  of  a pint  of  fieeps  milk 
twice  a day  : 

866.  Or,  half  a pint  of  decoftion  of  agrimony  ; 

867.  Or,  of  deco61ion  of  yarrow* 


273.  Urine 


C >36  ] 

273.  Uiine  by  Drops  with  Heat  and  Pain. 

f 

868.  Drink  nothing  but  lemonade  : tried. 

869.  Or,  beat  up  the  pulp  of  five  or  fix  mail- 
ed apples  with  near  a quart  of  water.  l ake  it 
at  lying  down.  It  commonly  cures  before 
morning. 

274.  Involuntary  Urine. 

870.  Ufe  the  cold  bath: 

871.  Or,  take  a tea-fpoonful  of  powdered 
agrimony  in  a little  water,  morning  and  evening: 

872.  Or,  a quarter  of  a pint  of  allum-poJJ'et 
drink  every  night : 

873.  Or,  foment  with  rofe-leaves  and  plantane- 
leaves  boiled  in  fmiths  forge  water.  Then  apply 
plaifters  of  allum  and  bole  armoniac , made  up  with 
oil  and  vinegar. 

275.  Sharp  Urine. 

874.  Take  two  fpoonfuls  of  frelh  juice  of 
ground-ivy. 

276.  Supprejjion  of  Urine 

875.  Is  fometimes  relieved  bv  bleeding: 

876.  Or,  drink  largely  of  warm  lemonade: 
tried. 

877.  Or,  a fcruple  af  nitre , every  two  hours : 

878.  Or, 


[ J3  7 ] 

878.  Or,  take  a fp'oonful  of  juice  of  lemons, 
fvveetened  with  fvrup  of  violets  : 

879.  Or,  a fpoonful  of  juice  of  radijhes  : 

880.  Or,  two  fpoonfuls  ofjuice  of  onions. 

277.  Uvula  inflamed.  + 

881.  Gargle  with  a decoction  of  beaten  liernp- 
feed  : 

882.  Or,  with  a decoflion  of  dandelion. 

278,  Uvula  relaxed. 

* 883.  Bruife  the  veins  of  a cabbage-leaf,  and 
lay  it  hot  on  the  crown  of  the  head,  repeat,  if 
needed,  in  two  hours. — I never  knew  it  fail. 

884.  Or,  gargle  with  decoftion  of  water-deck  ; 

885.  Or,  with  an  infufion  of  mufiardfeed . 

279.  Warts. 

886.  Rub  them  daily  with  a radifh  : 

887.  Or,  withjuice  of  dandelion  : 

888.  Or,  of  marigold  flowers:  it  will  hardly 
fail : 

889.  Or,  water  in  which  fal  arinoniac  is  dif- 
folved : 

890.  Or,  apply  bruifed  purflain  as  a poultice, 
changing  it  twice  a day.  It  cures  in  feven  or 
eight  davs. 

280.  Weak . 

t This  is  ufually  called  the  palate  of  the  mouth. 


[ 133  ] 

iSo.  Weaknejs  in  the  Ankles. 

Sgi.  Hold  them  in  cold  uaier  a quarter  of  an 
hour,  morning  and  evening. 

281.  A fcft  Wen. 

892.  Wrap  leaves  of  forrel  in  a wet  paper, 
and  road:  them  in  the  embers.  Mix  it  with 
finely  fifted  ajhes  into  a poultice.  Apply  this 
warm  daily. 

893.  Dr.  Riviere  fays,  “ I cured  a wen  as  big 
as  a large  fid,  thus:  I made  an  indrument  of 
hard  wood,  like  the  done  with  which  the  pain- 
ters grind  their  colours  on  a marble.  With  this 
I rubbed  it  half  an  hour  twice  a day.  Then  I 
laid  on  a fuppurating  plaider  very  hot,  which  I 
kept  on  four  or  dve  days.  The  wen  fuppurated 
and  was  opened.  Afterward  all  the  fubdance  of 
it  turned  into  matter  and  was  evacuated.  Thus  I 
have  cured  many  Cnee.” 

282.  The  Whites. 

894.  Live  chadly.  Feed  fparingly.  Ufe  ex- 
ercife  condantly.  Sleep  moderately,  but  never 
lying  on  your  back. 

895.  Take  eight  grains  of  jalap  every  eight 
days.  Thisufually  cures  in  Cve  weeks: 

896.  Or.  Crft  bleed.  Then  purge  thrice  with 
twenty  grains  of  rhubarb  and  Cve  of  calomel : 

897.  Or,  boil  four  or  Cve  leaves  of  the  white 

holy 


[ 139  I 


holy  oak , in  a pint  of  milk  with  a little  fugar. 
Then  add  a tea-fpoonful  of  balm  of  gilead. 
Drink  this  every  morning. — It  rarely  fails. 

§98.  Or,  boil  an  handful  of  dead  nettle  flowers , 
and  a dram  of  cinnamon  in  half  a pint  of  milk. 
Drink  half  of  it  every  night  and  morning. 

8 99.  Or,  make  Venice  turpentine,  flour,  and 
jine  flugar,  equal  quantities,  into  fmall  pills. 
Take  three  or  four  of  thefe  morning  and  even- 
ing. This  alfo  cures  mod  pains  in  the  back: 

goo.  Or,  in  a quarter  of  a pint  of  water, 
wherein  three  drams  of  tamarinds  and  a dram  of 
lentifh-wood  has  been  boiled,  when  cold,  infufe 
flena,  a dram,  coriander-fleed  and  liquorice  a dram 
and  half  each.  Let  them  Hand  all  night.  Strain 
the  liquor  in  the  morning,  and  drink  it  daily  two 
hours  before  breakfalt : 

901.  Or,  take  quickfilver  and  aqua flulphurata, 
as  for  an  afthma. — This  feldom  fails. 

902.  Or,  after  purging,  take  about  fifteen 
grains  of  cerufl  ofl antimony,  in  white  wine,  twice 
or  thrice  a day. 

283.  A Whitlow. 

903.  Apply  treacle  : tried. 

904.  Or,  honey  and  flour  : tried. 

905.  Or,  a poultice  of  chewed  bread.  Shift  it 
once  a day : 

906.  Or,  a plaifter  of  ground-ivy  flampt. 


284.  I Vo r ms. 


[ 140  ] 

28  j.  Worms,  f 


507.  Take  a fpooniul  of  fall  in  aglafs  of  water 
every  morning : 

908.  Or,  a tea  cup  full  of  flrong  infufion  of 
peach-leaves , fweetened  with  honey,  rafting  an 
hour  after  : 

909.  Or,  a dram  and  a half  of  litre  in 
broth  : /. 

910.  Or,  a fpoonful  of  juice  of  fpear-rnirt  \ 

91  t.  Or,  of  juice  of  lemons:  or,  two  fpoonfuls 
of  nettle  juice : 

912.  Or,  boil  four  ounces  of  quickflver  an 
hour,  in  a quart  of  clear  water.  Pour  it  off  and 
bottle  itup.  You  may  ufe  the  fame  quickfiJver 
again  and  again.  Ufe  this  lor  common  drink: 
or  at  leaf!  night  and  morning  for  a week  or  two. 
Then  purge  off  the  dead  worms  with  fifteen  or 
twenty  grains  of  jalap. 

913.  Or,  take  two  tea-fpoonfuls  of  worm-feed, 
mixt  wish  treacle  for  fix  mornings: 

914.  Or,  a dram  of  powdered  fern-root  boiled 
in  mead.  This  kills  both  the  flat  and  round 
worms.  Repeat  the  medicine  from  time  to 
time. 

285.  Flat  Worms. 

91,5.  Take  filings  of  tin  and  red  coral,  of  each 

an 

+ A child  may  be  known  to  have  the  worms,  by  chilhnefs, 
palencfs,  hollow  eyes,  itching  of  the  note,  {lading  in  deep,  and 
an  unufual  (tinking  breath. — Worms  a re  never  found  in  children 
that  live  wholly  on  milk , 


[ *4*  ] 


an  equal  quantity  : pound  them  together  into  a 
very  fine  powder:  of  which  one  dram,  made 
into  a bolus  with  conjerve  oj  the  tops  ofjea-worm - 
wood,  is  to  be  taken  twice  a day. 

286.  Wounds. 

916.  Apply  juice  or  powder  of  yarrow  : I. 

91 7.  Or,  bind  leaves  of  ground-ivy  upon  it  : 

g 18.  Or,  bruifed  hyjfop,  with  a little  fugar  : 

9x9.  Or,  wood-betony  bruifed.  This  quickly 

heals  even  cut  veins  and  finews,  and  draws  out 
thorns  or  fplinters : 

920.  Or,  keep  the  part  in  cold  water  for  an 
hour,  keeping  the  wound  clofcd  with  your 
thumb.  Then  bind  on  the  thin  fkin  of  an  egg- 
Jhelt for  days  or  weeks,  till  it  falls  off  of  itfelf. 
Regard  not  though  it  prick  or  fhoot  for  a time. 

287.  Contufed  or  ulcerated  Wounds. 

921.  Boil  halfan  ounce  of  fine  verdigreaje  in  a 
pound  of  linjeed  oil  till  it  is  diffolved. 

288.  Inward  JPounds. 

922.  Irifufe  yarrow  twelve  hours  in  warm 
water.  Take  a cup  of  this  four  times  a day.  /. 


289.  Putrid 


[ 142  ] 

289.  Putrid  Wounds. 


923.  Wafh  them  morning  and  evening  with 
"warm  decoftion  of  agrimony.  If  they  heal  too 
foon,  and  a matter  gather  underneath,  apply  a 
poultice  of  the  leaves  pounded,  changing  them 
once  a day  till  well. 


924.  Boil  comfrey  roots  to  a thick  mucilagej 
and  apply  this  as  a poultice,  changing  it  once  a 
day. 

291;  To  open  a Wound  that  is  clofed  too  foon. 

925.  Apply  bruifed  centaury  to  it. 


COLD-BATHING 

Cures  Young  Children  of 

ONVULSIONS, 


Coughs, 

Cutaneous  inflammations,  pimples  and  fcabs, 
Gravel, 


290.  Wounded  Tendons. 


Inflammations  of  the  ears,  navel  and  mouth, 

Rickets, 


[ HS  3 


Rickets, 

Suppreffion  of  urine, 

Vomiting, 

Want  of  deep. 

It  prevents  the  growth  of  hereditary 
Appoplexies, 

Afthmas, 

Blindefs, 

Confumptions, 

Deafnefs, 

Deliria, 

Gout, 

King's-Evil, 

Melancholy, 

Palfies, 

Rheumatifm, 

Stone. 

It  frequently  cures  every  Nervous,  and  every 
Paralytic  diforder  : in  particular, 

The  Afthma, 

Ague  of  every  fort, 

Atrophy, 

Blindnefs,* 

Cancer, 

Chin-cough, 

Coagulated  blood  after  bruifes, 

Confumption, 

Convulfions, 

Coughs, 

Complication  ofDiftempers* 

Convulfive  pains,* 

Deafnefs,* 


[ ‘44  ] 


Deafnefs,* 

Dropfy, 

Epilepfy, 

Violent  Fevers, 

Gout,  (running) 

Heftic  Fevers, 

Hemicrania, 

Hyfteric  Pains,* 

Incubus, 

Inflammations,* 

InvoluntaryStool,  orUrine,* 

Lamenefs, 

(Old)  Leprofy, 

Lethargy, 

Lofs  of  Appetite,  of  *Smell,*Speech,*Tafte, 
Nephritic  Pains, 

Palpitation  of  the  heart, 

Pain  in  the  Back,  Joints,  *Stomach, 
Rheumatifms, 

Rupture, 

Suffocations, 

Sciatica,* 

Surfeits,  (at  the  beginning) 

Scorbutic  Pams,* 

Swelling  on  the  Joints, 

Stone  in  the  Kidneys, 

Torpor  of  the  Limbs,  even  when  the  ufe  of 
them  is  loft, 

Tetanus, 

Tympany, 

Vertigo, 


St. 


[ *45  ] 


St.  Vitus’s  Dance, 

Vigilia, 

Various  Ulcers, 

The  Whites. 

But  in  all  cafes  where  the  fterves  are  ob- 
ftru&ed,  (fuch  as  are  thofe  marked  thus  you 
fliould  go  to  bed  immediately  after,  and  fweat. 

It  is  often  ufeful  to  ufe  the  hot  hath  a few 
days,  before  you  wife  the  cold. 

Wife  parents  fhould  dip  their  children  in  cold 
water  every  morning,  till  they  are  three  quar- 
ters old  ; and  afterwards,  their  hands  and  feet. 

N.  B.  No  child  fliould  ever  be  fwathed  tight. 

It  lays  the  foundation  for  many  difeafes. It 

is 'belt  to  wean  a child  at  about  feven  months 
old.  The}'  fliould  lie  in  the  cradle  at  lead  a 
year.  No  wife  parent  fliould  fuffer  a child  to 
drink  any  tea ; (at  leaft,  till  it  is  ten  or  twelve 
years  old)  or  to  eat  much  fpice  or  fugar.  Milk, 
milk-porridge,  and  water-gruel  are  the  proper 
breakfafts  for  children. 

Walhing  the  head  every  morning  in  cold  wa- 
ter, prevents  rheums,  and  cures  coughs,  old 
head-achs,  and  fore- eyes. 

Water  drinking  generallv  prevents 
Apoplexies, 

Afllnnas, 

Convulfions, 

Gout, 

Hyfteric  Fits, 

Madnefs, 

Vo  l.  XXV.  G 


-TalAes, 


[ M6  ] 


Palfies, 

Stone, 

Trembling, 

To  this  children  fhould  be  bred  up  from  their 
cradles. 

The  bell  water  to  drink,  efpecially  for  thofe 
who  are  much  troubled  with  the  wind,  is  rain- 
water. After  it  has  fettled,  draw  it  off  clear 
into  another  veffel,  and  it  will  keep  fweet  for  a 
long  time. 

Electrifying  in  a proper  manner,  cures 

St.  Anthony’s  Fire, 

Blindnefs, 

Blood  Extravafated, 

Bronchocele, 

Burns  or  Scalds, 

Coldnefs  in  the  Feet, 

Contraftion  of  the  Limbs, 

Convulfions, 

Cramp,  • 

Deafnefs, 

Falling  Sicknefs, 

Feet  violently  difordered. 

Felons, 

Fiftula  Lachrymalis, 

Fits, 

Flooding, 

Ganglions, 

Gout, 


Head- 


[ M7  1 


Head-ach, 

Impofthumes, 

Inflammations, 

King’s-Evil, 

Knots  in  the  Flefh, 

Lamenefs, 

Wafting, 

Weaknefs  of  the  Legs, 

Locked  Jaws  or  Joints, 

Leprofy, 

-Menftrual  Obftrn&ions,] 

Pain  in  the  Stomach, 

Palpitation  of  the  heart, 

Palfy, 

Rheumatifm, 

Ring-worms, 

Sciatica, 

Shingles, 

Sinews  fhrunk, 

Stiff-joints, 

Sprain,  however  old, 

Surfeit, 

Swellings  of  all  forts. 

Throat  fore, 

Tooth-ach, 

Ulcers, 

Wens. 

Nor  have  I yet  known  one  fingle  inftance, 
wherein  it  has  done  harm:  fo  that  I cannot  but 
doubt  the  veracity  of  thole  who  have  affirmed 
G 2 the 


[ <48  ] 


the  contrary.  Dr.  De  Haen  pofitively  affirms, 
“ it  can  do  no  hurt  in  any  cafe  that  is,  unlefs 
the  (hock  were  immoderately  ftrong. 

Fajling  Spittle  outwardly  applied  every  morn- 
ing, has  fometimes  relieved,  and  fometimes 
cured 

Blindnefs, 

Contra&ed  Sinews,  from  a cut, 

Corns,  (mixt  svith  chewed  bread  and  applied 
every  morning) 

Cuts,  (freffi) 

Deafnefs, 

Eye-lids,  red  and  inflamed, 

Scorbutic  tetters, 

Sore  Legs, 

Warts. 

Taken  inwardly,  it  relieves  or  cures 
Afthmas, 

Cancers, 

Falling  Sicknefs, 

Gout, 

Gravel, 

King’s-Evil, 

Leprofy, 

Palfy, 

Rheumatifm, 

Scurvy, 

Stone, 

Swelled  Liver. 

The  bell  way  is,  to  eat  about  an  ounce  of 

hard 


[ H9  ] 


hard  bread,  or  fea-bifcuit,  every  morning  : fad- 
ing, two  or  three  hours  after.  This  fhould  be 
done,  in  ltubborn  cafes,  for  a month  or  fix 
weeks. 


*#*  I advife  all  in  or  near  London, 
to  buy  their  Medicines  at  the  Apo- 
thecaries Hall.  There  they  are  fure 
to  have  them  good. 


G 3 ADVICES, 


[ 15©  ] 


ADVICE  S5 

With  refpea  to  HEALTH. 


Extracted  from  a late  Author. 


To  the  READER. 

1.  TXR.  Tiffot' s advice  to  people  in  general, 
publijhed  a few  years  fnce,  is  I am  per - 
faded,  one  of  the  mojl  ufeful  books  of  the  kind, 
which  has  appeared  in  the  prefent  century.  It 
plainly  f peaks  a perfon  of  ftrong  under fanding, 
extenfve  knowledge  and  deep  experience . At  the 
fame  time  he  f lews  great  humanity,  and  a tender 
fenfe  of  the ftffcrings  of  his  fellow-creatures.  And 
doubtlefs  a defire  of  preventing  or  lejfemng  thefe , 
was  at  leaf  one  reafon  of  this  publication. 

2.  His  defcriptions  of  difeafs  are  truly  admir- 
able, almojl  every  where  dr  awn  from,  the  life ; and 

fo 


[ 1*1  ] 

fo  clear , that  even  common  people  of  tolerable  fenfe, 
will  eafily  know  any  dijlemper  thereby.  His  medi- 
cines areexcceding  few  : fo  few , that  at frjl  fight, 
one  would farce  think  it  poffible  theyfiould  fuffce 
for  fo  many  diforders  as  he  had  treated  of.  And 
mof  of  thofe  few  are,  quite  fimple  ; asfmpleas  can 
well  be  imagined.  The  refl  are  feldom  compounded 
of  more  than  two  or  three  fmple  and  well-known  in- 
gredients. 

A farther  recommendation  of  them  is,  that  the 
far  greater  part  are  of  a moderate  price.  And  as 
they  are  cheap,  fo  mof  of  them  art  fafe  ; not  likely 
to  do  hurt  to  any  one. 

3.  It  is  another  mark  of  his  excellent  judgment, 
that  in  all  cafes  he  lays  fo  much  frefs  upon  regi- 
men : and  that  onfo  many  occafions  he  recommends 
outward  applications,  a method  conflantly  obferv- 
ed  by  theantient  phyf  cians.  Add  to  this,  his  ear- 
nefl  and  repeated  cautions  againjl  all  fpirituous 
and  heating  medicines  ; againf  keeping  the  pati- 
ent too  hot,  and  above  all,  againf  keeping  him  in 
a clofe  or  foul  air,  whereby  fo  many  difeafes  are 
heightened  or  prolonged,  and fo  many  thouf and  lives 
thrown  away.  Add  his  feafonable  detection  off 
many  vulgar  errors,  fame  of  which  have  almof 
univerfally  obtained  : and  which  neverthelefs  farce 
any  phyfician  of  note  had  before  dared  to  expofe. 

4.  Where  there  are  fo  many  excellent  things, 
is  there  any  defect  ? Pnffbly  a few  might  be  obferv- 
ed.  Some  would  efleem  as  fuch,  his  violent  fond - 
nefs for  bleeding  ; his  recommending  it  on  the  mo/l 

G 4 trifing 


[ *$■»  ] 

trifling  occasions  ; and  prescribing  very  frequent 
repetitions  of  it,  as  indifpenfably  neceffary , in fever  al 
dr f cafes,  which  maybe  perjeclly  cured,  without  ever 
bleeding  at  all.  I injiance  in  a pleurify.  Indeed 
thirty  years  ago,  I was  utterly  afonjhed,  when  I 
heard  Dr.  Cockburn  [of  St.  James's) Jay,  “ Sir,  I 
never  bleed  m a pleurify.  I know  no  caufe,  I know 
no  one  intention  it  anfwers,  winch  I cannot  anfwer 
as  well  or  belter,  without  thus  wafing  the  Jlrenglh  of 
my  patient.'  But  I have  now  fee  n the  proof  of  it 
over  and  over.  Nay,  1 will  fay  more.  I have  not 
feen  a man  in  a pleurify  theft  twenty  years , (and  I 
have  feen  not  a few)  whom  I could  not  cure,  net 
only  without  bleeding,  but  without  any  internal 
medicine  whatever.  Alas,  alas  ! Howfew  phyfeians 
love  their  neighbour'  as  then  fives  ! 

5.  Might  not  one  alj'o  rank  among  the  lefs  excel- 
lent things  in  this  t rati,  the  author’ s amazing  love 
g/glyfters?  One  remarked  of  Dr.  Swift,  {‘  In 
all  his  wr  itings  he  Jhews  an  uncommon  affeclion  for 
thc\aii  conco&ion  ofthe  human  nutriment/’  May 
not  (he  fame  remark  (in  a little  different  fenf  ) be 
made  of  Dr.  Tiflot  ? I wonder  whether  he  ever 
hirnfelf  fubmitted  to,  or  performed  the  operation  ? 
Undoubtedly  in  cafes  of  extreme  neceffty,  both 
modefly  and  cleanlinefs  muf  give  place  : and  either 
man  or  woman  would  Jin  again ft  God,  in  not  per- 
mitting an  injection  of  any  kind.  But  what  I 
pray,  befde  extreme  neceffty,  would  induce  any  but 
a beaf  of  a man,  either  to  prefenbe  to  another,  or 
admit  himfelf  fuch  a worfe  than  beaflly  remedy  ? 

6.  Is 


[ J53  ] 


6.  Is  there  not  an  objection  of  the  fame  kind,  to 
that  uncleanly , finking  ointment,  which  he  pre- 
fer ibes  for  the  cure  of  the  itch  ? And  what  need  of 
this,  when  it  may  be  cured  jujl  as  well,  by  medi- 
cines tuhich  have  no  fmell  at  all  ? Suppofe  by  hel- 
lebore and  cream,  or  by  juice  of  lemons  mixed  with 
oil  of  violets . But  there,  is  another  objedion  to  allthat 
the  doElor  has  wrote  upon  this  diforder.  Can  it 
be  thought  fo  great  a man  as  Dr.  Tiffot  never J'aw 
the  tranfaflions  of  our  royal  fociety  ? But  if  he  has 
feen  them,  how  could  he  utterly  forget  the  paper 
communicated  by  Dr.  Mead  which  puts  it  beyond 
all poffible  difpute,  being  a matter  of  ocular  demon - 
flration,  that  the  itch  is  nothing  but  animalcula  of  a 
peculiar  kind , burrowing  under  the Jcarjfkin  ? Yet 
if  he  had  not  utterly  forgot  this,  how  came  he  to 
preferibe  interal  medicines  for  it  ? Does  any  man 
prefenbe  vomits  or  purges,  to  kill feasor  lice  ? 

7.  May  I be  permitted  to  touch  upon  one  point  more, 
to  which  I cannot  fully  fubferibe?  1 amjenbfle,  it' 
may  be  ejleemed huge  want  offenfe,  if  not  ofmodefy 
likewife,  to  contradiEl  the  fitful,  in  their  own  art  ;• 
yea,  fome  of  the  greateft  names  in  Europe.  But 
I cannot  help  it:  when  either  the  fouls  or  lives  of 
men  are  at  fake,  I dare  not  accept  any  man  s per- 
fon . What  I refer  to,  is  his  vehement  recommen- 
dation of  the  Peruvian  bark,  as,  “ the  only  infal- 
liable  remedy  either  for  mortificationsor  intermit- 
ting fevers.”  He  really  feems  tranfported  with 
the  theme,  as  do  very  many  phyfeians  befide . / 

objeB  to  this,  1.  It  is  not  “ an  infallible  remedy  f 
either  for  one  or  the  other  : no,  not  even  when  a d- 
G 5 minifered 


[ *54  1 

minijiered  by  a very Jkilful phyficiah,  after  evacua- 
tions ej  every  kind.  / have  known  pounds  of  it 
given,  to  flop  a mortification : yet  the  mortification 
fpread,  till  it  killed  the  patient.  I myfelf  took  fome 
pounds  of  it  when  I was  young,  for  a common 
Tertian  ague.  And  that  after  vomiting.  Yet  it 
did  not,  would  not  effeEl  a cure.  And  I fhould 
probably  have  died  of  it.  Lad  I not  been  cured  una- 
wares, by  drinking  largely  o/  lemonade.  I will 
be  bold  to  fay,  from  my  per final  knowledge,  there 
are  other  remedies,  which  more  feldom  fail,  I 
believe  the  bark  has  cured  fix  agues  in  ten  : I know, 
cobweb  pills  have  cured  nine  in  ten.  The  bark  has 
often  fopped  a mortification  : and  fomitimes  it  has 
failed.  But  I could  never  learn,  that  Dr.  Piper  s 
method  + (of  EfTex)  has failed  in  a fugle  infance  : 
though  one  of  his  patients  was  of  a grofs  habit, 
and  above  fxty years  old,  and  another,  above  nine- 
ty. Let  than  philojophize  upon  thefe  things  whs 
pleafe\  I urge  plain  matter  of  fad.  I objeB,  fe- 
condly,  that  as  it  is  far  from  being  an  infallible  re- 
medy, Jo  it  is far  from  being  a fafe  one.  Not  that 
1 affirm,  as  Dr.  TifTot.  fuppofes  the  objcclors  do, 
that  it  occafions  ajlhmas  or  dropfies.  I do  not 
think  this  at  all  improbable  : however  I have  net 
obferved  it.  But  this  I affirm  in  the  face  of  the 
fun  ; it  frequently  turns  an  inter  milting  fever  into  a 
conjunction.  By  this  means  a few  years  face  one 
tf  the  mojl  amiable  young  women  I have  known, 

lojl 

+ What  his  method  is,  any  tne  mttyfee  in  the  lajl  edition  of  the  Prinri- 
tive  Phyfic. 


t Ji4  ] 


loft  her  life : and  Jo  did  one,  who  was  before  one. 
of  the  healthief.  and  foutef  young  men  in  York- 
shire. I could  multiply  inflances ; but  I need  go 
no  farther  than  my  own  cafe.  In  the  lafi  ague 
which  I had , thefrfl  ounce  of  bark  was,  as  I ex- 
pelled, thrown  off  by  purging.  The  fecond  being 
mixt  with  fait  of  wormwood , fayed  in  my  fomach. 
And  juft,  at  the  hour  my  ague  fio aid  have  come, 
began  a pain  at  the  point  of  my  fioulder -blade. 
Quickly  it  f ufted  its  place,  began  a little  under  my 
left  breaft  and  there  fxt.  In  lej's  than  an  hour  / 
had  a fiort  cough  ; foon  after , a fmall  fever. 
From  that  time  the  cough,  the  pain  and  the  fever 
continued  without  inter mifjion.  And  every  night, 
very  foon  after  I lay  down,  came  fir  ft  a dry  cough 
for  forty  or  fifty  minutes  : then  an  impetuous  one, 
till fomething  Jeemed  to  burfi,  and  fior  half  an  hour- 
more,  I threw  up  thick  fetid  pus.  Here  was  expe- 
dition ! What  but  a ball  could  have  made  quicker 
difpatch,  than  this  infallible  medicine ? In  lefts 
than  fix  hours,  it  obf  rubbed,  inflamed,  and  ul- 
cerated my  lungs,  and  by  this Jummary  procefs, 
brought  me  into  the  third fage  of  a true  pulmo- 
nary confumption.  ExcuJ'e  me  therefore,  if  having 
efcaped  with  the  fin  of  my  teeth,  I fay  to  all  I 
have  any  influence  over,  whenever  ■ you  have  an 
intermitting  fever,  look  at  me,  and  beware  of  the 
bark  ! I mean  the  bark  in  fubjlance.  If  you  love 
your  lives,  beware  of fw allowing  ounce  after  ounce , 
ef  indigeftible  powder,  though  it  icere  powder  of 
G -6  fioJI  ■ 


[ »5*  ] 

pojl.  To  inffions  or  decoctions  I have  no  ob- 
jection. 

8.  The  following  pages  contain  the  mojl  ufeful 
parts  of  Dr.  Tiilot  'shook:  I believe  the  fubjlance 
of  all  that  will  Jland  the  left  of  found  reafon  and 
experience.  I have  added  little  thereto , but  have 
judged  it  would  be  of  ufe,  to  retrench  a great  deal:% 
in  particular,  much  bleeding,  much  Peruvian  bark, 
and  abundance  of  glyfers.  It  is  my  belief,  that 
one  might  retrench,  without  any  lofs,  many  more  of 
the  remedies  he prefcribes  : in  many  cafes,  half,  in 
others  three  quarters-,  in  fome  eight  or  nine  parts 
in  ten  : Jince  a fingle  [perhaps  even  outward]  reme- 
dy, would  effetl  a perfeEl  cure. 

9.  / have  only  to  add  [what  it  would  not  be  fo 
faf non  able  for  a phyfician  to  believe,  much  lefs  to 

mention)  that  as  God  is  the  foverdgn  difpofer  of 
all  things , and  particularly  of  life  and  death,  l 
earnefly  advife  every  one,  together  with  all  his 
other  medicines,  to  ufe  that  medicine  of  medicines, 
prayer.  Dr.  TifTot  himfef  will  give  us  leave  to 
think  this,  an  univerfal  medicine.  At  the  fame 
tune  then  that  we  ufe  all  the  other  means  which 
reafon  and  experience  ditiate,  let  us  fcek  a bteffing 
from  him,  who  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth, 
who  gives  us  life  and  breath  and  all  things,  and 
who  cannot  withold  from  them  that  feek  him,  any 
manner  of  thing  that  is  good . 

ADVICES, 

% I have  gereraltj  lefcned  his  dcfisj  which  icere  far  loo  'trgc for  E?g- 
lifh  conjliutms. 


[ >57  ] 


ADVICES, 


With  refpeft  to  Health. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Of  the  ufual  caufe  of  popular  maladies . 
Sect.  I. 

FATIGUING  labour  too  long  continued,  is 
the  firft  caufe  of  thofe  maladies,  which  fo 
often  attack  the  inhabitants  of  both  city  and 
country.  Its  effefts,  in  the  firlt place,  are  for  the 
moll  part  inflammatory  difeafes,  fuch  as  quin- 
feys,  pleurifies,  defluxions  on  the  breaft.  In  the 
fecond  place,  that  ftate  of  weaknefs  into  which 
they  fall,  and  from  which  they  with  difficulty  re- 
cover. 

§ 2.  There  are  two  ways  of  preventing  thefe 
maladies.  The  firft  is,  to  avoid  the  caufe  that 
produces  them.  The  fecond,  to  diminiffi  their 
effe&s,  by  drinking  largely  of  cooling  draughts, 
fuch  as  whey,  butter-milk,  or  even  water  ; to 
every  pint  of  which  a glafs  of  vinegar  may  be 

added. 


t »S*  ] 

added,  or  the  juice  of  grapes,  or  goofeberries  not 
fully  ripe.  Thefe  form  an  agreeable  draught, 
which  flrengthens  and  fuflainsthe  labourer. 

§ 3.  A fecond  ordinary  caufe  of  difeafe  is, 
when  a perfon  overheated  by  labour,  repofes  in 
a cold  place,  or  on  the  ground.  This  flops  perfpi- 
ration,  andoccafions  quinfies,  rheumatifms,  in- 
flammations of  the  bread,  pleurifies  and  inflamma- 
tory cholics.  As  foon  as  the  patient  feels  the  firft 
fymptoms  (fometimes  not  till  feveral  days  after] 
he  fhould  immediately  bathe  his  legs  in  warm  wa- 
ter, and  after  being  well  rubbed  before  the  fire,  he 
fhould  drink  a good  quantity  of  the  warm  infufion. 
No  1.  Such  remedies  often  prevent  the  difeafe. 
But  on  the  contrary,  the  evil  becomes  more  dan- 
gerous, when  people  try  to  procure  a fweat  by 
heating  medicines. 

§ 4.  A third  caufe  of  difeafe,  is  drinking  cold 
water,  while  one  is  much  heated.  This  oper- 
ates as  the  former,  but  the  bad  effects  are  gener- 
ally more  violent.  I have  feen  fome  terrible  ex- 
amples of  this.  Violent  quinfeys,  inflammations 
of  the  breafl,  cholics,  inflammations  in  the 
liver,-  and  in  the  belly,  attended  with  fwellings, 
vomitings,  fuppreffion  of  urine,  and  terrible  an- 
guifh.  The  belt  remedies  are  bleeding  in  thebe- 
ginning,  drinking  warm  water,  to  which  a fifth 
part  of  milk  has  been  added  ; and  fomentations 
of  warm  water  applied  to  the  throat,  breafl,  and 
belly. 

§ 5.  A fourth  caufe,  is  the  inconflancy  of  the- 

climate. 


C *59  3 


climate.  In  one  day  we  ofren  feel  it  change’ 
from  hot  to  cold,  and  from  cold  to  hot.  The 
bell  precaution  is,  to  go  better  clothed  than  the 
weather  feerns  to  call  for  : to  put  on  our  winter- 
drefs  early  in  autumn,  and  quit  it  ;ate  in  fpring. 
Labourers  who  throw  off  their  clothes  while  at 
work,  fliould  never  flnp  till  an  hour  after  fun- 
rife,  and  fhouid  put  on  their  cloaths  immediate- 
ly on  ending  their  work,  or  rather  an  hour  before 
fun-fet. 

§ 6.  It  often  happens,  that  the  traveller  gets 
wet.  This  may  be  attended  with  no  bad  confe- 
quences,  provided  he  fhifts  his  cloaths  immedi- 
ately. But  I have  often  feen  deadly  pleurifies 
the  confequences  of  omitting  this.  * When  the 
body  and  legs  have  been  wet,  the  bell  way  is  to 
bathe  the  legs  in  warm  water.  I have  b-y  this 
means,  radically  cured  people  fubjecl  to  violent 
cholics,  from  having  their  feet  wetted.  This 
bath  becomes  ftili  more  efficacious,  by  diffolving 
fome  foap  in  it. 

§ 7.  A fifth  caufe  is  the  common  cuflom  in 
villages,  of  having  their  ditches  or  dunghills  di- 
reffly  under  their  windows.  Corrupted  vapours 
are  continually  exhaling  from  them,  which  in 
procefs  of  time  cannot  fail  of  being  prejudicial. 
Thofe  who  are  accuftomed  to  the  fmell,  become 
infenfible  of  it  ; but  the  caufe,  neverthelefs,  does 
not  ceafe  to  be  unwholefome  ; and  fuch  as  are 
unufed  to  it,  perceive  the  imprcflion  in  all  its 
force. 

\ 8.  To 


C 160  ] 


§ 8.  To  this  caufe  may  be  added  the  neglefl 
of  common  people  to  air  their  lodgings.  It  is 
well  known  that  too  clofe  an  air  occafions  malig- 
nant fevers;  and  the  poor  country  people  refpire 
no  other  in  their  own  houfes.  Their  lodgings* 
which  are  very  fmall,  and  which  notwithftand- 
ing  inclofe  (both  day  and  night)  the  father,  mo- 
ther, and  feven  or  eight  children,  are  never 
kept  open  during  fix  months  in  the  year,  and  very 
feldom  during  the  other  fix.  It  is  eafy,  to 
prevent  all  the  evils  arifing  from  this  fource,  by 
opening  the  windows  daily. 

§ g.  I confider  drunkennefs  as  a fixth  caufe  of 
difeafes.  The  poor  wretches,  who  abandon 
themfelves  to  it,  are  fubjebf  to  frequent  inflam- 
mations of  the  breaft,  and  to  pleurifies,  which 
often  carry  them  off  in  the  flower  of  their  age.  If 
they  efcape  thefe,  they  fink,  long  before  the  ordi- 
nary approach  of  old  age,  into  all  its  infirmities, 
and  efpecially  into  an  afthma,  which  terminates 
in  a dropfy  of  the  breaft,  that  is  incurable. 

§ 10.  The  provifions  of  the  common  people 
are  alfo  frequently  one  caufe  of  maladies.  This 
happens,  iff,  when  the  corn  was  not  well  ri- 
pened, or  not  well  got  in,  in  bad  harvefts. 
But  this  may  be  leffened  by  wafhing  and  drying 
the  grain  completely  ; by  allowing  it  a little 
more  time  to  fwell  or  rife,  and  by  baking  it  a 
little  more,  sdly.  The  better  faved  part  of  the 
wheat  is  fometimes  damaged  in  the  farmer’s 
houfe  ; either  becaufe  he  does  not  take  the  due 
care  of  it,  or  becaufe  he  has  no  convenient 

place 


[ >6*  ] 


place  to  preferve  it.  It  has  often  happened  to 
me,  on  entering  one  of  thefe  houfes,  to  be 
ftruck  with  the  fmell  of  wheat  that  has  been 
fpoiled.  Neverthelefs,  there  are  known  and 
eafy  methods  to  provide  againfl  this.-  gdly,  That 
wheat,  which  is  good,  is  often  made  into  bad 
bread,  by  not  letting  it  rife  fufRciently  ; by  bak- 
ing it  too  little,  and  by  keeping  it  long.  All  thefe 
errors  have  their  troublefome  confequences, 
efpecially  on  children  and  weakly  people. 

Cakes  may  beconlidered  as  an  abufe  of  bread. 
The  dough  is  almoll  conhantly  bad,  and  often 
unleavened,  ill  baked,  greafy,  and  Huffed  with 
either  fat  or  four  ingredients,  which  compound 
one  of  the  moll  indigeftible  aliments  imaginable. 
Women  and  children  confume  the  moft  of  this 
food,  and  are  the  very  fubjefls  for  whom  it  is 
the  moft  improper  : little  children  efpecially, 
who  are,  for  the  greater  part,  unable  to  digeft 
it  perfeflly.  Hence  arife  obftruftions  in  the 
bowels,  and  a (limy  vifcidity  throughout  the 
mafs  of  humours,  which  throws  them  into  vari- 
ous difeafes  ; flow  fevers,  a heftic,  the  rickets, 
the  King’s  evil,  and  feeblenefs,  for  the  mifera- 
ble  remainder  of  their  days.  There  is  nothing 
more  unwholefome  than  dough  not  fufficiently 
leavened,  ill-baked,  greafy,  and  foured  by  the 
addition  of  fruits. 

§ li.  We  fliould  not  omit,  in  enumerating 
the  caufes  of  maladies  among  country  people, 
the  conftruftion  of  their  houfes,  a great  many 

of 


C 162  ] 

of  which  either  are  clofe  to  a higher  ground,  or 
are  funk  a little  in  the  earth.  Each  of  thefe 
fituations  fubje&s  them  to  confiderable  moift- 
nefs ; which  is  not  the  Ieaft  fource  of  difeafes, 
efpecially  to  women  in  child-bed,  to  children, 
and  perfons  recovering  of  fome  diftemper.  It 
would  be  eafy  to  prevent  this  inconvenience,  by 
raifing  the  ground  on  which  the  houfe  flood, 
fome  inches  above  the  level,  by  a bed  of  gravel, 
of  fmall  flints,  pounded  bricks,  coals,  or  fuch 
other  materials ; and  bv  avoiding  to  build 
clofe  to,  or,  as  it  were,  under  a much  higher 
foil.  It  would  flill  cofl  lefs  trouble,  to  give  the 
front  of  the  houfes  an  expofure  to  the  fouth  eafl. 
This  expofure,  fuppofing  all  other  circumflances 
to  be  alike,  is  both  the  molt  wholefome  and  ad- 
vantageous- 


CHAP.  II. 

Of  the  caufs  which  aggravate  difeafes . 
Sect.  12. 

THE  caufes  already  enumerated  occafion 
difeafes ; and  bad  regimen  or  conduct, 
render  them  more  perplexing,  and  often  , mor- 
tal. 

There  is  a prevailing  prejudice,  which  is 

every 


C l63  J 


every  year  attended  witli  the  death  of  hundreds, 
— That  all  diftempers  are  cured  by  fweat  ; and 
that  to  procure  fweat,  they  mull  take  abundance  of 
hot  and  heating  things,  and  keep  themfelves  very 
hot.  This  is  a fatal  millake  ; and  it  cannot  be 
too  much  inculcated  ; that  by  thus  endeavour- 
ing to  force  fweating,  at  the  beginning  of  a dif- 
eafe,  they  are  taking  pains  to  kill  themfelves. 
I have  feen  cafes,  in  which  the  continual  care 
to  provoke  fweating,  has  as  manifeftly  killed  the 
patient,  as  if  a ball  had  been  Ihot  through  his 
brains  ; as  fuch  an  untimely  difcharge  carries 
off  the  thinner  part  of  the  blood,  leaving  the 
mafs  more  dry,  vifcid  and  inflamed.  Now  as  in- 
all  acute  difeafes,  except  a very  few,  the  blood  is 
already  too  thick  fuch-  a difcharge  muff  evi- 
dently increafethe  diforder. 

§ 13.  But  fuppofe  fweating  Was  beneficial  at 
the  beginning  of  difeafes,  the  means  they  ufe  to 
excite  it  would  prove  fatal.  The  firft  is,  to  ftifle 
the  patient  with  a clofe  apartment,  and  a load  of 
covering.  Care  is  taken  to  prevent  a breath  of 
frefh  air’s  fqueezing  into  the  room  ; from  which 
circumflance,  the  air  already  in  it  is  fpeedily 
corrupted  : and  fuch  a degree  of  heat  is  procured 
by  the  weight  of  the  bed  cloaths,  that  thefe  two 
caufes  alone  are  fufficient  to  excite  a fever,  even 
in  a healthy  man.  More  than  once  have  1 found 
myfelf  feized  with  difficulty  of  breathing,  on 
entering  fuch  chambers,  from  which  I have  been 

immediately 


[ M ] 

immediately  relieved,  on  opening  all  the  win- 
dows. Let  in  a little  frefh  air  on  thefe  miferable 
patients,  and  leffen  the  burthen  of  their  cover- 
ings, and’  you  generally  fee  upon  the  fpot,  their 
fever  and  oppreffion,  their  anguifh  and  raving 
abate. 

§ 14.  The  fecond  method  taken  to  raife  a 
fweaiki  thefe  patients  is,  to  give  them  hot  things, 
efpecially  Venice-lreacle,  or  wine.  In  all  fe- 
verifh  diforders  we  fhould  gently  cool,  and  keep 
the  belly  moderately  open  : while  thefe  tilings, 
both  heat  and  bind;  and  hence  we  may  eafily 
judge  of  their  confequences.  A healthy  perfon 
would  certainly  be  feized  with  an  inflammatory 
fever,  on  taking  the  fame  quantity  of  wine,  or 
Venice-treacle,  which  the  peafant  takes  when  he 
is  attacked  by  one  of  thefe  diforders.  'How  then 
fhould  a ftck  perfon  efcape  dying  by  them  ? 

§ 1,5.  But  I fhall  be  told,  that  difeafes  are 
often  carried  oflfby  fweat.  I anfwer,  it  is  true, 
fw'eating  cures  fome  diforders,  at  their  very  on- 
fet,  for  inftance,  thofe  flitches  that  are  called 
falfe  pleurifies,  fome  rheumatic  pains,  and  fome 
colds.  But  this  only  happens  w'hen  the  diforders 
depend  folely  on  abated  perforation,  to  which 
fuch  pain  inflantly  fucceeds  ; and  where  imme- 
diately, before  the  fever  has  thickenedthe  blood, 
and  inflamed  the  humours ; and  before  any  in- 
ternal load  is  formed,  fome  rvarm  drinks  are 
given,  which,  by  refloring  tranfpiration,  re- 
move the  caufe  of  the  diforder.  Neverthelefs, 


even 


r 164  1 

even  in  fuch  a cafe,  great  care  fhould  be  had, 
not  to  raife  too  violent  a commotion  in  the 
blood,  which  would  rather  reffrain  than  pro- 
mote fweat.  Sweating  is  alfo  of  fervice  in  dif- 
eafes,  when  their  caufes  are  extinguifhed,  by 
plentiful  dilution:  then  it  relieves  by  drawing 
off  with  itfelf  fome  part  of  the  diflempered  hu- 
mours ; (after  their  groffer  parts  have  paffed  off 
by  flool  and  by  urine, J and  carries  off  that  ex- 
traordinary quantity  of  water,  we  were  obliged 
to  convey  into  the  blood.  Under  fitch  circum- 
ftances,  it  is  of  importance,  not  to  check  the 
fweat.  As  much  care  fhould  be  taken  not  to 
check  that  evacuation  which  naturally  occurs 
towards  the  concltffion  of  difeafes,  as  not  to 
force  it  at  their  beginning  ; the  former  being  al- 
moft  conffanrly  beneficial,  the  latter  as  conflant- 
ly  pernicious.  Befides,  were  it  neceffary,  it 
might  be  dangerous  to  force  it  : frnce  by  heat- 
ing the  patients,  a vehement  fever  is  excited. 
Warm  water,  in  fhort,  is  the  befl  of  fudorifies. 
— An  able  pbyfician  long  fmce  affured  his  coun- 
trymen, that  wine  was  fatal  in  fevers;  I take 
leave  to  repeat  it  again  and  again,  and  wifh  it 
may  not  be  with  as  little  fuccefs. 

§ 16.  Their  difeafes  are  further  aggravated  by 
the  food  that  is  generally  given  them.  They 
-muff  be  weak,  in  confequence  of  their  being  Tick, 
and  the  ridiculous  fear  of  the  patients  dying  of 
weaknefs,  difpofes  their  friends  to  force  them 
to  eat;  which,  increafing  their  diforder,  renders 

the 


t >66  ] 


the  fever  mortal.  This  fet  is  abfolutely  chimerF 
cal ; never  yet  did  a perfon  in  a lever  die  merely 
for  weaknefs.  *They  may  be  fupporied  even  for 
weeks,  by  water  only;  and  are  ftronger  at  the 
end  of  that  time,  than  if  they  had  taken  more 
folid  nourifhment ; fince,  far  from  ftrengthen- 
ing  them,  their  food  increafes  their  difeafe,  and 
thence  increafes  their  weaknefs. 

§ i7.*From  thefirft  invafion  of  a fever,  diges- 
tion ceafes.  Whatever  folid  food  is  taken  cor- 
rupts, and  adds  nothing  to  the  ftrength  of  the  Tick 
but  greatly  to  that  of  the  diftemper.  1 here  are 
a thoufand  examples  to  prove,  that  it  becomes 
a real  poifon:  and  we  may  fenfibly  perceive 
thefe  poor  creatures,  who  are  thus  compelled  to 
eat,  lofe  their  ftrength,  and  fall  into  anxiety  and 
ravings,  in  proportion  as  they  fwaliow. 

§ 1 8.  They  are  further  injured  by  the  quality 
of  their  food.  They  are  forced  to  fup  llrong 
gravy  foups,  eggs,  bifcuits,  and  even  flefh,  if 
they  have  but  juft  ftrength  to  chew  it.  It  is 
almofl  impoffible  for  them  to  furvive  all  this  trafli. 
Should  a man  in  perfeft  health  be  compelled  to 
eat  {linking  meat,  rotten  eggs,  ftale  four  broth, 
he  is  attacked  with  as  violent  fymptoms,  as  if  he 
had  taken  real  poifon,  which,  in  effeft,  he  has. 
He  is  feized  v ith  vomiting,  anguifh,  a violent 
purging,  and  a fever,  with  raving,  and  eruptive 
fpots,  which  we  call  the  purple  fever.  Now  when 
the  fame  articles  of  food,  in  their  foundeft  ftate, 
are  given  to  a perfon  in  a fever,  the  heat,  and 

the 


[ 1 

the  morbid  matter,  already  in  his  ftomach,  quick- 
ly putrify  them  : and  after  a few  hours  produce 
all  the  above-mentioned  effedis.  Let  any  man 
judge  then,  if  the  leaft  fervice  can  be  expe&ed 
from  them. 

The  moft  obferving  perfons  remark,  that  when 
a feverifh  patient  fups  what  is  called  good  broth, 
the  fever  gathers  llrength,  and  the  patient  weak- 
nefs.  The  giving  fuch  a foup  or  broth,  though 
of  the  frefheft  meat,  to  a man  who  has  a high 
fever,  or  putrid  humours  in  his  ftomach,  is  to. 
do  him  exadfly  the  fame  fervice,  as  if  you  had 
given  him,  two  or  three  hours  later,  ftale  pu- 
trid foup, 

§ 19.  It  were  happy  for  mankind,  could  they 
he  thoroughly  perfuaded  of  this  demonftrable 
truth  : — That  the  only  thingst which  can  {Length- 
en fick  perfons,  are  thofe  which  weaken  their 
difeafe.  Out  of  twenty  fick  perfons,  who  are 
loft  in  the  country,  more  than  two-thirds  might 
have  been  cured,  if  thev  were  fupplied  with 
abundance  of  good  water. 

§ 20.  What  further  increafes  our  horror  at 
this  enormous  propenfity  to  heat,  drv  up,  and 
cram  the  fick  is,  that  it  is  totally  oppofite  to  what 
nature  herfelf  indicates,  in  fuch  circumftances. 
The  burning  heat  of  which  they  complain;  the 
drynefs  of  the  lips,  tongue  and  throat ; the  high 
colour  of  their  urine  ; the  longing  they  have  for 
cooling  things  ; the  pleafure  they  enjoy  from 
frefh  air,  are  fo  many  proofs,  which  cry  out  with 

a loud 


C it*  ] 

a loud  voice,  that  we  ought  to  coohthem  moder- 
ately, by  all  means.  Their  foul  tongues,  which 
{hew  the  ftomach  to  be  in  the  like  condition ; 
their  loathing,  tht-ir  propenfity  to  vomit,  their 
utteraverfion  to  all  foild  food,  and  efpecially  to 
flefh ; the  difagreeable  {tench  of  their  breath ; 
and  frequently  the  extraordinary  offenfivenefs 
of  their  excrements,  demonftratethat  their  bowels 
are  full  of  putrid  contents,  which  muff  corrupt 
all  the  aliments  fuperadded  to  them  ;.and  that 
the  only  thing  which  can  be  done,  is  to  dilute 
•them  by  plentiful  draughts  of  cooling  drinks.  I 
affirm  it  again,  and  I heartily  wifh  it  maybe  tho- 
roughly attended  to,  that  as  long  as  there  is  any 
talte  ofbitternefs,  or  of  putrefcence ; as  long  as 
there  is  a loathing,  a bad  breath,  heat  and  fe- 
verilhnefs  with  fetid  flools,  and  little  and  high 
coloured  urine  ; fo  long  all  flefh,  flefh-foup, 
eggSj  and  all  kind  of  food  compofed  of  them,  or 
of  any  of  them,  and  all  Venice-treacle.  wine,  and 
heating  things  are  fo  many  abfolute  poifons. 

§ 21.  Neither  fhould  it  be  omitted,  that  even 
when  a patient  has  efcaped  death,  the  mifchief 
is  not  ended  ; the  high  aliments  and  heating  me- 
dicines leave  behind  the  principle  of  fome  chro- 
nical difeafe  ; which  increafing  infenfibly,  burfts 
out  at  length,  and  finally  procures  his  death. 

§ 22.  I mud  alfo  lake  notice  of  another  com- 
mon praftice ; which  is  purging,  or  vomiting, 
at  the  very  beginning  of  a dillemper.  Infinite 
mifchiefs  are  occafioned  by  it.  There  are  fome 

cafes 


[ i6g  ] 

cafes  indeed,  in  which  it  is  neceffary.  But  it  is 
a general  rule,  that  they  are  hurtful  at  the  be- 
ginning ; always,  when  the  difeafes  are  ffriftly 
inflammatory - 

§ 23.  It  is  hoped  by  their  afliffance,  to  re- 
move the  oppreflion  of  theftomach,  adifpofition 
to  vomit,  a dry  mouth,  thirft,  and  un^afinefs. 
But  the  caufesof  thefe  fymptoms  are  feldom  of 
a nature  to  yield  to  thefe  evacuations.  By  the 
extraordinary  thicknefs  of  the  humours  that  foul 
the  tongue,  we  fhould  form  our  notions  of  thofe 
which  line  the  ftomach  and  the  bowels.  It  may 
be  wafhed,  gargled,  and  even  fcraped  to  little 
purpofe  : until  the' patient  has  drank  for  many 
days,  and  the  heat,  the  fever  and  the  fizinefs  of 
the  humours  are  abated,  this  filth  cannot  be 
thoroughly  removed.  The  ftate  of  the  ftomach 
being  conformable  to  that  of  the  tongue,  no  me- 
thod can  effeftually  fcour  and  clean  it  at  the  be- 
ginning: but  by  giving  diluting  remedies  plen- 
tifully, it  gradually  frees  itfelf ; and  the  propen- 
fity  to  vomit,  with  its  other  effects  go  off  na- 
turally. 

§ 24.  The  vomit,  efpecially,  being  given  in 
an  inflammatory  difeafe,  before  the  humours 
have  been  diminifhed  by  bleeding,  and  diluted 
by  plentiful  fmall  drinks,  is  productive  of  inflam- 
mations of  the  flomach,  of  the  lungs  and  liver, 
of  fuffocations  and  frenzies.  Purges  fometimes 
occafion  a general  inflammation  of  the  guts, 
which  terminates  in  death.  Some  inftances  of 

Vol.  XXV.  H each 


[ >7»  ] v 

each  I have  feen.  The  ene£l  of  fuch  medicines, 
in  thefe  circumftances,  are  much  the  fame  with 
thofe  we  might  expeft,  from  the  application  of 
fait  and  pepper  to  a dry,  inflamed  and  foul 
tongue,  in  order  to  moiflen  and  clean  it. 


CHAP.  III. 

OJ  the  means  that  ought  to  be.  ufed,  at  the  beginning 
oj  difeafes  ; and  of  the  did  in  acute  difeafes. 

Sect.  25. 

IYAVING  clearly  {hewn  the  dangers  of  the 
regimen, ' diet,  and  principal  medicines 
generally  made  ufe  of  on  thefe  occafions,  I mull 
now  point  out  the  method  they  ntay  purfue, 
without  any  rifque.  on  the  invafion  of  fome  a- 
cute  difeafes,  and  the  general  diet  ■which  agrees 
with  them  all.  And  whenever  I fhall  fay  in  ge- 
neral, that,  a patient  is  to  be  put  upon  a regi- 
men, it  will  fignify,  that  he  is  to  be  treated  ac- 
cording to  the  method  prefcribed  in  this  chapter. 

§ 26.  The  greater  part  of  acute  difeafes,  give 
fome  notice  of  their  approach  a few  weeks,  or  at 
leall  days  before  their  aftual  invafion;  iuch  as  a 
light  wearinefs,  fliffnefs  or  numbnefs  ; lefs  ac- 
tivity than  ufual,  lefs  appetite,  a fmall  load  or 

heavinefs 


* 


[ i?1  ] 

heavinefs  at  the  domach;  fome  complaint  in 
the  head  ; a profounder  degree  of  fleep,  yet  lefs 
compofed,  and  lefs  refrefhing  than  ufual ; fome- 
tlmes  a light  oppredion  of  the  bread,  a lefs  re- 
gular pulfe  ; a propenfity  to  he  cold;  an  apt- 
nefs  to  fweat ; and  fometimes  a fuppreffion  of  a 
former  dlfpofition  to  fweat.  At  fuch  a term  we 
may  prevent,  or  at  lead  mitigate,  the  mod  per- 
plexing diforders,  by  carefully  obferving  the  fol- 
io wing  points. 

1.  To  omit  all  violent  work  or  labour,  but  not 
a gentle  degree  of  exercife. 

2.  To  ufe  none,  or  very  little,  folid  food ; 
efpecially  no  defh,  defh -broth,  eggs,  or  wine. 

3.  To  drink  three,  or  even  four  pints  daily, 
by  fmall  glades  at  a time,  from  half-hour  to  half- 
hour,  of  the  Ptifans  No.  r.  and  2.  or  even  of 
warm  water,  to  each  quart  of  which  mav  be.  ad- 
deed  half  a glafs  of  vinegar.  No  perfon  can  be 
deditute  of  this.  Thofe  who  have  honey  will 
do  well  to  add  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  it  to 
the  water.  A light  infufion  of  elder  dowers,  or 
of  thofe  of  the  lime-tree,  may  alfo  be  advantage- 
oufly  ufed,  or  clear  fweet  whey. 

§ 27.  Very  unhappily  people  take  the  direflly 
contrary  method.  Prom  the  moment  thefe  pre- 
vious complaints  are  perceived  ; they  eat  no- 
thing but  grofs  meat,  eggs,  or  drongmeat-foups. 
They  leave  off  garden-duff  and  fruits,  which  would 
be  proper  for  them;  and  drink  heartily  (under  a 
notion  of  drengthening  the  domach)  of  wine 
H 2 ' and 


[ ] 


and  other  liquors,  which  ftrengthen  nothing  but 
the  fever,  and  expel  what  degree  of  health  might 
ft  ill  remain. 

§ 28.  When  the  diftemper  is  advanced,  and 
the  patient  is  feized  with  coldnefs  or  fhuddering, 
in  a greater  or  lefs  degree,  commonly  attended 
with  an  univerfal  oppreftion.  and  pains  over  all 
the  furface  of  the  body  ; he  fhould  be  put  to 
bed,  if  he  cannot  keep  up;  or  fhould  fit  down 
as  quietly  as  poftible,  with  a little  more  covering 
than  ufual : he  fhould  drink  every  quarter  of  an 
hour  a fmall  glafs  of  feme  of  thofe  liquids  I have 
recommended  § 26. 

§ 29.  Thefe  patients  covet  a load  of  covering, 
during  the  cold  or  {hivering:  but  we  fhould  be 
careful  to  lighten  them  as  foon  as  it  abates  ; fo 
that  when  the  heat  begins,  they  may  have  no 
more  than  their  ufual  covering.  It  were  to  be 
wifhed  they  had  rather  lefs.  The  country  peo- 
ple lie  upon  a feather-bed,  and  under  a quilt, 
that  is  commonly  extremely  heavy  ; and  the 
heat  which  is  heightened  and  retained  by  fea- 
thers, is  particularly  troublefome  to  perfons  in  a 
fever.  Neverthelefs,  this  cuftom  may  be  com- 
plied with  for  one  feafon  of  the  year  : but  during 
our  heats,  or  whenever  the  fever  is  violent, 
they  fhould  lie  on  a pallet,  and  throw  away  their 
coverings  of  down,  fo  as  to  remain  covered  on- 
ly with  fheeis,  or  fomething  iefs  injurious  than 
feather-coverings.  A peifon  could  fcarcelv  be- 

x lieve, 


C J73  ] 


iieve,  how  much  comfort  a patient  is  fenfible  ot, 
in  being  eafed  of  his  former  coverings.. 

§ 29.  As  foon  as  the  heat  after  the  fh uddering 
approaches,  we  fhould  provide  for  the  patient  s 
regimen.  And, 

1.  Care  fhould  be  taken  that  the  air,  in  the 
room  fhould  not  be  too  hot,  the  mildeft  degree 
of  warmth  being  fufficient;  that  there  be  as  lit- 
tle noife  as  poffible,  and  that  no  perfon  fpe'ak.  to 
the  fick,  without  neceffity.  No  external  cir- 
cumftance  heightens  the  fever  more,  nor  inclines 
more  to  raving,  than  the  perfons  in  the  cham- 
ber, efpecially  about  the  bed.  They  lefTen  the 
fpring  of  the  air ; they  prevent  a fucceffion  of 
frefh  air  ; and  the  variety  of  objects  occupies  the 
brain  too  much.  Whenever  the  patient  has 
been  at  ftool,  or  has  made  urine,  thefe  excre- 
ments fhould  be  removed  immediatelv.  The 
windows  fhould  certainly  be  opened  night 
and  morning,  at  lead  for  a quarter  of  an  hour 
each  time  ; when  alfo  a door  fhould  be  opened, 
to  promote  an  entire  change  of  the  air  in  the 
room.  Neverthelefs,  as  the  patient  fhould  not 
be  expofed  to  a cunent  of  air,  the  curtains  of 
his  bed  fhould  then  be  drawn.  If  the  feafon  be 
rigidly  cold,  it  will  be  fufficient  to  keep  the 
windows  open,  a few  minutes,  each  time.  In 
fummer,  at  leaft  one  window  fhould  be  fet  open 
day  and  night.  The  pouring  a little  vinegar 
upon  a red-hot  fhovel  alfo  greatly  conduces  to 
reftore  the  fpring,  and  correft  the  putridity  of 
H 3 ' the 


C 174  ] 


the  air.  In  our  greatefl  heats,  when  the  fick. 
perfon  is  fenfibly  incommoded  by  it,  the  floor 
may  be  fprinkled  now  and  then  bv  branches  of 
willow  or  afli  trees  dipt  a little  in  pails  of 
water. 

§ 30.  2.  With  refpefl  to  the  patient's  nourifh- 
ment  he  muft  entirely  abftain  from  all  food  but 
the  following,  which  is  one  of  the  wholefomeft, 
and  fimplefl.  Take  half  a pound  of  bread,  a mor- 
fel  of  the  frefbeft  butler  about  the  fize  of  a 
hazel  nut  (which  may  be  omitted  too)  three 
pints  and  a quarter  of  water  ; boil  them  till  the 
bread  be  entirely  reduced  to  a thin  confidence  : 
then  llrain  it  and  give  the  patient  one  eighth  part 
of  it  every  three,  or  every  four  hours  : but  flill 
more  rarely,  if  the  fever  be  vehemently  high. 
Thofe  who  have  barley,  oatmeal,  or  rice,  may 
prepare,  them  in  the  fame  manner,  with  fome 
grains  of  fait. 

r 31.  * The  fick  may  be  fometimes  indulged, 
in  lieu  oflhefe  fpoon-meats,  with  raw  fruits  in 
fummer,  or  in  winter  with  apples  baked  or  boil- 
ed, or  plumbs  and  cherries  dried  and  boiled. 
Perfons  of  knowledge  will  not  be  furprifed  to  fee 
fruit  direfted  in  acute  difeafes  : the  benefit  of 
which  they  may  have  frequently  feen.  Such 
advice  can  only  difguft  thofe,  who  remain  flill 
obflinately  attached  to  old  prejudices.  But  could 
they  refiefl  a little,  they  mud  perceive,  that 
thefe  fruits  which  allay  third,  which  abate  the 

fever, 


L m ] 

fever,  which  correft  and  attemper  the  putrid 
and  heated  bile,  which  gently  difpofe  the  belly  ro 
be  rather  open,  and  promote  the  difcharge  of  the 
urine,  muff  prove  the  propereft  nouriftnnent  for 
perfons  in  acute  fevers.  We  may  fafely  al- 
low, in  all  continual  fevers,  cherries,  red  and 
black,  ft  dewberries,  the  beft  cured  raifins,  rafp- 
berries,  and  mulberries  ; provided  all  of  them 
be  perfeftly  ripe.  Apples,  pears,  and  plumbs 
are  lefs  melting  and  diluting,  lefs  fucculent,  and 
rather  lefs  proper.  Some  kinds  of  pears  how- 
ever are  extremely  juicy,  fuch  as  the  dean  or 
valentia  pear,  different  kinds  oftheburee  pear  ; 
the  St.  Germain,  the  green  fugarv  pear,  and 
the  fummer  royal,  which  may  all  be  allowed  , 
as  well  as  a little  juice  of  very  ripe  plumbs  with 
the  addition  of  water  to  it.  * This  laft  I have 
known  to  affuage  thirft  in  a fever,  beyond  any 
other  liquor.  Care  fhould  be  taken,  at  the  fame 
time,  that  the  Pick  fhould  never  be  indulged 
in  a great  quantity  of  any  of  them  at  once, 
which  would  overload  the  ftomach  ; but  if  they 
are  given  a little  at  a lime  and  often,  nothing 
can  be  more  falutary.  China  oranges,  or  lemons 
may  be  taken  likewife  ; but  without  eating  any 
of  the  peel,  which  is  hot  and  inflaming. 

§ 32.  g.  Their  drink  fhould  be  fuch  as  allays 
thirft,  and  abates  the  fever  ; fuch  as  dilutes,  re- 
laxes, and  promotes  the  evacuations  by  ftool, 
urine  and  perfpiration.  All  thofe  which  1 have 
recommended  in  the  preceding  chapters,  poffefs 
H 4 thefe 


C *7«  ] 


theie  qualities.  A glafs  or  a glafs  and  a half  of 
the  juice  of  fuch  fruits  as  I have  juft  mentioned, 
may  alfo  be  added  to  three  full  pints  of  water. 

The  fick  fhould  drink  at  leaf!  twice  or  thrice 
that  quantity  daily,  often,  and  a little  at  once, 
between  three  or  four  ounces  every  quarter  of 
an  hour.  The  coldnefs  of  the  drink  fhould  juft 
be  taken  off. 

§ 33.  4.  As  long  as  the  patient  has  ftrength 

for  it,  he  fhould  fit  up  out  of  bed  one  hour  dailv, 
and  longer  if  he  can  bear  it;  but  at  leaft  half  an 
hour.  It  has  a tendency  to  leffen  the  fever,  the 
head-ach,  and  raving.  But  he  fhould  not  be 
raifed,  while  he  has  a hopeful  fweating  ; though 
fuch  fweats  hardly  ever  occur,  but  at  the  con- 
clufion  of  difeafes,  and  after  the  fick  has  had 
feveral  other  evacuations. 

§ 34.  5.  His  bed  fhould  be  made  daily  while 

he  fits  up  ; and  the  fheets,  as  well  as  the  patient’s 
linen,  fhould  be  changed  every  two  days,  if  it 
can  be  done  with  fafety.  An  unhappy  prejudice 
has  eftablifhed  a contrary  praftice.  The  people 
about  the  patient  dread  his  rifing  out  of  bed  ; 
they  let  him  continue  there  in  nafty  linen,  loaded 
with  putrid  .fleams ; which  not  only  keep  up 
the  diftemper,  but  even  .heighten  it  into  fome 
degree  of  malignity.  * I again  repeat  it  here, 
that  nothin?  conduces  more  to  continue  the  fe- 

O 

ver  and  raving,  than  confining  the  fick  con- 
flantly  to  bed,  and  withholding  him  from 
changing  his  foul  linen  : by  relieving  him  from 


r *77  ] 

both  of  which  I have,  without  the  afliftance  of 
any  other  remedy,  put  a flop  to  a continual  de- 
lirium of  twelve  days  uninterrupted  duration. 
A man  mull  be  in  nearly  a dying  condition,  not 
to  be  able  to  bear  thefe  fmall  commotions,  which, 
in  the  very  moment  he  permits  them,  increafe 
his  ftrength,  and  immediately  after  abate  his  com- 
plaints. One  advantage  the  fick  gain  by  fitting 
up  a little,  is  the  increafed  quantity  of  their 
urine.  Some  have  been  obferved  to  make  none 
at  all,  if  they  did  not  rife  out  of  bed. 

A confiderable  number  of  acute  difeafes  have 
been  effedlually  cured  by  this  method,  which 
mitigates  them  all.  Where  it  is  not  ufed,  me- 
dicines are  very  often  of  no  advantage.  It 
were  to  be  wifhed  the  patient  and  his  friends- 
were  made  to  underfland,  that  diftempers  were 
not  to  be  expelled  at  once  with  rough  ufage ; 
that  they  mull  have  their  courfe ; and  that  the 
ufe  of  violent  medicines  might  indeed  abridge 
the  courfe  £e>f  them,  by  killing  the  patient ; yet 
never  otherwife  Ihortened  the  difeafe ; but,  on 
the  contrary,  rendered  it  more  tedious  and  ob- 
flinate  ; and  often  entailed  fuch  unhappy  confe- 
quences  on  the  fufferer,  as  left  him  feeble  and- 
languid  for  the  reft  of  his  life. 

§ 35.  The  term  of  recovery  from  a difeafe  re- 
quires confiderable  attention,  as  it  is  always  a 
ftate  of  feeblenefs.  The  fame  kind  of  prejudice 
which  deftroys  the  Tick,  by  compelling  them  to 
eat,  during  the  violence  of  the  difeafe,  is  ex- 
H 5 tend  ecu 


[ >78  j 


tended  alio  to  the  Rage  of  recovery  ; and  either 
renders  it  troublefome  and  tedious:  or  produces 
fatal  relapfes.  In  proportion  to  the  abatement 
of  the  fever,  the  quantity  of  nourifhment  may' 
be  gradually  increafed  : but  as  long  as  there  are 
any  remains  of  it,  their  qualities  fhould  be  thofe  I 
have  recommended.  Whenever  the  fever  is 
compleatly  terminated,  different  foods  may7  be 
entered  upon  ; fo  that  the  patient  may  venture 
upon  a little  white  meat,  provided  it  be  tender ; 
fome  filh ; t fmall  broth,  a few  eggs  at  times, 
with  wine  proper  diluted.  It  muff  be  obferved 
at  the  fame  time,  that  thofe  very  aliments  which 
reRore  the  ffrength,  when  taken  moderatelv, 
delay  the  perfect  cure,  if  they'  exceed  in  quan- 
tity, though  but  a little ; hecaufe  the  ftomach 
being  extremely  weakened,  is  capable  only,  as 
yet,  of  a fmall  degree  of  digeRion. 

All  bad  confequences  are  prevented,  by  con- 
tenting themfelves,  for  fome  time  with  a very' 
moderate  fliare  of  proper  food.  W e are  not 
nourifhed  in  proportion  to  the  quantity'  we  fwal- 
low,  but  to  that  we  digeR.  A perfon  on  the 
mending  hand,  who  eats  moderately,  digeffs  it, 
and  grows  Rrong  from  it.  He  who  fwallows 
abundantly  does  not  digeR  it,  and  inRead  of  be- 
ing llrengthened,  he  withers  infenfiblv  away. 

§ 36.'  We 

+ The  fifh  that  are  proper  in  this  cafe  are  whitings,  flounders, 
plaice,  dubbs,  or  gudgeons ; falmon,  eels,  carp,  all  the  Ikate 
kind,  haddock,  and  the  like,  fhould  not  be  permitted,  before 
the  fick  return  to  their  ufual  Hate  of  health. 


[ *79  J 


! 

§ 3 6.  We  may  reduce,  within  the  few  follow- 
ing rules,  all  that  is  to  be  obferved,  in  order 
fully  to  cure  acute  difeafes. 

x.  Let  thefe  who  are  recovering,  take  very 
little  nourifhment  at  a time,  and  take  it  often. 

2.  Let  them  take  but  one  fort  of  food  at  each 
meal,  and  not  change  their  food  too  often. 

3.  Let  them  chew  whatever  folid  victuals  they 
eat,  very  carefully. 

4.  Let  them  diminifh  their  quantity  of  drink. 
Thebeft  for  them  in  general  is  water,  with  a fourth 
or  third  part  of  while  wine.  Too  great  a quan- 
tity of  liquids  at  this  time  prevents  the  flomach 
from  recovering  its  ftrength;  impairs  digeilion  ; 
increafes  the  tendency  to  a fwelling  of  the  legs. 

5.  Let  them  go  abroad  as  often  as  they  are  able, 
whether  on  foot,  in  a carriage,  or  on  horfeback. 
This  laft  exercife  is  the  healthieft  of  all.  They, 
whopra&ife  it,  fhould  mount  before  their  princi- 
pal meal,  which  fhould  be  about  noon,  and  ne- 
ver ride  after  it. 

6.  As  people  in  this  ftate  are  feldom  quite 
as  well  towards  night,  in  the  evening  they  fhould 
take  little  food.  Their  bleep  will  be  the  lefs  dif- 
turbed,  and  repair  them  the  more  and  fooner. 

7.  They  fhould  not  remain  in  bed,  above  feven 
or  eight  hours. 

* 8.  The  fwelling  of  the  legs  and  ancles, 
which  happens  to  mod  perfons  at  this  time,  is 
sot  dangerous,  and  generally  difappears  of  ft- 

H 6.  felf  j 


C ] 

felf ; if  they  live  foberly  and  regularly,  and  take 
moderate  exercife. 

9.  It  is  not  neceflary,  in  this  ftate,  that  they 
fhouid  go  conftantly  every  day  to  flool ; though 
they  fhouid  not  be  without  one  above  two  or 
three.  If  their  coftivenefs  exceeds  this  term, 
they  fhouid  take  fomething  opening. 

10.  They  muft  by  no  means  return  to  their 
labour  too  foon.  This  prevents  many  from  ever 
recovering  their  former  flrength  : and  makes 
them  lofe  in  the  confequence,  ever)7  following' 
week  of  their  lives,  more  time  than  they  ever 
gained,  by  their  over-early  refuming  of  their 
labour. 


CHAP.  IV. 

Of  an  inf  animation  of  the  lungs,. 

Sect.  37. 

APeripneumonv,  is  an  inflammation  of  the 
lungs,  commonly  of  one  only,  and  confe- 
quently  on  one  fide.  The  figns  are  a fhivering, 
of  more  or  lefs  duration,  during  which  the  per- 
fon  is  very  reftlefs  and  in  great  anguifli,  an  ef- 
fential  fymptom ; and.  which  has  helped  me 

more 


[ i8i  ] 


more  than  once  todiftinguifh  this  difeafe,  at  the 
very  inftant  of  its  itivafion.  A confiderable  de- 
gree of  heat  fucceeds  the  fhivering,  which,  fora 
few  hours,  is  often  blended,  with  returns  of 
chillinefs.  The  pulfe  is  quick,  flrong,  mode- 
rately full,  hard  and  regular,  when  the  diftemper 
is  not  very  violent ; but  fmall,  foft  and  irregular, 
when  it  is  very  dangerous.  There  is  alfo  a pain, 
but  rather  light  and  tolerable,  in  one  fide  of  the 
breaft  ; fometimes  a kind  of  ftraitening  on  the 
heart;  at  other  times  pains  through  the  whole 
body,  efpecially  along  the  reins.  The  patient 
finds  a neceffity  of  lying  almoft  continually  upon 
his  back,  being  able  to  lie  but  rarely  on  either 
of  his  fides.  Sometimes  his  cough  is  dry,  and 
then  attended  with  moil  pain  ; at  other  times  it 
is  accompanied  with  ahawkingup,  blended  with 
more  or  lefs  blood,  and  fometimes  with  pure 
blood.  There  is  alfo  fome  pain,  or  at  leaft 
weight  and  heavinefs  in  the  head  ; and  frequently 
a propenfity  to  rave.  The  face  is  almoft  conti- 
nually flufhed  : though  fometimes  there  is  a de- 
gree of  palenefs  and  an  air  of  aftonifhment, 
which  portend  no  little  danger.  The  lips,  the 
tongue,  the  palate,  the  fkin  are  all  dry : the 
breath  hot ; the  urine  little  and  high  coloured  in 
the  firft  ftage  : but  more  plentiful,  lefs  flaming, 
and  letting  fall  much  fediment  afterwards.  There 
is  a frequent  third,  and  fometimes  an  inclination 
to  vomit ; which,  impofing  on  the  ignorant  af~ 

fiftants9. 


[ 1*»  ] 

fiftants,  have  often  inclined  them  to  give  the 
patient  a vomit,  which  is  mortal,  efpecially  at 
this  junflure.  The  fymptoms  are  heightened 
almod  every  night,  during  which  the  cough  is 
more  exafperated,  and  the  fpitting  in  lefs  quan- 
tity. The  bed  expectoration  is  of  a middling 
confidence,  neither  too  thin,  nor  too  hard  and 
tough.  Sometimes  the  inflammation  afcends 
along  the  windpipe,  and  in  fome  meafure  fuffo- 
cates  the  patient. 

§ 38.  Whenever  the  difeafe  is  very  violent, 
the  patient  cannot  draw  his  breath,  but  when  he 
fits  up.  The  pulfe  becomes  very  fmall  and  very 
quick,  the  countenance  livid,  the  tongue  black, 
the  eyes  flare  wildly  : and  he  buffers  inexprefli- 
ble  anguifh,  attended  with  inceflant  redleffnefs: 
he  raves  without  intermiflion;  can  neither 
throughly  wake  nor  bleep.  The  fkin  of  his 
bread;  and  of  his  neck  is  covered  (efpecially 
when  the  diflemper  is  extremely  violent)  with 
livid  fpots ; he  finks  into  a lethargy,  and  foon 
dies. 

§ 39.  If  the  difeafe  ruflies  on  at  once,  with  a 
violent  attack ; if  the  cold  fhivering  lad  many 
hours,  and  is  followed  with  a fcorching  degree 
of  heat ; if  the  brain  is  affefted  from  the  very  on- 
fet ; if  the  patient  has  a fmall  purging,  attended 
with  a draining  tc  dool ; if  he  abhors  the  bed  ; 
if  he  either  fweat  exceffively,  or  his  fkin  be  ex- 
tremely dry ; and  if  he  fpits  up  with  much  diffi- 
culty, the  difeafe  is  extremely  dangerous. 

§ 40.  He 


[ *8d  ] 


40.  He  mud  direflly,  from  the  fird  feizure 
in  this  date,  be  put  upon  a regimen,  and  his 
drink  mud  never  be  given  cold.  It  fhould  ei- 
ther be  the  barley  water  No.  2.  the  almond  emul- 
fionNo.  4.  or  that  of  No.  7.  The  juices  of  the 
plants,  which  enter  into  the  lad  of  thefe  drinks, 
are  excellent  remedies;  as  they  powerfully  atten- 
uate the  vifcid  blood,  which  caufes  the  inflam- 
mation. 

As  foon  as  the  cold  affault  is  over,  twelve 
ounces  of  blood  mud  be  taken  away  ; and,  if  the 
patient  be  young  and  drong,  fourteen  or  even 
fixteen.t  This  plentiful  bleeding  gives  him  more 
eafe,  than  if  twenty-four  ounces  had  been  drawn 
at  three  different  times. 

§ 41.  When  the  difeafe  is  circumdanced  as 
defcribed  (§  3 7.)  the  fird  bleeding  makes  the  pa- 
tient eafy  for  fome  hours;  but  the  complaint 
returns ; and  to  obviate  its  violence,  we  mud  re- 
peat the  bleeding  four  hours  after  the  fird,  taking 
again  twelve  ounces  of  blood.  And  if,  about 
the  expiration  of  eight  or  ten  hours,  it  appears 
to  kindle  up  again,  it  mud  be  repeated  a third, 
or  even  a fourth  time. 

§ 43.  In  this,  and  all  other  inflammatoiy  dif- 
eafes,  the  blood  is  thick  and  vifcid  ; and  almod 
immediately  on  its  being  drawn,  a white  tough 
ikin,  fonrewhat  like  leather,  is  formed  on  its 
top,  which  is  called  the  pleuritic  crujl.  It  is 

thought 

+ The  applications  fet  down  in  the  Primitive  Phylic  cure 
without  bleeding  at  all. 


[ lS4  ] 

thought  a promifing  appearance,  when  at  each 
bleeding  it  feems  lefs  hard,  and  lefs  thick,  than 
it  was  at  the  preceding  ones  ; and  this  is  gene- 
rally true,  if  the  fick  feels  himfelf,  at  the  fame 
time,  fenfibly  better  : but  whoever  fhall  attend 
Jolely  to  the  appearance  of  the  blood,  will  find 
himfelf  often  deceived. 

§ 43.  The  patient's  legs  fhould  every  day,  for 
half  an  hour,  be  put  into  a bath  of  warm  water, 
wrapping  him  up  clofe!y ; that  the  cold  may 
not  check  that  perfpirarion,  which  the  bath  pro- 
motes. 

And  every  two  hours  he  fhould  take  two 
fpoonfuls  of  the  mixture  No.  8.  which  promotes 
all  the  difcharges,  and  chiefly  that  of  expectora- 
tion. 

§ 44.  When  the  oppreflion  and  ftraitnefs  are 
eonfiderable,  and  the  cough  dry,  the  patient 
may  receive  the  vapour  of  boiling  water,  to 
which  a little  vinegar  lias  been  added.  There 
are  tsvo  ways  of  effecting  this  ; either  by  placing 
below  his  face,  after  fetting  him  up,  a velfel 
filled  with  boiling  water,  and  covering  the  pati- 
ent’s head  and  the  veiTel  with  a linen  cloth,  that 
may  inclofe  the  fleam  ; or  by  holding  before  his 
mouth  a fpunge  dipped  in  the  fame  boiling  li- 
quor. This  lafl  method  is  the  lead,  effedlual, 
but  it  fatigues  the  patient  confiderably  lefs. 
W hen  this  bad  fymptom  is  extremely  preffmg, 
vinegar  alone  fliouid  be  ufed  without  u'ater; 
and  the  vapour  of  it  has  often  faved  patients, 

who 


[ 185  ] 


who  feemed  to  have  one  foot  in  the  grave  : but 
it  fhould  be  continued  for  feveral  hours. 

The  outward  remedies  directed  in  No.  9,  are 
alfo  applied  with  fuccefs  to  the  breaft,  and  to 
the  throat. 

§ 45.  When  the  fever  is  extremely  high,  the 
fick  fhould  take  every  hour,  a fpoonful  of  the 
mixture  No.  10,  in  a cup  of  the  Ptifan,  + but 
without  diminifhing  on  this  account  the  ufual 
quantity  of  his  other  drinks,  which  may  be  taken 
immediately  after  it. 

§ 46.  As  long  as  the  patient  continues  equally 
bad,  the  fame  medicines  are  to  be  repeated.  But. 
if  on  the  third  day  (though  it  rarely  happens  fo 
foon)  or  fourth,  or  fifth,  the  difeafe  takes  a more 
favourable  turn ; the  cough  be  lefs  fevere,  the 
matter  coughed  up  lefs  bloody;  refpiration 
becomes  eafier ; the  head  be  lefs  afifefted  ; the 
tongue  not  quite  fo  dry  ; if  the  high  colour  of 

the 

+ The  ufe  of  acids,  in  inflammations  of  the  breaft,  requires 
no  little  confideration.  Whenever  the  fick  perfon  has  an  averfion 
to  them;  when  the  tongue  is  moift,  the  ftomach  is  heavy  and 
difordered,  and  the  habit  of  the  patient  is  mild  and  foft : when 
the  cough  is  very  [harp  without  great  thirft,  we  ought  to  abftain 
from  them.  But  when  the  inflammation  is  joined  to  ■a  dry 
tongue,  to  great  thirft,  heat  and  fever,  they  ate  of  great  fervice. 
Slices  of  China-oranges  fprinkled  with  fugar  may  be  given  firft  ; 
a light  lemonade  may  be  allowed  afterwards;  and  at  laft  fmall 
doles  of  the  mixture,  No.  xo.if  it  becomes  neceflfary. 

In  this  difeafe,  and  in  pleurifies,  more  folid  benefit  has  been 
received  from  the  ufe  of  fnake  root,  than  from  any  other  medi- 
cine. Bleeding  indeed  is  pretnifed  to  it ; but  it  has  often  laved 
the  neceflity  of  repeated  bleedings. 


C 186  ] 

the  urine  abates,  and  its  quantity  be  increased, 
it  may  be  fufficient  then  to  keep  the  patient 
carefully  to  his  regimen.  The  exafperation  that 
occurs  the  fourth  day  is  often  the  higheft. 

S 47’  ^his  diltemper  is  commonly  cariied  off 
by  expectoration,  often  by  urine,  which  on  the 
feventh,  the  ninth,  or  the  eleventh  day,  fome- 
times  on  the  days  between  them,  begins  to  let 
fall  a plentiful  fedinfent  of  a pale  red  colour, 
and  fometimes  real  pus.  Thefe  difcharges  are 
fucceeded  by  fweats,  which  are  as  ferviceable 
then  as  they  were  injurious  at  the  beginning  of 
the  difeafe. 

§ 48.  Some  hours  before  thefe  evacutions  ap- 
pear, there  come  on  not  feldom,  fome  alarming 
fvmptoms,  fuch  as  great  anguifh:  palpitations, 
fome  irregularity  in  the  pulfe  ; an  increafed  op- 
preffion  ; convulftve  motions  (this  being  the 
crifis,  of  the  diltemper)  but  they  are  no  way  dan- 
gerous, provided  they  do  not  occafion  anv  im- 
proper treatment.  Thefe  fvmptoms  depend  on 
the  morbid  matter,  which,  being  diflodged,  cir- 
culates with  the  humours,  and  irritates  different 
parts  until  the  difcharge  of  it  has  fairly  begun  ; 
after  which  all  fuch  fvmptoms  difappear,  and 
deep  generally  enfues.  However  I cannot  too 
Itronglv  infill  on  the  neceffity  of  great  prudence 
in  fuch  circumftances.  If,  the  abfura  practice 
of  direCling  particular  remedies  for  fuch  acci- 
dents takes  place,  fuch  as  fpirituous  cordials, 
Venice-treacle,  confeCtions,  caltor  and  rue ; the 

confe* 


C >*7  3 

confequence  is,  that  nature  being  diflurbed  in 
her  operations,  the  crijis  is  not  effected ; the 
matter  which  fhould  be  difcharged  by  ftool,  by 
urine,  or  by  fweat,  is  not  difcharged  out  of  the 
body;  but  is  thrown  upon  fome  internal  or  ex- 
ternal part  of  it.  Should  it  be  on  fome  inward 
part,  the  patient  either  dies  at  once,  or  another 
diftemper  fucceeds,  more  troublefome  than  the 
firfl.  Should  it  be  expelled  to  fome  outward 
part,  as  foon  as  ever  a tumour  appears,  ripening 
poultices  fhould  be  applied,  after  which  it  fhould 
immediately  be  opened. 

§ 49.  In  order  to  prevent  fucli  unhappy  confe- 
quences,  great  care  muff  be  taken,  whenever 
fuch  terrifying  fymptoms  come  on,  (about  the 
time  of  the  crijis)  to  make  no  change  in  the  diet, 
or  treatment  of  the  patient ; except  in  applying 
every  two  hours  a flannel,  fqueezed  out  of  warm 
water,  which  may  cover  all  the  bellv,  and  in  a 
manner  go  round  the  body  behind  the  reins. 
The  quantity  of  his  drink  may  alfo  be  increafed  a 
little;  and  nourifbment  leffened,  as  long  as  this 
violent  ffate  continues. 

§50.  Vomits  and  purges,  are  diredtly  contrary 
to  the  nature  of  this  difeafe.  Anodynes,  or  opi- 
ates, are  alfo,  in  general,  very  improper. 
When  the  difeafe  proceeds  in  a regular  manner, 
the  patient  may  be  called  fafe  by  the  fourteenth 
day  ; when  he  may,  if  he  has  an  appetite,  be 
put  upon  the  diet  of  people  who  are  recovering. 
But  if  he  ftill  retains  an  averfion  to  food  ; if  his 

mouth 


[ 1 88  ] 


tnouth  is  foul  and  furred,  and  he  is  fenfible  of 
fome  heavinefs  in  his  head,  he  fhould  take  the 
purging  portion  No.  11. 

§ ,5  1. Bleedings  from  the  nofe  occur  fometimes 
in  this  difeafe,  even  after  repeated  bleedings  ; 
thefe  are  favourable,  and  are  commonly  attended 
with  more  relief  than  artificial  bleedings.  Such 
voluntary  difcharges  may  fometimes  be  expected 
when  the  patient  is  fenfibly  mended  after  the  ufe 
of  the  lancet  : and  yet  complains  of  a great 
pain  in  his  head  accompanied  with  quick 
fparkling  eyes  and  a rednefs  of  the  nofe.  Nothing 
fhould  be  done  to  flop  thefe  bleedings,  they  will 
ceafe  of  themfelves.  At  other  times,  but  more 
rarely,  the  diflemper  is  carried  off  by  a natural 
purging,  attended  with  moderate  pain,  and  the 
difcharge  of  bilious  matter. 

§ 52.  If  the  expectoration  flops  fuddenly, 
and  is  not  fpeedily  attended  with  fome  other 
evacuation  : the  oppreffion  and  anguifh  of  the 
patient  immediately  return,  and  the  danger  is 
great  and  preffing.  If  the  dillemper,  is  not  of 
many  days  handing  ; if  the  patient  is  a flrong 
perfon  ; if  he  has  not  as  yet  been  plentifully  bled, 
if  there  be  flill  fome  blood  mixed  with  the  hu- 
mour he  expedlorates  ; or  if  the  pulfe  be  flrong 
and  hard,  he  fhould  be  bled  immediately  in  the 
arm  ; and  conftantly  receive  the  fleam  of  hot 
water  and  vinegar  by  the  mouth,  and  drink  plen- 
tifully of  the  ptifan  No.  2,  fomething  hotter 

than 


[ i89  ] 


than  ordinary.  But  if  his  circumflances,  are  dif- 
ferent from  thefejuft  mentioned,  inffead  of  bleed- 
ing, two  blifters  fhould  be  applied  to  the  legs  ; and 
he  fhould  drink  plentifully  of  the  piifan  No.  12. 
The  caufes  which  ofteneft  produce  this  fuppref- 
fion  of  expectoration  are,  i,  a fudden  cold  air; 
2,  too  hot  a one;  3,  over  hot  medicines;  4, 
exceffive  fweating  ; 5,  a purge  ill-timed  ; 6,  or 
fome  immoderate  paffion. 

§ 53.  When  the  fick  has  not  been  fufficientlv 
bled,  and  fometimes,  when  he  has  been  weaken- 
ed by  exceffive  bleeding,  fo  that  the  difcharges 
have  not  been  diffidently  made  ; whenthefe  dif- 
charges have  been  confufed  by  fome  other  caufes  ; 
then  the  velfels  that  have  been  inflamed,  do  not 
unload  the  humours,  which  opprefs  them  : but 
there  happens  in  the  lung,  the  fame  circum- 
ftance  we  fee  daily  on  the  furface  of  the  body. 
If  an  inflammatory  fwelling  does  not  difperfe,  it 
forms  an  impoilhume.  Thus  in  the  inflamed 
lung,  if  the  inflammation  is  not  diffipated,  it 
forms  an  abfcefs  : and  the  matter  of  that  abfcefs, 
like  the  external  ones,  remains  often  long  in- 
clofed  in  its  bag,  without  bur  fling  its  cafe,  and 
difcharging  itfelf. 

§ 54.  If  the  inflammation  was  not  deeply  feat- 
ed  in  the  lung,  but  was  near  the  ribs,  the  fack 
will  burfl  on  the  furface  of  the  lung,  and  the 
matter  be  difcharged  in'o  the  cavity  of  the  bread. 
But  when  the  inflammation  is  confiderably  deep- 
er, the  impoilhume  burfts  within  the  lung  it- 
felf. 


[ »9°  J 


felf.  If  its  orifice  is  fo  final  l,  that  little  can  get 
out  at  once  ; if  the  quantity  of  matter  be  incon- 
fiderable,  and  the  patient  is  pretty  ftrong,  he 
coughs  up  the  matter,  and  is  fenfibly  relieved. 
But  if  its  orifice  is  wide,  and  it  throws  out  a 
great  quantity  at  once  ; or  if  the  patient  is  very 
weak,  he  dies  the  moment  it  burhs,  and  that  fome- 
times  when  it  is  leaft  expefted.  I have  feen  one 
patient  expire,  when  he  was  conveying  a fpoon- 
ful  of  foup  to  his  mouth  ; and  another  while  he 
was  wiping  his  nofe. 

§ 55.  Whatever  diftemper  is  included  within 
thebreaft  of  a living  patient,  is  neither  an  objeCl 
of  the  fight  nor  touch  ; whence  thefe  inward  tu- 
mours are  fo  often  unfufpeCted.  The  evacua- 
tions that  were  neceflary  for  the  cure  have  not 
taken  place  during  the  firlt  fourteen  days.  At 
the  end  of  them,  the  patient,  is  not  confiderably 
relieved  ; but,  the  fever  continues  pretty  high, 
with  a pulfe  continually  quick  ; in  general  fo  ft 
and  weak;  though  fometimes  pretty  hard,  and 
often  fluctuating,  or,  as  it  were,  waving.  His 
breathing  is  ftill  difficult,  with  finall  fhudderings 
from  time  to  time,  an  exafperation  of  the  fever, 
fluffied  cheeks,  dry  lips,  and  thirffi 

The  increafe  of  thefe  fymptoms  declare, 
that  matter  is  formed  ; the  cough  then  becomes 
more  continual  ; being  exafperated  with  the 
leaf!  motion  ; or  as  foon  as  the  patient  has  taken 
any  nouriffiment.  He  can  repofe  only  on  the 
fide  affeCted.  It  often  happens  indeed,  that  he 

cannot 


r i9i  ] 


cannot  lie  down  at  all  ; but  is  obliged  to  fit  up 
all  day:  foinetimes  even  without  daring  to  lean 
a little  upon  his  loins,  for  fear  of  increafing  the 
cough  and  oppreffion.  He  is  unable  to  fleep  ; 
has  a continual  fever,  and  his  pulfe  frequently 
intermits. 

The  fever  is  not  only  heightened  every  even- 
ing, but  the  fmalleft  quantity  of  food,  the  gen- 
teleft  motion,  a little  coughing,  the  lighted: 
agitation  of  the  mind,  a little  more  than  ufual 
heat,  foup  either  a little  too  ftrong,  ot  a little 
too  fait,  increafe  the  quicknefs  of  his  pulfe 
the  moment  they  occur.  He  is  refllefs,  has 
fome  fhort  attacks  of  terrible  anguifh,  ac- 
companied and  fucceeded  by  fweatings  on  his 
bread.  He  fweats  fometimes  the  whole  night; 
his  urine  is  reddifh,  now  frothy,  and  at  other 
times  oily,  as  it  were.  Sudden  flufhings,  hot  as 
flames,  rife  into  his  whole  vifage.  The  greater 
number  of  the  fick  are  fenfible  of  a difagreeable 
tafle  in  their  mouth  ; fome,  of  old  flrong  cheefe  ; 
others  of  rotten  eggs;  others  of  {linking  meat, 
and  fall  greatly  away.  The  third  of  fome  is  un- 
quenchable, their  mouths  and  lips  are  parched, 
their  voice  weak  and  hoarfe,  their  eyes  hollow, 
with  a kind  of  wildnefs  in  their  looks.  They 
have  a general  difguft  to  all  food;  and  if  they 
fhould  afk  for  fome  particular  nourifhment 
without  feeing  it,  they  rejeft  it  the  moment  it  is 
brought  them ; and  their  ftrength  at  length  leems 
wholly  exhaufled. 


§ 56.  When 


L *92  ] 


§ 56.  When  a vomica  is  formed,  as  long  as  it 
is  not  emptied,  all  thefe  fymptoms  increafe,  and 
the  vomica  grows  in  fize  : the  whole  fide  of  the 
lung  aftefted  fometimes  becomes  a bag  of  mat- 
ter. The  found  fide  is  compreffent  and  the 
patient  dies  after  dreadful  anguifh. 

To  avoid  fuch  fatal  confequences,  it  is  necef- 
fary  to  procure  the  rupture  of  this  abcefs,  as  foon 
as  we  are  certain  of  its  exigence  ; and  as  it  is 
fafer  it  fhould  break  within  the  lobe  whence  it 
may  be  difcharged,  by  hawking  up,  than  that  it 
fhould  void  itfelf  into  the  cavity  of  the  breaft, 
we  mud  endeavour,  that  this  rupture  may  be  ef- 
fected within  the  lungs. 

§ 57.  The  mod  effeftual  methods  to  procure 
this  are  ; 1.  To  make  the  patient  continually  re- 
ceive, by  his  mouth,  the  vapour  of  warm  water. 
2.  When  by  this  means  that  part  of  the  fack  is 
foftened,  where  we  wiih  the  rupture  to  happen, 
he  is  to  fwallow  a large  quantity  of  emollient  li- 
quid ; fuch  as  barley-water,  light  veal  broth,  or 
milk  and  water.  By  this  means  the  ftomach  is 
kept  always  full : fo  that  the  refiflence  to  the 
lungs  being  conftderable  on  that  fide,  the  abfcefs 
will  be  preffed  towards  the  fide  of  the  wind-pipe, 
as  it  will  meet  with  lefs  refiftence  there.  This 
fulnefs  of  the  ftomach  will  alio  incline  the  pati- 
ent to  cough,  which  may  concur  to  pioduce  a 
good  event.  Hence,  g.  we  fhould  endeavour 
to  make  the  patient  cough,  bv  making  him  lined 
to  fome  vinegar,  or  even  fnuff  up  a little : or  by 

injetling 


[ 193  3 

inje&ing  into  his  throat,  by  means  of  a fmall  fy- 
ringe,  a little  water  or  vinegar.  4.  He  fhould 
he  advifed  to  bawl  out  loud,  or  to  read  loud. 
5.  Let  him  take  every  two  hours  afoup-ladle  of 
the  potion  No.  8.  6.  He  (hould  be  put  into  a 

cart,  or  fome  other  carriage  ; but  not  before  he 
, has  drank  plentifully  of  thofe  liquors:  after 
which  the  jolting  in  the  carriage  has  fometimes 
immediately  procured  a rupture. 

Many  perfons  affiifted  with  a vomica,  faint 
away  the  very  inftant  it  breaks.  Some  {harp  vi- 
negar fhould  be  directly  held  to  their  nofe.  This 
fmall  afbftance  is  generally  fufficient,  where  the 
burfling  of  it  is  not  attended  with  fuch  appear- 
ances as  fnew  it  to  be  mortal. 

§ 58.  If  the  fick  perfcn  was  not  extremely 
weak  before  the  burfting  of  the  abfcefs,  if  the 
matter  was  white,  and  well-condiiioned  ; if  the 
fever  abates  after  the  cough  is  lefs  violent  ; if 
the  patient  recovers  his  , deep  and  appetite  ; if 
his  ufual  flrength  returns,  if  the  quantity  he  ex- 
pectorates, becomes  gradually  lefs;  and  if  his 
-urine  is  apparently  better,  we  may  have  room 
•to  hope,  that  by  the  afhflance  of  thefe  remedies 
I fhall  direft,  he  may  be  completely  cured. 

§ 59.  But  when  his  flrength  is  exhaufted  be- 
fore the  burfling  of  the  abfcefs,  when  the  matter 
is  too  thin  and  trar.fparent,  brown,  green,  yel- 
low, bloody,  and  of  an  offenfive  fmell ; if  the 
pulfe  continues  quick  and  weak  ; if  the  patient’s 
Vol.  XXV.  I appetite. 


r *94  ] 


appetite,  flrength,  'and  deep,  do  not  improve, 
there  remains  no  hope  of  a cure. 

§ 60.  1.  Give  every  four  hours  a little  barley 
or  rice-cream.  2.  If  the  matter  brought  up  is 
thick  and  glewy,  fo  that  it  is  difficult  to  be  dif- 
charged,  give  every  two  hours  a foup-ladle  of 
the  potion  No.  8.  and  between  the  giving  thefe 
two,  let  the  patient  take  every  half-hour,  a cup 
of  the  drink  No.  13.  3.  When  there  is  no  oc- 

cafion  for  thefe  medicines  to  promote  the  dif- 
charge,  they  muff  be  omitted  ; though  the  fort 
and  quantity  of  food  are  to  be  continued ; but 
with  the  addition  of  an  equal  quantity  of  milk  ; 
or,  which  would  be  flill  better,  inftead  of  this 
mixture,  we  fhould  give  an  equal  quantity  of 
fweet  milk,  taken  from  a good  cow,  which,  in 
ffich  a cafe,  may  compofe  the  whole  nourifh- 
ment  of  the  patient.  4.  He  fhould  take  four 
times  a day,  beginning  early  in  the  morning, 
and  at  the  dillance  of  two  hours,  a dofe  of  the 
powder  No.  14.  diluted  in  a little  water.  + His 
common  drink  fhould  be  almond-milk,  or  bar- 
lev-water,  or  frefh  water,  with  a fourth  part 
hulk.  3.  He  fhould  exercife  every  day  on 
horfeback,  or  in  a carriage,  according  as  his 
flrength  and  circumflances  allow.  But  of  all 
forts  of  exercife,  that  upon  a trotting  horfe,  is, 
beyond  comparifon,  the  bed,  if  he  can  bear  it. 

§'61.  The 

f Rather  pou-r  upon  it  tojfet  cup  full  of  boiling  meter.  Cover  this 
*n'o  or  thfee  . Xhfn  drink  leaving  tu:  f .dr  be- 

laud. 


C 1 95  1 

§ 61.  The  influence  of  the  air  is  of  more  im- 
portance in  this  diforder,  than  in  any  others  ; 
for  which  reafon  great  care  fhould  be  taken  to 
procure  the  beft,  in  the  patient’s  chamber.  For 
this  purpofe  it  fhould  often  have  an  admiflion  of 
freflt  air,  and  be  fvveetened  from  time  to  time, 
though  very  lightly,  with  a little  good  vinegar  ; 
and  in  the  feafon  it  fhould  be  plentifully  fuppli- 
ed  with  agreeable  herbs,  flowers  and  fruits. 
Should  the  fick  be  confined  in  an  unwholefoine 
air,  there  can  be  but  little  profpecl:  of  curing 
him. 

§ 6 2.  Out  of  many  perfons  affebled  with  thcfe 
diforders,  fome  have  been  cured  by  taking  no- 
thingbut  butter-milk  ; others  by  melons  and  cu- 
cumbers only  ; and  others  again  by  fummer 
fruits  of  every  fort.  Neverthelefs,  as  fitch  cafes 
are  fingular,  I advife  the  patient  to  obferve  the 
.method  I have  dire&ed  here. 

§ 63.  When  the  difcharge  from  the  breaff  di- 
minifhes,  and  the  patient  is  mended  in  every 
refpeSt,  it  is  a proof  that  the  abfcefs  is  clean, 
and  difpofed  to  heal  up.  If  the  difcharge, 
continues  in  great  quantity,  if  it  feems  but 
of  an  indifferent  confiftence  ; if  the  fever  '^re- 
turns every  evening,,  it  may  be  apprehended, 
that  the  wound,  inflead  of  healing,  may  dege- 
nerate into  an  ulcer.  Then  the  patient  would 
fall  into  a confirmed  heftic. 

I am  not  acquainted  with  any  better  remedv,  in 
fcuh  cafe,  than  a perfeverance  inthefe  already  di- 
re£led,  with  exercife  on  horfeback.  In  fome  of 
1 2 them 


[ *96  ] 


shem  indeed,  recourfe  may  be  had  to  the  fweeC 
vapours  of  fome  vulnerary  herbs  in  hot  water, 
with  a little  oil  of  turpentine,  as  diredted  No. 
15.  I have  feen  them  fucceed.  If  the  cough  pre- 
vents the  patient  from  {leeping,  he  may  take  in 
the  evening  two  or  three  table  fpoonfuls  of  the 
prefcrijnion  No.  16,  in  a glafs  of  barley  water. 

§ 64.  The  very  fame  caufes  which  fuddenly 
fupprefs  the  expedtoration,  in  an  inflammation 
of  the  bread,  may  check  the  expectoration,  from 
a vomica  : in  which  circumftance  the  patient  is 
fpeedily  affliCted  with  an  opprefbon  andanguifh, 
a fever  and  evident  feeblenefs.  We  (hotild  im- 
mediately endeavour  to  remove  this  doppage,  by 
the  vapour  of  hot  water  ; by  giving  a fpoonhil 
ol  the  mixtuie  No.  3,  every  hour:  by  a large 
quantity  of  the  ptifan  No.  12,  and  by  a proper 
degree  of  exercife.  As  foon  as  ever  the  expec- 
toration returns,  the  other  fymptoms  difappear. 
I have  feen  this  fuppredion  in  drong  habits 
quickly  followed  with  an  indaramation  about 
the  feat  of  the  vomica,  which  has  obliged  me  to 
bleed,  after  which  the  expectoration  immediate- 
ly returned. 

§ 63.  Some  may  be  furpifed,  that  in  treating 
of  an  abfcefsof  the  lungs,  I fay  nothing  of  thofe 
remedies,  commonly  termed  baljhmics.  as  tur- 
pentines, balfam  of  Peru,  of  Mecca,  frahkincenfe, 
madich,  myrrh,  dorax  and  balfam  of  fulpliur. 
I never  in  fuch  cafes  made  ufe  of  thefe  medi- 
cines : becaufe  I an  convinced,  that  their  opera- 
tion 


I 1 97  1 

tion  is  hurtful  ; they  protrafl  the  cure,  and 
often  change  a flight  diforder  into  an  incurable 
difeafe.  They  on  fir  u cl  the  finell  veffels  of  the 
luno-s,  whofe  obftru&ions  we  (hould  endeavour 
to  remove;  and  evidently  occafion,  except  their 
dofe  be  extremely  (mail,  heat  and  oppref- 
fion. 

§ 66.  If  the  vomica , inflcad  of  breaking  with- 
in the  lungs,  fhould  break  without  it,  the  pus 
falls  into  the  cavity  of  the  bread;.  We  know 
when  that  has  happened,  by  the  fenfation  of  the 
patient  ; who  perceives  a Angular  kind  of  move* 
ment,  generally  accompanied  with  a fainting. 
The  oppreffion  and  anguifh  ceafe  at  once,  the 
fever  abates,  the  cough  however  commonly  con- 
tinues, though  without  any  expe£loration.  But 
this  feeming'amendment  is  fhort,  flnce  from  the 
daily  augmentation  of  the  matter,  and  its  becorn* 
ing  more  acrid  or  fharp,  the  lungs  become  oppref- 
fed,  irritated  and  eroded.  !The  difficulty  of 
breathing,  heat,  thirft,  wakefulnefs,  diffafte,  and 
deafnefs,  return,  with  frequent  finkings  and 
weaknefs.  The  patient  fhould  be  confined  to 
his  regimen , to  retard  the  increafe  of  the  difeafe 
as  much  as  poflible  ; notwithllanding  no  other 
effeftual  remedy  remains,  except  that  of  open- 
ing the  bread  between  two  of  the  ribs,  to  dif- 
charge  the  matter. 

§ 67.  An  inflammation  mav  alfo  form  what  we 
call  a.Jcirrkus,  which  is  a very  hard,  unpainful, 
tumour.  This  is  known  to  occur,  when  the 
I 3 difeafe 


[ *98  J 

clifeafe  is  not  terminated  in  any  of  thofe  manners 
I have  reprefented  ; and  where,  thougli  the  fever 
ana  the  other  fymptoms  difappear,  the  breath- 
ing remains  a little  opprefled  ; the  patient  hill 
retains  a'troublefome  fenfation  in  one  fide  of  his 
bread  ; and  has  from  time  to  lime  a drv  cough, 
which  increafes  after  exercife,  and  after  eating. 
This  malady  is  but  feldom  cured:  though  fome 
attacked  with  it  lad  many  years,  without  any 
other  confiderable  complaint.  They  fhould  avoid 
all  occafions  of  over-heating  themfelves  ; which 
might  readily  produce  a new  inflammation  about 
this  tumour,  the  confequences  of  which  would 
be  high!)  dangerous. 

T he  bed  remedies  againd  this  diforder,  and 
from  which  I have  feen  fome  good  effefts,  are 
the  medicated  whey  No.  17,  and  the  pills  No. 
18.  The  patient  may  take  twenty  pills,  and  a 
pint  and  a half  of  the  whey  every  morning  for 
a long  continuance  ; and  receive  inwardly,  now 
and  then,  the  vapour  of  hot  water. 


CHAP.  V. 

Of  the  P L E U R I S Y. 

Sect.  68. 

T’’HE  pleurify  is  chiefly  known  by  thefe  four 
fymptoms,  a drong  fever,  a difficulty  of 

breathing. 


[ m 3 

breathing,  a cough,  and  an  acute  pain  about  the 
bread. 

Thecaufe  of  this  difeafe  is  exaftly  the  fame 
with  that  of  the  former ; that  is,  an  inflammation 
of  the  lungs;  but  an  inflammation  that  fee:  w; 
rather  a little  more  external.  The  only  confider- 
abie  difference  in  the  fymptoms  is,  that  the  plcu- 
rify  is  accompanied  with  a moll  acute  pain  tut* 
der  the  ribs.  This  pain  is.  felt  indifferently  over 
every  part  of  the  bread;  though  more  common- 
ly about  the  Tides,  and  ofteneft  on  the  right  fide. 
The  pain  is  greatly  increafed  whenever  the  pat ; 
ent  coughs  or  draws  in  the  air  in  breathing ; 
and  hence  fome  patients  forbear  to  cough  or 
refpire,  as  much  as  they  poffibly  can;  and  that 
aggravates  the  difeafe,  by  flopping  the  courfe  of 
the  blood  in  the  lungs,  which  are  foon  over- 
charged with  it.  Hence  the  inflammation  of  the 
lungs  becomes  general  ; the  blood  mounts  up  to 
the  head  ; the  countenance  looks  deeply  red,  or 
as  it  were  livid  ; and  the  patient  becomes  nearly 
fuffocated. 

Sometimes  an  inflammation  of  the  lungs  is 
communicated  alfo  to  th e.  pleura  ; but  this  is  not 
frequently  the  cafe. 

§ 6 9.  Spring  is  commonly  the  feafon  produc- 
tive of  pleunfies.  The  difeafe  ufually  begins 
with  a violent  {hivering,  fucceeded  by  confidera- 
ble  heat,  with  a cough,  an  oppreffion,  and  foine- 
times  wuh  a feufible  ffraitning,  as  it  were,  all 
over  the  bread  ; and  alfo  with  a head-ach,  a red- 
I 4 nefs 


£ 200  ] 


nefs  of  the  cheeks,  and  with  Teachings  to  vomit. 
The  flitch  does  not  always  happen  at  fird  ; often 
not  till  after  feveral  hours  : fometimes  not  be- 
fore the  fecond,  or  even  the  third  day.  Some- 
times the  patient  feels  two  ditches,  in  different 
parts  of  the  fide  ; though  it  feldom  happens  that 
they  are  equally  fharp,  and  the  lighted  foon 
ceafes.  Sometimes  alfo  the  ditch  drifts  its  place, 
which  promifes  well,  if  the  part  fird  attacked  by 
it  continues  free  from  pain  : but  it  has  a bad  ap- 
pearance, if,  while  the  fird  is  prefent,  another 
fupervenes,  and  both  continue.  There  often 
occurs  at,  or  quickly  after,  the  invafion,  fuch 
an  expeftoration,  as  happens  in  an  inflammation 
of  the  bread  ; at  other  times  there  is  net  the 
lead  appearance  of  it,  whence  fuch  are  named 
dry  pleurifies.  Sometimes  the  lick  cough  but 
little,  or  not  at  all.  They  often  lie  more  at  eafe 
upon  the  fide  affedled,  than  on  the  found  one. 
The  progrefs  of  this  difeafe  advances  exaclly 
like  that  deferibed  in  the  preceding  chapter . 

§ 70.  This  didemper  is  often  produced  by 
drinking  cold  water,  while  a perfon  is  hot; 
from  which  caufe  it  is  fometimes  fo  violent,  as 
to  kill  the  patient  in  three  hours.  A young  man 
was  found  dead  at  the  fide  of  the  fpring,  from 
which  he  had  quenched  his  third.  Neither  in- 
deed is  it  uncommon  for  pleurifies  to  prove  mor- 
tal within  three  days. 

Sometimes  the  ditch  difappears,  whence  the 
patient  complains  lefs ; but  at  the  fame  time  his 

countenance 


[ 201  ] 

countenance  changes ; he  grows  pale  and  fad  ; 
his  eyes  look  dull  and  heavy,  and  his  pulfe 
grows  feeble.  This  fignihes  a tranflation  of  the 
difeafe  to  the  brain,  a cafe  which  is  almoh  con- 
flantly  fatal. 

There  is  no  difeafe  in  which  the  critical  fymp- 
toms  are  more  violent,  and  more  ftrongly  mark- 
ed, than  in  this.  It  is  proper  this  fhould  be 
known,  as  it  may  prevent  or  leffen  our  excef- 
five  terror.  A perfedl  cure  fupervenes,  fome- 
times,  at  the  very  moment  when  death  was  ex- 
pended. 

§ 71.  This  malady  is  one  of  the  moil  dehroy- 
ing  kind,  as  well  from  its  own  violent  nature,  as 
through  the  pernicious  treatment  of  it  in  coun- 
try places.  As  foon  as  a perfon  is  afflidled  with 
a flitch,  all  the  hot  medicines  are  fet  to  work. 
This  mortal  error  deflroys  more  people  than 
gunpowder. 

The  proper  manner  of  treating  this  difeafe,  is 
exaftly  the  fame  with  that  of  the  peripneumony. 
Hence  the  bleedings,  the  foftening  and  diluting 
drinks,  the  fleams,  and  the  poultices  are  the 
real  remedies.  Thefe  laft  perhaps  are  hill  more 
effeftual  in  the  pleurifv;  and  therefore  they 
fhould  be  continually  applied  over  the  very 
flitch. 

If,  from  the  beginning  of  the  difeafe,  fhe 
pulfe  is  but  a little  quicker  and  harder  than  in  a 
healthy  hate;  if  the  head-ach  and  the  hitches 
I 5 ax# 


[ 202  J 

are  moderate  ; if  the  cough  is  not  too  violent  ; 
bleeding  may  be  omitted. 

§ 72.  In  thofe  dry  pleurifies,  in  which  the 
flitch,  the  fever,  and  the  head-ach  are  flrong  and 
violent ; and  where  the  pulfe  is  very  hard  and 
very  full,  with  an  exceflive  drynefs  of  the 
fkin  and  of  the  tongue,  bleeding  fhould  be  fre- 
quently repeated,  and  at  fmall  intervals.  This 
method  commonly  cures  the  difeafe  effectually, 
■without  ufing  any  other  evacuation.! 

§ 73.  It  has  been  obferved  that  fome  perfons, 
who  have  been  once  attacked  by  this  difeafe, 
are  often  liable  to  relapfes  of  it.  Such  as  can 
confine  themfelves  to  fome  proper  precautions, 
may  prevent  thefe  returns,  even  without  bleed- 
ing, by  a temperate  regimen,  by  abftaining, 
from  time  to  time,  from  eating  flefh,  and  drinking 
wine  ; at  which  times  they  fhould  drink  whey, 
or  fome  of  thofe  diet-drinks  No.  1,  2,  4,  and  by 
frequently  bathing  their  legs  in  warm  water, 
efpecially  in  thofe  feafons  when  this  difeafe  is 
mofl  likely  to  return. 

CHAP.  VI. 

Of  the  Difeafes  of  the  Throat.. 

Sect.  74. 

H E throat  is  fubjefl  to  many  difeafes ; 
-i  one  of  the  moll  dangerous,  is  that  inflam- 
mation 

•}  So  dees  a fcuhis*/  toiled  nettles,  uithout  Heeding. 


« 


[ 203  ] 

mation  of  it  called  a auinfey.  This  in  effefi  is  a 
diftemper  of  the  fame  nature  with  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  breaft;  but  as  it  occurs  in  a different 
part,  the  fymptoms  are  very  different.  They 
alfo  vary,  according  to  the  different  parts  of  the 
throat  which  are  inflamed. 

§ 75.  The  general  fymptoms  of  an  inflamma- 
tion of  the  throat  are,  fhivering,  fubfequent  ’neat, 
a fever,  head-ach.  red  high-coloured  urine,  a 
confiderable  difficulty',  and  fometimes  an  impof- 
fibility,  of  fwallowing  any  thing.  If  the  nearefl 
parts  to  the  wind-pipe  are  attacked,  breathing 
becomes  excefiively  difficult  ; the  patient  is 
fenfible  of  extreme  anmiifh,  the  difeafe  is  then 
extended  to  the  windpipe,  and  even  to  the  fub- 
ftance  of  the  lungs,  whence  it  becomes  fpeedily 
fatal. 

The  inflammation  of  the  other  parts  is  attend- 
ed with  lefs  danger  ; and  this  danger  becomes 
ftill  lefs,  as  the  difeafe  is  more  extended  to  the 
fuperficial  parts.  When  the  inflammation  is 
general,  and  feizes  all  the  internal  parts  et  the 
throat,  and  particularly  the  tonfils,  the  uvula* 
and  the  root  of  the  tongue,  it  is  one  of  the  moft 
dangerous  and  dreadful  maladies.  The  face  is 
then  fwelled  up  and  inflamed  ; the  whole  inflde 
of  the  throat  is  in  the  fame  condition  ; the  pa- 
tient can  get  nothing  down  ; he  breathes  with 
pain  and  anguiih,  which  concur,  with  a fluffing 
in  his  brains,  to  throw  him  into  a kind  of  fu- 
rious delirium  the  miferable  patient  is  deprived. 


[ 2°4  ] 

of  all  his  firength,  and  commonly  dies  the  fecond 
or  third  day. 

§7 6.  Sometimes  the  difeafe  fhifts  from  the 
internal  to  the  external  parts  : the  fkin  of  the 
neck  and  bread:  grows  very  red  and  painful,  but 
the  patient  finds  himfelf  better. 

At  other  times  the  diforder  quits  the  throat  ; 
but  is  transferred  to  the  brain,  or  the  lungs. 
Both  thefe  tranflations  are  mortal,  when  the  belt 
advice  cannot  he  immediately  procured;  and 
even  the  bed  often  is  ineffectual. 

§ 77.  The  mod  ufual  kind  of  this  difeafe  is 
that  which  affects  only  the  tonfils  and  the  palate. 
It  general!)' fird  invades  one  of  the  tonfils,  which 
becomes  inlarged,  red  and  painful,  and  does 
not  allow  the  afflicted  to  fwallow,  but  with  gieat 
pain.  Sometimes  the  diforder  is  confined  to  one 
fide  : but  mod  commonly  it  is  extended  to  the 
uvula,  and  then  to  the  other  tonfil.  If  it  be  of  a 
mild  kind,  the  tonfil  fird  affeCted  is  generally 
better,  when  the  fecond  is  attacked.  When 
they  are  both  affefted  at  once,  the  pain  and  the 
anguifh  of  the  patient  are  very  coofiderablc. 

The  fever,  is  fometimes  very  high  and  the  dri- 
veling often  endures  for  manv  hours.  It  is  fuc- 
ceeded  by  confiderable  heat,  and  a violent  he».d- 
ach,  fometimes  attended  with  drowfmefs.  The 
fever  is  commonly  pretty  high  in  the  evening, 
and  by  the  morning  perhaps  there  is  none  at 
ail. 


§78.  ^ 


[ 2C\5  ] 


§ 78.  It  has  never  happened,  within  my  know- 
ledge, that  this  fort  of  difeale,  prudently  treated, 
has  terminated  either  in  a mortification,  or  a 
feirrhus  : but  I have  been  a witnefs  to  either  of 
thefe  fupervening,  when  fweating  was  extorted 
in  the  beginning  of  it,  bv  hot  medicines. 

§ 79.  The  treatment  of  the  q-uinfey,  as  well  as 
of  all  other  inflammatory  difeafes,  is  the  fame 
with  that  of  an  inflammation  of  the  breaft.t 

The  fick  is  immediately  to  be  put  upon  a regi- 
men : and,  in  that  fort  deferibed  § 75,  bleeding 
muft  be  repeated  four  or  five  times  within  a few 
hours;  and  fometimes  there  is  a neceffity  to  re- 
cur ftill  oftener  to  it.  When  it  affaults,  the  pa- 
tient in  the  moft  vehement  degree,  all  medicines 
are  generally  ineffectual ; they  fhould  be  tried 
however.  We  fhould  give  as  much  as  can  be 
taken  of  the  drinks  No.  2,  and  4.  But  as  the 
quantity  they  are  able  to  fwallow  is  often  very 
inconfiderable,  the  glyfter  No.  5,  fhould  be  re- 
peated every  three  hours  ; and  their  legs  fhould 
be  put  into  a bath  of  warm  water,  thrice  a day. 

§ 80.  Cupping-glaffes,  with  fcarification,  ap- 
plied about  the  neck,  after  bleeding  twice  or 
thrice,  have  often  been  experienced  to  be 
highly  ufeful.  In  the  moft  defperate  cafes,  when 
the  neck  is  exceflively  fwelled,  one  or  two  deep 
incifions  made  with  a razor,  on  this  external 
tumor,  have  fometimes  faved  a patient’s  life. 

^81.  In 

t And  accordingly  it  is  almoft  always  cured  in  a few  hours? 
by  a poultice  of  boiled  nettles. 


[ 20  6 ] 

81.  In  that  kind  defcribed  ^ 77,  we  mufl 
have  very  frequent  recourfe  to  bleeding  ; and  it 
fhould  never  be  omitted  when  the  pulfe  is  hard 
and  full.  It  is  of  the  utmoft  confequence  to  do 
it  inftantly,  fince  it  is  the  only  means  to  prevent 
the  abfcefs,  which  forms  very  readily,  if  bleeding 
has  been  neglc&ed,  only  for  a few  hours. 
Sometimes  it  is  necefTary  to  repeat  it  a fecond 
time,  but  very  rarely  a third. 

This  difeafe  is  frequently  fo  gentle  and  mild, 
as  to  be  cured  without  bleeding,  by  good  ma- 
nagement; efpecially  if  the  patient  drinks  plen- 
tifully of  the  ptifan  No.  2. 

Befides  the  general  remedies  againft  inflam- 
mations, a few  particular  ones,  calculated  only 
for  this  difeafe,  may  be  applied  in  each  kind  of 
it.  The  heft  are,  firft  the  emollient  poultices. 
No.  9,  laid  over  the  whole  neck.  + 

2,  Of  the  gargarifms  (No.  19.)  a great  variety 
may  be  prepared  of  equal  efficacy.  Thofe  I di- 
re£l  here  are  what  have  fitcceeded  beft  with  me, 
and  they  are  very  fimple.  ^ 

3.  The  fleam  of  hot  wTater,  fhould  be  repeated 
five  or  fix  times  a day;  a poultice  fhould  be 
conflantly  kept  on,  and  often  renewed;  and  the 
patient  fhould  frequently  gargle. 

There 

■f  A mixture  of  oil  and  fpirit  dfhartlhorn.  as  a liniment  and 
application  round  die  neck,  deferves  the  firft  place  amongft 
local  applications  againft  the  inflammatory  quinfey. 

J Dr.  Pringle  prefers  a deception  of  figs  in  milk  and  water,  tf- 
which  he  adds  a fiuall  quantity  of  fpirit  of  fal  ammoniac. 


[ 207  ] 


There  are  fome  perfons,  who  cannot  gargle 
themfelves : and  the  pain  occafioned  by  it  makes 
it  more  difficult.  In  fuch  a cafe,  inllead  of  garg- 
ling, the  fame  gargarifm  (No.  19  ) may  be  in- 
jefted  with  a fmall  fyringe.  The . inje&ion 
reaches  further  than  gargling,  and  often  caufes 
the  patient  to  hawk  up  a confiderable  quantity  of 
glary  matter  to  his  fenfible  relief.  This  injec- 
tion fhould  be  often  repeated.  The  patient 
ffiould  breathe  out,  rather  than  infpire,  during 
the  inje&ion. 

§ 82.  Whenever  the  difeafe  terminates  with- 
out fuppuration,  the  fever,  the  head-ach,  the 
heat  in  the  throat,  and  the  pain  in  fwallowing, 
begin  to  abate  from  the  fourth  day,  foroetimes 
from  the  third,  often  only  from  the  fifth  ; and 
on  the  fixth,  feventh,  or  eighth,  the  patient  is 
entirely  well. 

§ 83.  If  the  inflammation  does  not  difperfe,  fa 
that  an  abfcefs  is  forming;  then  the  fymptoms 
attending  the  fever  continue,  though  raging  a 
little  lefs  after  the  fourth  day  : the  throat  conti- 
nues red : a pain  alfo  continues,  though  lefs 
acute.  The  pulfe  commonly  grows  a little 
fofter;  and,  on  the  fifth  or  fixth  day,  and  fome- 
times  fooner,  the  abfcefs  is  ready  to  break.  This 
mav  be  difcovered  by  the  appearance  of  a fmall 
white  and  foft  tumour,  when  the  mouth  is  open, 
which  commonly  appears  about  the  middle  of 
the  inflammation.  It  burfls  ofitfelf ; or,  fhould 
it  not,  it  mult  be  opened.  The  patient  fhould 

gargle 


[ 208  ] 

gargle  himfelf  after  the  difcharge  of  it  with  the 
cleanfing  gargarifm.  No.  19. 

§ 84.  Frequently  die  matter  is  not  collected 
e.xaftlv  in  the  place  ■where  the  inflammation  ap- 
peared, but  in  foroe  lefs  viftble  place  ; whence 
a facility  of  fwallowing  is  reflored,  the  fever  a- 
bates,  the  patient  fleeps,  and  imagines  he  is  cur- 
ed. But  the  lollowing  ftgns  may  enable  him  to 
difcover  that  there  is  an  abfcefs  ; a certain  in- 
quietude and  general  uncafinefs,  a pain  through- 
out the  mouth;  fome  fhiverings  from  time  to 
time,  frequendy  fharp  but  fhort  and  tranflent 
heat  ; a fenfation  of  thicknefs  and  heavinefs  in 
the  tongue,  finall  white  eruptions  on  the  gums, 
on  the  infide  of  the  cheek,  on  the  infide  and 
outfide  of  the  lips,  and  difagreeable  tafie  and 
odour. 

^ 85.  In  fucb  cafes  milk  or  warm  water  fliould 
frequently  be  retained  in  the  mouth,  the  vapour 
of  hot  water  fhouid  be  conveyed  into  it,  and  ca- 
tapiafms  applied  abotu  the  neek.  All  thefe  con- 
cur to  the  fohening  and  breaking  of  the  ablcefs. 
The  finger  may  alfc  be  introduced  to  feel  for  its 
Ctuation,  and,  when  difcovered,  the  furgeon 
may  eafily  open  it.  I happened  once  to  break 
one  under  my  finger,  without  making  the  leaft 
efioi  t to  do  it.  Wasm  water  may  be  injefiled 
pretiy  forcibly,  either  bs’  the  mouth  or  the  nof- 
trils : this  fometin.es  occafions  a kind  of  cough, 
which  breaks  it.  I have  feen  this  happen  even, 
from  laughing. 


§ 86.  Difordcrs 


r 2°9  3 

$ 86.  Diforders  of  the  throat,  are,  with  refpc<?t 
"to  particular  perfons  an  habitual  difeafe,  return- 
ing every  year,  or  oftner.  They  may  be  pre- 
vented by  the  fame  means,  which  I have  direct- 
ed for  the  prefervation  from  habitual  pleurines, 
5 73  ; and  by  defending  the  head  and  the  neck 
from  cold  : efpecially  after  being  heated  by  any 
violent  exercife,  or  even  by  hinging  long  and 
loud,  which  may  be  confidered  as  an  extraordi’ 
nary  exercife  of  home  of  the  parts  alfedled  in  this 
difeafe. 


CHAP.  VII. 

Of  Co  L D S. 

Sect.  87. 

r | ''HERE  are  many  prejudices,  with  regard  to 
colds,  which  may  be  attended'  with  perni- 
cious confequences,  The  firft  is,  that  a cold  is 
never  dangerous  ; an  error  which  deftroys  the 
lives  of  many.  Colds  defroys  jnore  than  plagues, 
was  the  anfwer  of  an  experienced  phyfieian  to 
one  of  his  friends,  who,  being  afked  how  he  was, 
replied,  ,J  I have  nothing  but  a cold.” 

A fecond  prejudice  is,  that  colds  require  no 
medicines,  and  lad  the  longer  for  being  nurfed. 
Colds  like  other  diforders,  have  their  proper  re- 
medies » 


f 210  J 


medies : and  are  removed  with  more  or  lefs  fa- 
cility, as  they  are  conduced  better  or  worfe. 

§ 88.  A third  mifiake  is,  that  they  are  not 
only  dangerous,  but  even  wholefome  too.  Not 
fo.  A cold  con  dandy  produces  fome  diforder  in 
the  fundlions  of  fome  part  of  the  body,  and  thus 
becomes  the  caufe  of  a difeafe.  It  is  indeed  a 
real  diforder  itfelf,  and  when  violent,  makes  a 
very  perceivable  affault  upon  our  whole  machine. 
Colds,  with  their  defluxions,  confiderably  weak- 
en the  bread,  and  fooner  or  later  confiderably 
impair  the  health.  Perfons  fubjeft  to  frequent 
colds  are  never  ftrong;  they  oftcn'fink  into  lan- 
guid diforders  ; and  a frequent  aptitude  to  take 
cold  is  a proof,  that  their  perfpiration  may  be 
eafily  checked  ; whence  the  lungs  become  op- 
preffea  and  obfiruCted,  which  muft  always  be  at- 
tended with  danger. 

A cold  in  truth  is  ahnoft  conftantly  an  inflam- 
matory difeafe,  a light  inflammation  of  the  lungs, 
of  the  throat,  or  ol  the  membrane  which  lines 
the  noflrils,  and  the  infide  of  certain  cavities  in 
the  bones  of  the  ckceks  and  forehead.  Thefe 
cavities  communicate  with  the  nofe,  in  fuch  a 
manner,  that  when  one  part  of  this  membrane 
is  afiedled  with  an  inflammation,  it  is  eafily  com- 
municated to  the  other  parts. 

§ 89.  Colds  are  of  no  certain  continuance. 
Thofe  of  the  head  generally  laft  but  a few  days, 
of  the  breaft  longer.  Some  terminate  in  four  or 
five  days.  If  they  extend  beyond  this  tajpm  they 

prove 


[ 211  J 

prove  hurtful.  1.  Becaufe  the  cough  diforders 
the  whole  machine  ; particularly,  by  forcing  up 
the  blood  to  the  head.  2.  By  depriving  the  per- 
ion  afflifted  of  his  ufual  fleep.  g.  By  impairing 
the  appetite,  and  confufing  the  digeftion.  4- 
By  weakening  the  lungs,  through  the  continual 
coughing,  whence  all  the  humours  being  gradually 
determined  towards  them,  as  the  weakeft  part,  a1 
continual  cough  fubftlls.  Hence  alfo  they  be- 
come overcharged  with  humours,  which  grow 
vifcid,  the  refpiration  is  overloaded,  a flow  fever 
appears,  nutrition  alinoft  ceafes  : the  patientbe- 
conres  weak;  finks  into  a walling  ; and  often  dies 
in  a fhort  time. 

§ go.  Wherefore,  fince  a cold  is  a difeafe  of 
the  fame  kind  with  quin  Ties,  and  inflammations 
of  the  bread,  it  ought  to  be  treated  in  the  fame 
manner.  The  drinks  No.  1,  2,  3,  4,  fhould  be 
very  plentifully  ufed.  It  is  advantageous  to 
bathe  the  feet  in  warm  water  every  night  at  going 
to  bed.  + In  a word,  if  the  patient  is  put  into 
a regimen,  the  cure  is  very  fpeedily  effefted. 

§ 91.  The  diforded  indeed,  is  often  fo  flight, 
that  it  may  be  eafily  cured  without  any  phyfic, 
by  abflaining  from  flefh,  broth,  and  wine;  from 
all  food  that  is  fharp,  fat  and  heavy  ; and  by  diet- 
ing upon  bread,  pulfe,  fruit,  and  water  ; particu- 
larly by  eating  little  or  no  flipper;  and  drinking, 
if  thirfly,  a fimple  ptifan  of  barley,  with  the  ad- 
dition 

+ Itfrequendy  happens,  that  thefe  bathings,  alone  remove  the 
head-ach;  and  the  cough  too. 


[ 212  '] 

dition  of  a third  or  fourth  part  of  milk.  Bath- 
ing the  feet,  and  the  powder  No,  20.  contribute 
to  difpofe  the  patient  to  fleep. 

§ 92.  In  colds  of  the  head,  the  fleam  of  warm 
water  alone,  or  that  in  which  elder-flowers,  or* 
fome  other  mild  aromatic  herbs  have  been 
boiled,  commonly  afford  a fpeedy  relief.  Thefe 
are  alfo  ferviceable  in  colds  fallen  on  the  breaft. 

* It  has  been  a praflice,  though  of  no  very 
long  Handing,  to  give  the  fat  of  a whale  in  thefe 
cafes  ; but  this  is  a very  crude  indigeflible  kind 
of  fat,  and  fuch  oily  medicines  feldom  agree 
with  colds.  Befides,  this  is  very  difagreeable 
and  rancid  : fo  that  it  were  better  to  forbear 
ufing  it  : I have  fometimes  feen  ill  effetls  from, 
it,  and  rarely  any  good  ones. 

§ 93.  Such  perfons  as  abate  nothing  of  the 
ufual  quantity  of  their  food,  when  feized  with 
3 cold,  and  who  fwallow  large  quantities  of  hot 
water  ruin  their  health.  Their  digeftion  ceafes  ; 
the  cough  begins  to  affedl  the  flomach,  without 
ccafing  to  afflict  the  breaft. 

Drams,  agree  fo  little  with  colds,  that  frequent- 
ly a very  fmali  quantity  "of  them  revives  a cold 
that  was  juft  expiring.  There  are  fome  perfons 
who  never  drink  them  without  taking  cold,  which 
is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  as  they  occafion  a 
light  inflammation  in  the  breaft,  which  is  equiva- 
lent to  a cold  or  diftillation. 

* Neverthefefs,  people  in  this  diforder  fhould 
not  expofe  themfelves  to  violent  cold  weather  : 

though 


[ 2i3  J 


though  they  fhould  equally  guard  againd  excef- 
five  heat.  Thofe  who  inclofe  themfelves  in 
very  hot  rooms,  never  get  quite  cured  ; arid  how 
,-is  it  poffible  they  flrould  ? Such  rooms,  abdradt- 
ed  from  the  danger  of  coming  out  of  them,  pro- 
duce colds  in  the  fame  manner  that  drams  do, 
by  producing  a light  inflammation  in  the  bread. 

§ 94.  * Perfons  fubjeft  to  Irequent  colds,  ima- 
gine, they  ought  to  keep  themfelves  very  hot. 
This  is  an  error  which  throughly  deftroys  their 
health.  Such  a difpefnion  to  take  cold  arifes 
from  two  caufes,  either  becaufe  their  perfpi  ra- 
tion is  ea'fily  impaired,  or  from  the  weaknefs  of 
the  fiomach  or  the  lungs.  When  the  complaint 
arifes  from  the  perfpiration’s  being  eafily  leffen- 
ed,  the  hotter  they  keep  themfelves,  they  in- 
creafe  their  complaint  the  more.  This  warm 
air  weakens  the  whole  machine,  and  more  par- 
ticularly the  lungs,  where  the  humours  finding 
lefs  refiftawce,  are  continually  derived,  and  are 
•accumulated  there.  The  {kin,  being  condantly 
bathed  in  a fmall  fweat,  becomes  relaxed,  foft, 
and  incapable  of  completing  its  functions  : from 
’which  failure,  the  flighted  caufe  produces  a total 
obdruflion  of  perfpiration  : and  a multitude  of 
languid  di forders. 

The  patients  redouble  (heir  precautions  againd 
the  cold,  or  even  the  coolnefs  of  the  ait  , while 
their  cautions  are  fo  many  cffefciuai  means  to 
weaken  their  health  ; and  the  more  certainly,  as 
their  dread  of  the  free  air  fubje&s  them  to  a fe- 

dentary 


[ 214  ] 

dentary  life,  which  increafes  all  their  fymptoms ; 
while  the  hot  drinks  they  indulge  in,  complete 
their  feverity.  There  is  but  one  method  to  cure 
people  thus  fituated;  that  is,  by  accuftoming 
them  gradually  to  the  air  ; to  keep  them  out  of 
hot  chambers  ; to  leflen  their  cloathing  by  de- 
grees, to  make  them  deep  cool,  and  to  let  them 
eat  or  drink  nothing  but  what  is  cold.  To  make 
them  life  much  exercife  ; and,  finally,  if  the 
diforder  be  inveterate,  to  make  them  ufe  the 
cold  bath.  This  method  fucceeds  equally  too 
with  tliofe,  in  whom  the  difeafe  originally  de- 
pended on  a weaknefs  of  the  ftomach,  or  of  the 
lungs:  and  in  faft,  at  the  end  of  a certain  pe- 
riod, theie  three  caufes  are  always  combined. 


C H A P.  VIII. 

Of  the  Difeafcs  of  the  Teeth. 

Sec  t.  95. 

THE  difeafes  of  the  teeth,  depend  on  ihree 
principal  caufes.  1.  On  a cants  or  rot- 
tennefs  of  the  teeth.  2.  On  an  inflammation  of 
the  nerves  of  the  teeth,  or  of  the  membrane 
which  covers  them  ; and  which  affcfls  the  mem- 
brane of  the  gums.  3.  A cold  humour  that  falls 
on  the  teeth,  and  their  nerves  and  membrane. 
In  the  firft  of  thefe  cafes,  the  caries  having 

eat 


[ Z15  ] 

cat  down  to,  and  expofed  the  naked  nerve,  the 
air,  food,'  and  drink  irritate  it ; and  this  irrita- 
tion is  attended  with  pain. 

Here  a little  oil  of  cloves  may  be  applied,  by 
introducing  a fmall  pellet  of  cotton,  dipt  in  it,  to 
the  rotten  hollow  tooth;  which  often  affords 
confiderable  eafe.  Some  make  ufe  of  a tinfture 
of  opium,  or  laudanum,  after  the  fame  manner  ; 
and  indeed  thefe  two  medicines  may  be  ufed  to- 
gether in  equal  quantities.  * A gargarifm  made 
of  filverweed  or  wild  tanfey,  in  water,  frequent- 
ly appeales  the  pain  : and  in  fuch  cafes  many 
people  have  iound  themfeives  at  eafe,  under  a 
conflant  ufe  of  if.  It  certainly  is  an  application 
that  cannot  hurt,  and  is  even  beneficial  to  the 
gums.  Others  have  been  relieved  by  rubbing 
their  cheek  with  honey. 

§ 96.  The  fecond  caufe  is  the  inflammation 
of  the  nerve  within  the  fubflancc,  or  of  the  mem- 
brane on  the  outfide  of  the  tooth.  They  who 
are  young,  fanguine,  who  heat  themfeives  much, 
whether  by  labour,  by  their  food,  their  drink, 
by  fitting  up  late,  or  by  any  other  excefs  : they 
who  have  been  accuflomed  to  any  eruptions 
of  blood,  whether  natural  or  artificial,  and 
ceafe  to  have  them  as  ufual,  are  much  expofed 
to  the  tooth-ach,  from  this  caufe. 

This  pain  commonly  happens  very  fuddeniy. 
The  pulfe  is  flrong  and  full,  the  countenance 
confide rably  red,  the  mouth  extremely  hot; 
there  is  often  a pretty  high  lever,  and  a violent 

head-ac.h 


[ 216  3 


head-ac'h.  The  gums,  or  fome  part  of  them, 
become  inflame’d,  fwelled,  and  fometimes  an 
abfcefs  appears.  At  other  times  the  humours 
throw  themfelves  upon  the  more  external  parts, 
the  cheek  fwells  and  the  pain  abates. 

§97.  In  this  fpecies  of  the  difeafe,  we  mull 
have  recourfe  to  the  smitera]  method  of  treating 

O O 

inflammatory  diforders,  and  direft  bleeding, 
which  often  produces  immediate  eafe,  if  per- 
formed early.  After  bleeding,  the  patient  fhould 
gargle  with  barley-water,  or  milk  and  water ; 
-and  apply  an  emollient  cataplaim  to  the  cheek. 

If  a little  impollhume  appears,  the  ripening  of  it 
is  to  be  promoted,  by  holding  continually  in  the 
mouth  fome  hot  milk,  or  figs  boiled  in  milk  : 
and  as  Toon  as  ever  it  feems  ripe,  it  fhould  be 
opened,  which  may  be  done  eafily,  and  with- 
out any  pain.  Otherwife  he  fhould  bathe  his  g 
feet  in  warm  water  for  fome  evenings  fucceflive- 
ly,  taking  one  dofe  of  the  powder  No.  20.  En- 
tire abflinence  from  wine  and  flefh,  efpecially 
at  night,  has*cured  feveral  perfons  of  inveterate 
maladies  of  the  teeth. 

In  this  fpecies  of  tooth- ath,  all  hot  remedies 
are  pernicious,  and  are  fo  far  from  producing 
the  relief  expefted,  that  .they  aggravate  the  pain. 

§ 98.  When  the  difeafe  arifes  from  a cold  hu- 
mour, it  is  commonly  attended  with  lefs  violent 
fymptoms.  The  pulfe  is  neither  ftrong,  full, 
nor  quick  ; the  mouth  is  lefs  heated,  and  lefs 
fwelled.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  aftlicled  fhould  be 

purged 


I 


[ 2I7 


purged  with  the  powder  No.  21,  which  has 
fo  me  times  perfectly  cured  very  ob  din  ate  com- 
plaints. After  purging  they  fliouid  make  life 
of  the  diet-drink  No.  22.  This  has  cured  tooth- 
aches, which  have  baffled  other  attempts  for 
many  years;  but  it  muff  be  added,  this  drink 
would  be  hurtful  in  the  difeafe  from  a different 
caufe. 

§ 99.  As  this  lad  caufe  is  often  the  confe- 
quence  of  a weaknefs  in  the  ilomach.  Here  is  a 
neceffity  that  fuch  perfons  fhould  make  ufe  of 
fuch  medicines  as  are  proper  to  ftrengthen  the 
flomach.  The  powder  No.  14.  has  often  pro- 
duced the  bed  confequences,  when  I have  or- 
dered it  in  .thefe  cafes  ; and  it  never  fails  to  di-fli- 
pate  the  tooth-ach  very  fpeedily,  which  returns 
periodically  at  dated  days  and  hours.  I have 
alfo  cured  fonre  perfons  who  never  drank  wine, 
by  advifing  them  to  the  ufe  of  if. 

§ 100.  But  befides  the  difeafes  of  the  teeth, 
that  are  owing  to  thefe  caufes,  there  are  fome 
that  are  occafioned  by  a fharpne^  of  the  blood, 
and  which  are  never  cured  by  any  other  medi- 
cines but  fuch  as  correfcd  that  acrimony.  When  it 
is  of  a fcorbutic  nature,  the  wild  horfe-radifh 
(pepperwort)  water-crefles,  brooklime,  forrel, 
and  wood-forrel  cure  it. 

The  rheumatifm  and  the  gout  are  fome- 
; imes  transrerred  to  the  teeth,  and  give  rife  to 
Vol.  XXV.  K ° the 


C 218  ] 

the  mod  excruciating  pains,  which  mud  be  treat- 
ed like  difeafes  from  which  they  arife. 

§ 101.  From  what  has  been  faid,  the  reader 
will  difeern  why  an  application,  that  relieves 
oneperfon  in  it,  affords  not  the  lead  relief  to 
another. 

The  difeafes  of  the  teeth,  as  well  as  other  dif- 
eafes, arife  from  different  caufes  ; and  if  thefe 
cauies  are  not  oppofed  by  medicines  fuited  to 
them,  the  difeafe,  far  from  being  cured,  is  aggra- 
vated. 

I have  cured  violent  tooth-achs  of  the  lower 
j aw,  by  applying  a plader  of  meal,  the  white  of 
an  egg,  brandy  and  madich,  at  the  corner  of  that 
jaw,  over  the  fpot  where  the  pulfation  of  the 
artery  may  be  perceived  ; and  I have  alfo  mi- 
tigated the  molt  excruciating  pains  of  the  head, 
by  applying  the  fame  plaider  upon  the  temporal 
artery. 


CHAP.  IX. 

Oj  the  Apoplexy. 

Sect.  102. 


AN  Apoplexy  is  a hidden  lofs  of  all  fenfe,  and 
of  all  voluntary  motion  ; the  pulfe  at  the 
fame  time  being  kept  up,  hut  refpiration  being 
oppreffed. 

This 


[ aig  ] 

This  difeafe  is  diftinguifhed  into  two  kinds, 
the  fanguineous  and  ferous  apoplexy.  Each  of 
them  refults  from  an  -overfulnefs  ofthe  blood- 
veffels  of  the  brain,  which  preffes  upon  the 
nerves.  The  difference  confifts  in  this,  that  the 
fanguineous  apoplexy  prevails  among  ftrong 
robuft  perfons,  who  have  a rich  and  inflammable 
blood,  and  that  in  a large  quantity.  The  ferous 
apoplexy,  invades  perfons  of  a lefs  robuft  conftitu- 
tion,  whole  blood  is  more  dilute  or  watery,  and 
whofe  veffels  are  in  a more  relaxed  ftate. 

§ 103.  When  the  firft  kind  of  this  difeafe  exifts 
in  its  moll  violent  degree,  it  kills  inftantane- 
oufly.  When  the  alfault  is  lefs  violent,  and 
we  find  the  patient  with  a ftrong,  full  pulfe,  his 
vifage  red  and  bloated,  and  his  neck  fwelled  up, 
with  an  oppreffed  and  loud  hoarfe  refpiration, 
being  fenfible  of  nothing,  and  capable  of  no  other 
motions,  except  fame  effort  to  vomit,  -the  cafe 
is  not  fo  defperate.  We  muft  therefore  immedi- 
ately, 

1.  Entirely  uncover  the  patient's  head,  cover- 
ing the  reft  of  his  body  but  very  lightly  ; procure 
him  inftantly  very  frefli,  free  air,  and  leave  his 
neck  quite  unbound  and  open. 

2.  His  head  fhould  be  placed  as  high  as  may 
be,  with  his  feet  hanging  down. 

_ 3.  He  muft  lofe  from  twelve  to  fixteen  ounces 
of  blood,  from  a free,  open  orifice  in  the  arm  ; the 
ftrength  or  violence  with  which  the  blood  flows 
out,  fhould  determine  the  furgeon  to  take  a few 
K 2 ounces 


[ 220  ] 

ounces  more  or  lefs.  It  fhould  be  repeated  to  the 
third  or  fourth  time,, within  the  fpace  of  three  or 
four  hours,  if  the  fymptoms  require  it,  either 
in  the  arm., or  in  the  foot. 

4.  A glyftcr  fhould  be  given  of  a decoction 
of  the  firfl  opening  herbs  that  can  be  got,  with 
four  fpoonfuls  of  oil,  one  fpoonful  of  fait  ; and 
this  fhould  be  repeated  every  three  hours. 

,5.  If  it  is  poffible,  • he  fhould  force  himfelfto 
fwallow  water  plentifully,  in  there  pints  of  which 
three  drams  of  nitre  are  difTolved. 

6.  As  foon  as  the  violence  of  the  pulfe  abates, 
when  bis  breathing  becomes  lefs  difficult,  and  his 
countenance  lefs  inflamed,  he  fhould  take  the  de- 
coftion  No.  23  ; or,  if  it  cannot  be  got  in  time, 
three  quarters  of  an  ounce  of  cream  of  tartar,  and 
drink  whey  plentifully  after  it.  d his  medicine 
fncceeded  extremely  tvell  with  me  in  a cafe  where 
I could  not  readily  procure  any  other. 

7.  He  fliould  abflain  from  all  flrong  liquor, 
wine,  difliiled  fpirits,  whether  inwardly  or  by 
outward  application,  and  fliould  even  avoid 
fm  el  ling  them. 

8.  He  fhould  not  be  fUrred,  or  even  touched, 
as  little  as  poffible  : every  thing  muff  be  avoided 
that  creates  the  leaf!  agitation.  This  advice  I 
am  fen  Able,  is  direftly  oppofite  to  the  common 
praftice  ; notwithftanding  which,  it  is  founded 
inreafon,  and  approved  by  experience.  In  facb, 
the  whole  evil  refultsfrom  the  blood  being  forced 
up  in  too  great  a quantity,  to  the  brain.  Now 

flrong 


[ 221  ] 

ftrong  liquors,  wines,  fpirits,  volatile  lalis,  all 
agitation  and  friQdons,  increale  the  embarraif- 
ment  of  the  brain  ; whereas,  every  thing  that 
calms  the  circulation,  contributes  to  relieve  it. 

9.  Strong  ligatures  fhould  be  made  about  the 
thighs  under  the  ham  : by  this  means  the  blood 
is  prevented  m its  afcent  from  the  legs,  and  lefs 
is  carried  up  to  the  head. 

§ 104.  When  nature  and  art  effeft  his  reco- 
very, his  fenfes  return  : though  there  frequent- 
ly remains  a little  delirium  for  fome  time and 
frequently  a paralytic  defect,  more  or  lefs,  of  the 
tongue,  the  arm,  the  leg,  and  the  mufcles  of  the 
fame  fide  of  the  face.  This  palfy  fometimes 
goes  offgradually,  by  the  help  of  cooling  purga- 
tives, and  light  diet.  All  hot  medicines  are  ex- 
tremely hurtful  in  this  cafe,  and  may^open  the 
■way  to  a repeated  attack.  A vomit  might  be 
even  fatal,  .and  has  been  more  than  once  fo. 

§ 105.  The  other  fpecies  of  apoplexy  is  at- 
tended with  the  like  fymptoms,  excepting  the 
pulfe  not  being  fo  high  or  ftrong  : the  counte- 
nance is  alfo  lefs  red,  fometimes  even  pale  ; the 
breathing  lefs  opprelfed  ; and  fometimes  the 
fick  have  a facility  to  vomit. 

As  this  kind  of  the  diforder  attacks  perfons 
who  abound  lefs  in  blood,  bleeding  is  not  often 
neceffary  ; the  repetition  of  it  is  fcarcely  ever  fo  : 
and  fhould  the  pulfe  have  but  a fmall  fulnefs,  and 
not  the  leaft  unnatural  hardnefs,  it  might  even 
be  pernicious. 

K 3 


1,  The 


[ 222  J 

1.  The  patient  however  fhould  be  placed  as 
was  direfled  in  the  former  feftion. 

2.  He  fhould  receive  a glyfter,  but  without 
oil,  with  double  the  quantity  of  fait,  and  a bit 
of  foap  of  the  fiae  of  a fmall  egg.  It  may  be  re- 
peated twice  a clay. 

3.  He  fhould  be  purged  with  the  powder, 
No.  4.+ 

4.  His  common  di  ink  may  be  a flrong  infu- 
fion  ot  leaves  of  balm. 

5.  The  purge  fhould  be  repeated  the  third 
day. 

6.  Bliflers  fhould  immediately  be  applied  to 
the  flefhy  part  of  the  legs,  or  between  the  fhoul- 
der-blades. 

7.  Should  nature  feem  difpofed  to  relieve  her- 
felf  by  fu^eatings,  it  fhould  he  encouraged  ; and 
I have  often  known  an  infufion  of  the  car  dims 
benediflus,  produce  this  efTefl  very  fuccefsfullv. 
If  this  method  be  entered  upon,  the  fweat  ought 
to  be  kept  up  (without  flirting  if  poflible,)  for 
many  days.  It  has  then  fometimes  happened, 

that 

+ Vomits  which  are  fo  pernicious  in  the  fanguineous  apoplexy, 
where  the  patient’s  countenance  and  eyes  arc  inflamed  : and  which 
arc  alio  dangerous  01  ufelefs,  when  a perfon  lias  been  moderate 
in  his  meals,  or  is  weak,  are  nevenhelefs  very  proper  for  grofs 
teeders,  more  efpecially,  if  fuch  a one  has  a little  while  before  in- 
dulged himfclfcxccilively.  And  vomits  are  the  true  fpccific  for 
apoplexies,  occafioned  by  any  flupef\  ing  poilons.  Id  thefe  two 
laft  cafes,  a double  dofc  of  Tartar-emetic  fhould  be  diflolvcd 
in  a cup  of  water,  of  which  the  patient  fhould  immediately  take 
a large  fpponful ; which  fhould  be  repeated  every  quarter  of  ca 
hour,  till  it  operates. 


C ] 


that  at  tlie  end  of  nine  days  the  patient  has  been 
totally  freed  from  the  palfy,  which  commonly 
fucceeds  this  fpecies  of  apoplexy. 

§ 106.  Perfons  who  have  been  attacked  with 
either  kind  of  this-  diforder,  are  liable  to  fubfe- 
quent  ones  ; each  of  which  is  more  dangerous 
than  that  preceding.  Whence  an  endeavour  to 
prevent  fuch  relapfes,  becomes  of  the  utmoft 
importance.  This  is  to  be  effefled  by  a very 
exaft  diet,  diminifhing  the  ufual  quantity  of 
food;  the  mqft  elTential  precaution  to  be  ob- 
ferved  by  any  who  have  been  once  affaulted 
with  it,  being  entirely  to  leave  off  fuppers.  In- 
deed thofe  who  have  been  once  attacked  with 
the  [anguineous  apoplexies,  fhould  be  hill  more 
exaft  than  the  others.  They  fhould  deny  them- 
felves  whatever  is  rich  and  juicy,  hot  or  aroma- 
tic, wine,  diftilled  liquors  and  coffee.  They 
ihould  chiefly  confine  themfelves  to  garden-fluff, 

. fruits,  and  acids ; fhould  eat  but  little  flefh,  and 
only  thofe  called  white  ; taking  ever)-  week  two 
or  three  dofes  of  the  powder,  No.  24,  in  a morn- 
ing faffing,  in  a glafs  of  water.  They  fhould  be 
purged  twice  or  thrice  a year  with  the  draught, 
No.  23.  ufe  daily  exercife;  avoid  hot  rooms,  and 
the  violent  heat  of  the  fun.  Thev  fhould  50  10 
bed  betimes,  rife  early,  never  lie  in  bed  above 
fevc-n  or  eight  hours;  and  if  it  is  obferved  that 
their  blood  increafes  conftderably,  and  has  a ten- 
dency towards  the  head,  they  fhould  be  bled 
without  hefitation,  and  for  fome  lime  confine 
K 4 themfelves 


J 


[ 2H 

themfelves  entirely  to  a thin  and  low  regimen. 
In.  thefe  circumilances,  warm  bathings  are  perni- 
cious. In  the  other,  the  ferous  apoplexy,  in- 
ftead  of  purging  with  No.  23,  the  patient  fhould 
take  the  purge  No.  21. 

§ 107.  i'he  fame  means,  that  are  proper  to 
prevent  a helapfer  might  keep  off  a firft  affault,  if 
employed  in  time  ; for  notwithftanding  it  may 
happen  fuddenlv,  yet  this  difeafe  forefhews  it- 
feif  many  weeks,  fometimes^months,  nay  even 
years  beiorehand,  by  vertigos,  heavinefs  of  the 
head  ; fmall  defects  of  the  tongue  or  fpeech  ; 
momentary  palfies,  fometim.es  of  one,  fometimes 
of  another  part;  fometimes  Lv  loathings  and 
reach ings  to  vomit;  without  any  obflruclion  in 
the  fiilf  paffages,  or  any  other  caufe  in  the  flo- 
raach.  There  happens  alfo  foine  particular 
change  in*  the  looks  not  eafy  to  be  defcribed  ; 
fiiarp  and  quick  pains  about  the  region  of  the 
heart ; an  abatement  of  the  flrcngth,  without  anv 
difcernible  caufe. 

Some  perfons  are  liable  to  certain  fymptoms, 
which  arife  from  the  fame  caufe  as  an  apoplexy  ; 
and  which  indeed  may  be  confidered  as  light 
apoplexies,  of  which  they  fuftain  many  attacks, 
yet  without  any  confiderable  -annoyance.  The 
blood,  all  at  once,  as  it  were,  rufires  up  to  their 
heads  : they  appear  heedlefs  or  blundering,  and 
and  have  fometimes  difguffs  and  nauUas,  and 
vet  without  any  abatement  of  their  fenfes,or  mo- 
tion of  any  kind.  Tranquility  of  mind  and  body, 


once 


[ 225  j 

once  bleeding,  and  a few  glvfters,  ufualiy  carry 
this  off  loon  after  its  invafion.  The  returns  of 
it  may  be  prevented  by  the  above  regimen,  and. 
efpecially  by  a frequent  ufe  of  the  powder  No. 
24.  Otherwife  one  of  thefe  commonly  degene- 
rates into  a mortal  apoplexy. 


CHAP.  X. 

OJ  the  violent  influence,  or  Jirokes  of  the  fun. 
Sect.  108. 

IF  we  confider  that  wood,  hone  and  metals, 
when  long  expofed  to  the  fun,  become  fo 
hot,  that  they  can  fcarcely  be  touched  without 
a fenfation  of  burning,  we  may  eafily  conceive 
the  danger  a perfon  undergoes,  in  having  his 
head  expofed  to  the  fame  degree  of  heat.  The 
blood  veffels  grow’  dry,  the  blood  itfelf  thickens  - 
and  a real  inflammation  is  formed.  The  figms  of. 
it  are  a violent  head-ach,  attended  with  a very 
hot  and  dry  fkin  ; the  eyes  are  dry  and  red,  being 
neither  able  to  remain  open,  nor  yet  to  bear  the 
light  ; and  fometimes  there  is  a kind  of  involun- 
tary motion  in  the  eye-lid;  while fome  degree 
of  relief  is  perceivable  from  the  application  of  any 
cooling  liquor.  Some  cannot  poffibly  lleep  ; . 
yet  at  other  times  they  have  a great  drowfinefs. . 

K 5 There- 


« 


[ 226  ] 


There  is  a very  ftrong  fever ; a great  faintnefs, 
and  a total  difrelifh  and  loathing. 

§ log.  People  may  be  affefted  thus,  either  in 
the  fpring,  or  during  the  raging  heats.  Country 
people  are  little  liable  to  the  former.  They  chief- 
ly affetl  the  inhabitants  of  cities,  and  delicate 
perfons,  who  have  ufed  little  bbour  in  the 
winter,  and  abound  with  fnperfiuous  humours. 
If,  thus  circumllanced,  they  expgfe  themfelves 
to  the  fun,  even  in  the  fpring,  it  a£ts  upon  their 
head  like  a bliller,  attracting  a great  quantity  of 
humours  to  it.  This  produces  tormenting  pains 
of  the  head,  frequently  attended  with  quick  and 
violent  fhootings,  and  with  pains  in  the  eves  ; 
notwi  hltanding  this  degree  of  the  malady  is  fel- 
dom  dangerous.  The  fummer  Hi okes  are  much 
more  troublefome  to  labourers  and  travellers, 
who  are  long  expofed  to  them.  Then  it  is  that 
thofe  who  are  thus  flruck  often  die  upon  the  fpot. 
In  the  hot  climates  this  caufe  deltroys  many  in 
the  very  llreets,  and  makes  dreadiul  havock  a- 
mong  armies  on  the  march.  After  having  march- 
cd  a whole  day  in  the  fun,  a naan  lhall  fall  into 
a lethargy,  and  die  within  fome  hours,  with  the 
fymptoms  of  raving  madnefs.  I have  feen  a tyler 
in  a very  hot  day,  complaining  to  his  comrade 
of  a violent  pain  in  his  head  ; and  at  the  mflant 
he  purpofed  to  retire  out  of  the  fun,  he  funk 
down  dead.  This  fame  caufe  produces  often 
moll  dangerous  phrenzses. 

- * 


$ ito.  The 


[ 227  } 


§ no.  The  vehemence  of  the  fun  is  hill  more 
dangerous  to  thofe,  who  venture  to  fleep  expof- 
ed  to  it.  Two  mowers  who  fell  afleep  on  a 
haycock,  being  wakened  by  fome  others,  imme- 
diately daggered,  and  pronouncing  a few  inco- 
herent words,  died.  When  the  violence  of 
wine  and  that  of  the  fun  are  combined,  they  kill 
very  fuddenly.  And  thole  who  efcape  death, 
are  fubjeft  for  the  remainder  of  their  lives,  to 
chronical  head-achs.  It  has  alfo  been  known, 
that  fome  perfons  have  been  Itruck  into  a deli- 
rium without  a fever,  and  without  complaining 
of  a head-ach.  Sometimes  a gutta  ferena  has  been 
the  confequence. 

§ 111.  In  very  young  children,  who  never 
fhould  be  expofed  long  to  excefhve  heat,  this 
malady  dilcovers  itfell  by  a deep  drow fined, 
which  lafts  for  feveral  days  ; alfo  by  ravings, 
mingled  with  rage  and  terror,  much  the  fame  as 
when  they  are  arfefled  with  violent  fear:  and 
fometimes  by  convulfive  twitchings  ; by  head- 
achs  which  return  at  certain  periods,  and  con- 
tinual vomitings.  __ 

§112.  * Old  men,  who  often  expofe  them- 
felves  to  the  fun,  are  little  apprized  olthe  danger. 
1 his  cuflom  (in  hot  weather)  certainly  difpofes 
to  an  apoplexy,  and  to  diforders  of  the  head. 
One  of  the  flighteft  effeSts  of  much  folar  heat 
upon  the  head  is,  to  caufe  a defiuxion  from  the 
glands,  a fwelling  of  the  glands  of  the  neck, 
and  a drynefs  of  the  eyes,  which  fometimea 
continues  for  a confiderable  term. 

K 6 


§133.  The 


[ 22$  ] 

§ x 1 3 • The  effect  of  too  much  common  fire,  is 
of  the  fame  quality  with  that  of  the  fun.  A man 
who  fell  afleep  with  his  head  dire&ly  oppofite 
to  the  fire,  went  off  in  an  apoplexy,  during  his 

nap. 

§ 1 14.  The  action  of  too  violent  a fun  is  not 
only  pernicious  to  the  head,  but  to  other  parts  ; 
and  thofe  who  continue  long  expofed  to  it,, 
though  their  heads  Ihould  not  be  affefted,  often 
experience,  a difagreeable  fenfation  of  heat,  and 
a confiderable  fiiffnefs  in  the  parts  that  have  been 
parched  bv  it;  as  in  the  legs,  the  knees,  the 
thighs,  reins  and  arms ; and  fomeiimes  they 
prove  feverifh. 

^ 115.  It  is  neceffarv  to  fet  about  the  cure  of 
this  diforder,  as  foon  as  may  be  ; for  fitch  as 
might  have  been  eafily  preferred  by  an  early  ap- 
plication, are  confiderably  endangered  by  a ne- 
glect of  it.  The  method  of  treating  this  is  very 
much  the  fame  with  that  of  inflammatory  dif- 
. cafes;  that  is.,  lay  cooling  medicines  of  various 
kinds.  And  1.  If  the  difeafe  be  very  high  and 
urgent,  a large  quantity  of  blood  fhould  be  taken 
away.  Lewis  XIV.  was  bled  nine  times  to  pre- 
vent the  fatality  of  a flroke  of  the  fun,  which  lie 
received  in  hunting  in  16,58. 

2.  After  bleeding,  the  patient’s  legs  fhould  be 
plunged  into  warm  water.  This  affords  the'moft 
fpeedy  relief.  When  the  diforder  is  highly  dan- 
gerous, it  will  be  neceffary  to  treat  the  patient 
with  warm  baths,  in  which  he  may  fit  up  to  the 

hips ; 


[ 229  J 

hips  ; and  in  the  mof!  dangerous  degrees  of  it, 
even  to  bathe  the  whole  body  : but  the  water 
Ihould  be  only  fenfibly  warm:  the  ufe  of  hot 
would  be  highly  pernicious. 

3.  The  patient  fltould  drink  plentifully  of  le- 
monade, which  is  a mixture  of  the  juice  of  le- 
mons and  water,  (and  is  the  belt  drink  in  this 
diforder)  of  water  and  vinegar  which  is  a very 
good  fubftitute  for  lemonade  ; or  of  very  cleat- 
whey,  with  the  addition  of  a little  vinegar. 
Thefe  various  drinks  may  all  be  taken  cold  ; 
linen-cloths  dipt  in  cold  water  may  be  applied  to 
the  forehead,  the  temples,  or  all  over  the  head. 

Cold  baths  have  fometimes  recovered  perfons 
out  of  violent  fymptoms,  from  this  caufe. 

An  officer  who  had  rode  poll  for  feveral’days 
fucceffively,  in  very  hot  weather,  fwooned  away, 
immediately  on  his  difmounting;  from  which 
he  could  not  be  recovered  by  the  ordinary  af- 
fillance  ufed  in  fuch  cafes.  He  was  faved  by 
being  plunged  into  a bath  of  freezing  water.  It 
Ihould  be  obferved  however,  that  in  thefe  cafes 
the  cold  bath  Ihould  never  be  recurred  to,  with- 
out previous  bleeding. 

§ 116.  It  is  paft  doubt,  that  if  a perfon  ftands 
Hill  in  the  heat  of  the  fun,  he  is  more  lia- 
ble to  be  llruck  wiih  it,  than  if  he  walks  about ; 
and  the  ufe  of  white  hats,  or  of  fome  folds  of 
clean  white  paper  under  a black  one,  may  con- 
tribute to  prevent  any  injury  from  it. 


CHAP,. 


C 23°  ] 


CHAP.  XI. 

Of  the  Rheumatis  m«. 

Sect.  117. 

rT^H  E Rheumatifm  may  exift  either  with  or 
without  a fever.  The  find  is  preceded  by  a.. 
{hivering,  a fubfequem  heat,  hard  pulfe,  and  a hsad- 
ach.  Sometimes  indeed  an  extraordinary  coldnefs, 
with  general  uneafmefs  e.xills  feveral  days  before 
the  fever  is  perceived.  On  the  fecond  or  third  day,, 
and  fometimes  on  the  firfl.  the  patient  is  feized, 
with  a violent  pain  in  fome  part  of  his  body,  but 
efpecially  about  the  joints,  which  prevents  their 
motion,  and  is  often  accompained  with  heat,  red- 
nefs  and  fwelling.  The  knee  is  often  the  firil 
part  attacked,  and  fometimes  both  the  knees 
3tonce.  When  the  pain  is  fixed,  an  abatement 
of  the  fever  frequently  happens  -r  though  in  fome- 
it  continues  feveral  days,  and  increafes  every 
evening.  The  pain  diminilhes  in  one  part  alter 
a duration  of  fome  days,  and  then  invades 
fome  other.  Sometimes  one  part  is  quite  free 
from  pain,  when  another  is  attacked  ; at  other 
times  many  parts  are  fcized  nearly  at  the  fame 
inflant ; and  I have  fometimes  feen  every  joint 
afflifled  at  once.  In  this  cafe  the  patient  is  in 
a terrible  fituation,  being  incapable  of  any  motion, 

and 


[ 231  ] 

and  even  dreading  the  affidance  of  his  attend- 
ants, as  he  can  fcarcely  admit  of  touching.  The 
parts  in  which  the  pains  are  the  mod  tormenting 
and  obdinatc,  are  the  region  of  the  Joins,  the 
hips,  and  the  nape  of  the  neck. 

§ 118.  This  difeafe  is  oiten  extended  oyer  the 
fcalp,  and  the  furface  of  the  head  ; and  there  the 
pains  are  exceflive.  I have  feen  them  affect;  the 
eyelids  and  ;he  teeth,  with  inexpre'fible  torment. 
As  long  as  the  diftemper  is  fituated  in  the  exter- 
nal parts,  the  patient  is  in  no  great  danger,  if  he 
be  properly  treated ; but  if  the  difeafe  be  repel- 
led upon  an  internal  part,  his  cafe  is  extremely 
dangerous.  If  the  brain  is  attacked,  a raging  de- 
lirium is  the  confequence  ; if  k fails  upon  the 
lungs,  the  patient  is  fuffocated;  and  if  it  attacks 
the  lfomach  or  bowels,  it  is  attended  with  the 
mod  adonifhing  pains,  can  fed  by  the  inflamma- 
tion, which  if  violent,  is  fpeedily  fatal. 

§ 1 19.  An  obdrudled  perfpii ation,  and  an  in- 
flammatory thicknefs  of  the  blood,  conftitute  the 
general  caufe  of  the  vheumatifm.  This  lad 
caufe  is  that  we  mud  immediately  encounter  ; 
fince,  as  long- as  that  fubfids,  perfpiration  can- 
not be  perfectly  re-edablifned. 

As  foon  as  it  is  fufhciently  manifed,  twelve 
ounces  of  blood  fhould  be  taken  from  the  arm. 
The  patient  is  to  enter  upon  a regimen,  and 
drink  plentifully  of  the  ptifan,  No.  2,  and  of 
very  clear  whey,  fweetened'with  a little  honey. 
1 have  known  a very  fevere  rheumatifm  cured, 

after 


[ 232  ] 

after  twice  bleeding,  without  any  other  food  or 
medicine,  for  the  fpace  of  thirteen  days.r 

§ 120.  If  the  diftemper  is  not  confiderably  af- 
fuaged  by  the  firft  bleeding,  it  fhould  be  repeat- 
ed fome  hours  after.  I have  ordered  it  four  times 
within  the  firft  two  days ; and  fome  days  after 
I have  even  directed  a fifth  bleeding.  But  in 
general,  the  harduefs  of  the  pulfe  becomes  lefs 
after  the  fecond:  and  notwi'hftanding  the  pains 
may  continue,  yet  the  patient  is  fenfible  of  lefs 
inquietude.  If  the  patient  diflikes  a glvfter,  his 
drinks  fhould  be  made  as  opening  as  poffible ; 
and  a dofe  of  the  cream  of  tartar.  No.  24,  fhould 
be  given  night  and  morning.  *This  very  medi- 
cine, with  the  affiftance  of  whey,  cured  two 
perfons  I aavifed  it  to,  of  rheumatic  pains,  of 
which  they  had  been  infefted  with  frequent  re- 
turns for  many  years. 

Apples  coddled,  prunes  ftewed,  and  well-ri- 
pened fummer- fruits,  are  the  propereft  nourilh- 
ment  in  this  diforder. 

■^Ve  may  fave  the  fick  a great  deal  of  pain,  bv 
putting  one  ftrong  towel  always  under  then- 
back,  and  another  under  their  thighs,  in  order 
to  move  them  the  more  eafily.  When  their 
hands  are  without  pain,  a third  towel  hung  upon 
a cord,  which  is  fattened  acrofs  the  bed,  will 
afiift  them  in  moving  themfelves. 

§ 121.  When  the  fever  entirely  difappears, 

and 

+ I have  known  it  cured  by  living  on  whev,  without  any 
bleeding  at  all. 


[ 233  3 


and  the  hardnefs  of  the  pulfe  13  removed,  I 
have  ordered  the  purge,  No.  23,  with  good 
effeft : and  if  it  is  attended  with  five  or  fix  mo- 
tions, the  patient  is  fenfibly  relieved.  The  day 
but  one  after  it  may  be  repeated,  and  a third 
time,  after  an  interval  of  two  or  three  weeks. 

§ 122.  When  the  pains  are  extremely  violent, 
they  admit  of  no  outward  application  : vapour- 
bath?,  however,  may  be  employed,  and  provided 
they  are  often  ufed,  and  for  a confiderable  time, 
they  prove  very  efficacious.  The  purpofe  of 
thefe  baths  is  to  convey  the  fleam  of  boiling  water 
to  the  parts  affefled,  which  may  always  be  ef- 
fefted  by  a variety  of  eafy  contrivances;  the 
choice  of  which  muft  depend  on  the  different 
circumftances  and  fituation  of  the  fick. 

Wrhenever  it  is  Doffible,  fome  of  the  emollient 
applications,  No.  9,  fhould  be  continually  em- 
ployed. A bath  of  warm  water,  in  which  the 
patient  fhould  remain  an  hour,  after  fufficient 
bleedings,  affords  the  greatefl  relief.  I have  feen 
a patient,  under  the  moll  acute  pains  of  the 
loins,  of  the  hips,  and  of  one  knee,  put  into 
one.  He  continued  flill  under  extreme  torment 
in  the  bath,  and  on  being  taken  out  of  it:  but 
an  hour  after  he  had  been  put  to  bed,  he 
fweated  to  an  incredible  quainty,  for  thirty-fix 
hours,  and  was  cured.  But  the  bath  fhould  not 
be  made  ufe  of  until  after  repeated  bleedings,  or 
other  equivalent  evacuations. 

The  pains  are  generally  moft  fevere  in  the 

night 


[ 23d  ] 


sight;  whence  it  has  been  ufual  to  give  com- 
pofing  medicines.  But  opiates  augment  the 
caufe  of  the  difeafe,  and  deflroy  the  efficacy  of 
the  proper  remedies. 

§ 123.  The  rheumatifm  goes  off  either  by  {fool, 
by  turbid  thick  urine,  which  drops  a yellow  fedi- 
ment,  or  by  fweats : and  it  generally  happens, 
that  this  laft  difcharge  prevails  towards  the 
condufton  of  the  difeafe.  It  may  be  kept  up  by 
drinking  an  infufion  of  elder- flowers.  At  the 
beginning,  fweating  is  pernicious. 

It  happens  alfo,  though  feldom,  that  rheuma- 
iifms  determine  by  depofiting  a {harp  humour 
upon  the  legs  ; where  it  forms  a kind  of  blifters, 
which  burft  open,  and  form  ulcers.  But  they 
heal  naturally  of  themfelves,  by  a regular  diet, 
and  a few  gentle  purges. 

Sometimes  again,  an  abfcefs  is  formed  either 
in  the  alfefled  part,  or  in  fome  adjoining  onei 

Another  crifis  of  the  rheumatifm  has  happened 
by  a kind  of  itch,  which  breaks  out  on  the  parts 
adjacent  to  the  feat  of  this  diftemper.  Imme- 
diately after  this  eruption,  the  pains  vaniffi  : 
but  the  puflules  fometimes  continue  for  feveral 
weeks, 

^ 124.  I have  never  obferved  the  pains  to  lad, 
with  violence,  above  fourteen  days;  though 
there  remains  a weaknefs,  numbnefs,  and  fome 
inflation  of  the  adjoining  parts  : and  it  will  be 
many  weeks,  fometimes  months ; efpecially  in 
the  fall,  before  the  fick  recover  thcii  ftrength. 

I have 


[ 2 35  3 

I have  known  fome  perfons,  who,  after  a very 
painful  rheumatifm,  have  been  troubled  with  a 
very  difagreeable  laffitude,  which  did  not  go  off 
till  after  a great  eruption  all  over  the  body,  of 
little  blillers,  full  of  watry  humour  : many  of 
them  burft,  and  others  withered  and  dried  up 
without  burliing. 

The  return  of  ftrength  into  the  parts  affeCled, 
may  be  promoted  by  fri&ions  night  and  morning,, 
with  flannel ; by  ufing  exercife  ; and  by  con- 
forming exactly  to  the  directions  given  in  the 
chapter  on  recovery  from  acute  difeafes.  The 
rheumatifm  may  alfo  be  prevented  by  the  means 
I have  pointed  out,  in  treating  of  pleurifies  and 
quin  Ties. 

§ 125,  Sometimes  the  rheumatifm,  with  a fe- 
ver, invades  perfons  who  are  not  abounding  in 
blood  : whofe  flefh  and  fibres  are  fofter;  and  in 
whofe  humours  there  is  more  thinnefs  and  fharp- 
nefs.  Bleeding  proves  lefs  neceffary  for  thefe, 
though  the  fever  fhould  be  very  Itrong.  Some 
conftitutions  require  more  aifcharges  by  itool ; 
and  after  they  are  properly  evacuated,  blillers. 
may  be  applied,  unlefs  where  the  pulfe  is  hard. 
The  powder  No.  25,  anfwers  very  well  in  thefe 
cafes. 

§ 126.  Tlvere  is  another  kind  of  rheumatifm, 
called  Chronical.  It  is  known  by  the  following 
marks.  1.  It  is  commonly  unattended  with  a 
fever.  2.  It  continues  a long  time.  g.  It  fel- 
dom  attacks  many  parts  at  once.  4.  Frequently 

the 


[ 236  J 


the  affected  part  is  neither  more  hot.  red,  nor 
fwelled,  than  in  its  healthy  hate  ; though  fome- 
times it  is.  5.  The  former  attacks  ftrong  robuft 
perfons  : this  rather  invades  peiTons  arrived  at  a 
certain  period  of  life,  or  fuch  as  are  weak  and 
lanffuifhinff. 

O O 

§ 127.  The  pain  of  the  chronical  rheumatifm, 
when  injudicioufly  treated,  lads  fometimes  many 
months,  and  even  years-  It  is  particularly  ob- 
ftinate  when  it  falls  on  the  head,  the  loins,  or 
on  the  hip,  and  along  the  thighs,  when  it  is 
called  the  Jciatica.  There  is  no  part  indeed, 
which  this  pain  may  not  invade : fometimes  it 
fixes  itfelf  in  a^finall  fpot,  as  in  one  corner  of 
the  head,  the  angle  of  the  jaw,  the  extremity  of 
a finger,  in  one  knee,  on  one  rib,  or  on  the  breaft, 
where  it  often  excites  pains,  which  make  the 
patient  apprehenfive  of  a cancer.  It  penetrates 
alio  to  the  internal  parts.  When  it  affects  the 
lungs,  amoft  obftinate  cough  is  the  confequence; 
which  degenerates  at  length  into  very  dangerous 
diforders.  In  the  flomach  and  bowels,  it  occa- 
fions  violent  pains  like  a cholic  ; and  in  the 
bladder,  fymptoms  fo  gieatly  refembling  thofe 
of  the  Hone,  that  perfons  of  experience,  have 
been  more  than  once  deceived  by  them. 

§ 128.  The  treatment  of  this  rheumatifm  va- 
ries confiderably  from  that  of  the  former.  Ne- 
verthelefs  at  firft,  if  the  pain  is  very  acute,  and 
the  patient  robuft,  a fingle  bleeding  is  proper. 
2.  The  humours  ought  to  be  diluted,  and  their 

fharpnefs. 


f 237  ] 

ftiarpnefs  diminifhed,  by  a plentiful  ufe  of  a 
ptifan,  No.  26.  g.  Four  or  five  days  after  drink- 
ing abundantly  of  this,  the  purging  powder,  No. 
21,  may  be  taken  with  fuccefs. 

When  general  remedies  have  been  ufed,  and 
the  diforder  fiill  continues,  recourfe  fhould  be 
had  to  fuch  medicines  as  refiore  perfpiration  ; 
and  thefe  fhould  be  perfifled  in  for  a confiderable 
time.  The  pills  No.  18,  with  a firong  infufion 
of  elder- flowers,  have  fucceeded  in  this  refpedl : 
and  after  a long  continuance  of  diluting  drinks ; 
if  the  ftomach  exerts  its  funflions  well ; the  pa- 
tient is  no  ways  colli ve,  if  he  is  not  of  a dry 
habit  of  body  ; and  the  part  affe&ed  remains 
without  inflammation;  the  patient  may  fafely  take 
the  powder  No.  29,  at  night  going  to  bed,  with  a 
cup  or  two  of  an  infufion  of  carduus  benedi&us, 
and  a morfel  of  Venice-treacle  of  the  fize  of  a 
hazel-nut.  This  remedv  brings  on  a very  copi- 
ous fweating,  which  often  expels  the  difeafe.  f 
Thefe  fweats  may  be  rendered  fiill  more  effe&ual, 
by  wrapping  up  the  afletled  part  in  a flannel 
dipt  in  the  decoftion  No.  27. 

§ 129.  But  of  all  thefe  pains,  the  Jciatica  is 
one  of  the  moll  obflinate.  Neverthelefs  I have 
feen  the  greatefl  fuccefs,  from  the  application  of 
feven  or  eight  cupping-glaffes  on  the  tormented 

part; 

+ Gum  guaiacum  given  from  fix  to  ten  grains  morning  and 
evening,  is  often  very  fuccefsful  in  thefe  calcs.  It  may  be  made 
into  pills  or  boluffes  with  the  rob  of  elder,  or  with  the  extraft  of 
juniper. 


C 238  ] 

part ; by  which,  without  the  affiftance  of  any 
other  remedy,  I have  cured,  in  a few  hours, 
Jciaticas  of  many  years  {landing.  Green  cere- 
cloth, commonly  called  oil-cloth,  (whether  the 
ingredients  be  fpread  on  taffety  or  on  linen,) 
being  applied  to  the  difeafed  part,  difpofes  it  to 
fweat  abundantly,  and  thus  to  difcharge  the  fharp 
humour  which  occafions  the  pain.  Sometimes 
both  of  titefe  applications,  but  efpecially  that 
fpread  on  filk,  (which  may  be  applied  more  ex- 
actly and  clofely  to  the  part,  and  which  is  alfo 
fpread  with  a different  compofition)  raife  a little 
vefication  on  the  part.  A plaifler  of  quicklime 
and  honey  blended  together,  has  cured  inveterate 
Jciaticas. 

§ 130.  Cold  baths,  are  the  bed  to  keep  off  this 
difeafe ; but  they  cannot  always  be  fafely  ven- 
tured on.  Many  circumflances  render  the  ufe 
of  them  impracticable  to  particular  perfons. 
Such  as  are  fubjett  to  this  chronical  rheumatifm, 
would  do  well  to  rub  their  whole  bodies  even* 
morning,  if  they  could,  but  efpecially  the  afflicted 
parts  with  flannel.  This  keeps  up  perfpiration 
beyond  any  other  afliftance  ; and  indeed  fome- 
times  increases  it  too  much. 

After  a violent  rheumatifm.  people  fliould  long 
avoid  cold  and  moift  air. 

* § 131.  Rheumatic  people  have  too  frequent 
a recourfe  to  hurtful  medicines,  which  daily  pro- 
duce very  bad  confequences.  Such  are  fpiritu- 
ous  medicines,  brand}',  and  arquebufade  w'ater. 

They 


[ 239  ] 


They  either  render  the  pain  more  obflinate,  by 
hardening  the  fkin,  or  repel  the  humour  to  home 
inward  part.  And  inftances  are  not  wanting  of 
perfons  who  have  died  fuddenly,  from  the  appli- 
cation of  fpirit  of  wine. 

* Sharp  and  greafv  unctions  are  equally  dan- 
gerous. A rottennefs  of  the  bones,  has  enfued 
upon  the  nfe  of  a medicine  called  the  Balfam  of 
Sulphur  with  turpentine.  There  are  fome  rheu- 
matic pains,  which  admit  of  no  application ; 
alrnoft  every  medicine  aggravates  them.  In 
fuch  cafes  the  afflifled  mull  content  themfelves 
with  keeping  the  parts  affedted  from  the  impreffi* 
■onsof  the  air,  by  a flannel. 

§ 132-.  If  the  duration  of  the  pains  fixed  in  the 
fame  place,  fliould  caufe  fome  degree  of  ftiffnefs 
in  the  joint,  it  fliould  be  expofed  twice  a day  to 
the  vapour  of  warm  water,  and  diied  well  after- 
wards with  hot  linen:  then  it  fliould  be  well 
chaffed,  and  touched  over  with  ointment  of 
marfh-mallows. 

§ 1 33*  Very  young  children  are  fometimes 
fubjeft  to  fuch  violent  pains,  that  they  cannot 
bear  touching  in  any  part,  without  exceflive  cry- 
ing. We  mull  be  careful  to  avoid  miftaking 
thefe  cafes,  and  not  to  treat  them  like  rheu- 
matifms.  They  fometimes  are  owing  to  worms, 
and  go  off  when  thefe  have  been  difcharged. 


CHAP. 


C 24<>  ] 


CHAP.  XII. 

OJ  the  Bite  cj  a Mad  Dog. 

Sect.  134. 

WHEN  a perfon  is  bit  by  fuch  a dog,  the 
wound  commonly  heals  up  readilv:  but 
after  a longer  or  fhorter  term,  from  three  weeks 
to  three  months;  commonly  in  about  fix  weeks, 
the  perfon  bit  begins  to  perceive  in  the  fpot  that 
was  bitten,  a dull  pain.  The  fear  Iwells,  in- 
flames, burfts  open,  and  weeps  out  a fharp,  fetid, 
and  fomewhat  bloody  humour.  At  the  fame 
time  the  patient  becomes  fad  ; he  feels  a kind 
of  infenfibility,  and  general  numbnefs;  and  al- 
rnoft  inceflant  coldnefs;  a difficulty  of  breath- 
ing; a continual  anguifh,  and  pains  in  his 
bowels.  His  pulfe  is  weak  and  irregular,  his 
fleep  refllefs,  and  confufed  with  ravings,  and 
with  terrible  frights.  His  difeharges  by  ftool 
are  often  irregular,  and  fmall  cold  fweats  appear 
at  very  fhort  intervals.  Sometimes  there  is  alfo 
a flight  pain  in  the  throat.  Such  is  the  firfl  de- 
gree oi  this  diftemper. 

§ 135.  In  its  fecond  degree,  the  patient  is 

afflicted 


[ H1  ] 


arfii&ed  with  a violent  third:  and  pain  in  drink- 
ing. Soon  after  this  he  avoids  all  drink,  parti- 
cularly water,  and  within  fo me  hours  abhors  it. 
This  horror  becomes  fo  violent,  that  the  bring- 
ing water  near  his  lips,  or  into  his  fight,  the  very 
name  of  it,  or  of  any  other  drink;  the  fight  of 
objects  which  have  any  refemblance  of  water, 
afflifts  him  with  extreme  anguifh.  Yet  he  con- 
tinues to  fwallow  (though  not  without  great 
difficulty)  a little  bread  or  meat,  and  fometimes  a 
little  foup.  Some  even  get  down  the  liquid  me- 
dicines that  areprefcribed,  provided  there  be  no 
appearance  of  water  in  them.  Their  urine  be- 
comes thick  and  high  coloured,  and  fometimes 
there  is  a fuppreffion  of  it:  the  voice  either 
grows  hoarfe,  or  is  almoft  entirely  abolifhed. 
They  are  troubled  with  Ihort  deliriums,  which 
are  fometimes  mixed  with  fury.  Jt  is  at  fuch 
times  that  they  fpit  at  all  around  them  ; that  they 
attempt  alfo  to  bite.  Their  iooks  are  fixed,  as 
ft  were,  and  fomewhat  furious,  and  their  vifaffe 
frequently  red.  It  is  common  for  thefe  mifera- 
ble  patients  to  be  fenfible  of  the  approach  of  their 
raging  fit,  and  to  conjure  the  by-flanders  to  be 
upon  their  guard.  Many  of  them  never  have 
any  inclination  to  bite.  The  increafing  anguifh 
and  pain  become  inexpreffible : they  earnedly 
wifh  for  death ; and  fome  of  them  have  dellroyed 
themfelves. 

§ 136.  It  is  with  the  fpittle,  and  the  fpittle 
Vol.  XXV.  ' L only, 


[ 242  ] 


only,  tliat  this  dreadful  poifon  unites  itfelf. 
And  it  may  be  obferved,  ill,  that  if  the  wounds 
have  been  made  through  any  of  the  patient's 
cloaths,  they  are  lefs  dangerous  than  thofe  in- 
flifted  on  the  naked  fkin.  2.  That  animals  who 
abound  in  wool,  or  have  thick  hair,  are  often 
preferved  from  the  mortal  impreihon  of  the  poi- 
fon ; becaufe  the  cloaths,  the  hair,  or  the  wool, 
have  wiped,  or  dried  up  the  Haver  of  their  teeth, 
g.  The  bites  inrlifted  by  aninfeffed  animal,  very 
foon  after  he  has  Titten  many  others,  are  lefs 
dangerous  than  the  former  bites,  becaufe  their 
Haver  is  exhaufted.  4.  If  the  bite  happens  in 
the  face,  or  in  the  neck,  the  danger  is  greater, 
and  the  operation  of  the  venom  is  quicker,  j. 
The  higher  the  degree  of  the  difiemper  is  ad- 
vanced, the  bites  become  proportionably  more 
dangerous.  Hence  it  may  be  feen,  why,  of 
many  who  have  been  bitten,  fome  have  been 
infe&ed  with  this  dreadful  malady,  and  others 
not. 

§ 137.  There  is  a neceffuy  for  deflroying  or 
expelling  the  poifon  itfelf,  which  mercury  ef- 
fe&s,  and  is  confequently  the  counter  poifon  of 
it.  That  poifoii  produces  a general  irritation  of 
the  nerves;  this  is  to  be  removed  by  antifpafmo- 
dics:  fo  that  in  mercury,  joined  to  antifpafmo- 
dics,  confifts  the  whole  cure  of  this  malady. 
There  have  been  many  inftances  of  perfons 
cured  by  thefe  medicines,  in  whom  the  diftem- 

per 


r 243  ] 

per  had  been  manifeft  in  its  rage  and  violence. 
It  is  acknowledged  however,  that  they  have 
proved  ineffectual  in  a few  cafes  ; but  what  dif- 
temper  is  there  which  does  not  fometimes  prove 
incurable  ? 

§ 138.  The  very  moment  after  receiving  the 
bite,  if  it  can  be  effected,  the  part  affefted  fhouid 
be  cut  away.  The  ancients  directed  it  to  be 
burnt  with  a red-hot  iron  ; but  this  requires 
more  refolution  than  every  patient  is  endued 
with.  The  wound  fhouid  be  wafhed  a confidera- 
ble  time  with  warm  water,  with  a little  fea-falt 
diffolved  in  it.  After  this,  into  the  lips  and 
edges  of  the  wound,  and  into  the  furface  of  the 
part  all  about  it,  fhouid  be  rubbed  a quarter  ol 
an  ounce  of  the  ointment  No  28.  and  the  wound 
fhouid  be  drelfed  twice  daily,  with  the  fob  leni- 
ent ointment  No.  29.  but  that  of  No.  28  is  to  be 
ufed  only  once  a day. 

The  quantity  ol  nourifhment  fhouid  be  lefs 
than  ufual,  particularly  of  fie Qi  : he  fhouid  ab- 
flain  from  wine,  fpirituous  liquors,  all  forts  of 
fpices,  and  hot  inflaming  food.  Tie  fhouid 
drink  only  barley-water,  or  an  infufion  of  the 
flower  of  the  lime-tree.  He  fhouid  be  guarded 
againft  coftivenefs  by  a foft  relaxing  diet,  and 
bathe  his  legs  once  a day  in  warm  water.  Every 
third  day  one  dofe  of  the  medicine  No.  go  fhouid 
be  taken ; which  is  compounded  of  mercury, 
that  counterworks  the  poifon,  and  of  roufk, 
which  prevents  the  convulfive  motions.  * I 
L 2 confefs 


[ 244  ] 


confefs  I have  lefs  dependence  on  the  mercury 
given  in  this  form,  and  think  the  rubbing  in  of 
its  ointment  conftderably  more  efficacious, 
which  I think  will  always  prevent  the  fatality  of 
this  dreadful  d'ifeafe. 

§ 139.  If  the  dread  of  water  has  already  ap- 
peared, and  the  patient  is  flrong,  and  abounds 
with  blood  : he  ffiould, 

1.  Be  bled  to  a confiderable  quantity,  and  this 
may  be  repeated  twice,  thrice,  or  even  a fourth 
time,  if  circumftances  require  it. 

2.  The  patient  ffiould  be  put,  if  poffible,  into 
a warm  bath  ; and  this  ffiould  be  ufed  twice 
daily. 

3.  He  fhould  every  day  receive  two,  or  even 
three  of  the  emollient  glyfters  No.  5. 

4.  The  wound,  and  the  pans  adjoining  to  it, 
ffiould  be  rubbed  with  the  ointment  No.  28, 
twice  a day. 

5.  The  whole  limb  which  contains  the  wound, 
ffiould  be  rubbed  with  oil,  and  be  wrapped  up 

’in  an  oily  flannel. 

6.  Every  three  hours,  a dofe  of  theqiowder 
No.  30.  ffiould  be  taken  in  a cup  of  the  infufion 
of  lime-tree  and  elder- flowers. 

7.  The  prefcriptioh  No.  31,  is  to  be  given 
every  night,  and  to  be  repeated  in  the  morning, 
if  the  patient  is  not  eafy,  waffling  it  down  with 
the  fame  infufion. 

8.  II' t!  ere  be  a great  naufeoufnefs  at  the  flo- 

mach, 


[ 24 5 ] 

mach,  with  a bitternefs  in  the  mouth,  give  the 
powder  No.  35,  which  brings  up  a copious  dif- 
charge. 

9.  There  is  little  occafion  to  fay  any  thing  of 
the  patient’s  food,  in  fucli  a fituation.  Should 
he  afk  for  any,  he  may  be  allowed  panada, 
bread,  foups  made  of  meally  vegetables,  or  a 
little  milk. 

§ 140.  By  the  ufe  of  thefe  remedies,  the 
fymptoms  will  lelfen,  and  difappear  by  degrees. 

* It  is  certain  that  a boy,  in  whom  the  raging 
fymptoms  had  appeared,  was  perfectly  cured,  by 
bathing  all  about  the  wounded  part  with  fallad 
oil,  in  which  fome  camphire  and  opium  were 
dilfolved.  This,  with  the  addition  of  repeated 
fri&ions  of  the  ointment  No.  28,  brought  on  a 
very  plentiful  fweat,  on  which  all  the  fymptoms 
vanifhed. 

§ 1-41.  Dogs  may  be  cured  by  rubbing  in  a tri- 
ple quantity  of  the  fame  ointment  directed  for 
men,  and  by  giving  them  the  bolus  No.  33.  But 
both  thefe  means  fhould  be  ufed  as  foon  as  ever 
they  are  bit. 

As  foon  as  ever  dogs  are  bit,  they  fhould  be 
fafely  tied  up,  and  not  let  loofe  again  before  the 
expiration  of  three  or  four  months. 

§ 142.  A dangerous  prejudice  has  prevailed 
with  regard  to  the  bites  from  dogs.  That  if  a 
dog  who  had  bit  'any  peifon,  without  being  mad 
at  the  time  of  his  biting,  fhould  become  mad 
afterwards,  the  perfon  bitten  would  prove  mad 


[ 246  ] 


loo  at  the  fame  time.  Such  a notion  is  full  as 
abfurd,  as  it  would  be  to  affirm,  that  if  two  per- 
fons  had  flept  in  the  fame  bed,  and  one  of 
them  ffiould  take  the  itch,  or  the  fmall-pox, 
ten  or  twelve  years  after,  the  other  would  be  in- 
fecled  with  it,  and  at  the  fame  time  too. 

§ 143.  It  is  neceifary  no  longer  to  reprefent 
the  horror  of  that  cruel  praftice  which  prevailed 
not  very  long  fmce,  ol  fuffocating  perfons  in  the 
height  of  this  difeafe.  It  is  now  prohibited  in 
mo  ft  countries. 

* Another  cruelly,  of  which  we  hope  to  fee 
no  repeated  inftance,  is  that  of  abandoning  thofe 
miferable  p'atients  to  themfelves  : a moftdetclta- 
ble  cuffom  even  in  thofe  times  when  there  was 
not  the  leaf!  hope  of  favingthem  ; and  flilimore 
criminal  in  our  days,  when  they  may  be  reco- 
vered effeflually.  I again  affirm,  that  it  is  not 
often  thefe  afflifted  patients  are  difpofed  to  bite; 
and  that  even  when  they  are,  they  are  afraid  of 
doing  it ; and  requeft  the  by-ftanders  to  keep 
cut  of  their  reach  ; fothat  no  dangerit  incurred  : 
or  where  there  is  any,  it  may  be  avoided  by  a 
few  precautions. 


CHAP. 


» 


[ 247  3 


CHAP.  XIII. 

Of  the  Small-Pox. 

S e c t.  144. 

HE  fmall-pox  is  the  moll  extenfive  of  all 


difeafes ; fxnce  out  of  a hundred  pcrfcus 
there  are  not  more  than  two  or  three  exempted 
from  it.  It  is  equally  true,  that  if  it  attacks  al- 
moft  every  perfon,  it  attacks  them  but  once,  fo 
that  having  efcape'd  through  it,  they  are  always 
fecure  from  it.  It  lrfufl  be  acknowledged,  at  the 
fame  time,  to  be  one  of  the  moll  deftruftive  dis- 
tempers ; for  if  in  fome  it  proves  to  be  of  a gen- 
tle kind,  in  others  it  is  almoft  as  fatal  as  the 
plague  : it  being  demonftrated,  by  calculating  the 
confequences  of  its  utmoft  raging,  and  its  gentleft 
prevalence,  that  it  kills  one  feventh  part  of  the 
number  it  attacks. 

§ 14,5.  This  malady  often  gives  fome  intima- 
tion of  its  approach,  three  or  four  days  before 
the  fever,  by  a little  dejeftion  ; lefs  vivacity’ 
than  ufual  ; a great  propenfity  to  fweat ; lefs  ap- 
petite ; a flight  alteration  of  the  countenance ; 
and  a fort  of  pale  livid  colour  about  the  eyes. 

Short  viciffitude  of  heat  or  coldnefs  fucceed, 


and 


[ 24&  } 


and  ai  length  a confiderable  fhivering,  of  one,  two, 
three  or  four  hours  : this  is  fucceeded  by  violent 
heat,  accompanied  with  pains  of  the  head,  loins,, 
vomiting,  or  at  lead  a frequent  propenfity  to 
vonjit. 

This  flate  continues  for  fome  hours,  after 
which  the  fever  abates  a little  in  a fweat  : the 
patient  then  finds  himfelf better,  but  is  neverthe- 
lefs  caft  down,  heavy,  fqueamifh,  with  a liead- 
ach  and  pain  in  the  back,  and  a difpofition  to- 
be  drowfy.  The  lad  fymptom  indeed  is  not 
very  common,  except  in  children  lefs  than  fe- 
ven  or  eight  years  of  age. 

The  abatement  of  the  fever  is  of  Ihort  dura- 
tion; fome  hours  after,  generally  towards  the 
evening,  it  returns  with  all  its  attendants,  and 
terminates  again  by  fvvests,  as  before. 

This  Hate  lafts  three  or  lour  days  : at  the  end 
of  which,  and  feldom  later,  the  firlf  eruptions 
appear  among  the’ fweat,  which  terminates  the 
paroxyfm  of  the  fever.  I have  generally  ob- 
ferved  the  earlieft  eruption  to  appear  in  the  face, 
next  to  that  on  the  hands,  on  the  fore-part  of 
the  arms,  on  the  neck,  and  on  the  upper  part 
of  the  bread.  As  foon  as  this  eruption  appears, 
if  the  didemper  is  of  a gentle  kind,  the  fever  al- 
moli  entirely  vanilhes ; the  patient  continues  to 
fweat  a little ; the  eruptions  increafe,  others 
coming  out  on  the  back,  the  fides,  the  belly,  the 
thighs,  the  legs,  and  the  feet.  Sometimes  they 

O'  O'  «r 

arc  pulhed  out  very  plentifully,  even  to  the  foies 


[ 24 9 ] 

of  the  feet ; where,  as  they  increafe  in  fize,  they 
often  excite  very  fliarp  pain  by  reafon  of  the 
tliicknefs  and  hardnefs  of  the  fkin  in  thefe 
parts. 

Frequently  on  the  firft  and  fecond  day  of  erup- 
tion {fpeaking  hitherto  of  the  mild  kind)  there 
returns  a gentle  fever  about  the  evening,  which, 
about  the  termination  of  it,  is  attended  with  a 
eonfiderable and  final  eruption:  though,  as  often 
as  the  fever  terminates  perfectly  after  the  earheft 
eruption,  a fmall  one  is  a pretty  certain  confe- 
quence.  For  though  the  eruption  is  moderate, 
the  fever  does  not  totally  difappear;  a linall  de- 
gree of  it  Fill  remaining  and  heightening  a little 
every  evening. 

Thefe  puftules,  on  their  firff  appearance,  are 
litttle  red  fpots,  refembling  a flea-bite;  but  dif- 
tinguifhable  by  a fmall  white  point  in  the  middle,, 
a little  raifed  above  the  refi,  which  gradually 
increafes  in  fize,  with  the  rednefs  extended 
about  it.  They  become  whiter,  in  proportion 
as  they  grow  larger  ; and  generally  upon  the  fixth 
day,  including  that  of  their  firft  eruption,  thev 
attain  their  utmofl  magnitude,  and  are  full  of 
pus  or  matter.  Some  of  them  grow  to  the  fize 
of  a pea,  and  fome  a little  larger  ; but  this  ne- 
ver happens  to -the  greateft.  number  of  them. 
From  this  time  they  begin  to  look  yellowifh, 
they  gradually  become  dry,  and  fall  off  in  brown 
fcales,  in  ten  or  eleven  days  from  their  firffc 
L 5 appearance. 


[ 25°  ] 

appearance.  As  their  eruption  occurred  on  dif- 
ferent days,  they  alfo  wither  and  fall  off  fuccef- 
fively.  The  face  is  fomeiimes  clear  of  them, 
while  puflules  ff ill  are  feen  upon  the  legs,  not 
fully  ripe  : and  thofe  in  the  foies  of  their  feet 
frequently  remain  much  longer. 

§ 145.  The  fkin  is  of  courfe  extended  by  the 
puflules  ; and  after  the  appearance  of  a certain 
quantity,  all  the  parts  between  the  puflules,  are 
red  and  bright  with  a proportionable  fwelling  of 
the  fkin.  The  face  is  the  firfl  part  that  appears 
bloated,  from  the  puflules  there  firfl  attaining 
their  full  fize  ; the  like  happens  alfo  to  the  neck, 
and  the  eyes  are  often  clofed  up.  The  fwelling 
of  the  face  abates  in  proportion  to  the  drying  up 
of  the  puflules,  and  then  the  hands  are  puffed 
up  prodigioufly.  This  happens  fueceffively  to 
the  legs,  the  fwelling  being  the  confequence  of 
the  puflules  attaining  their  utmofl  fize. 

§ 146.  Whenever  there  is  a very  confiderable 
eruption,  the  fever  is  heightened  at  the  time  of 
fuppuration,  which  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  ; 
one  boil  excites  a fever  ; how  is  it  poffible  then 
but  fome  hundreds,  or  thoufands  of  thefe  little 
abfceffes  muff  ? This  fever  is  the  mofl  danger- 
ous period,  and  occurs  between  the  ninth  and 
thirteenth  davs.  At  this  feafon  the  patient  be- 
comes hot.  and  thirfly;  he  is  harraffed  with  pain, 
and  finds  it  difficult  to  difcover  an  eafy  pofture. 
If  the  malady  runs  high,  he  has  no  fleep  : he 
raves,  becomes'oppreffed,  is  feized  with  drowfinefs, 

and 

- 


[ *5»  3 


and  if  lie  does  no!  furvive,  he  dies  either  fuffo- 
cated  or  lethargic,  and  fometimes  in  ailate  com- 
pounded of  both. 

The  pulfe,  during  this  fever  of  fuppuration, 
is  fometimes  of  an  aftonifhirig  quicknefs.  The 
mod  dangerous  time  is,  when  the  fwellings  of  the 
face,  head,  and  neck,  are  in  their  highe ft  degree. 
Whenever  the  fwelling  begins  to  fall,  the  fcabs 
on  the  face  to  dry,  and  the  fkin  to  fhrivel,  as  it 
were,  the  danger  diminifhes.  When  the  puf- 
tules  are  very  few,  this  fecond  fever  is  fo  moder- 
ate, that  it  requires  fome  attention  to  difcern 
it. 

§ 147.  Befides  thefe  fymptoms,  there  are  fome 
others,  which  require  confiderable  attention. 
One  of  thefe  is  the  forenefs  of  the  throat,  with 
which  many  are  affli&ed,  as  foon  as  the  fever 
grows  pretty  flong.  It  continues  for  two  or 
three  days  ; feels  very  troublefome  in  the  abtioii 
of  fwallowing  ; and  fometimes  entirely  prevents 
fwallowing.  It  begins,  mcft  frequently,  before 
the  eruption  appears  ; if  this  complaint  is  in  a 
light  degree,  it  terminates  upon  the  eruption  ; 
and  whenever  it  revives  in  the  courfe  of  the 
diftemper,  it  is  always  in  proportion  to  the  de- 
gree of  the  fever.  As  often  as  it  is  of  any  con- 
fierable  duration,  it  is  attended  with  a difcharge 
of  a great  quantity  of  fpittle.  When  the  erup= 
tion  is  confluent,  and  the  patient  adult,  the  dif- 
charge is  furprifing.  This  often  incommodes  him 

L 6 


more 


[ 252  ] 


more  than  any  other  fymptom  of  the  diftemper, 
and  fo  much  the  more,  as,  after  its  continuance 
for  fome  days,  the  lips,  the  infide  of  the  cheeks, 
the  tongue,  and  the  roof  of  the  mouth,  are,  as  it 
were  head.  Neverthelefs  however  painful  this 
difcharge  may  be,  it  is  very  necelTarv  and  falu- 
tary. 

§ 148.  Children,  to  the  age  of  five  or  fix 
years,  are  lible  to  convulfions,  before  eruption  ; 
thefe  however  are  not  dangerous,  if  they  are  not 
accompanied  with  violent  fvmptoms.  But  fitch 
convulfions  as  fupervene,  either  when  the  erup- 
tion Jirikts  in  ; or,  during  the  courfe  of  the  fe- 
ver of  fuppnration  are  more  terrifying. 

Involuntary  difcliarges  of  blood  from  the  nofe 
often  occur,  in  the  firft  flage  of  this  diftemper, 
which  are  extrt.  ely  ferviceable,  and  commonly 
leffen,  or,  carry  ofi  the  head-ach. 

§ 149. The  fmah-pox  is  commonly  diftinguifh- 
ed  into  two  kinds,  confluent  and  the  dii- 
tinft.  But  the  f re  atm  j of  each  of  them  is  the 
fame.  We  may  expefct  confluent  ana  danger- 
ous pock,  if,  at  the  ve  *ime  of  feizure,  the 

patient  is  attacked  with  ' violent  fvmptoms, 
mote  especially  if  his  eyx : are  extremely  quick, 
lively',  and  even  gliftem:  if  he  vomits  almoft 

continually,  if  the  pain  of  1 loins  be  violent ; and 
if  he  fnffers  great  anguith  a i inquietude;  if  in 
infants  there  is  great  ftupor  or  heavinefs  : if  the 
eruption  aDpears  on  the  third  day,  or  even  or  the 

fecond : 


[ £53  } 

fecond  : as  the  haftier  eruptions  in  this  difeafe 
fignify  themoft  dangerous  kind  of  it. 

§ 150.  The  diforder  is  fometimes  fo  flight, 
that  the  eruption  appears  with  fcarce  any  fufpi- 
'cion  of  the  child’s  having  the  leaft  ailment.  And 
the  event  is  equally  favourable.  The  puflules 
grow  large,  fupp urate,  and  attain  their  maturity, 
without  confining  the  patient  to  his  bed,  or  lef- 
fening  either  his  fleep  or  appetite. 

But  wine,  Venice  treacle  cordial  confe&ions, 
hot  air,  and  loads  of  bed-cloaths,  annually  fweep 
off  thoufands  of  children,  who  might  have  re- 
covered, if  they  had  taken  nothing  but  water  ; 
and  every  perfon  who  is  inte;  il  ed  in  t h e recovery 
of  patients  in  this  diftemper,  ought  care  .’ally  to 
prevent  the  fmalleft  ufe  of  fuel  drugs  ; which, 
certainly  increafe  the  feveritv,  and  annex  the 
moil  unhappy  confequence  to  it. 

§ 151.  At  the  very  beginning  of  the  fmall- 
pox  the  patient  is  immediately  to  be  put  on  a 
flrift  regimen,  and  to  have  his  legs  bathed  morn- 
ing and  evening  in  warm  water.  This  is  the  pro- 
per method  to  leffen  the  quantity  in  the  face  and 
head,  and  to  facilitate  it  every  where  elfe.  If  he 
vomits,  it  is  highly  pernicious  to  flop  it  by  any 
cordial  confeflion  or  by  venice-treacle  ; and  fiill 
more  dangerous  to  give  a vomit  or  purge,  which 
are  hurtful  in  the  beginning  of  the  frnail  pox. 

If  the  fever  be  moderate,  the  bathing  of  the 
legs  on  the  firfi  day  of  fickening  may  fuffice  then. 
The  patient  mull  be  reftrained  to  his  regimen  ; 

and 


C 254  ] 

and  need  drink  nothing  but  milk,  diluted 
with  two  thirds  of  elder-flower  or  lime-tree 
tea,  or  with  balm  tea,  if  there  be  no  perceiv- 
able fever : yea,  or  with  good  clear  water. 
An  apple  coddled,  or  baked,  may  be  added, 
to  it  ; and  if  they  complain  of  hunger,  a little 
bread  may  be  allowed  ; but  they  mull  be  denied 
anv  meat  or  meat  broth,  eggs  and  flrong  drink. 
In  this  early  ftage  too,  clear  whey  alone  may 
fervethem  inftead  of  every  other  drink,  thegood 
effefts  of  which  I have  frequently  been  a witnefs 
too : or  butter-milk  may  be  allowed.  When  the 
diftemper  is  of  a mild  fpecies,  a perfeft  cure  en- 
fues,  without  any  other  affiftance  : but  we  fliould 
not  negleff  to  purge  the  patient  as  foon  as  the 
puflules  are  perfeftly  fcabbed  on  the  greater  part 
of  his  face,  with  the  prefcription  No.  11,  which 
muft  be  repeated  fix  days  after.  He  fhculd  not 
be  allowed  flefh  till  after  this  fecond  purge  ; 
though  after  the  firft  he  may  be  allowed  fome 
well  boiled  pulfe,  or  garden-fluff  and  bread,  and 
in  fuch  a quantity,  as  not  to  be  pinched  with 
hunaer,  while  he  recovers  from  the  difeafe. 

§ 152.  But  if  the  fever  be  flrong,  the  pulfe 
hard,  and  the  pain  of  the  head  and  loins  violent, 
he  muft  immediately  lofe  blood  from  the  arm  ; 
receive  a glyfler  two  hours  after  : and,  if  the  fe- 
ver continues,  the  bleeding  muft  be  repeated. 

I have  direfted  a repetition  of  it  even  to  the 
fourth  time,  within  the  two  firft  days,  to  young 
people  under  the  age  of  18  ; and  it  is  more  efpe- 

c tally 


•t* 


[ 2 55  ] 

daily  neceflary  in  fuch  as,  with  a hard  and  full 
pulfe,  are  alfo  affeded  with  drowfinefs  or  a de- 
lirium. 

2.  As  long  as  the  fever  continues  violent,  two, 
three,  or  even  four  glyfters  fhould  be  given  in 
the  "24  hours  ; and  the  legs  fhould  be  bathed 
twice. 

3.  The  patient  is  to  be  taken  out  of  bed,  and 
fupported  in  a chair  as  long  as  he  can  toler- 
ably bear  it. 

4.  The  air  of  his  chamber  fhould  frequently 
be  renewed ; and  if  it  be  too  hot,  which  it  often 
is  in  fummer,  in  order  to  refrelh  it,  and  the  pa- 
tient, the  means  mull  be  employed  which  are  di- 
reded  in  § 29. 

g.  He  is  to  be  reftrainedto  the  ptifans  No.  2.  or 
4 ; and  if  that  does  not  fufficiently  moderate  the 
fever,  he  fhould  take  every  hour,  or  every  two 
hours,  according  to  the  urgency  of  the  cafe,  a 
fpoonful  of  the  mixture  No,  10,  mixed  with  a 
cupofptifan.  After  the  eruption,  the  fever  be- 
ing then  abated,  there  is  lefs  occafion  for  medi- 
cine ; and  fhould  it  entirely  difappear,  the  pati- 
ent may  be  regulated  as  direded  § 151. 

When,  after  a remiflion  or  intermiftion  of 
fome  days,  the  fuppuration  revives  the  fever,  we 
ought  particularly,  to  keep  the  body  very  open. 
For  this  purpofes  an  ounce  of  lenitive  eleduary 
fhould  be  added  to  the  glyfters : or  they  might 
be  fimply  made  of  whey,  with  honey,  oil,  and 
fait.  Give  the  patient  three  times  every  morn- 
ing, 


C *56  ] 

ing,  at  the  interval  of  two  hours  between  each, 
three  glaffes  of  the  ptifan  No.  32.  Purge  him 
after  two  days,  with  the  portion  No.  23,  but  on 
that  day  he  muft  not  take  the  ptifan  No.  32. 

2.  He  muft,  if  the  diftemper  be  very  violent, 
take  a double  dole  of  the  mixture  No.  10. 

3.  The  patient  fhould  be  taken  out  of  bed,  and 
kept  up  in  a room  well  aired  day  and  night,  un- 
til the  fever  has  abated.  Many  perfons  will  be 
furprized  at  this  advice  ; neverthelefs,  it  is  that 
which  l have  often  experienced  to  be  the  rnoft 
efficacious,  and  without  which  the  others  are 
ineffeblual.  They  will  fay,  how  fhall  the  patient 
fleep  at  this  rate  ? To  which  it  may  be  anfwer- 
ed,  fleep  is  not  neceflary,  in  this  ftate  and  ftage 
of  the  difeafe.  Befides,  he  is  unable  to  fleep  : 
the  continual  falivation  prevents  it,  and  it  is  very 
neceflary  to  keep  up  the  falivation  : which  is  fa- 
cilitated by  often  injebling  warm  water  and  ho- 
ney into  his  throat.  It  is  alfo  of  confiderable 
fervice  to  throw  fome  up  his  ncftrils,  and  often 
thus  to  cleanfe  the  fcabs  which  form  within  them. 
A due  regard  to  thefe  circumftances  contributes 
to  leffen  the  patient’s  uneafinefs,  and  are  very 
efieclual  to  cure. 

4.  If  the  face  and  neck  are  greatly  fwelled, 
emollient  cataplafms  are  to  be  applied  to  the  foies 
of  the  feet. 

§ 133  The  eyelids  are  fwelled  when  the  dif- 
eafe runs  high,  fo  as  to  conceal  the  eves  for  fe- 
veral  days.  Nothing  further  fhould  be  attempted, 

with: 


[ ^57  ] 

with  refpefl  to  this,  but  the  frequent  moiften- 
ing  of  them  with  a little  warm  milk  and  water. 
What  chiefly  conduces  to  prevent  the  inflamma- 
tion of  the  eyes  alter  the  difeafe,  and  in  general 
all  its  other  bad  confequences,  is  to  be  content 
for  a confiderable  time  with  a very  moderate 
quantity  of  food,  and  particularly  to  abftain  from 
flefli  and  wine.  In  the  very  bad  fmall-pox,  and 
in  little  children,  the  eyes  are  clofed  up  from 
the  beginning  of  the  eruption. 

§ 154.  * One  help,  which  has  not  been  made 
ufe  of  for  a long  time  pafl,  except  as  a means  to 
preferve  the  fmootlmefs  of  the  face  ; but  which 
has  the  greatefl  tendency  to  preferve  life  itlelf, 
is  the  opening  of  the  puflules,  not  only  upon 
the  face,  but  all  over  the  body.  In  the  firft 
place,  by  opening  them,  the  retention  of  pus  is 
prevented,  whjch  prevents  any  erofion,  or  eat- 
ing down  from  it  : whence  fears,  deep  pits,  and 
other  deformities  are  obviated.  Secondly,  in 
giving  a vent  to  the  poifon,  the  retreat  of  it  into 
the  blood  is  out  off,  which  removes  a principal 
caufe  of  the  danger.  Thirdly,  the  fkin  is  relax- 
ed ; the  tumour  of  the  face  and  neck  diminifh 
in  proportion  to  that  relaxation ; and  thence 
the  return  of  the  blood  from  the  brain  is  facili- 
tated. The  puflules  fhould  be  opened  every 
where,  fucceflively  as  they  ripen.  The  precife 
time  of  doing  it,  is  when  they  are  entirely  white  ; 
when  they  juft  begin  to  turn  a very  little  yel- 
lowifh ; and  when  the  red  circle  furrounding 

them 


[ 2 <58  ] 

them  is  quite  pale.  They  fhould  be  opened 
with  very  fine  fharp  pointed  fciffars ; this  does 
not  give  the  patient  the  leafl  pain  ; and  when  a 
certain  number  of  them  are  opened,  a fpunge 
dipt  in  a little  warm  water  is  to  be  repeatedly  ap- 
plied to  fuck  up  and  remove  the  pus.  But  as 
the  puftules,  when  emptied  thus,  foon  fill  again, 
a difcharge  of  this  frefh  matter  mult  be  obtained 
in  the  fame  manner  fome  hours  after : and  this 
muff  fometimes  be  repeated  five  or  fix  times  fuc- 
ceffively.  Such  extraordinary  attention  in  this 
point  may  probably  be  confidered  as  trivial;  and 
is  very  unlikely  to  become  a general  practice: 
but  I do  again  affirm  it  to  be  of  much  import- 
ance ; and  that  as  often  as  the  fever  attending 
fuppuration.  Is  violent,  a repeated  .v»nlr..'. 
emptying  and  abforbing  of  the  ripened  puftules, 
is  a remedy  of  the  utmoft  efficacy. 

§ x55-  * The  patient  fhould  very  carefully  ab- 
ftain  from  the  ufe  of  Venice-treacle  laudanum, 
diacodium,  that  is,  the  fyrup  of  white  poppies, 
or  even  of  the  wild  red  poppy  ; fyrup  of  amber, 
pills  of  ftorax,  and  in  one  word,  of  every  medi- 
cine which  produces  fleep.  And  their  ufe 
fhould  be  entirely  banifhed,  through  the  fecon- 
dary  fever. 

If  the  eruption  fhould  fuddenlv  ftrike  in, 
heating,  foporific,  fpirituous  and  volatile  reme- 
dies fhould  carefully  be  avoided  ; but  the  patient 
may  drink  plentifully  of  the  infufion  No.  12,  or 
rather  of  cold  water. 


§ 1 56.  To 


[ §59  ] 

§ 156.  To  prepare  children  for  the  fmall-pox, 
the  firlt  Hep  is  an  abatement  of  their  ufual  lood. 
Children  commonly  eat  too  much.  Their  limi- 
tation fhould  be  in  proportion  to  their  fize  and 
growth.  But,  with  regard  to  all,  we  may  be 
allowed  to  make  their  fupper  very  light,  and  very 
fmall. 

Their  fecond  advantage  will  conftft  in  the 
choice  of  their  food.  It  Ihould  be  of  the  fimpleft 
kind,  as  vegetables  and  milk-meats.  Their  bread 
Ihould  be  well  baked  ; their  pulfe  dreffed  without 
bacon  : and  their  fruits  well  ripened.  Thefe  re- 
gulations maybe  fufficient. 

d’he  third  article,  is  to  bathe  their  legs  now 
and  then  in  warm  water,  before  they  go  to  bed. 
This  promotes  perfpii  ation,  cools,  dilutes  the 
blood,  and  allays  the  fharpnefs  of  it,  as  often  as 
it  is  properly  timed. 

The  fourth  precaution  is  the  frequent  ufe  of 
very  clear  whey.  This  agreeable  remedy,  which 
confids  of  the  juices  of  herbs  filtred  through,  and 
as  it  were,  fweetened  by  the  organs  of  a 
healthy'  ainmal,  anfwers  every  vifible  indi- 
cation : it  imparts  a flexibility'  to  the  veffels ; 
it  abates  the  thicknefs  of  the  blood ; which 
is  augmented  by  the  aftion  of  the  poifonous 
caufe  of  the  fmall-pox.  It  removes  all  obdruc- 
tions  in  the  bowels.  It  alfo  promotes  flools,  urine 
and  perfpiration ; and,  in  a word,  communi- 
cates the  moft  favourable  difpofition  of  the  body, 

not 


[ z6°  ] 


not  to  be  too  violently  agitated  by  the  operation 
of  an  inflammatory  poifon. 

I have  already  obferved,  lhat  it  may  alfo  be 
ufed  to  great  advantage,  during  the  courfe  of  the 
diftemper  ; but  I mult  alfo  obferve,  that  how- 
ever falutary  it  is  in  the  cafes  for  which  I have 
dire&ed  it,  there  are  others  in  which  it  would 
be  hurtful.  It  would  be  pernicious  to  weak, 
languifhing,  pale  children,  fubjeft  to  vomitings, 
purgings,  and  to  all  difeafes  which  prove  their 
bowels  to  be  weak,  and  their  humours  to  be 
fharp.  Thofe,  to  whom  it  is  advifed,  may  take 
a few  glaffes  every  morning,  and  even  drink  it 
daily  for  their  common  drink  ; they  may  alfo 
fup  it  with  bread  for  breakfaft,  for  fupper,  and 
indeed  at  any  time. 


CHAP.  XIV. 

0/  the  M E A S L E s. 

Sect.  157. 

IN  fome  conftitutions,  the  meafles  give  notice 
of  its  approach,  b\  a fmall  dry  cough,  with- 
out any  other  complaint  ; though  more  irequent- 
ly  by  a general  uneafinefs;  by  fucceffions  of  fhi- 
vering  and  of  heat  ; by  a fevere  head-acb  in 
grown  perfons  ; ai  heavinefs  in  children;  aeon- 
fiderable  complaint  of  the  throat;  and,  by  what 

particularly 


[ 26l  3 

particularly  chara&erizes  this  diftemper,  an  in- 
flammation and  a confiderable  heat  in  the  eyes, 
attended  with  a fwelling  of  the  eye-lids,  with  a 
defluxion  of  fharp  tears,  and  fo  acute  a fenfa- 
tion  of  the  eyes,  that  they  cannot  bear  the  light ; 
by  very  frequent  fneezings,  and  a dripping  from 
the  no fe  of  the  fame  humou  r that  trickles  from 
the  eyes. 

The  heat  and  the  fever  increafe  with  rapidity; 
with  a cough,  a fluffing,  and  continual  teachings 
to  vomit ; with  violent  pains  in  the  loins  ; and 
fometimes  with  a loofenefs.  In  other  fubjedls, 
fweating  chiefly  prevails.  The  tongue  is  foul 
and  white  ; the  thirfl  is  often  very  high  ; and  the 
fymptoms  are  generally  more  violent  than  in  the 
mild  fmall-pox. 

At  length,  on  the  fourth  or  fifth  day,  and 
fometimes  about  the  end  of  the  third,  a hidden 
eruption  appears,  and  in  a very  great  quantity, 
efpecially  about  the  face  ; which  in  a few  hours 
is  covered  with  fpots,  each  ©f  which  refembles 
a flea-bite;  many  of  them  foon  joining,  form 
red  flreaks,  larger  or  fmaller,  which  inflame  the 
fkin,  and  produce  a very  perceivable  fwelling  of 
the  face  ; whence  the  very  eyes  are  fometimes 
clofed.  Each  fmall  fpot  is  raifed  a little  above 
the  furface,  efpecially  in  the  face,  where  they  are 
manifeft  both  to  the  fight  and  the  touch. 

The  eruption,  is  afterwards  extended  to  the 
breaft,  the  back,  the  arms,  the  thighs,  and  legs. 
Itgenerally  fpreads  very  plentifully  over  the  breaft 

and 

/ / 


[ 262  ] 


and  back,  and  fcmetimes  red  fuffufions  are  found 
upon  the  breaft,  before  any  eruption  has  appear- 
ed in  the  face. 

The  patient  is  often  relieved,  as  in  the  fmall- 
pox,  by  plentiful  difcharges  of  blood  from  the 
nofe,  which  carry  off  the  complaints  of  the  head, 
of  the  eyes,  and  of  the  throat. 

When  this  diftemper  appears  in  its  mildeft 
charadfer,  almoft  every  fymptom  abates  after 
erruption,  though,  in  general,  the  change  for 
the  better  is  not  as  perceivable  as  in  the  fmall- 
pox.  The  Teachings  ceafe  almoft  entirely  ; but 
the  fever,  the  cough,  the  head-ach  continue; 
and  I have  fomeiimes  obferved,  that  a bilious 
vomiting,  a day  or  two  after  the  eruption,  prov- 
ed a confiderable  relief  to  the  patient.  On  the 
third  or  fourth  day  of  the  erruption,  the  rednefs 
diminifhes  ; the  fpots  dry  up  and  fall  off  in  very 
little  branny  fcales  : the  cuticle  flmvels  off,  and 
is  replaced  by  one  fucceeding  beneath  it.  On 
the  ninth  day,  when  the  progrefs  of  the  mala- 
dy has  been  fpeedy,  and  on  the  eleventh,  when  it 
has  been  very  flow,  no  trace  of  the  rednefs  is  to 
be  found  ; and  the  furface  refumes  its  ufual  ap- 
pearance. 

§ 158.  Yet  the  patient  is  not  fafe,  except  dur- 
ing the  courfe  of  the  diftemper,  or  immediately 
after  it,  he  has  had  fome  confiderable  evacua- 
tion ; fuch  as  vomiting;  or  a bilious  loofenefs, 
confiderable  difcharges  by  urine,  or  very  plen- 
tiful fweating.  For  when  any  of  thefe  evacua- 
tions 


[ s63  ] 


tions  fupervene,  the  patient  refumes  his  ftrength, 
and  perfectly  recovers.  It  happens  fometimes, 
even  without  any  of  thefe  difcharges,  that  in- 
fenfible  perfpiration  expels  the  relics  of  the  dis- 
temper. Yet  it  occurs  too  often,  that  this 
venom  not  having  been  entirely  expelled,  is  call 
upon  the  lungs,  where  it  produces  a flight  inflam- 
mation. In  confequence  the  oppreflion,  the 
cough  and  fever  return,  and  the  patient’s  Situa- 
tion becomes  very  dangerous.  This  outrage  is 
frequently  lefs  vehement,  but  it  proves  tedious 
and  chronica],  leaving  a very  ohflinate  cough 
behind  it,  with  many  refemblances  of  the 
whooping-cough. 

Though  this  be  the  frequent  cafe,  when  men 
are  treated  with  a hot  regimen  ; yet  when  proper 
care  was  taken  to  moderate  the  fever  at  the  be- 
ginning, and  to  keep  up  the  evacuations,  fuch 
confequences  have  been  very  rare. 

§ 1 eg.  The  proper  method  of  conducting  this 
malady,  is, 

1.  If  the  fever  be  high,  the  pulfe  hard,  the 
oppreflion  heavy,  the  patient  mult  be  bled  once 
or  twice. 

2.  His  legs  mull  be  bathed:  the  vehemence 
of  the  fymptoms  muft  regulate  the  number  of 
times. 

3.  The  ptffans  No.  3 or  4,  mull  be  taken,  or 
a tea  of  elder  and  lime-tree  flowers,  to  which  a 
fifth  part  milk  may  be  added. 

4.  The  fleam  of  warm  water  fhould  alfo  be  em- 

ployed 


[ £64  ] 


ployed  to  a Ullage  the  cough,  the  forenefs  of  the 
throat,  and  the  oppreffion. 

3.  As  foon  as  the  rednefs  becomes  pale, 
the  patient  is  to  be  purged  with  the  draught 
No.  23. 

6.  He  is  hill  to  be  kept  flri&Iy  to  his  regimen, 
for  two  days  after  this  purge;  after  which  he  is 
to  be  put  upon  the  diet  of  thofe  who  are  in  a 
ftate  of  recovery. 

7.  If,  during  the  eruption,  fuch  fymptoms  fu- 
pervene  as  occur  (at  the  fame  term,)  in  the  fmall- 
pox,  they  are  to  be  treated  in  the  manner  di- 
rected there. 

§ 160.  Whenever  this  method  has  not  been 
obferved',  and  the  accidents  defcribed  § 138  fu- 
pervene,  the  difiemper  mult  be  treated  like  an 
inflammation  in  its  firft  hate,  and  all  mull  be 
done  as  direCted  § 139.  If  the  difeafe  is  not 
vehement,  bleeding  may  be  omitted.  If  it  is  of 
fome  Handing  in  grofs  children,  loaded  with 
Humours,  inaCtive,  and  pale,  we  mud  add  to 
the  medicines  already  prefcribed  the  portion 
No.  8. 

§ 161.  It  often  happens  that  the  dregs  of  the 
diftemper  have  been  too  little  regarded,  efpeci- 
ally  the  cough  ; in  which  circumftance,  it  forms 
a real  fuppuration  in  the  lungs,  attended  with  a 
flow  fever.  I have  feen  many  chidren  in  coun- 
try villages  deftroyed  by  this  negleCt.  Their 
cafe  terminates  in  a loofenefs,  (attended  with 
very  Title  pain,)  which  carries  off  the  patient. 


C 265  ] 


In  fuch  cafes,  we  muft  recur  to  milk  and  exer- 
cife,  which  I have  often  feen  in  fuch  fituations 
accomplifh  a very  difficult  cure.  I muft  advife 
the  reader  at  the  fame  time,  that  milk  has  not  fa 
compleat  an  efTeft,  as  when  it  is  taken  folely 
unjoined  by  any  other  aliment ; and  that  it  is  of 
the  laft  importance  not  to  join  it  with  any, 
which  has  theleaft  fharpnefs. 

§ 163.  Sometimes  there  remains,  after  the 
meafles.  a ftrong  dry  cough,  with  great  heat  in 
the  breaft,  and  throughout  the  whole  bod}-,  with 
thirft;  an  exceflive  drynefs  of  the  tongue,  and 
of  the  whole  furface  of  the  body.  I have  cured 
perfons  thus  indifpofed,  by  making  them  breathe 
in  the  vapour  of  warm  water ; by  the  repeated 
ufe  of  warm  baths  ; and  by  allowing  them  to 
take  nothing  for  feveral  days  but  water  and 
milk. 


CHAP.  XV. 

Cf  the  Burning  Fever. 

Sect.  164. 

MOST  of  the  diftempers  I have  hitherto 
confidered,  refult  from  an  inflammation 
Vol.  XXV.  M of 


•of  the  blood,  combined  with  the  particular 
inflammation  of  fome  part,  or  occafioned 
by  fome  poifon,  which  mud  be  evacuated. 
But  when  the  blood  is  flrongly  inflamed,  with- 
out an  attack  upon  any  particular  part,  this 
fever  which  we  term  burning,  is  the  confe- 
quence. 

The  flgns  are,  a hardnefs  and  fullnefs  of  -the 
pulfe  in  a higher  degree  than  happens  in  any 
other  malady  ; an  exceflive  heat ; great  thirfl  ; 
with  an  extraordinary  drynefs  of  the  eyes,  nof- 
trils,  lips,  of  the  tongue,  and  of  the  throat;  a 
violent  head-ach  ; and  fometimes  a raving  at  the 
height  of  the  paroxyfm,  which  rifes  confiderably 
every  evening.  The  refpiration  is  alfo  fome- 
w-hat  opprelfed,  but  efpecially  at  the  return  of 
this  paroxyfm,  with  a cough  now  and  then ; 
though  without  any  pain  in  the  breafl,  and 
without  any  expeftoration.  The  body  is  cof- 
tive ; the  urine  very  high  coloured,  hot,  and  in 
a fmall  quantity.  The  lick  are  alfo  liable  to 
flart ; hut  efpecially  w hen  they  foem  to  fleep; 
for  they  have  little  found  refreshing  fleep,  but 
rather  a kind  of  drowfmefs,  that  makes  them 
little  fenfible  of  what  happens  about  .them,  or 
even  of  their  own  condition.  They  have 
fometimes  a little  fweat  or  jnoifture ; though 
commonly  a very  dry  (kin ; they  are  very 
weak,  and  have  either  little  or  no  fmell  or 
tafle. 


[ *«7  ] 


i 165.  This  difeafe,  like  all  other  inflamma- 
tory ones,  is  produced  by  the  caufes  which 
thicken  the  blood,  and  increafe  its  motion  ; fitch, 
as  excefiive  labour,  violent  heat,  want  of  fleep, 
wine  or  ftrong  liquors ; the  long  countinuance 
of  a dry  conflitution  of  the  air,  excefs  of  every 
kind,  and  heating  food. 

§ 166,  The  patient  ought,  1,  immediately  to 
be  put  upon  a regimen,  10  have  the  food  allowed 
him  given  only  every  eight  hours,  and,  in  fome 
cafes,  only  twice  a day  : and  indeed,  when  the 
attack  is  extremely  violent,  nourifhment  may 
be  wholly  omitted. 

2.  Bleeding  fhould  be  repeated,  until  the  hard- 
nefs  of  the  pulfe  is  fenfibly  abated.  The  firft: 
difeharge  fhould  be  confiderable,  the  fecond 
fhould  be  made  four  hours  after.  If  the  pulfe  is 
foftened  by  the  firft,  the  fecond  may  be  fufpended, 
and  not  repeated  before  it  becomes  fufficiently 
hard  again,  to  make  us  apprehenlive  of  danger  : 
but  fhould  it  continue  ftrong  and  hard,  the 
bleeding  may  be  repeated  on  the  fame  day  a 
third  time. 

3.  His  legs  are  to  be  bathed  twice  a day  in 
warm  water : his  hands  may  be  bathed  in  the 
fame  water,  linen  or  flannel  cloths  dipt  in  warm 
water  may  be  applied  over  the  breaft,  and  upon 
the  belly  ; and  he  fhould  regularly  drink  the  al- 
mond milk  No.  4,  and  the  ptifan  No.  7.  The 
pooreft  patients  may  content  themfelves  with 
the  laft,  but  fhould  drink  very  plentifully  of  it ; 

M 2 and 


[ 268  ] 

and  after  the  bleeding  properly  repeated,  frefli 
air  and  the  plentiful  continuance  of  fmall  dilut- 
ing liquors  generally  edablifh  the  health  of  the 
patient. 

4.  If  notwithftanding  the  repeated  bleedings, 
the  fever  dill  rages  highly,  it  may  be  lelfened 
by  giving  a fpoonful  ol  the  potion  No.  10. 
every  hour,  until  it  abates ; and  afterwards 
every  three  hours,  until  it  becomes  very  mo- 
derate. 

§ 167.  Bleedings  from  the  nofe  frequently  oc- 
cur, greatly  to  the  relief  of  the  patient. 

The  fil'd  appearances  of  amendment  are  a 
foftening  of  the  pulfe,  (which  however  does  not 
lofe  all  its  hardnefs,)  a fenfible  abatement  of  the 
head  ach  ; a greater  quantity  of  urine,  and  that" 
lefs  high  coloured ; and  an  evident  moidure  of 
the  tongue.  Thefe  favourable  figns  keep  increaf- 
ing,  and  there  frequently  enfue  between  the 
ninth  and  tire  fourteenth  day,  and  often  after  a 
flurry  of  fome  hours  continuance,  very  large 
evacuations  bv  dool ; a great  quantity  ol  urine, 
which  lets  fall  a pale  reddifli  fediinent;  the  urine 
above  it  being  of  a natural  colour;  and  thefe 
accompanied  with  fweats.  At  the  fame  time  tire 
nodrils  and  the  moinh  grow  moifl,  the  crud 
which  covered  the  tongue  peels  off  of  itfelf ; the 
third  is  diminifhed  ; the  drowfinefs  goes  off,  and 
the  natural  drength  is  refioreJ.  "When  things 
are  evidently  in  this  way,  the  patient  fliould  take 

die 


f a«9  ] 

the  potion  No.  23,  and  be  put  upon  the  regimen 
of  thofe  who  are  in  a date  of  recovery.  It 
Ihould  be  repeated  at  the  end  of  eight  or  ten 
days.  Some  patients  have  perfe&ly  recovered 
from  this  fever  without  the  lead  fediment  in 
their  urine. 

§ 168.  The  augmenting  danger  of  this 

fever  may  be  difcerned,  from  the  continued 
hardnefs  of  the  pulfe,  though  with  an  abate- 
ment of  it  ftrength ; if  the  brain  becomes 
more  confufed  ; the  breathing  more  difficult  ; 
if  the  eyes,  nofe,  lips  and  tongue  become  ftiil 
more  dry.  If  to  thefe  fynrptoms  there  be 
added  a fwelling  of  the  belly  ; a diminution  of 
the  quantity  of  urine;  a conflant  raving;  great 
anxiety,  and  a certain  wildnefs  of  the  eves, 
the  patient  cannot  furvive  many  hours.  The 
hand  and  fingers  at  this  period  are  inceiTantly 
in  motion,  as  if  feeling  for  fomething  upon 
the  bed-c’.oaths,  which  is  commonly  termed, 
their  hunting  for  flies. 


M 3 


CHAP. 


[ 2 7°  3 


CHAP.  XVI. 

Of  Putrid  Fevers. 

Sect.  168. 

AVING  treated  of  fuchfeverifh  diflempcrs 


as  arife  from  an  inflammation  of  the 
blood,  I fhall  here  treat  of  thofe  which  are  pro- 
duced bv  corrupt  humours,  which  A agnate  in 
the  Aomach,  or  bowels,  or  have  already  paffed 
from  them  into  the  blood.  Thefe  are  called 
putrid  fevers,  or  fometimes  billious  fevers,  when 
a corruption  of  the  bile  feems  to  prevail. 

This  diflemper  frequently  gives  notice  of  its 
approach  feveral  days,  by  a great  dejeftion, 
pains  of  the  loins  and  knees;  a foulnefs  of  the 
mouth  in  the  morning;  litile  appe:ite;  broken 
flumber;  and  fometimes  an  excelflve  head-ach. 
After  thefe,  a fhivering  comes  on,  followed  by 
a fharp  and  dry  heat  : the  pulie,  which  was 
fmall  and  quick  during  the  fhivering,  is  raifed 
during  the  heat,  and  is  often  very  Arong,  though 
it  is  not  attended  with  the  'fame  hardnefs,  as  in 
the  preceding  fever ; except  the  putrid  fever  be 
combined  with  an  inflammatory  one,  which  it 
fometimes  is.  During  the  heat,  the  head-ach 


[ 27 1 ] 


fs-  commonly  extreansly  violent ; the  patient  is- 
almoft  conhantly  affe&ed  with  loathings,  and' 
fomeiimes  vomiting;  with  thirh,  difagreeable 
filings.  a bitlernefs  in  the  mouth  ;.  and  very  little 
urine.  This  heat  continues  for  many  hours, 
frequently  the  whole  night ; it  abates  a little  in 
the  morning,  and  the  pulfe,  though  always  fe- 
verifh,  is  then  font e thing  lefs  fo,  while  the 
patient  buffers  lefs,  though  hill  greatly  deje&ed. 

The  tongue  is  white  and  furred,  the  teeth  are 
foul,  and  the  breath  fmells  difagreeably.  The’ 
colour,  quant i'y,  and  confidence  of  the  urine, 
are  very  various  and  changeable.  Some  pati- 
ents are  cohive,  others  frequently  have  final! 
ftools,  without  the  leah  relief  accruing;  from 
them.  The  Ikin  is  fometimes  dry,  and  at  o her 
times  there  is  fome  fenfible  perfpiration,  but 
without  any  benefit  attending  it.  The  fever 
augments  every  day,  and  frequently  at  unex- 
pected irregular  periods.  Befides  that  great 
paroxyfm,  which  is  perceivable  in  all  the  fub- 
je£ts  of  this  fever,  fome  have  alfo  other  lefs  in- 
tervening ones. 

§ 169.  When  the  difeafe  is  left  to  itfelf,  or 
injudioioufly  treated,  the  aggravations  of  it  be- 
come more  frequent,  longer,  and  irregular. 
There  is  fcarce  an  interval  of  eafe.  The  pati- 
ent’s bell v is  fwelled  out  like  a foot-ball  , a deli- 
rium comes  on;  he  proves  infenhble  of  his  own 
evacuations,  he  rejeVhs  affihance,  and  keeps 
muttering  continually,  with  a quick,  final],  irre- 
M 4 gula'r 


[ 272  ] 

gular  pulfc.  Sometimes  little  fpots  of  a brown, 
or  of  a livid  colour  appear  on  the  furface,  but 
particularly  about  the  neck,  back,  and  brcaft. 
All  the  difcharges  from  his  body  have  a moft 
fetid  fmell:  convulfive  motions  alfo  fupervene, 
efpecially  in  the  face ; his  fvveats  ftream  down 
from  agony,  his  breaft  fwells  out,  and  he  dies 
miferably. 

§ 170.  This  fever  feems  to  have  no  critical 
time,  either  for  its  termination  in  recovery,  or 
in  death.  When  it  is  very  violent,  or  very 
badly  conduced,  it  proves  fometimes  fatal 
on  the  ninth  day.  Perfons  often  die  of  it  from 
the  18th  to  the  20th;  fometimes  about  the 
40th ; after  having  been  alternately  better  and 
worfe. 

When  it  happens  but  in  a light  degree,  it  is 
fometimes  cured  in  a few  days.  Yet  fome  patients 
are  not  out  of  danger  before  the  end  of  fix 
weeks,  and  even  flail  later.  Neverthelefs  it  is 
certain,  that  this  often  depends  on  the  manner 
of  treating  them  ; and  that  in  general  their 
courfe  is  determined  fome  time  from  the  14th  to 
the  30th  day. 

§ 171.  The  treatment  of  this  fpecies  of  fevers 
is  comprized  in  the  following  method. 

1.  The  patient  muft  be  put  into  a regimen, 
his  common  drink  fhould  be  lemonade  ; inflead 
of  juice  of  lemons,  vinegar  may  be  occafionally 
fubftituted. 

2.  If  there  be  an  inflammation,  which  may 

be 


C 273  ] 


be  difcovered  by  the  ftrength  and  hardnefs 
of  the  pulfe,  and  by  the  complexion  of  the 
patient  ; if  he  is  naturally  robult,  and  has 
heated  lnmfelf,  he  fliould  be  bled  once, 
and  a fecond  time,  if  necefiary,  fome  hours 
after.  I mull  obferve,  however,  that  very 
frequently  there  is  no  fuch  inflammation,  and 
that  in  fuch  a cafe,  bleeding  would  be  hurtful. 

3.  When  the  patient  has  drank  very  plenti- 
fully for  two  days  of  thefe  liquids,  if  his  mouth 
{till  continues  in  a foul  ftate,  and  he  has  vio- 
lent Teachings  to  vomit,  he  mult  take  the 
powder  No.  34,  diffolved  in  a pint  and  half  of 
warm  water,  a glafs  of  it  being  to  be  drank 
every  half  quarter  of  an  hour.  But,  as  this 
medicine  vomits,  it  mult  not  be  taken,  except 
we  are  certain  the  patient  is  not  under  anv 
circumltance,  which  forbids  the  ufe  of  a vomit: 
if  the  firft  glafles  excite  a plentiful  vomiting, 
we  mud  forbear  giving  another,  and  be 
content  with  obliging  the  patient  to  drink  a 
confiJerable  quantity  of  warm  water.  But  if 
the  former  glafles  do  not  occaflon  vomiting, 
they  mull  be  repeated  until  they  do.  Thofe  who 
are  afraid  of  taking  this  medicine,  may  take 
that  of  No.  33,  alfo  drinking  warm  water  plen- 
tifully during  its  operation  ; but  the  former  is 
preferable,  as  more  prevalent  in  dangerous 
cafes.  We  mult  caution  our  readers  at  the 
fame  time,  that  wherever  there  is  an  inflamma- 
tion of  any  part,  neither  of  thefe  medicines- 
M 3 muft. 


C s74  ] 


mull  be  given,  which  might  prove  a real  poifon 
in  fuch  a circumffance  ; and  even  if  the  fever 
is  extremley  violent,  though  there  fliould  he 
no  particular  inflammation,  they  fliould  not  he 
given. 

The  time  of  giving  them  is  foon  after  the  end 
of  the  paroxyfm,  when  the  fever  is  at  the 
lowed.  The  medicine  No.  34,  generally 
purges,  after  it  ceafes  to  make  the  patient  vo- 
mit: but  No.  35  is  feldom  attended  with  the 
fame  effect. 

When  the  operation  of  the  vomit  is  entirely 
over,  the  fick  fliould  return  to  the  ufe  of  the 
ptifin;  and  great  care  fhould  he  taken  to  pro- 
hibit the  ufe  of  flclh  broth,  under  the  pretext 
of  working  off  a purging  with  it.  The  Lme 
method  is  to  he  continued  on  the  following 
days;  hut  as  it  is  of  importance  to  keep  the 
bodv  open,  he  fhould  take  every  morning  fome 
of  the  ptifan  No.  32.  Such  as  this  would 
be  too  expenfive  for,  may  fubflitute,  in  the 
room  of  it,  a fourth  part  of  the  powder  No. 
34,  in  five  or  fix  glades  of  water,  of  which 
they  aae  to  take  a cup  every  two  hours,  be- 
ginning early  in  the  morning.  Nevertheless,  if 
the  fever  be  very  high,  No.  32  lhould  be  pre- 
ferred to  it. 

4.  After  the  operation  of  the  vomit,  if  the 
cfever  ffill  continue,  if  the  ffools  are  remarkably 
fetid,  and  if  the  belly  is  tenfe  and  diffended, 
and  die  quantity  of  urine  finall,  a fpoonful  of 

• the 


[ 275  ] 

the  potion  No.  10.  fhould  be  given  every  two 
hours.  Should  the  diftemper  become  violent, 
it  ought  to  be  taken  every  hour. 

5.  Whenever  (notwithflanding  the  giving 
all  thefe  medicines)  the  fever  continues  obftinate, 
the  brain  is  manifellly  difordered : there  is  a 
violent  head-ach,  or  veiy  great  refileflhefs ; 
two  bliflering  plaifters,  No.  36,  mult  be  applied 
to  the  fie  Pay  part  of  the  legs,  and  their  difcharge 
continued  as  long  as  poflible. 

6.  If  the  fever  is  extremely  violent,  there 
is  an  abfolute  neceflity  to  prohibit  the  patient 
from  receiving  the  lead  nourifhment. 

7.  When  it  is  thought  improper  to  give 
the  vomit,  the  patient  fhould  take  in  the 
morning,  for  two  fucceflive  days,  three  dofes 
of  the  powder  No.  24,  at  the  interval  of  one 
hour  between  each:  this  medicine  produces 
fome  bilious  ftools,  which  greatly  abate  the 
fever,  and  confiderably  leffens  all  the  other 
fymptoms,.  This  may  be  done  with  fuccefs^ 
when  the  excefiive  heat  of  the.  fever  prevents 
us  from  giving  the  vomit:  and  we  fhould 
limit  ourfelves  to  this  medicine,  as  often  as 
we  are  uncertain,  whether  the  circumftances 
will  admit  of  vomiting ; which,  may  alfo  be 
difpenfed  with  in  many  cafes. 

8.  When  the  diflemper  has  confiderably  de= 
dined,  the  paroxyfms  are  flight,  and  the 
patient  continues  without  any  fever  for  feveraL. 

M6  hours  j... 


[ 276  ] 

hours ; the  daily  ufe  of  the  purging  drinks 
fhould  be  difcontinued.  The  common  ptifans 
however  fhould  be  ftill  made  ufe  of;  and  it 
will  be  proper  to  give  every  other  day  two 
doles  of  the  powder  No.  24. 

9.  If  the  fever  has  been  clearly  off  for  a 
long  part  of  the  day,  if  the  tongue  appears  in 
a g®od  ftate,  if  the  patient  has  been  well 
purged  ; and  yet  one  moderate  paroxyfm  of  the 
fever  returns  every  dav  ; he  fhould  take  the 
bitter  deco&ion  No.  37,  four  glaffes  of  which 
may  be  taken  at  equal  intervals,  between  the 
returns  of  the  fever. 

10.  As  the  organs  of  degeflion  have  been 
confiderably  weakened  through  the  courfe  of 
this  fever,  there  is  a neceffity  for  the  pati- 
ent’s conducting  himfelf  very  regularly  long 
after  it,  with  regard  both  to  the  quantity  and 
quality  of  his  food.  He  Ihould  alfo  ufe  due 
exercife  as  foon  as  his  flrength  will  permit, 
without  which  he  may  be  liable  to  fall  into  fome 
chronical  diforder. 


CHAP, 


[ 2 77  ] 


CHAP.  XVII. 
^Malignant  Fevers. 


HOSE  fevers  are  called  malignant,  in  which 

O 7 


the  danger  is  more  than  the  fvmptoms 
would  make  us  apprehenfive  of : they  have  fre- 
quently a fatal  event  without  appearing  fo  peri- 
lous ; on  which  account,  it  has  been  well  faid 
of  this  fever,  that' it  is  a dog  which  bites  with- 
out barking. 

The  difiinguifhing  mark  of  malignant  fevers, 
is.  a total  lofs  of  the  patient’s  firength,  immedi- 
ately on  their  fir  It  attack.  They  arife  from  a 
corruption  of  the  humours,  which  is  noxious  to 
the  very  principle  of  firength,  the  impairing 
which  is  the  caule  of  the  feeblenefs  of  the  fymp- 
toms  ; by  reafon  none  of  the  organs  are  ftrong 
enough  to  exert  a vigorous  oppofition. 

§173.  The  caufes  of  this  malady  are  a long 
ufc  of  animal  food  alone,  without  pulfe,  fruits, 
or  acids : the  continued  ufe  of  bad  provifions, 
fuch  as  bread  made  of  damaged  corn,  or  very 
ftale  meat.  Thefe  fevers  are  frequently  the  con- 
fequence  of  a great  dearth  or  famine  : of  too  hot 
and  moift  an  air,  or  of  a very  clofe  and  flagnant 
air,  efpecially  if  many  perfons  are  crouded  toge- 


S E C T.  172. 


ther 


[ 278  ] 

ther  in  it.  Tedious  grief  and  vexation  alfo  con- 
tribute to  generate  thefe  fevers. 

§ 174.  I he  frck  petfon  feems  to  labour  under 
great  anguifh  : he  has  fometimes  twitcbiugs  in 
Iris  face  and  hands,  as  well  as  in  his  arms  and 
legs.  His  fenfes  feem  torpid,  or  as  it  were  be- 
numbed. I have  feen  many  who  had  loft,  to  all 
appearance,  the  whole  five,  and  vet  fome  of  them 
recover.  Their  voices  change,  1 ecome  weak, 
and  are  fometimes  quite  loft.  Some  of  them 
have  a fixed  pain  in  fome  part  of  the  belly  : 
tins  arifes  from  a fluffing  and  often  ends  in  a van- 
grene,  whence  this  fymptom  is  highly  dan- 
gerous. 

The  tongue  is  fometimes  little  altered  from  its- 
appearatice  in  health ; at  other  times  covered 
with  a yellowifh  brown  humour  ; but  it  is  more 
rarely  dry  in  ibis  fever,  than  in  the  others;  and 
yet  fometimes  refembles  a tongue  that  has  beerr 
long  Imoked. 

The  fkin  is  often  neither  hot,  dry,  nor  moift  r 
it  is  frequently  overfpread  with  little  fpots  of  a 
reddith  livid  colour,  efpecially  on  the  neck,  about 
the  ftboulders,  and  upon  the  back.  At  other 
times,  the  fpots  are  larger,  and  brown,  like  the 
colour  of  pultules  from  the  ftrokes  of  a Hick. 

The  urine  of  the  fick  is  altnoft  conftantly  of  a 
lighter  colour  than  ordinary.  I have  feen  fome, 
which  could  not  be  diftlnguifhed,  merely  by  the 
eye.  from  milk.  A black  and  {linking  purging 
fometimes  attends  this  fever,  which  is  mortal, 

except 


C 279  J 

except  the  Tick  be  evidently  relieved  by  the  dif~ 
charge. 

^ 175.  The  duration  and  crijis  of  thefe  fevers, 
3re  very  irregular.  Sometimes  the  Tick  die  on 
the  feventh  or  eighth  day,  more  commonly  be- 
tween the  twelfth  and  [the  fifteenth,  and  not  un. 
frequently  at  the  end  of  five  or  fix  weeks  Some 
of  thefe  fevers,  at  their  fir  ft  mvafion,  are  very 
flow  ; and,  during  a few  of  the  firit  days,  the 
patient,  though  very  weak,  and  with  a very  dif- 
ferent look  and  manner,  fcarcely  thinks  himfeff 
fick. 

The  period  of  the  cure  is  as  uncertain  as  that  of 
death.  Some  are  out  of  danger  at  the  end  of  fif- 
teen days,  or  fooner ; others  not  in  feveral 
weeks. 

The  figns  which  portend  a recovery  are,  a 
little  more  ftrengtli  in  the  pulfe;  a more  con- 
cobted  urine  ; lets  dejection  and  difcovragement, 
a lefs  confided  brain  ; an  equal  kindly  heat;  a 
pretty  warm  or  hot  fweat  in  a moderate  quanti- 
ty ; the  revival  of  the  fenfes  : though  the  deaf- 
nefs  is  riot  a very  threatning  fymptom,  if  the 
others  amend. 

This  malady  commonly  leaves  the  patient  very 
weak  ; and  a long  interval  will  enfue  before  be 
recovers  his  full  ffrength. 

§ 176.  It  is,  in  the  firfl  place,  of  great  import- 
ance, both  for  the  patients,  and  thofe  who  at- 
tend them,  that  the  air  be  renewed  and  purified. 
Vinegar  Ihould  often  be  evaporated  from  a hot 

tile 


[ 280  ] 

tile  or  iron  in  the  chamber,  and  one  window 
kept  almoff  conftantly  open. 

2.  The  diet  fhould  be  light;  ajid  the  juice  of 
forrel  may  be  mixed  with  their  water;  the  juice 
of  lemons  may  be  added  to  foups  prepared  from 
different  grains  and  puls  ; the  patient  may  eat 
fharp  acid  fruits,  fuch  as  morella  cherries,  goofe- 
berries,  final!  black  cherries,  jam  of  currants  or 
barberries  ; and  thofe  who  can  afford  them,  may 
be  allowed  lemons,  oranges,  and  pomegranates. 

3.  The  patient  s linen  fhould  be  changed 
every  two  days. 

4.  Bleeding  and  glyflers  are  very  rarely  need- 
ful. 

5.  The  patient’s  common  drink  fhould  be 
barley-water  made  acid  with  the  fpirit  No.  10, 
at  the  rate  of  one  quarter  of  an  ounce  :o  at  leaf! 
three  pints  of  the  water,  or  accidulated  agreeably 
to  his  tafle.  He  may  alfo  drink  lemonade. 

6.  It  is  necedary  to  evacuate  the  bowels, 
where  a trreat  quantity  of  corrupt  humours  is  ge- 
nerally lodged.  The  powder  No.  35.  may  be 
given  for  this  purpofe  ; after  the  operation  of 
which,  the  patient  generally  finds  himfelf  better. 
It  is  ot  importance  not  to  omit  this  at  the  begin- 
ning of  the  difeafe  ; though  if  it  has  been  omit- 
ted at  fir  ft,  it  were  heft  to  give  it  even  later, 
provided  no  particular  inflammation  has  fuper- 
vened,  and  the  patient  has  flill  fotne  flrength. 
I have  given  it,  and  with  remarkable  fuccefs,  on 
the  twentieth  day. 


7.  Having 


C 281  ] 


7.  Having  by  this  medicine  expelled  a confi- 
derable  portion  of  the  bad  humours,  the  patient 
fhould  take  every  other  day,  and  fometimes 
every  day,  one  dofe  of  the  cream  of  tartar  and 
rhubarb,  No,  38.  This  expells  the  worms  that 
are  very  common  in  thefe  fevers,  which  the 
patient  fometimes  difcharges  upwards  and  down- 
wards, and  which  frequently  conduce  to  many 
of  the  odd  fymptoms,  that  are  obferved  in  ma- 
lignant fevers.  In  fhort  it  ftrengthens  the  bowels, 
and,  without  checking  the  neceffary  evacuations, 
it  moderates  the  loofenefs,  when  it  is  hurtful. 

8.  11  the  fkin  be  dry,  with  a loofenefs,  and 
that  by  checking  it,  we  deftgn  to  increafe  per- 
foration, mftead  of  the  rhubarb,  the  cream  of 
tartar  may  be  blended  with  the  ipecacuana  No. 
39  ; which,  being  given  in  fmall  and  frequent 
dofes,  refrains  the  purging,  and  forwards  per- 
fpiration.  1 his  medicine,  as  the  former,  is  to 
be  taken  in  the  morning  ; two  hours  after,  the 
fick  muff  begin  with  the  potion  No.  qo,  and  re- 
peat it  regularly  every  three’  hours,  until  it  be 
interrupted  by  giving  one  of  the  medicines  No. 
38,  or  39  : after  which,  the  portion  is  to  be  re- 
peated till  the  pstient  grows  confiderably  better. 

9.  If  the  flrength  of  the  fick  be  confiderably  de- 
preffed,  and  he  is  in  great  dejection,  he  fhould 
take  with  every  draught  of  the  potion,  the  bolus 
No.  41.  If  the  purging  is  violent,  there  fhoqld 
beadded,  once  or  twice  a-day  to  the  bolus,  20 
grains. 


10.  Whenever 


r 282  ] 


10.  Whenever,  notwithftanding  all  this,  the  pa- 
tient continues  weak  and  infenftble,  two  large 
blifters  fhould  be  applied  to  the  infides  of  the 
legs,  or  a large  one  to  the  nape  of  the  neck. 
1 heir  difcharge  is  to  be  promoted  abundantly  : 
and,  if  they  dry  up  within  a few  days,  others 
are  to  be  applied,  and  their  evacuation  is  tobe 
kept  up  for  a conftderable  time. 

11.  As  foonas  the  maldav  is  fufficiently  abated 
for  the  patient  to  remain  fome  hours  with  very 
little  or  no  fever,  we  muff  avail  ourfelves  of  this 
interval,  to  give  him  fix,  or  five  dofes  of  the 
draught  No.  43,  and  repeat  the  fame  the  next 
day,  which  may  prevent  the  return  of  the  fever  : 
after  which  it  mav  be  fufficient  to  give  daily 
only  two  dofes  for  a few  days. 

12.  When  the  fick  continues  entirely  clear 
of  a fever,  he  is  to  be  put  into  the  regimen  of 
perfons  in  a Hate  of  recovery.  But  if  his  llrength 
returns  very  flowly,  in  order  to  the  fpeedier 
efiablifhment  of  it,  he  may  take  three  dofes  a 
day  of  the  Theriaca  Pauper um,  or  poor  man’s 
treacle  No.  42,  the  fir  ft  of  them  fading  and  the 
other  twelve  hours  after.  It  were  to  be  wifhed 
this  medicine  was  introduced  into  all  the  apothe- 
caries fhops,  as  an  excellent  ftomachic,  in  which 
refpecf  it  is  much  preferable  to  venice-treacle, 
which  is  an  abfurd,  dear,  and  often  a dangerous 
compofition.  It  is  true  it  does  not  difpofe  the 
patients  to  fleep  ; but  there  are  better  medi- 
cines to  anfwer  thatpurpofe. 


CHAP. 


[ 283  1 


CHAP.  XVIII. 

Oj  INTERMITTING  FEVERS, 

Sect.  177. 

TH  E R E are  various  kinds  of  intermitting 
fevers,  which  take  their  different  names 
from  the  different  time  in  which  the  fits  re- 
turn. 

If  the  fit  returns  every  day,  it  is  either  a true 
quotidian,  or  a double  tertain  fever  : the  firft 
of  thefe  may  be  diftinguifhed  from  the  laft  by 
this,  that  in  the  quotidian,  the  fits  are  long  ; and 
correfpond  nearly  to  each  other  in  degree  and 
duration.  In  the  double  tertian,  the  fits  are  fhorter 
and  one  is  alternately  light,  and  the  other 
more  fevere. 

In  the  fimple  tertian,  or  third  day’s  fever,  the 
fits  return  every  other  day. 

The  fit,  in  a quartan,  returns  every  fourth 
day,  including  the  day  of  the  firft  and  that  of  the 
fecond  attack. 

The  other  kinds  of  intermittents  are  much 
rarer.  I have  feen  however  one  true  quintan, 
or  fifth  day  ague,  the  patient  having  three  clear 

days 


C 284  ] 


days  between  two  fits,  and  one  regular  weekly 
ague,  returning  every  Sunday. 

§ 178.  The  firfl  attack  of  an  intermitting  fever 
often  happens,  when  the  patient  imagined  him- 
ielf  in  perfett  health.  Sometimes  however  a 
perception  of  cold,  and  a fort  ol  numbnefs,  con- 
tinue fome  da\s  before  the  fit.  It  begins  with 
frequent  yawnings,  a latitude,  a general  weak- 
nefs,  with  coldnefs,  fhivering,  and  flraking  : 
there  is  alfo  a palenefs  of  the  extreme  parts  of 
the  body,  attended  with  loathings,  and  fome- 
times  an  aclual  vomiting.  The  pulfe  is  quick, 
weak,  and  final]. 

At  the  end  of  an  hour  or  two,  fometimes 
three  or  four  hours,  heat  fucceeds,  which  be- 
comes violent  at  its  height.  At  this  period  the 
whole  body  grows  red,  the  anxiety  of  the  patient 
abates;  the  pulfe  is  very  flrongand  large,  and  his 
thirll  exceffive.  He  complains  ofhead-ach,  and 
of  a pain  in  all  his  limbs,  but  different  from  that 
he  was  fenfible  of,  while  his  coldnefs  continued. 
Having  endured  this  hot  fiate,  four,  five,  or  fix 
hours,  he  falls  into  a general  fweat : upon  whtc’n 
all  the  fymptoms  abate,  and  fometimes  fleep  fu- 
pervenes. 

At  the  conclufion  of  this  nap,  the  patient  often 
wakes  without  any  fever;  complaining  only  of 
weaknefs.  Sometimes  his  pulfe  returns  entirely 
to  its  natural  fiate  between  the  two  fits : though 
it  oftet^  continues  a little  quicker. 

One  fymptom,  which  particularly  charafteiixes 

thefe 


r 28s  j 

thefe  fevers,  is  the  urines  which  the  Tick  pafs 
after  the  fit.  They  are  of  a reddifh  colour,  and 
let  fall  a fediment,  which  exactly  refembles  brick- 
duft.  They  are  fometiraes  frothy  too,  and  a 
thin  filmy  lkin  appears  on  the  top. 

The  duration  of  each  fit  is  of  no  fixed  time. 
Sometimes  they  return  precifely  at  the  fame 
hour;  at  other  times  they  come  one,  two,  or 
three  hours  fooner.  and  in  other  infiances,  as 
much  later. 

Generally  fpeaking,  intermitting  fevers  are 
not  mortal ; often  terminating  m health  of  their 
own  accord  after  fome  fits.  But  in  this  refpeft 
intermittents  in  the  fpring  differ  from  thole  in 
the  fall,  which  continue  a long  time,  and  fome- 
times  even  until  fpring,  if  they  are  not  removed 
by  art. 

Quartan  fevers  are  always  more  obftinate  than 
tertians;  per  fevering  in  fome  conflitutions  for 
whole  years.  When  thefe  occur  in  marfhy 
countries,  they  are  not  only  tedious,  but  per- 
fons  infelled  with  them  are  liable  to  frequent  re- 
lapfes. 

A few  fits  of  an  intermittent  are  not  very  inju- 
rious, and  it  happens  fometimes,  that  they  are 
attended  with  a favourable  alteration  of  the 
health ; by  their  exterminating  the  caufe  of 
fome  tedious  diforder : though  it  is  erroneous 
to  confider  them  as  falutary.  If  they  prove  ob- 
ftinate, and  the  fits  are  long  and  violent,  they 
^weaken  the  whole  body,  impairing  all  its  func- 
tions } 


[ 286  ] 


tlotrs  : they  make  the  humours  (harp,  and  in- 
troduce feveral  other  maladies,  fuch  as  the  jaun- 
dice, dropfy,  afthma,  and  flow  wafting  fevers. 
Nay  fometimes  old  perfons,  and  thofe  who  are 
very  weak,  expire  in  the  fit ; though  fuch  an 
event  never  happens  but  in  the  cold  fit. 

§ 179.  * In  the  fpring- fevers,  if  the  fits  are 
not  very  fevere  ; if  the  patient  is  well  in  their 
intervals;  if  his  appetite,  his  ftrength,  and  his 
bleep  continue  as  in  health,  no  medicine  fhould 
be  given,  nor  any  other  method  taken,  but  that 
of  putting  the  perfon  upon  the  regimen  direcl- 
'cd  lor  perfons  in  a ftate  of  recover}'. 

§ 180.  If  the  fever  extends  beyond  the  fixth, 
or  the  feventh  fit,  arid  the  patient  feems  to  have 
no  occafion  for  a purge  ; t he  may  take  the  pow- 
der'No.  tq.  If  it  is  a quotidian,  or  a double 
tertian,  fix  dofes,  containing  three  quarters  of 
an  ounce,  fhould  be  taken  between  the  two  fits; 
and  as  thefe  intermiflions  commonly  confift  of 
but  ten  or  twelve,  or  at  the  mod  of  fourteen  or 
fifteen  hours,  there  fhould  be  an  interval  of  only 
one  hour  and  a half  between  each  dofe.  Dur- 
ing this  interval  the  fick  may  take  two  of  his 
ufual  Tefrefhment.. 

When  the  fever  is  a tertian,  an  ounce  fhould 
be  given  between  the  two  fits;  which  makes 

eight 

+ As  there  is  not  the  lea  ft  danger  from  a gentle  purge,  fuch 
asthofeofNo.il,  0123;  we  think  it  would  be  prudent  always 
to  prevnife  a dofe  or  two  of  either  to  the  baik.  But  a vomit  is 
.generally  nectffary  before  the  bark  is  given. 


[ 287  J 

eight  dofes,  one  of  which  is  to  be  t-aken  every 
three  hours, 

In  a quartan  I direft  one  ounce  and  an  half,  to 
be  taken  in  the  fame  manner.  The  laft.  dofe  is 
to  be  given  two  hours  before  the  ufual  return  of 
the  fit. 

The  dofes  juft  mentioned,  frequently  prevent 
the  return  of  the  fit;  but  whether  it  returns  or 
not,  after  the  time  of  its  ufual  duration  is  pall, 
repeat  the  fame  quantity,  in  the  fame  number 
ol  dofes  and  intervals,  which  certainly  keeps 
off  another.  For  fix  days  following,  half  tire 
fame  quantity  muft  be  continued,  in  the  inter- 
vals that  would  have  occurred  between  the  fits, 
if  they  had  returned  : and  during  all  this  time  the 
patient  fliould  inure  himfelf  to  as  much  exercife 
as  he  can  bear. 

§ 181.  Should  the  fits  be  very  ftrong,  the  pain 
efi  the  head  violent,  the  vifage  red.  the  pulfe 
full  and  hard  ; if  there  is  any  cough  ; rf  even 
after  the  fit  is  over,  the  pulfe  flill  is  hard  ; if  the 
urine  is  inflamed,  hot  and  high  coloured,  and 
the  tongue  very  dry,  the  patient  muft  be  bled, 
~and  drink  plentifully  of  barley-water  No.  3. 
Tliefe  two  remedies  generally  bring  the  patient 
into  die  ftate  defcribed  § 179  : in  which  flate 
be  may  take  one  a day,  when  tire  fever  is  entire- 
ly off,  three  or  four  dofes  of  the  powder  No.  24, 
and  then  leave  the  fever  to  purfue  its  courfe  for 
■the  fpace  of  a few  fits.  But  fliould  it  not  then 

■terminate 


[ 288  ] 

terminate  of  itfelf,  the  bark  muft  be  recurred 
to. 

If  the  patient,  even  in  the  interval  of  the  re- 
turns, has  a fetid,  furred  mouth,  a loathing, 
pains  in  the  loins,  or  in  the  knees,  much  anxi- 
ety, and  bad  nights,  he  fhould  be  purged  with 
the  powder  No.  21,  or  the  postion  No.  23,  be- 
fore he  takes  the  bark. 

§ 182.  If  the  fever  in  autumn  appear  to  be 
of  the  continual  kind,  and  verv  like  putrid  fe- 
vers, the  patients  fhould  drink  abundantly  of 
barley-water;  and  if  at  the  expiration  of  two  or 
three  days,  there  ft  ill  appears  to  be  a load  at 
the  ftomach,  the  powder  No.  34,  or  that  of  35, 
is  to  be  given  : and  if,  after  the  operation  of 
this,  the  figns  of  putridity  continue,  the  body 
is  to  be  opened  with  repeated  dofes  of  the  pow-_ 
her  No.  24;  and  when  the  fever  becomes  quite 
regular,  with  diftinft  remiffions  at  leaft,  the  bark 
is  to  be  given  as  directed  $ 180. 

But  as  autumnal  fevers  are  more  obftinate  ; 
after  having  difcontinued  the  bark  for  eight  days ; 
notwithftanding  there  has  been  no  return  of  the 
fever,  it  is  proper  to  refume  the  bark,  and  to 
give  three  dofes  of  it  daily  for  the  fucceeding 
eight  days,  more  efpecially  if  it  was  a quartan; 
in  which  fpecies  1 have  ordered  it  to  be  repeat- 
ed every  eight  davs,  for  fix  times. 

After  the  patient  has  begun  with  the  bark,  he 
muft  take  no  purging  medicine,  as  that  evacua- 
tion would  occafion  a return  of  the  fever. 

Bleeding 


r _*«?  j 

Bleeding  is  never  neceffary  in  a quartan  agua, 
which  occurs  with  fymptoms  of  putridity  rather 
than  of  inflammation. 

§ 183.  The  patient  ought,  two  hours  before 
the  fit,  to  drink  a final  1 glafs  of  warm  elder- 
flower  tea,  fweetened  with. honey,  every  quarter 
of  an  hour,  and  to  walk  about  moderately  ; this 
difpofes  him- to  a very  gentle  fweat,  and  thence 
renders  the  enfuing  fit  milder.  He  is  to  con- 
tinue the  fame  drink  throughout  the  cold  fit;  and 
when  the  hot  one  approaches,  he  may  either 
continue  the  fame,  or  fubftitute  that  of  No.  ?. 
which  is  more  cooling.  It  is  not  neceffary  how- 
ever, to  drink  it  w7arm,  it  is  fufficient  that  it  be 
not  over  cold.  When  the  fweat,  after  the  hot 
fit,  is  concluded,  the  patient  fhould  be  well  wip- 
ed and  dried,  and  may  get  up.  If  the  fit  was 
very  long,  he  may  be  allowed  a little  gruel,  or 
fome  other  fuch  nourifhment  during  the  fweat. 

§184,  Sometimes  the  firft  dofes  of  the  bark 
purge:  when  it  purges,  it  does  not  prevent  the 
return  of  the  fever;  fo  that  thefe  dofes  may  be 
confidered  as  to  no  purpofe,  and  others  fhould 
be  repeated,  which,  ceafing  to  purge,  prevent 
it.  Should  the  loofenefs  notwithflanding  con- 
tinue, the  bark  muff  be  difcontinued  for  one  en- 
tire day,  in  order  to  give  the  patient  twenty 
grains  of  rhubarb  : after  which  the  bark  is  to  be 
refumed,  and  if  the  loofenefs  Hill  perfevercs,  fif- 
teen grains  of  Venice-treacle  fhould  be  added  to 
each  aofe. 

: Vol.  XXV.  N § 185.  Another 


[ 29°  ] 


§ 185.  Another  eafy  method,  of  which  I have 
often  availed  my  patients,  under  tertian  fevers, 
(but  which  fucceeded  with  me  only  tw'ice  in 
quartans}  was  to  procure  the  fufferer  a very  plen- 
tiful fweat,  at  the  very  time  when  the  fit  was  to 
return,  in  its  ufual  courfe.  To  effecl  this  he  is 
to  drink,  three  or  four  hours  before  it  is  expeft- 
ed,  an  infufion  of  elder- flowers  fweetened  with 
honey ; and,  one  hour  before  the  ufual  invafton 
of  the  fhivering,  he  is  to  go  into  bed,  and  take, 
as  hot  as  he  can  drink  it,  the  prefcription  No. 
4T 

I have  alfo  cured  fome  tertians  and  even  quar- 
tans, by  giving  them,  every  four  hours  between 
the  fits,  the  powder  No.  45. 

§ 186.  The  fame  caufes  which  produce  inter- 
mitting fevers,  frequently  occafion  diforders, 
which  return  periodically  without  fhivering, 
without  heat,  and  often  without  any  quicknefs 
of  the  pulfe.  Such  diforders  generally  preferve 
the  intermiflions  of  quotidian  or  tertian  fevers, 
much  feldomer  thofe  of  quartans.  I have  feen 
violent  vomitings,  and  Teachings  to  vomit,  with 
inexpreflible  anxiety  ; the  fevereft  opprefhons, 
the  mofl  racking  cholics;  dreadful  palpitations, 
and  exceflive  tooth-achs : pains  in  the  head,  and 
very  often  an  unaccountable  pain  over  one  eye, 
the  eyelid,  eyebrow,  and  temple,  on  the  fame 
fide  of  the  face  ; with  a rednefs  of  that  eve,  and 
a continual,  involuntary  trickling  of  tears.  I 
have  alfo  feen  fuch  a prodigious  fwelling  of  the 

affected 


[ 29 1 ] 


afTefled  part,  that  the  eye  proje&ed,  or  flood 
out  above  an  inch  from  the  head,  covered  by 
the  eyelid,  which  was  alfo  extremely  inflamed. 
All  thefe  maladies  begin  precifely  at  a certain 
hoar;  laft  about  the  ufual  time  of  a fit;  and, 
terminating  without  any  fenfible  evacuation,  re- 
turn exactly  at  the  fame  hour,  the  next  day,  or 
the  next  but  one.  . 

There  is  but  one  known  medicine  that  can 
effeOually  oppofe  this  fort,  which  is  the  bark, 
given  as  dire&ed  § 180.  Nothing  affoids  relief 
in  the  fit,  and  no  other  medicine  puts  it  off.  If 
a fufficient  dofe  of  it  be  given,  the  next  (it  is  very 
mild  ; the  fecond  is  prevented  ; and  I never  faw 
a relapfe  in  thefe  cafes,  which  fometimes  hap- 
pens after  the  fits  of  common  intermittents  feem 
cured. 

§ 187.  In  fituations  where  the  air  renders 
thefe  fevers  very  common,  the  inhabitants 
fhould  frequently  burn  in  their  lodging-rooms, 
fome  aromatic  wood  or  herbs.  They  fhould 
daily  chew  fome  juniper-berries,  and  drink  a 
fermented  infufion  of  them.  Thefe  two  reme- 
dies aie  very  effeflual  to  fortify  the  weakeft  fto- 
machs,  to  prevent  obftructions,  and  to  promote 
perfpiration.  And,  as  thefe  are  ihe  caufes 
which  prolong  thefe  fevers  the  moft  obflinately, 
nothing  is  a more  certain  prefervation  from  them 
than  thefe  cheap  and  obvious  afliftances.T 

N 2 CHAP. 

+ I have  known  an  infufion  of  two  ounces  of  the  beft  bark  in 
fine  powder,  or  two  ounces  and  a half  in  grofs  powder,  in  a quart 


[ 292  ] . 


CHAP.  XIX. 

Oj  the  Erifipelas,  and  Bites  of  Animals. 
Sect.  188. 

THE  Erifipelas,  commonly  called  St.  An- 
thony's fire,  is  fometimes  a flight  indifpo- 
fition  which  appears  on  the  (kin.  It  generally 
affecis  the  face  or  the  legs.  The  fkin  diftends, 
becomes  rough  and  red : the  patient  feels  a 
burning  heat,  which  is  painful,  and  fometimes 
hinders  him  from  fleeping.  The  diflemper  in- 
creafes  for  two  or  three  days,  remains  in  its 
height  one  day  or  two,  and  abates  ; then  the  af- 
feffed  Hein  falls  off  in  great  feales  and  all  is  oyer. 

§ 189.  At  other  times,  this  malady  comes  to 
a greater  height  ; it  begins  by  a very  flrong  fhi- 
vehing,  followed  by  a burning  heat,  a violent 
head  ach,  fteknefs  at  heart,  or  t eachings  to  vo- 
mit, which  never  ceafe  till  the  erifipelas  breaks 
out,  and  this  happens  the  fecond,  or  third  day : 
then  the  fever  abates,  and  the  fteknefs  ceafes  : 
but  often  there  remains  a little  of  the  fever  and 
loathing,  during  all  the  time  that  the  erifipelas 

increafes. 

of  the  beft  brandy,  for  three  or  four  days  (a  fmall  wine  glafs  to 
be  taken  by  grown  perfor.s  at  the  aiftance  of  from  four  to  fix 
hours)  effeftually  and  fpeedily  terminate  fuck  inveterate  agues,  as 
had  given  but  little  way  to  the  baik  in  fubftance. 


[ 293  ] 


inereafes.  When  it  affefts  the  face,  the  head- 
ach  continues  till  it  is  on  the  decline,  the  eye- 
lid fwells,  the  eye  clofes,  and  the  patient  has 
not  the  lead  eafe.  Often  the  eruption  goes 
from  one  cheek  to  the  other,  and  fpreads  luc- 
ceflivelv  on  the  forehead,  and  the  neck  : Nay 
often,  when  the  difeafe  is  fevere,  the  brain  is 
opprelfed,  the  patient  raves,  and  fomctimes,  if 
he  does  not  get  help  he  dies. 

As  foon  as  the  erifipelas  is  ftrong,  it  is  co- 
vered with  fm all  puflules  full  of  a clear  water, 
fuch  as  that  which  comes  from  a tumour  occa- 
fioned  by  a burn,  and  thefe  puflules  afterwards 
dry  and  fcale-off.  I have  fometimes  feen,  efpe- 
cially  when  the  erifipelas  attacks  the  face,  that 
the  humour,  which  came  from  thefe  puflules, 
was  very  vifcous,  and  formed  thick  crufly 
fcabs  like  thofe  of  fucking  children  ; and  they 
continued  feveral  days  before  they  went  off. 

When  the  erifipelas  is  violent,  it  continues 
fometimes  eight,  ten,  twelve  days,  and  at  lafl 
goes  away  by  a plentiful  fweat ; during  the  ma- 
lady, all  the  fkin  is  dry,  even  the  infide  of  the 
mouth. 

§ 190.  An  erijtpdlas  rarely  comes  to  fuppura- 
tion,  and  when  it  does,  is  much  difpofed  to  de- 
generate into  an  ulcer.  Sometimes  a malignant 
kind  of  krifipelas  is  epidemical,  feizing  a great 
number  of  perfous,  and  frequently  terminating 
in  gangrenes. 

h 191.  This  diflemper  often  fhifts  its  fituation; 

: n3 


It. 


L 294  ] 

it  l'ometimes  retires  fuddenly  ; but  tbe  patient  is 
linear)',  he  has  a propenfity  to  vomit,  with  a 
fenuble  anxiety  and  heat  ; the  erifipelas  appears 
again  in  a different  part,  and  he  feels  himfelf 
quite  relieved.  But  if  indead  of  re-appearing 
on  feme  other  part,  the  humour  is  thrown  on 
the  brain,  or  the  bread,  he  dies  within  a few 
hours;  and  thefe  fatal  changes  fometimes  oc- 
cur, without  the  lead;  apparent  reafon. 

If  the  humour  is  transferred  to  the  brain,  the 
patient  immediately  becomes  delirious,  with  a 
very  fluffed  vifage,  and  fparkling  eyes  : very 
foon  alter  he  proves  downright  frantic,  and 
goes  off  in  a lethargy. 

If  the  lungs  are  attacked,  tbe  oppieffion,  anxi- 
ety, and  heat  are  inexpredible. 

There  are  fome  conditutions,  fubjefl  to  a fre- 
quent eri/iptlas.  If  it  often  affefts  the  face,  it  is 
generally  on  the  fame  fide  ; and  that  eye  is,  at 
length,  confiderably  weakened. 

§ 192.  This  didemper  refults  from  two  caufes  ; 
the  one,  a ffarp  humour,  diffufed  through  the 
mafs  of  blood  ; the  other,  that  humour’s  not  be- 
ing fufficiently  dilcharged  bv  perfpiration. 

§ 193.  * When  thisdifeafe  is  gentle,  it  will  be 
fufficient  to  put  a man  upon  the  regimen  fo  often 
referred  to,  with  a plentiful  ufe  of  nitre  in  elder- 
tea.  Fleff,  eggs,  and  wine  are  prohibited  of 
conrfe,  allowing  tbe  patient  a little  pulfe  and 
ripe  fruits.  'He  ffould  drink  elder-flower  tea 
abundantly,  and  take  half  a drachm  of  nitre 

every 


C 295  ] 

every  three  hours ; or,  which  amounts  to  the 
fame  thing,  let  three  drachms  of  nitre  be  diffolv- 
ed  in  as  much  infufion  of  elder-flowers  as  he 
can  drink  in  twenty-four  hours. 

§ 194.  When  the  diftemper  prevails  in  a 
greater  degree,  if  the  fever  is  high,  and  the 
pulfe  ftrong  or  hard,  it  may  be  neceffary  to 
bleed  once  ; but  this  fhould  never  be  permitted 
in  a large  quantity ; it  being  more  advifable,  if 
a fufRcient  quantity  has  not  been  taken  at  once 
to  bleed  a fecond  time,  arid  even  a third.  .And 
in  fome  cafes  nature  has  faved  the  patients  by 
effefting  a large  bleeding,  to  the  quantity  of  four 
or  five  pounds. 

After  bleeding,  the  patient  is  to  be  reflrained  to 
his  regimen  ; and  he  fhould  drink  barley-water 
freely,  No.  g. 

When  the  fever  is  diminifhed,  either  the 
purge  No.  23,  fhould  be  given,  or  a few  dofes 
every  morning  of  cream  of  tartar  No.  24.  Purg- 
ing is  abfolutelv  neceffary.  It  may  fometimes 
be  necefTary  too,  if  the  difeafe  is  very  tedious  ; 
Athe  ficknefs  at  the  ftomach  is  obftinate ; the 
mouth  ill  favoured,  and  the  tongue  foul,  (pro- 
vided there  be  only  a flight  fever,  and  no  fear 
of  an  inflammationj  to  give  the  medicines  No. 
34,  or  35  ; which  remove  thefe  impediments 
fhll  better  than  purges. 

It  commonly  happens  that  this  difeafe  is  more 
favourable  after  thefe  evacuations  ; neverthelefs 
it  is  fometimes  neceffary  to  repeat  them  the  next 
N 4 day, 


[ 296  ] 

day,  or  the  next  but  one;  efpeeially  if  ihe  ma- 
lady affeffs  the  head.  Purging  is  the  true  eva- 
cuation for  curing  it,  whenever  it  attacks  this 
part. 

If  even  after  thefe  evacuations,  the  fever  con- 
tinues fevere,  the  patient  fhould  take  every  two 
hours,  or  occaficnallv,  oftner.  two  fpoonfuls  of 
the  prefcription  No.  to,  added  to  a glafs  of 
ptifan. 

* It  will  be  very  ufeful,  when  this  difeafe  is 
featedinthe  head  or  face,  to  bathe  the  legs  fre- 
quently in  warm  water  ; and  where  it  is  violent 
there,  alfo  to  apply  finapifms  + to  the  foies  of 
the  feet.  I have  feen  this.application,  in  about 
four  hours,  draw  down  an  trifipelas  to  the  legs, 
which  had  fpread  over  the  nofe  and  both  the  eyes. 
When  the  dillemper  begins  to  go  off  by  fweat- 
ing,  this  fhould  be  promoted  by  elder-flower  tea 
and  nine,  and  the  fweating  may  be  encouraged 
lor  fome  hours. 

§ 195.  The  bbft applications  that  can  be  made 
to  the  adecled  part  are  : the  herb  Robert,  a kind 
of  crane’s-bill;  or  parflev,  or  elder- flowers : 
* but  if  the  complaint  be  mild  it  mav  be  fuffi- 
cient  to  apply  a foftfmooth  linen  over  it,  duffed 
over  with  a little  drymeal4 

r?.  * If  there  is  a very  confiderable  inflammation, 
flannels  wrung  out  of  a flrong  decof'tion  of  elder- 
flowers,  and  applied  warm,  afford  the  fpeediefl 

eafe. 

+ Rather  warm  treacle. 

J This  application  is  of  all  others  the  molt  efficacious. 


[ 297  ] 


eafe.  By  this  fimple  application,  I have  appeal- 
ed the  molt  violent  pains  of  the  molt  cruel  fpe* 
cies  of  erifipelas. 

3.  The  plaifler  of  fmalt,  and  fmalt  itfelf,  No. 
q6.  are  alfo  fuccefsfully  employed  in  this  dif- 
eafe.  This  powder,  or  meally  ones,  agree  heft 
when  a thin  watery  humour  di flils  from  the  lit- 
tle vefications,  which  it  is  convenient  to  abforh 
by  fuch  applications. 

AH  other  piaifters,  which  are  greafy,  or  refi- 
nous,  are  very  dangerous ; they  often  flrike  in 
the  erifipelas  occafioning  it  to  ulcerate,  or  even 
to  gangrene.  If  people  who  are  naturally  fub- 
je£l  to  this  difeafe  apply  any  fuch  plaifler  to 
their  fkin,  even  in  its  founded  Hate,  an  erifipelas 
is  the  fpeedv  confequence. 

§ 196.  Whenever  the  humour  occafioning 
the  diftemper  is  repelled,  and  thrown  upon  any 
internal  part,  the  patient  fhould  be  bled  : blif- 
ters  applied  to  the  legs ; and  elder-tea,  with 
nitre  diffolved  in  it,  plentifully  drank. 

§ 197.  People  who  are  liable  to  frequent  re- 
turns of  an  erifipelas,  fhould  carefully  avoid  uf- 
ing  cream,  and  all  fat  and  vifcid,  or  clammy 
food,  fpices,  thick  and  he  ady  liquors,  a feclen- 
tary  life,  the  more  affive  paffions,  efpecially- 
anger,  and  if  poffihle,  all  chagrin  too.  Their 
food  fhould  chiefly  confift  of  herbs  and  fruits,  of 
fubfiances  inclining  to  acidity,  and  which  tend 
to  keep  the  body  open:  they  fhould  drink  wa~ 
N & ter* 


[ 298  ] 

ter,  by  no  means  omitting  the  frequent  ufe  of 
cream  of  tartar. 

Of  the  Jhngs,  or  fma'l  wounds,  by  animals. 

§ 198.  The  flings  or  little  bites  of  animals, 
frequently  producing  a kind  of  erifipelas , I fhall 
add  a very  few  words  here  concerning  them. 

The  only  flings  we  are  expofed  to,  are  thofe 
of  bees,  wafps,  hornets,  gnats,  dragon  flies : 
fome  of  which  are  attended  with  fevere  pain,  a 
fwelling,  and  a confiderable  rednefs.  The  fymp- 
toms  go  off  naturally  within  a few  days,  without 
any  afliflance  : neverthelefs  they  may  either  be 
prevented  or  fhortened. 

1.  By  extracting  the  Ring  of  the  animal,  if  it 
is  left  behind. 

2.  By  applying  oil  quickly,  or  pounded  parf- 
ley. 

3 Bv  bathing  the  legs  of  the  perfon  flung  in 
warm  water. 


CHAP.  XX. 

OJ  Inflammations  of  the  Breaf,  and  offalft  and 
bilious  Pleuri/ies. 

Sect  199. 

THE  inflammation  of  the  breafl  and  thepleu- 
rify  which  we  call  bilious,  are  the  very 
fame  diforder  ; it  is  properly  a putrid  fever  ac- 
companied 


[ 299  2 

compan-ied  with  an  oppreflion  of  the  lungs,  which 
is  either  without  pain,  and  (hen  is  called  a pu- 
trid or  bilious  peripneumony,  or  with  a pain  in 
the  fide,  and  is  called  a pleurify. 

The  figns  which  diflinguilh  thefe  diforders 
from  the  inflammatory  diforders  of  the  fame 
name,  are  a pulfe  lefs  hard,  lefs  ftrong,  more 
quick,  with  a foulnefs  or  bitternefs  in  the 
mouth,  the  heat  is  fharp  and  dry,  the  patient  feels 
a heavinefs,  an  uneafinefs  about  his  ftomach  and 
loathings,  his  complexion  is  lefs  red,  it  is  a little 
yellow,  his  urine  is  like  that  in  putrid  fevers  ; he 
has  vey  often  a fmall  bilious  loofnefs  and  very 
fetid;  his  fkin  is  general;  y very  dry,  the  fpittle 
lefs  thick,  leu  red,  but  more  yellow  than  in  the 
inflammatory  kind. 

^ 200.  Thefe  difeafes  are  treated  in  the  fame 
way  as  putrid  fevers.  If  there  is  any  inflamma- 
tion, one  bleeding  removes  it,  afterwards  barley- 
water  is  given  No.  3 : and  when  the  inflamma- 
tion is  entirely  gone,  the  vomiting  and  purging 
portion  is  ufed  No.  34.  But  the  greateft  care 
mufl  be  taken  not  to  give  it  till  the  whole  inflam- 
matory difpofition  is  removed  ; afterwards  one 
may  employ  the  purging  potion  again  at  the  end 
of  fome  days  with  the  medicine  No.  23.  The 
powder  No.  25,  fucceeds  alfo  very  well  as  a 
vomit. 

If  the  fever  becomes  very  violent,  plenty  of 
the  portion  No.  10,  mufl  be  given. 

^ 201.  Thefalfe  inflammation  of  the  breaft 
N 6 is? 


[ 3°°  ] 

is  an  overfulnefs  or  oblfruftion  in  the  lungs,  ac-< 
campanied  with  a fever;  and  it  is  caufed  by  thick 
humours  ; and  not  by  inflammatory  blood,  or 
by  any  putrid  or  bilious  humour. 

This  difiemper  happens  mofl  frequently  in 
the  fpring.  Cld  men,  puny  children,  languid 
women,  feeble  young  men,  and  particularly  fuch 
as  have  worm  their  conflitutions  by  drinking, 
are  mofl  frequently  attacked  by  it  ; efpecial- 
ly  if  they  have  ufed  little  exercife  through  the 
winter;  and  have  fed  on  vifcid,  and  fat  ali- 
ments. 

2.  The  patient  many  days  before  has  a flight 
tough,  a fmall  opprefiion  when  he  moves  aboui ; 
a littlerefllefsnefs,  and  is  fome  times  a little  cho- 
leric or  fretful.  - His  countenance  is  higher  co- 
loured than  in  health  ; he  has  a propenfity  to 
fieep,  but  without  refrefhment,  and  has  fome- 
umes  an  extraordinary  appetite. 

3.  When  this  Prate  has  continued  for  fome  days, 
there  comes  on  a cold  {hivering,  it  is  fucceed- 
ed  by  a moderate  degree  of  beat,  attended  with 
much  inquietude  and  opprefiion.  The  fickper- 
fon  cannot  confine  himfelf  to  the  bed  ; but  walks 
to  and  fro  in  his  chamber,  and  is  greatly  dejePt- 
ed.  The  pulfe  is  weak  and  pretty  quick  ; the 
urine  is  fometimes  but  litt.e  changed  from  that 
in  health  ; at  other  times  it  is  di Charged  but  in 
a fmall  quantity,  and  is  higher  coloured  : he 
coughs  but  moderately,  and  does  not  expecioraie 
but  with  difficulty.  Sometimes  it  happens,  ef- 

pecially 


[ 3°i  ] 


pecially  to  perfons  of  advanced  age,  that  this  hate 
fuddenly  terminates  in  a mortal  fwoon  : in  other 
cafes,  the  opprefhon  and  anguifh  increafe  ; the 
patient  cannot  breathe  but  when  fitting  up,  and 
that  with  great  difficulty  : the  brain  is  utterly 
difturbed  ; this  (late  lafis  for  fome  hours,  and 
then  terminates  of  a fudden. 

§ 202.  This  is  a very  dangerous  diflemper  ; 
both  becaufe  it  chiefly  attacks  thofe  perfons 
whofe  conflitution  is  weakened,  and,  becaufe  it 
is  of  a precipitate  nature,  the  patient  fometimes 
dying  on  the  third  day,  feldom  furviving  the 
feventh. 

1.  If  the  patient  has  a pretty  good  ffiare  of 
health  ; if  the  pulfe  has  a perceivable  hardnefs, 
and  yet  at  the  fame  time  fome  firength  ; if  the 
weather  is  dry,  and  the  wind  blows  from  the 
north,  he  may  be  bled  once  to  a moderate  quan- 
tity. But  if  the  greater  part  of  thefe  circum- 
flances  are  wanting,  bleeding  would  be  very  pre- 
judical.  Were  we  obliged  to  eftabliffi  fome 
general  rule  in  this  cafe,  it  were  better  to  ex- 
clude bleeding,  than  to  admit  it. 

2.  The  fiomach  and  bowels  fhotild  be  unload- 
ed ; and  the  medicine  which  fucceeds  bell  is 
No.  35,  when  the  fymptoms  ffiew  there  is  a 
neceffity  for  vomiting,  and  there  is  no  inflamma- 
tion. When  we  are  afraid  of  hazarding  the  agi- 
tation ofa  vomit,  thepotion  No.  1 1.  may  be  given. 
But  we  mull  be  cautious,  in  regard  to  old  men, 

- even 


[ 302  ] 

even  with  this  ; as  fuch  may  expire  during  the 
operation  of  it. 

3.  1 hey  fhould,  from  the  beginning  of  the 
difeafe,  drink  plentifully  of  the  ptifan  Xo  26,  or 
that  of  No.  12,  adding  half  a dram  of  nine  to 
every  pint  of  it. 

4.  A cup  of  the  mixture  No.  8,  mud  be  taken 
every  two  hours. 

3.  Bilfters  are  to  be  applied  to  the  infides  of 
the  legs. 

When  the  cafe  is  doubtful  and  perplexing,  it 
were  bed  to  confine  ourfelves  to  the  three  lad 
mentioned  remedies,  which  can  occafion  no  ill 
confequence. 

Wh  en  this  malady  invades  old  people,  though 
they  partly  recover,  they  never  recover  perfectly 
and  if  due  precaution  is  not  taken,  they  are  very 
liable  to  fall  into  a dropfy  of  the  bread. 

§ 203.  The  fpurious  pleurify  is  a didemper 
that  does  not  affeCt  the  lungs,  but  only  thelkin, 
and  the  mufcles  which  cover  the  ribs.  It  is  the 
efieft  of  a rheum  atic  humour  thrown  upon  thefe 
parts,  in  which,  as  it  produces  dirap  pains  re- 
fembling  a ditch,  it  has  been  termed  a pleu- 
rify. 

It  is  generally  fuppofed,  that  a falfe  pleurify  is 
more  dangerous  than  a true  one  ; but  this  is  a 
midake.  It  is  often  ufhered  in  by  a'diivering, 
and  almod  ever  attended  with  a little  fever,  a 
fmall  cough,  and  a flight  difficulty  of  breathing  ; 
but  yet  no  anguifh,  nor  the  other^fymptoms  of 

true 


[ 3°3  J 

true  pleurifies.  In  forne  patients  this  pain  is 
extended  almod  over  the  whole  -bread,  and  to  the 
nape  of  the  neck.  The  fic.k  pei  Ton  cannot  repofe 
himfelfon  the  fide  affefited. 

1 his  diforder  is  not  more  dangerous  than  a 
rheumatilm,  except  in  two  cafes  ; x.  When  the 
pain  is  fo  fevere,  that  the  patient  drongly  en- 
deavours not  to  breathe  at  all,  winch  brings  on  a 
great  fluffing  in  the  lungs.  2.  When  this  hu- 
mour, like  anv  other  rheumatic  one,  is  transfer- 
red to  fome  internal  part. 

§ 2o_j,.  It  mull  be  treated  exaftly  like  a rheu- 
matifm. 

After  bleeding  once  or  more,  a bliffer  applied 
to  the  affefted  part  is  often  attended  with  a very 
good  effeft  ; this  being  indeed  the  kind  of  pleu- 
rify,  in  which  it  particularly  agrees. 

It  fometimes  gives  way  to  the  fird  bleeding  ; 
often  terminating  on  the  third,  fourth,  or  fifth 
day,  by  a very  plentiful  fwead,  and  rarely  lading 
beyond  the  feventh. 


CHAP.  XXI. 

Of  Co  LICKS. 

Sect.  205. 

BY  a colick,  I mean  all  the  pains  that  afifeft 
the  ftomach,  or  the  guts. 

* I have 


f 3°4  ] 

* I have  proved  before,  that  in  fome  difeafes, 
the  patient  is  killed  by  foicing  him  into  a fweat ; 
in  colics  the  patient  is  killed  by  endeavouring  to 
expel  the  wind  by  fpirituous  liquors. 

Of  the  injlammat  ory  Colick. 

§ 206.  The  mod  violent  kind  of  colick,  and, 
the  mod  dangerous,  is  that  which  proceeds  from 
the  inflammation  of  the  domach,  or  iruedines. 
It  begins  by  a violent  pain  in  the  belly;  the  pain 
increafes  by  degrees,  the  pulfe  becomes  quick 
and  hard:  the  patient  feels  a burning  heat  in  all 
his  belly  ; fometimes  he  has  a watery  diarrhoea; 
atother  times  he  is  rather  codive  and  fubjeft  to 
vomitings.  The  counfenance  becomes  red ; the 
belly  didends,  and  it  cannot  be  touched  with- 
out increafing  the  pain  The  third  is  very 
great ; no  drink  can  quench  it.  The  pain  ex- 
tends often  to  the  loins,  where  it  is  very  flrarp. 
The  patient  makes  little  urine,  and  what  he 
makes  is  burning  and  red ; he  gets  no  red ; 
fometimes  he  raves.  If  the  difeafe  is  not  dop- 
pea  til!  the  pains  come  to  the  height,  the  pulfe 
becomes  lefs  drong,  lefs  hard,  but  more  quick, 
the  face  lofes  its  rednefs;  the  parts  around  the 
eye  become  livid.  ; the  patient  lofes  his  drength 
entirely ; his  face,  hands,  feet,  and  the  whole 
body  except  the  belly  become  cold  ; the  fkin  of 
the  belly  turns'  bluifh,  weaknefs  enfucs,  and  the 
patient  dies.  There  happens  often,  a moment 
before  death,  a plentiful  evacuation  by  dool,  of 

matter 


[ 3 °5  l 

matter  extremely,  fetid,  and  it  is  during  that  eva- 
cuation that  the  patient  dies,  with  his  bowels 
mortified. 

When  the  difeafe  attacks  the  ffomach,  the 
fymptoms  are  the  fame ; the  patient  vomits  al- 
mofl  all  that  he  takes,  the  torment  is  horrible, 
and  the  ravings  come  very  foon.  This  diftem- 
per  kills  in  a few  days. 

§ 207.  The  method  of  cure  is. 

1.  Take  a large  quantity  of  blood  from  the 
arm  : this  almoft  immediately  diminifhes  the 
pain,  and  allays  the  vomiting.  It  is  often  ne- 
ceffary  to  repeat  this  bleeding  within  the  fpace 
of  two  hours. 

2.  Whether  the  patient  has  a loofenefs  or  not, 
a glyffer  of  a decoftion  of  mallows,  or  of  barley- 
water  and  oil,  fliould  be  given  every  two  hours. 

3.  The  patient  fhould  drink  very  plentifully 
of  warm  almond-milk  No.  4 ; or  of  barley-water. 

4.  Flannels,  dipped  in  hot-water,  fhould  be 
continually  applied  over  the  belly  ; fhifting 
them  every  hour,  or  rather  oftner. 

5.  If  the  difeafe  notwithflanding  continues 
violent,  the  patient  fhould  be  put  into  a warm 
bath,  the  extraordinary  fuccefs  of  which  I have 
obferved. 

When  the  pains  and  fever  are  ceafed,  fo  that 
the  patient  recovers  a little  flrength,  and  gets  a 
little  fleep,  it  will  be  proper  to  give  him  two 
ounces  of  manna,  and  a quarter  of  an  ounce  of 
Epfom  fait,  diffolved  in  a glafs  of  clear  whey. 

Manna 


j 


[ 3°6 

Manna  alone  may  fuffice  for  delicate  conftku- 
tions.  all  lliarp  purges  would  be  highly  danger* 
ous. 

§ 208.  It  is  fometimes  theeffeftof  a general 
inflammation  of  the  blood;  and  is  produced,  like 
other  inflammatory  difeafes,  by  extraordinary 
labour,  very  great  heat,  heating  meats  or  drinks. 
It  is  often  the  confequence  of  other  colics 
which  have  been  injudicioufly  treated. 

During  the  progrefs  of  this  violent  difeafe,  no 
food  is  to  be  allowed  ; and  we  (hould  not  be  too 
rnattentive  to  fuch  degrees  of  pain,  as  fome- 
times remain  after  their  feverity  is  over;  lefl  a 
fcirrhus  fhould  be  generated,  which  may  occa- 
ficn  the  moft  inveterate  maladies. 

§ 209.  An  inflammation  of  the  inteflines,  and 
one  of  the  fiomach,  may  alfo  terminate  in  an 
abfcefs  : and  at  may  be  apprehended  that  one  is 
forming,  when,  though  the  violence  of  the  pain 
abates,  there  ft  ill  remains  a flow,  heavy  pain 
with  general  inquietude,  little  appetite,  frequent 
fhiverings;  the  patient  at  the  fame  time  not  re- 
covering any  flrength.  In  fuch  cafes  the  pati- 
ent fhould  be  allowed  no  other  drinks,  but  what 
are  direfted  in  this  chapter,  and  foine  foups 
made  of  pulfe,  or  other  farinaceous  food. 

The  breaking  of  the  abfcefs  may  fometimes  be 
difcovered  by  a flight  fainting  fit ; ' attended  with 
a perceivable  collation  of  a weight  in  the  part 
where  it  was  lately  felt:  and  when  the  pus  is 
effufed  into  the  gut,  the  patient  fometimes  ha ; 

Teachings 


l S°7 


reachings  to  vomit,  a fwimming  in  the  head, 
and  the  matter  appears  in  the  next  {tools.  In 
this  cafe  there  remains  an  ulcer  within  the  gut, 
which,  if  either  negle feted  or  improperly  treated, 
may  pave  the  way  to  a (low  wailing  fever,  and 
even  to  death.  Yet  this  I have  cured  by  mak- 
ing the  patient  live  folely  upon  fkimmed  milk, 
diluted  with  one  third  part  water,  and  by  giving 
every  other  day  a glyfter,  confuting  of  equal 
pans  of  milk  and  water,  with  the  addition  of  a 
little  honey. 

Of  the  bilious  Colick. 

§ 2x0.  The  bilious  colick  difcovers  itfelfby 
very  acute  pains,  but  is  feldom  accompanied 
with  a fever;  at  leaft,  not  until  it  has  lafled  a 
day  or  two.  And  even  if  there  fhould  be  fome 
degree  of  a fever,  yet  the  pulfe,  though  quick,  is 
neither  {hong  nor  hard:  the  belly  is  neither  tenfe 
nor  burning  hot  ; the  urine  comes  away  with 
more  eafe,  and  is  leTs  high-coloured:  neverthe- 
lefs,  the  inward  heat  and  thirft  are  confiderable ; 
the  mouth  is  bitter;  the  vomiting  or  purging, 
when  either  of  them  attend  it,  difcharge  a yel- 
lowifh  humour  or  excrement ; and  the  patient’s 
head  is  often  dizzy. 

§ 2x1.  The  method  of  curing  this  is, 
x.  By  injefehng  glyhers  of  whey  and  honey; 
cr,  if  whey  is  not  readily  procurable,  by  repeat- 
ing the  glyfter  No.  5. 

2.  By 


[ 3°s  ] 


2.  By  making  the  fick  drink  confiderably  of 
the  fame  whey,  or  of  a ptifan  made  of  the  root 
of  dogs-grafs  (the  common  grafs)  and  a little 
juice  of  lemon,  for  want  ol  which,  a little 
vinegar  and  honey  may  be  fubflituted  in  place 
of  it.  + 

3.  By  giving  every  hour  one  cup  of  the  me- 
dicine No.  32  ; or  where  this  is  not  to  be  had, 
half  a drachm  of  tartar  at  the  fame  fhort  in- 
tervals. 

4.  Fomentations  of  warm  water  and  half-baths 
are  alfo  very  proper. 

5-  If  the  pains  are  fharp  in  a robuft  flrong 
perfon,  and  the  pulfe  is  ftrong  and  tenfe,  bleed- 
ing fhould  be  ufed. 

6.  No  other  nourifhment  fhould  be  given,  ex- 
cept fome  thin  foups,  made  from  vegetables, 
and  particularly  of  forrel. 

7.  After  plentiful  dilution  with  the  proper 
drink,  if  no  fever  fupervenes  ; if  the  pain  conti- 
nues, and  the  patient  difcharges  but  little  by 
flool,  he  fhould  take  a moderate  purge.  That 
direfted  No.  47,  is  a very  proper  one. 

§ 212.  This  bilious  colick  is  habitual  to  many 
perfons ; and  may  be  prevented  by  an  habitual 
ufe  of  the  powder  No.  24  ; by  fubmitdn'g  to  a 
moderate  retrenchment  in  the  article  of  flefh- 

meat ; 

+ Pullet,  or  rather  chicken-broth,  made  very  weak,  may 
often  do  inftead  of  ptifan,  or  ferve  fof  a little  variety  of  drink. 
Beef  tea  alfo  may  be  ufed  for  the  fame  purpofe. 


C 3°9  3 

meat ; and  by  avoiding  bleating  and  greafy 
food. 

Of  Colicks from  Indigejlions,  and  of  lndigejlion. 

§ 213.  Under  this  appellation.  I comprehend 
all  thefe  colicks,  which  are  either  owing  to  any 
overloading  quantity  of  food  taken  at  once  ; or 
to  a mafs  of  aliments  formed  by  degrees  in  fuch 
ftomachs,  as  digeft  but  imperfeftly;  or  which 
refult  from  noxious  mixtures  of  aliment  in  the 
ftomach,  fuch  as  that  of  milk  and  acids:  or  from 
food  either  not  wholefo'me  in  itfelf,  or  degene- 
rated into  an  unwholefome  condition. 

This  kind  of  colick  may  be  known  from  any 
of  thefe  caufes  having  preceded  it ; by  its  pains, 
which  come  on  by  degrees,  being  lefs  fixed 
than  in  the  colicks  before  treated  of.  Thefe 
colicks  are  alfo  without  any  fever,  heat,  or  third, 
but  accompanied  with  giddinefs  and  efforts  to 
vomit. 

Thefe  diforders  are  not  dangerous  in  them- 
felves;but  may  be  made  fuch  by  injudicious  ma- 
nagement ; the  only  thing  to  be  done  is  to  pro- 
mote the  difcharges  by  warm  drinks.  There  are 
a confulerable  variety  of  them,  which  feem 
equally  good,  fuch  as  warm  water,  or  even  cold 
water  with  a toaft  : a light  infufion  of  camomile, 
common  tea,  or  balm,  it  imports  little  which, 
provided  the  patient  drinks  plentifully  : in  con- 
fequence  of  which  the  offending  matter  is  dif- 

charged, 


[ 310  3 

charged,  either  by  vomiting,  or  a confiderable 
purging  ; and  the  fpeedier  and  more  in  quantity 
thefe  difcharges  are,  the  fooner  the  patient  is 
relieved. 

The  expulfion  of  the  obftrufling  matter  is 
facilitated,  bv  rubbing  the  belly  with  hot  cloths. 

It  is  often  found,  that  after  thefe  plentiful 
difcharges,  and  when  the  pains  are  over,  there 
remains  a very  difagreeable  tafle  in  the  mouth, 
refembliu<>'  the  favour  of  rotten  etjas.  This 
may  be  removed  by  giving  fome  dofes  of  the 
powder  No.  2_j,  and  drinking  largely  of  good 
water. 

It  is  an  effential  point  in  thefe  cafes,  to  take 
no  food  before  a perfect  recovery. 

§ 214.  Some  have  been  abfurd  enough  to  fly 
to  fome  heating  cordial,  to  Venice-treacle,  ani- 
feed-water,  geneva,  or  red  wine ; but  there 
cannot  be  a more  fatal  practice  : fince  evacuati- 
ons are  the  only  thing  which  can  cure.  And 
fhould  this  endeavour  of  flopping  them  fucceed, 
the  patient  is  either  thrown  into  a putrid  fever, 
or  fome  chronical  malady  ; unlefs  nature  fhould 
prevail  over  the  obflacles  oppofed  to  her  reco- 
very, and  reftore  the  obflrucied  evacuations  in 
the  fpace  of  a few  days. 

§ 215.  Sometimes  an  indigeflion  happens, 
with  very  little  pain,  but  with  violent  Teachings, 
faintings,  and  cold  fweats:  and  not  feldom  the 
malady  begins  with  a hidden  and  unexpet*ed 
fainting : the  patient  immediately  lofes  his 

fenfes, 


[ 311  ] 

fenfes,  his  face  is  pale  and  wan : he  has  fome 
hickups,  which  joined  to  the  fmallnefs  of  the 
pulfe,  make  this  diforder  didinguifhable  from  a 
real  apoplexy.  Neverthelefs,  when  it  riles  to 
this  height,  it  fometimes  kills  in  a few  hours. 
The  firft.  thing  is  to  throw  up  a (harp  glyder,  in 
which  fait  and  foap  are  diffolved  ; next  to  get 
down  as  much  fait  and  water  as  he  can  fwallow  ; 
and  if  that  is  inefiecfual,  the  powder  No.  4 is  to 
be  diffolved  in  three  cups  of  water ; one  half 
of  which  is  to  be  given  dire&ly ; and  if  it 
does  jnot  operate  in  a quarter  of  an  hour,  the 
other  half.  Generally  fpeaking  the  patient's 
fenfe  begins  to  return,  as  foon  as  he  begins  to 
vomit. 

Of  the  flatulent  or  windy  Colick. 

§ 21,5.  Every  particular  which  conftitutes  our 
food,  whether  folid  or  liquid,  contains  much 
air.  If  they  do  not  diged  foon  enough,  or  but 
badly  ; if  they  contain  an  extraordinary  quantity 
of  air;  or  if  the  guts  being  comprelfed  any 
where  in  the  courfe  of  their  extent,  prevent 
that  air  from  being  equally  diffufed  (which 
mud  occafion  a greater  proportion  of  it  in  fome 
places)  then  the  (lomach  and  the  guts  are  dif- 
tended. 

This  fpecies  of  colick  rarely  appears  alone; 
but  is  often  complicated  with  the  other  forts,  of 
which  it  is  a confequence  ; and  is  more  efpeci- 

ally 


[ 312  1 

ally  joined  with  the  colick  from  indigeftions. 
It  may  be  known,  like  that,  by  the  caufes  which 
preceded  it,  by  its  not  being  accompanied  either 
with  fever,  heat,  or  third ; the  belly’s  being 
large  and  full,  though  without  hardnefs,  being 
unequal  in  its  largenefs,  w'hich  prevails  more  in 
one  part  of  it  than  in  another,  forming  fomething 
like  pockets  of  wind,  fometimes  in  one  part, 
fometimes  in  .another  ; and  by  the  patient’s 
feeling  fome  eafe  merely  from  the  rubbing  of  his 
belly,  as  it  moves  the  wind  about;  which  ef- 
caping  either  upwards  or  downwards  affords  him 
dill  greater  relief. 

§ 216.  When  it  is  combined  with  any  different 
fpecies  of  the  colick,  it  requires  no  diftind  treat- 
ment ; and  it  is  removed  by  the  medicines  which 
cm  e the  principal  difeafc. 

* Sometimes  however  it  does  exift  alone,  and 
then  it  depends  on  the  windinefs  of  the  food  : 
fuch  as  beer,  efpeciallv  -very  new  beer,  certain 
fruits,  and  garden  ftuff.  It  may  be  cured  bv 
chaffing  the  belly  with  hot  cloths ; or  by  ca- 
momile tea.  When  the  pains  are  abated,  and 
there  is  no  fever,  the  patient  may  take  a little 
fpiced  wine,  which  is  not  to  be  allowed  in  any 
other  kind  of  colick. 

When  a perfon  is  frequently  fubjed  to  colirk 
pains,  it  is  fign  that  the  digeftive  faculty  is  im- 
paired ; the  reltoring  of  which  ffiould  be  care- 
fully attended  to  ; without  which  his  health  muff 
fuffer  confiderably. 


Qf 


• \ 

313  ] 

Of  Coliclis  occafioned  by  Cold. 

§ 217.  * When  any  perfon  has  been  very 
cold,  efpecially  in  his  feet,  it  is  common  for 
him  to  be  attacked,  within  a few  hours,  with 
violent  colick  pains,  in  which  heating  and  fpi- 
rituous  medicines  are  very  pernicious ; but 
which  are  eafdy  cured  by  rubbing  the  legs  well 
with  hot  cloths,  and  keeping  them  afterwards 
for  a confiderable  tjme  in  warm  water ; at  the 
fame  time  drinking  freely  of  a light  infufion  of 
camomile,  or  toaft  and  water. 

The  cure  will  be  effe&ed  the  fooner,  if  the 
patient  is  put  to  bed  and  fweats  a little,  efpeci- 
ally in  the  legs  and  feet. 

If  the  pain  be  exceflive,  it  may  be  neceffary 
to  give  a glyfler  of  warm  water;  to  keep 
the  legs  feveral  hours  over  the  fleam  of  hot  wa-  « 
ter,  and  afterwards  in  the  water  ; to  drink  plen- 
tifully of  an  infufion  of  camomile:  if  the  diitem- 
per  is  not  fubdued  by  thefe  means,  blifters  fhould 
be  applied  to  the  legs,  which  I have  known  to 
be  highly  efficacious. 

§ 218.  It  appears  through  the  courfe  of  this 
chapter,  that  we  mud  be  on  our  guard  againfl 
heating  and  fpirituous  medicines  in  colicks,  as 
they  may  not  only  aggravate,  but  even  render 
them  mortal.  In  fhort  they  fhould  never  be 
given ; and  when  it  is  difficult  to  difcover  the 
real  caufeof  ihe  colick,  I advife  people  to  con- 
fine themfelves  to  thefe  remedies,  which  cannot 
Vol.  XXV.  O be 


[ 3*4  ] 

be  hurtful.  Let  the  patient  drink  warm  water 
plentifully,  and  let  the  belly  be  often  fomented  in 
warm  water,  which  is  the  bell  fomentation  of 
any. 

* I have  mentioned  nothing  here  of  the  ufe 
of  any  oils  in  this  difeafe.  I advife  a total  difufe 
of  them,  fince  they  may  be  of  bad  confequence 
in  many  re fp efts. 

* § sig.  Chronical  difeafesnot  coming  within 
the  plan  of  this  work,  I purpofelv  forbear  treat- 
ing of  them  : but  I think  it  my  duty  to  admonifh 
thofe  fubjedl  to  them,  that  they  fliould,  1.  Avoid 
with  the  greateft  care,  the  ufe  of  fharp,  hot,  vio- 
lent medicines,  vomits,  ftrong  purges,  elixirs. 
2.  They  fhould  be  thoroughly  on  their  guard 
againft  all  thofe  who  promife  them  a very 
fpeedy  cure,  by  the  affiftance  of  fome  fpecific 
remedy.  3.  They  fhould  be  convinced,  they  can 
entertain  no  reafonable  hope  of  being  cured, 
without  an  exa£t  conformity  to  a proper  regi- 
men, and  a long  perfeverance  in  a courfe  of 
mild  and  fafe  remedies.  4.  They  fhould  conti- 
nually reflect,  that  there  is  little  difficulty  in  do- 
ing them  great  mifchief;  and  that  their  com- 
plaints require  the  greateft  knowledge  in  thofe 
perfons  to  whom  the  treatment  and  cure  of 
them  are  confined. 


CHAP, 


[ 315  3 


CHAP.  XXII. 

Of  the  Iliac  Paffion , and  the  Cholera  Morbus . 

Sect.  220. 

f I ^HE  iliac  paflion  is  the  molt  tormenting  of 
all  difeafes. 

If  the  inteftines  are  clofed  up  in  any  part,  all 
the  food  is  flopped,  and  the  continual  motion 
which  is  obferved  in  the  bowels  to  force  every 
thing  downwards,  is  done  a direft  contrarv 
manner,  and  forces  every  thing  towards  the 
mouth. 

The  difeafes  begins  fometimes  after  a coftive- 
nefs  of  fome  days  ; at  other  times,  it  is  preceded 
by  pains  in  the  belly,  efpecially  round  the  nave], 
which  pains  increafing  by  degrees  become  at 
lalt  very  violent.  Some  feel  a hard  tumaur 
round  the  belly,  as  if  it  was  a cord  ; flatulences 
are  heard,  fome  come  upwards ; and  the  vomit- 
ings, which  fupervene  foon,  increafe,  till  the 
patient  throws  up  all  that  he  has  taken,  with  in- 
expreflible  pain.  At  the  beginning,  he  calls  up 
the  laft  food  which  he  took,  with  fome  yellowifli 
matter,  and  his  drink : but  aftewards  the  matter 
O 2 becomes 


[ 3l6  ] 

becomes  {linking;  and  when  the  difeafe  is  come 
to  a height,  the  matter  lias  a frnell  which  is  called 
the  frnell  of  excrement,  but  which  is  more  like 
the  frnell  of  a corrupted  dead  body.  Sometimes 
likewife,'  if  the  patient  has  taken  injections  of  a 
ftrong  fmeli,  the  fame  is  found  in  what  is  vo- 
mited up.  But  I never  faw  any  body  vomit  up 
real  excrements,  nor  the  compofition  ofglyflers. 
During  all  the  diftemper,  the  patient  has  notone 
flool,  the  belly  is  tenfe,  the  urine  fupprefied.  or 
thick  and  flinking.  The  pulfe,  which  at  firft 
was  pretty  hard,  becomes  quick  and  flow  ; the 
flrength  is  loft,  the  patients  rave  ; there  comes 
on  almoll  always  a hiccup,  and  fometimes 
general  convulfions ; the  excrements  grow  cold, 
the  pains  and  vomitings  ceafe,  and  the  patient 
dies. 

^ 221.  As  this  difeafe  is  highly  dangerous,  the 
moment  it  is  apprehended,  it  is  neceffary  to 
oppofe  it : the  fmallefl  error  may  be  of  fatal  con- 
fequence,  and  hot  liquors  kill  the  patient  in  a 
few  hours. 

This  di.eafe  fhould  be  treated  precifely  in  the 
fame  manner  as  an  inflammatory  colick. 

1.  The  patient  fhould  be  plentifully  bled,  if 
the  pin  fician  has  been  called  in  before  the  ftek 
has  lofl  his  flrength. 

2.  He  fhould  receive  opening  glvflers  made  of 
a decoftion  of  barley-water,  with  five  or  fix 
ounces  of  oil  in  each. 

3.  We  fhould  endeavour  to  allay  the  violent 

efforts 


[ 3*7  J 

efforts  to  vomit,  by  giving  every  two  hours  a 
Ipoonful  of  the  mixture  No.  48. 

4.  The  fick  fhould  drink  plentifully,  in  very 
fmall  quantities,  often  repeated,  of  an  appealing 
drink,  which  tends  to  promote  both  llools  and 
urine.  Nothing  is  preferable  to  the  whey  No. 
49,  if  it  can  be  had  immediately  : if  not,  give 
fimple  clear  whey  fweetened  with  honey,  and 
the  drinks  prefcribed  § 207.  art.  3. 

5.  The  patient  is  to  be  put  into  a hot  bath, 
and  kept  as  long  as  he  can  bear  it  ; repeating  it 
at  often  daily  as  his  ftrength  will  permit. 

6.  After  bleeding,  warm  bathing,  repeated 
glyfters  and  fomentations,  if  all  thefe  have  a- 
vailed  nothing ; the  fmoak  of  tobacco  may  be 
introduced  in  the  manner  of  aglyfter. 

I cured  a perfon  of  this  difeafe,  by  conveying 
him  into  a.bath,  immediately  alter  bleeding  him, 
and  giving  him  a purge  on  his  going  into  the 
bath. 

§ 222.  If  the  pain  abates  before  the  patient  has 
quite  loft  his  ftrength  ; if  the  pulfe  improves ; 
if  the  vomitings  are  lefs ; if  he  feels  fomething 
rumbling  in  his  bowels ; if  he  has  fome  little 
difcharge  by  ftool ; and  if  at  the  fame  time 
he  feels  himfelf  a little  ftronger,  his  cure  may 
be  reafonably  expefled ; but  if  he  is  otherwife 
circumftanced,  he  will  foon  depart.  It  fre- 
quently happens  a fingle  hour  before  death,  that 
the  pain  feems  to  vanilh,  and  a furprizing quan- 
tity of  extremely  fetid  matter  is  difcharged  by 
O 3 ftool : 


[ 3*8  3 

ftool : the  patient  is  fuddenly  feized  with  a 
great  weaknefs  and  finking,  falls  into  a cold 
fweat,  and  immediately  expires. 

Oj  the  Cholera  Morbus. 

§ 223.  This  difeafe  is  a fudden,  abundant,  and 
painful  evacuation  by  vomiting  and  by  flool. 

It  begins  with  much  wind,  and  flight  pains  in 
the  belly,  followed  with  large  evacuations  either 
by  ftool  or  by  vomit  at  firft,  but  whenever  either 
of  them  has  begun,  the  other  quickly  follows : 
the  pulfe  is  almoft  conftantly  feverifh,  is  fome- 
times  ftrong  at  firft,  but  foon  finks  into  weak- 
nefs, in  confequence  of  the  prodigious  difc'narge. 
Some  patients  purge  a hundred  times  in  the 
compafs  of  a few  hours : they  may  even  be  feen 
to  fall  away.  After  a great  number  of  them, 
they  are  affli&ed  with  cramps  in  their  legs, 
thighs,  and  arms.  When  the  difeafe  rages  too 
highly  to  be  affuaged,  hiccups,  convulfions,  and 
acoldnefs  of  the  extremities  approach;  there  is 
a fcarcely  intermitting  fucceflion  of  fainting  fits, 
the  patient  dying  either  in  one  of  them,  or  in 
convulfions. 

It  commonly  prevails  towards  the  end  of  July 
and  in  Auguft  ; efpecially  if  the  heats  have  been 
very  violent,  and  there  have  been  little  or  no 
fummer  fruits,  which  greatly  conduce  to  allay 
the  putrefeent  acrimony  of  the  bile. 

4 223.  * Our  firft  endeavour  fhould  be  to 

drown 


[ 3*9  ] 

drown  this  acrid  bile,  by  the  moll  mitigating 
drinks.  Wherefore  the  patient  fhould  continu- 
ally take  in,  either  barley-water,  or  pure  water, 
with  one  eighth  part  milk.  Or  he  may  ufe  a 
very  light  deco£lion  of  bread,  which  is  made  by 
gently  boiling  a pound  of  toafted  bread,  in  five 
or  fix  quarts  of  water,  for  half  an  hour. 

A very  light  foup  made  of  a pullet,  or  one 
pound  of  lean  veal,  in  four  quarts  of  water,  is 
very  proper.  Whey  is  alfo  employed  to  good 
purpofe  ; and  in  thofe  places,  where  it  can  be 
eafily  had,  butter-milk  is  the  befi  drink  of  any. 
But,  which  ever  of  thefe  drinks  fhall  be  thought 
preferable,  it  is  a neceffary  point  to  drink  very 
plentifully  of  it. 

* 2.  If  the  patient’s  attendants  ufe  Venice - 
treacle,  mint-water,  fyrup  of  white  poppies, 
called  diacodium,  opium  or  mithridate,  it  cither 
happens,  that  the  difeafe  and  all  its  fymptoms 
are  heightened  ; or,  if  the  evacuations  fhould  be 
flopt,  the  patient  is  thrown  into  a more  danger- 
ous condition. 

§ 22 q.  If  the  pains  and  evacuations  gradually 
abate,  it  will  be  proper  to  perfevere  in  the  medi- 
cines already  directed,  though  fomewhat  lefs 
frequently.  And  now  we  may  allow  a few  foups 
from  meally  fubftances;  and  as  foon  as  they  are 
quite  ceafed,  he  nmfl  be  referred  to  the  regimen 
fo  frequently  recommended  to  perfons  in  a fiate 
of  recover)  : When  the  concurring  ufe  of  the 
O q powder 


[ 32°  J 


powder  No.  24,  taken  twice  a day,  will  greatly 
aifift  to  haften  and  eflabliflr  his  health. 


CHAP.  XXIII. 

Of  the  Diarrhoea. 

Sect.  225. 

r | 'HOSE  fluxes  which  attack  fuadenly,  with- 
-A  out  any  preceding  diflemper,  which  are 
not  attended  with  ftrong  pains  or  a fever,  are 
vgther  an  advantage  than  difadvantage.  They 
evacuate  matter  that  has  been  long  amaffed, 
which,  were  it  not  carried  off,  would  produce 
*•  home  diflemper. 

Thefe  purgings  then  muft  not  be  flopped; 
they  go  away  generally  of  thcmfelves,  when  all 
the  hurtful  matter  is  difeharged ; and  they  require 
no  medicine.  All  that  ought  to  be  done,  is  to 
diminilh  the  quantity  of  food;  to  abftain  from 
eating  flefh,  eggs,  and  wine;  to  live  on  foup, 
pulfe,  or  a little  fruit  raw  or  baked,  and  to  drink 
a little  more  than  ufual. 

§ 22 6.  If  after  five  or  fix  days,  the  diflemper 
continues,  and  the  pains  increafe,  then  it  muft  be 
flopped.  For  that  efleft.  a man  muft  be  put 

into 


L 321  ] 


into  a regimen  : and,  if  the  diarrhoea  was  ac- 
companied with  a great  loathing,  rifings  at  the 
flomach,  fonlncfs  of  the  tongue,  and  a bad  tafle 
in  the  mouth,  the  powder  No.  35,  rnufl.  be  given. 
If  thefe  fymptoms  fhould  not  happen,  the  pow- 
der  No.  51,  fhould  be  adminillered,  and  during 
three  hours  after  this  medicine,  he  fhould  take 
every  half  hour  a cup  of  weak  broth. 

If  the  diarrhoea,  flopped  by  this  medicine, 
fhould  return  at  the  end  of  fome  days,  it  would 
be  a proof  that  there  remains  a tenacious  matter 
which  has  not  been  difchartted.  In  this  cafe  the 
medicines  No.  21,  23,  or  47  mull  be  given  ; ancN 
afterwards,  the  patient  mull  take,  falling,  for 
two  mornings,  the  half  of  the  powder  No.  57. 

§ 227.  A purging  is  often  negledled  for  a- 
long  time,  from  which  negledl  they  degenerate- 
into  perpetual  ones.  In  fuch  cafes,  the  medi- 
cine No.  33,  Ihould  be  given  firfl ; then  every 
other  day  for  four  times  fucceflively,  he  fhould 
take  No.  51  : during  all  which  time  be  Ihould 
live  on  nothing  but  panada,  or  on  rice  boiled  in. 
weak  chicken-broth.  A ftrengthening  floma- 
chic  plaifler  has  fometimes  been  fuccefsfully 
applied,  which  may  be  often  moiflened  in  a de- 
codlion  of  herbs  boiled  in  wine.  Cold  and  moif- 
ture  fhould  be  avoided,  which  frequently  occa- 
sion immediate  relapfes,  even  after  the  loofenefe-. 
Bad  ceafed  for  many  days. 


O, 


CHA  E. 


[ 322  ] 


CHAP.  XXIV. 

Of  the  Dysentery. 

Sect.  228. 

THE  dyfentery  is  a flux,  with  flronggripings, 
and  frequent  inclinations  to  go  to  ftool. 
There  is  commonly  a little  blood  in  the  ftools, 
but  not  always. 

The  dyfentery  is  generally  epidemical ; it 
begins  foinetimes  at  the  end  of  July,  oftener  in 
Auguft,  and  ends  when  the  froft  begins. 

§ 228  It  begins  with  a fhivering  for  fome 
hours  ; and  great  pains  in  the  belly,  which  fome- 
times  lafl  many  hours  before  the  evacuations  be- 
gin. The  patient  has  vertigos,  inclinations  to 
vomit:  he  grows  pale  ; his  pulfe  however  is  not 
feverifh,  but  generally  fmall  : at  lafl  the  ftools 
come  on;  the  firft  are  often  of  a liquid  and  yel- 
lowifh  matter,  but  very  foon  they  are  mixed 
with  glairy  matter,  and  that  glairy  matter  it  co- 
loured with  blood  : the  pains  increafe,  and  the 
ftools  become  fo  frequent,  that  the  parent  has 
eight,  ten,  eleven,  twelve,  fifteen  o;  them  dur- 
ing the  fpace  of  an  hour;  then  the  fundament 
is  irritated,  the  tenefmus  (which  is  an  inclina- 
tion of  going  to  ftool,  though  there  is  no  matter 
inwardly)  joins  to  the  dyfentery,  and  occafions 
often  a falling  down  of  the  fundament  ; and  this 
is  a frefti  pain  to  the  patient,  who  difcharges 

fometimes 


[ 323  ] 


fometimes  worms,  fometimes  thickened  glairy 
matter,  which  refembles  pieces  of  the  guts,  and 
fometimes  dots  of  blood. 

A raging  delirium,  fometimes  comes  on  before 
the  minute  of  expiration.  I have  feen  a very 
unufual  fymptom  accompany  this  difeafe  in  two 
perfons,  which  was  an  impoffibility  of  fwallow- 
ing,  for  three  days  before  death. 

Many  of  the  fick  have  not  the  lead  fever  ; and 
a third  is  lefs  common  in  this  difeafe  than  in  a- 
dimple  loofenefs. 

§ 229.  The  moll  efficacious  remedy  is  a vo- 
mit. That  of  No.  34,  if  taken  on  the  fil'd  inva- 
fion  of  it,  often  removes  it  at  once  ; and  always 
fhortens  its  duration.  That  of  No.  35.  is  not 
lefs  effectual.  If  the  dools  prove  lefs  frequent 
after  the  operation  of  either  of  them,  it  is  a good 
fign  ; if  they  are  no  ways  diminiffied,  the  difeafe 
is  like  to  be  obdinate. 

The  patient  is  to  be  ordered  to  a regimen,  ab- 
ftaining  from  all  fleffi-meat  with  the  greated  at- 
tention, until  a perfect  cure.  The  ptifan  No.  3, 
is  the  bed  drink  for  him. 

The  day  after  the  vomit  he  mud  take  the  pow- 
der No.  51.  divided  into  two  dofes  ; the  next 
day  he  ffiould  take  no  other  medicine  but  his 
ptifan ; on  the  fourth  the  rhubarb  mud  be  re- 
peated : after  which  the  violence  of  the  difeafe 
commonly  abates.  His  diet  during  the  difeafe 
is  neverthelefs  to  be  continued  exaflly  for  fome 
O 6 days 


[ 324  ] 


days ; after  which  he  may  be  allowed  to  enter 
upon  that  of  perfons  in  a hate  of  recovery. 

§ 230.  The  dyfentery  fometimes  begins  with 
an  inflammatory  fever,  a feverifh,  hard,  full 
pulfe,  with  a violent  pain  in  the  head  and  loins, 
and  a (tiff  diftended  belly.  In  Rich  a cafe  the 
patient  mull  be  bled  once  ; and  daily  receive 
three  or  even  four  of  the  glyflers  No.  6,  drink- 
ing plentifully  of  the  drink  No.  3. 

When  all  dread  of  an  inflammation  is  over, 
the  patient  is  to  be  treated  in  the  manner  juft  re- 
lated; although  often  there  is  no  neceflity  for 
the  vomit  ; and  if  the  inflammatory  fymptoms 
have  run  high,  his  firll  purge  fhould  be  that  of 
No.  1 x,  and  the  Life  of  the  rhubarb  may  be  poft- 
poned,  till  about  the  conclufion  of  the  difeafe. 

* I have  cured  many  dyfenteries,  by  ordering 
the  fick  no  other  remedy,  but  a cup  of  warm 
water  ever)-  quarter  of  an  hour  ; and  it  were  bet- 
ter to  rely  on  this  Ample  remedy,  than  to  em- 
ploy thofe,  of  whofe  eflefts  we  ai'e  ignorant. 

§ 231.  It  fometimes  happens  that  the  dyfen- 
tery is  combined  with  a putrid  fever,  which 
makes  it  neceflary,  after  the  vomit,  to  give  the 
purges  No.  23  or  47,  and  feveral  dofes  of  No. 
24,  before  the  rhubarb  is  given.  No.  32  is  ex- 
cellent in  this  combined  cafe. 

When  the  dyfentery  is  blended  with  fymp- 
toms  of  malignity,  after  premifing  the  prefcrip- 
tion  No.  35,  thofe  of  No.  38  and  39  may  be 
called  in  fuccefsfully. 


§ 232.  When. 


[ 3 25  ] 


§ 232.  When  the  difeafe  has  already  been  of 
many  days  handing,  without  the  patient’s  hav- 
ing taken  any  medicines,  or  only  fuch  as  were 
injur  ious  to  him,  he  mull  be  treated  as  if  the  dif- 
temper  had  but  juft  commenced  ; unlefs  fome 
fvmptoms,  foreign  to  the  nature  of  the  dyfen- 
tery  have  fupervened  upon  it. 

§ 233.  Relapfes  fometimes  occur  in  dyfen- 
teries,  fome  few  days  after  the  patients  appear- 
ed well  ; much  the  greater  number  of  which  are 
occafioned  either  by  fome  error  in  diet,  by  cofd 
air,  or  by  being  over-heated.  They*  are  to  be 
prevented  by  avoiding  thefe  caufes  of  them  : and 
may  be  removed  by  putting  the  patient  on  his 
regimen,  and  giving  him  one  dofe  of  the  pre- 
fcription  No  5 1. 

This  difeafe  is  fometimes  combined  too  with, 
an  intermitting  fever  ; in  which  cafe  the  dyfen- 
tery  mull  be  removed  firfl,  and  the  intermit- 
tent afterwards. 

§ 234.  A prejudice,  which  hill  generally  pre- 
vails, is,  that  fruits  are  noxious  in  a dyfentery. 
Whereas  ripe  fruits,  of  whatever  fpecies,  and 
efpecially  fummer  fruits,  are  the  real  preferva- 
tives  from  it.  They  thin  and  wafh  down  the 
humours,  efpecially  the  thick  glutinous  bile; 
ripe  fruits  being  the  true  diffolvents  of  fuch;  by 
which  indeed  they  may  bring  on  a purging,  but 
fuch  a one,  as  is  a guard  againft  a dvientery. 

We  had  an  extraordinary  abundance  of  fruit 
in  17^9  and  1760,  but  fcarcely  any  dyfenteries. 

Whenever 


[ 32^  ] 

Whenever  I have  obferved  dyfenteries  to  pre- 
vail, I made  it  a rule  to  eat  lefs  flefh , and  plen- 
ty of  fruit ; I have  never  had  the  flighted  attack 
of  one;  and  feveral  phyficians  ufed  the  fame 
caution  with  the  fame  fuccefs. 

* I have  feen  eleven  patien  s in  a dyfentery  in 
one  houfe,  of  whom  nine  eat  fruit  and  recover- 
ed. The  grandmother  and  one  child,  whom  fhe 
loved  more  than  the  red,  did  not.  She  manag- 
ed the  child  after  her  own  fafhion,  with  burnt 
wine  and  fpices,  but  no  fruit.  She  conducted 
lierfelf  in  the  very  fame  manner,  and  both  died. 

In  a country  feat  near  Ber?.e,  in  the  year  17.51, 
when  thefe  fluxes  made  great  havock,  and  peo- 
ple were  feverely  warned  againd  the  life  ol 
fruits,  out  of  eleven  perfons  in  the  family  ten 
cat  plentifully  of  plums,  and  not  one  of  them 
was  feized  with  it : the  poor  coachman  alone  ri- 
gidly obferved  that  abdinence  from  fruit,  and 
took  a terrible  dyfentery. 

* This  dideniper  had  nearly  dedroyed  a Swifs 
regiment  in  garrifon  in  thefouth  of  France  ; the 
captains  purchafed  the  whole  crop  of  feveral 
acres  of  vineyard  ; where  they  carried  the  fick 
foldiers,  and  gathered  the  grapes  for  fuch  as 
could  not  bear  being  carried  ir.to  the  vineyard  ; 
thofe  who  were  well  eat  nothing  elfe  : after  this 
not  one  more  died,  nor  were  any  more  even 
attacked  with  the  dyfentery. 

A clergyman  was  feized  with  a dyfentery, 
which  was  not  in  the  lead  mitigated  by  any  me- 
dicines 


[ 327  J 


dicines  he  had  taken.  B'v  mere  chance  he  faw 
fome  red  currants:  lie  longed  for  them,  and 
eat  three  pounds  of  them  between  feven  and 
nine  o’clock  in  the  morning  : that  very  day  he 
became  better,  and  was  entirely  well  on  the 
next. 

§ 23 3.  It  is  necelfary,  that  each  fubjefl  of 
this  difeafe  fhould  have  a clofe-ltool  apart  to  him- 
felf,  as  the  npatter  difcharged  is  extremely  in- 
fectious : and  if  they  make  life  of  bed  pans,  they 
fhould  be  carried  immediately  out  of  the  cham- 
ber, the  air  of  which  fhould  be  continually  re- 
newed, fprinkling  vinegar  frequently  in  it. 

It  is  alfo  neceffarv  to  change  the  patient’s  lin- 
nen  frequently;  without  which  precautions  the 
diflemper  becomes  more  violent,  and  attacks 
others  who  live  in  the  fame  houfe. 

§ 236.  * It  has  happened,  by  fome  unaccount- 
able fatality,  that  there  is  no  difeafe,  for  which  a 
greater  number  of  remedies  are  advifed,  than 
for  the  dvfentery.  Of  thefe  many  boafled  com- 
pofiticns,  fome  are  only  indifferent,  but  others 
pernicious.  The  only  true  method  of  cure  is 
that  I have  advifed,  the  purpofe  of  which  is 
evacuating  the  offending  matter  : all  thofe  me- 
thods, which  have  a different  fcope,  are  perni- 
cious ; and  the  method  moil  generally  followed* 
which  is  that  of  flopping  the  (fool  by  aHringents* 
or  by  opiates,  is  the  word  of  all,  and  even  fo  mor- 
tal a one,  as  to  deflroy  a multitude  of  people  an- 
nually, and  throw  others  into  incurable  difeafes- 

-CHAP, 


[ 3a8  ] 


CHAP.  XXV. 

The  treatment  of  diftafes  peculiar  to  Women. 
Sect.  237. 

BESIDES  the  preceding  difeafes,  to  which 
women  are  liable  in  common  with  men, 
their  fex  alfo  expofes  them  to  others  peculiar  to 
it,  and  which  depend  upon  four  principal  fources  -r 
which  are  their  monthly  difeharges,  their  preg- 
nancy, their  labours  in  child  birth,  and  the 
confequences  of  their  labours.  It  is  my  prefent 
defign  only  to  give  fome  general  direffions  on 
thefe  four  heads. 

§238.  Nature,  who  intended  women  for  the 
increafe,  and  the  nourifhment  of  the  human 
race  at  the  bread,  has  fubjefled  them  to  a perio- 
dical difeharge  of  blood : which  circumdance 
conllitutes  the  fource,  from  whence  the  infant 
is,  afterwards  to  receive  neutrition  and  growth. 

This  difeharge  commences  generally  with  us, 
between  the  age  of  fixteen  and  eighteen.  Young 
maidens,  before  this,  are  often,  and  many  for  a 
long  time,  in  a dale  of  tveaknefs,  which  is  term- 
ed the  sreen  deknefs : and  when  the  terms  are 

o 

flow  and  backward,  it  occafions  grievous,  and 
fometimes  mortal  difeafes.  Neverthelefs  it  is  im- 
proper to  aferibe  all  the  evils,  to  which  they  are 

fubjeft 


[ 329  ] 

fubjeft  at  this  term  of  life,  to  this  caufe ; the 
fibres  of  women  which  are  intended  to  give  way, 
when  they  are  extended  by  the  growth  of  the  child, 
and  its  inclofing  membranes  fhonld  necefTarily 
be  lefs  ftifif  and  rigid,  and  more  lax  and  yield- 
ing than  the  fibres  of  men.  Hence  the  circula- 
tion of  th.eir  blood  is  more  flow  and  languid  than 
in  males  ; their  blood  is  lefs  denfe ; their  fluids 
are  more  liable  to  flaemate  and  to  form  obflruc- 
tions. 

§ 239.  The  diforders  to  which  fuch  a conflitu- 
tion  fubje&s  them  might,  in  fome  meafure,  be  pre-  \ 
vented,  by  affifling  the  feeblencfs  of  their  natural 
movements,  through  conffant  exercife  : but  this 
affiflance,  which  is  more  neceflary  for  females 
than  maies,  they  are  partly  deprived  of,  by  edu- 
cation : as  they  are  ufually  employed  in  ma- 
naging houfhold  bufmefs,  and  light  fedentary 
work.  They  flir  about  little,  whence  their  na- 
tural tendency  to  weaknefs  increafes.  Their 
blood  circulates  imperfeflly;  the  humours  tend 
to  a general  flagnation  ; and  none  of  the  vital 
funftions  are  completely  difcharged. 

From  fuch  caufes  they  fink  into  a flate  of 
weaknefs,  before  this  difcharge  can  be  expefted. 
This  flate  difpofes  them  to  be  inactive  : a little 
exercife  fatigues  them,  whence  they  take  none 
at  all.  It  might  prove  a remedy  of  their  com- 
plaint ; but  as  it  is  difagreeable  to  them,  they  re- 
ject it,  and  thus  increafe  their  diforders. 

Their  appetite  declines  with  the  other  vital 

fnn&ions 


r 330  ] 

fun&ions ; the  ufual  kinds  of  food  never  excit- 
ing it ; inftead  of  which  they  indulge  themfeJves 
with  whimfical  cravings,  and  often  of  tne  oddeft 
and  mofl  improper  fubfiances  for  neutrition. 

After  the  duration  of  this  ftate  for  a few  years, 
the  ordinary  time  of  their  monthly  evacuations 
approaches,  which  however  make  not  the  leaft 
appearance,  for  two  reafons.  The  firft  is,  that 
their  health  is  too  much  impaired  to  accomplifh 
this  new  fun&ion  at  a time  when  all  the  others 
are  fo  languid.  And  the  fecond  is,  that,  under 
fuch  circum fiances,  the  evacuations  themfelves 
are  unneceffary  ; fince  their  final  purpofe  is  to 
difcharge  (when  the  fex  are  not  pregnant)  that 
fuperfktous  blood,  which  they  were  intended  to 
produce.  And  this  fuperfluity  of  blood  does  not 
exift  in  women,  who  have  been  long  in  a low 
and  langui filing  fiate. 

§ 240.  Their  diforder  however  continues  to  in- 
creafe,  and  this  increafe  is  attributed  to  the  non- 
appearance  of  1 heir  monthly  efflux,  where  as  the 
diforder  is  not  owing  to  that  fupprefiion  : but 
this  is  the  effect  of  their  diforder. 

So  that  all  the  complaints  of  young  maidens 
are  not  owing  to  the  want  of  their  ciifloms. 
Neverthelefs  it  is  certain,  fome  are,  for  infiance, 
when  a firong  young  virgin  in  lull  health,  who 
maniieftly  abounds  with  blood,  does  not  obtain 
this  difcharge  at  the  ufual  time,  then  this  fuper- 
flttous  blood  is  the  fountain  of  many  diforders. 

§ 241.  Tbefe  difcharges  are  fupprefied,  in  the 

circumftances 


[ 331  ] 


circumftances  mentioned  § 238,  by  a continuance 
of  the  difeafe,  which  was  fil'd  an  obdacle  to  their 
appearance  ; and,  in  other  cafes,  they  have 
been  fiipprehed  by  cold,  moidure,  violent  fear, 
any  very  ftrong  padion  ; by  indigediori  : or  too 
hot  and  irritating  diet  ; by  exercife  too  long 
continued,  and  by  unufual  watching. 

§ 242.  The  great  facility  with  which  this  eva- 
cuation may  be  fuppreded,  diminiihed  or  difor* 
dered,  the  terrible  confequences  of  fuch  inter- 
ruptions and  irregularities  of  them,  are  cogent 
reafons  to  engage  the  fex  to  ufe  all  poffible  care 
in  every  refpefl,  to  preferve  the  regularity  of 
them  ; by  avoiding  during  their  approach  and 
continuance,  every  caufe  that  may  prevent  or 
kffen  them. 

B elides  the  caution  with  which  they  fihould 
avoid  the  general  caufes  jud  mentioned,  every 
perfon  ought  to  remember  what  has  moil  parti- 
cularly difagreed  with  her  during  that  term,  and 
for  ever  conflantly  to  rejefl  it. 

§ 243.  There  are  many  women  whofe  cudoms 
vifit  them  without  the  {lighted  impeachment  of 
their  health  : others  are  fenfiblv  difordered  on 
every  return  of  them  ; and  to  others  again  they 
are.  very  tormenting,  by  the  violent  colicks,  of  a 
longer  or  fhorter  duration,  which  precede  or 
accompany  them.  I have  known  feme  of  thefe 
lad  but  foine  minutes,  or  hours.  But  feme  have 
perdded  for  many  days,  attended  with  vomit- 
ing, fainting,  convulfions  from  excefljve  pain, 

with 


[ 332  ] 

with  vomiting  of  blood,  or  bleedings  from  the 
nofe,  which  have  brought  them  to  the 
very  jaws  of  death.  Some  are  fubjeft  to  thefe 
fymptoms  every  month,  from  the  firft  appear- 
ance, to  the  final  termination  of  thefe  dif- 
charges;  except  proper  remedies  and  regimen, 
andfometimes  a happy  child-birth,  remove  them. 
Others  complain  but  now  and  then,  every  fe- 
cond,  third,  or  fourth  month ; and  there  are 
fome  again,  who  having  fuffered  very  feverely 
during  the  firfi  months,  or  years,  fulfer  no  more 
afterwards.  A fourth  number,  after  having  had 
their  cuftoms  for  a long  time,  without  the  leaft 
complaint,  find  themfelves  afflitled  with  cruel 
pains,  at  every  return  of  them ; if  by  impru- 
dence, they  have  fuppreffed,  diminilhed,  or  de- 
layed them.  This  confideration  ought  to  fug- 
gell  a proper  caution  even  to  fuch  as  undergo 
thefe  difcharges  without  pain  : fince  all  may  be 
alfured,  that  though  they  fuffer  no  fenfible  dif- 
order  at  that  time,  they  are  neverthelefs  more 
delicate,  more  eafily  affefted  by  the  pafiions  of 
the  mind,  and  have  alfo  weaker  ftomachs  at 
thefe  periods. 

§ 244.  Thefe  difcharges  may  alfo  be  fome- 
times  too  profufe.  In  fuch  cafes,  recourfe 
may  be  had  to  the  directions  I (hall  give  here- 
after. 

§ 245.  Finally,  after  their  continuance  for  a 
certain  number  ofvears  (rarely  exceeding  thirty- 
five)  they  go  off  of  their  own  accord,  and  ne- 

ceffarily. 


[ 333  ] 

ceflarily,  between  the  age  of  forty-five  and  fifty: 
and  this  cri/is  is  generally  very  troublefome,  and 
often  very  dangeious. 

§ 246.  The  evils  mentioned  § 238,  may  be 
pievented,  by  avoiding  the  caufes;  and  1.  By 
obliging  young  maidens  to  ufe  confiderable  ex- 
ercife  ; efpecially  as  fooa  as  there  is  the  lead 
reafon  to  fufpeft  the  approach  of  the  green  fick- 
nefs. 

2.  By  watching  them  carefully,  that  they  eat 
nothing  unwholfome  or  improper.  The  befi: 
drink  for  them  is  water,  in  which  red  hot  iron 
has  been  extinguifhed. 

3.  They  mud  avoid  hot  fharp  medicines,  and 
fuch  as  are  intended  to  force  down  their  terms, 
which  are  frequently  attended  with  pernicious 
confequences,  and  never  do  any  good:  and  thev 
are  dill  the  more  hurtful,  as  the  patient  is  the 
younger. 

4.  If  the  malady  increafes,  it  will  be  neceflary 
to  give  them  fome  remedies  ; but  thefe  fhould 
not  be  purges,  nor  diluters,  and  deco&ions  of 
herbs,  falts,  and  a heap  of  other  ufelefs  or 
noxious  ingredients  ; but  they  fhould  take  filings 
of  iron,  which  is  the  mod  certain  remedy. 
Thefe  filings  fhould  be  of  true  fimple  iron, 
and  not  deel  ; and  care  fhould  be  taken  that  it 
be  not  rudy,  in  which  date  it  has  very  little 
efiedt. 

At  the  beginning  of  this  didemper,  and  to 
young  girls,  it  is  fufficient  to  give  twenty  grains 

daily. 


[ 334  ] 

daily,  enjoining  due  exercife  and  a fuitable  diet. 
When  it  prevails  in  a feverer  degree,  and  the 
patient  is  not  fo  young,  a quarter  of  an  ounce 
may  be  fafely  ventured  on  : certain  bitters  or 
aromatics  may  be  joined  to  the  filings,  which 
are  numbered  in  the  appendix,  54,  55,  56,  and 
conHitute  the  mod  effeffual  remedies  in  this 
diltemper,  to  be  taken  in  the  form  of  powder, 
of  vinous  infufion,  or  of  ele&uary.  When 
there  is  a juft  indication  to  bring  down  the  dif- 
charge,  the  vinous  infufion  No.  55  mud  be  gi- 
ven, and  generally  fucceeds  : but  I mud  again 
repeat  it  fas  it  fliould  carefully  be  confidered) 
that  the  floppage  of  this  difcharge  is  frequently 
the  efiefl,  not  the  caufe  of  this  difeafe;  and  that 
there  fhould  be  no  attempt  to  force  it  down, 
which,  in  fuch  a cafe,  may  fometimes  prove  more 
hurtful  than  beneficial  ; fince  it  would  naturally 
return  of  its  own  accord,  with  the  ftrength  of 
the  patient:  there  are  fome  cafes  particularly, 
in  which  it  would  be  highly  d angerous  to  ufe 
hot  and  aftive  medicines;  fuch  cafes  for  inftance, 
as  are  attended  with  fome  degree  of  fever,  a 
frequent  coughing,  a bleeding,  with  great  lean- 
nefs  and  confiderable  thirft : all  which  com- 
plaints fnould  be  removed,  before  any  hot  medi- 
cines are  given  to  force  this  evacuation,  which 
many  very  ignorantly  imagine  cures  all  other 
female  diforders ; an  error,  that  has  occafioned 
the  lofsof  many  womens  lives. 


§ 247.  The 


[ 335  ] 

§ 247«  The  6ther  fort  of  obftru&ions  defcribed 
§ 240  requires  a very  different  treatment. 
Bleeding,  which  is  hurtful  in  the  former  fort, 
has  often  removed  this.  Bathing  of  the  feet, 
the  powders  No.  20,  and  whey,  have  frequently 
fucceeded:  hut  at  other  times  it  is  necellary 
to  accommodate  the  remedies  and  the  method 
to  each  particular  cafe,  and  to  judge  of  it 
from  its  own  peculiar  circumllances  and  appear- 
ances. 

§ 248.  When  thefe  evacuations  qaturally  ceafe 
through  age,  if  they  hop  fuddenly  and  all  at  once, 
and  had  formerly  flowed  very  largely,  1.  Bleed- 
ing muff  be  direffed. 

2.  The  ufual  quantity  of  food  fhould  be  fome- 
what  diminifhed,  efpecially  of  flefh,  of  eggs,vand 
of  llrong  drink. 

g.  Exercife  fhould  he  increafed. 

4.  The  patient  fhould  frequently  take  in  a 
morning  faffing,  the  powder  No.  24,  which  is 
very  beneficial  in  fuch  cafes  ; as  it  moderately 
increafes  the  natural  excretions  by  ftool,  urine, 
and  perfpiration  ; and  thence  Jeffens  that 
quantity  of  blood,  which  would  otherwife  fuper- 
abound. 

Neverthelefs,  fhould  this  total  ceffation  be  pre- 
ceded by,  or  attended  with  any  extraordinary 
lofs  of  blood,  which  is  frequently  the  cafe, 
bleeding  is  not  neceffary;  but  the  regimen  and 
]>-uwder  juft  dire&ed  are  fo;  to  which  the  purge 
No.  23,  fhould  now  and  then  be  joined,  at  mo- 
derate 


[ 33«  3 


derate  intervals.  The  ufe  of  aftringent  medi- 
cines at  this  critical  time  might  difpofe  the 
patient  to  a cancer  of  the  ■womb. 

Many  women  die  about  this  age,  as  it  is  an 
eafy  matter  to  injure  them  then;  -a  circumftance 
that  fhould  make  them  very  cautious  in  the  me- 
dicines they  recur  to.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
alfo  frequently  happens,  that  their  confiitutions 
alter  for  the  better  after  this  ; their  fibres  grow 
ftronger;  they  find  themfelves  more  hearty  and 
hardy  ; many  former  infirmities  difappear,  and 
they  enjoy  a healthy  and  happy  old  age.  I have 
known  feveral  who  threw  away  their  fpeftacles 
at  the  age  of  fifty-two,  or  fifty-three,  which 
they  had  uf^d  five  or  fix  years  before. 

Of  •.{[orders  attending  Gravidalion , or  the  term 
of  going  with  Child. 

§ 249.  In  gravidation,  women  are  fubjedl  to 
pains  of  the  ftomach,  to  vomiting  in  a morning, 
to  head-ach  and  tooth-ach.  In  this  cafe  once 
blooding  will  for  the  mod  part  fuffice,  and  that 
no  very  plentiful  one ; efpecially  as  we  may  aflilt 
this  principal  remedy  by  others  of  a more  gentle 
kind;  fuch  as  gentle  purgatives,  moderate  exer- 
cife,  and  a thin  fpare  diet. 

^ 250.  Sometimes  after  carrying  too  heavy 
burthens  ; after  too  much  or  too  violent  work  ; 
after  receiving  exceffive  jolts,  or  having  had  a 
fall,  they  are  fubjefl:  to  \iolent  pains  of  the 

loins. 


C 337  ] 

9 

1-bins,  which  extend  down  to  their  thighs;  a'hd 
terminate  quite  at  the  bottom  of  the  belly;  and 
which  commonly  import,  that  they  are  in  dan- 
ger of  mifcarrying. 

To  prevent  this  confequence,  they  fhould,  x. 
Immediately  go  to  bed;  and  if  they  have  not  a 
mattrefs;  they  fhould  lie  upon  a bed  fluffed  w'th 
flraw,  a feather-bed  being  very  improper.  They 
fhould  keep  ihemfelves  quite  flill  in  this  fitua- 
tion  for  feveral  days. 

2.  They  fhould  diredlly  lofe  eight  or  nine 
ounces  of  blood  from  the  arm.  - 

3.  They  fhould  not  eat  flefh,  flefh-broth,  nor 
eggs  ; but  live  folely  on  foups  made  of  meally 
fubftances. 

4.  They  fhould  take  every  two  hours,  half  a 
paper  of  the  powder  No.  20,  and  fhould  drink 
nothing  but  the  ptifan  No.  2. 

Some  fanguine  rohufl  women  are  very  liable 
to  mifcarry  at  a certain  flage  of  their  pregnancy. 
This  may  be  obviated  by  their  bleeding  fome 
days  before  that  time  approaches,  and  by  their 
obferving  the  regimen  I have  advifed. 

Of  Delivery  r or  Child-birth. 

, § 251.  The  errors  which  are  incurred,  during 
aflual  labour,  are  numberlefs,  and  too  often  ir- 
remediable. #I  {hall  only  mark  one:  that  is. 
the  cuflom  of  giving  hot  irritating  things,  when- 
ever the  labour  is  very  painful,  or  flow ; fuch  as 
Vo  L.  XXV.  P callor, 


C 33*  ] 

caftor,  or  its  tin#ure,  faffron,  fage,  rue,  fa  vie, 
oil  of  amber,  wine,  Venice-treacle,  wine  burnt 
with  fpices,  coffee,  brandy,  anifeed  water,  wal- 
nut-water, fennel-water,  and  other  drams  or 
flrong  liquors.  All  thefe  things  far  from  pro- 
moting the  woman’s  delivery,  render  it  more 
difficult  by  inflaming  the  womb  (which  cannot 
then  fo  well  contra#  itfelf,)  and  the  parts 
through  which  the  hirth  is  to  pafs,  in  confe- 
quence  of  which  they  fwell,  become  more 
draitened,  and  cannot  yield  or  be  dilated. 
Sometimes  thefe  flimulating  hot  medicines  bring 
on  haemorrhages,  which  prove  mortal  in  a few 
hours. 

§ 252.  A confiderable  number,  both  of  mo- 
thers and  infants,  might  be  preferved  by  the  di- 
reHly  oppofite  method.  As  foon  as  a woman 
who  was  in  good  health,  before  the  approach  of 
her  labour,  being  rebuff  and  well  made,  finds 
her  travail  come  on,  and  that  it  is  painful  and 
•difficult ; far  from  encouraging  thofe  premature 
-efforts,  and  from  furthering  them  by  thofe  per- 
nicious medicines,  flic  fhould  be  bled  in  the 
arm,  which  will  prevent  the  fwelling  and  inflam- 
mation, affuage  the  pains,  relax  the  parts,  and 
-difpofe  every  thing  to  a favourable  iffue. 

During  affual  labour  no  other  nourifhment 
fhould  be  allowed,  except  a little  panada  even' 
three  hours,  and  as  much  toaft  and  water  as  the 
woman  chufes. 

Every  fourth  hour  a glyfler  fhould  be  given, 

confiding 


[ 339  3 

confining  of  a deco&ion  of  mallows  and  a little 
oil.  In  the  intervals  between  thefe  glyfters  fhe 
fhould  be  fet  over  a kind  of  Hove,  or  in  a 
pierced  eafy  chair,  containing  a veffel  in  which 
there  is  fotne  hot  water:  the  paffage  fhould  be 
gently  rubbed  with  a little  butter ; and  ftupes 
wrung  out  of  a fomentation  of  fimple  hot  water, 
which  is  the  moll  efficacious  of  any,  fhould  be 
applied  over  the  belly. 

By  this  method  many  labours,  which  feem 
difficult  at  firft,  terminate  happily,  and  this  fafe 
manner  of  proceeding  at  leaf!;  affords  time  to 
call  in  further  affiftance.  Befides  the  confe- 
rences of  fuch  deliveries  are  healthy  and  hap- 
py ; when  by  purfuing  the  heating  pradlice, 
even  though  the  delivery  be  effefled,  both  the 
mother  and  infant  have  been  fo  cruelly,  though 
undefignedly  tormented,  that  both  of  them  fre- 
quently periffi. 

I acknowledge  thefe  means  are  infufficient, 
when  the  child  is  unhappily  fituated  in  the 
womb ; or  when  there  is  an  embarraffing  con- 
formation in  the  mother : though  at  leaft  they 
prevent  the  cafe  from  proving  worfe,  and  leave 
time  for  calling  in  help. 

Of  the  Confcquaices  of  Labour , or  Child-birth. 

■§  253.  The  ufual  confequences  of  child-birth, 
are;  1.  An  exceffive  haemorrhage.  2.  An  in- 
flammation of  the  womb.  3.  A fudden  fup- 
P 2 preffion 


C 34°  3 


preflion  of  the  lochia,  or  ufual  difcharges  after 
delivery.  And,  4.  The  fever  and  other  acci- 
dents, refulting  from  the  milk. 

ExcefTive  bleedings  or  floodings,  fhould  be 
treated  according  to  the  manner  direfted  § 250: 
and  if  thev  are  very  exceflive,  folds  of  linen, 
which  have  been  wrung  out  of  a mixture  of 
equal  parts  of  water  and  vinegar,  fhould  be  ap- 
plied to  the  belly,  the  loins,  and  the  thighs : 
thefe  fhould  be  changed  for  frefh  moifl:  ones,  as 
they  dry;  and  fhould  be  omitted,  as  foon  as  the 
bleeding  abates. 

The  inflammation  of  the  womb  is  difcovera- 
ble  by  pains  in  all  the  lower  parts  of  the  belly; 
by  a tightnefs  of  the  whole;  by  a fenfible  in- 
creafe  of  pain  upon  touching  it ; a kind  of  red 
ftain  or  fpot,  that  mounts  to  ihe  middle  of  the 
belly,  as  high  as  the  navel  ; which  fpot,  as  the 
difeafe  increafes,  turns  black,  and  then  is  always 
a mortal  fymptom;  by  a very  extraordinarv  de- 
gree ofweaknefs;  an  amazing  change  of  counte- 
nance ; a light  delirium  ; a continual  fever,  with 
a ■weak  and  hard  pulfe  ; fometimes  inceffant  vo- 
mitings; a frequent  hiccup;  a moderate  dif- 
chaige  of  a reddifh,  ftinking,  fbarp  water; 
frequent  urgings  to  go  to  ftool  ; a .burning  heat 
of  urine  ; and  fometimes  an  intire  fuppreffion 
of  it.  .'~r.  . 

fins  dangerous  difeafe  fhould  be  treated  like 
inflammatory  ones.  After  bleeding,  frequent 
g:  iters  ox  u arm  water  muff  by  no  means  be 

omitted 


C 34 1 •] 

©milted  ; fome  fliould  alfo  be  inje&ed  into  the 
womb,  and  applied  continually  over  the  belly. 
The  patient  may  alfo  drink  continually,  eithet 
of  fimple  bailey-water,  with  a quarter  of  an 
ounce  of  nitre  in  every  three  pints  of  it,  or  of 
almond  milk  No.  4. 

§ 254.  The  total  fuppreffion  of  the  lochia , 
fhouid  be  treated  exaftly  in  the  fame  manner: 
but  if  unhappily  hot  medicines  have  been  given, 
in  order  to  force  them  down,  the  cafe  will  gene- 
rally prove  a mod  hopelefsone. 

§ 255-  ^ the  milk-fever  run  very  high,  the 
barley  ptifan  direfled  § 253,  with  a very  light 
diet,  confiding  only  of  panada,  or  made  of  fome 
other  meally  fubdances,  and  very  thin,  generally 
remove  it. 

§ 256.  Delicate  women,  who  have  not  all  the 
attendance  they  want;  and  fuch  as  are  obliged 
to  work  too  foon,  are  expofed  to  many  accidents; 
and  hence,  the  feparation  of  the  milk  in  their 
breads  being  didurbed,  there  are  knots  as  it 
were,  which  are  very  painful  and  troublefome. 
They  often  happen  on  the  thighs,  in  which  cafe 
the  ptifan  No.  58  is  to  be  drank,  and  the  poulti- 
ces No.  59  mud  be  applied.  Thefe  two  reme- 
dies gradually  diflipate  the  tumour,  if  that  can 
be  effe&ed.  But  if  matter  is  actually  formed,  a 
furgeon  mud  open^  the  abfcefs,  and  treat  it  like 
any  other. 

Should  the  milk  curdle  in  the.  bread,  it  is  of 
the  utmod  importance  immediately  to  diflolve 
• - ' P 3 that 


0 

r 342  ] 

that  thicknefs,  which  would  otherwife  degene- 
rate into  a hardnefs,  and  prove  a fcirrhus  ; and 
from  a fcirrhus  in  procefs  of  time  a cancer. 

This  may  be  prevented  by  an  application  to 
thefe  fmall  tumours,  as  foon  as  ever  they  appear. 
Tor  this  purpofe  nothing  is  more  effectual  than 
the  prefcriptions  No.  57  and  60;  but  under  fuch 
menacing  circumltances,  it  is  prudent  to  take 
the  bell  advice  as  early  as  polhble. 

From  the  moment  thefe  hard  tumours  become 
cbftinately  fo,  and  yet  without  any  pain,  we 
Ihould  abftain  from  every  application,  all  are 
injurious  ; and  greafy,  fharp,  refinous  and  fpiri- 
tuous  ones  often  change  the  fcirrhus  into  a can- 
cer. Whenever  it  becomes  manifeflly  fuch,  all 
applications  are  equally  pernicious,  except  that 
of  No.  60.  Cancers  have  long  been  thought 
incurable  ; but  within  a few  years  paff  fome  have 
been  cured  by  the  remedy  No.  57  ; which  ne- 
verthelefs  is  not  infallible,  though  it  Ihcmld  al- 
ways be  tried. 

§ 257.  The  nipples  of  women,  who  give  milk, 
are  often  fretted  or  excoriated,  which  proves 
feverely  painful  to  them.  One  of  the  bell  appli- 
cations is  the  molt  fimple  ointment,  being  a 
mixture  of  oil  and  wax  mehed  together  ; or  the 
ointment  No.  66.  Should  the  complaint  prove 
very  obftinate,  the  nurfe  ought  to  be  purged, 
which  generally  removes  it. 


CHAP. 


wr 


[ 343  ] 


CHAP.  XXVI. 

Directions  concerning  Children . 

Sect.  258. 

EARLY  all  the  children  who  die  before 


they  are  one  or  two  years  old,  die  with 
convulfions:  people  fay,  they  died  of  them, 
which  is  partly  true,  as  it  is  in  effefh  the  con- 
vullions  that  have  deftroyed  them.  But  then 
thefe  convulfions  are  the  confequences  of  other 
difeafes,  which  require  the  utmoft  attention. 
The  four  principal  caufes  are,  the  meconium , the 
excrements  contained  in  the  body  of  the  infant 
at  the  birth ; acidities,  or  fharp  and  four  hu- 
mours: the  cutting  of  the  teeth,  and  worms.  I 
fhall  treat  briefly  of  each. 


§ 259.  The  ftomach  and  guts  of  the  infant, 
at  its  entrance  into  the  world,  are  filled  with 
a black  fort  of  matter,  which  is  called  the  meco - 
niuth. 

The  evacuation  of  this  excrement  is  procured, 
by  making  them  drink  fome  water,  to  which  a 


Of  the  Meconium . 


little 


[ 344  3 


little  fugar  or  honey  is  added,  which  will  dilute 
'this'  meconium , and  promote  the  difeharge  of  it 
by  flool,  and  fometimes  by  vomiting. 

To  be  the  more  certain  of  expelling  all  this 
matter,  they  fhould  take  one  ounce  of  compound 
fyrup  + of  fuccory,  which  Ihould  be  diluted  with 
a little  water,  drinking  up  this  quantity  within 
the  fpace  of  four  or  five  hours.  This  fyrup  is 
greatly  preferable  to  all  others,  given  in  fuch 
cafes,  and  efpecially  to  oil  of  almonds. 

Should  the  great  weaknefs  of  the  child  feem 
to  call  for  fome  nourifhment,  there  would  be  no 
inconvenience  in  allowing  a little  bifeuit  well 
boiled  in  water,  which  is  pretty  commonly 
done,  ora  little  very  thin  light  panada. 

Of  Acids,  or  Jliarp  Humours. 

"fj  260.  Notwithftanding  the  bodies  of  children 
hdvebeen  emptied, yet  the  milk  very  often  turns 
four  in  their  ftomachs,  producing  vomitings, 
violent  colicks,  convulfions,  or  a loofenefs. 
I here  are  but  two  purpofes  to  be  purfued  in 
each  cafes,  to  carry  off  the  four  humours,  and  to 
prevent  the  generation  of  more.  The  firft  of 

thefe 

+ This  method  is  ufed  whenever  the  mother  docs  not  fuck  Is 
her  child.  But  when  the  does,  thefe  remedies  feem  ufelefs. 
The  mother  thould  give  her  child  the  breaft  as  foon  as  the  can. 
-The  firft  milk,  the  Jlrippings,  as  :t  is  called  in  quadrupeds, 
which  is  very  ferous  or  watry,  will  be  feiviceable  as  a purga- 
tive; it  will  forward  the  expulfion  of  the  meconium,  prove  gra- 
nt u4lly  nourifhing,  and  is  better  than  Lifcuits,  or  panada. 


r 345  ] 

thefe  intentions  is  bell  effected  by  the  fyrup  of 
fuecory,  or  of  violets.. 

The  generation  of  further  acidities  is  prevent- 
ed, by  giving  three  dofes  daily,  if  the  fymptoms 
are  violent,  and  but  two,  or  even  one  only,  if  they 
are  moderate,  of  the  powder  No.  6 1,  drinking 
after  it  balm-tea. 

It  has  been  a cultom  to  load  children  with  oil 
of  almonds,  t as  foon  as  ever  they  are  infefled 
with  gripes  : but  it  is  a pernicious  cullom,  and 
attended  with  very  dangerous  confequences. 

§ 261.  Infants  are  commonly  moll  fubjeft  to 
colicks  during  their  earlier  months ; which 
abate  as  their  ftomachs  grow  flronger.  They 
may  be  relieved  in  the  fit  by  glvfters  of  a decoc- 
tion of  camomile  flowers,  in  which  a bit  of  foap 
of  the  fize  of  a hazel-nut  is  dilfolved,  or  by  a 
piece  of  flannel  wrung  out  of  a decoftion  of  ca- 
momile flowers,  with  the  addition  of  feme  Ve- 
nice-treacle  applied  hot  over  the  ftomach  and 
on  the  belly. 

But  a certain  means  to  prevent  thefe  colicks, 
which  are  owing  to  children’s  not  digefling  their 
milk,  is  to  move  and  exercife  them  as  much  as 
pofhble ; having  a due  regard  however  to  their 
tender  time  of  life. 

§ 262.  Before  I proceed  to  the  third 
caufe  of  the  difeafes  of  children,  I mull  take 
notice  of  the  firft  cares  their  birth  requires, 
P 5 that 

+ A little  magnelia  alba  will  be  more  proper  for  children 
than  any  oils  whatever.  ~ 


[ 346  ] 

that  is  the  wafhing  of  them  the  firft  time, 
merely  to  cleanfe,  and  afterwards  to  flrengthen 
them. 

The  whole  body  of  an  infant  juft  born  is 
covered  with  a grofs  humour,  which  is  occafi- 
oned  by  the  fluids,  in  which  is  was  fufpended 
in  the  womb.  There  is  a neceflity  to  cleanfe 
it  dire&ly  from  this,  for  which  nothing  is  fo 
proper  as  a mixture  of  one  third  wine  and  two 
thirds  water ; wine  alone  would  be  dangerous. 
This  wafhing  may  be  repeated  fome  days 
fucceftively ; but  it  is  a bad  cuftom  to  continue 
to  wafh  them  warm,  the  danger  of  which  is 
augmented  by  adding  fome  butter  to  the  wine 
and  water.  If  this  grofs  humour,  that  covers 
the  child,  feems  more  thick  and  glutinous 
than  ordinary,  a deco&ion  of  camomile  flow- 
ers, with  a little  bit  of  foap,  may  be  ufed. 
The  regularitv  of  perfpiration  is  the  great 
foundation  of  health  ; to  procure  this,  the 
fkin  muft  be  flrengthened ; but  warm  wafhing 
tends  to  weaken  it.  Therefore  children  fhould 
be  wafhed,  fome  few  days  after  their  birth 
with  cold  water,  in  the  ftate  it  is  brought  from 
the  fpring. 

* For  this  purpofea  fpunge  is  employed,  with 
which  they  begin,  by  wafhing  firft  the  face, 
the  ears,  the  back  part  of  the  head  (carefully 
avoiding  the  mould  of  the  head)  the  neck,  the 
loins,  the  trunk  of  the  body,  the  thighs,  legs  and 
arms,  and  in  fhort  every  fpot.  This  method 

wdiich 


[ 347  3 

<vliich  has  obtained  for  fo  many  ages,  will  appear 
fhocking  to  feveral  mothers  ; they  would'  be 
afraid  of  killing  their  children  by  it  ; yet,  they 
cannot  give  a more  fubflantial  mark  of  their  ten- 
dernefr.  to  them,  than  by  fubduing  their  fears  and 
their  repugnance. 

"Weakly  infants  are  thofe  who  have  the  greateft 
need  of  being  wafhed  ; and  it  feems'  fcarcely' 
credible  how  greatly  this  method  conduces  to 
their  ftrength. 

They  fhould  be  wafhed  very  regularly  every 
day,  in  every  feafon,  and  every  fort  of  weather  ; 
and  in  the  fine  warm  feafon  they  fhould  be  plun- 
ged into  a large  pail  of  water,  into  a brook,  a 
river,  or  a lake. 

After  a few  days  crying,  they  grow  fo  well  ac- 
cuftomed  to  this  exercife,  that  it  becomes  one 
of  their  pleafures : fo  that  they  laugh  all  the  time 
of  their  going  through  it. 

The  firft  benefit  of  this  practice  is,  the  keeping 
up  their  perfpiration,  and  rendering  them  lefs 
obnoxious  to  the  impreffions  of  the  air  and 
weather:  And  it  is  in  confequence  of  this,  that 
they  are  preferved  from  a great  number  of  mal- 
adies, efpecially  from  knotty  tumours  ; front: 
obftruftions  ; from  difeafes  of  the  (kin,  and  from 
convulfions. 

§ 263;  But  care  Ihould  be  taken  not- to  undo 
the  benefit  of  this  wafhing  by  the  bad  cuftom  of 
keeping  them  too  hot.  There  is  not  a more 
pernicious  one  than  this,  nor  one.  that  deftroys 
P 6 store.* 


[ 343  J 


i/ieie  children.  They  fhould  be  accuffomed  to 
Ijght'  clyathing  by  day,  and  light  covering  by 
night,,  to  go  with  their  beads  very  thinly  cover- 
ed, atj/inotai  all  in  the  day  time,  after  the  age 
of  two.  years.  They  fhould  not  fleep  in  cham- 
bers that  are  too  hot,  and  fhould  live  in  the 
open  air  both  fummer  and  winter  as  much  as 
pollible.  Children  who  have  been  kept  too  hot, 
are  very  liable  to  colds ; they  are  weakly,  pale, 
languifhing  and  bloated.  They  are  fubjeft  to  hard 
knotty  fwellingSj  a confumption,  all  forts  of 
languid  diforders,  and  either  die  in  their  infan- 
cy, or  only  grow  up  intd  a miferable  valetudi- 
nary life. 

§ 264,  I muff  add  that  infancy  is  not  the  only 
ifag;e  of  life,  in  which  cold  bathing  is  advan- 
tageous. I have  advifed  it  with  remarkable  fuc- 
ccTs  fo  perfo-is  of  every  age,  even  to  that  of  fe- 
venty  ; and  there  are  two  kinds  of  difeafes,  in 
which  cold  baths  fucceed  very  greatly  • that  is, 
in  weaknefs  of  the  nerves,  and  when  perfpira- 
tton  is  difordered.  When  ye  ms  are  liable  to 
colds,  feeble  and  languifhing,  ' cold  b'aih  re- 
efM'lifhes  perfpiraiion  ; refloi  ;:  e:.gth  to  the 
nerves  ; and  by  that  means  d>  re  lbs  all  the  dif- 
Orders,  which  arife  from  thefc  ’wo  caufes,  in 
the  animal  oeconomy.  They  fhould  be  ufed 
any  time  before  dinner. 


[ 349  }. 

Of  the  cutting  of  the  Teeth. 

§ 265.  Cutting  of  the  teeth  is  often  very  tor- 
menting to  children.  If  it  proves  very  plentiful,, 
we  Ihould  during  that  period  ; 1.  Keep  their  bel- 
lies open  by  glyflers,  confiding  only  of  a decoc- 
tion of  mallows, 

2.  Their  ordinary  quantity  of  food  Ihould  be 
leffened  for  two  reafons;  fir  ft,  becaufe  the  fto- 
mach  is  then  weaker  than  ufual ; and  next,  be- 
caufe a fmall  fever  fometimes  accompanies  the 
cutting. 

3.  Their  ufual  quantity  of  drink  fhould  be  in- 
creafed  a little;  the  bell  for  them  is  an  infufion 
of  the  leaves  or  flowers  of  the  lime-tree,  to 
which  may  be  added  a little  milk 

4.  Their  gums  fhould  frequently  be  rubbed 
with  a mixture  of  equal  parts  of  honey,  and  mu- 
cilage of  quince-feeds , and  a root  oT march-mal- 
lows, or  liquorice,  may  be  given  them  to  chew. 

Of  Worms . 

\ 2 66.  The  fymptoms  which  make  it  proba- 
ble they  are  infefled  with  worms,  are  flight,  fre- 
quent, and  irregular  colicks  ; a great  quantity  of 
fpittle  running  off  while  they  are  fatting  ; a difa- 
greeable  finell  of  their  breath,  efpecially  in  the 
morning ; a frequent  itchinefs  of  their  noles, 
which  make  them  fcratch  or  ru'o  them,  often  ; a 
very  irregular  appetite,  pains  at  the  ftomach  and 

vomitings  : 


r 350  ] 

vomitings : fometimes  a coftive  belly  ; but  more 
frequently  loofe  flools  of  indigefted  matter  ; the 
belly  larger  than  ordinary,  the  reft  of  the  body 
meagre  ; a third  which  no  drink  allays ; and 
often  great  weaknefs,  with  fome  degrefe  of  me- 
lancholy. Their  urine  is  often  whitifh,  fome  as 
white  as  milk.  Sometimes  they  are  afflicted 
with  palpitations,  fwoonings,  convulfions,  long 
and  profound  drowfinefs  ; cold  fweats,  which 
come  on  fuddenly  ; fevers  which  have  the  ap- 
pearance of  malignity ; obfcurities  and  evert- 
lofs  of  fight  and  of  fpeech  ; palfies  either  of  their 
hands,  their  arms,  or  their  legs,  and  numbnefs. 
They  have  often  the  hiccup,  a finall  and  irregu- 
lar pulfe,  ravings,  and,  what  is  one  of  the  lead 
doubtful  fymptoms,  frequently  a finall  dry 
cough. 

§ 267.  There  are  a very  great  multitude  of 
medicines  againft  worms.  The  worm  feed  is  a 
very  good  one.  The  prefeription  No.  62  is  alfo 
a very  fuccefsful  one  ; and  the  powder  No.  14 
is  one  of  the  heft.  Flower  of  brimftone,  the 
juice  of  ere  flies,  acids,  aud  honev-water  have 
often  been  ferviceable  ; but  the  firft  three  I have 
mentioned,  fucceeded  by  a purge,  are  the  beft. 
No.  63  is  a purging  medicine,  that  the  moft  dif- 
ficult children  may  eafily  take. 

A difpofition  to  breed  worms  always  ’{hews 
the  digeftions  are  weak  and  imperfefd;  for 
which  reafon  children  liable  to  worms  fhould 
not  have  food  difficult  to  digeft.  A long  con- 
tinued; 


[ 35*  ] 

firmed  ufe  of  filings  of  iron  is  tne  remedy,  that 
moll  effectually  deftroys  this  difpofuion. 

Of  Convulfons. 

§ 268.  I have  already  faid,  that  the  convuf- 
fions  of  children  are  almoft  confiantly  the  effeft 
of  foirte  other  difeafe,  and  efpecially  of  fame  of 
the  Four  I have  mentioned.  Others  fometimes 
occaFon  them. 

The  fil'd  of  them  is  the  corrupted  humours, 
that  often  abound  in  their  fiomachs  and  intef- 
tines  ; the  confequence  of  too  great  a load  of 
aliments,  or  offuch  as  the  fiomachs  of  children 
are  incapable  of  digefting. 

It  lllay  be  known  that  the  convulfions  of  a 
child  are  owing  to  this  caufe,  by  a loathing  fio- 
mach  ; by  a foul  tongue  ; a great  belly;  by  its 
bad  complexion,  and  its  dillurbed  unrefrefhing 
fleep. 

A diminution  of  the  quantity  of  its  food  : and 
the  purge  No.  63,  generally  remove  fuch  con- 
vulfions. 

§ 269.  The  fecond  caufe  is  the  bad  quality  of 
their  milk.  Whether  it  be  that  the  nurfe  has  fal- 
len into  a violent  paffion,  Fame  confiderable  dif- 
gufl,  or  a great  fright : whether  fhe  has  eat 
unwholefome  food,  drank  too  much  wine,  or 
ftrong  drink  : whether  fhe  is  feized  with  a de- 
fcent’of  her  monthly  difcharges,  and  that  has 
greatly  difordered  her  health  ; or,  whether  fbe 


f 35z  1 


be  fick  ; in  all  thefe  cafes  the  milk  is  vitiated, 
and  expofes  the  infant  to  violate  fympioms. 

The  remedies  for  convulfions,  from  this  caufe, 
confifl  ; 1.  In  letting  the  child  abffain  from  this 
corrupted  milk,  until  the  nurfe  Avail  have  reco- 
vered her  (late  of  health  and  tranquility. 

2.  In  making  the  child  drink  plentifully  of  a 
light  infufion  of  the  lime-tree-flowers  :+  in  giving 
no  other  nourifhment  for  a day  or  two,  except 
panada,  and  other  light  Ipoon-meat,  without 
milk. 

3.  In  purging  the  child  with  an  ounce  of 
manna. 

A third  caufe  which  produces  convulfions,  is 
the  fmall-pox  and  the  mealies;  fuch  convulfions 
require  no  other  treatment,  but  that  proper  for 
the  diforder. 

§ 270.  It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  faid, 
that  convulfions  are  commonly  a fymptom  at- 
tending fome  other  diflemper,  rather  than  an 
original  diflemper  ; that  they  depend  on  many 
.different  caufes ; that,  hence  there  can  be  no 
general  remedy  for  them  ; and  that  the  only 
means  which  are  fuitable  in  each  cafe,  are  thofe, 
which  are  proper  to  oppofe  the  particular  caufe 
producing  them. 

The 

■)  Lime-tree  flowers  have  an  agreeable  flavour,  which  is  com- 
municated to  water  by  infufion,  and  rifes  with  it  in  diftillation. 
Thefe  flowers  mav  be  gathered  in  mod  places  in  Br'tain  in  the 
month  o July.  They  ate  confidered  by  Hoffman  and  fcveral 
other  writers,  as  a fpecific  in  all  kinds  offpafms  and  pains,  and 
even  fometimes  in  the  epilepfy, 


[ 353  J 

The  greater  part  of  the  pretended  fpecificS, 
which  are  employed  in  all  forts  of  convulfions, 
are  often  ufelefs,  and  often  prejudicial.  Ofthis 
laft  fort  are, 

1.  All  fharp  and  hot  medicines,  fpirituous  li- 
quors, oil  of  amber  : other  hot  oils  and  elTence, 
volatile  falts,  and  fuch  other  medicines,  as  by 
the  violence  of  their  aflion  are  likelier  to  pro- 
duce convulfions,  than  to  allay  them. 

2.  Afhingent  medicines,  which  are  highlyper- 
nicious,  whenever  the  convulfions  are  caufed  by 
any  fharp  humour  that  ought  to  be  difcharged 
by  ftool ; or  when  fuch  convulfions  are  an 
effort  of  nature  to  affeft  a ciifis : befides  that 
there  is  always  fome  danger  in  giving  them  to 
children  without  mature  confideration,  as  they 
often  difpofe  them  to  obftrufldons. 

3.  Opiates,  fuch  as  Venice-treacle,  mithridate, 
fyrup  of  poppies,  are  alfo  attended  with  the  mod 
embarraffing  events,  in  regard  to  convulfions ; 
and  are.  improper,  for  nine  tenths  of  thofe  they 
are  advifed  to.  It  is  true,  they  often  produce 
an  apparent  eafe  for  fome  minutes,  or  hours  ; 
but  the  diforder  returns  with  greater  violence 
for  this  fufpenfion,  becaufe  they  have  augment- 
ed all  the  caufes  producing  it.  Indeed  there  are 
fome  cafes,  in  which  they  are  abfolutely  necef- 
fary,  As, 

r.  When  the  convulfions  continue,  after  the 
original  caufe  of  them  is  removed. 

2.  When  they  are  fo  violent,  as  to  threaten 

life  ; 


[ 354  ] 

lift  ; and  .when  they  prove  an  obflacle  to  the 
taking  proper  remedies.  And, 

3.  When  the  caufe  producing  them  isjof  fuch 
a nature,  as  is  apt  to  yield  to  the  force  of  ano- 
dynes ; as  when,  for  inftance,  they  have  been 
the  immediate  confequence  of  a fright. 

Some  children  are  very  obnoxious  to  convul- 
frons.  In  general,  cold  bathing,  and  the  pow- 
der No.  14,  are  fervjceable  in  fuch  circum- 
ftances. 

General  Directions,  with  refpecl  to  Children . 

§ 271.  I (hall  conclude  this  chapter  by  fuch 
advice,  as  may  contribute  to  give  children  a 
more  vigorous  conftitution,  and  to  prefetrve 
them  from  many  diforders. 

Firrt  then,  we  fhould  be  careful  not  to  cram 
them,  and  to  regulate  both  the  quantity  and  the 
fet  time  of  their  rneals,  which  is  a very  pra£lica- 
-ble.  thing,  even  in  the  very  earlied  days  of  theiF 
life  : \vhen  the  woman  who  nurfes  them,  will  be 
careful  to  do  it  regularly.  Perhaps  indeed  this 
is  the  yery  age,  when  fuch  a regulation  may  be 
the  moll  eafily  effected. 

* Sicknefs  is  the  only  circumflances,  that  Can 
warrant  any  alteration  in  the  order  and  intervals 
of  their  meals:  and  then  this  change  fhould  con- 
fill  in  a diminution  of  their  uftial  quantity,  not- 
withflanding  a general  and  fatal  conduft  feems 
to  eflablilh  the  reverfe;  and  this  pernicious 

faflrion 


[ 355  1 

fafhion  authorizes  the  nurfes'  to  cram  thefe  poof 
little  creatures  the  more,  in  proportion  as  they 
have  real  need  of  lefs  feeding.  They  conclude 
of  courfe,  that  all  their  cries  are  the  effefts  of 
hunger,  and  the  moment  an  infant  begins,  then 
they  immediately  flop  his  mouth  with  food  ; 
without  once  fuTpefting,  that  thefe  wailings  may 
be  occafioned  by  the  uneafinefs  of  an  over- 
loaded ifomach  ; or  by  pains  whqfe  caufe  is 
neither  removed  nor  mitigated,  by  making  the 
children  eat ; though  the  mere  aftion  of  eating 
may  render  them  infenfible  to  flight  pains,  for 
a few  minutes. 

Thofe  who  overload  them  with  viffuals,  in 
hopes  of  flrengthening  them,  are  extremely  de- 
ceived j there  being  no  one  prejudice  equally 
fatal  to  fuch  a number  of  them.  Whatever  un« 
neceflary  aliment  a child  receives,  weakens,  in- 
ftead  of  hrengthens  him.  The  flomach,  when 
over-diftended,  fuffers  in  its  force,  and  becomes 
lefs  able  to  digefl  throughly.  The  excefs  of  food 
impairs  the  concofdion  of  the  quantity  that  Was 
really  neceffary  ; which,  being  badly  digefted, 
is  fo  far  from  yielding  any  nourifhment  to  the 
infant,  that  it  weakens  it,  proves  a fource  of 
difeafes,  and  concurs  to  produce  obflru&ions, 
rickets,  the  evil,  flow  fevers,  a confumption, 
and  death. 

Another  unhappy  cuflom  prevails,  with  re- 
gard  to  the  'diet  of  children,  when  they  begin 
to  receive  any  other  food  befides  their  nurfe  s 

milk, 


[ 3 5&  J 


rnilk,  and  that  is,  to  give  them  fuch  as  exceeds 
the  digeftive  power  of  their  fiomachs  ; and  to 
indulge  them  in  a mixture  of  fuch  things  in  their 
meals,  as  are  hurtful  in  themfelves,  and  more 
particularly  fo,  with  regard  to  their  feeble  and 
delicate  organ  s. 

To  juflify  this  pernicious  indulgence,  they  af- 
firm it  is  necefiary  to  accuffom  their  fiomachs 
to  every  kind  of  food  : but  this  notion  is  high- 
ly abfurd,  fince  their  fiomachs  fhould  fir fh  be 
flrengthened,  in  order  to  make  them  capable  of 
digefling  every  fort  of  food;  and  crouding  indi* 
geltible,  or  very  difficult  digeflible  materials  in- 
to it,  is  not  the  way  to  flrengthen  if.  To  make 
a foal  fufficiently  flrong  for  future  labour,  he  is 
exempted  from  any,  till  he  is  four  years  old  ; 
which  enables  him  to  fubtnit  to  confiderable 
work,  without  being  the  worfc  for  it.  But  if, 
to  inure  him  to  fatigue,  he  fhould  be  accnflom- 
ed,  immediately  from  his  birth  to  fubmit  to  bur- 
dens above  his  flrength,  he  could  never  prove 
any  thing  but  an  utter  jade.  The  application  of 
this  to  the  flomach  of  a child  is  obvious. 

* I fhall  add  another  important  remark,  the 
too  early  work  to  which  fome  children  are 
forced,  becomes  of  real  piejudice  to  the  pub- 
lic. Hence  families  themfelves  are  lefs  nu- 
merous, and  the  more  children  are  removed 
from  their  parents,  while  they  are  very  young, 
thofe  who  are  left  are  the  more  obliged  to  work, 
and  very  often  even  at  hard  labour.  Hence  they 


sc  ear 


[ 357  ] 


wear  out  in  a manner,  before  they  attain  th.e  or- 
dinary term  of  manhood  ; they  never  arrive  at 
their  utmoft  ftrength,  or  ftature ; and  it  is  too 
common  to  fee  a countenance  with  the  look  of 
twenty  years,  joined  to  a ilature  of  twelve  or 
thirteen. 

Secondly,  They  mull  be  frequently  bathed  in 
cold  water. 

Thirdly,  They  fhould  be  moved  about,  and 
exercifed  as  much  3S  they  can  bear,  after  they 
are  fome  weeks  old.  That  fort  of  motion  they 
receive  in  go-carts,  or  other  vehicles,  is  more 
beneficial  to  them,  than  what  they  have  from 
their  nurfes  arms,  becaufe  they  are  in  a better 
attitude  in  the  former ; and  it  heats  them  Iefs  in. 
fummer,  which  is  a circumltance  of  no  fmall 
importance  to  them  ; confiderable  heat  and 
fweat  difpofing  them  to  be  ricketty. 

Fourthly,  They  fhould  be  accullomed  to 
breathe  in  the  free  open  air  as  much  as  polfible. 


CHAP.  XXVII. 

Directions  with  refpcCi  to  drowned  Perjons. 
Sect.  272. 

WHENEVER  a perfon  who  has  been 
drowned,  has  remained  a quarter  of  an 
hour  under  water,  there  can  be  no  confiderable 

hopes 


r 358  ] 

hopes  of  his  recovery  : the  fpace  of  two  or  three 
minutes  in  fuch  a fituation  being  often  fufficient 
to  kill  a man.  Neverthelefs,  as  feveral  circum- 
fiance,  may  happen  to  have  continued  life,  be- 
yond the  ordinary  term,  we  Pnould  not  give 
them  up  too  foon : fince  it  has  often  been 
known,  that  after  the  expiration  of  two,  and 
fometimes  even  of  three  hours,  fttch  bodies 
have  recovered. 

# Water  has  fometimes  been  found  in  the  flo- 
much  of  drowned  perfons  ; at  other  times  none 
at  all.  And,  the  greateff  quantity  which  has 
ever  been  found  in  it  has  not  exceeded  that, 
which  may  be  drank  without  any  inconveni- 
ence; whence  we  may  conclude,  the  mere 
quantity  was  not  mortal  ; neither  is  it  eafy  to 
conceive  how  drowned  perfons  can  1 wallow  wa- 
ter. What  really  kills  them  is  mere  fuffocation, 
or  the  interception  of  air,  of  the  affion  of  breath- 
ing ; and  the  water  which  defeends  into  the 
lungs,  and  which  is  determined  there,  by  the 
efforts  they  make,  to  draw  breath,  after  they 
are  under  water : (for  there  does  not  any  wa- 
ter defeend,  either  into  the  ftomach  or  the  lungs 
of  bodies  plunged  into  water,  after  they  are 
dead  :)  this  water  intimately  blending  itfelf  with 
the  ait  in  the  lungs,  forms  a kind  of  froth,  which 
entirely  deffrovs  the  funflion  of  the  lungs  ; 
whence  the  miferable  fufferer  is  not  only  fuffo- 
cated,  but  the  return  of  the  blood  from  the  head 
being  intercepted,  the. blood  veffels  of  the  brain 


arc 


L 359  ] 


are  overcharged,  and  an  apoplexy  is  combined 
with  the  fuffocation. 

§ 273.  The  intention  that  fhould  be  purfued, 
is  that  of  unloading  the  lungs  and  the  brain,  and 
of  reviving  the  extinguilhed  circulation.  For 
which  purpofe  we  fhould ; 1.  Immediately  flrip 
the  fufferer ; rub  him  ftrongly  with  dry  coarfe 
linen;  put  him  as  foon  as  poffible  into  a well 
heated  bed,  and  continue  to  rub  him  a confi- 
derable  time  together. 

2.  A flrong  and  healthy  perfon  fhould  force 
his  own  warm  breath  into  the  patient’s  lungs ; 
and  the  fmoke  of  tobacco,  if  fome  was  at  hand, 
by  means  of  a pipe,  introduced  into  the  mouth. 
This  being  forcibly  blown  in,  by  flopping  the 
fufferer’s  noflrils  clofe  at  the  fame  time,  pene- 
trates into  the  lungs,  and  there  ratifies  that  air, 
which,  blended  with  the  water,  compofed  the 
froth.  Hence  that  air  becomes  difengaged  from 
the  water,  recovers  its  fpring,  dilates  the  lungs; 
and  if  there  remains  within,  any  principle  of  life, 
the  circulation  is  renewed. 

3,  If  a furgeon  is  at  hand,  he  muft  open  the 
jugular  vein,  and  let  out  ten  or  twelve  ounces  of 
blood.  Such  a bleeding  renews  the  circulation, 
and  removes  the  obftrufftion  of  the  head  and 
lungs:  and,  it  is  fometimes  the  only  veffel, 
whence  blood  will  ilfue  under  fuchcircumflances. 
The  veins  of  the.  feet  then  afford  none ; and 

thofc 


. [ 3*o  ] 

thofe  of  the  arm  feldom  ; but  the  jugular  almoft 
conftantly. 

4,  The  fume  of  tobacco  fhould  be  thrown  up, 
as  fpeedily  and  plentifully  as  poflible,  into  the 
inteflines  by  the  fundament.  Two  pipes  mav 
be  well  lighted  and  applied;  the  extremity 
of  one  is  to  b'e  introduced  into  the  fundament; 
and  the  other  may  be  blown  through  into  the 
lungs. 

Any  other  vapour  may  alfo  be  conveyed  up, 
by  introducing  a canula,  or  any  other  pipe, 
with  a bladder  firmly  fixed  to  it.  This  bladder 
is  fattened  at  its  other  end  to  a large  tin  funnel, 
under  which  tobacco  is  to  be  lighted.  This 
contrivance  has  fucceeded  with  me  upon  other 
occafions,  in  which  neceffity  compelled  me  to 
apply  it. 

The  ftrongett  volatiles  fhould  be  applied  to 
the  patient's  noflrils.  The  powder  of  fome 
flrono-  dry  herb  fhould  be  blown  up  his  nofe, 
fuch  as  marjoram,  or  very  well  dried  tobacco. 
But  thefe  means  are  moft  properly  employed 
after  bleeding. 

6.  As  long  as  the  patient  fhews  nofigns  of  life, 
he  will  be  unable  to  fwallow.  But  as  foon  as 
he  difcovers  any  motion,  he  fhould  take  within 
one  hour,  a ttrong  inlufion  o { carduus  lenediElus , 
or  of  camomile  flowers  fweetened  with  honey  : 
and  fuppofing  nothing  elfe  to  be  had,  fome 
warm  water,  ‘wit  h the  addition  of  a little  fait. 

y:  Notwithftanding  the  fick  difcover  tokens 

of 


[ ] 

of  life,  we  fhould  not  ceafe  to  continue  our 
affiflance ; fince  they  fometimes  expire,  after 
thefe  firft  appearances  of  recovering. 

Taftly,  Though  they  fhould  be  manifeftly  re- 
animated; there  fometimes  remains  an  oppref- 
fion,  a coughinsc  and  feverifhnefs : and  then 
it  becomes  neceffary  fometimes  to  bleed  them 
in  the  arms;  and  to  give  them  barley-water 
plentifully. 

§ 274.  Having  thus  pointed  out  fucb  means  as 
are  effeftual,  I fh all  briefly  mention  fome  others, 
which  it  is  the  cuftom  to  ufe. 

x.  Thefe  unhappy  people  are  fometimes 
•wrapped  up  in  a bleep's,  or  calf’s,,  cr  dog’s  fkin, 
immediately  bead  from  the  animal : but  their 
operations  are  more  flow,  and  lefs  efficacious, 
than  the  heat  of  a well-warmed  bed. 

* 2.  The  method  of  rolling  them  in  an  empty 
hogffiead  is  dangerous,  and  mifpends  a deal  of 
important  time. 

* 3.  That  alfo  of  hanging  them  up  by  the  feet 
ought  to-  be  wholly  difcontinued.  The  froth 
which  is  one  of  the  caufes  of  their  death,  is  too 
thick  and  tough  to  difcharge  itfelf  by  its  own 
weight.  This  muff  alfo  be  hurtful,  by  its  tend- 
ing to  increafe  the  overfulnefs  of  the  head  and 
lungs. 

At  the  very  time  of  writing  this,  two  young 
ducks,  who  were  drowned  have  been  revived 
Vo l.  XXV.  Q by 


[ 362  1 


bv  a dry -bath  of  hot  alhes.  + The  heat  of  a 
dung-heap  may  alfo  be  beneficial  ; and  I have 
been  informed,  by  a fenfible  fp  eclat  or  of  it, 
that  it  e!fe tlu ally  contributed  to  reflore  life 
io  a man,  who  had  remained  fix  hours  under 
water. 


Oj  Subjlances  Jlopt  between  the  Mouth  and  the 
Stomach. 


HE  food  we  take  in  defeen  Is  from  the 


mouth  through  a very  llrait  paifage,  the 
gullet,  which  joins  to  the  ftomacb. 

It  happens  fo  me  times  that  bodies  are  fiopt  in 
this  channel,  without  being  able  either  todefeend 
or  to  return  up  again. 

The  danger  of  fucli  cafes  does  not  depend  fo 
much  on  the  nature  of  the  obllructing  fubftance, 
as  on  its  fize,  and  of  the  manner  in  which  it 
forms  the  obfiruflion  ; and  frequently  the  Very 
food  may  occafion  death  ; while  lubftances  lefs 


+ B)-  much  the  moft  cfifcftual  agp’icaiion  is  common  fait 
heated  to  a coufiderabte  degree! 


CHAP.  XXVIII. 


Sect.  styj. 


adapted 


[ 363  3 

adapted  to  be  {wallowed  are  not  attended  with 
any  violent  confeqnences. 

§ 276.  Whenever  any  fubftance  is  thus  de- 
tained in  the  gullet,  there  are  two  ways  of  re- 
moving it;  that  is,  either  by  extrafling  it,  or 
pnfhing  it  down.  The  fafeft  is  to  draw  ir  out, 
but  this  is  not  always  the  eafieft  : and  as  the  ef- 
forts made  for  this  purpofe  greatly  fatigue  the 
patient,  if  the  occahon  is  urging,  it  may  be 
eligible  to  tbruft  it  down  ; if  there  is  no  danger 
from  the  oblfrucling  bodies  reception  into  the 
flomach. 

The  fubflances  which  may  be  pufhed  down 
without  danger,  are  all  common  nourifhing 
ones. 

The  fubflances  we  fhould  endeavour  to  draw 
our,  though  it  be  more  painful,  are  all  thofe 
whofe  confeqnences  might  be  dangerous,  if 
fwallowed.  Such  are  all  totally  indigeftible 
bodies,,  as  cork,  linen-rags,  wood,  flones,  me- 
tals: and  more  efpecially  if  any  further  danger 
may  be  fuperadded  to  that  of  its  indigeftibilitv, 
from  the  fh'ape  of  the  fubftance  fwallowed- 
Wherefore  see  fhould  chiefly  endeavour  to 
extraft  pins,  needles,  fifh-bones,  pointed  frag- 
ments of  bones,  bits  of  glafs,  feiffars,  rings,  or 
buckles. 

When  fuph  fubflances  have  not  palled  in  to© 
deep,  we  fhould  endeavour  to  extrafl  them  with 
our  fingers.  If  they  are  lower  we  fhould  make 
ufe  of  nippers  or  a fmali  Jorceps  ; in  cafe  of 
Q 2 neceffity, 


[ 364  ] 

neceffity,  they  might  be  made  very  readily  out 
of  two  bits  of  wood.  But  this  attempt  to  extra£l 
rarely  fucceeds,  if  the  fubflance  has  defcended 
far. 

§ 277.  If  the  fingers  and  the  nippers  fail, 
crotchets,  a kind  of  hooks,  mull  be  employed. 

Thefe  may  be  made  at  once  with  a pretty 
ftrong  iron  wire,  crooked  at  the  end.  It  mull 
be  introduced  in  the  flat  way,  and  for  the  better 
conducting  of  it,  there  fliould  be  another  curve 
or  hook  at  the  end  it  is  held  by,  to  ferve  as  a 
kind  of  handle  to  it,  which  has  this  further  ufe, 
that  it  may  be  fecured  by  a firing  tied  to  it ; a 
circumflance  not  to  be  omitted  in  any  inflrument 
employed  to  avoid  fuch  ill  accidents  as  have 
fometimes  enfued,  from  thefe  infiruraents  flip- 
ping out  of  the  operator’s  hold. 

This  crotchet  is  alfo  very  convenient,  when- 
ever a fubflance  fomewhat  flexible,  as  a pin  or  a 
fifli-bone,  flicks,  as  it  were,  a crofs  the  gullet. 

§ 278.  Another  material  employed  on  thefe 
occafions  is  the  fponge.  Its  propertv  of  fwelhng 
confiderably,  on  being  wet,  is  the  foundation 
of  its  ufefulnefs  here. 

If  any  fubflance  is  flopt  in  the  gullet,  but 
without  filling  up  the  whole  pafTbge,  a bit  of 
fponge  is  introduced,  into  that  part  that  is  un- 
Ilopped,  and  beyond  the  fubflance.  The  fponge 
foon  grows  larger  in  this  moift  fiiuation,  and  in- 
deed the  enlargement  of  it  may  be  forwarded,  by 
making  the  patient  fwallow  a few  drops  of  wa- 


ter; 


[ 3 65-  ] 

ter ; and  then  drawing  back  the  fponge  by  the 
handle  it  is  fattened  to,  as  it  is  now  too  lante  to 
return  through  the  ttnall  cavity,  by  which  it  was 
conveyed  in,  it  draws  out  the  obttru&ing  body 
with  it. 

Sponge  is  alfo  applied  in  another  manner. 
When  there  is  no  room  to  convey  it  into  the  gul- 
let, becaufe  the  obftrufting  fubftance  ingrofTes  its 
whole  cavity  ; and  fuppofing  it  not  hooked  into 
the  part,  but  folely  detained  by  the  ttraitnefs  of 
the  palfage,  a pretty  large  bit  of  fponge  is  to  be 
introduced  clofe  to  the  obftrudting  fubttance  : 
thus  applied,  the  fponge  fwells,  and  thence  dilates 
that  part  of  the  paffage  that  is  above  this  fub- 
ftance.  The  fponge  is  then  withdrawn  a little,  and 
but  a very  little,  and  this  fubttance  being  lefs  pref- 
fed  upon  above  than  below,  it  fometimes  happens, 
that  the  contraction  of  the  lower  part  of  the  paf. 
fage,  caufc-s  that  fubttance  to  afcend ; and  as 
foon  as  this  firft  loofening  of  it  has  happened, 
the  total  difengagement  of  it  eafily  follows. 

§ 279.  When  all  thefe  methods  prove  una- 
vailable, there  remains  one  more,  which  is  to 
make  the  patient  vomit;  but  this  canfcarcely  be 
of  fervice,  but  when  fuch  obftrufting  bodies  are 
fimply  engaged  in,  and  not  ttuck  into  the  Tides 
of  the  oefophagus : fince  under  this  latter  cir- 
cumftance  vomiting  might  occafion  further  mif- 
chief. 

If  the  patient  can  fwallow,  a vomiting  may  be 
excited  with  the  prefcription.No.  8,  or  with  No. 

Q 3 31 


£ 366  ] 


3-{  or  35.  By  this  operation  a bone  was  thrown 
out,  which  had  flopped  in  the  paffage  four  and 
twenty  hours. 

When  the  patient  cannot  fwallow,  we  may  ex- 
cite him  to  vomit  by  twirling  about  the-  feathery 
end  of  a quill  in  the  bottom  of  tire  throat.  But, 
if  the  obflrufting  body  ftrongly  compreffes  the 
tshole  circumference  of  the  gullet,  then  no 
other  refource  is  left,  but  giving  a glyflerof  to- 
bacco. A certain  perfon  fwallowed  a lame 

~ O 

morfel  of  calf's  lights,  which  (lopped  in  the 
middle  of  the  gullet,  and  exaftly  fided  up  the 
pa.Tage.  A furgeon  unfuccefsfully  attempted 
various  methods  to  extraft  it ; but  another  fee- 
ing the  patient’s  vifage  becoming  black  and 
fwelled;  and  his  eyes  ready  to  flart,  as  it  were. 
c.;ut  of  his  head  ; caufed  a gh  her  of  an  ounce  of 
tobacco  boiled  to  be  thrown  up ; the  confe- 
cuence  of  which  was  a violent  vomiting,  which 
threw  up  the  fubftance  that  was  fo  near  killing 
him. 

§p.8o.  When  it  is  more  convenient  to  pufh 
the  ob If rufting  body  downwards,  it  has  been 
ufual  to  make  ufe  of  leeks,  or  of  wax  candle 
oiled,  and  but  a very  little  heated,  fo  as  to  make 
it  flexible;  or  of  a piece  of  whalebone  ; or  of 
iron  wire ; one  extremity  of  which  may  be 
thickened  and  blunted  in  a minute  with  a little 
melted  lead.  Small  flicks  of  fome  flexible  wood 
may  be  as  convenient  for  the  fame  ufe,  fuch  as 
the  birch- tree,  the  hazel,  the  afh,  the  willow. 

All 


[ o67  J 

All  there  fub fiances  fhould  be  very  finooth  ; for 
which  reafon  they  are  fometimes  covered  with  a 
thin  bit  of  fheep's  gut. 

§ £01.  Should  it  be  pofhble  to  extrafl  the  bo- 
dies mentioned  § 276,  we  niufl  prefer  the  leaft  of 
two  evils,  and  rather  run  the  hazard  of  pufhing 
ihem  down,  than  fuffer  the  patient  to  perifhin  a 
few  moments. 

One  of  thefe  four  even's  is  always  the  cafe, 
after  fwallowing  fuch  things.  They  either,  1. 
Go  off  by  ftool ; or,  2.  1 hey  are  not  difcharged, 
and  kill  the  patient.  Or  elfe,  3.  They  are  dif- 
charged by  urine  ; or,  4.  Are  vifibly  extruded  to 
the  Ikin. 

§ 282.  I fhalladd  fome  general  dire£lions. 

1.  It  is  often  ufual  to  take  a confiderable  quan- 
tity of  blood  from  the  arm;  efpecially  if  the  pa- 
tient’s breathing  is  extremely  oppreffed ; or 
when  we  cannot  fpeedily  fucceed  in  our  efforts 
to  remove  the  obflrufling  fubflance ; as  the 
bleeding  is  adapted  to  prevent  the  inflammation, 
which  the  frequent  irritations  from  fuch  fub- 
flances  occafion  ; and  as  by  its  difpofmg  the. 
whole  body  into  a date  of  relaxation,  it  might 
poffihly  procure  an  immediate  difcharge  of  the 
offending  fubflance. 

2.  Whenever  it  is  manifeft  that  all  endea- 
vours, either  to  extraft,  or  to  pufh  down  the 
fubflance,  are  ineffeftual,  they  fhould  be  difcon- 
tinued ; becaufe  the  inflammation  occafioned 

Q 4 


I 3^8  ] 

by  perfiflirig  in  them,  would  be  as  dangerous  as 
the  obllruflion  itfelf. 

g.  While  the  means  already  advifed  are  mak- 
ing life  of,  the  patient  fhould  often  fwallow, 
or  if  he  cannot,  he  (hould  frequently  receive 
by  injefdion  through  a crooked  tube,  that  may 
reach  lower  down  than  the  glottis,  warm  water, 
either  alone  or  mixed  with  milk,  or  a de- 
eoclion  ol  barley,  of  mallows,  or  of  bran.  A 
two-fold  advantage  may  arife  from  this ; firlt, 
thefe  foftening  liquors  fmooth  and  footh  the 
irritated  parts;  fecond,  an  injection,  ftrongly 
thrown  in,  has  often  been  more  fuccefsful  in 
loofening  the  obflrufting  body,  than  all  attempts 
with  inflxuments. 

4.  When  after  all  we  are  obliged  to  leave 
this  in  the  part,  the  patient  mull  be  treated 
as  if  he  had  an  inflammatory  difeafe;  he  mull 
be  bled,  ordered  to  a regimen,  and  have  his 
whole  neck  furrounded  with  emollient  poul- 
tices. The  like  treatment  mrfl  be  ufed,  though 
the  obllrufiling  fubflance  be  removed  ; if  there 
is  room  .to  fuppofe  any  inflammation  left  in  the 
paffage. 

5.  A proper  degree  of  agitation  has  fome- 
times  loofened  the  inhering  body,  more  ef- 
fectually than  inflruments.  It  has  been  expe- 
rienced, that  a blow  with  the  fill  on  the  middle 
of  the  back,  has  often  difengaged  fitch  ob- 
flru&ing  bodies;  and  I have  known  two  in- 

llances 


[ 3 s9  j 

ftances  of  patients  who  had  pins  flopped  in 
the  paflage  ; and  who  getting  on  horfeback  to 
ride  out  in  fearch  of  relief  at  a neighbouring 
village,  found  each  of  them  the  pin  difen- 
gaged  after  an  hour’s  riding  : one  fpit  it  out, 
and  the  other  fwallowed  it,  without  any  ill 
confequences. 

6.  When  there  is  an  immediate  dread  of 
the  patient’s  being  fuffocated  ; when  bleeding 
him  has  been  of  no  fervice ; when  all  hope 
of  freeing  the  paflage  in  time  is  vanilhed, 
and  death  is  feeminglv  at  hand  ; the  operation 
of  opening  the  windpipe,  muft  be  prefently 
performed:  an  operation  neither  difficult  to  a 
tolerably  expert  furgeon,  nor  very  painful  to 
the  patient. 

7.  When  the  fubftance  that  was  flopped 
paffes  into  the  flomach,  the  patient  muft  im- 
mediately be  put  into  a very  gentle  regimen. 
He  fhould  avoid  all  fharp  and  inflaming  lood; 
wine,  fpirituous  liquors,  all  ftrong  drink,  and 
coffee  ; taking  but  little  nourifhment  at  once, 
and  no  folids,  without  their  having  been 
very  well  chewed.  The  heft  diet  would  be 
that  of  meally  foups,  made  of  various  legu- 
minous grains,  and  of  milk  and  water,  which  is 
much  better  than  the  common  cuftom  of  fwal- 
lowing  oils. 

§ 283.  The  Author  of  nature  has  provided, 
that  in  eating,  nothing  fhould  pafs  by  the 
glottis  into  the  windpipe.  This  misfortune 
Q j never- 


[ 37°  3 

neverthelefs  does  fometimes  happen  ; at  which 
very  inftant  there  enfues  an  incefTant  cough, 
an  acute  pain,  with  fuffocation,  all  the  blood 
being  forced  up  into  the  head,  the  patient 
is  in  great  anguifh,  being  agitated  with  vio- 
lent motions,  and  fometimes  dying  on  the 
fpot. 

In  a cafe  thus  circumflanced,  the  patient 
fhould  be  ftruck  often  on  the  middle  of  the 
back  ; fome  efforts  to  vomit  fhould  be  excited  ; 
he  fhould  be  prompted  to  fneeze  with  any 
cephalic  fnufis,  which  fhould  be  blown  ftrongly 
up  his  nofe. 

If  all  thefe  methods  are  ineffectual,  bron'- 
chatomy  mult  fpeediiy  be  performed.  By  this 
operation,  fome  bones,  a bean,  and  a fifh-bone 
have  been  extrafted,  and  the  patient  has  been 
delivered  from  approaching  death. 

hen  the  ec:'  phagvs  is  fo  fully  and  ftrongly 
clofe,  that  the  patient  can  receive  no  food  by 
the  mouth,  he  is  to  be  nourifhed  by  glvfters 
of  foup,  gelly,  and  the  like,  or  by  dices  of  raw 
flefh  applied  to  the  pit  of  the  flomacln. 


CHAP. 


[ 37*  I 


C H A P.  XXIX. 

Gj  (xter  nai  disorders,  and  fuch  as  require  cRirur- 
gical  applications . 

Sect.  284. 

Of  Burns. 

WHEN  a burn  is  trifling,  it  is  fufKcient 
to  clap  a comprefs  of  feveral  folds  of 
foft  linen  upon  it,  dipped  in  cold  water,  and 
to  renew  it  every  quarter  of  an  hour,  till 
the  pain  is  entirely  removed.  But  when; 
the  burn  has  bliflered.  a comprefs  of  very  fine 
linen,  fpread  over  with  the  pomatum  No.  64,. 
fhoukl  be  applied  over  it,  and  changed  twice 
a day. 

If  the  true  fkin  is- burnt,  and  even  the  fiefh 
under  it  be  injured,  the  fame  pomatum  may 
be  applied  ; but  inflead  of  a comprefs,  it 
fnould  be  fpread  upon  a pledget  of  foft  lint,, 
to  be  applied  very  exaftly  over  it,  and  over 
the  pledget  again,  a flip  of  the  fimple  plaiffer. 
No.  65,  which  every  body  may  eafily  pre- 
pare ; or,  if  they  would  prepare  itr  the  piaiiter 
No,.  66*. 

£)  6;  Ba& 


[ 372  J 


But,  befldes  this,  whenever  the  burn  has 
been  very  violent,  and  is  highly  inflamed,  the 
fame  means  mud  be  recurred  to,  which  are  ufed 
in  violent  inflammations:  the  patient  fhould  be 
bled,  put  into  a regimen,  and  drink  nothing 
but  the  ptifans  No.  2,  and  4. 

If  the  ingredients  for  the  ointment,  called  tiu- 
iritum , are  not  at  hand  to  make  the  pomatum 
No.  64  ; one  part  of  wax  fhould  be  melted  in 
eight  parts  of  oil,  to  two  ounces  of  which  mix- 
tore,  the  yolk  of  an  egg  fhould  be  added.  A 
flill  more  Ample  application,  is  that  of  one  egg, 
both  the  yolk  and  the  white  beat  up  with  two 
common  fpoonfuls  of  the  fweeteft  oil,  without 
any  ranknefs.  When  the  pain  of  the  burn,  and 
all  its  other  fymptoms  have  very  nearly  difap • 
peared,  it  is  fufhcient  to  apply  the  oil-rloth 
No.  66. 

Of  Wounds. 

§ 28j.  If  a wound  has  penetrated  into  any  of 
the  cavities,  and  has  wounded  any  part  contain- 
ed in  the  breaft,  or  in  the  belly:  or  if  it  has 
opened  forne  great  blood-veflel  ; or  has  wound- 
ed a confiderable  nerve,  there  is  an  abfolute  ne- 
celfity  for  calling  in  a furgeon.  But  when  the 
wound  affefts  only  the  flefhy  parts  and  the  fmall 
veflels,  it  may  be  eafily  dreffed  without  fuch 
afliftance  ; fince,  in  general,  all  that  is  necef- 
fery  in  fuch  cafes  is,  to  defend  the  wound  from 
the  impreffioits  of  the  air  ; yet  not  fo  as  to  give 

any 


[ 373  ] 

any  material  obftrufition  to  the  difcharge  of  the 
matter,  that  is  to  ilfue  from  it. 

§ 286.  If  the hloocl  docs  not  flow  out  of  any 
eonfiderable  veflel,  but  trickles  afmoft  equally 
from  every  fpot  of  the  wound,  it  may  be  permit- 
ted to  bleed,  while  fome  lint  is  fpeedily  prepar- 
ing. As  foon  as  the  lint  is  reads',  fo  much  of  it 
may  be  introduced  into  the  wound  as  will  near- 
ly fill  it,  without  being  forced  in.  It  lhould  be 
covered  over  with  a comprefs  dipped  in  fweet 
oil  : and  the  whole  drefling  fhould  be  kept  on, 
with  a bandage  of  two  fingers  breadth,  roiled  on 
tight  enough  to  feciue  the  drelfmgs,  and  yet  fo 
moderately,  as  to  bring  on  no  inflammation. 

This  bandage  with  thefe  dreflings  are  to  remain 
on  twenty-four  or  forty-eight  hours  ; wounds  be- 
ing healed  the  fooner,  for  being  lefs  frequently 
dreffed.  At  the  fecond  drefling  all  the  lint  mull 
be  removed  ; but  if  any  of  it  fhould  flick  clofe, 
in  confequence  of  the  dried  blood,  it  fhould  be 
left  behind,  adding  a little  frefh  lint  to  it;  this 
drefliug  in  other  refpe&s  exactly  refembling  the 
firft. 

When,  from  the  continuance  of  this  Ample 
drefling,  the  wound  is  become  very  fuperficial, 
it  is  fufncient  to  apply  the  plaifler,  without  any 
lint. 

§ 287.  When  the  wound  is  eonfiderable,  it 
muft  be  expended  to  inflame  before  fuppuration 
can  enfue  : which  inflammation  will  be  attend- 
ed with  pain,  with  a fever,  and  fometimes  with 

raving 


f 374  ] 

raving  to.  In  fucli  a ftuation,  a poultice  of 
bread  and  milk,  with  the  addition  of  a little  oil, 
that  it  may  not  flick  too  clofe,  mud  be  applied, 
inftead  of  the  comprefs  : which  poultice  is  to  he 
changed,  but  without  uncovering  the  wound, 
three  or  four  times  every  day. 

§ 288.  Should  fome  pretty  confiderahle  blood- 
veffel  be  opened  by  the  wound,  there  mull  be 
applied  over  it,  a piece  of  argaric  of  the  oak. 
No.  76.  It  is  to  be  kept  on,  by  applying  a good 
deal  of  lint  over  it;  covering  the  whole  with  a 
thick  comprefs,  and  then  with  a bandage  a little 
tighter  than  ufual.  If  this  fhould  not  be  fuffi- 
cient  to  prevent  bleeding,  and  the  wound  be  in 
the  leg  or  arm,  a flrong  ligature  mult  be  made 
above  the  wound  with  a turniquet,  which  is 
made  in  a moment  with  a fkain  of  thread,  or  of 
hemp,  that  is  pafTed  round  the  arm  circularly, 
into  the  middle  of  which  is  inferted  a piece  of 
wood,  or  flick  of  an  inch  thicknefs,  and  four  or 
five  inches  long;  fo  that  by  turning  round  this 
piece  of  wood,  any  tightnefs  or  compreffion 
may  be  effefled  at  pleafure.  But  care  mtifl  be 
taken;  1.  To  difpofe  the  fkain  in  fuch  a man- 
ner, that  it  muff  always  be  two  inches  wider 
than  the  part  it  furrounds  : and,  2.  Not  to  flrain 
it  fo  tight  as  to  bring  on  an  inflammation. 

§ 289.  All  the  boafled  virtues  of  a multitude 
of  ointment  are  downright  nonfenfe  or  quack- 
ery. 

Spirituous  applications  are  commonly  hurtfuL 

and. 


[ 375  J 

and  can  be  proper  but  in  a few  cares,  which- 
phyficians  and  burgeons  only  can  diflinguiflr. 

When  wounds  occur  in  the  head,  inllead  of 
the  comprefs  dipped  in  oil,  the  wound  fhould  be 
covered  with  a betony  plaifler  ; or  when  none 
is  to  be  had  in  time,  with  a comprefs  fcjueezed 
out  of  hot  wine. 

When  the  wound  has  penetrated  to  fome  in- 
ternal part,  no  remedy  is  morq  certain  than  that 
of  an  extremely  light  diet.  Such  wounded  per- 
fons  as  have  been  fuppofed  incapable  of  living 
many  hours,  after  wounds  in  the  breaff,  in  the 
belly  or  in  the  kidneys,  have  been  compleatly 
recovered,  by  living  for  feveral  weeks  on  no- 
thing but  fa  barley,  or  other  meally  ptifians, 
without  fait,  without  foup,  without  any  medi- 
cine ; and  efpecially  without  the  ufe  of  any 
ointment. 

Of  Eruifes. 

§ 290.  In  a contufion,  happening  to  anv  in- 
ward part,  the  blood  is  either  internally  effufed, 
or  the  circulation  wholly  obftrufted  in  fome  vi- 
tal organ.  This  is  the  caufe  of  the  fudden  death 
of  perfons  after  a violent  fall ; or  of  thofe  who 
have  received  the  violent  force  of  heavy  bodies 
on  their  heads ; or  of  fome  violent  ftrokes,. 
without  any  evident  external  hurt  or  mark. 

When  the  accident  has  occurred  in  a flight 
degree,  and  there  has  been  no  great  nor  general 
fhock,  external  applications  may  be  fuScient- 

They 


[ 3/S  ] 

They  fhould  confid  of  fucTi  things  as  are  adapted 
fir  ft,  to  attenuate  and  rcfolve  the  effufed  blood  : 
and,  fecondly,  10  reflore  the  tone,  and  to  reco- 
ver the  firength  of  the  affected  veffefs. 

1 he  belt  application  is  vinegar,  diluted,  if 
very  fnarp,  with  twice  as  much  warm  water;  in 
which  mixture  folds  of  linen  are  to  be  dipped, 
within  which  the  contufed  parts  are  to  be  in- 
volved ; and  thefe  folds  are  to  be  remoiltened 
and  reapplied  every  two  hours  on  the  liift  day. 

Parfley,  and  houfeleek  leaves,  lightly  pound- 
ed, have  alfo  been  fuccefsfully  employed ; and 
theie  applications  are  preferable  to  vinegar, 
when  a wound  is  joined  to  the  bruife.t 

§ 291.  It  has  been  a common  practice  imme- 
diately to  apply  fpi  ri.tuous  liquors,  fuch  as  bran- 
dy' or  arquebufade  water.  But  thefe  bquias, 
which  coagulate  the  blood  inflead  of  refolving  it, 
are  truly  pernicious. 

It  is  flill  a more  pernicious  praflice  to  apply, 
in  bruifes,  plaifiers  compofed  of  greafy  fub- 
flances,  rofins,  gums,  or  earths.  The  moft 
boafted  of  thefe  is  -always  hurtful,  and  there 
have  been  many  in  dances  of  very  flight  contu- 
fions  being  aggravated  into  gangrenes  by  fuch 
plaifiers  ; which  bruifes  would  have  been  en- 
tirely fubdued  bv  the  oecoiaomy  of  nature,  if  left 
to  herfelf,  in  the  fpace  of  four  days. 

Thofe  fuffufions  of  coagulated  blood,  which 
are  vifible  under  the  fkin,  fhould  never  be  open- 
ed. 


+ But  nothing  is  equal  to  electrifying. 


r 377  ] 

ed,  fince  they  infenfibly  diflipate ; inftead  of 
which  by  opening  them,  they  fometinles  termi- 
nate in  a dangerous  ulceration. 

§ 292.  The  internal  treatment  of  contufions 
is  exaflly  the  fame  with  that  of  wounds;  only 
that  in  thefe  cafes  the  bell  drink  is  the  prefcrip- 
tion,  No.  j,  to  three  pints  of  which  a drachm 
of  nitre  muff  be  added. 

When  any  perfon  has  got  a violent  fall ; has 
loft  his  fenfes,  or  is  become  ftupid ; when  the 
blood  ftarts  out  of  his  noftrils.  or  his  ears;  when 
he  is  greatly  oppreffed,  or  his  belly  feels  very 
tight,  which  import  an  effufion  of  blood  either 
into  the  head,  the  breaft  or  the  belly,  he  mult 
firft  of  all,  be  bled  upon  the  fpot,  and  the  means 
mnft  be  recurred  to,  which  have  been  mention- 
ed § 289,  giving  the  patient  the  leaft  poftible  mo- 
tion; and  by  all  means  avoiding  to  jog  or  lhake 
him,  which  would  be  dire&ly  killing  him,  by 
caufing  a farther  eflufion  of  blood.  Inftead  of 
this,  the  whole  body  Fnould  be  fomented,  with 
fome  one  of  the  decoftions  already  mentioned; 
and  when  the  violence  has  been  chiefly  impref- 
fed  on  the  head,  wine  and  water  Ihould  be  pre- 
ferred to  vinegar. 

Falls  attended  with  wounds,  and  even  a frafdure 
of  the  fkull,  and  with  the  moft  alarming  fymp- 
toms,  have  been  cured  by  thefe  internal  remedies, 
and  without  any  other  exteranal  afiillance,  except 
the  ufe  of  the  aromatic  fomentation,  No.  68. 

It  is  proper,  in  all  conliderable  bruifes,  to  open 

the 


[ 378  ] 

tlie  patient’s  belly  with  a mild  cooling  purge, 
Inch  as  No.  11,  23,  32,  49.  The  prescription 
No.  24,  and  the  honey  whey,  are  excellent  re- 
medies. 

§ 293.  In  thefc  circumdances,  wine,  diddled 
Spirits,  and  whatever  has  been  fuppofed  to  re- 
vive, is  mortal.  We  Should  not  be  too  impati- 
ent, becaufe  the  patients  remain  Some  tirrte  with- 
out SenSe  or  Seeling.  Turpentine  is  more  like- 
ly to  do  miSchieS  than  good  ; So  is  fpermaca?ti, 
dragons  blood,  crabs-e)  es,  and  ointments  oS what- 
ever Sort. 

■ § 294.  When  an  aged  perSon  gets  a Sad.  tho’ 
he  Should  not  Seem  in  the  lead  incommoded  by 
it,  if  he  is  Sanguine,  he  Should  part  wfth  three 
or  Sour  ounces  oS  blood.  Ke  Should  take  im- 
mediately a Sew  SucceSSive  cups  oS  tea  Sweetened 
with  honev,  and  Should  move  gently  about. 
He  muSl  retrench  a little  Srom  the  uSual  quan- 
tity oS  his  Sood,  and  accudom  himSelf  to  very 
gentle  but  very  Srequent  exerciSe. 

§ 295^  Sprains  or  wrenches  Should  be  treated 
as  a contufion.f 

The  bed  remedy  in  this  caSe  is  abSolute  red, 
after  applying  a comprefs  moidened  in  vinegar 
and  water,  which  is  to  be  renewed  and  continu- 
ed, till  the  marks  of  the  contufion  entirely  disap- 
pear. Then  indeed,  and  not  before,  a little 
brandy  or  arquebufade-water  may  be  added  to 
the  vinegar  ; and  the  part  Should  be  Strengthen- 

- l 

ea 

+ Electrify  rg  curct  all  fort  of  fprainsalfo. 


N 


r 3 79  ] 


ed  and  fecured  for  a confiderable  time  with  a 
bandage  ; as  it  might  otherwife  be  liable  to  frefh 
fprains,  which  would  daily  more  and  more  en- 
feeble it : and  if  this  evil  is  overlooked  in  its  in- 
fancy, the  part  never  recovers  its  full  drength  ; 
and  a fmall  fwelling  often  remains  to  the  end  of 
the  patient’s  life. 

If  the  fprain  is  moderate,  a plunging  of  the 
part  into  cold  water  is  excellent;  but  if  this  is 
not  done  immediately  after  the  fprain,  or  if  the 
contufion  is  violent,  it  is  hurtful. 

Of  Ulcers. 

§ 296.  When  ulcers  arife  from  a fault  of  the 
blood,  it  is  impofhble  to  cure  them  without  de- 
ftroying  the  caufe. 

Rancid  oils  are  one  of  the  caufes,  which 
change  the  mod  fimple  wounds  into  obdinate 
ulcers. 

What  didinguifhes  ulcers  from  wounds,  is  the 
drynefs  and  hardnefs  of  the  fides  of  ulcers,  and 
the  humours  difcharged  from  them;  which  in- 
diead  of  being  ripe  confident  matter,  is  a liquid, 
of  a difagreeable  fcent,  and  fo  fharp,  that  if  it 
touch  the  adjoining  {kin,  it  produces  rednefs  or 
indammation. 

Sometimes  the  hardnefs  is  fo  obdinate,  that 
it  cannot  be  mollided,  but  by  fcarifying  the  edges 
with  a lancet.  But  when  it  may  be  adefted  by 
other  means,  let  a pledget  fpread  with  the  oint- 
ment, *'  o.  69,  be  applied  all  over  the  ulcer ; 

and 


[ 3«o  ] 

and  tills  pledget  be  covered  again  with  a com- 
priefs  of  feveral  folds,  moillened  in  the  liquid 
No.  70,  which  fhould  be  renewed  three  times 
daily;  though  it  is  fufficient  to  apply  a frefh 
pledget  only  twice. 

To  forward  the  cure,  faked  food,  fpices,  and 
Prong  drink  fhould  be  avoided;  the  quantity 
of  flefh-meat  fhould  be  lenened  ; and  the  body 
be  kept  open  by  a regimen  of  pulfe,  of  vege- 
tables, and  by  the  habitual  ufe  of  whey  fweetened 
with  honey. 

If  the  ulcers  are  in  the  legs,  it  is  of  .great 
importance,  as  w7ell  as  in  wounds  of  the  fame 
parts,  that  the  patient  fhould  walk  about  but 
little ; and  yet  never  hand  up  without  walking. 
Negligence,  in  this  material  point,  changes 
the  flighted:  wounds  into  ulcers,  and  the  moifl 
trifling  ulcers  into  incurable  ones. 

Of  froztn  Limbs. 

\ 297.  It  is  common  in  rigorous  winters,  for 
fome  perfons  to  be  pierced  fo  with  cold,  that 
their  hands  or  feet  are  frozen  juft  like  a piece  of 
flefh-meat  expofed  to  the  air. 

If  the  perfon  attempts  to  warm  the  parts 
that  have  been  frozen,  his  cafe  proves  irreco- 
verable. Intolerable  pains  are  the  confequence, 
which  are  fpeedily  attended  with  an  incurable 
gangrene;  and  there  is  no  means  left  to  fave 

the 


[ 33x  ] 

the  patient’s  life,  but  by  cutting  off  the  gan- 
grened limbs. 

There  is  but  one  certain  remedy  in  fuch 
cafes ; and  this  is  to  convey  the  perfon  into 
fome  place  where  it  does  not  freeze,  but  when* 
it  is  but  moderately  warm,  and  there  continu- 
ally to  apply  to  the  frozen  parts,  fnow  if  it  be 
at  hand ; and  if  not,  to  keep  wafhing  them 
inceffantly,  but  very  gently  (fince  all  fri&ion 
would  at  this  juncture  prove  dangerous)  in  ice- 
water,  as  the  ice  thaws  in  the  chamber.  By 
this  application,  the  patients  will  be  fenfible  of 
their  feeling’s  returning  very  gradually  to  the 
part.  In  this  hate  they  may  fafely  be  moved 
into  a place  a little  warmer,  and  drink  fome 
cups  of  the  potion  No,  13,  or  of  another  of  the 
like  quality. 

Every  perfon  may  be  a judge  of  the  danger 
of  attempting  to  relief  fuch  parts  by  heating 
them,  and  of  the  ufe  of  ice-water  by  daily 
experience.  Frozen  pears,  apples,  and  radifhes 
being  put  into  water  j 11  ft  about  to  freeze,  reco- 
ver tlreir  former  flate,  and  prove  eatable.  But  if 
they  are  put  into  warm  water,  or  into  a hot 
place,  rottennefs,  which  is  a fort  of  gangrene, 
is  the  immediate  effect. 

§ 298.  * When  cold  weather  is  extremely 
fevere,  and  a perfon  is  expofed  to  it  for  a long 
time  at  once,  it  proves  mortal,  in  confequence 
of  it  congealing  the  blood,  and  forcing  too  great 

a pro- 


t 322  j 

a proportion  of  it  up  to  the  brain;  fo  that  the 
patient  dies  of  a kind  of  apoplexy,  which  is 
preceded  by  a fieepinefs.  In  this  circumftance, 
the  traveller,  who  finds  himfelf  drowfv,  firould 
redouble  his  efforts  to  move.  Tor  this  flecp, 
would  prove  his  laft. 

The  remedies  in  fuch  cafes  are  the  fame 
with  thofe  direfted  in  frozen  limbs.  The  pa- 
tient mull  be  conducted  to  an  apartment  ra’her* 
cold  than  hot,  and  be  rubbed  with  fnow  or  with 
-ice-water. 

And  fince  it  is  known  that  many  people  have' 
revived,  who  had  remained  in  the  fnow,  or 
had  been  cxpofed  to  the  freezing  air  during 
five,  or  even  fix  days,  and  who  had  difcovercd 
no  mark  of  life  for  feveral  hours,  the  utmoll 
endeavours  firould  be  u!ed  for  the  recoverv  of 
perfons  in  the  like  circumfiances. 

OJ  Kibes  or  Chilblains. 

§ 299.  Thefe  begin  with  a kind  of  {'welling, 
which  at  firft,  occafions  a heat,  pain,  or  itching. 
Sometimes  they  go  off  without  any  application  : 
but  at  other  times  their  heat,  itching,  and  pain 
increafe ; fo  tha  the  patient  is  often  deprived 
of  the  free  ufe  ol  his  fingers  by  the  pain,  fwell- 
ing,  and  numbnefs. 

Whenever  the  inflammation  mounts  to  a 
fiill  higher  degree,  final!  blifters  are  formed, 
which  are  not  lcmr  without  burftine;  thev 

O LV  J 

leave 


[ 383  ] 

leave  a rawnefs,  as  it  were,  which  fpeedily  ulce- 
rates, and.  frequently  proves  a deep  and  obdi- 
nate  ulcer. 

§ 300.  In  this  cafe  the  veins,  which  are  more 
fuperficial  than  the  arteries,  being  more  affefied 
and  ftraitened  by  the  cold,  do  not  carry  off  all 
the  blood  communicated  to  them  by  the  arte- 
ries ; perhaps  alfo  the  particles  of  cold,  which 
are  admitted  through  the  pores,  may  a£l  upon 
our  fluids,  as  it  does  upon  water,  ami  occafion  a 
congelation  of  them,  or  a confiderable  approach 
towards  it. 

Kibes  occur  moft  frequently  to  children  from 
their  weaknefs  and  the  greater  teudernefs  of  their 
organs.  It  is  the  frequent  and  flrong  alteration 
from  heat  to  cold,  that  contributes  the 'moft 
powerfully  to  them  ; and  this  effeib  of  it  is  moft 
confiderable,  when  the  heat  of  the  air  is  at  the 
fame  time  blended  with  moifture  ; whence  the 
extreme  and  fuperficial  parts  pafs  fuddenly  as  it 
were,  out  of  a hot  into  a cold  bath.  A man 
fixty  yeais  of  age,  who  never  before  was  trou- 
bled with  kibes,  having  worn,  for  fome  hours  on 
a journey,  a pair  of  furred  gloves  in  which  his 
hands  fweated,  felt  them  very  tender,  and 
found  them  fwelled  up  with  blood.:  this  man, 
was  at  that  age  firft  attacked  with  chilblains, 
which*  proved  extremely  troublefome ; and 
he  was  every  fucceeding  winter  infefted 
with-  them,  within  half  an  hour  after  ’ he  left 

off 


[ 384  ] 

off  his  gloves,  and  was  expofed  to  a very  cold 
air. 

Chilblains  which  attack  the  nofe,  often  leave 
a mark  that  alters  the  afpeft  of  the  patient, 
for  the  remainder  of  his  life:  and  the  hands 
of  fuch  as  have  fuffered  from  very  obflinate 
onds,  are  commonly  ever  fenfible  of  their  con- 
fequer.ces. 

^ 301.  We  fhould  fil'd  do  our  utmoff  to  pre- 
vent them  : and  next  endeavour  to  cure  fuch  as 
we  could  not  prevent. 

Since  they  manifeflly  depend  on  the  fenfibi- 
lity  of  the  fkin,  the  nature  of  the  humours,  and 
the  changes  of  the  weather  from  heat  to  cold, 
in  order  to  prevent  them,  firft,  The  fkin  muff 
be  rendered  firmer.  2.  That  vicious  quality 
of  the  temperament  muff  be  correffed. 
And,  3.  The  perfons  fo  liable  muff  guard 
as  well  as  pofiible  againfl  thefe  changes  of 
weather. 

* Now  the  fkin  of  the  hands,  as  well  as  that 
of  the  whole  body,  may  be  flrengthened  by 
waffling  or  bathing  in  cold  water.  And  in  faff, 

I have  never  feen  children,  who  had  been  early 
accuflomed  to  this,  as  much  afflifled  with  chil- 
blains as  others.  But  a more  particular  regard 
fhould  be  had  to  the  fkin  of  the  hands,  which 
are  more  obnoxious  to  this  diforder  than  the 
feet,  by  making  children  dip  them  in  cold 
water,  and  keep  them  lor  fome  moments 
together  in  it  every  morning,  and  every  even- 
ing . 


C 385  ] 

mg  too  before  fupper,  from  the  very  beginning 
of  the  fall.  It  will  give  the  children  no  pain 
daring  that  feafon,  to  contrafi  this  habit ; and 
when  it  is  once  contra&ed,  it  will  give  them  no 
trouble  to  continue  it  throughout  the  winter. 
They  may  alfo  be  habituated  to  plunge  their 
feet  into  cold  water  twice  or  thrice  a week : 
and  this  method,  which  might  be  lefs  adapted 
for  grown  perfons,  mull  be  without  objeftion, 
with  refpedl  to  fuch  children  as  have  been 
accullomed  to  it;  to  whom  all  its  confequences 
mull  be  ufeful  and  neceffary. 

§ 302.  But  then  further,  1.  The  children  mull 
be  taught  never  to  warm  their  hands  before  the 
fire.  2.  They  Ihould  never  accuftorn  them- 
felves  to  wear  muffs.  They  Ihould  never  ufe 
gloves,  unlefs  fome  particular  circumltances 
require  it : but  if  any,  let  the  gloves  be  thin  and 
fmooth. 

§ 303.  The  firll  degree  of  this  complaint  goes 
off,  as  I have  faid,  without  the  aid  of  medicine. 
But  when  they  rife  to  the  fecond  degree, 
they  mull  be  treated  like  other  complaints 
from  congelation,  with  cold  water,  ice-water, 
and  fnow. 

* No  other  medicine  is  fo  efficacious  as  very 
cold  water,  fo  as  to  be  ready  to  freeze,  in 
which  the  hands  are  to  be  dipped  and  retained 
for  fome  minutes  together,  and  feveral  times 
daily.  In  Ihort,  it  is  the  only  remedy  which 
ought  to  be  applied,  when  the  patient  has  the 

Vol.  XXV.  R courage 


[ 3*6  ] 

courage  to  bear  it<  It  is  the  only  application 
I have  ufed  for  rriyfelf,  after  having  been  at- 
tacked with  chilblains  for  fome  years  pall,  from 
having  accu homed  myfelf  to  a muff. 

There  enfues  a flight  pain  for  fome  moments 
after  plunging  the  hand  into  water,  but  it  dimi- 
nifhes  gradually.  On  taking  the  hand  out, 
the  fingers  are  numbed  with  the  cold,  but  they 
prefently  grow  warm  again ; and  within  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  it  is  entirely  over. 

The  hands,  on  being  taken  out  of  the  water, 
are  to  be  well  dried,  and  put  into  thin  gloves  ; 
after  bathing  three  or  four  times,  their  fwelling 
fubfides,  fo  that  the  {kin  wrinkles : but,  by 
continuing  the  cold  bathing  it  grows  tight  and 
fmooth  again  ; the  cure  is  compleated  by  ufing 
it  three  or  four  days ; and,  the  diforder  feldom 
returns  the  fame  winter. 

The  moil  troublefome  raging  itching  is 
certainly  affwaged  by  plunging  the  hands  into 
cold  water. 

The  effefl  of  fnow  is,  perhaps,  II ill  more 
fpeedy  ; the  hands  are  to  be  gently  and  often 
rubbed  with  it  for  a confiderable  time ; they 
grow  hot,  and  are  of  a very  high  red  for  fome 
moments,  but  perfect  eafe  quickly  fucceeds. 

Neverthelefs,  a very  fmall  number  of  perfons, 
who  have  extremely  delicate  ffins,  do  not  ex- 
perience the  efficacy  of  this  application.  It 
feems  too  a£Uve  for  them;  it  affects  the  fk in 

like 


[ 387  ] 

like  a blifter,  and  increafes,  inftead  of  lefTentng 
the  complaint. 

§ 304.  When  this  laft  reafon,  or  fome  other 
circumftance,  fuch  as  the  child’s  want  of 
courage  ; the  monthly  difcharges  in  a woman  ; 
a violent  cough  ; habitual  colicks  ; forbid  this 
'application,  fome  others  mull  be  fubftituted. 

* One  of  the  bed  is  to  wear,  day  and  night, 
without  ever  putting  it  off,  a glove  made  of 
fome  fmooth  fkin,  fuch  as  that  of  a dog;  which 
feldom  fails  to  extinguii’h  the  diforder  in  fome 
days  time. 

When  the  feet  have  chilblains,  focks  of  the 
fame  fkin  fhould  be  worn  ; and  the  patient  keep 
his  bed  for  fome  days. 

§ 3° 5-  When  the  diforder  is  violent,  the  ufe 
of  cold  water  prohibited,  and  the  gloves  juft 
recommended  have  but  a flow  efFeift,  the  dif- 
eafed  parts  fhould  be  moiftened  feveral  times 
a day,  with  fome  decoftion,  rather  more. than 
warm  : which,  at  the  fame  time,  fhould  be  dif- 
folving  and  emollient.  Such  is  that  celebrated 
decoftion  of  tbe  fcrapings  of  the  peel  of  ra- 
difhes,  whofe  efficacy  is  ftill  further  increafed, 
by  adding  one  fixth  part  of  vinegar  to  the  de- 
coftion. 

As  foon  as  the  hands  are  taken  out  of  thefe 
decobtions,  they  muft  be  defended  from  the  air 
by  dog-fkin  gloves. 

306.  Vapours  or  fteams  are  often  more 
efficacious  than  decobtions ; whence  inftead  of 
R 2 dipping 


[ 388  ] 


dipping  the  hands  into  thefe  already  mentioned 
we  may  expofe  them  to  their  vapours,  with 
ftill  more  fuccefs.  That  of  hot  vinegar  is  one 
ot  the  moft  powerful  remedies.  It  may  be 
needlefs  to  add,  that  the  affeQed  parts  mull  be 
defended  from  the  air,  as  well  after  the  fleams  as 
the  decoQions. 

* When  the  diflemper  is  fubdued  by  the  ufe 
of  bathings  or  fleams,  which  make  the  fkin 
fupple  and  foft,  then  it  fhould  be  flrengthened 
by  wafhing  the  parts  with  a little  campho- 
rated brandy,  diluted  with  an  equal  quantity  of 
water. 

§ 307.  When  the  nofe  is  affeQed  with  a chil- 
blain, the  fleam  of  vinegar,  and  a covering  for 
it,  made  of  dog-fkin,  are  the  moll  efFeQ.ua! 
applications.  The  fame  treatment  is  proper 
for  the  ears  and  chin,  when  infefled  with  them. 
Frequently  wafhing  thefe  parts  in  cold  water, 
is  a good  prefervative. 

§ 308.  Whenever  the  inflammation  rifes  high, 
and  brings  on  fome  degree  of  fever,  the  patient  s 
ufual  quantity  of  flrong  drink  and  of  flefh  meat 
mufl  be  leffened ; his  body  fliould  be  kept  open; 
he  fliould  take  every  evening  a dofe  of  nitre  as 
prefcribed  No.  20 ; and  if  the  fever  prove 
flrong,  lofe  fome  blood. 

As  many  as  are  troubled  with  obfliuate  chil- 
blains, mufl  be  denied  the  ufe  of  flrong  liquor 
and  flefh. 

When  the  parts  are  ulcerated,  befides  keep- 
ing 


E 3§9  3 


ing  the  patients  flriflly  to  the  regimen  of  per fo ns 
in  a way  of  recovery,  and  giving  them  a purge 
of  manna,  the  fwelled  parts  fhould  be  expofed 
to  the  fleams  of  vinegar  ; the  ulcerations  fhould 
be  covered  with  a diapalma  plaifler  ; and  the 
whole  part  fhould  be  enveloped  in  a finooth  foft 
fkin,  or  in  thin  cere-cloths. 

OJ  Ruptures. 

§ 309.  Ruptures  fometimes  occur  at  the  very 
birth,  though  more  frequently  they  are  the 
effe&s  of  violent  crying,  of  a flrong  forcing 
cough,  or  of  repeated  efforts  to  vomit,  in  the 
firfl  months  of  infarlcv. 

t > 

They  mav  happen  afterwards  at  every  age, 
either  as  confequences  of  particular  maladies, 
or  accidents.  They  happen  much  oftner  to 
men  thgin  women  ; and  the  mod  common  fort, 
the  only  one  of  which  I propofe  to  treat  is 
that  which  conlifls  in  the  defeent  of  a part  of 
the  guts  or  of  the  cawl,  into  the  ferotum. 

When  it  occurs  in  little  children,  it  is  almoft 
ever  cured  by  making  them  conffantly  wear  a 
bandage,  which  fhould  be  made  only  of  fuftian, 
with  a little  pillow  or  pincufhion,  fluffed  with 
linen-rags,  hair,  or  bran.  There  fhould  be  at 
leaf!  two  of  thefe  bandages,  to  change  them 
alternately  : nor  fhould  it  ever  be  applied,  but 
when  the  child  is  laid  on  its  back,  and  after 
being  well  affured  that  the  gut  or  cawl,  has 
R 3 been 


r 39°  ] 

been  fafely  returned  into  the  cavity  of  the  belly  ; 
fince  without  this  precaution  it  might  occafion 
the  woid  confequences. 

The  good  effefct  of  the  bandage  may  be  further 
promoted,  by  applying  upon  the  ikin,  and 
within  the  plait  or  fold  of  the  groin,  fome 
drengthening  plaider,  fuch  as  that  mentioned 
$ 144.  Here  we  may  obferve,  that  ruptured 
children  fhould  never  be  fet  on  a horfe,  nor  be 
carried  by  any  perfon  on  horfeback,  before  the 
rupture  is  perfeftlv  cured. 

§ 310.  In  a more  advanced  age,  a bandage  of 
fuflain  is  not  fufficient : one  mull  be  procured 
with  a plate  of  Heel,  even  fo  as  to  conftrain  and 
incommode  the  wearer  a little  at  firft  : Never- 
thelefs,  it  foon  becomes  habitual,  and  is  then 
no  longer  inconvenient. 

Ruptures  fometimes  attain  a mondrous  ftze  : 
and  a great  part  of  the  guts  fall  down  into  the 
Jcrotum.  In  this  date,  the  application  of  the 
trufs  is  impra&icable,  and  the  patients  are  con- 
demned to  carry  their  burden  for  the  remainder 
©f  their  fives;  which  may,  however,  be  palliat- 
ed a little  by  the  ufe  of  a fufpenfory  and  bag,  ad- 
apted to  the  fize  of  the  rupture  ; when  the  part 
of  the  bowels  which  is  fallen  down  inflames. 

$311.  The  bed  means  are,  1,  As  foon  as  ever 
this  appears,  to  bleed  the  patient  very  plentifully 
as  he  lies  down  in  his  bed.  and  upon  his  back, 
with  his  head  a little  raifed,  and  his  legs  fome  - 
what  bent,  fo  that  his  knees  may  be  ereiEt.  This 

is 


[ 39 1 1 

is  the  podure  they  fhould  always  prcferve  as 
much  as  podible.  When  the  malady  is  not  too 
far  advanced,  the  firft  bleeding  often  makes  a 
complete  cure  ; and  the  guts  return  up  as  foon 
as  it  is  over.  At  other  times  this  bleeding  is 
lefs  fuccefsful,  and  leaves  a neceffity  for  its  re- 
petition. 

2.  A glyder  mull  be  thrown  up  confiding  of 
a drong  decoction  of  the  large  white  beetdeaves, 
with  a fmall  fpoonful  of  common  fait,  and  a 
piece  of  frelh  butter  of  the  fize  of  an  egg. 

3.  Folds  oflinen  dipt  in  ice -water  mud  be  ap- 
plied all  over  the  tumour,  and  renewed  every 
quarter  of  an  hour.  This  remedy,  when  im- 
mediately applied,  has  produced  the  mod  hap- 
py effefts;  but  if  the  fymptom  has  endured  vio- 
lently more  than  ten  or  twelve  hours,  it  is  often 
too  late  to  apply  it;  and  then  it  is  better  to  make 
ufe  of  dannels  dipt  in  a warm  decoftion  of  mal- 
Jow  and  elder- flowers,  fliifting  them  frequently. 
It  has  been  known  however,  that  ice-water,  or 
ice  itfelf  has  fucceeded  as  late  as  the  third  day.t 

4.  When  thefe  endeavours  are  infufficient, 

R 4 glyders 

+ Pieccr-  of  icc  applied  between  two  pieces  of  linen,  direfl'y 
upon  the  rupture,  as  foon  as  poffible  after  its  firft  appearance,  rs 
one  o-fthofc  extraordinary  remedies,  which  we  fhould  never  hc- 
fitate  to  make  immediate  ufe  of.  We  may  be  certain  by  this  ap- 
plication, if  the  rupture  is  Ample,  and  not  complicated  from 
fume  aggravating  caufc,  to  remove  fpeedily,  and  with  very  lit- 
tle pain,  a difoider  that  might  be  attended  with  the  mod  dread- 
ful confcquenccs.  But  the  continuance  of  this  application  muft  be 
proportioned  to  the  ftrength  of  the  perfon  ruptured)  which  may 
be  fafftciently  eflimated  by  the  piftfc. 


[ 392  ] 

glyflers  of  tobacco  frnoke  maft  be  tried,  which, 
has  often  cured  ruptures,  when  every  thing  elfe 
had  failed. 

Of  Boils. 

s>3i2.  Whenever  their  inflammation  is  very 
confiderable  ; when  there  are  a great  many  of 
them  at  once,  and  they  prevent  the  patients 
from  flecping,  it  becomes  neceffary  to  enter 
them  into  a cooling  regimen ; and  to  make  them 
drink  plentifully  of  the  ptifan  No.  2. 

Should  the  inflammation  be  very  high,  a poul- 
tice of  bread  and  milk,  or  of  forrel  a little  boil- 
ed and  bruifed,  mull  be  applied  to  it.  But  if  the 
inflammation  is  moderate,  a plaifler,  of  the  Am- 
ple diachylon,  may  be  fufflcient. 

The  boil,  commonly  terminates  in  fuppuration, 
of  a Angular  kind.  It  breaks  open  at  flrfl  on  its  top, 
when  fome  drops  of  a pus  come  out,  after  which 
the  core  of  it,  may  be  difcerned : which  may  be 
drawn  out  entirely  in  the  fhape  of  a fmall  cylin- 
der. The  emiflion  of  this  core  is  commonly  fol- 
lowed by  the  difcharge  of  liquid  matter.  As 
foon  as  this  difcharge  is  made,  the  pain  goes  en- 
tirely off ; and  the  fwelling  difappears  at  the 
end  of  a few  davs,  by  continuing  to  apply  th© 
Ample  diachylon. 

Of  Fellons  or  Whitlows. 

§313.  The  danger  of  thefe  fmall  tumours  is 

much 


[ 393  3 . 

much  greater  than  is  generally  fuppofed.  It  is 
an  inflammation  at  the  end  of  a finger,  which  is 
often  the  effeSl  of  a fmall  quantity  of  humour 
extravafated  ; whether  this  has  happened  in  con- 
fequence  of  a bruife,  a fling,  or  a bite.  At  other 
times,  it  has  refuited  from  no  external  caufe,  but 
is  the  effeft  of  fome  inward  one. 

This  diforder  begins  with  a flow  heavy  pain, 
attended  by  a flight  pulfation ; but  in  a little 
time,  the  pain,  heat,  and  pulfation  or  throbbing 
become  intolerable.  The  part  grows  large  and 
red;  the  adjoining  fingers  and  the  whole  hand’ 
often  Swelling  up.  In  fome  cafes,  a kind  of  red 
ftreak,  beginning  at  the  affeSled  part,  is  con- 
tinued almofl  to  the  elbow;  neither  is  it  unyfual 
for  the  patients  to  complain  of  a very  Sharp  pain 
under  the  fhoulder ; and  Sometimes  the  whole 
arm  is  exceffively  inflamed  and  Swelled.  The 
ft ck  have  not  a wink  of  fleep,  the  fever  and 
other  Symptoms  quickly  increafing  Indeed,  if 
the  diftemper  rifes  to  a violent  degree,  a de- 
lirium and  convulfions  Supervene. 

This  inflammation  of  the  finger  determines, 
either  in  Suppuration,  or  in  a gangrene.  When 
the  lafl  of  thefe  occurs,  the  patient  is  in  great 
danger,  if  he  is  not  Speedily  relieved  ; and  it  has 
proved  neceffary  more  than  once  to  cut  off  the 
arm,  for  the  preservation  of  his  life.  When 
Suppuration  is  effefted,  if  the  matter  lies  very 
deep,  the  bone  is  often  carious  and  loft.  Bu% 
R 5 how 


[ 394  ] 


how  gentle  foever  the  complaint  has  been,  the 
nail  generally  falls  off. 

§ 314.  The  internal  treatment  in  whitlows,  is 
the  fame  with  that  in  other  inflammatory  di {tem- 
pers. The  patient  muft  enter  upon  a regimen 
more  or  lefs  flridt,  in  proportion  to  the  degree 
of  the  fever  : and  if  this  runs  very  high,  and  the 
inflammation  be  very  confiderable,  there  may 
be  a neceffity  for  feveral  bleedings. 

The  external  treatment  confilts  in  allaying  the 
inflammation;  in  foftening  the  fkin  ; and  in  pro- 
curing a difcharge  of  the  matter,  as  foon  as  it  is 
formed.  For  this  purpofe, 

x.  The  finger  affeftedis  to  be  plunged,  as  foon 
as  the  diforder  is  manifeft,  in  water  a little  more 
than  warm  ; the  fleam  of  boiling  water  may  alfo 
be  admitted  to  it;  and  by  doing  thefe  things  al- 
moli  conflantly  for  the  firft  day,  a total  diffipa- 
tion  of  the  malady  has  often  been  obtained.  But 
unhappily  it  is  commonly  neglefcled  till  the  dif- 
order has  greatly  advanced  ; in  which  flate,  fup- 
puration  becomes  abfolutelv  necefTary. 

2.  This  fuppuration  may  be  forwarded,  by 
involving  the  finger,  with  a cataplafm  of  bread 
and  milk.  This  may  be  rendered  flill  more  ac- 
tive, by  adding  a few  white  lilly-roots,  or  a lit- 
tle honey.  But  this  lafl  muff  not  he  applied  be- 
fore the  inflammation  is  fomewhat  abated,  and 
fuppuration  begins  ; before  which  term,  all  fharp 
applications  are  very  dangerous.  At  this  time, 

yeaft 


[ 395  ] 

yeaft  or  leaven  may  be  advantageoufly  ufed, 
which  powerfully  promotes  fuppuration. 

A fpeedy  difcharge  of  the  ripe  matter  is  of 
confiderable  importance,  but  this  particularly  re- 
quires the  attention  of  the  furgeon  : as  it  is  not 
proper  to  wait  till  the  tumour  breaks ; and  this 
the  rather,  as  from  the  fkin’s  proving  fometimes 
extremely  hard,  the  matter  might  be  inwardly 
effufed  between  the  mufcles,  and  upon  their 
membranes,  before  it  could  penetrate  through 
the  fkin.  For  this  reafon,  as  foon  as  matter  is 
fufpefted  to  be  formed,  a furgeon  fhould  be  cal- 
led in,  to  determine  exaftly  on  the  time,  when 
an  opening  fhould  be  made  ; which  had  better 
be  performed  a little  too  foon  than  too  late  ; and 
a little  too  deep,  than  not  deep  enough. 

When  the  orifice  has  been  made,  and  the  dif- 
charge effefted,  it  is  to  be  drefied  with  the  plaif- 
ter  No.  66,  fpread  upon  linen-,  or  with  the  cere- 
cloth ; and  thefe  dreffings  are  to  be  repeated 
daily. 

§ g 15.  When  the  whitlow  is  caufed  by  a hu- 
mour extravafated  very  near  the  nail,  an  expert 
furgeon  cures  it  effeflually  by  an  incifion  which 
lets  out  the  humour.  Yet,  notwithftanding  this 
operation  is  in  no  ways  difficult,  all  furgeons 
are  not  qualified  to  perform  it,  and  but  too  many 
have  no  idea  at  all  of  it. 

Proud  flefh,  fometimes  appears  during  the 
healing  of  the  incifion.  Such  may  be  kept  down 
with  fprinkling  a little  red  lead,  or  burnt  allum 
R 6 over 


[ 396  ] 


over  it.  Bat  if  a caries,  a rottennefs  of  the  bone, 
fhould  be  a confequence,  there  is  a necefTity  for 
a furgeon’s  attendance. 

Of  Thorns,  Splinters,  or  other  pointed  Suhjlances 
piercing  into  the Jkin  or  JleJIu 

^316.  If  fuch  fubflances  are  immediately  and 
entirely  extracted,  the  accident  is  generally  at- 
tended with  no  bad  confequences  ; though  mote 
certainly  to  obviate  any  fuch,  compreffes  of  lin- 
nen  dipped  in  warm  water  may  be  applied  to  the 
part.  But  if  any  fuch  body  cannot  be  dire&Iy 
extracted,  or  if  a part  of  it  be  left  within,  it 
caufes  an  inflammation,  which  foon  produces 
the  fame  fymptoms  as  a whitlow  : or  if  it  hap- 
pens in  the.  leg,  it  inflames  and  forms  a confi- 
derable  abfcefs  there. 

^317.  To  prevent  this,  if  the  penetrating  fub- 
flance  is  Hill  near  the  furface,  and  an  expert  fur- 
geon  is  at  hand,  he  muft  immediately  make  a 
fmall  incifton,  and  extract  it.  But  if  the  inflam- 
mation were  already  formed,  this  would  be  ufe- 
lefs,  and  even  dangerous. 

When  the  incifton  is  improper,  there  fhould 
be  applied  to  the  affected  parts,  (after  convey- 
ing the  fleam  of  fome  hot  water  into  it]  a poul- 
tice of  the  crumb  of  bread,  milk,  and  oil. 

It  is  abfolutely  neceffary,  that  the  injured  part 
fhould  be  kept  in  the  eaGeft  poflure,  and  as  im- 
moveable as  poflible. 


If 


[ 397  ] 

If  fuppuration  has  not  been  prevented,  the 
abfcefs  Ihouldbe  opened  as  foon  as  ever  matter 
is  formed.  I have  known  verf  troublefome 
events  from  its  being  too  long  delayed.. 

Of  U'aits. 

$ 318.  Warts  are  fometimes  the  effects  of  a 
particular  fault  in  the  blood,  which  extrudes  a 
furprizing  quantity  of  them.  This  happens  to 
fome  children,  from  four  to  ten  years  old,  and 
efpecially  to  thofe  who  feed  moll  plentiful- 
ly on  milk.  They  may  be  removed  by  a mo- 
derate change  of  their  diet,  and  the  pills  pre- 
feribed  No.  18. 

But  they  are  more  frequently  an  accidental 
diforder  of  the  fkin,  arifing  from  fome  exter- 
nal caufe. 

In  this  lad  cafe,  if  they  are  very  troublefome 
in  confequence  of  their  great  fize,  their  fituation, 
or  their  long.  Handing,  they  may  be  deftroyed, 
1.  By  tying  them  clofely  with  a filk-  thread,  or 
with  a ftrong  flaxen  one  tvaxed.  2.  By  cutting- 
them  off  with  a fharp  feiffars,  and  applying  a 
plaifter  of  diachylon,  with  the  gums,  over  the 
cut  wart,  which  brings  on  a fmall  fuppuration 
that  deflroys  the  root  of  the  wart ; and,  3.  By 
drying,  or  as  it  were,  withering  them  up  by 
fome  moderately  corroding  application,  fuch  as 
that  of  the  milky  juice  of  fig-leaves,  or  of  fpurge. 
But  people  who  have  very  delicate  fkins  fliould 

BOi 


C 298  ] 


not  make  ufe  of  them,  as  they  may  occafion  a 
painful  [welling,  * Strong  vinegar,  charged  with 
as  much  common  fait  as  it  will  diffolvc,  is  a very 
proper  application  to  them.  A plaifler  may 
alfo  be  compofed  from  fal  ammoniac  and  foir.e 
galbanum,  which,  being  kneaded  up  well  toge- 
ther and  applied,  feldom  fails  of  deftroying  them. 

Wens,  if  of  a pretty  confulerable  ftze,  and 
duration,  arc  incurable  by  any  other  remedy,  ex- 
cept amputation. 

Of  Corns. 

. 319.  The  general  caufes  of  corns,  are  fhoes 

either  too  hard  and  [liff,  or  too  fmall. 

* The  whole  cure  confiils  in  foftenintr  the 
corns  by  repeated  walkings  and  foakings  of  the 
feet  in  pretty  hot  water  ; then  in  cutting  them, 
when  foftened,  xvith  a penknife  or  feiffars,  with- 
out wounding  the  found  parts,  and  next  in  applv- 
ing  a leaf  of  houfe-leek,  of  ground-ivy,  or  of 
purfiin  dipt  in  vinegar,  upon  the  part.  Inftead 
of  thefe  leaves,  if  any  perfon  will  give  himfelf 
the  little  trouble  of  drefhng  them  every  day,  he 
may  apply  a plaifler  of  fimple  diachylon,  or  of 
gum  ammoniacum  foftened  in  vinegar. 

The  inereafe  or  return  of  corns  can  only  be 
prevented,  by  avoiding  the  caufes  that  produce 
them. 


CHAP, 


[ 393 


l 


CHAP.  XXX. 

Of  Siuoonings. 

Sect.  320. 

THERE  are  various  kinds  of  fwooning,  or 
fainting  away  ; the  {lighted:  is  that  in 
which  the  patient  perceives  and  underftands, 
yet  without  the  power  of  fpeech.  This  happens 
frequently  to  vapourifh  perfons,  and  without  any 
obfervable  alteration  of  the  pulfe. 

If  the  patient  totally  lofes  fenfation  and  un- 
derftanding,  with  a very  confiderable  finking  of 
the  pulfe,  this  is  called  a fyncopey  and  is  the  fe- 
cond  degree  of  fwooning. 

But  if  this  fyncopt  is  fo  violent,  that  the  pulfe 
feems  entirely  extinguifiied  ; without  any  per- 
ceivable breathing;  with  a manifeft  chillinefs  of 
the  whole  body  ; and  a wan  livid  countenance, 
it  conffitutes  a third  degree,  which  is  the  true 
image  of  death. 

Swoonings  refult  from  many  different  caufes, 

' of  which  I {hall  enumerate  the  principal  ; and 
the fe  are,  1.  Too  large  a quantity  of  blood.  2. 
A defefl  of  it,  and  a general  weaknefs.  3.  A 
load  at,  and  violent  diforders  of  the  ftomach. 
4.  Nervous  maladies.  5.  The  paffions : and 
6.  Some  kinds  of  difeafes. 


Of 


[ 4«o  J 

Of  Swoomngs  occafionid.  by  Lxtcfs  oj  Blood. 

§ 321.  An  exceflive  quantity  of  blood  is  fre- 
quently a caufe  of  fwooning  ; and  it  may  be  in- 
ferred that  it  is  owing  to  this  caufe,  when  it  at- 
tacks fanguine  hearty  perfons  ; and  more  efpe- 
cially  when  it  attacks  them,  after  being  combin- 
ed with  any  additional  caufe,  that  fuddenly  in- 
crcafed  the  motion  of  the  blood;  luch  as  heat- 
ing meats  or  drinks,  wine,  fpirimous  liquors  ; 
fmaller  drinks,  if  taken  very  hot  and  plentifully, 
.fuch  as  coffee,  tea,  or  balm  tea,  a long  expofnre 
to  the  hot  fun,  or  being  detained  in  a very  hot 
place;  much  and  violent  exercife  ; intenfe 
fludy  or  appi  cation,  or  fotne  excetlive  palhon. 

In  fuch  c;  .es,  firft  of  ail  the  patient  fhould  be 
made  to  hr. all,  or  even  to  fnuft  up  feme  vine- 
gar ; and  Ins  forehead,  his  temples,  and  his 
wrifts  fhould  be  bathed  with  it ; adding  an  equal 
quantity  of  tv  arm  water,  if  at  hand.  Bathing 
them  with  difulled  or  fpirituous  liquids  would 
be  prejudicial  in  this  kind  of  fwooning. 

2.  The  patient  fhould  be  made,  il  pofhble,  to 
fwallow  two  or  three  fpoonfuls  of  vinegar,  with 
four  or  five  times  as  much  water. 

3.  The  patient's  garters  fhould  be  tied  very 
tight  above  his  knees ; as  by  this  means  a greater 
quantity  of  blood  is  retained  in  the  legs,  whence 
the  heart  may  he  lefs  overladen  with  it. 

3.  If  the  fainting  proves  obflinate,  that  is,  it 
it  continues  longer  than  a quarter  of  an  hour,  or 

degenerates 


L 401  } 

degenerates  into  a fyncupe,  an  abolition  of  feed- 
ing and  underflanding,  he  mull  be  bled  in  the 
arm,  which  quickly  revives  him. 

3.  After  the  bleeding,  the  patient  fhould  be 
kept  hill  and  calm,  only  Jetting  him  drink,  every 
half  hour,  fome  cups  of  elder-flower  tea,  with 
the  addition  of  a little  fugar  and  vinegar. 

When  fwoonings  which  refult  from  thiscaufe 
occur  frequentlv  in  the  fame  perfon,  he  fhould, 
in  order  to  efcape  them,  purfue  the  direflions 
I fhall  mention  § 354. 

The  very  fame  caufes,  which  cccafion  thefe 
fwoonings  frequently  produce  violent  palpita- 
tions, preceding  or  following  them. 

Of  Swoonings  occajioned  by  Weaknejs. 

§ 322.  If  too  great  a quantity  of  blood,  is  fome- 
times  the  caufe  of  fwooning,  it  is  oftner  the  effeQ: 
of  a contrary  caufe,  want  of  blood. 

This  fort  of  fwooning  happens  after  great  dif- 
chargss  of  blood ; after  fudden  or  excefhve 
evacuations,  or  fuch  as  are  more  flow,  but  of 
longer  duration,  as,  for  infiance,  alter  an  inve- 
terate purging,  excefhve  fweats  ; a flood  of 
urine ; fuch  excefles  as  tend  to  exhauft  nature  ; 
obhinate  wakefulnefs  ; a long  inappetency, 
which,  by  depriving  the  body  of  its  neceffary 
fuftenance,  is  attended  with  the  fame  confe* 
quences  as  profufe  evacuations. 

Thefe  different  caufes  of  fwooning  fhould  be  - 

oppoled 


[ 402  ] 

©ppofed  by  the  remedies  adapted  to  e ch.  But 
t lie  affiftances  that  are  neced'ary  at  the  time  of 
fwooning,  are  nearlv  the  fame  for  all  cafes  of 
this  clafs : fird,  the  patients  Ihould  he  laid 
down  on  a bed,  and  being  covered,  Ihould  have 
their  legs  and  thighs,  their  arms  and  their  whole 
bodies  rubbed  pretty  flronglv  with  hot  flannels ; 
and  no  ligature  fhouid  remain  on  any  part  of 
them. 

2.  They  fhouid  have  very  fpirituous  things  to 
fmell  or  fnuff  up,  fuch  as  Hungary  water,  fpirit 
offal-ammoniac,  flrong  fmelling  herbs,  as  rue, 
fage,  rofemarv,  mint,  or  wormwood. 

3.  Thefe  fhouid  be  conveyed  into  their 
mouths ; and  they  fhouid  be  forced,  if  poffible, 
to  fwallow  fome  drops  of  brandy,  or  of  fome 
other  potable  liquor,  mixed  with  a little  water ; 
while  fome  hot  wine  mixed  with  fugar  and  cin- 
namon, which  makes  one  of  the  bell  cordials,  is 
getting  ready. 

q.Acomprefs  of  flannel,  dipt  in  hot  wine, 
in  which  fome  aromatic  hath  been  fleeped,  mud 
be  applied  to  the  pit  of  the  flomach. 

3.  II  the  fwooning  feems  likely  to  continue, 
the  patient  mud  be  put  into  a wm!l  heated  bed, 
which  Iras  belore  been  perfumed  with  burning 
fugar  and  cinnamon  ; the  friflions  of  the  whole 
body  with  hot  flannels  being  dill  continued. 

6.  As  loon  as  the  patient  can  fwallow,  lie 
fhouid  take  fome  foup  or  broth  ; or  a little  bread 
orbuifcuit,  foaked  in  hot  fpiced  wine. 

7.  Laftly, 


[ 4®3  ] 

7.  Laftlv,  during  the  whole  time  that  all  pre- 
cautions are  taken  to  oppofe  the  caufe  of  the 
fwooning,  care  mud  be  had  for  fome  days  to 
prevent  any  fainting,  by  giving  them  often,  and 
but  little  at  a time,  fome  light  vet  flrengthening 
nourilhrnent,  fuch  as  panada  made  with  foup  in- 
ftead  of  water,  new  laid  eggs  very  lightly  poach- 
ed, light  roaft  meats  with  fweet  fauce,  chocolate, 
and  foups  of  the  molt  nourilhing  meats. 

§ 323.  Thofe  fwoonings,  which  are  the  efleft 
of  bleeding,  or  of  the  violent  operation  of  fome 
purge,  are  to  be  ranged  in  this  clals. 

Such  as  happen  after  artificial  bleeding,  are 
generally  ve'ry  moderate,  commonly  terminating 
as  foon  as  the  patient  is  laid  upon  the  bed  ; per- 
fons  fubjeft  to  this  kind  fhould  be  bled  lying 
down,  in  order  to  prevent  it.  But  fhould  the 
fainting  continue  longer  than  ufual,  fome  vine- 
gar fmelt  to,  and  a little  fwallowed  with  fo.me 
water,  is  a very  good  remedy. 

The  treatment  of  fuch  fainti rig's  or  fwoonings, 
as  are  the  confequences  of  too  violent  vomits  or 
purges,  may  be  fecn  hereafter,  § 352, 

O/fdiiilings  occafioned  by  a load,  or  unea/inejs  at 
the  Stomach. 

§ 324.  It  has  been  already  obferved,  that  indi- 
geftions  were  fometimes  attended  with  fwoon- 
ings, and  indeed  fuch  vehement  ones,  as  require^ 
fpeedy  fuccour.  The  indigeflion  is  fometimes 

lefs 


[ 4°4  } 


lefs  the  effe£t  of  the  quantity,  than  of  the  quality, 
or  the  corruption  of  the  food,  contained  in  the 
flomach.  Thus  we  fee  there  are  feme  perfons, 
who  are  difordered  by  eating  eggs,  fifh,  or  arty 
fat  meat ; being  thrown  by  them  into  inexpreili- 
bld  anguilh  attended  with  fwooning.  It  may  be 
fuppofed  to  depend  on  this  caufe,  when  thefe 
very  aliments  have  been  lately  eaten;  and  when 
it  does  not  depend  on  the  other  caufes  1 have 
mentioned. 

We  fhould  in  this  cafe,  revive  the  patients  as 
in  the  former,  by  making  them  receive  fome 
very  flrong  fwell  ; but  the  molt  effential  point  is 
to  mahe  them  fwallow  a large  quantity  of  light 
warm  fluid ; which  may  ferve  to  drown,  as  it 
were,  the  indigefted  matter  ; which  may  foften 
its  acrimonv  ; and  either  effeft  the  difeharge  of 
it  by  vomiting,  or  lorce  it  down  into  the  in- 
teflines. 

Alight  infufion  of  camomile-flowers,  of  tea, 
of  fage,  of  eider- flowers,  or  of  carduus  benedidus, 
operate  with  much  the  fame  efficacy. 

The  fwooning  ceafes  at  leaf!  confiderablv 
abates. in  thefe  cafes,  as  foon  as  ever  the  vomit- 
ing commences. 

When  thefe  fwoonings  are  terminated,  the 
patient  muff  be  kept  for  fome  days  to  a very  light 
diet,  and  take  at  the  fame  time,  every  morning 
fading,  a dofe  of  the  powder  No.  38,  which  re~ 
lieves  the  flomach  of  whatever  noxious  contents 
. niiffiu 

O 


[ 4°5  ] 

Bright  remain  in  it  ; and  then  reRores  its  natural 
flrength  and  functions. 

§ 32 3.  Another  kind  of  fwooning,  refults  from 
acaufe  in  the  ftomach  ; but  different  from  this 
we  have  juR  been  treating  of.  It  a fifes  from  an 
extraordinary  fenfibility  of  this  organ,  and  from 
a general  weaknefs  of  the  patient. 

Thofe  fubjeft  to  this  malady  at e valetudinary 
perfons,  whofe  Romachs  are  at  once  very  feeble 
and  fenlible.  They  have  a little  uneafinefs  after 
a meal,  if  they  indulge  but  a little  more  than 
ufual ; or  if  they  eat  of  any  food  not  quite  fo  e3fy 
of  digeflion  ; nay,  fhould  the  weather  only  be 
unfavourable,  and  fometimes  without  any  per- 
ceivable caufe,  their  uneafinefs  terminates  in  a 
fwoon. 

Patients  fwooning,  from  thefe  caufes,  have 
more  neceffuy  for  tranquility  and  repofe,  than 
for  any  other  remedy  ; and  it  might  be  fufficient 
to  lay  them  down  on  the  bed  : but  fome  fpiri- 
tuous  liquid  may  be  held  to  their  nofe,  while 
their  temples  and  wrifis  are  rubbed  with  it ; and 
at  the  fame  time  a little  wine  given  them. 

This  fpecies  of  fwooning  is  oftener  attended 
with  a little  feverifnnefs  than  the  others. 

Of  thofe  Swoonings , which  arife.  from  nervous 
diforders. 

As  there  is  no  organ  unprovided  with  nerves  ; 
and  hardly  any  function,  in  which  the  nerves 

have 


[ 4°6  ] 

have  not  their  influence  ; it  mav  be  eafliv  com- 
prehended, that  the  vapours  being  a flate  which 
arifes  from  the  nerves  exerting  irregular  motions, 
and  all  the  functions  of  the  body  depending  part- 
ly on  the  nerves:  there  is  no  one  fymptom  of 
other  difeafes  which  the  vapours  mav  not  pro- 
duce or  imitate.  It  is  alfo  very  conceivable,  that 
the  vapours  are  a real  malady : of  which  the  fur- 
prizing  oddity  of  the  fymptoms  is  a necelfary  ef- 
fe£b  ; and  that  no  perfon  can  any  more  prevent 
his  being  invaded  by  the  vapours,  than  he  can 
prevent  the  attack  of  a fever,  or  of  the  tooth- 
ach. 

§ 327.  A few  plain  inftances  will  furnifh  out  a 
more  compleat  notion  of  the  vapours. 

If  an  involuntary  unufual  motion  in  the  nerves, 
that  are  dillributed  through  the  lungs,  Ihould 
ftraiten  the  little  vehicles,  or  bladders,  which  ad- 
mit the  frefh  air  at  every  refpiration,  the  pati- 
ent will  feel  a degree  of.  fuffocation  ; juft  as  if 
that  ftraitening  of  the  veficles  were  occaftoned 
by  fome  noxious  fteam  or  vapour. 

Should  the  nerves  which  are  diftributed 
throughout  the  whole  fkin,  bv  a fucceflion  of 
thefe  irregular  motions,  contract  themfelves,  as 
they  may  from  external  cold,  perfpiration  by 
the  pores  will  be  prevented;  whence  the  hu- 
mours, which  fhould  be  evacuated  through  the 
pores,  will  be  thrown  upon  the  kidnies,  and  the 
patient  will  make  a great  quantity  of  thin  clear 
urine,  a fymptom  very  common  to  vapourKh 

people  ; 


[ 4°7  ] 


people  ; or  it  may  be  diverted  to  the  glands  of 
the  intellines,  and  terminate  in  a watery  loofe- 
nefs,  which  frequently  proves  a very  obftinate 
one. 

Neither  are  fwoonings  tiie  lead  ufual  fymp- 
toms  attending  the  vapours : and  we  mav  be 
certain  they  fpring  from  this  fource,  when  thev 
happen  to  a perfon  fubjefl  to  the  vapours;  and 
none  of  the  other  caufes  have  lately  preceded 
them. 

Such  fwoonings,  however,  are  very  rarely 
dangerous,  and  fcarcely  require  any  a fit  fiance. 
The  patient  fhould  be  laid  upon  abed;  the 
frefh  air  fhould  be  freely  admitted  to  him  ; and 
in  fuch  faintings,  the  fmell  of  burnt  leather,  of 
feathers,  or  of  paper,  have  often  proved  of  great 
fervice. 

§328.  Perfons  alfo  frequently  faint  away,  in 
confequence  of  failing  too  long;  from  having 
eat  a little  too  much  ; from  being  confined  in 
too  hot, a chamber;  from  having  feeti  too  much 
company;  from  fmelling  too  over-powering  a 
fcent ; from  being  too  coflive  ; from  being  too 
forcibly  affected  with  fome  difcourfe  or  fenti- 
ments  ; and,  in  a word,  from  a great  variety  of 
caufes.  which  make  no  impreffion  on  perfons  in 
perfeft  health  ; but  11411011  violently  operate  upon 
them,  becaufe  their  nerves  are  too  acutely  af- 
fefted. 

As  foon  as  the  particular  caufe  is  diflinguifhed, 
which  4jas  occafioned  the  prefent  fwooning;  it 

is 


[ 4°8  ] 


is  manifeft  this  fwooning  is  to  be  remedied  by 
removing  that  caufe  of  it. 

Of  Swoonings  occafioned  by  the  Paffions. 

i 

§ 329.  There  have  been  fome  inftances  of  pcr- 
fons  dying  within  a moment,  through  exceflive 
-joy  ; and  in  a very  Abort  time,  from  rage,  vexa- 
tion, and  dread  or  horror.  I (hall  confider  here 
fuch  faintings  as  enfue  from  rage,  and  vehement 
grief  or  difappointment. 

Exceflive  rage  and  violent  affliction  are  fome- 
times  fatal  ; though  they  oftner  terminate  in 
fainting.  Exceflive  grief  is  efpecially  accompa- 
nied with  this  confequence  ; and  it  is  very  com- 
mon to  fee  perfons  thus  affetled,  fink  into  fuc- 
ceflive  faintings  for  feveral  hours.  Very  little 
afliflance  can  be  given  in  fuch  cafes:  it  is  pro- 
per, however,  they  fliould  fine  11  to  ftrong  vine- 
gar; and  frequently  take  a few  cups  of  fome  hot 
and  mild  drink,  fuch  as  balm-tea,  or  lemonade 
with  a little  orange  or  lemon  peel. 

It  is  not  to  be  fuppofed,  that  fwoonings  or 
faintings,  from  exceflive  paflions,  can  be  cured 
by  nouriflnnent.  The  condition,  into  which  ve- 
hement grief  throws  the  body,  is  that,  of  all 
others,  in  which  nouiifhment  would  be  mofl  in- 
jurious ; and  as  long  as  the  vehemence  of  the 
affliftion  endures,  the  fufferer  Ihould  take  no- 
thing but  fome  fpoonfuls  of  foup  or  broth,  or  a 
few  models  of  fome  light  meat  roafled. 


When 


r 

L 


409  ] 


When  wrath  has  rifen  fo  high,  that  the  body, 
exhaufted  by  that  violent  effort,  finks  down  at 
once  into  exceffive  relaxation,  a fainting  fome- 
times  fucceeds,  and  even  the  moft  perilous  de- 
gree of  it. 

It  is  the  moft  that  can  be  done  here,  to  let  the 
patient  be  perfeflly  ftill  awhile;  only  making 
him  fmell  to  home  vinegar.  But  when  he  is  come 
to  hirnfelf,  he  fhould  drink  plentifully  of  hot 
lemonade. 

Sometimes  there  remain  fickneffes  at  the  ftomach, 
Teachings  to  vomit,  a bitternefs  in  the  mouth, 
and  fome  vertiginous  fymptoms  which  feem  to 
require  a vomit.  But  fuch  a medicine  mull  be 
very  carefully  avoided,  fince  it  may  be  attended 
with  the  moft  fatal  confequence  ; and  lemonade 
with  glyfters  generally  and  gradually  remove 
thefe  fwoonings.  If  the  ficknefs  at  ftomach  con- 
tinue,  the  utmoft  medicine  we  Ibould  allow  be- 
fides,  would  be  that  of  No  23,  or  a few  dofes  of 
No.  24. 

Of fymptomatical  Swoonings,  or  fuch  as  happen  in 
progrefs  of  other  difeajes. 

§ 330.  Swoonings,  in  the  beginning  of  putrid 
difeafes,  denote  an  oppreffion  at  the  ftomach, 
or  a mafs  of  corrupt  humours  ; and  they  ceafe  as 
foon  as  an  evacuation  fupervenes,  whether  by 
vomit  or  ftool. 

When  they  occur  at  the  beginning  of  malig- 
nant fevers,  they  declare  the  high  degree  of  their 

Vol.  XXV.  S malignancy, 


[ 4*°  ] 


malignancy,  and  the  great  diminution  of  the  pa- 
tient’s  natural  ftrength. 

' In  each  of  thefe  cafes  vinegar,  ufed  externally 
and  internally,  is  the  beft  remedy  during  the 
paroxyfm  ; and  plenty  of  lemon-juice  and  water 
after  it. 

Swoonings  which  fupervene  in  difeafes,  ac- 
companied with  great  evacuations,  are  cured  like 
thofe  which  are  owing  to  weaknefs  ; and  endea- 
vours fhould  he  ufed  to  reftrain  or  moderate  the 
evacuations. 

Thofe  who  have  any  inward  impofthume  are 
apt  to  fwoon  frequently.  They  may  fometimes 
be  revived  a little  by  vinegar. 

§ 331.  Many  perfons  have  a (lighter  or  a deep- 
er fwooning,  at  the  end  of  a violent  fit  of  a fe- 
ver. A fpoonful  or  two  of  light  white-wine,  with 
an  equal  quantity  of  water,  affords  all  the  fuccour 
proper  in  fuch  a cafe. 

Every  fwooning  fit  leaves  the  patient  in  dejec- 
tion and  weaknefs  ; the  fecretions  from  the  blood 
are  fufpended  ; the  humours  difpofed  to  ftagna- 
tion ; coagulations,  and  obftruftions  are  form- 
ed ; and  if  the  motion  of  the  blood  is  totally  in- 
tercepted, or  confiderably  checked,  polxpufes, 
and  thefe  often  incurable,  are  formed  in  the  heart, 
or  in  the  larger  veffels. 

O 

OjHizmorrhages,  or  an  involuntary  lofs  of  blood. 

§ 332.  Haemorrhages  of  the  nofe,  after  in  flam 

matcry 


* [ d11  ] 

matory  fevers,  commonly  prove  a favourable 
crifis  ; which  bleeding  we  fhould  carefully  avoid 
flopping;  except  it  threatens  the  patient's  life. 

As  they  fcarcely  ever  happen  in  health,  but 
from  abundance  ofblood,  it  is  improper  to  check 
them  too  foon  ; left  fome  internal  obftruflions 
fhould  prove  the  confequence. 

A fwooning  fometimes  enfues  after  the  lofs  of 
only  a moderate  quantity  ofblood.  This  fwoon- 
ing flops  the  haemorrhage,  and  goes  off  without 
any  affiftance,  except  the  fmelling  to  vinegar. 
But  in  other  cafes  there  is  a fucceffion  of  faint- 
ing fits,  without  the  blood’s  flopping ; while  at 
the  fame  time,  flight  convulfive  motions  enfue. 
attended  with  a raving,  when  it  hecomes  necef- 
farv  to  flop  the  bleeding  ; and  without  waiting 
till  thefe  violent  fymptoms  appear,,  the  follow- 
ing figns  will  fufficiently  direff  us. — As  long  as 
the  pulfe  is  pretty  full  ; the  heat  of  the  body 
equally  extended  to  the  extremeties ; and  the 
countenance  and  lips  preferve  their  natural  red- 
nefs,  no  ill  confequence  is  to  be  apprehended 
from  the  haemorrage,  though  it  be  very  copious. 

But  when  the  pulfe  begins  to  faulter;  when 
the  countenance  and  the  lips  grow  pale,  and  the 
patient  complains  of  a ficknefs  at  the  ftomach, 
it  is  abfolutely  neceffary  to  flop  it.  And  confi- 
deririg  the  operation  of  remedies  does  not  im- 
mediately follow  the  application  of  them,  it  is 
fafer  to  begin  a little  too  early  than  to  delay 
them,  though  ever  fo  little  too  long. 

S2  ^333,  Firft, 


[ 412  ] 


§ 333*  then  bandages  fliould  be  ap- 
plied round  both  arms,  on  the  part  they  are  ap- 
plied over  in  order  to  bleeding;  and  round  the 
lower  part  of  both  thighs,  on  the  gartering  place ; 
to  detain  the  blood  in  the  extremities. 

2.  Next  the  legs  are  to  be  plunged  in  warm 
water  up  to  the  knees  ; for  by  relaxing  the  blood - 
veffels  of  the  legs  and  feet,  they  are  dilated  at 
the  fame  time,  and  thence  receive,  and,  in  con- 
quence  of  the  ligatures  above  the  knees,  retain 
the  more  blood. 

As  foon  however  as  the  bleeding  is  ftopt,  thefe 
ligatures  (on  the  thighs)  may  be  relaxed,  or  one 
of  them  entirely  removed  ; allowing  tiie  others 
to  continue  on  an  hour  or  two  longer;  but  great 
precaution  fhould  be  taken  not  to  flacken  them 
entirely,  nor  all  at  once. 

3.  Seven  or  eight  grains  of  nitre,  and  a fpoon- 
ful  of  vinegar,  in  half  a glafs  of  cool  water, 
fhould  be  given  the  patient  every  half  hour. 

4.  One  drachm  of  white  vitriol  mull  be  dif 
folved  in  two  fpoonfuls  of  fpring-water  ; and  a 
tent  of  lint,  or  bits  of  foft  fine  linen  dipt  in  this 
fiolution,  are  to  be  introduced  into  the  nofirils, 
horizontally  atfirft,  but  afterwards  to  be  intruded 
upwards,  and  as  high  as  may  be,  by  the  afiif- 
tance  of  a flexible  bit  of  wood  or  whale-bone. 
But  fliould  this  application  be  ineffectual: 
brandy,  and  even  fpirits  of  wine,  mixed  with 
a third  part  vinegar,  have  anfwered  entirely 
well. 


The 


[ 4*3  1 

The  prefcription  No.  67,  may  alfo  be  fen'ice- 
able  on  this  occafion.  It  mull  be  reduced  to 
powder,  and  conveyed  up  the.  noftnls  as  high  as 
may  be,  cm  the  point  of  a tent  of  lint,  which 
may'  eafily  be  covered  with  it. 

5.  When  the  flux  of  blood  is  totally  flopt, 
the  patient  is  to  be  kept  as  flill  and  quiet  As 
poffible ; taking  great  care  not  to  extrafl  the 
tent  which  remains  in  the  nofe ; nor  to  remove 
the  clots  of  coagulated  blood  which  fill  up  the 
paffage.  The  removing  of  thcfe  fhou'd  be  ef- 
fefiled  very  gradually  and  cautioufly  ; and  fre- 
quently the  tent  does  not  fpring  out  ipontane- 
oufly  till  after  many  days. 

S 334-  * I have  not  faid  any  thing  of  artifi- 
cial bleeding  in  thefe  cafes,  as  I drink  it  at  beft 
unferviceable ; fince,  though  it  may  fometimes 
have  flopt  the  morbid  lofs  of  blood,  it  has  at 
other  times  increafed  it.  Neither  have  I 
mentioned  anodynes  here,  whofe  conflant  effect 
is  to  determine  a larger  quantity  of  blood  to  the 
head. 

Applications  of  cold  water  to  the  nape  of  the 
neck  ought  to  be  wholly  difufed,  having  fome- 
times been  attended  with  the  mofl  embarraffing 
confequences. 

In  all  fluxes  of  blood,  great  tranquility,  liga- 
tures, and  the  ufe  of  the  drink  No.  2 or  q,  are 
very  ufeful. 

People  who  are  liable  to  haemorrhages,  ought 
to  manage  themfelves  conformable  to  the  di- 
S 3 regions 


C 434  ] 

regions  § 354.  They  fhdlild  take  very  little 
fupper;  avoid  all  fpirituous  liquors,  apartments 
that  are  over  hot,  and  cover  their  heads  but 
very  lightly. 

When  a patient  has  for  a long  time  been  fub- 
je£l  to  haemorrhages,  if  they  ceafe,  he  fhould  re- 
trench his  quantity  of  food  ; and  take  fome 
gentle  opening  purges,  efpecially  that  No.  24, 
and  frequently  a little  nitre  in  an  evening. 

Of  Convulfion-Tits. 

§ 335-  Convulfions  are,  in  general,  more  ter- 
rifying than  dangerous;  they  refult  from  various 
caufes;  and  on  the  removal  of  thefe  their  cure 
depends. 

In  the  fit  itfelf  little  is  to  be  done. 

As  nothing  fhortens  the  duration,  or  even 
lelfens  the  violence  of  an  epileptic  fit,  fo  no- 
thing at  all  fhould  be  attempted  in  it:  and  the 
rather,  becaufe  means  often  aggravate  the  dif- 
eafe.  We  fhould  confine  our  endeavours 
folely  to  the  fecurity  of  the  patient,  by  prevent- 
ing him  from  giving  lhmfelf  any  violent  flrokes, 
by  getting  fomething,  if  poffible,  between  his 
teeth,  fuch  as  a fmall  roller  of  linen  to  prevent 
his  tongue  from  being  hurt,  or  dangeroufly 
fqueezed. 

The  only  caufe  which  requires  immediate 
alhflance  inthe  fit,  is,  when  the  neck  is  fo  fwelled, 
and  the  face  fo  very  red,  that  there  is  room  to  be 

appre- 


[ 4*5  ] 

apprehenfive  of  an  apoplexy,  which  we  fhould 
endeavour  to  obviate,  by  drawing  eight  or  ten 
ounces  of  blood  from  the  arm. 

Some  fpecies  of  epilepfy  are  wholly  incura- 
ble : and  fuch  as  are  fufceptible  of  a«>cure,  re- 
quire the  utmofl  care  and  confideration  of  the 
moll  experienced  phyficians. 

§ 336.  Simple  convulfion  fits,  which  are  not 
epileptic,  are  frequently  of  a long  continuance, 
perfevering  with  very  few  and  fhort  intervals, 
for  days  and  even  weeks. 

The  true  caufe  fhould  be  found  as  foon  as 
poffible,  though  nothing  fhould  be  attempted  in 
the  fit.  The  nerves  are,  during  that  term,  in  fo 
high  a degree  of  tenfion  and  fenfibility,  that  the 
very  medicines,  fuppofed  to  be  flrongly  indi- 
cated, often  redouble  the  ftorm. 

Thefe  watery  liquors  are  the  mod  innocent 
things  that  can  be  given:  fuch  as  balm,  lime- 
tree,  and  elder-flower-tea.  A ptifan  of  liquorice- 
root  only,  has  fometimes  anfwered  better  than 
any  other. 

Of fujfocating  or fir  angling  Fits. 

§ 337.  Thefe  fits  (by  whatever  other  name 
they  may  be  called,)  whenever  they  fuddenly  at- 
tack a perfon,  whofe  breathing  was  eafy  juft  be- 
fore, depend  almoft  conftantly  on  a contraction 
of  the  nerves  in  the  vehicles  of  the  kino's;  or 
upon  a fluffing  of  the  fame  parts,  produced  by 
clammy  humours.  The  former  go  off  of  them- 
S 4 felves, 


[ 4*6  ] 

felves,  or  may  be  treated  like  fwoonings  owing 
to  the  fame  caufe.  See  § 327. 

§ 338.  That  fuffocation,  which  is  the  effefft  of 
a fanguineous  fulnefsand  obftru&ion,  may  be  dif- 
tinguifhed  by  its  attacking  ftrong,  fanguine  per- 
fons,  who  are  great  eaters,  ufing  much  juicy  nu- 
tricious  food,  and  ftrong  wine  and  liquors  ; when 
the  fit  has  come  on  after  any  inflaming  caufe  ; 
when  the  pulfe  is  full  and  ftrong,  and  the  counte- 
nance red. 

Such  are  cured,  1.  By  a very  plentiful  dif- 
charge  of  blood  from  the  arm,  which  is  to  be  re- 
peated, if  neceffary. 

2.  By  drinking  plentifully  of  the  ptifan  No.  1 ; 
to  three  pints  of  which,  a drachm  of  nitre  is  to 
be  added.  And, 

3.  By  the  vapour  of  hot  vinegar,  continually 
received  by  breathing. 

There  is  reafon  to  think  that  one  of  thefe  fits 
is  owing  to  humours"  in  the  lungs,  when  it  at- 
tacks perfons,  whofe  temperament,  and  manner 
of  living  are  oppofite  to  thofe  1 have  juft  defcrib- 
ed ; fueh  as  valetudinary,  weakly,  phlegmatic, 
inaftive  perfons,  who  feed  badly,  or  on  fat,  vif- 
cid,  and  infipid  diet,  and  who  drink  much  hot 
water,  either  alone,  or  in  tea-like  infufions. 
And  this  caufe  is  ftill  more  probable,  if  the  fit 
come  on  in  rainy  weather,  and  during  a fouther- 
ly  wind. 

The  moft  efficatious  treatment  is,  1 . To  give 
every  half  hour  half  a cup  of  the  portion  No.  8,  if  it 

can 


[ 4i7  ] 


can  be  readily  had.  2.  To  make  the  patient 
drink  very  plentifully  of  the  drink  No.  12;  and 
3.  To  apply  two  ftrong  blilters  to  the  flefhy 
parts  of  his  legs. 

Thofe  afflicted  with  this  malady  are  commonly 
relieved,  as  foon  as  they  expeftorate,  and  foine- 
times  even  by  vomiting  a little. 

The  medicine  No.  25,8  dofe  of  which  may 
be  taken  every  two  hours,  with  a cup  of  the 
ptifan,  No.  12,  often  fucceed  well. 

But  if  neither  this  medicine,  nor  the  prefcrip- 
tion  of  No,  8.  are  at  hand;  an  onion  of  a mode- 
date  fize  fhould  be  pounded  in  an  iron  or  marble 
mortar ; upon  this,  a glafs  of  vinegar  is  to  be 
poured,  and  then  ftrongly  fqueefed  through  a 
piece  of  linen.  An  equal  quantity  of  honey  is 
to  be  added  to  it.  A fpoonful  of  this  mixture, 
whofe  remarkable  efficacy  I have  been  a witnefs 
of,  is  to  be  given  every  half  hour. 

Of  the  vioient  Effttls  of  Fear. 

^ 339.  The  general  effefls  of  terror,  are  a 
great  contraction  of  all  the  fmall  veffels,  and  a re- 
pulfion  of  the  blood  into  the  large  and  internal 
ones.  Hence  follow  the  fuppreffion  of  perfpira- 
tion,  the  general  oppreffion,  the  trembling,  the 
palpitations  and  anguifb,  from  the  heart  and  the 
lungs  being  overcharged  with  blood;  and  fome- 
times  attended  with  fwoonings,  A heavy  drow- 
finefs,  and  a kind  of  furious  delirium  happen  in  . 

S.  5 other 


[ 4i8  ] 

other  cafes,  which  I have  frequently  obferved  in 
children,  when  the  blood  veiTels  of  the  neck 
were  fwelled  and  fluffed  up;  and  convutfions 
and  even  the  epilepfy,  have  come  on. 

When  the  humours  that  fhould  have  pafied  off 
by  perfpiration,  are  repelled  to  the  intellines,  a 
tedious  ioofenefs  is  the  frequent  confequence. 

§ 340.  Our  endeavours  fhould  be  directed  to 
re-eftablifh  the  difordered  circulation  ; to  reflore 
the  obflrufted  perfpiration  ; and  to  allay  the 
agitation  of  the  nerves. 

The  cuflom  is  to  give  the  patient  fome  cold 
water  direftly  : but  when  the  fright  is  confider- 
able,  tiiis  is  a very  pernicious  cuflom. 

They  fhould,  on  the  contrary,  ibe  conveyed 
into  fome  very  quiet  fituation,  leaving  there  but 
very  few  perfons,  and  fuch  only  as  they  are' 
thoroughly  familiar  with.  They  fhould  take  a 
few  cups  of  pretty  warm  drink,  particularly  of 
an  infufion  of  lime-tree  flowers  or  balm.  Their 
legs  fhould  be  put  into  warm  water,  and  remain 
there  an  hour,  if  they  will  permit  it,  rubbing 
them  gently  now  and  then,  and  giving  them 
every  half  quarter  of  an  hour,  a final  1 cup  of  the 
faid  drink.  When  their  compofure  is  returned 
a little,  and ’their  fkin  has  .recovered  its  warmth, 
care  fhould  be  taken  to  difpofe  them  to  fleep, 
and  to  perfpire  plentifully.  For  this  purpofe 
the}7  may  be  allowed  a few  fpoonfuls  of  wine, 
on  putting  them  to  ted,  with  one  cup  of  the 
former  infufion ; or,  which  is  more  effeftual, 

a few 


[ 4*9  ] 

a few  drops  of  Sydenham's  liquid  laudanum', 
No.  44. 

§ 341.  It  fometimes  happens  that  children  da 
not  feem  at  firft  extremely  terrified ; but  the 
fright  is  renewed  while  they  deep,  and  with 
no  fmall  violence.  The  directions  I have  juft 
given  muft  then  be  obferved,  for  fome  fucceffive 
evenings,  before  they  are  put  to  bed. 

Their  fright  frequently  returns  at  the  latter 
end  of  the  night,  and  agitates  them  violently 
every  day.  The  fame  treatment  Ihould  be  con- 
tinued in  fuch  cafes  ; and  wc  fhould  endeavour 
to  difpofe  them  to  be  afleep  at  the  ufual  hour  of 
its  return. 

By  this  very  method,  I have  difiipated  the 
difmal  confequences  of  fear  ol  women  in  child- 
bed, which  is  fo  commonly  mortal. 

Il  a fuffocation  from  this  caufe  is  violent, 
there  is  fometimes  a necefiity  for  opening  a vein 
in  the  arm. 

Thefe  patients  fhould  gradually  be  inured 
to  an  almoft  continual,  but  gentle,  kind  of 
exercife. 

All  violent  medicines  render  thofe  difeafes, 
which  are  the  confequences  of  great  fear,  in- 
curable. 

Oj accidents  or  fymptoms  produced  by-  the  vapours 
of  coal,,  and  oj  wine,. 

§ 342<  When  finall  coal,  and  efpecially  when. 

S 6 charcoal 


C 42°  ] 

charcoal  is  burnt  in  a chamber  clofe  fhut,  it  is 
clireft  poifon  to  a perfon  fhut  up  in  it.  The 
fulphurous  oil,  which  is  let  at  liberty  anddiffufed 
by  the  fire,  expands  itfell  through  the  chamber; 
while  thofe  who  are  in  it  perceive  a diforder  iii 
their  heads;  vertigos,  ficknefs  at  the  flomach,  a 
weaknefs,  and  a very  unufual  kind  of  numbnefs  ; 
become  raving,  convulfed  and  trembling;  and  if 
they  have  not  prefence  of  mind,  and  llrength  to 
get  out  of  the  chamber,  they  die  within  a fhort 
time. 

This  vapour  proves  mortal  in  confequence 
of  its  producing  an  apopleftic  diforder,  blended, 
at  the  fame  time,  with  fomething  convulftve; 
which  fufficiently  appears  from  the  clofure  of 
the  mouth,  and  the  ftriff  locking  of  the  jaws. 

Such  as  are  fenfible  of  die  danger,  and  retreat 
feafonably  from  it,  are  generally  relieved  as  foon 
as  they  get  into  the  open  air;  oi  if  they  have 
any  remaining  uneafinefs,  a little  water  and 
vinegar,  or  lemonade,  drank  hot,  affords  them 
fpeedy  relief.  But  when  they  are  fo  far  poi- 
foned,  as  to  have  loft  their  underftanding,  if 
there  be  any  means  of  reviving  them,  fuch 
means  confift ; 

1.  In  expofmg  them  to  a very  pure,  frefh.and 
open  air. 

2.  In  making  them  fmell  to  fome  very  pene- 
trating odour,  as  the  volatile  fpirit  of  fal  ammo- 
niac ; and  afterwards  furrounding  them,  as  it 
were,  with  the  fleam  of  vinegar. 


3 Iu 


[ 42 1 ] 


3.  In  taking  foine  blood  from  their  arm. 

4.  I11  putting  their  legs  into  warm  or  hot 
water,  and  chafing  them  well. 

5.  In  making  them  fwallow,  if  practicable, 
much  lemonade,  or  water  and  vinegar,  with  the 
addition  of  nitre. 

A vomit  would  be  hurtful ; and  the  Teachings 
to  vomit  arife  only  Irom  the  opprelfion  on  the 
brain. 

Hence  it  amounts  even  to  a criminal  degree 
of  imprudence,  to  fleep  in  a chamber  while 
charcoal  or  fmall-coal  is  burning  in  it. 

343.  The  bakers,  who  make  much  ufe  of 
fmall  coal,  often  keep  great  quantities  of  it  in 
their  cellars,  which  frequently  abound  fo  much 
with  the  vapour  of  it,  that  it  feizes  them  the 
moment  they  enter.  They  fink  down  at  once 
deprived  of  all  fenfation,  and  die,  if  they  are 
not  drawn  out  of  it  foon. 

" One  certain  mean  of  preventing  fuch  fatal 
accidents  is,  upon  going  into  the  cellar  to  throw 
fome  flaming  paper  into  it,  and  if  this  continue 
to  flame  out  and  confume,  there  is  no  reafon  for 
dreading  the  vapour:  if  it  be  extinguifhed,  no 
perfon  lho.uld  venture  in.  But  after  opening 
the  vent-hole,  a bundle  of  flaming  ftraw  muff  be 
fet  at  the  door,  which  ferves  to  attrafl:  the  exter- 
nal air  ffrongly.  Soon  after,  the  experiment  of 
the  flaming  paper  muft  be  repeated,  and  if  it 
goes  out,  more  ftraw  is  to  be  fet  on  fire  before 
the  cellar  door, 


C 422  ] 

§ 344-  Small-coal  is  not  fo  dangerous  as 
charcoal , the  danger  of  which  arifes  from  this, 
that  in  extinguifhing  it  by  the  ufual  methods, 
all  thofe  fulphurous  particles  of  it,  in  which  its 
danger  confifts,  are  concentred.  Neverthelefs, 
fmall-coal  is  not  entirely  deprived  of  all  iis  noxi- 
ous quality. 

When  the  mod  dangerous  Symptoms  difap- 
pear,  and  there  remains  only  fome  weaknefs, 
numbnefs,  and  a little  loathing  at  the  ftomacii, 
nothing  is  better  than  lemonade,  with  one 
fourth  part  wine,  half  a cup  of  which  fhould 
frequently  be  taken,  with  a fmall  cruft  of 
bread. 

§ 345'  The  vapour  which  exhales  from  wine, 
and  in  general  from  all  fermenting  liquors,  kills 
in  the  like  manner  with  the  vapour  of  coal ; 
and  there  is  always  danger  in  going  into  a cellar, 
where  there  is  much  wine  in  the  ftate  of  fermen- 
tation; if  it  has  been  (hut  up  clofe  for  feveral 
hours.  There  have  been  many  examples  of 
perfons  ftruck  dead  on  emeiing  one,  and 
of  others  who  have  efcaped  out  of  it  with 
difficulty. 

When  fuch  accidents  occur,  men  fhould  not 
be  expofed  one  after  another,  by  endeavouring 
to  fetch  out  the  firft  who  funk  down  upon  his 
entrance  ; but  the  air  fhould  immediatelv  be 
purified  by  the  method  already  direfled,  or  by 
difeharging  fume  guns  into  the  cellar;  and  when 
the  perfons  unfortunately  affected  are  brought 

out* 


C 423  ] 

out,  they  are  to  be  treated  like  thofe,  who  were 
affe&ed  with  the  coal-vapour. 

§ 346.  When  caves  that  have  been  long  fhut, 
are  opened ; or  when  deep  wells  are  cleaned, 
that  have  not  been  emptied  for  feveral  years, 
the  vapours  arifing  from  them  produce  the  fame 
fymptoms.  They  are  to  be  purified  by  burning 
fulphur  and  faltpetre  in  them,  or  gunpowder,  as 
compounded  of  both. 

§ 347>  The  °f  lamps,  and  of  candles, 

efpecially  when  their  flames  are  extinguifhed, 
operate  like  other  vapours,  though  with  lefs 
violence.  Neverthelefs  there  have  been  in- 
ftances  of  people  killed  by  the  fumes  of  lamps 
fed  with  nut  oil,  which  had  been  extinguifhed  in 
a clofe  room.  Thefe  lall  fumes  prove  noxious 
alfo,  in  confequence  of  their  greafinefs,  which 
being  conveyed  into  the  lungs,  prevent  their 
refpiration : and  hence  we  may  obferve,  that 
fome  perfons  find  themfelves  quickly  oppreffed 
in  apartments,  illuminated  with  many  candles. 
The  fteam  of  vinegar  is  very  ferviceable  in  fuch 
cafes. 

Of  Puifons. 

§ 348.  There  are  a great  number  of  poifons. 
Bur  arfenic,  or  ratfbane,  and  fome  particular 
plants,  are  the  poifons  which  are  moll  frequent 
in  country  places. 

It  is  in  confequence  of  its  acrimony,  that  arfe- 
nic 


r 424  ] 

nic  deftroys  by  an  cxceffive  inflamraation,  with 
a burning  fire  as  it  were  in  the  mouth,  throat, 
ftomach1,  guts. 

The  beft  remedy  of  all  is  pouring  down  whole 
torrents  of  milk,  or,  where  there  is  not  milk,  of 
warm  water.  Nothing  but  a prodigious  quantity 
of  fuch  weak  liquids  can  avail  fuch  a miferable 
patient.  If  the  caufe  of  the  diforder  is  immedi- 
ately known  after  having  very  fpeedily  taken 
down  a large  quantity  of  warm  water,  vomiting 
may  be  excited  with  oil,  or  with  melted  butter, 
and  by  tickling  the  infide  of  the  throat  with  a 
feather.  But  when  the  poifon  has  already  in- 
flamed the  ftomach  and  die  guts,  we  mull  not 
expeft  to  difcharge  it  by  vomiting.  Whatever 
is  healing  or  emollient,  decoftions  of  meally 
pulfe,  of  barley,  of  oatmeal,  of  marfhmallows, 
and  butter  and  oil,  are  the  molt  fuitable. 

As  foon  as  ever  the  pains  are  felt  in  the  belly, 
glyflers  of  milk  mult  be  very  frequently  thrown 

Up* 

If  at  the  very  beginning  the  patient  has  a 
ftrong  pulfe,  a very  plentiful  bleeding  may  be 
confiderably  ferviceable  by  its.  delaying  and  di- 
minifhing  the  inflammation. 

And  even  though  a patient  overcome  the  firft 
violence  of  this  dreadful  accident,  it  is  common 
for  him  to  continue  in  a languid  ftate  for  a long 
time,  and  fometimes  all  his  life.  The  moft 
certain  method  of  preventing  this,  is  to  live  for 
feme  months  folely  upon  milk,  turd  fome  new 

laid 


[ 4=5  3 


laid  eggs,  juft  received  from  the  hen,  and  blended 
in  the  milk,  without  boiling  them. 

§ 349.  The  plants  which  chieflv  produce 
thefe  unhappy  accidents  are  fome  kinds  of  hem- 
lock, whether  it  be  the  leaf  or  the  root;  the 
berries  of  the  deadly  nightihade,  which  chil- 
dren eat  by  miftake  for  cherries ; fome  kind  of 
nmfhrooms,  and  the  feed  of  the  ftmkiug  thorn- 
apple. 

All  poifons  of  this  clafs  prove  mortal  rather 
from  a ftupih  ing,  than  from  an  acrid,  fharp 
quality.  Vertigos,  faint ings.  Teachings  to  vomit* 
and  acfua!  vomitings  are  the  firll  ij  mptoms  pro- 
duced by  them. 

The  patient  fhould  immediately  fwallow  a 
large  quantity  of  water,  moderately  feafoned 
with  fait  or  fugar ; and  then  a vomiting  ftiould 
be  excited  as  foon  as  poftlble  by  the  prefcription 
No.  34  or  33  ; or,  if  neither  of  thefe  is  readily 
procurable,  with  radilh-feed  pounded,  to  the 
quantity  of  a tea  fpoonful,  fwaliowed  in  warm 
water,  foon  after  forcing  a feather  or  a finger 
into  the  ptatient’s  throat. 

After  the  operation  of  the  vomit,  he  muft 
continue  to  take  a large  quantity  of  water, 
fweetened  with  honey  or  fugar,  together  with  a 
conftderable  quantity  of  vinegar,  which  is  the 
true  antidote  againft  thofe  poifons. 

§ 330.  If  a perfon  has  taken  too  much  opium, 
or  any  medicine  into  which  it  enters,  he  muft  be 

bled 


[ 426  ] 

bled  upon  the  fpot,  and  treated  as  if  he  had  a 
fanguinous  apoplexy  ; for  opium  in  effett  pro- 
duces fueh  a one.  He  fhould  fnuff  up  the  va- 
pour of  vinegar  plentifully,  adding  it  alfo  libe- 
rally to  the  water  he  is  to  drink. 

OJ  acute  Pains. 

i 

§ 3,5  When  a perfon  found  and  hale,  finds 
himfelf  fuddenlv  attacked  with  fome  exceffive 
pain,  in  whatever  part  it  occurs,  without 
knowing  either  the  nature,  or  the  caufe  of 
it,  they  may,  till  proper  advice  can  be  pro- 
cured, 

1.  Part  with  fome  blood,  which,  almoft 
conftantly  affuages  the  pains,  at  leaft  for  fome 
time. 

2.  Drink  abundantly  of  fome  very  mild  tem- 
perate drink,  fuch  as  the  ptifan  No.  2,  the  al- 
mond emulfion  No.  4,  or  warm  water,  with  a 
fourth  or  fifth  part  milk. 

3.  The  whole  part  that  is  affe&ed,  and  the 
adjoining  parts  fhould  be  covered  with  catap- 
lafms,  or  foothed  with  the  emollient  fomentation 
No.  9. 

4.  If,  notwithftanding,  the  pain  continues 
violent,  and  the  pulfe  is  neither  full  nor  hard, 
the  grown  patient  may  take  an  ounce  of  fyrup  of 
diacodium,  or  fixteen  drops  of  liquid  laudanum  ; 
and,  when  neither  of  thefe  are  to  be  had,  an 

Englifh 


'[  427  ] 


Englifh  pint  of  boiling  water  may  be  poured  upon 
three  or  four  poppy  heads  with  their  feeds,  but 
without  the  leaves,  and  this  decodlion  is  to  be 
drank  like  tea. 

Perfons  very  fubjefl  to  frequent  pains,  and 
efpecially  to  violent  head  achs,  fliould  abftain 
from  all  ftrong  drink  ; fuch  abftinence  Jaeing 
often  the  only  means  of  curing  them  : and  peo- 
ple are  miftaken  in  fuppofing  wine  necetTary  for 
as  many  asfeem  to  have  a weak  fiomach. 


CHAP.  XXXI. 

Of  giving  Remedies  by  way  of  prevention. 

Sect.  352. 

nPHE  habit  of  taking  medicines,  is  no  indif- 
ferent  matter.  It  is  dangerous  and  even 
criminal  to  omit  them,  when  they  are  neceffary, 
but  not  lefs  fo  to  take  them  when  they  are 
not  wanted. 

Of  Bleeding. 

Of  an  inflammation  of  the  blood,  I have 
already  fpoken.  Here  I fhall  point  out  the 
figns  and  caufes  of  an  excefs  of  blood. 


If 


C 428  ] 


If  a man  is  a great  eater,  ahd  indulges  in 
juicy. nutritious  food,  and  efpecially  flelh  meat; 
if  he  drinks  rich  and  nourifhing  wine,  or  other 
flrong  drink,  and  at  the  fame  time  enjoys  a good 
digeition  : if  he  takes  but  little  exercife,  fleeps 
much,  and  has'  not  been  futjeft.  to  any  very  con- 
fiderable  evacuation,  he  may  well  be  fuppofed 
to  abound  in  blood. 

2.  The  total  flopping  of  fome  involuntary 
bleeding,  to  which  he  had  been  accuftomed. 
3.  A full  and  flrong  pulfe,  and  veins  vifibly  filled 
with  blood.  4.  A florid  lively  rudmefs.  5.  A 
confideruble  and  unufual  numbnefs ; a little  op. 
preflion  and  heavrnefs  from  walking.  6 Swim- 
mings of  the  bead,  efpecially  on  bowing  it  down 
and  railing  it  up  at  once.  7.  Frequent  pains  of 
the  head,  to  which  the  perfon  was  not  formerly 
fubjeft ; and  which  feem  not  to  arife  from  any 
defedl  in  the  digeft  ons.  8.  An  evident  fenfa- 
tion  of  heat  over  the  whole  body.  And  laflly, 
Frequent  haemorrhages,  and  thefe  attended  with 
manifeft  relief,  and  more  vivacitv. 

' People  fhould,  notwithflanding,  he  cautious  of 
fuppofing  an  excefs  of  blood,  from  any  one  of 
thefe  fymptoms  onlv.  Many  of  them  muft 
concur;  and  they  fhould  endeavour  to  be  cer- 
tain, that  even  fitch  a concurrence  of  them  does 
not  refult  from  a different  caufe. 

But  when  it  is  certain,  from  the  whole  ap- 
pearance, that  fuch  an  excefs  doth  exift,  then  a 


Angle 


[ 429  ] 

Tingle  or  even  a fecond  bleeding  is  attended  with 
good  effe&s. 

§ 353-  On  the  other  hand,  when  thefe  cir- 
cumitances  do  not  exilt,  bleeding  is  in  no  wife 
neceffary  : nor  Ihould  it  ever  be  practited  in  the 
following  circumflances  : except  for  fome  pani- 
cular  and  llrong  reafon. 

Fii  R,  in  a very  advanced  age,  or  in  very  early 
infancy.  2.  When  a man  is  naturally  of  a weak 
conlfnution,  or  has  been  rendered  To  by  ficknefs 
or  accident.  3.  When  the  pulfe  is  {'mail,  Toft, 
feeble,  and  the  lkin  is  pale.  4.  When  the  ex- 
tremities of  the  body  are  often  cold,  puffed  up 
and  foft.  When  his  appetite  has  been  fmall  for 
a long  time  ; his  food  but  little  nourilhing,  and 
.his  exercife  great.  6.  When  the  patient  has 
been  conliderably  emptied,  whether  by  haemor- 
rhages, a loofenefs,  profufe  urine  or  fweat.  7. 
When  he  has  long  been  afflitbed  with  fome  de- 
prefftng  difeafe.  8.  Whenever  a perfon  is 
exhaufled,  from  whatever  caufe.  9.  When  the 
blood  is  in  a thin,  pale,  and  diffolved  ftate. 

Whatever  he  the  fituation  of  the  patient,  and 
however  naturally  robufl,  that  bleeding,  which 
is  unneceffary,  is  noxious.  * Repeated  bleed- 
ings weaken  and  enervate,  haflen  old  age,  dimi- 
nifh  the  force  of  the  circulation,  thence  fatten 
and  puff  up  the^body  : and  next  by  weakening 
the  digeffions,  lead  to  a fatal  dropfy.  They  dif- 
order  the  perfpiration  by  the  fkin,  and  leave  the 
patient  liable  to  colds  and  defluxions  : they 

weaken 


r 43°  ] 


weaken  the  nervous  fyftem,  and  render  them 
fubjefd  to  vapours,  and  to  all  nervous  maladies. 

The  quantity  of  blood,  which  a grown  man 
may  part  with,  by  way  of  precaution,  is  about 
ten  ounces. 

§ 354.  Perfons  fo  conflituted  as  to  breed  much 
blood,  fhould  carefully  avoid  all  thofe  caufes 
which  tend  to  augment  it,  (fee  § 352.)  and  when 
they  are  fenfible  of  the  quantity  augmented,  they 
fhould  confine  themfelves  to  a light  frugal  diet, 
on  pulfe,  fruits,  bread,  and  water  ; they  fhould 
often  bathe  their  feet  in  warm  water,  taking  night 
and  morning  the  powder  No.  20  ; drink  of  the 
ptifan  No.  1 ; deep  but  very  moderately,  and 
take  much  exercife.  By  ufing  thefe  precautions, 
they  may  remove  all  the  danger  that  might  en- 
fue  from  omitting  to  bleed,  at  the  ufual  feafon, 
when  the  habit  of  bleeding  had  been  long  efla- 
blifhed  in  him. 

Of  Purges. 

§ 355-  The  ftomach  and  bowels  are  emptied 
either  bv  vomiting,  or  by  flools,  the  latter  dif- 
charge  being  much  more  natural  than  the  firit. 
Nevertheless,  there  are  fome  cafes,  which  re- 
quire this  artificial  vomiting:  but  thefe  excepted, 
we  fhould  rather  prefer  thofe  remedies  which 
work  by  flool. 

The  Signs,  which  indicate  a neceflity  for  purg- 
ing are,  1.  A difagreeable  fade  in  the  mouth  in 


a morning, 


C 431  ] 


a mofning  a foul,  furred  tongue  and  teeth,  difa- 
greeable  emulations,  windinefs  and  diftenfion. 

2.  A want  of  appetite  increafmg  gradually, 
without  any  fever,  which  degenerates  into  a to- 
tal averfion  to  food. 

.3.  Reachings  to  vomit  in  a morning  fading, 
and  fometimes  throughout  the  day ; fuppofmg 
fuch  not  to  depend  on  a woman’s  pregnancy. 

4.  A vomiting  up  of  bitter,  or  corrupted,  hu- 
mours. 

5.  A manifeft  fenfation  of  weight,  in  the  fto- 
mach,  the  loins,  or  the  knees. 

6.  Pains  of  the  ftomach,  frequent  pains  of  the 
head,  or  vertigos ; fometimes  a drowfinefs,  which 
increafes  after  meals. 

7.  A pulfe  lefs  regular,  and  lefs  ftrong,  than 
what  is  natural  to  the  patient,  and  which  fome- 
times intermits. 

When  thefe  fvmptoms,  or  fome  of  them,  af- 
certain  the  neceffity  of  purging  a perion,  not 
then  attacked  by  any  manifeft  difeafe,  a proper 
purging  medicine  may  be  given  him.  The  bad 
tafte  in  his  mouth  ; the  continual  belchings;  the 
frequent  reachings  to  vomit  : the  actual  vomit- 
ings difeover,  that  the  caufe  of  his  diforder  re- 
fides  in  the  ftomach,  and  fliew  that  a vomit  will 
be  of  fervice.  But  when  fuch  fymptoms  are  not 
evident,  the  patient  fhould  take  fuch  purging  re- 
medies, as  are  particularly  indicated  by  the  pains. 

§ 356.  But  we  fhould  abftatn  from  either  vo- 
miting or  purging  ; i^Whenever  the  complaints 

of 

> 


C 432  ] 

of  the  patients  are  founded  in  their  being  already 
exhausted.  2.  When  there  is  a general  drynefs 
of  the  habit,  fome  inflammation,  or  a flrong  fe- 
ver. 3.  Whenever  nature  is  exerting  herfelf  in 
fome  other  falutary  evacuation  ; whence  purging 
mult  never  be  attempted  in  critical  fweats,  dur- 
ing the  monthly  difeharges,  nor  during  a fit  of  the 
gout.  4.  Not  in  fuch  inveterate  obftruftions  as 
purges  cannot  remove.  5.  Neither  when  the 
nervous  fyftem  is  confiderafcly  weakened. 

§ 3J7-  There  are  other  cafes,  it  which  it  may 
be  proper  to  purge,  but  not  to  give  a vomit. 
Thefe  cafes  are,  1.  When  the  patient  abounds 
too  much  with  blood,  ftnee  the  efforts  which  at- 
tend vomiting,  greatly  augment  the  force  of  the 
circulation  ; whence  the  blood  vends  of  the  head 
and  of  the  bread  might  burft.  2.  For  the  fame 
reafon  they  fhould  not  be  given  to  perfons,  who 
are  fttbjefl  to  frequent  bleeding  Irom  the  nofe,  or 
to  vomiting  of  blood  ; to  women  who  are  fubjeft 
to  exceflive  or  unfeafonable  difeharges  of  blood, 
nor  to  thofe  who  are  with  child  No.  3.  to  reput- 
ed perfons; 

When  any  perfons  have  taken  too  fliarp  a vo- 
mit, or  a purge,  which  operates  with  exceflive 
violence;  we  fhould  treat  them,  as  if  they  had 
been  aftually  poifoned,  by  violent  corroding  poi- 
fons,  that  is,  we  fhould  fill  them  with  draughts 
of  warm  water,  milk,  of  bat  ley- water  ; and  alfo 
bleed  them,  if  their  pains  are  exceflive,  and  their 
pulfes  flrong  and  feveriflu 


The 


C 433  ] 

The  fviper-purgation,  is  then  to  be  flopped,  by 
the  calming  medicines  directed  $ 351.  No.  4. 

Flannels  dipped  in  hot  water,  in  which  fome 
Venice- treacle  is  diffolved,  are  very  ferviceable. 

But  Ihould  the  vomiting  be  exceflive,  without 
any  purging,  the  patient  Ihould  be  placed  in  a 
warm  bath. 

§ 358.  Purges  frequently  repeated,  without 
neceflity  are  attended  with  much  the  fame  ill  ef- 
fefts  as  frequent  bleedings.  They  deftroy  the 
digeflion  ; the  ftomach  no  longer  exerts  its 
functions  : the  inteftines  prove  inactive ; the 

patient  becomes  liable  to  fevere  cholics  ; perfpi- 
ration  is  difordered  ; defluxions  enfue  ; nervous 
maladies  come  on,  and  the  patient  proves  old, 
long  before  his  years  have  made  him  fo. 

It  is  a prejudice  generally  received,  that  per- 
fons  who  have  little  or  no  appetite  need  purg- 
ing ; but  this  is  often  falfe  ; becaufe  moft  of  thofe 
caufes,  which  deftroy  the  appetite,  cannot  be  re- 
moved by  purging. 

To  perfons  whofe  ftomachs  contain  much  vif- 
cid  matter,  purges  prove  a very  flight  and  deceit- 
ful relief.  Thefe  humours  are  owing  to  that 
laxity  of  the  ftomach,  which  purges  augment  ; 
fince  notwithftanding  they  carry  off  part  of  thefe 
vifcid  humours,  after  a few  days' there  is  a great- 
er accumulation  of  them  than  before.  The  real 
cure  of  fuch  cafes  is  affefted  by  direftly  oppofite 
medicines.  Thofe  mentioned  § 187,  are  highly 
conducive  to  it. 

VOL.  XXV. 

> 


T 


§ 359-  * The 


[ 434  ] 

§ 359*  * The  cuftom  of  taking  medicines  in- 
fufed  in  brandy,  fpirit  of  wine,  or  cherry-water, 
is  always  dangerous ; for  notwithfianding  the  pre- 
fent  relief  fuch  infufions  afford  in  fome  diforders 
of  the  ftomach,  they  really  by  flow  degrees,  im- 
pair and  ruin  that  organ ; and  it  may  be  obferved, 
that  as  many  as  accuflom  themfelves  to  drams, 
go  off,  juft  like  exceffive  drinkers;  in  confe- 
quence  of  their  having  no  digeflion;  whence 
they  fink  into  a ftate  of  depreffton  and  languor, 
and  die  dropfical.  , 

-§  360.  Either  vomits  or  purges  may  be  often 
well  omitted,  even  when  they  have  fome  ap- 
pearance of  being  neceffary,  by  abating  one  meal 
a-day  for  fome  time  : by  abftaining  from  the 
moft  nourifhing  forts  of  food  ; by  drinking  free- 
ly of  cold  water,  and  taking  extraordinary  exer- 
cife.  The  fame  regimen  alfo  fubdues,  without 
the  ufe  of  purges,  the  various  complaints  which 
often  invade  thofe,  who  omit  taking  purging  me- 
dicines, at  thofe  feafons,  in  which  they  have 
made  it  a cuftom  to  take  them. 

361.  The  medicines  No.  34  and  35,  arethe 
moft  certain  vomits.  The  powder  No.  21  is  a 
good  purge,  when  the  patient  is  no  way  feverifh. 

The  dotes  recommended  in  the  table  of  reme- 
dies are  thofe,  which  are  proper  for  a grown 
man,  of  a vigorous  conftitution.  Neverthelefs 
there  are  fome  few,  for  whom  they  m^y  be  too 
-weak  : in  fuch  circumftances,  they  may  be  in- 
t:reafed.  But  we  muft  be  careful  not  to  double 
:i  the 


[ 435.  ] 


the  dofe,  which  has  fometimes  killed  the  patient. 
In  cafe  of  purging  not  enfuing,  we  fhould  rather 
give  large  draughts  of  whey  fweetened  with  ho- 
ney, or  of  warm  water,  in  three  pints  of  which 
an  ounce,  or  an  ounce  and  a half  of  common 
fait,  mult  be  diffolved  ; and  this  quantity  is  to  be 
taken  from  time  to  time  in  fmall  cups,  moving 
about  with  it. 

§ 362.  A man  fhould  not  drink  after  a vomit, 
until  it  begins  to  work  : but  then  he  fhould  drink 

O 

warm  wateg  or  a light  infufion  of  camomile- 
flowers.i 

It  is  ufual,  after  purges,  to  take  fome  thin 
broth  during  their  operation  ; but  warm  water, 
fweetened  with  fugar  or  honey,  or  an  infufion 
of  fuccory-flowers,  would  be  more  fuitable. 

§ 363.  The  mofl  certain  prefervative,  and  the 
raofl  attainable  to  by  every  man,  is  to  avoid  all 
excefs,  and  efpecially  excefs  in  eating  and  in 
drinking.  People  generally  eat  more  than 
throughly  confifls  with  health,  or  than  permits 
them  to  attain  the  utmoft  vigour,  of  which  their 
natural  conffitutions  are  capable.  The  cuflom  is 
effabhfhed,  and  it  is  difficult  to  eradicate  it  : not- 
withftanding  we  fhould  at  leafl  refolve  not  to 
eat,  but  through  hunger,  and  always  under  a 
fubjeftion  to  reafon  ; becaufe,  except  in  a very 
few  cafes,  reafon  conflantly  fuggeffs  to  us  not  to 
eat,  when  the  ftomach  has  an  averfion  to  food. 
Sobriety  of  itfelf  cures  fuch  maladies  as  are 
T 2 otherwife 

+ One  quart,  at  four  times,  is  commonly  enough, 


C 436  ] 

otherwife  incurable,  and  may  recover  the  moft 
unhealthy  perfons. 


TABLE 

Of  the  prefcriptions  and  medicines  referred  to  in 
the  foregoing  treatife  ; which,  with  the  notes  be. 
neath  them,  are  to  be  read  b fore  the  taking , or 
application , of  any  of  the  fid  medicines. 

THE  pound  which  I mean,  throughout  all 
tliefe  prefcriptions,  is  that  confifting  of 
fixteen  ounces. 

The  drinking-glafs  or  cup  contains  three 
ounces. 

A fpoonfulis  fuppofed  to  be  half  an  ounce, 
d he  fmall  fpoon  or  tea-fpoon  contains  thirty 
drops.  Five  or  fix  of  thefe  are  equal  to  a com- 
mon foup*fpoon. 

The  bafon  or  porringer  may  be  eftimated  at 
eighteen  ounces : a fick  perfon  fhould  never  be 
allowed  to  take  more  than  a third  part  of  this 
quantity  of  nourifhment,  at  any  one  time. 

The  dofes  in  all  the  following  prefcriptions 
ate  adjufled  to  ftrong  grown  men,  from  the  age 
of  eighteen  to  that  of  fixty  years.  From  the  age 


ot 


[ 437  ] 


of  twelve  to  eighteen,  ■ vo*  thirds  of  that  dofe  will 
generally  be  fufficient  ; and  from  twelve  down 
to  feven  years  one  half,  dimimfhing  this  ftill 
lower,  in  proportion  to  the  greater  youth  of  the 
patient : fo  that  not  more  than  one  eighth  of 
the  dofe  prefcribed  fhould  be  given  to  an  infant 
under  one  year.  But  their  different  conftitutions 
will  make  a confiderable  difference  in  adjufting 
their  different  dofes.  It  were  to  be  wilhed,  that 
every  perfon  would  carefully  obferve  whether  a 
ftrong  dofe  is  neceffary  to  purge  him  ; as  exaft- 
nefs  is  important  in  adjufting  the  dofes  of  fuch 
medicines,  as  are  intended  to  purge,  or  to  eva- 
cuate in  any  manner. 

No.  l.  Take  a pugil  or  large  pinch  between 
the  thumb  and  two  fingers  of  elder  flowers  ; put 
them  into  an  earthen-ware  mug,  with  two  ounces 
cf  honey,  and  an  ounce  and  a half  of  good  vine- 
gar. Pour  upon  them  three  pints  and  one  quar- 
ter of  boiling  water.  Stir  it  a little  with  a fpoon 
to  mix  and  diffolve  the  honey;  then  cover  up 
the  mug ; and,  when  the  liquor  is  cold,  ftrain  it 
throughra  linen  cloth. 

No.  2.  Take  two  ounces  of  whole  barley, 
cleanfe  and  wafh  it  well  in  hot  water,  throwing 
away  this  water  afterwards.  Then  boil  it  in  five 
pints  of  water,  till  the  barley  burfts  and  opens. 
Towards  the  end  of  the  boiling,  throw  in  one 
drachm  and  a half  of  nitre  [fait  petre  f]  firain  it 
T 3 through 


C 438  3 

through  a linen  cloth,  and  add  one  ounce  and 
a half  of  honey,  and  one  ounce  of  vinegart. 

No.  3.  Take  the  fame  quantity  of  barley  as 
before,  and  inltead  of  nitre,  boil  in  it,  as  foon 
as  the  barley  is  put  in  to  boil,  a quarter  of  an 
ounce  of  cream  of  tartar.  Strain  it,  and  add 
nothing  elfe. 

No.  4.  Take  three  ounces  of  the  frelhelt  fweet 
almonds,  and  one  ounce  of  gourd  ©r  melon 
feeds  ; bruife  them  in  a mortar,  adding  to  them 
by  a little  at  a time,  one  pint  ol  water,  then 
llrain  it  through  linen.  Bruife  what  remains 
again,  adding  gradually  to  it  another  pint  of  wa- 
ter, then  {framing  ; and  adding  water  to  the  re- 
fidue,  till  full  three  pints  of  water  are  thus  ufed  ; 
after  which  it  may  again  be  poured  upon  the 
bruifed  mafs,  ffirred  well  about,  and  then  be 
finally  {trained  off.  Half  an  ounce  of  fugar  may 
fafely  be  bruifed  with  the  almonds  and  feeds  at 
firft ; and  delicate  perlons  may  be  allowed  a lit- 
tle orange-flower  water  with  it. 

No.  5.  Take  two  piigils  of  mallow  leaves  and 
flowers,  cut  them  fmall,  and  pour  a pint  of  boil- 
ing water  upon  them.  After  {landing ^fome  time 
ffrain  it,  adding  once  ounce  of  honey  to  it.  For 
want  of  mallows,  which  is  preferable,  a fimiiar 
glyfter  may  be  made  of  the  leaves  of  marfh-mal- 
lows,  lettuice,  or  fpinage.  A few  particular  con- 

{fitutions 

+ This  makes  an  agreeable  drink  : and  the  notion  of  its  being 
windy  is  idle : fince  it  is  fo  only  to  thofe,  with  whom  barley 
docs  not  agree.  It  may,  where  barley  is  not  procurable,  be 
made  from  oats. 


[ 439  ] 

flitutions  are  not  to  be  purged  by  any  glyfter  but 
Warm  water  alone  ; fuch  fhould  receive  no  other, 
and  the  water  fhould  not  be  very  hot. 

No.  6.  Boil  a pugil  of.  mallow-flowers,  in  a 
pint  of  barley-water  for  a glyfter. 

No.  7.  Take  three  pints  of  fnnple  barley-water, 
add  to  it  three  ounces  of  the  juice  of  fow-thiflle, 
or  of  groundfel,  or  of  the  greater  houfeleek,  or 
of  boragef. 

No.  8.  To  one  ounce  of  oxymel  of  quills,  add 
five  ounces  of  aftrong  infufion  of  elder-flowers. 

No.  9,  There  are  many  different  emollient  ap- 
plications, which  have  nearly  the  fame  virtues. 
The  following  are  the  mofl  efficacious. 

1.  Flannels  wrung  out  of  a hot  decoftion  of 
mallow-flowers. 

2.  Small  bags  filled  with  mallow-flowers,  or 
with  thofe  of  camomile,  and  boiled  either  in  milk 
or  water. 

3.  Poultices  of  the  fame  flowers  boiled  in  milk 
and  water. 

4.  A poultice  of  boiled  bread  and  milk^;. 

No.  10.  To  one  ounce  of  fpirit  of  fulphur, 

add  fix  ounces  of  fyrup  of  violets,  or,  for  want  of 
T 4 the 

+ Thefejuices  arc  to  be  procured  from  the  herbs  whenfrefhand 
very  young,  if  pofltble,  by  bating  them  in  a marble  mortar,  or  for 
want  of  fuch  [or  a wooden  mortar}  in  an  iron  one,  and  then 
fqueezung  out  the  juice  through  a linen  bag.  Itmuft  be  left  to  fet- 
tle a little  in  an  earthen  vefTcl,  after  which  the  clear  juice  mull  be 
decanted  gently  off,  and  the  fediment  be  left  behind. 

| Boiled  nettles  are  belt  of  all. 


[ 44*>  ] 

the  latter,  as  much  barley-water,  of  a thicker 
conhftence  than  ordinary. 

No.  n.  Take  an  ounce  of  manna,  and  half  an 
ounce  of  Epfom  fait ; diffolving  them  in  four 
ounces  of  hot  water,  and  ftrainingthem. 

No.  12.  Take  of  elder-flowers  one  pugil,  of 
fiyffop  leaves  half  as  much.  Pour  three  pints  of 
boiling  water  upon  them.  After  infufing  fome 
time,  flrain,  anddiffolve  three  ounces  of  honey 
in  the  infufion. 

No.  13.  The  fame  drink  bv  only  omitting  the 
hyffop,  and  adding  inftead  of  it  as  much  more 
elder-flowers. 

No,  14.  Let  one  ounce  of  thebefl  Jefuits  bark 
in  fine  powder  be  divided  into  fixteen  equal  por- 
tions. 

No.  15.  Take  of  the  flowers  of  St.  John’s  wort, 
of  elder,  and  of  melilot,  of  each  a few  pinches ; 
put  them  into  the  bottom  of  a veffel  containing 
five  or  Gx  Englifh  pints,  with  half  an  ounce  of 
oil  of  turpentine,  and  Gil  it  up  with  boiling 
water. 

No.  16.  The  fyrup  of  the  flowers  of  the  wild 
fed  corn  poppy. 

No.  17.  Very  clear  fweet  whey,  in  every  pint 
of  which  one  ounce  of  honey  is  diflolved. 

No.  18.  Take  of  hard  white  foap  Gx  drachms; 
of  e.xtra£l»  of  dandelion  one  drachm  and  a half; 
of  gum  amoniacunt  half  a drachm,  and  with  fy- 
rup of  maidenhair  make  a mafs  of  pills,  to  be 
formed  into  pills,  weighing  three  grains  each. 

No. 


No.  19.  Gargarifms  may  be  prepared  from  an 
jnffiuon  of  the  leaves  of  redrofes,  or  of  mallows. 
Two  ounces  of  vinegar  and  as  much  honey  mud 
be  added  to  every  pint  of  it,  and  the  patient 
fhould  gargle  with  it  pretty  hot.  The  deterging, 
cleanfing  gargarifm  is  a light  infufion  of  the  tops 
of  fage,  adding  two  ounces  of  honey  to  each 
pint  of  it. 

No.  20.  One  ounce  of  powdered  nitre,  divid- 
ed into  fixteen  equal  dofes. 

No.  21.  Take  of  jalap,  of  fenna,  and  of  cream 
of  tartar  of  each  twenty  grains  finely  powdered, 
and  let  them  be  very  well  mixed. 

No.  22.  Take  of  China  root,  and  of  farfapa- 
rilla  of  each  one  ounce  and  a half,  of  faffafras 
root,  and  of  the  fhavings  of  guiacum,  otherwife 
lignum  vitae,  of  each  one  ounce.  Let  the  whole 
be  cut  very  fine.  Then  put  them  into  a glazed 
earthen  veffel;  pouring  upon  them  about  five 
pints  of  boiling  water.  Let  them  boil  gently 
for  an  hour ; then  take  it  from  the  fire,  and 
flrain  it  off  through  linen.  This  is  called  the 
decoftion  of  the  woods.  More  water  may,  after 
the  firfl  boiling,  be  poured  on  the  fame  ingredi- 
ents, and  be  boiled  up  into  a fmall  decoftion  for 
common  drink. 

No.  23..  Take  one  ounce  of  the  pulp  of  tama- 
rinds, half  a drachm  of  nitre,  and  four  ounces  of 
water ; let  them  boil  not  more  than  one  minute, 
then  add  an  ounce  of  manna,  and  when  diffolv- 
ed  drain  the  mixture  off! 


[ 442  ] 


No.  24.  An  ounce-  ofcream  of  tartar,  divided 
into  eight  equal  parts. 

No.  25.  The  preparation  of  Kermes  mineral, 
othervvife  called  the  Chatrufian  powder,  Dr.  Tis- 
SOT  orders  but  one  grain  for  a dofe.  It  has 
been  directed  from  one  to  three. 

No.  26.  Take  three  ounces  of  the  common 
burdock-roct  ; boil  it  for  hall  an  hour,  with  half 
a drachm  of  nitre,  in  three  full  pints  of  water. 

No.  27.  Take  half  a pinch  of  the  heibs  prc- 
fcribed  No.  9,  Article  2,  and  half  an  ounce  of 
hard  white  foap,  fhaved  thin.  Pour  on  thele 
one  pint  and  a half  of  boiling  water,  and  one 
glafs  of  wine.  Strain  the  liquor,  and  fquccze  it 
ilrongly  out. 

No.  28.  Take  of  the  pureft  quickfilvcr  otic 
ounce;  of Vcnice-turpentine  half  a drachm,  of 
the  frelheft  hotps  lard  two  ounces,  and  let  the 
whole  be  very  we’rt  rubbed  ton;cther  into  an  oint- 
ment. 

No.  29.  The  yellow  bafilicon. 

No.  30.  Take  of  natural  and  fictitious,  or  arti- 
ficial cinnabar,  twenty-four  grains  each;  of  nutk. 
fixteen  grains,  and  let  the  whole  be  reduced  into 
fine  powder,  and  very  well  mixedt. 

No. 

+ This  medicine  was  brought’  over  from  the  Eaft-Indics  bv  Sir 
George  Cobb,  and  pubhfkcd  under  the  name  of  the  jonquin  Mc- 
dirinc.  Its  reputation  was  very  confidcrable,  and  tome  fucctfs 
was  even  obferved  from  its  ufc  in  Europe.  Dr.  Nugent  Phyiiaan 
in  Bath  has  publifhed  a cafe  wherein  its  good  effe2s  were  mani- 
feft  ; and  Dr.  Whyat,  in  his  late  Trcatifc  on  Nervous  Diforders, 
has  given  us  a limilar  inftance  of  tht  good  effects  of  thi»  mccLciac. 


C 443  ] 

No.  31.  Take  one  drachm  of  Virginia  fnake- 
root  in  powder;  of  camphor  and  afifa-fcetida  ten 
grains  each;  of  opium  one  grain,  and  with, a 
fufficient  quantity  of  conferve,  or  rob  of  elder, 
make  a bolus. i 

No.  32.  Take  three  ounces  of  tamarinds.  Pour 
on  them  one  pint  of  boiling  water,  and  after  let- 
ting them  boil  a minute  or  two,  flrain  the  liquor 
through  a linen- cloth. 

No.  33.  Take  feven  grains  of  turbith  mineral'; 
and  make  it  into  a pill  or  bolus  with  a little  crumb 
of  bread. § 

No.  34.  Six  grains  of  tartar  emetic|j. 

No.  35.  Take  thirty  grains  of  ipecacuana, 
T 6 which 

I. 

It  is  to  be  obferved  however,  that  in  both  thefc  cafes  opium  was 
given  along  with  it ; and  in  the  latter  a plaifter  of  galbanum  and 
opium  was  applied  to  the  throat. 

J When  this  is  preferred  to  No.  30.  of  which  mufk  is  an  in- 
gredient, the  grain  of  opium  fhould  be  omitted,  e<cept  once,  or 
at  mofl  twice  in  the  twenty-four  hours.  Two  dofes  of  quick- 
filver,  of  fifteen  graiqs  pch,  fhould  be  given  daily  in  the  morn- 
ing, in  the  interval  between  the  other  bolufes. 

§ This  medicine  makes  the  dogs  vomit  and  flavcr  abundantly. 
It  has  cffe&ed.  many  cures  after  the  hydrophobia,  the  dread  of 
water,  was  manifeft.  It  muft  be  given  three  days  fuccefllvely. and. 
afterwards  twice  a week,  for  fifteen  days. 

||  When  people  are  ignorant  of  the  ftrength  of  the  tartar  emetic, 
(which  is  often  various,)  or  of  the  patient’s  being  eafy  or  difficult 
to  vomit,  a dofe  and  a half  may  be  diffolved  in  a quart  of  warm, 
■water,  of  which  he  may  take  a glafs  every  quarter  of  an  hour, 
■whence  the  operation  may  be  regulated  according  to  the  rihmber 
of  vomits  or  ftools.  This  method,  much  ufed  in  Paris,  fee  ms  a- 
fafe  one.  . . 1 ■ 


[ 444  ] 

which  in  the  very  ftron'geft  conftitutions,  may 
be  augmented  to  forty-five.t 

No.  36.  The  common  bliftering  plaifier. 

No.  37.  Take  of  the  tops  of  ground  oak,  of 
the  lefier  centuary,  of  wormwood  and  of  camo- 
mile, of  each  one  pugil.  Pour  on  them  three 
pints  of  boiling  water;  and  differing  them  to 
infufe  until  it  is  cold,  flrain  the  liquor  through  a 
linen-cloth,  preffing  it  out  flrongly. 

No.  38.  Take  forty  grains  of  rhubarb,  and  as 
much  cream  of  tartar  in  powder,  mixing  them 
well  together.^ 

No.  39.  Take  three  drachms  of  cream  of  tar- 
tar, and  one  drachm  of  ipecacuana  finely  pow- 
dered. Rub  them  well  together,  and  divide 
them  into  fix  equal  parts  : or  twelve,  for  weak 
people. 

No.  qo.  Take  of  the  fimple  mixture  one 
ounce,  of  fpirit  of  vitriol  half  an  ounce,  and  mix 
them.  The  dofe  is  one  or  two  tea-fpoonfuls  in 
a cup  of  the  patient’s  common  drink.  The 
fimple  mixture  is  compofed  of  five  ounces  of 
treacle-water  camphorated,  of  three  ounces  of 
fpirit  of  tartar  reftified,  and  one  ounce  of  fpirit 
of  vitriol.  If  the  patient  has  an  infuperable 
averfion  to  the  camphor,  it  mull  be  omitted, 
though  the  medicine  is  lefs  efficacious  without 
it.  And  if  his  third:  is  not  very  confiderable, 

the 

+ In  weak  conftitutions,  ten  grains  arc  fufficicnt. 

| For  a weak  conftitution  fifteen  grains  of  each  are  quite 
fufficient. 


[ 445  ] 


the  fi'mple  mixture  may  be  given  alone,  without 
any  further  addition  of  fpirit  of  vitriol. 

No.  41.  Take  half  a drachm  ol  Virginia  fnake- 
root,  fix  grains  of  camphor,  and  make  them  into 
a bolus  with  rob  of  elder-berries.  If  the  pa- 
tient’s fiomach  cannot  bear  lo  large  a dofe  of 
camphor,  he  may  take  it  in  fmaller  dofes  and 
oftner,  viz.  three  grains  every  two  hours.  If 
there  is  a violent  loofenefs,  diacordium  mud 
be  fubdituted  inflead  of  the  rob  of  elder  berries. 

No.  42.  The  t/ier'iaca  paupirwi),  or  poor 
man’s  treacle,  in  the  dofe  of  a quarter  of  an 
ounce.  The  following  compolition  of  it  is  the 
heft.  Take  equal  parts  of  round  birthwort- 
roots,  of  elecampane,  of  myrrh,  and  of  rob 
or  conferve  of  juniper-berries,  and  make 
them  into  an  ele&uary  of  a rather  thin, 
than  very  ftiff  confidence,  with  fyrup  of  orange 
peel. 

No.  43.  The  firft  of  the  three  medicines  re- 
ferred to  in  this  number,  is  that  already  directed 
No.  37.  The  fecond  is  as  follows : 

Take  equal  parts  of  the  leffer  centuary,  of 
wormwood,  of  myrrh,  all  powdered,  and  of  con- 
ferve of  juniper-berries,  making  them  up  into 
a pretty  thick  confidence  with  fyrup  of 
wormwood.  The  dofe  is  a quarter  of  an 
ounce ; to  be  taken  at  the  fame  intervals  as 
the  bark. 

For  the  third  compolition, — Take  of  the  roots 
of  calamus  aromaticus  and  elecampane  well 

bruifed. 


[ 4i6  ] 

bruifed,  two  ounces  of  the  tops  of  the  lefler 
centaury  cut  fmall.,  a pugil ; of  filings  of  unrufted 
iron  two  ounces,  of  old  white  wine,  three  pints. 
Put  them  all  into  a wide-necked  bottle,  and  fet 
it  upon  embers,  or  on  a fiove,  or  by  the  chimney, 
that  it  may  always  be  kept  hot.  Let  them 
infufe  twenty-four  hours,  fhakingthem  well  five 
or  fix  times;  then  let  the  infufion  fettle,  and 
ftrain  it.  The  dofe  is  a common  cup  even’  four 
hours,  four  times  daily,  and  timing  it  one  hour 
before  dinner. 

No.  44.  Take  a quarter  of  an  ounce  of  cream 
of  tartar,  a pugil  of  common  camomile  ; boil 
them  in  twelve  ounces  of  water  for  half  an  hour, 
and  flrain  it  off. 

No.  45.  Sal  ammoniac,  from  two  fcruples  to 
-one  drachm  for  a dofe.  This  may  be  made  into 
a bolus  with  rob  of  elder;  but  a delicate  fiomach 
does  not  well  admit  of  this  fait. 

No.  46.  Take  one  pugil  of  camomile-flowers, 
and  as-much  elder-flowers,  bruifing  them  well  ; 
of  fine  flour  three  ounces  ; of  cerufs  and  of  blue 
fmalt  each  half  an  ounce.  Rub  the  whole,  and 
mix  them  well.  This  powder  may  be  applied 
immediately  to  the  part. 

Take  of  the  ointment  called,  (fee  No.  64,) 
nutritum,  made  with  the  neweft  fweet  oil,  two 
ounces;  of  white  wax  three  quarters  of  an 
ounce,  and  one  quarter  of  an  ounce  of  blue 
fmalt.  Melt  the  wax,  then  add  the  nutritum  to 
it,  after  the  fmalt  finely  powdered  has  been 

exactly 


_ [ 447  3 

exactly  incorporated  with  it ; ftirring  it  about 
with  an  iron-fpatula,  or  rod,  till  the  whole  is 
well-mixed  and  cold.  This  is  to  be  fmoothly 
fpread  on  linen  cloth. 

A quarter  of  an  ounce  of  fmalt  may  alfo  be 
mixed  exati.lv  with  two  ounces  of  butter  or  oint- 
ment  of  lead,  to  be  ufed  occafionally  inflead  of 
this  plailler. 

No.  47.  Take  half  an  ounce  of  Epfom  fait, 
and  two  ounces  of  tamarinds:  pour  upon  them 
eight  ounces  of  boiling  water,  ftirring  them 
about  to  diftolve  the  tamarinds.  Strain  it  oft, 
and  divide  it  into  two  equal  draughts,  to  be  gi- 
ven at  the  interval  of  half  an  hour  between  thfe 
firft  and  laft. 

No.  48.  Take  of  Sydenham’s  liquid  laudanum 
eighty  drops;  of  balm  water  two  ounces  and  a 
half.  If  the  firft  or  fecond  dofe  flops,  orconfl* 
derably  lelfens  the  vomiting,  this  medicine 
lhould  not  be  repeated. 

No.  49.  Diftolve  three  ounces  of  manna  and 
twenty  grains  of  nitre  in  twenty  ounces  of  fweet 
whey. 

No.  50. To  two  ounces  of  fyrup  of  diacodium, 
or  white  poppy-heads,  add  an  equal  weight  of 
elder- flower  water,  or  for  want  of  it,  fpring- 
water. 

No.  51.  Fifteen  grains  of  rhubarb  in  powder. 

No.  52.  Take  of  Julphur  vivum , or  of  flour  of 
brimftone,  one  ounce ; of  fal  ammoniac  one 

drachm  ; 


[ 448  ] 

drachm  ; of  frefh  hog’s  lard,  two  ounces ; and 
mix  the  whole  very  well  in  a mortar. 

No.  53.  Take  two  drachms  of  crude  of  anti- 
mony and  as  much  nitre,  both  finely  powdered 
and  very  well  mixed ; dividing  the  whole  into 
eight  equal  doles. 

No.  54.  t Take  of  filings  of  iron,  not  the  lead 
nifty,  andoffngar,  each  one  ounce;  ofanifecds 
powdered,  halt  an  ounce.  Alter  rubbing  them 
very  well  together,  divide  the  powder  into 
twenty  four  equal  portions;  one  of  which  is 
to  be  taken  three  times  a-dav,  an  hour  before 
eating. 

No.  55.  Take  of  filings  of  found  iron  two 
ounces ; of  leaves  of  rue,  and  ol  white  hoar- 
hound.  one  pugil  each  ; of  black  hellbore-root, 
one  quarter  of  an  ounce,  and  inftife  the  whole 
in  three  pints  of  wine  in  the  manner  already 
directed,  No.  43.  The  dofe  ol  this  is  one 
ftnall  cup  three  times  a-dav,  an  hour  before 
eating-i 

No.  56. 

+ The  prefcriptions  No.  54,  55,  56,  are  calculated  again)! 
diftempers  which  arife  from  oblti uftions,  and  a ftoppage  of  the 
monthly  difeharges  ; which  No.  55,  is  more  particularly  intended 
to  remove  ; thofe  of  54  and  56  are  mol!  convenient,  cither  when 
the  fuppreflion  does  not  exit!,  or  ts  r.ot  to  be  much  regarded,  if 
it  docs.  This  medicine  may  be  rendered  lefs  unpalatable  for 
perfons  in  eafy  circum fiances,  by  adding  as  much  cinnamon  irv- 
ftcad  ofanifecds;  and  tho'  the  quantity  of  iron  be  ftnall,  it  may 
be  fufficicnt  if  given  early  in  the  complaint ; one,  01  at  the  mol!, 
two  of  thefe  dofes  daily,  being  fufficicnt  for  a very  young 
maiden. 

J I chafe  to  repeat  here,  the  more  ftrongly  to  inculcate  fo 


C 449  } 


No.  56.  Take  two  ounces  of  filings  of  iron  ; 
of  rue-leaves  and  anifeeds  powdered,  each  half 
an  ounce.  Add  to  them  a fufficient  quantity  of 
honey  to  make  an  ele&uary  of  agood  confidence. 
The  dofe  is  a quarter  of  an  ounce  three  times 
daily. 

No.  57.  Take  of  the  extradl  of  the  /linking 
hemlock,  with  the  purple  fpotted  ftalk,  one 
ounce.  Form  it  into  pills  weighing  a grain  and 
a half  each  ; add  as  much  of  the  powder  of  dry 
hemlock  leaves,  as  the  pills  will  eafily  take  up. 
Begin  the  ufe  ol  this  medicine  by  giving  one 
pill  night  and  morning.  Some  patients  have 
been  fo  familiarized  to  it,  as  to  take  at.  length 
half  an  ounce  daily.if: 

No.  58.  Take  of  the  roots  of  grafs  and  of  fuc- 
cory  well  wafhed,  each  one  ounce.  Boil  them 
a quarter  of  an  hour  in  a pint  of  water.  Then 
di/folve  in  it  half  an  ounce  of  Epfom  fait,  and 
two  ounces  of  manna  ; and  drain  it  off  to  drink 
one  glafs  of  it  from  half  hour  to  half  hour,  till  its 
effefts  are  fufficient.  It  is  to  be  repeated  at  the 
interval  of  two  or  three  days. 

No.  59.  A poultice  made  of  crumb  of  bread, 
with  camomile -flowers  boiled  in  milk,  and  the 

addition 

important  a point,  that  in  women  who  have  long  been  ill  and 
languid,  our  endeavours  nuift  be  directed  towards  the  reftoring 
of  the  patient’s  health  and  ftrength,  and  not  to  forcing  down  the 
monthly  difeharges,  which  is  a very  pernicious  prattice.  Thcle 
will  return  of  courfe,  if  the  patient  is  of  a proper  age,  as  [he 
grows  better. 

} I doubt  the  virtue qF  this  medicine. 


C 450  ] 

addition  of  fome  foap,  fo  that  each  poultice  may 
contain  half  a quarter  of  an  ounce  of  it.  And 
when  the  circumftances  of  female  patients  have 
not  afforded  them  that  regular  attendance,  which 
the  repetition  of  the  poultice  requires,  as  it 
fhould  he  renewed  every  three  hours,  I have 
fuccefs  fully  directed  the  hemlock  plaifter  of  the 
fhops. 

No.  60.  Take  a fufficient  quantity  of  dr)-  hem- 
lock leaves.  Secure  them  properly  between  two 
pieces  of  thin  linen  cloth,  fo  as  to  make  a very 
flexible  fort  of  fmall  matrafs,  lei  fine-  it  boil  a few 
moments  in  water,  then  fqueeze  it  out  and  apply 
it  to  the  affefiled  part.  It  muff  thus  be  moi- 
ffened  and  heated  afrefh,  and  re-applied  every 
two  hours. 

No.  61.  Take  of  the  true  white  magnefia,  two 
drachms  ; of  cinnamon  powdered  four  grains. 
Rub  them  very  well  together,  and  divide  the 
whole  into  eiarht  dofes.  One  of  thefe  is  to  be 

O 

given  in  a fpoonful  of  milk,  or  water,  before  the 
infant  fucks. 

No.  62.  Take  of  an  extraft  of  walnuts,  made 
in  water,  two  drachms  ; and  diffolve  it  in  half  an 
ounce  of  cinnamon  water.  Fiity  drops  a day 
of  this  folution  is  to  be  given  to  a child  of  two 
years  old  ; and  after  the  whole  has  been  taken, 
the  child  fhould  be  purged.  1 his  extract  is 
to  be  made  of  the  unripe  nuts,  when  they 
are  of  a proper  growth  and  confiftence  for 
pickling. 


No.  63; 


[ 45i  ] 


No.  63.  Take  of  refin  of  jalap  two  grains. 
Rub  it  a confiderable  time  with  ten  or  fifteen 
grains  of  fugar,  and  afterwards  with  three  or  four 
fweet  altnonds  ; adding,  very  grad 'uj by,  two 
common  fpoonfuls  of  water.  Then  {train  it 
through  clear  thin  linen,  as  the  emuifion  of  al- 
monds was  ordered  to  be.  JLadly,  add  a tea- 
fpoonful  of  fyrup  of  maiden-hare  to  it.  This  is 
no  difagreeable  draught,  and  may  be  given  to  ‘a 
child  of  two  years  old  : and  if  they  are  older,  a 
grain  or  two  more  of  the  refin  may  be  allowed; 

• But  under  two  years  old,  it  is  prudent  to  purge 
children  rather  with  fyrup  of  fuccory,  or  with 
manna. 

No.  64.  Take  of  the  ointment  called  nutritum 
one  ounce  ; the  entire  yolk  of  one  fmall  egg,  or 
the  half  of  a large  one,  and  mix  them  well  toge- 
ther. This  nutritum  is  made  by  rubbing  very 
well  together,  and  for  fome  time,  two  drachms 
of  white  lead,  half  an  ounce  of  vinegar,  and 
three  ounces  of  common  oil. 

No.  63.  Melt  four  ounces  of  white  wax  ; add 
to  if,  if  made  in  winter  two  fpoonfuls  of  oil ; if 
in  fummer  none  at  all,  or  at  moll  not  above  a 
fpoonful.  Dip  in  this  flips  of  linen  cloth  not 
worn  too  thin,  and  let  them  dry  : or  fpread  it 
thin  and  evenly  over  them. 

No.  66.  Take  of  oil  of  rofes  one  pound  ; of 
red  lead  half  a pound  ; of  vinegar  four  ounces. 
Boil  them  together  nearly  to  the  confidence  of  a 

plaider  j 


[ 4.5 2 ] 


plaifier ; then  diiTolve  in  the  liquid  mafs  an 
ounce  and  a half  of  yellow  wax,  and  two 
drachms  of  camphor,  ftirring  the  whole  about 
well.  Remove  it  then  from  the  fire,  and  fpread 
it  on  fhe’ets  or  nips  of  paper,  of  what  fize  you 
think  moft  convenient.  The  ointment  of 
Chambauderie , fo  famous  in  many  families  on 
the  continent,  is  made  of  a quarter  of  a pound 
of  yellow  wax,  of  the  plaifterof  three  ingredients 
(very  nearly  the  fame  with  No.  66.)  of  com- 
pound diachylon  and  of  common  oil,  of  each 
the  fame  quantity,  all  melted  together,  and  then 
ftirred  about  well,  after  it  is  removed  from  the 
fire,  till  it  grows  cold.  To  make  an  oil  cloth, 
it  mull  be  melted  over  again  with  the  addition 
of  a little  oil,  and  applied  to  the  linen  as  directed 
No.  65. 

No.  67.  Gather  in  autumn,  while  the  fine 
weather  lafls,  the  agaric  of  the  oak,  which  is  a 
kind  of  fungus  or  excrefcence,  iffuing  from  the 
wood  of  that  tree. 

It  confifis  at  firfl  of  four  parts,  which  prefent 
themfelves  fucceflively  ; l.The  outward  rind  or 
fkin,  which  may  be  thrown  away.  2.  1 hat  part 
immediatelv  under  this  rind,  which  is  the  belt  of 
all.  It  is  to  be  beat  well  with  a hammer,  till  it 
becomes  foft  and  very  pliable.  1 Ins  is  the  only 
preparation  it  requires,  and  a flice  of  it  of  a 
proper  fize  is  to  be  applied  direttly  over  the 
buiftiug  open  blood- veilels.  It  conflringes  and 

brings 


C 453  ] 

brings  them  clofe  together:  (lops  the  bleedings ; 
and  generally  falls  off  at  the  end  of  two  days.  3. 
The  third  part,  adhering  to  the  fecond  may 
ferve  to  flop  the  bleeding  from  the  fmaller  vef- 
fels ; and  the  fourth  and  laft  part  may  be  re- 
duced to  powder,  as  conducing  to  the  fame 
purpofe. 

No.  68.  Take  four  ounces  of  crumbs  of  bread, 
a pugil  of  elder-flowers,  and  the  fame  quantity 
of  thofe  of  camomile,  and  of  St.  Johns,  wort. 
Boil  them  into  a poultice  in  equal  quantities  of 
vinegar  and  water. 

If  fomentations  fltould  be  thought  preferable, 
take  the  fame  herbs:  throw  them  into  a pint 
and  a half  of  boiling  water  ; and  let  them  infufe 
fome  minutes.  Then  a pint  of  vinegar  is  to  be 
added,  and  flannels  or  other  woollen  cloths 
dipped  in  the  fomentation,  and  wrung  out,  are  to 
be  applied  to  the  part  affeffled. 

For  the  aromatic  fomentations,  take  leaves  of 
Tetony  and  of  rue,  flowers  of  rofemary  or  of 
lavender,  and  red  rofes,  of  each  a pugil  and  a 
half.  Boil  them  for  a quarter  of  an  hour  in  a 
pint  with  a cover,  with  three  pints  of  old  white 
wine.  Then  ftrain  off,  fqueezing  the  liquor 
ftrongly  from  the  herbs,  and  apply  it  as  already 
directed. 

No.  69.  The  plaifter  of  diapalma.t 

No.  70. 

+ To  fpread  this  upon  lint,  it  mutl  be  melted  down  again 
with  a little  oil. 


[ 454  ] 


No.  70.  A mixture  of  two  parts  water,  and 
one  part  of  vinegar  ol  litharge. 

No.  71.  Take  of  the  leaves  of  fow-bread,  and 
of  camomile  tops,  of  each  one  pugil.  Put  them 
into  an  earihen  velfel  with  half  an  ounce  of  foap, 
and  as  much  fal  ammoniac,  and  pour  upon  ti^em 
' three  pints  of  boiling  water. 


The  End  of  the  Twenty- Fifth\  olume. 


THE 

CONTENTS 


Of  the  Twenty -Fifth  Volume. 


Paqe 

Primitive  Phyfic;  or,  an  eafy  and  natural 
way  of  cuiing  mo/t  difeafes  — 3 

Advices  with  rej'petl  to  health,  exiratled  from 
a late  author  - — — 150 

Chap.  I.  Of  the  ufual  caufes  of popular  maladies  1 37 
Chap.  II.  Of  the  caufes  which  aggravate  dif- 
eafes — — 162 

Chap.  III.  Of  the  means  that  ought  to  be  ufed 
at  the  beginning  oj  dijeajcs ; and  of  the 
diet  in  acute  difeafes  — — 170 

Chap.  IV.  Oj  an  inflammation  oj  the  lungs  180 
Chap ,\T . Oj  the pleunfy  — — ig8 

Chap.  VI.  Of  the  difeafes  of  the  throat  202 

-Chap.  VII.  Of  colds  — — • 209 

Chap.  VIII.  Of  the  difeafes  oj  the  teeth  214 

Chap.  IX.  OJ  the  apoplexy  — 218 

Chap.  X.  Oj  the  violent  infuence,  or  froke  of 
the  fun  — — 225 

Chap.  XI.  Of  the  rheumatif m . 230 

Chap.  XII.  Of  the  bite  of  a mad  dog  240 

Chap.  XIII.  Of  the  fmall-pox  — 247 

Chap, 


CONTENTS. 


Page. 


Chap.  XIV.  Oj  the  meafles  — 260 

Chap.  XV.  Of  the  burning  fever  — ■ 265 

Chap.  XVI.  Of  putrid  fevers  — 270 

Chap-  XVII.  Oj  malignant  fevers  2 77 

Chap.  XVIII.  Of  intermitting  fevers  -283 

Chap.  XIX.  Of  the  eriflpe/as,  and.  biles  of 

animals  29~ 

Chap.  XX.  Of  inflammations  of  the  breafl , 

and  of fiilfe  and  bilious pleurijies  — 298 

Chap.  XXI.  Of  colicks  — 3°3 

Chap.  XXII.  Of  the  iliac  pafflon , and  the 
cholera  morbus  — 3*5 

Chap.  XXIII.  Of  the  diarrhoea  — 320 

Chap.  XXI W.  Of  the  dyf enter y — 322 


Chap.  XXV.  The  treatment  of  difeafs  pecu- 

..  028 

liar  to  women  o 

Chap.  XXVI.  Directions  concerning  children  343 

Chap.  XXVII.  Diredions  with  ref  peel  to 

drowned  pofons  3 57 

Chap.  XXVIII.  Of  fubflances  Jlopt  between 

the  mouth  and  thejlomach  — 3^2 

Chap.  XXIX.  Of  external  diforders,  and 

fuch  as  require  chirurgical  applications  371 

Chap.  XXX.  Of  fwoomngs  — 399 

Chap.  XXXI.  Of  remedies  by  way  of  proven - 

tion  — 427 

Table  of  the  preferiptions  andremedies  referred 

to  in  this  treatije  — — 43^ 


ERRATA,  Vol.  XXV. 


Page  Line. 

9 9 r natural 

53  27  r amputated 
59  6 r plumbago 

40  8 infcrt2.nd.oi 

4+  20  r warm  water 
48  24  r fleam 
fi  15  r drained 
5811  r lawrr/ 

63  — r z/^ethum 

64  16  r quince 

jo  21  r DecoSUon  of 
95  antepen.  r and  every 
(where 

— — r A Aim 
102  3 r with  wine 

— 3 r fchirrous 

106  11  r quick -bea»i 

107  12  infer t Electrifying 

thro’  the  bread:  is 
ofadmirabie  fer  vice 


117 

19 

r 

Or  apply 

i2g 

3 

r 

into  their 

*32 

3 

r 

Or,  take 

1 39 

13 

r 

lenti/1' 

145 

3 

r 

varirous 

*33 

J7 

r 

internal 

— 

20 

r 

fen/ible 

168 

5 

r 

lblid 

J92 

S 

r 

comprcflca' 

Line . 

23  r diforder 
2 r like  the 
10  r three 
9 r liable 
penult  dele  then 

23  r animal 
ult.  r to  the 

24  r porion,  and  fo 
over  and  over 

9 r malady 
24  r two  fpoonf nils 
8 r wor ne  out 
18  r it  may 
7 r in  a 

2 infert  cloths  dipt 

(therein 

3 r paiafull 
2 r violent 

13  r ditficiilr/y 

4 r Avpoffible 
16  r wiefuW 

6 r refu/red 
22  dele  No.  3 to  re- 
(puted  perfonj 
antepen.  effected 
2$  r one 
penult,  dele  of  pills 
4 r Chartruiian 
22  r factitious 


Page 

21  I 

218 

220 

2J2 

253 

259 

28l 

283 

286 

300 

306 

315 

341 

349 

352 

356 

567 

393 

43  2 

433 

438 

440 

442 


■ 


I 


* 


