ee 
Tame war gareay our 
baeeerees 


ees 


a ate 
rar 


: 
te 
rea 
Ps 


pases 
area sre rerse 
rent 


paiednnd 

seers 

ee 
eee 


pre oe ero ea ee 
eer 
iieanare 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
In 2025. 


https://archive.org/details/owb_ 1T3-BNU-007 | 


THE LORD FROM HEAVEN 


“We have read all Sir 
Robert Anderson’s 
books but, in our opin- 
ion, this is about the 
weightiest of them 
all.” 

— Tue Lire oF Farr 


THE LORD 
FROM HEAVEN 


A Study of the Deity 
of the Lord Jesus Christ 


SIR ROBERT ANDERSON, 
E:GB., LI.D: 


Tan Kampen Pics 


INC. 
WHEATON, ILLINOIS 


This edition, reprinted after many years, 
is dedicated to the members of 
Bible Schools and Seminaries 
Christian Booksellers Association 
Christian Business Men’s Committee 
The Gideon’s International 
Pocket Testament League 
Youth For Christ, International 
and all other Christians 
who revere and honor the Name of 
THE LORD JESUS CHRIST 


PREFATORY NOTE 


SIR ROBERT ANDERSON kindly invites me, as an old friend, 
to prefix these few lines to his book on Tue Derry or Cunist. 
I count it an honor to do so. 

On the supreme greatness and significance of the subject 
I need not dwell. To Christianity, if it is the Christianity 
of original fact, and not of late and arbitrary theory, the 
Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ, true, proper, absolute, is vital. 
It was an insight into that vitality which, in the fourth 
Christian century, made Athanasius strong contra mundum— 
“against the world,” at least against a vast proportion of the 
then professing Church, backed in some stages of the struggle 
by the nominally Christian State. He saw that no compromise 
was possible, if man’s salvation was to be proclaimed and 
received in its divine fulness. His opponents were prepared 
to say practically anything of the greatness of the Christ 
short of this—that without reserve, without compromise, sans 
phrase, He is Gop. And the victory was won, for the Church 
and for the world, on two grounds, which have everything 
to do with each other. On the one hand, it was shown that 
the Gospel record of the Lord cannot be fairly explained, 
just as it stands, without the recognition of His true Deity— 
manifested in true Manhood, but true Deity none the less. 
On the other hand, the human soul, then as now, once fully 
awakened to itself and to its needs, to its mysterious great- 
ness and to its mysterious but awfully real sinfulness, can 
find rest only in a Saviour who is, in equal truth, one with 
man and one with God. Such a Saviour bridges, as with living 
adamant, the gulf of doom and sin, which severs creature 


5 


INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL 
OF THEOLOGY LIBRARY . 5OO0S9E 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


from Maker. A Saviour not quite God is a bridge broken. 
at the farther end. 

The author handles his great theme with a penetration 
and force all his own, and at the same time with worshipping 
reverence, and with whole-hearted reliance on the Written 
Word. I pray our Master’s blessing on this close study of 
the witnesses for the glory of Christ, done not by an official 
advocate of the faith, but by one long versed in weighty 
and difficult duties of civil law and order, accustomed through 
his whole life to the keenest of facts, and to the ruthless 
exposure of fallacy. 

Just here and there, upon details which do not touch 
the real argument, my personal opinion may vary somewhat 
from the author's. But I say this only to accentuate my sense 
of the value of the whole work, its reverence, its penetration, 
its suggestiveness, its witness to the glory of the Christ of God. 


HanpbLeEY DUNELM. 


AUTHOR’S NOTE 


SOME years ago the author was asked to mediate between 
the Committee of one of our Missionary Societies and certain 
of their younger agents, whose faith had been disturbed by 
Moslem hostility to the truth of the Sonship of Christ. Though 
not unversed in the literature on the subject, he could find 
no book that definitely met the difficulties of the missionaries, 
and the project of writing such a book was suggested to him. 
And a recent correspondence disclosed the fact that, by those 
who deny the Lord’s Deity, that truth is supposed to depend 
- on the special texts which teach it explicitly. 

These pages accordingly seek to unfold the doctrine of 
the Sonship, and to call attention to some of the indirect 
testimony of Scripture to the Deity of Christ. The book is 
not controversial. It is a Bible study. And if the perusal of 
it proves as helpful to any, as the writing of it has been to 
the author, its purpose will be satisfied. 

He wishes here to acknowledge help received in the 
preparation of it. To the Bishop of Durham he is under very 
special obligations for kindly and valuable criticism and 
counsel. And his labors were lightened by his friend, Miss 
A. R. Habershon, who, besides aid freely given in other ways, 
prepared for his use a New Testament “concordance” of the 
names and titles of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

It may be well to mention that in these pages the refer- 
ences to Scripture do not specify which of our Versions is 
quoted, save where it is desired to call special attention to 
the reading adopted. 


us 


PREFACE 
TO THE SECOND EDITION 


THE publication of this book has brought me many striking 
proofs that a book of this kind is needed. The mass of men 
are unreached by learned works upon this great subject, and 
mere popular treatises fail to convince the thoughtful. But 
in these pages there is nothing which any Bible student can- 
not follow, and yet they contain enough to satisfy all who 
accept the authority of Christ as a divine Teacher, or the 
authority of Holy Scripture as a divine revelation. And this 
being the scheme of the book, I have refrained from quoting 
the writings of theologians; and my acquaintance with ancient 
controversies has been used solely to enable me to shun the 
heresies which provoked them. 

It would seem that very many who, by habitually repeat- 
ing the creeds, give a conventional assent to the doctrine of 
the Deity of Christ, are practically agnostics in relation to 
it. And to me this discovery is made still more startling by 
the fact that their doubts seem to be confirmed by the language 
of the very formulas which were intended to set the question 
at rest for ever. For the phrase, “the persons of the Trinity,” 
apparently conveys a meaning wholly different from that 
which the original words were intended to express. And to 
the illiterate it suggests error which leaves them an easy prey 
to the Unitarian propagandist. 

As the Latin Dictionary tells us, the word persona is 
“from per-sono, to sound through”; and it means “a mask, 
especially that used by players, which covered the whole head, 


9 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 


and was varied according to the different characters to be 
represented.” And, according to the Oxford English Diction- 
ary, our word “person” means “(1) a character sustained or 
assumed in a drama, or the like, or in actual life; part played; 
hence function, office, capacity; (2) an individual being.” It 
will thus be seen how closely the primary and classical signi- 
fication of “person” is allied to the Latin persona, and what 
slight affinity it has with the popular and ordinary meaning 
of the word. And yet its ordinary meaning has a definite in- 
fluence upon the minds of ordinary people when they speak 
of “the persons of the Trinity.” 

The Deity is not to be likened to a triumvirate acting 
in unison. God is One. But He has manifested Himself as 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; and the crowning manifestation 
of Himself was in the Son. At the coming of Christ He was 
“manifested in flesh.” The somewhat doubtful revised read- 
ing of I Timothy 3:16 in no way affects the force of the 
passage. The statement that the Man of Nazareth “was mani- 
fested in flesh” would be nothing better than a grandiloquent 
platitude. “He who was manifested in flesh” must refer to 
God. The words are the equivalent of John 1:18, which 
tells us that the Son has declared Him. 

But, we are asked by people who own that they are in 
the habit of repeating the creeds, “How could the Son be 
God, seeing that He prayed to God, and spoke of God as 
a Being distinct from His own personality?” This is a real 
difficulty; and it is not to be met by attempting to explain 
“the mystery of God, even Christ,” but by freely owning that 
the mystery is one which reason cannot solve. How strange 
it is that while, on “the authority of the Church,” men give 
an unquestioning assent to the superstitions of what they deem 
to be “the Christian religion,” we hesitate to accept the 
mysteries of the Christian faith upon the authority of the 
Word of God! And with great humility I hazard the opinion 


10 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


that, in their zeal for the truth, the orthodox Fathers went 
to unwise lengths in analyzing and defining the Deity. But 
be that as it may, certain it is that the formularies of those 
days create difficulties in many devout minds in our own times. 

In presence of the mystery of God, which, we are 
expressly told, we cannot fathom, our part is simply to accept 
the “It is written.” But let us see to it that what we accept is 
really what is written. I am here reminded of help received 
many years ago from having my attention called to the Greek 
text of John 1:1. My lesson was learned during a railway 
journey, and my teacher was a Roman Catholic friend, one 
of H.M.’s judges of the Supreme Court, who pointed out to 
me the significance of the presence of the Greek article in the 
one clause, and its absence in the other clause, of the familiar 
passage. 

Our English idiom fails us here; but if we might use 
the word “Deity” as a synonym for “God,” any one could 
appreciate the difference between the statement that the 
Word was with the Deity, and the further statement that the 
Word was Himself Deity. 

Of course the Unitarian fritters away the force of this. 
But even in days when the language of Scripture is treated 
with reckless freedom, the signficance of the words which 
follow cannot be evaded. For we are told, “All things were 
made by Him”; and if the Creator of all things be not God, 
language has no meaning. Classic paganism, indeed, could 
fall back on the figment of a subordinate God—a conception 
which modern enlightenment rejects—and the Arian heresy 
would never have gained such a hold in the Patristic Church 
had not the minds of so many of the Fathers been corrupted 
by the paganism of their early training (see p. 57 post). 
Indeed, we learn from I Corinthians 8 that even the Chris- 
tians who enjoyed the benefit of direct Apostolic teaching 
were not wholly free from pagan error in this respect. 


ce 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 


We need to keep this in view in reading that chapter, 
for the sixth verse, “To us there is one God the Father,” is the 
Unitarian’s charter text. And this, we are told, is rendered 
the more emphatic by the sequel, “And one Lord Jesus Christ.” 

And the teaching here is aimed at the pagan errors which 
then prevailed; and, in view of the immediate context, it is an 
impossible suggestion that the Apostle Paul intended to teach 
that the Lord Jesus Christ was but a creature. For the added 
words, “by whom are all things,” unequivocally declare the 
truth which is more fully revealed in Colossians 1:15-17, that 
the Lord Jesus is the Creator of the universe. And if this do 
not assert His Deity, I again repeat, words have no meaning. 
He “by whom are all things” must be God. Any one, there- 
fore, who refuses the truth that the Lord Jesus is God, must 
acknowledge two Gods. 


The Christian reads the passage in the light of the words, 
“I and My Father are One.” But, we are told, these words 
are to be explained by His prayer to the Father on behalf 
of His people, “that they may be one even as we are One” 
(John 17:22). Surely we might suppose that even a child 
could understand the difference between perfect unity and 
essential oneness. When Hooker wrote, “Our God is one, or 
rather very oneness,” he was not giving expression to a mere 
platitude, but to divine truth about the God whom we know 
as Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. 


The prayer of the betrayal night points to the time when 
the unity between His people and God will be as perfect 
as the unity between the Father and the Son. But that is vastly 
different from essential oneness. Will that unity empower 
them, either corporately or as individuals, to create worlds, 
to forgive sins, or to give life to whom they will! And these 
supreme prerogatives of Deity pertain to the Lord Jesus 
Christ. There is no escape from the dilemma in which this 


12 


THE Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


places us. If there be not two Gods, we must own that the 
Father and Son are One. 

But, some one demands, “How then do you explain—?” 
Without waiting to hear what form the inquiry assumes, we 
reply at once that we do not attempt to explain “the mystery 
of God.” “No one knoweth the Son, save the Father.” And 
the force of this is intensified by the sequel, “Neither doth 
any one know the Father, save the Son, and he to whom- 
soever the Son willeth to reveal Him.” The truth of the 
Fatherhood is a mystery revealed in Christ: the truth of the 
Sonship remains an unrevealed mystery which transcends 
reason, but which faith accepts. In teaching our children we 
often find that what to us seems clear is beyond the mental 
grasp of childhood; and yet we fail to recognize that divine 
truth may be beyond the capacity of finite minds. “Canst 
thou by searching find out God? Canst thou find out the 
Almighty to perfection?” The Arian controversy assumes that 
we can! 

Heresy trades upon isolated texts, and the Unitarian 
heresy, as we have seen, ignores even the context of the 
words on which it relies. Take another striking instance of 
this. At the grave of Lazarus “Jesus wept.” And presently 
“He lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee that 
Thou hast heard me.” What proof this gives of His humanity, 
and that His relation to God was that of a man dependent on 
the divine Father! Yes, truly; but at that same time, and 
in that very scene, it was that He spoke the words, “J am 
the resurrection and the life.” No Gentile, perhaps, can 
fully realize what those words conveyed to a devout Jew. 
If He who uttered them was not divine in the fullest and 
most absolute sense, the men who crucified Him were obeying 
one of the plainest commands of the divine law in putting 
Him to death. 


13 


PREFACE TO SECOND EDITION 


In saying this we assume, of course, that the Lord actually 
spoke the words attributed to Him. For these pages are 
addressed to Christians; and if the Gospels be not the divinely 
accredited records of His ministry, the Christian faith must 
give place to agnosticism in the case of all but the super- 
stitious. 

And while utterly rejecting the Kenosis theology—that our 
Lord’s words were at times the expression of divine truth, 
and at other times of Jewish error—we may notice that, as 
these particular words were in such violent opposition to all 
Jewish thought, they must, even on that profane hypothesis, 
be accepted as divine. 

With some people religious doctrines seem to be kept 
in water-tight compartments. And thus they can hold divine 
truth along with human error which conflicts with it. But 
truth is really one, and if any part be assailed the whole is 
imperiled. If, for example, we let go the Deity of Christ, 
which is the foundation truth of Christianity, the doctrine of 
the Atonement is destroyed. For in the whole range of false 
religions there is not a more grotesquely silly superstition 
than that the death of a fellow-creature could expiate the sin 
of the world. 


But in these days the need of expiation is largely ignored. 
And this because the ordinary conception of sin is so inade- 
quate as to be practically false. Therefore it is that the truth 
of the Lord’s Deity is held so lightly. For men are content 
with a vague belief in reconciliation brought about in some 
undefined way by the example of a perfect life and a self- 
sacrificing death. And even this is lost by those who adopt 
the figment that the Lord belonged to a higher type of 
creaturehood than humanity. Certain it is that He who died 
for men must Himself be man. And yet were He only man 
His death would avail us nothing; for, as the Bishop of Dur- 


14 


THe Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


ham puts it, “A Saviour not quite God is a broken bridge at 
the farther end.” 

And we must be on our guard against another error. 
The popular conception of “a divine man,” “a God-man,” a 
being half human and half divine, savors of old-world pagan- 
ism. The Lord Jesus Christ is “very man” and yet “very 
God.” He is the “type” and pattern of humanity, and yet 
He is the Son of God in all which that title signifies. He 
is the only God the world shall ever know. Apart from Him 
“no one has ever seen God”: apart from Him no one of man- 
kind can ever see Him. 

And He it is who died for us. For “He who knew no 
sin was made sin for us.” And if it be demanded how this 
could be, we answer with Bishop Butler, “All conjectures 
about it must be, if not evidently absurd, yet at least uncer- 
tain.” “And,” as he adds, “no one has any reason to complain 
from want of further information unless he can show his claim 
to it,’ God here retreats upon His divine Sovereignty, and 
faith accepts the divine “It is written.” 

But everything depends upon the Deity of Christ; and, 
therefore, as Athanasius said long ago, in contending for that 
great truth “we are contending for our all.” 

R. A. 


15 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY: THE QUESTION AT ISSUE 
Prof. Harnack quoted—The Divinity of Christ is now admit- 
ted, but His Deity is denied—Renan quoted—The Tubingen 
School—The Schmiedel School—The New Testament teach- 
es the Deity of Christ-The Crucifixion proves that the 
Lord laid claim to Deity-The answer made by Unitar- 
ianism. 
CHAPTER II 
THE MEANING OF “SON” IN SCRIPTURE 


Ordinary meaning of the word—Its figurative meaning—The: 


distinction between “Son” and “Child”; ignored in Author- 
ized Version—The Christian as such is a “Child,” but is 
not called a “Son’—Illustrative passages cited—Personality 
of the Apostle John—Meaning of Barnabas’ name. 


CHAPTER III 
THE SON OF MAN Sess aty cian re ome 
Meaning of that title-The Lord’s use of it—It connotes a 
heavenly glory—It does not refer to His human birth—As 
Son of Man He is Lord of the Sabbath, forgives sins, and 


has all judgment committed to Him—How and when we 
shall see God. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE SON OF GOD 


Christ the mystery of God—An incident in the French 


Chamber—An unscriptural definition of the Sonship—“The 
Onlybegotten Son”—Meaning of the term, and its use in 
Scripture—The perversion of Paul’s defense of the Resur- 
rection illustrates the evil of “explaining” such mysteries— 
The Virgin Birth-The Lord laid claim to Deity. 


16 


PAGE 


19 


29 


38 


CHAPTER V 
THE TESTIMONY OF THE FIRST GOSPEL 


The distinctive characteristics of the Four Gospels—Matthew 
and John compared—The sermon on the Mount was a claim 
to Deity—In Matthew 11, 16 and 24 the Lord laid claim 
to Deity—Dr. Edersheim and Isaiah 63—“Silly Billy” on 
the Trinity. 


CHAPTER IV 
THE TESTIMONY OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


The omissions of the Fourth Gospel an evidence of Inspira- 
tion—The purpose of the Fourth Gospel—The Arian con- 
ception of a subordinate God was due to paganism— 
Passages in John illustrate the Lord’s claim to Deity—His 
Deity proved by the resurrection of Lazarus, and by the 
Apostles’ miracles. 


CHAPTER VII 
THE TESTIMONY OF JAMES AND THE HEBREWS 


Edersheim quoted in illustration of it—Character, value, and 
date of James’ Epistle, and his testimony to the Deity— 
The testimony of Hebrews—Character and authorship of 
Hebrews, and Paul’s connection with it—If Christ be not 
God, He must be a creature—The indirect evidence of the 
Deity—The faith of the first disciples. 


CHAPTER VIII 
THE TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE PAUL 


The testimony of Spiritualism to inspiration—The training of 
a prophet—The Apostle Paul’s suffering—His stoning at 
Lystra—His “thorn in the flesh”—His turning to Jerusalem 
—-His personality and antecedents lend weight to his testi- 
mony to the Deity—Quotations from his Epistles. 


CHAPTER Ix 
THE TESTIMONY OF THE REVELATION 

The unity of Scripture exemplified by Revelation—Importance 

of the book—It refutes a “Christ after the flesh” religion— 

Thepresent-day attacks on Scripture—The Apocalyptic 

visions establish the Deity—The only tenable alternative 
stated in the language of the “New Theology.” 


17 


PAGE 


47 


55 


62 


69 


80 


CHAPTER X PAGE 
“FOR THE SAKE OF HIS NAME”... .. :« 88 


The Lord’s claim to Deity, and to Divine honor—Prevailing 
irreverence in naming Him—Christendom copies the Jewish 
exorcists—Queen Victoria’s letters—The mode in which the 
Lord is named in the Gospels; and in the Epistles—The 
practice of Paul; and of Peter—A closing appeal for 


reverence, 
CHAPTER XI 
THE REVELATION OF GRACE, AND THE LIFE 
TO} GOMES 0 S.c fa oe ae ee ee 


The Eden promise—The primeval revelation and ancient 
mythologies—The seeming incredibility of Christianity— 
The faith that overcomes the world—Conventional beliefs 
and real faith—Organized Christianity has failed—The 
Christian revelation apparently falsified by facts—The 
explanation of this—Grace a lost truth—The Lord in the 
Synagogue of Nazareth—The day of grace, and the day 
of vengeance—Punitive action against sin awaits the day 
of judgment—A pandemonium and a bonfire!—That the 
Church will convert the world is a grotesque figment— 
The coming of Christ is the hope of both Church and 
world—Conclusion. 


APPENDIX 
NOTE “TO: CHAPTER O1V) tase ge os ee ee eee 


The argument of Arius, and the answer to it—The false 
inferences based on the word “onlybegotten”—The Virgin 
Birth—Why it is not mentioned in the Epistles—The 
meaning of the word “firstborn” (prototokos), and the 
passages in which the word occurs. 


WO TEETO: CHAPTERLX vnc) eee eieetrse UE 


Illustrative publications: a syllabus of addressess, a theo- 
logical work, a publisher’s circular, and a book of piety 
—The rationalistic character of modern theological works— 
Irreverence in naming the Lord—The practice of the 
Fathers—The mode in which the Lord is named in the 
Gospels, and in Acts and the Epistles—Comments on the 
prevailing practice—“The Lord’s death, till He come”— 
Our hymnology—“Safe in Jehovah’s keeping.” 


18 


CuHapPtTeErR I 


INTRODUCTORY: THE QUESTION AT ISSUE 


“THE great English philosopher, John Stuart Mill, has some- 
where observed that mankind cannot be too often reminded 
that there was once a man of the name of Socrates. That is 
true; but still more important is it to remind mankind again 
and again that a man of the name of Jesus Christ once stood 
in their midst.” 

These are the opening sentences of a well-known work 
from the pen of the greatest Rationalists of this century. But in 
this twentieth century such a reminder is an anachronism. 
For infidelity has changed its ground, and the facts of the 
life and ministry of Christ no one now denies. The only 
question in dispute today relates to His personality. Who 
and what was the Great Teacher whose advent changed the 
history of the world? 

As the result of the controversies which raged around 
that question in the early centuries, the creed of Christendom 
proclaims His Deity. But in these days the creed of Christen- 
dom has been thrown into the melting-pot. And the real 
aim of the Christianized Rationalist, concealed beneath a 
cloak of Christian terminology, is to prove that the “Jesus 
Christ” who once stood in our midst was but a man. 

And the great problem of the ages has today assumed 
a new and subtle phase. For that which was formerly the 
issue in the Unitarian controversy is no longer in dispute. 
The divinity of Christ is now acknowledged even by the 
infidel. “Rest now in thy glory!” Renan exclaims in an out- 


1Prof, Adolf Harnack’s “What is Christianity?” 
19 


THE QUESTION AT IssUE 


burst of enthusiastic homage. “Thy work is achieved, thy 
divinity established. . . . Between thee and God men shall 
distinguish no longer.” Indeed it is accepted even by the 
base apostasy which masquerades as “the New Theology.” 


For, we are told, God is “immanent” in human nature, 
and we are all His sons. The Nazarene’s title to divinity 
therefore is not only undisputed, but it is admittedly pre- 
eminent, albeit it is not exclusive. Every prince of the blood 
is a royal personage. But not even the Prince of Wales, 
unique though his position be, has either the power or the 
dignity of kingship. The parable needs no interpreting: the 
question at issue today is not the divinity of Christ, but His 
DEIrTy. 

In dark days now past, when the avowal of “heretical” 
beliefs involved suffering and loss, men thought deeply before 
they strayed from the beaten tracks of “orthodoxy.” They 
knew what it meant to “gird up the loins of their mind.” But 
slovenly-mindedness is a marked characteristic of religious 
thought in this shallow and silly age of ours. The catch 
phrases of the fashionable pulpit or the popular press are 
accepted without any sort of mental struggle; and “historic 
beliefs” are jettisoned without the slightest exercise of heart 
or conscience. And yet, having regard to the transcendent 
importance and solemnity of the question here at issue, such 
levity is intolerable. For if the “historic beliefs” are true, the 
coming of Christ was the crisis of the world.? 

While then, with the Rationalist, the Great Teacher was 
“a man of the name of Jesus Christ,” the Christian maintains 
His Deity. This belief, moreover, is based on the writings 
of His first disciples; and if the beliefs of the Apostles and 
other writers of the New Testament on a subject of such 
supreme importance do not reflect the teaching of their 
2See John 12:81. 


20 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


Lord, and of the Holy Spirit who was given to guide them 
into all truth, faith in Christianity is mere superstition. 


That the New Testament teaches the Deity of Christ 
is so indisputable that the infidel accepts the fact, and the 
task he sets himself is to disparage the testimony of the 
writers. In Baur’s day this was achieved by maintaining that 
most of the sacred books were not written by the men whose 
names they bear, but belong to a later age. It is achieved 
in our day by insisting that, just because the writers were 
His disciples, they were not impartial witnesses, and their 
evidence is therefore unreliable. 


Such are the ways of those who attack the Bible. “The 
Tiibingen school”® implicitly allowed that if the New Testa- 
ment had been written by the Lord’s contemporaries, the 
evidence would be valid. The Schmiedel school today insist 
that, just because the writers were His personal disciples, 
they were not impartial, and their evidence should be rejected! 
To put it tersely, no one who believed in His claims should 
be allowed a hearing in support of His claims. 


The conception of a tribunal which acted on this princi- 
ple would be delightful in a “nonsense book” or in a farce to 
be acted on the stage. It is a theory of evidence unknown in 
any civilized community—ancient or modern. And no less 
absurd would it be if applied to history. Suppose, for example, 
a life of Queen Victoria written on the system of excluding 
everything derived from those who knew and honored her! 
3It might be in order to say that this is a term applied to a theological 

movement which had its origins in the teachings of Ferdinand Chris- 
tian Baur, of the University of Tiibingen, in Germany. His distinctive 
and guiding principles were those of the Hegelian philosophy. It was 
his aim to reconstruct the history of early Christianity so that it would 
be seen to be in harmony with the laws which supposedly govern his- 
torical evolution. Accordingly he supposed a conflict between the teach- 


ings of Paul and of Peter. But after Paul’s death a reconciliation was 
effected which resulted in the establishment of the old Catholic Church. 


21 


THE QUESTION AT IssUE 


How, then, does the matter stand? Upon the question 
here at issue, the testimony of the disciples is so clear that 
even the infidel acknowledges that it would deserve accept- 
ance if it were confirmed by independent evidence. But no 
confirmatory evidence is more convincing than that of hostile 
witnesses, and the fact that the Lord laid claim to Deity is 
incontestably established by the action of His enemies. We 
must remember that the Jews were not a tribe of ignorant 
savages, but a highly cultured and intensely religious people; 
and it was upon this very charge that, without a dissentient 
voice, His death was decreed by the Sanhedrin—their great 
national Council, composed of the most eminent of their 
religious leaders, including men of the type of Gamaliel and 
his great pupil, Saul of Tarsus. 

That He was of the royal house of David was proved by 
the official genealogies. That He did great miracles was 
universally acknowledged, and not even His enemies denied 
that all His acts and, save on one vital point, all His words, 
were worthy of His Messianic claims. How, then, can the 
fact be accounted for that good men—men who had a zeal for 
God—condemned Him to death as a blasphemer? The 
answer is not doubtful. It was not for His good deeds that 
He had been threatened with stoning, but because, said they, 
“Thou, being a man, makest Thyself God.” And upon this 
charge it was, I repeat, that He was arraigned. Had that 
charge been false, had it been due to a perversion of His 
words, He would, as a devout Jew, have repudiated it with 
indignant earnestness, whereas His acceptance of it was 
unequivocal. 

“Not so,” the Unitarian will object, “the accusation was 
not that He claimed to be God, but that He called Himself 
the Son of God; and the answer He gave—that He was yet 
to sit ‘on the right hand of power’—was in keeping with all 
His teaching. The very assertion of His Sonship was itself 


22 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


an acknowledgment that He took a subordinate place, oat 
owned the Supreme as His Father and His God.” 

Are we to conclude, then, that the crucifixion of Christ 
was due to a misunderstanding which any one of us might 
have put right, if only we could have gained a hearing before 
the Sanhedrin on that fateful day? The alternative to this 
absurd suggestion is that the assertion of His Sonship was 
essentially to Deity. And this suggests an inquiry of extreme 
interest and importance respecting the use and meaning of 
the word “son” in the New Testament. 


23 


CHAPTER II 


THE MEANING OF “SON” IN SCRIPTURE 


IT IS unnecessary to notice passages where the word “son” 
stands for remote descendant, as, for example, in the first 
verse of the first Gospel, or in the familiar phrase “Children 
of Israel,” or again, when the Lord declared that in building 
the tombs of the prophets the Jews bore witness that they 
were the “sons” of those who slew them.? Still less need we 
notice the numerous occurrences of the word in its primary 
and common acceptation. But such is the influence of our 
English Bible upon our habits of thought and speech that 
when we are told that James and John were “sons of thunder” 
the phrase seems as natural as when we read that they were 
sons of Zebedee. Our English Bible, I say advisedly; for when 
the Revised Version first appeared, people were inclined to 
resent such unfamiliar phrases as “sons of the bridechamber,” 
and “sons of disobedience.” And yet the distinction between 
“son” and “child” is of great importance; and in ignoring it 
our translators have sometimes obscured, or even perverted, 
vital truth. 


In the Sermon on the Mount, for instance, the Lord 
seems to say that by loving their enemies men may become 
children of God. But this is utterly opposed to Christian 
teaching. It is by birth, and only by birth, that the relation- 
ship of father and child can be created. Moreover the Lord 
was there addressing His disciples.* 


1The word in the original is Sons of Israel. 
2Matthew 28;29-31. 
8Matthew 5:44, 45, 


24 


Tue Lorp rromM HEAVEN 


Again, the A.V. reads, “As many as received him, to 
them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them 
that believe on his name, which were born . . . of God.” 
But this is no less inaccurate. Thus it is indeed that we become 
children of God, and “children” is the word here used; but 
sonship connotes what children ought to be. “As many as 
are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.”5 

To many the statement may seem startling, but its truth 
can be easily tested, that in the New Testament believers in 
Christ, as such, are never designated sons of God. In other 
words, that phrase never occurs as a mere synonym for 
“children of God.” The words of Galatians 3:26 may seem 
to be an exception to this, but in fact they afford a striking 
illustration of it. For when the Apostle writes, “Ye are all 
the sons of God, through faith, in Christ Jesus,” he uses the 
word “sons” in a peculiar sense, his purpose being to mark 
the difference between the position of children under age, 
and of those who have attained their majority. In this Chris- 
tian dispensation the people of God are no longer treated 
as in a state of nonage, “under tutors and governors,” but 
are now deemed to be of full age, and take rank as sons.® 

In Hebrews 12:8, again, the word “sons” occurs in a 
sense equally foreign to our English use for it marks the 
distinction between the legitimate offspring and the illegiti- 
mate, to the latter of whom the status of son is denied. 

These two passages are quite exceptional, the word 
“son” being employed to connote dignity or privilege, whereas 
it is generally used to indicate character or nature. And it 
is noteworthy that when the word is employed in this ethical 
sense, no thought of parentage is involved, unless, perhaps, 
remotely, and by way of a poetic figure. The Gentile Galatian 
“4John 1:12, 13. 


5Romans 8:14, R.V.; cf. Il Corinthians 6:17, 18. 
6See Galatians 4:1-5, and Alford in loco. 


25 


THE MEANING OF “SON” 


converts, for example, could have no possible claim to be 
“children of Abraham,” nor would the Apostle have thus 
described them; but, though not “sons of the stock of Abra- 
ham,”? he tells them that “they which are of faith, the same 
are sons of Abraham.” The word is here used as definitely in a 
figurative sense, as in the phrase “sons of thunder.” 

And that phrase might teach us to distinguish between 
the traditional “St. John” and the Apostle of that name. The 
one was a soft, womanly creature, whereas “the beloved 
disciple” was a bold and manly man who used strong, stern 
words. For with him those who cherish malice are murderers; 
and those who belittle the Lord Jesus Christ, or deny His 
glory, are liars and anti-Christs. And remembering that his 
brother, the Apostle James, was a man of the same type, we 
can well understand why his death was specially pleasing to 
the Jews when he fell as a victim of Herod’s malignity. 

If Joseph (or Joses) had been called “a child of conso- 
lation,” we might suppose him to have been the recipient 
of very special comfort; but when we read that the Apostles 
surnamed him Barnabas, or “son of consolation,”® we conclude 
that he was a man of intensely sympathetic spirit. 

In the same way “sons of wrath” would be Greek for 
the Hebrew “sons of Belial”; but when the Epistle to the 
Ephesians tells us that by nature we are “children of wrath,” 
the words are meant to express our condition and destiny. 
So, again, the phrase “a child of disobedience” might perhaps 
imply that the individual was the progeny of a parent’s sin, 
whereas “sons of disobedience” describes what men are 
essentially and as to their very nature.!° 


TActs 13:26. The R.V. is in error here. The word is “sons.” 
8Galatians 3:7. 

®Acts 4:36. 

10Ephesians 2:2, 8, and 5:6 (Col. 8:6). 


26 


THE Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


The fact that the Apostle exhorts the Ephesians to walk 
as “children of light,” whereas “sons of light” is his word to 
the Thessalonians,"! may seem to indicate that in this instance, 
at least, the words are used as synonyms. But an examination 
of the passages will make it clear that here, as elsewhere, 
the words carry their distinctive meanings. The one statement 
describes the normal condition and environment of the Chris- 
tian the other relates to his character and nature. There is a 
double parallel: “Watch and be sober” answers to “Walk as 
children of light,” but “Ye are all sons of light” answers to 
“Ye are light in the Lord.” 


This may remind us of the Lord’s words in explaining the 
Parable of the Unjust Steward: “The sons of this world are 
for their own generation wiser than the sons of the light.”!? 
The comparison here is not between earth and heaven, but 
between those who belong morally to the present economy 
and those who are “light in the Lord.” But in another pas- 
sage, where the Lord speaks of “sons of this world” and “sons 
of the resurrection,” the contrast is merely between our con- 
dition in the present economy, and what we shall be when 
we “attain to that world.” He thus uses the phrase in a 
double sense. In the one case, “sons of this world (or age)” 
includes all who belong to this economy in the sense of 
being in it, whereas in the parable it indicates those who are 
of it. 

Nor will this seem strange if we keep in mind that in 
Scripture the word bears an Oriental and essentially figura- 
tive meaning. And this is true, even where a literal sense 
might seem possible, as for example, when the Apostle Peter 
appeals to the Jews as “sons of the prophets.”* His audience 
11Ephesians 5:8; I Thessalonians 5:5. 
12L,uke 16:8. 


13Luke 20:34-36, 
14Acts 3:28. 


27 


THe MEANING OF “SON” 


may, of course, have included some who were actual descend- 
ants of the prophets; but the words he added, “and of the 
covenant,” make it clear that no such thought was in his 
mind. In addressing them as “sons of the prophets and of 
the covenant,” he was appealing to them as heirs of the hopes 
and promises of which the covenant and the prophecies spoke. 

So again, when the Apostle Paul denounced Elymas 
the sorcerer as “Thou son of the devil,”!> his Oriental hearers 
would understand his words as describing the man’s character 
and nature. And in this same sense it was that the Lord 
Himself branded the typical proselyte of the Pharisees as 
a “son of hell.”1¢ 


15Acts 13:10. 
16Matthew 23:15. 


28 


CuaPter III 


THE SON OF MAN 


THIS preliminary inquiry will help us to appreciate the 
significance of the word “Son” in the titles of our Divine 
Lord. And first as to His self-chosen designation of Son of 
Man. Is it, as the Rationalist and the Jew would tell us, a 
mere Hebraism meaning no more than that He was human? 

The English reader misses the significance which the 
Greek article lends to the words in the original. But it is 
recognized by scholars; and those who wish to evade it 
maintain that the Lord spoke in Palestinian Aramaic, and 
in that dialect, they declare, the phrase could not have the 
meaning which the Christian assigns to it. But we can afford 
to ignore discussions of this kind. For words are like 
counters, in that their value is settled by those who use them; 
and there can be no doubt as to the significance which the 
Lord Himself attached to this His favorite title. 

When, for example, He exclaimed, “The foxes have holes 
and the birds of the air have nests, but the Son of man hath 
not where to lay his head,” it is clear that the contrast 
implied in His words was between the highest and the 
lowest. The humblest creatures had a home, but He, “the 
firstborn of all creation,’? was an outcast wanderer. This 
is the first occurrence of the phrase in the New Testament, 
and in Scripture a first occurrence is often specially signifi- 
cant. And certain it is that on the last occasion on which 
He used the title—it was when on His defense before the 
Sanhedrin—His purpose was, by declaring Himself to be the 


1Matthew 8:20. 
2Colossians 1:15, R.V. 


29 


THe Son oF Man 


Son of Man of Daniel’s vision, to assert His claim to heavenly 
glory.’ 

For while the first vision of the seventh chapter of 
Daniel (like the vision of the second chapter) is of earthly 
kingdoms in relation to Israel and Israel’s Messiah, the vision 
which follows, in which He is seen as “Son of Man” in 
heaven, reveals a wider sovereignty and a higher glory. In 
many a learned treatise the question is discussed whether 
this be a Messianic title at all; and in not a few this question 
becomes merged in an inquiry whether the Jew regarded it 
as such. But the Lord’s words before the Sanhedrin clearly 
point to the conclusion suggested by His use of the title in 
the passage already cited, namely that it was His rejection 
as Messiah that led Him to declare Himself the Son of Man.4 

And this conclusion is confirmed by the record of the 
martyr Stephen’s vision. His murder was Jerusalem’s final 
rejection of Messiah. For he was the messenger sent after 
the King to say they would not have Him to reign over them. 
And as his eyes were closing upon this world, they were 
opened to see the heavenly vision Daniel saw—“the Son of 
Man on the right hand of God.”> 

It was not His human birth that constituted Him the 
Son of Man. That birth, indeed, was the fulfilment of the 
promise which the name implied; but the Son of Man, He 
declared explicitly, “descended out of heaven.”6 And He 
said again, “What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend 


’Without attempting to limit the meaning of His saying, “the Son of 
Man which is in heaven” (John 8:18), it certainly implies “whose place 
i in heaven” (Alford). It is a heavenly title, therefore, and a heavenly 
glory. 

4His crucifixion was the climax of a rejection that declared itself at the 
very beginning of His ministry. “He came unto His own, and His own 
received Him not. 

5Acts 7:56. Cf. Luke 19:14, 

6John 3:13. 


80 


Tye Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


up where he was before?”? When, therefore, He proclaims 
that “the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was 
lost,"* came “to give his life a ransom for many,” faith 
responds intelligently in the words of that noblest of the 
Church’s hymns, “When Thou tookest upon Thee to deliver 
man, Thou didst not abhor the Virgin’s womb.” For the 
virgin birth was but a stage in the fulfilment of His mission. 


Nor was it as the Virgin’s Son, but as the Son of Man, 
that He claimed to be “Lord even of the Sabbath,” and to 
have “power upon earth to forgive sins.”. And, according to 
the language of our English Versions, it is as the Son of 
Man that the prerogative of judgment has been committed 
to Him. The Father, He said, “hath given him authority 
to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of Man.”?° 
But a reference to the original discloses the fact that here 
the form of the words suggests that His purpose is to empha- 
size that it is because He is Man that He is appointed to be 
the judge of men." 


The revelation of the Son of Man will lead the spiritual 
Christian, who has learned to note the hidden harmony of 
Scripture, to recall the language of the creation story: “Let 
us make man in our image, after our likeness.”1? “The type,” 
as the biologist would phrase it, is not the creature of Eden, 


7John 6:62. 

8Luke 19:10. 

9Matthew 20:28. 

10John 5:27. 

11Fighty times the words “Son of Man” occur as uttered by the Lord; 
but here, and here alone, they are anarthrous (see p. 29 ante). Bishop 
Middleton maintains (“The Greek Article,” p. 246) that the absence 
of the articles makes no difference; and he accounts for it by saying 
that “Now, for the first time, has Christ asserted His claim to the title: 
in all other places He has assumed it.” But surely this would be a valid 
reason only if this were either the first time, or the last, of His using 
the words. 

12Genesis 1:26. 


$1 


Tue Son oF MANn 


but He after whose likeness the creature was fashioned. And 
this suggests the solution of a “mystery.” We are but men, 
and while angels behold the face of God, no man hath seen 
Him or can see Him.!2 We are “flesh and blood,” and “flesh 
and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God.”* And yet 
as men we are to dwell in heavenly glory; and that wonderful 
promise shall be fulfilled to us—“They shall see his face.” 

How is this seeming paradox to be explained? “Flesh 
and blood” are not essential to humanity. True it is that, as 
“the children are partakers of flesh and blood, He also Him- 
self likewise took part of the same.'® He assumed “a natural 
body.” “For there is a natural body, and there is a spiritual 
body.” The one pertains to the “first man,” who is “of the 
earth earthy, the other to “the second Man,” who is “of 
heaven.”!* For the Lord from heaven is “Very Man,” and it 
is as Man that He is now upon the throne. But the body is 
not the man: it is but the tent, the outward dress, as it were, 
which covers Him. And He is “the same yesterday, and today, 
and for ever”;!8 the same who once trod the roads of Galilee 
and the streets of Jerusalem. He is enthroned as Man, but 
no longer now in “flesh and blood.” For ere He “passed 
through the heavens” He changed His dress. 

And we too “shall be changed.” “As we have borne the 
image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the 
heavenly.” The image, or pattern, of the earthy is the Adam 
of the Eden creation; that of the heavenly is the last Adam, 
the Lord from heaven. And He will “fashion anew the body 
of our humiliation, that it may be conformed to the body of 
18Timothy 6:16, 
14T Corinthians 15:50. 
15Revelation 22:4. 
16Hebrews 2:14. 


17] Corinthians 15:44, 47. 
18Hebrews 18:8. Cf. 1:12. 


32 


THe Lorp rromM HEAVEN 


his glory.° For the triumph of redemption will be in 
restoring us to the place which Adam lost by sin, but in 
raising us to the perfectness of the new creation, of which 
the Lord from heaven is the head. The eyes of our faith 
are not fixed upon the blessedness of Eden, but upon the 
glory of “the Holy Mount”; for “we know that when he shall 
appear we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.”?° 
We must bear in mind, then, the distinction so clearly 
marked in Scripture between the Lord’s essential glory as 
the Son of Man, and what He became in virtue of His human 
birth. Nor is this all. We need to remember also that, because 
of His humiliation, He has been raised to a position and a 
glory beyond what is revealed in the Hebrew Scriptures, or 
even in the doctrinal teaching of the Gospels. “He humbled 
himself, becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death 
of the cross. Wherefore also God highly exalted him and 
gave unto him the name which is above every name.”?? 


In view of His prayer on the night of the betrayal, how 
can this be understood? “And now,” He said, “O Father, 
glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I 
had with thee before the world was.”? A higher glory is 
inconceivable, and this glory was His by right: what meaning, 
then, can be given to the statement that He was raised to the 
highest glory in virtue of the cross? There is only one expla- 
nation possible, namely that it is as Man that He has been 
exalted. It is not that as the Son of Man, by inherent right, 
He has “ascended up where He was before,” but that as the 
Crucified of Calvary He is enthroned in all the glory of God. 

And this may explain what to some may seem a difficulty. 
The Apostle John was not only “the disciple whom He 
19Philippians 3:21. 
20J John 3:2, 
21Philippians 2:8,9, R.V. 
22John 17:5. 


Tue Son oF MAN 


loved”—he was one of the favored three who were with Him 
on the Mount of Transfiguration; how is it, then, that while 
that vision of glory served only to excite wondering worship, 
and led the disciples to pray for its continuance,” he was 
so completely overwhelmed by the vision of the Lord vouch- 
safed to him at Patmos? “When I saw Him,” he writes, “I 
fell at His feet as dead.” May not the explanation be that, 
whereas the glory of “the Holy Mount” was that of “the 
Son of man coming in his kingdom,”* the Patmos vision 
revealed Him in all the fulness of the supreme glory to which 
He was exalted when “begotten again from the dead”? He 
was “like unto the Son of Man”; but “His eyes were as a 
flame of fire.” “And he had in his right hand seven stars; 
and out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword, and his 
countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength.”?° 

And it is as thus exalted that the Christian is called 
upon to know Him and to worship Him. It is not that there 
are many Christs, but that “upon His head are many crowns.” 
Nor is it that the Lord Jesus of Bethlehem and Calvary is 
lost to us. “He laid His right hand upon me, saying unto 
me, Fear not,” is the seer’s record of the scene when he lay 
like one dead in presence of such awful glory. But though 
his hand held the stars of that vision of glory, it was the same 
loving hand that had so often rested on him in the days of 
the humiliation. And though that voice was “as the sound 
of many waters,” the words were such as the beloved disciple 
was doubtless used to hear during the ministry of the forty 
days—“I am he that liveth, and was dead; and, behold, I am 
alive for evermore, Amen; and have the keys of hell and 
of death” (Rev. 1:18). 
23“Lord, it is good for us to be here” (Matt. 17:4). 
24The division of the chapters obscures the connection between Matthew 


16:28 and the record of the Transfiguration. 
%Revelation 1:14, 16. 


34 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


That supreme glory was His, I repeat, by inherent right. 
“Originally in the form of God,” and “on an equality with 
God,” are the words of the often-cited text. But, not counting 
this “a prize” (or “a thing to be grasped”), He emptied 
Himself—divested Himself of it all.?¢ 
The inference of the rationalistic “Higher Criticism” is 
that during His earthly sojourn He was, in effect, a mere 
man, and therefore a dupe of the ignorance and error which 
prevailed among the Jews of His time. And this, moreover, 
not merely in ordinary matters, but in the sphere that most 
vitally concerned His ministry and His mission.?" Strange it 
is that even unspiritual men can fail to be shocked by the 
profanity of this; stranger still that even a surface acquaint- 
ance with the Gospels does not enable them to detect its 
falseness. For the antithesis so often emphasized in His 
teaching was not between the divine and the human, but 
between the Father and the Son. 
Nor was this the limit of His self-renunciation. He not 
merely “emptied Himself” in coming into the world, but, 
“being found in fashion as a man He humbled Himself.” 
And yet He claimed to forgive sins, and to be Lord of the 
Sabbath and in the hour of what seemed His greatest weak- 
ness and shame He declared that He could summon myriads 
of angels to His help.” 
Is this the attitude, is this the language, of “a Jew of 
His time’? As we read the record we realize that we are in 
the divine presence of the Son of Man. And yet He humbled 
26Philippians 2:6, 7. (See R.V., margin. ) 
27Here are the words of the standard textbook of the cult: “Christ .. . 
held the current Jewish notions respecting the divine authority and 
revelation of the Old Testament.” (Hasting’s Bible Dict., article “Old 
Testament,” p. 601.) 

28“But,” He added, as with divine knowledge He surveyed the wide field 
of the prophetic Scriptures, “how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled?” 
(Matt. 26:53, 54). 


85 


Tue Son or Man 


Himself to the extent of giving up even His liberty as a man, 
and refraining, not merely from doing His own will, but 
even from speaking His own words. 

The holiest of men could not be trusted thus. When, 
in His dealings with the exiles of the Captivity, God needed 
a prophet who would never speak save in words divinely 
given, He struck Ezekiel dumb. Two judgments had already 
fallen on the nation—first, the Servitude, and then the Captiv- 
ity, to Babylon. But they were warned that, if they remained 
impenitent, a third, more terrible than either, would befall 
them—that of the seventy years’ Desolations; and until the 
day when Jerusalem, their boast and pride, was smitten, 
Ezekiel’s mouth was closed, save when the Spirit came unto 
him, and God gave him words to speak.?® But the self- 
renunciation of the Son of God was so absolute and unreserved 
that He could use language such as this: 

“The Son can do nothing of himself, but what he seeth 
the father do” (John 5:19). 

“He that rejecteth me, and receiveth not my words, 
hath one that judgeth him: the word that I have spoken, the 
same shall judge him in the last day. For I have not spoken 
of myself; but the Father which sent me, he gave me a 
commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak. 
And I know that his commandment is life everlasting: what- 
soever I speak, therefore, even as the Father ‘said unto me, 
so I speak” (John 12:48-50). 

Are these the words of One who “held the current Jewish 
notions” of His time? Blind though they were, the Jews of 
His time were not so blind as some Christian ministers and 
professors of Christian Universities today. For the Jews 
could recognize that “He taught them as one having author- 
ity, and not as their scribes.”° From the scribes they were 


20Ezekiel 3:26, 27; 24:24-27; 33:21, 22. 
30Matthew 7:29, 


86 


THE Lorp FrroM HEAVEN 


used to receiving definite and dogmatic teaching, but it was 
teaching based upon “the law and the prophets”: here was 
One who stood apart and taught them from a wholly different 
plane. The words of the Apostles and Evangelists were 
“inspired,” but His words were “the words of God”! in a 
higher sense. For it was not merely the body of His teaching 
that was thus divine, but the very language in which it was 
conveyed. So that in His prayer on the betrayal night He 
could say not only “I have given them thy word,” but “I 
have given them the words which thou gavest me.”°? 

So complete was His self-renunciation and submission 
that beyond what the Father gave Him to speak He knew 
nothing, and was silent. With reference to His coming in 
glory, for instance, He declared, “Of that day or that hour 
knoweth no one, not even the angels in heaven, neither the 
Son, but the Father.”?5 

This was not within His “authority”; the Father had 
not given Him to speak of it. But if and when He spoke, He 
spoke with authority. “Whatsoever I speak, therefore,” He 
declared, “even as the Father said unto me, so I speak.”34 
What wonder, then, that He said again—and the words gain 
tremendous force from being part of the very same sentence 
in which He disclaimed the knowledge of the time of His 
return—“Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words 
shall not pass away.”°° What wonder that He declared His 
coming to be the crisis of the world! 
31John 3:34, 
82John 17:8, 14. 
33Mark 18:22 (and Matt. 24:36, R.V.). 


84John 12:50. 
85Mark 13:31. 


387 


CHAPTER [V 


THE SON OF GOD 


WE HAVE seen, then, that “the Son of Man” is a Messianic 
title only in the sense that it belongs to Him who is Israel’s 
Messiah; further, that the Lord assumed this higher glory 
when His Messianic claims were rejected; and lastly, that 
so far from its implying sonship by a human father, the title 
is altogether independent of His human birth. He was not 
only the man who was born in Bethlehem, but the Son of 
Man who “descended out of heaven’—Man by a higher title 
than human birth could give. 

In speaking of Him as the man of Bethlehem and Nazareth 
we are treading, as it were, the sacred enclosure reserved 
for the feet of the covenant people. And when we dwell 
upon His glory as the Son of Man, we seem to have passed 
the outer veil, where none but anointed priests might enter. 
But He is not merely the Son of Man, but the Son of God; 
and here we stand before the second veil which shrouds the 
mysteries of the holiest of all. 

And if we may dare to draw aside that veil, let us take 
heed that we do so with befitting reverence, and in the 
spirit of the words of Agur’s “prophecy.” We do well to 
recall them here: “Who hath ascended up into heaven, or 
descended? . . . What is his name, and what is his Son’s 
name, if thou canst tell? ... Add thou not unto his words.”1 
Here, then, are some of the words of the Son of God: “All 
things have been delivered into me of my Father; and no 
one knoweth the Son, save the Father.” 


1Proverbs 30:4, 6. 
2Matthew 11:27. 


88 


Tue Lorp From HEAVEN 


The Lord goes on to say, “Neither doth any know the 
Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son willeth 
to reveal him;* but there is no such added clause respecting 
the knowledge of the Son. No ONE KNOWETH THE SON, SAVE 
THE FATHER; or, as the Lord expressed it upon another 
occasion more definitely still, “No one knoweth who the Son 
is, save the Father.” This is absolute, and in the light of it 
we read the Apostle’s words, “the mystery of God, even 
Christ.”5 

Would that this had always been remembered in the 
past! For the truth of Christ has suffered more from the 
mistaken zeal of its learned and devout defenders, than from 
the ignorance and malice of its assailants, heretical or pro- 
fane. There are truths which we can make our own, and 
these we can distribute, so to speak, in our own image. 
But in presence of truth so solemn, so mysterious, so trans- 
cendental, it is our part simply to accept what is written, 
and to keep to the very words in which it is revealed. 

An incident in the French Chamber might teach us a 
lesson here, for “the children of this world are wiser in their 
generation than the children of light.” Trouble was caused 
in a certain district through the general in command having 
communicated a War Office order in his own words. And 
when the Minister of War was challenged in Parliament 
for punishing him, his answer was, “He committed an offence, 
and I removed him; he paraphrased an order which it was 
his duty only to read.” 

"8The popular belief that men by nature know the Father is in direct 
opposition to these explicit words of the Lord Jesus Christ. 

4T uke 10:22. Here Dean Alford writes, “I am convinced that our Lord 
did utter, on the two separate occasions, these weighty words.” And 
Alford’s proverbial intolerance of “harmonizing or escaping difficulties” 


lends weight to his judgment on such a point. 
5Colossians 2:2, R.V. 


89 


Tue Son or Gop 


And men have offended grievously by paraphrasing the 
words in which “the mystery of God” has been revealed. 
The Sonship of Christ has thus been defined and explained 
in the terms used to express the generation of human beings, 
thus affording the Jew a further excuse for his unbelief, and 
the Moslem an occasion for his blasphemies. As the Lord's 
title of Son of Man does not mean that He was begotten by 
a man, but that He is the very impersonation of humanity, 
ought we not to interpret His title of Son of God on this 
same principle? 

But is He not called the “only begotten Son of God”? 
Such is indeed the inaccurate rendering of our English 
versions.® Etymologically “onlybegotten,” as one word, would 
be the precise equivalent in English of the Greek word here 
used (monogenes ); but what concerns us is not the etymology 
of the word, but the meaning of it. 

The language of the New Testament is largely based 
upon that of the Greek version of the Old; and this word is 
used by the LXX. to represent a Hebrew term of endear- 
ment—a term in which there is no suggestion whatever of 
“begetting.” It properly denotes “only”; and by a natural 
transition it comes to mean unique, and then greatly beloved. 

In six of its twelve occurrences the Septuagint Version 
has “beloved,” the very word by which the Lord Jesus was 
hailed from heaven at His baptism, and again on the Holy 
Mount. And in every one of these six passages our English 
translators render it “only.” In one passage (Ps. 68:6), it 
is taken, both in the Greek Bible and also in the English, to 
mean “solitary”; and in Proverbs 4:3 it is rendered by a 
term of affection. 


“This rendering somewhat obscures the exact sense of the original 
word. . .. The thought in the original is centered in the personal Being 
of the Son, and not in His generation.” (Bishop Westcott in “The 
Speaker’s Com.,” John 14.) 


40 


THE Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


In the four remaining passages (Judges 11:34; Ps. 22:20; 
25:16; and 35:17), the Septuagint rendering is monogenes. 
The first of these passages tells us that Jephthah’s daughter 
was his only child. In Psalm 25 the word in our translations 
is “desolate.” And in Psalms 22 and 85, where our divine 
Lord is referred to as, “darling” is the word used in the 
English versions. 

Then as to the use of this word monogenes in the New 
Testament; in three of the nine passages where it occurs, 
it means an only child (Luke 7:12; 8:42; 9:88). And their 
rendering of it by “only begotten” in Hebrews 11:17 sug- 
gests that our translators regarded this English phrase as a 
term of endearment; for Isaac, though his father’s darling, 
was not his only son. In the other passages where it occurs, 
it designates the Son of God (John 1:14, 18; 8:16, 18; and I 
John 4:9). 

The view we take of the first of these passages will 
influence our reading of the rest. “And we beheld his glory, 
glory as of the only begotten from the Father.” Thus the 
revisers have given a literal translation of the text. And 
apart from controversy, every one would naturally under- 
stand it to mean that the glory of Christ was glory such as 
the Father would bestow upon the only Son. But yet most 
commentators read it differently, although the phrase “only 
begotten from the Father” is as unusual in Greek as it is in 


7Grimm’s Lexicon gives it “single of its kind, only”; and adds, “He is so 
spoken of by John, not because of generation by God, but because 
He is of nature, or essentially, Son of God.” 

Dean Alford says: “In New Testament usage it signifies the only 
Son.” (“Gr. Test. Com.”) 

Bloomfield says, with reference to “the Beloved” in Ephesians 1:6: 
“It may be compared with monogenes of John 1:14, 18, 3:18; I John 
4:9, where the full sense is ‘only and most dearly beloved.’ ” (“Gr. Test. 
Com.” ) 


4] 


Tue Son or Gop 


English, and the meaning of the word rendered “only 
begotten” is acknowledged to be “only” and “beloved.” 

Such, indeed, is clearly the governing thought in every 
passage where the word is applied to the Lord; and it may 
be averred with confidence that, but for the controversies 
of other days, no other element would have been imported 
into it. “Words are the counters of wise men, the money of 
fools,” and in this sphere, above all others, it behooves us 
to keep clear of folly. The meaning of a word is settled by 
its use, and having regard to the Scriptural use of the word 
here in question, it is certain that the dogma with which it 
is associated must be based on some other foundation. And 
to base it on His title of “Son” is, as we have seen, to ignore 
the meaning of that word in Scriptural usage. 

But it may be demanded, How then is His Sonship to 
be explained? The mysteries of the Christian revelation 
have this in common with the superstitious dogmas that have 
been based upon it, that they claim acceptance on trans- 
cendental grounds. But here the analogy ends; for although 
these truths of revelation may be above our reason, yet, 
unlike the errors of superstition, they never outrage reason. 
But while with the “Christian religionist” “the voice of the 
Church” is an end of controversy, and he refuses to discuss 
the dogmas of his creed, the Christian seems to have so little 
confidence in the Word of God that he is always eager to 
“explain” the mysteries of his faith. 

A signal example of the evil of this tendency is afforded 
by the usual perversion of the Apostle Paul’s defense of the 

And the crowning proof is the marginal reading of John 1:18, in 

the R.V., “God only begotten.” This reading, which has high MS. 
authority, would be in the text of the R.V. if Westcott and Hort had 
had their way. Dr. Hort’s “Dissertation” on the subject, read at 


Cambridge in 1876, is the most thorough defense of it. But I refer 
to it only as a proof that monogenes does not mean “Begotten.” 


42, 


Tue Lorp From HEAVEN 


resurrection. In reply to the demand, “How are the dead 
raised up, and with what body do they come?” he does not 
attempt to explain the mystery. His answer is, “Thou fool!” 
The words which follow are the germ and “pattern” of Bishop 
Butler’s great “apology.”® If, the Apostle argues, we cannot 
explain the most familiar processes of Nature—as, for instance, 
the growth of corn from “bare grain,” dead and buried in 
the ground—how can we expect to explain the resurrection 
of the dead? 

But if there be a living God—an Almighty God—there is 
no improbability in the thought of the resurrection. And so, 
when arraigned before his heathen judges at Cesarea, the 
Apostle exclaimed, “Why should it be thought a thing incred- 
ible with you that God should raise the dead?” And in the 
same spirit we may well demand, Why should it be thought 
a thing incredible that God should manifest Himself to men? 
For if we recognize, as all thoughtful persons must recognize, 
the reasonableness of such a revelation,® the only question 
open relates to the manner of it. 

And judging by our Bible “Dictionaries” and “Encyclo- 
pedias,” it would seem that our decision of that question 
should depend on whether the divine method commends 
itself to the “wise and prudent.” That God thundered forth 
His law at Sinai, and engraved it upon stone, the “wise and 
prudent” scout as a superstitious legend. And that “His only 
begotten Son declared Him,” they reject as mysticism. 

If, indeed, instead of living in a remote province, and 
among a superstitious people—they happened to be the land 
and people of the Covenant!—the Christ had submitted His 
claims to committees of scientific experts in Rome and Athens, 
and the “blue-book” containing their report upon His test 
“8“The Analogy of Religion with the Constitution and Course of Nature.” 


9As has been justly said, “The idea of a revelation may be said to 
be logically involved in the notion of a living God” (Fairburn). 


48 


Tue Son or Gop 


miracles were before them, the “wise and prudent” would 
believe in Him. But Christians are so dull-witted that even 
if such a blue-book were available they would prefer the 
New Testament! And in the New Testament they find that 
when, during His ministry, the “wise and prudent” rejected 
Him, He “answered and said, I thank Thee, O Father, Lord 
of heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these things from 
the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.” 

“Babes”—that is, children.° It is not that children are 
unintelligent—they are often more quick-witted than their 
seniors—but that they are guileless, and believe what they 
are told. And if in this spirit we enter on the study of the 
Bible, we shall be content to accept the divine revelation 
about Christ, without attempting to explain its mysteries. 
But we are not content to take the place of children. And 
the result is deplorable. For just as the mysteries of the 
Atonement are “explained” in the language of the market 
and the criminal court, so the mysteries of the Incarnation 
are “explained” in the language of——! 

But here I check myself.1 I am not. unmindful that it 
is only the unlearned who base His title of Son of God upon 
the Virgin birth. But the majority of Christians are “un- 
learned.” The first occurrence in the New Testament of the 
full title, the “Son of God,” is the Apostle Peter’s confession:!? 
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” Was this 
confession due to a sudden appreciation of the fact that the 
Lord’s mother was a virgin? The suggestion is both painful 
and grotesque.’* That could be attested by “flesh and blood” 


in is the word used in I Corinthians 13:11; Galatians 4:3; Ephesians 

314, 

11The subject is a delicate one; I deal with it in an Appendix note. 

12Matthew 16:16. See p. 40 ante., App. note. 

13Quite as painful, bad still more grotesque, would be the suggestion 
that this was the burden of Paul’s preaching in the Damascus syna- 
gogues (Acts 9:20). 


44 


THe Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


on the recognized principles of evidence;' but of this truth 
of His Sonship the Lord declared, “Flesh and blood hath not 
revealed it unto thee, but My Father which is in heaven.” 

And so was it with all the Eleven at the last; throughout 
His ministry He had been subjected to a constant ordeal 
of interrogation. But His words at the Supper drew from 
them the confession, “Now we are sure that thou knowest 
all things, and needest not that any one should question 
thee; by this we believe that thou camest forth from God.”1® 
It was not what He had become in virtue of His human 
birth, but what He was by inherent right. For His “coming 
forth from God” does not point to the manger of Bethlehem, 
and the date of the Nativity, but to a past Eternity and the 
_ Father’s throne. 

And this is the truth on which the faith of the Christian 
rests—the faith that “overcometh the world.” “For whosoever 
shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in 
him, and he in God.”!® It is not an inference from the 
Virgin birth, but a revelation from the Father in heaven. 

If, then, His title of Son of God does not depend on the 
Virgin birth—and it is a fact of vital moment that the word 
“begotten” is used of Him only in relation to His resurrection 
from the dead'’—what can be its significance? The only 
meaning that can be given to it is that which it conveyed 
to those who heard His teaching, those among whom He lived 
and died. Just as by “Son of Man” He claimed to be man 
in the highest and most absolute sense, so by “Son of God” 


14That the mother of our Lord was a virgin is stated in the Gospel 
narrative as plain matter of fact. But the “wise and prudent” seem 
to be ignorant of the strict and elaborate provisions of the Jewish law 
for testing the virginity of brides. 

15John 16:30. 

16] John 4:15, 

17Psalm 2:7; Acts 13:33. 
See App. note, p. 107 post. 


THE Son oF Gop 


He laid claim to Deity. His disciples understood it thus, and 
they worshipped Him as divine; and those who refused to 
believe in Him understood it thus, and they crucified Him 
as a blasphemer. 


CHAPTER V 


THE TESTIMONY OF THE FIRST GOSPEL 


THE GOSPELS may be studied either as the divinely 
accredited records of the Ministry, or as a progressive revela- 
tion of Christ. Not that the Lord’s teaching was divided 
chronologically into sections, but that in the books which 
contain the inspired record of His teaching there is a definite 
and systematic “progress of doctrine.” The purpose of the 
First Gospel, for example, is to record His Messianic mission 
to the people of the covenant, and it contains nothing save 
what relates to that mission. A fuller spiritual knowledge of 
Scripture is needed, perhaps, to enable us to recognize in 
Mark the revelation of Him as Jehovah’s Servant; but no 
one can miss the prominence which the humanity of Christ 
holds in the Third Gospel; and the distinctive character of 
the Fourth, as the revelation of the Son of God, is universally 
acknowledged. 

But though the Gospels thus present us with four differ- 
ent portraits, there is but one Christ. And while the Fourth 
Gospel was written expressly to reveal Him as the Son of 
God, it displays Him none the less as Israel’s Messiah, 
Jehovah’s Servant, and the Son of Man. For such is the 
divine system of a progressive revelation. What has yet to 
be unfolded is rarely anticipated, but what has been already 
revealed is incorporated and continued. 

“He came unto his own, and his own received him 
not.”! This brief sentence on the opening page of the Fourth 
Gospel sums up the story of His Messianic mission as recorded 


1John 1:11. Here our English idiom fails; the French is admirable: “I 
est venu chez soi, et les siens ne l’ont point recu.” 


47 


Tue TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW 


in the First. And when we read that “The Word was made 
flesh, and dwelt among us,” we recall the Virgin birth. No 
need to set forth the manner of it, for that has been already 
told; and now all that remains is to give the full revelation 
of the Son of God. 

Not even the full title, “the Son of God,” is to be found 
in the earlier Gospels, save only in Peter’s confession,* in the 
mysterious homage accorded Him by demons,‘ and in the 
charge on which the Sanhedrin condemned Him for blas- 
phemy. That charge gave proof that He had used it in His 
ministry. But the Holy Spirit, in inspiring the records of 
the Ministry, reserved the unfolding of it for the Apostle 
whose peculiar receptivity led to his being known among 
his brethren as the disciple whom He loved. And the purpose 
of his Gospel is expressly stated at the close: “That ye might 
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God”; that “Jesus,” 
the Man who was born in Bethlehem, is the Christ—Israel’s 
Messiah—and that He is the Son of God. 


But though the Gospel of John has thoroughly distinctive 
characteristics, it is merely an advance in a progressive 
revelation, and not, as some would tell us, a breaking away 
from all that has gone before. The figment that the other 
Evangelists do not teach the Deity of Christ betrays extra- 
ordinary blindness; for though that truth is nowhere asserted 
by them as a dogma, it is in the warp and woof of their 
record of the Lord’s ministry. Abundant proof of this may 
be found in each of the earlier Gospels, but for the present 
purpose an appeal to the Gospel of Matthew will suffice. 


*See App. note, p. 107 post. 

3Matthew 16:16. 

4Mark 3:11, Luke 4:41. “Mysterious” I call it, because it cannot have 
been prompted by Satan, and it was rendered at a time when even 
His own disciples were only groping after the truth. 


48 


Tue Lorp From HEAVEN 


Take, for example, the “Sermon on the Mount.” Of the 
Ten Commandments Moses declared, “These words the Lord 
spake in the Mount, out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, 
and of the thick darkness, with a great voice; and He added 
no more.”® In Scripture they have a special.solemnity. What, 
then, was the Lord’s attitude toward them? “Ye have heard 
that it was said to them of old time, Thou shalt not kill; 
but I say unto you...” And this formula is five times 
repeated.® Was it that He thus intended either to revoke 
or to disparage the law of Sinai? Far from it; the words 
are prefaced by the declaration that that law is eternal. But 
the “Mount of the Beatitudes” spoke with the same divine 
authority as the mount of the thunder and the fire: this is 
the explanation of His words. 

The Hebrew prophets spake from God, but “Thus saith 
the Lord” prefaced all their utterances. And though the 
Apostle Paul had abundant revelations, and he insisted that 
his words had divine authority, the authority he claimed for 
them was that they were “commandments of the Lord.” He 
himself was nothing, and the emphatic ego’s in his teaching 
are rare; they are usually inserted, indeed, to mark his insig- 
nificance. In Colossians, for instance, that wonderful Epistle 
in which the revelation of the Christ reaches its highest 
development—there is never an ego anywhere, save in declar- 
ing himself a servant.’ But in the Lord’s teaching the ego 
stands out with the utmost prominence, and “I say unto 
you” takes the place of “Thus saith the Lord.” 

Of the law of Sinai He declared, “Till heaven and earth 
pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law 


5Deuteronomy 5:22. 

6Matthew 5:22, 28, 34, 89, 44. 

7Colossians 1:23, 25. There is not another ego in the Epistle. The English 
reader must bear in mind that in Greek the pronoun is ordinarily 
implied in the verb. It is expressed only where it is emphatic. 


49 


INTERNATIONAL SCHOOL 


Per ee ew Me ce mee 


Tue TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW 


till all be fulfilled’; of His own teaching He declared, 
“Heaven and earth shall pass away, but My words shall not 
pass away. “Thou shalt not kill,” “Thou shalt not commit 
adultery,” “Thou shalt not steal,”—these are words for sinners. 
And when the great telos* comes, when all things have been 
subdued for Him, and God has become all in all—when “the 
first heaven and the first earth are passed away, and the 
tabernacle of God is with men, and God Himself shall be 
with them”—then the words of Sinai shall be a memory of 
an evil past; but the words of the Ministry of our glorious 
Lord and Saviour shall live as the everlasting heritage of 
His people. 

Entirely in keeping with this is His teaching recorded 
in the eleventh chapter. Upbraiding the cities wherein most 
of His mighty works were done, He declared that it shall be 
more tolerable for Sodom in the day of judgment than for 
Capernaum. What Sodom was—that name of infamy—we 
know. But what had Capernaum done? He did mighty 
works there; He taught in its streets; He made His home in 
it—it is called “His own city”: all this gives proof that in 
Capernaum there can have been no open hostility to His 
ministry. But “they repented not”—that is all. Sodom poured 
contempt upon “the moral law,” which was afterwards 
embodied in the “ten words” thundered forth at Sinai: 
Capernaum failed to repent on hearing the words of Christ. 
And yet He declared that the sin of Capernaum was deeper 
than the flagrant and filthy iniquities of Sodom. If His words 
were not as divine as the words of Sinai, the profanity of 
this would be astounding. 

8I Corinthians 15:24. The telos in Greek is not the end in the sense of 
our English word. It connotes, not cessation, but result. The end of 


a journey is our arrival at our destination; its telos is the accomplishment 
of the purpose with which we set out. 


50 


_Tue Lorp From HEAVEN 


And yet then and there He owned His position of 
dependence and subjection, calling upon God as His Father 
and the Lord of heaven and earth. The most absolute sub- 
jection, here and always; but subordination, never by word 
or act throughout His ministry. Notice the terms in which 
He addresses Him—“Lord of heaven and earth”: His “Lord” 
He never calls Him. 

And mark what follows. Though He was “the First-born 
of all creation’—the One by whom and for whom all created 
things were made; the Word who in the beginning, and 
before there was a creature made, was with God, and was 
God®—He had, when coming into the world, divested Him- 
self of all His rights and all His glory; but the response of 
the Father was to re-invest Him with all that He had sur- 
rendered. Not, as the Neo-theology would tell us, after His 
return to heaven—till then, indeed, He could not re-assume 
the glory—but here, in the time and scene of His humiliation 
and rejection, He could say, “All things are delivered unto 
Me of My Father.” And in the same breath He adds, antici- 
pating the craving which such words excite to understand 
the mystery of His personality, “No one knoweth the Son, 
save the Father.” 

And then—“Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are 
heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Another emphatic I. 
If words like these came from the greatest, holiest, best of 
men, we should fling them back with indignation. But they 
are the words of Him by whom and for whom we were 
created; of Him who spoke from Sinai, and knows the guilt 
and penalty of sin; of Him to whom all judgment has been 
committed, and who can anticipate the decrees of the Great 
Day; of Him—let us not forget it—who “took part of flesh and 
blood,” and knows our burdens and our toils. And when 


John 1:1-8. 
51 


Tue TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW 


spiritual men dwell upon His words, with thoughts like these 
filling their hearts, they do not sit down to frame a christology; 
they cast themselves at His feet and worship Him. 

Many another passage might be cited, pointing to the 
same conclusion. “I will build my Church”;!? “Where two 
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the 
midst”;1 “Behold I send unto you prophets”!?—two more 
of these great, emphatic ego’s, that would savor of profanity 
if the speaker were not divine. 

When we come to “the Second Sermon on the Mount’— 
chapters 24 and 25—the same conclusion is irresistible. There 
is no “Thus saith the Lord” to accredit His words, as He 
surveys the great drama of the future, and fixes the course 
of events, and the destinies of men. As we have seen, He 
never speaks of God as His Lord, but yet, once and again, 
He here claims to be the Lord of the people of God. If we 
did not know Him as “our great God and Saviour,” this 
would be quite incomprehensible, if it did not seem utterly 
profane. 

The concluding verses of the First Gospel record the 
words He spoke on the Galilean mountain which He had 
appointed as the trystingplace for His disciples after His 
resurrection from the dead. And it is a strange enigma that 
any one who accepts the record as Holy Scripture can deny 
or doubt His Deity. He must have a mind that is not 
governed by reason. Who can this be who has “all power 
in heaven and on earth”? Who is this who commissions the 
disciples to teach His commandments? Who is this that 
dismisses them with the words, “Lo, I am with you all the 
days, even unto the end of the world’? And this is only 
the fringe, as it were. That the Father is God, and the Holy 
10Matthew 16:18. 


11Matthew 18:20. 
12The author of “The Life and Times of Jesus the Messiah.” 


52 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


Spirit is God, Christian and Jew acknowledge. Who, then, 
is this who claims equality with both, placing His name 
with theirs, and taking precedence, as men would say, of 
the Holy Spirit? 

I once had the privilege of meeting the late Dr. Eder- 
sheim of Oxford,'* and in our conversation he impressed on 
me that, when we bring the truth of “the Trinity” before a 
Jew, it is to his own Scriptures we should appeal. And to 
exemplify his words he quoted the middle verses of Isaiah 63. 
Jehovah, the prophecy declares, became the Saviour of His 
people. But how? “The Angel of His presence saved them.” 
The word to Moses was, “Behold I send an angel before 
thee. . . . Take ye heed of him and hearken unto his voice; 
provoke him not, for he will not pardon your transgressions, 
for my name is in him.”!* 

If doubt be possible as to who it is that is here indicated, 
surely it is dispelled by the terms in which the promise was 
renewed—“My presence shall go with thee.”° Hence the 
prophet’s words, “the Angel of His presence.” And mark 
what follows: “But they rebelled, and vexed His Holy Spirit.”16 
Thus we have Jehovah, the Angel of His presence, and His 
Holy Spirit, as the God of the Covenant people in the Old 
Testament dispensation; and in the New Testament we have 
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. The nomenclature 
is changed, but it is the same God. Some, indeed, would 
argue that, because the Son is never so designated in the 
Old Testament, His personality began with the Incarnation. 
But the argument if valid would apply also to the Father; 
for the revelation of “the Father” awaited the coming of 


13Matthew 23:34. 

14Fxodus 23:20, 21. Verse 22 is noteworthy; it is the Angel’s voice, but 
it is God who speaks. 

15Exodus 88:14. 

16Compare the words of Stephen in Acts 7:51. 


53 


Tue TESTIMONY OF MATTHEW 


“the Son.”!7 And if they who worship Father, Son, and 
Spirit are justly chargeable with having three gods, all who 
own the Father and the Holy Spirit are no less open to the 
taunt of having two. 

But how can this mystery be explained? It is well to 
acknowledge plainly and with emphasis that in this matter 
not only the heresies that distracted the professing Church, 
in the early centuries, but many of the discussions to which 
they gave rise, assumed that by searching we can find out 
God, and know the Almighty to perfection.’® 

The story is told of a meeting in a certain provincial 
town, at which the local clergy were holding forth on the 
doctrine of “the Trinity.” The fool of the place, whom 
everybody knew as “Silly Billy,” excited amusement by the 
earnestness with which he plied his pencil; and at the close 
they asked to see his “notes.” The paper showed tokens 
of laborious effort and many failures, but as the result the 
following lines could be deciphered— 


“This can Silly Billy see, 
Three in One and One in Thee, 
And One of them has died for me.” 


The poor town fool had got hold of what many who are 
“wise and prudent” miss! 


1"The figure of God’s Fatherhood to His people is occasionally used in the 
Psalms and the Prophets, but “the Father” is not to be found in the 
Old Testament. Christ revealed the Father. 

18Job 11:7. 


54 


Carter VI 


THE TESTIMONY OF THE FOURTH GOSPEL 


AS ALREADY noticed, the four Gospels have been described 
as so many different portraits of Christ—portraits, not biogra- 
phies; and the portrait presented to us in the Gospel of 
John is that of Christ as Son of God. To the intelligent reader 
its omissions, of which unbelief makes much for its evil 
purposes, afford a striking indication of its Divine author- 
ship, and of the purpose for which it has been given. 


The Apostle John is the only one of the four Evangelists 
who was with the Lord on the Mount of Transfiguration, and 
yet he is the only one whose Gospel makes no mention of 
that vision of glory. He is the only one of the Evangelists 
who witnessed the agony in the Garden, and yet he is the 
only one whose Gospel is silent with respect to it. And 
though one of the eleven disciples who were with the Lord 
on the Mount of Olives when He was “taken up from them 
into heaven,” his book contains never a word of direct record 
about the Ascension. 


May not these extraordinary omissions be explained if 
we remember that in the vision of the Holy Mount the 
Lord appeared in His glory as Son of Man, whereas the 
purpose of the Fourth Gospel is to reveal Him as Son of God. 
So also with regard to Gethsemane, we have the Lord’s explicit 
words, “The Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.” 
And though His exaltation to the right hand of God proclaimed 
Him to be the Son of God, this was beyond the scope of the 


55 


THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN 


Evangelist’s commission,’ for it was of the earthly ministry 
that He was inspired to write. 

But there is another “omission,” far more extraordinary 
even than these. The writer is the disciple to whom the Lord 
in His dying hour entrusted the care of His mother; “and 
from that hour,” we read, “that disciple took her unto his 
own home.” What talks they must have had together about 
the sacred birth and childhood! What unnumbered hours 
he must have spent in listening to her thrilling reminiscences! 
And how ineffaceably must the record have been stamped 
upon his memory and his heart! And yet not a word is to 
be found here about the angel’s visit, the Bethlehem inn, 
or the home life at Nazareth. “He was in the world.” “The 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us.” And that is 
all! For though He of whom the Evangelist speaks is the 
Man of Bethlehem and Nazareth, yet here again it is not of 
Him as Man that he is inspired to write, but as the Son of God. 


“Inspired,” I say again advisedly; for if these omissions 
are not to be accounted for by the divine guidance and 
restraint that we call “inspiration,” what explanation can be 
given of them? Put yourself in his place. If any one of 
us had had the Apostle John’s experiences, is it conceivable 
that we could write a book about the Lord without referring 
to them? Indeed, if this Gospel be a merely human work, 
it presents a psychological phenomenon so extraordinary as 
to have no parallel in the literature of the world. 

Here are the opening words of it: “In the beginning was 
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was 
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things 
were made by him; and without him was not any thing 


1The Messianic Gospel—Matthew—also omits the Ascension because 
the closing words of it belong dispensationally to the time when 
Zechariah 14:4 shall be fulfilled (compare Acts 1:11), and Christ will 
send out His earthly people as His missionaries to evangelize the world. 


56 


Tue Lorp FRoM HEAVEN 


made that was made. In him was life; and the life was the 
light of men” (chapter 1:1-4). 

The book was written, we are expressly told, that we 
might believe that He is the Son of God; and it begins by 
proclaiming that He is God. Could there be a clearer proof 
of the significance of the title “Son of God”? He is called 
the “Son of Man” because He is “very man,” and He is called 
the “Son of God” because He is “very God.” The book as 
a whole is designed to confirm faith in His Godhood. 


The layman is apt to exaggerate the relative value of 
direct evidence, but the lawyer recognizes that no testimony 
is more convincing than that which is incidental; and here, 
as in the preceding notice of the First Gospel, it is to the 
indirect and incidental proof that I would briefly claim 
attention. 

To the Christian the positive statement that “the Word 
was God” seems to be “an end of controversy”; but this 
statement was used by the Arians to prove that He held a 
subordinate position.* And when the alternative reading of 
verse 18 (“the only begotten God”) was pressed on them, 
they seized on the words as distinguishing Him from the 
Father, who alone was God in the highest sense. 

The Arian controversy indeed affords signal proof of what 

has been often noticed, that the Fathers were influenced by 
the paganism which prevailed around them, and in which 
so many of them had been steeped before their conversion 
to Christianity. And to the pagan mind there was nothing 
2John 22:31. 
3Critics who take the Arian view urge the absence of the article in 
the phrase “the Word was God”; but “the writer could not have 
written it thus without manifest absurdity” (Bishop Middleton), for 
that would imply that He was God in an exclusive sense. I Timothy 
2:5 supplies a parallel; and, following the R.V. reading of it, “one 
mediator . . . Himself Man,” we might here read, “the Word was with 
God, and the Word was Himself God.” 


57 


THe TESTIMONY OF JOHN 


absurd, or even incongruous, in the conception of a subor- 
dinate God; whereas to us, who think of God only as the 
Supreme Being, it involves a contradiction in terms, and 
seems mere nonsense. With us, therefore, the issue is a 
definite and simple one, namely, whether Christ is God, or 
only man. 

Let us, then, shake ourselves free from the prejudices 
which religion seems to excite in the minds of many, and also 
from the slovenly-mindedness that leads us to give an unthink- 
ing assent to truths which, if really believed, would influence 
our whole life; and, in the spirit of honest and earnest seekers 
after truth, let us try to grasp the significance of the words 
of the Lord Jesus as recorded in this book. Here are a few 
of His sayings, culled almost at random, and from a single 
section of it: 

“I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall 
never hunger, and he that believeth on me shall never thirst” 
(John 6:35). 

“He that believeth on me hath everlasting life: I am 
the bread of life” (6:47, 48). 

“I am the living bread which came down from heaven: 
if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the 
bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the 
life of the world” (6:51). 

“He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, 
out of his belly shall flow the rivers of living water” (7:38). 

“I am the light of the world” (8:12). 

“If a man keep my word, he shall never see death” (8:51). 

“Before Abraham was, I am” (8:58). 

“Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down 
my life, that I may take it again. No one taketh it from me, 
but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, 
and I have power to take it again” (10:17, 18). 


58 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


“I am the good shepherd. . . . My sheep hear my voice, 
and I know them, and they follow me; and I give unto them 
eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any 
man pluck them out of my hand. ...I and my Father are 
one” (10:11, 27, 28, 80). 

As we ponder such words as these we seem to be basking 
in the sunshine, and we are ready to exclaim, as Thomas did, 
“My Lord and my God.” But some of us have minds so 
constituted that clouds of doubt cover our sky at times, and 
we ask ourselves, How can we be sure that these are really 
the very words of Christ? Let us then look at other sayings 
of His, the genuineness of which is confirmed by facts. The - 
following are His words recorded in John 5:21-29: 

“For as the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth 
them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will. For the 
Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment 
unto the Son; that all men should honour the Son, even as 
they honour the Father. He that honoureth not the Son, 
honoureth not the Father which hath sent him. Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, he that heareth my word, and believeth on 
him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come 
into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when 
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they 
that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself, 
so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath 
given him authority to execute judgment also, because he 
is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, 
in the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, 
and shall come forth; they that have done good, unto the 
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, unto the 
resurrection of damnation.” 

The Lord here unequivocally claims equal honor with 
God the Father. He declares that as the Father raises the 


59 


THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN 


dead, so He Himself “gives life to whom He will.” He has 
life in Himself: not life derived or delegated, but life as God 
has life. And He adds that it will be at His command that 
the graves shall yet give up their dead. 

What meaning shall we give to such words as these? 
The narrative of the eleventh chapter supplies the answer; 
for there we read that, standing by a tomb which covered a 
decaying corpse, “He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come 
forth; and he that was dead came forth.” 

Martha’s halting faith could credit Him with power to 
save her brother’s life. She held, moreover, a conventional 
belief in “the resurrection at the last day.” But she was utterly 
incapable of grasping the truth or meaning of His words, “I 
am the resurrection and the life’; and so, when He directed 
the opening of the grave, she at once exclaimed, “Lord, by 
this time he stinketh, for he hath been dead four days.” 
“Said I not unto thee,” was the Lord’s gracious rebuke, “that 
if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of 
God?” And then and there she had a vision of that glory, 
for in obedience to His word, “he that was dead came forth.” 

People who reject the divine direction implied in inspir- 
ation may reasonably doubt the accuracy of a record of 
spoken words. But this is a narrative of facts. The writer 
here gives a detailed account of events which happened before 
his eyes. Lazarus of Bethany he knew personally. And he 
saw him come out of his grave in obedience to the call of 
Christ, “bound hand and foot with grave-clothes.” The 
casuistry of skepticism may belittle the account of miracles 
of another kind, but here is a cause in which mistake was 
impossible. Unless the whole story be a fabrication—and in 
that case the writer was a profane impostor—the resurrec- 
tion of Lazarus is a fact. And if the resurrection is a fact, 
“the riddle of the universe” is solved: God, “the author 


60 


THe Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


and giver of life,” has manifested Himself to men. The 
Deity of Christ is established. 

The Rationalist is too intelligent not to recognize this; 
and so, “to save his face,” he rejects the Fourth Gospel. But 
if any one who professes to believe the Scriptures denies or 
questions the Deity of Christ, he not only belies his Christian 
profession, but outrages reason itself. For none but God 
could give life to a decaying corpse. 

But it may be said, perhaps, the Apostle Peter called 
Dorcas back to life, and notable miracles were wrought by 
the other Apostles also. Yes, and this would in itself be 
proof of the Deity of the Lord Jesus; for it was in His 
name that all their mighty works were done. In His name: 
not in the name of the Father, but of the Son. When the 
Apostle Paul declared that he was in no respect “behind the 
very chiefest Apostles,” he added, “though I be nothing.” 
And to his amazing boast, “I can do all things,” he added, 
through Christ who strengthens me. In himself he had no 
power. But here is One who not only has power in Himself, 
but who can empower others to act in His name. And He 
has life in Himself—life in the sense in which none but God 
has life, so that He can say “I am the life.” 

But, it may be asked, was not His prayer at the grave 
of Lazarus an acknowledgment of His dependence on the 
Father? Dependence, yes; but not in the sense of incompe- 
tence or weakness, but of entire submission. That prayer is 
to be read in the light of His words, “I do nothing of Myself.” 
Though He could say, “The Son giveth me to whom He 
will,” that power and that will were held in absolute subjection 
to the will of the Father. 


61 


CuHaAPTerR VII 


THE TESTIMONY OF JAMES AND THE 
HEBREWS 


“JAMES, a servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to 
the twelve tribes which are of the dispersion, greeting” 
GJasocl str): 

It is almost impossible for a Gentile Christian to appre- 
ciate the amazing change in the mind and heart of a devout 
Jew which words like these betoken. Though sects and here- 
sies were many in Judaism, the great truth of the One God 
was held with passionate fervor by all, whether orthodox or 
heretic; and yet here the Deity of Christ is unequivocally 
acknowledged! by one who in the course of the Ministry 
had shared the prevailing unbelief.? 

Superstition pictures the Christ of the Ministry with a 
halo round His head, and skepticism represents Him as 
echoing “current Jewish notions.”? But while the Christian 
worships Him as Divine, he recalls the words of the prophet, 
“He hath no form nor comeliness, and when we shall see 
Him there is no beauty that we should desire Him.” And 
yet, even with Isaiah 53 in view, no Gentile Christian per- 
haps can understand how a Jew regarded the Lord and His 
ministry. “There was in such a Messiah absolutely nothing— 
past, present, or possible; intellectually, religiously, or even 
nationally—to attract, but all to repel.” 


1This is so, whether the sentence be construed epexigetically or read as 
in our English Versions. That a Jew could bracket a fellow-man with the 
God of Israel in this way is quite incredible. 

2John 7:5, 

3See p. 35, ante. 


62 


Tue Lorp rrom HEAVEN 


This startling dictum of Dr. Edersheim’st may help us 
to appreciate the testimony of the Epistle of James. The 
truth of the Deity of Christ must have been forced upon 
the writer by overwhelmingly compelling proofs. And as that 
truth is assumed without a word of “apology” or explanation, 
it must have been accepted by all the Jewish believers, for it 
was to them that the Epistle was addressed. 

“James, the Lord’s brother,” is the only New Testament 
writer who never names Him otherwise than as Lord. He 
names Him indeed only once again, when he writes, “My 
brethren, hold not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the 
Lord of glory, with respect of persons” (Jas. 2:1). Is it 
conceivable that a man with the training of a Jew could 
write such a sentence, unless He believed that Christ was 
Divine? And it is a fact of extreme significance that through- 
out his Epistle he uses this title, “the Lord,” indifferently of 
both the Father and the Son.® And his testimony ought to 
have increased weight with those who regard the writer 
as a “Judaiser.” 

But I would enter a protest in passing against the dis- 
paragement of this Epistle by certain of the Fathers and 
Reformers. The current theology of Christendom regards 
the present dispensation as the climax of God’s purposes of 
blessing for earth; but the New Testament represents it as 
an episode, filling up the interval between the setting aside 
of the Covenant people and their restoration again to favor. 
During that interval the Church, the body of Christ, is being 
gathered out; and the Church in its lower aspect, as a public 
organization upon earth, ought, according to the divine pur- 
“A"Life and Times of the Messiah,” vol. 1 p. 145. 
5See, e.g., verses 7, 8, 10, 11, 14, 15, of James 5. The Greek Kurios 

has as wide a range of meaning as our word “Lord.” It is sometimes 
used as a mere title of dignity, equivalent to the English “Sir,” and 


at other times it denotes the Supreme Being. In the Greek Bible it is 
the rendering for “Jehovah.” Its force in this Epistle is not doubtful. 


63 


JAMES AND THE HEBREWS 


pose, to fill the place which the Covenant people were 
intended to hold. But through the apostasy of Christendom 
the main channel has become a stagnant pool; and the 
professing Church as a whole has lapsed from the place 
originally assigned to it. 

With us today all this is elementary truth, but the Fathers 
had but a very partial apprehension of it, and the German 
Reformers shared their ignorance. What specially concerns 
us here, however, is that in the transitional Pentecostal dis- 
pensation, recorded in the Acts of the Apostles, the Jew still 
held a distinctive place. And while “to the Jew, first,” char- 
acterized it throughout, “to the Jew only” marked its initial 
phase. And it is to that period that the Epistle of James 
should be assigned, and to that dispensation his ministry 
specially pertained.® 

It is just because the Pentecostal Church was Jewish 
that in considering the indirect evidence for the Deity of 
Christ, the belief of the early disciples is of such importance. 
For it is inconceivable that these Jewish converts could have 
come to worship two Gods, and yet the Epistles that were 
specially their own make it clear that their belief in Christ 
as God was outside the sphere of controversy or doubt. 


I here assume that the James of the Epistle was “the Lord’s brother”; 
for the study of many a treatise to prove the contrary has satisfied 
me that he held that relationship. Indeed Matthew 13:55 is conclusive. 
The ordinary “man-of-the-world” Jew knew nothing of a “pre-existent 
divine Messiah.” The Christ he looked for was one of his own people, 
and therefore that he should have cousins would be regarded as a 
matter of course—they supposed that John the Baptist was the Christ 
(Luke 8:15); but the thought of His having brothers and sisters seems 
to have been repugnant to ay 

And a careful study of the chronological question has convinced me 
that they are right who hold the Epistle of James to be perhaps the 
earliest of the New Testament writings. It belongs to that period of 
the Pentecostal dispensation when the whole Church was Jewish, and 
when their meeting-places still bore the Jewish designation of “syna- 
gogues” (James 2°95, 


64 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


To many the testimony of the Epistle to the Hebrews 
may seem more telling in this respect than that of James, 
although here we cannot appeal with certainty to the per- 
sonality of the writer. No one who has experience in dealing 
with questions of the kind will ignore either the weighty 
evidence which connects the Apostle Paul with the Epistle, 
or the difficulties which beset the hypothesis of his author- 
ship. When dealing in a practical way with such problems, 
the expert often finds in some purely incidental point a clew 
to the way out of a seeming impasse. And here a sentence 
in the typically “Pauline” postscript to the Epistle may pos- 
sibly suggest the’ solution of this much-debated question. 
“Suffer the word of exhortation,” the writer concludes, “for 
I have written a letter unto you in few words.” 


This is generally dismissed as a meaningless convention- 
alism, for Hebrews is one of the longest of the Epistles; and 
moreover, as has been often noticed, the first twelve chapters 
are a treatise rather than an Epistle. And as it is to the 
thirteenth chapter that the advocates of the Pauline hypothe- 
sis specially appeal, may not that last chapter contain the 
“few words” added by the great Apostle in sending the 
treatise to those for whom it was written?” 

But whatever view we take of its authorship, the testi- 
mony which the Epistle renders to the Lord’s Deity is con- 
clusive. Even if we dismiss every question of inspiration, and 
regard it merely as a human work, it proves beyond doubt 
that the doctrine of the Godhood held rank at that time 
among the certainties of the faith. 


Here we need not go beyond the first chapter, or, indeed, 

the opening sentences of it. By the Son it was that God 
TThis is not a theory hastily formed for the purpose of my “argument,” 
but a belief which I have held for many years. A statement of the 


grounds on which it is based would require a lengthy excursus that 
would not be germane to the subject of these pages. 


65 


JAMES AND THE HEBREWS 


made the worlds. He is the effulgence of the glory of God, 
and the impress, or very image, of the Person of God. And 
He it is who upholds all things by the word of His power. 
If all this applies to a creature, words have no meaning, and 
“Christian doctrine” may be dismissed as a tangle of hyper- 
bole and superstition. And if the Son be not a creature, he 
must be God. No pagan alternative can be accepted by 
either Christian or Jew. 

And this disposes of that subtle phase of error which 
ascribes a kind of secondary Divinity to the Son, while refus- 
ing to recognize His Deity. Appeal is made to numerous 
passages which represent God as working by and through 
the Son, whether in the sphere of creation, or of government, 
or of redemption. And stress is laid on the emphatic statement 
that “to us there is one God, the Father, of whom are all 
things, and we unto Him, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through 
whom are all things, and we through Him.” But if the 
Socinian reads these words aright, then, in view of the uncom- 
promising monotheism of Scripture, we must relegate our 
Lord and Saviour to the position of a fellow-creature; and 
to pay Him any divine homage whatever is pagan idolatry, 
and treason against God. 

The prominent place which this difficulty has occupied 
in all the controversies of all the centuries is proof of its 
reality and its magnitude. But it is to be solved, not by giving 
up Christianity, but by accepting the plain and emphatic 
words of our Lord Jesus Christ, by which He declares His 
oneness with the Father—words such as these 

“I and my Father are one” (John 10:30). 

“The Father is in me, and I in him” (John 10:38). 

“He that hath seen me hath seen the Father” (John 14:9), 

“I am in the Father, and the Father in me” (John 14:10). 

It is with the indirect evidence of this truth that I am 
dealing; and, as already noticed, the expert sets a high value 


66 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


upon evidence of that kind. Statements that teach explicitly 
the Deity of Christ may be frittered away by those who 
refuse the truth; but no one can thus evade the testimony 
supplied by the beliefs of the early disciples. 

And the force of that testimony is far greater than our 
theologians recognize. The learned treatises which discuss 
whether the Jew believed in a pre-existent Divine Messiah 
are strangely unintelligent. For, whether in the first century 
or the twentieth, it is only the spiritually enlightened who 
really believe in the Godhood of Christ; and every influence 
of the kind which, with us, leads men to give a blind assent 
to that doctrine, operated to prejudice the unregenerate Jew 
against it. The Gospels make it clear that with the little 
company of those who, in the midst of almost universal 
apostasy, were “waiting for the redemption,” the question 
at issue was whether the Nazarene was really the Son of 
God; but with the ordinary Jew the very fact of His claiming 
to be Son of God was deemed conclusive evidence of blas- 
phemy. The beliefs of the disciples, therefore, were formed 
and avowed in opposition to every influence which ecclesi- 
astical authority could bring to bear on them. 

In Christendom all who regard the Church as the oracle 
of God profess to believe Christ to be divine, just as they 
believe that the “consecrated wafer” is a symbol of His flesh. 
But the unregenerate Jew of nineteen hundred years ago stood 
intellectually on a higher level than the nominal Christian of 
today, for his beliefs rested upon Holy Scripture. And yet 
he shared the incapacity of all unspiritual men to receive its 
spiritual teaching. Indeed, the Sadducean heresies were 
merely a formal development of thoughts and doubts that 
are common to all unregenerate men whose minds are not 
warped or blinded by superstition. They prevail extensively 
today. For while the intellectual revolt of the sixteenth cen- 
tury re-established the authority of the Bible, and resulted 


67 


JAMES AND THE HEBREWS 


in Protestantism, that of the seventeenth and eighteenth cen- 
turies led to an orgy of infidelity. And unfortunately the 
movement of our own day is not on the lines of the Reforma- 
tion. But this is a digression. 

Every Jew looked for a Messiah. But in Judaism there 
was no clear line of division between politics and religion; 
and so, while all expected him to be a prophet and a religious 
leader, the hopes of ordinary men were fixed on the coming 
of a great national champion who would deliver them from 
Gentile supremacy, and restore to them the prosperity and 
greatness of bygone days.® 

But the faith of the little band of the Lord’s disciples 
was far removed from the creeds and hopes of carnal men. 
“Thou art the Christ, the Son of the loving God” (Matt. 
16:16); “Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of 
Israel” (John 1:49): these were typical confessions. None 
but the Christ could be King of Israel, and Christ was the 
Son of God in the pregnant sense which that title signified. 
The confession of Thomas, “My Lord and my God” was the 
full expression of it. And if any one can suppose that devout 
Jews could have uttered such words to a fellow-creature, or 
that the Lord would have tolerated them had He not claimed 
to be divine, we have no common ground for a discussion 
of the question. 


8A belief in two Messiahs, one to suffer, and one to reign in glory, seems 
to have been a popular solution of the difficulties which the study 
of the prophecies presented. 


68 


Cuapter VIII 


THE TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLE PAUL 


TO THE “beloved disciple” and the great Apostle of the 
Gentiles were entrusted the crowning revelations of the 
Christ. 

The blindness of infidelity in rejecting on a priori 
grounds the verbal inspiration of Scripture is exposed even 
by the facts of Spiritualism—facts which are accredited by 
men of high character, some of whom are eminent as 
scientists and scholars. For these men testify to communi- 
cations received from the spirit world; not mere impressions, 
nor yet trivial messages such as those of the days of “spirit- 
rapping,” but serious verbal communications, sometimes 
spoken by human lips, sometimes written by the agency of 
a human hand. 

To accept these facts and yet deny that the God who 
made. us speak through inspired Prophets and Apostles, does 
not savor of intelligent skepticism, but of the folly of 
systematized unbelief. 

But Spiritualism may also touch us more than most 
Christians seem to realize as to what inspiration means. The 
Apostle’s words, “Forbidding to marry and commanding to 
abstain from meats” have reference to the Demon cult of 
these “latter times”:1 and so exacting is the fastidious asceti- 
cism of that cult that “mediums” are few. And we may be 
well assured that God requires an infinitely higher fitness 
in those through whom He will make revelations to His 
people. True it is that in extraordinary circumstances a 


1The Christian knows that the spirits of spiritualistic seances are not 
the departed dead, but demons who personate them. 


69 


Tue TESTIMONY OF PAUL 


Sadducean priest may have been entrusted with a divine 
message to his fellows,” just as “a dumb ass” was once made 
use of to rebuke the madness of a prophet. But all the 
Hebrew seers, from Moses to Malachi, were trained for their 
ministry in the severest of divine schools. Like Him of whom 
they spoke, they were “made perfect through suffering.” 

And what was true of the prophets of the Old Testa- 
ment was no less true of the holy men to whom the New 
Testament revelations were entrusted. For “I think,” said 
the foremost of them, “God hath set forth us, the Apostles, 
last of all as men doomed to death: for we are made a 
spectacle unto the world, both to angels and to men... 
We are made as the filth of the world and the offscouring of 
all things, even until now.”* Here is his personal tale of 
suffering, even at a comparatively early stage of his ministry: 
“Of the Jews five times received I forty stripes save one. 
Thrice was I beaten with rods, once was I stoned, thrice I 
suffered shipwreck, a night and a day I have been in the 
deep; in journeyings often, in perils of waters, in perils of 
robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by the 
heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in 
perils in the sea, in perils among false brethren; in weariness 
and painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in 
fastings often, in cold and nakedness.”4 


“Once was I stoned.” It is strange how little notice 
has been taken of the Apostle’s martyrdom at Lystra. Stoning 
was a common death sentence under the Jewish law; and 
even when inflicted judicially the death was both swift and 
sure. But the stoning of Paul was not an execution, but a 
murder, and his murderers were men whose passions were 
inflamed by religious hate. The fierceness and brutality of 
2John 9:49-51. 


3I Corinthians 4:9-18. 
4I Corinthians 11:24-27. 


70 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN * 


their action is indicated by the narrative. The ordinance 
which enjoined that stoning should be inflicted “outside the 
camp” was construed as requiring that, in the case of a city, 
it should take place outside the gate. But in their rage against 
Paul this was ignored; and so, after stoning him, “supposing 
that he was dead, they dragged him out of the city”,> “dragged 
him,” as they might have treated the carcass of a dog. 

If the record ended there we might conjecture that the 
Apostle was borne away by the disciples, and lovingly nursed 
back to life, and that, after many weeks of suffering, he was 
able once again to resume his ministry. But among all the 
New Testament miracles of healing there is nothing more 
wonderful than what actually happened. For “as the disciples 
stood round about him he rose up and entered into the city; 
and on the morrow he went forth with Barnabas to Derbe,” 
and preached the gospel there. If ever there was a miracle, 
surely this was one! 

Whether he had actually passed through the gates of 
death on that dreadful day, and been again called back to 
life, the Apostle never knew. But this he knew, that “whether 
in the body or out of the body’—whether dead or living— 
he had been “caught up even to the third heaven,” and had 
heard unspeakable words. His vision on the Damascus road 
was again and again described by him, but the glory of 
Paradise and the words he heard there surpassed the possi- 
bilities of human utterance. 

Well might he be “exalted overmuch” by “the exceeding 
greatness of the revelations”; and to humble him some trouble, 
“DActs 14:19. “They stoned him, not in the Jewish method, but 

tumultuously and in the streets, dragging him out of the city after- 
wards” (Alford). “The full sense is ‘And having prevailed on the 
multitude [to permit them to stone Paul], and having stoned him, they 
drew him out of the city.’ Suro having reference to the brutal insults 
offered to the dead bodies of executed malefactors, which were usually 


dragged by the heels out of the city gates” (Bloomfield). 
71 


Tue TESTIMONY OF PAUL 


which he calls “a messenger of Satan,” was permitted to 
make his life a martyrdom. The nature of that affliction has 
been the subject of many a conjecture. It evidently dated 
from the period of the “revelations”;* and the inference is 
a natural one that it originated in the physical sufferings 
with which the “revelations” were associated. That it was 
something which tended to unfit him for his public ministry 
is evident—“something in his aspect or personality which 
distressed him with an agony of humiliation.” 


One more clew is needed to guide us to a conclusion 
here. In Corinth his speech was deemed “contemptible,” 
where as in his earlier ministry he had ranked as an orator. 
For though Barnabas was a man of no common capacity 
and mark, it was not Barnabas, but Paul, who was hailed at 
Lystra as “the god of eloquence.” What, then, is the explana- 
tion of the seeming paradox? How natural that the stoning 
should have caused some facial paralysis, or some still more 
distressing affection which destroyed all control of his fea- 
tures, and made him an object of derision to the hostile or 
ill-conditioned members of every audience he addressed.® 
And this, I venture to suggest, was his “Gethsemane”—the 
affliction from which his thrice-repeated supplication sought 


6“Evidently,” I say, because the affliction was “given” to him lest 
the revelations should exalt him overmuch. The Romish exegesis of the 
passage, therefore, is certainly false. And the fact that Patristic authority 
can be cited for it does not deter me from describing it as shameful. 
*Dean Farrar. 


8It is very noteworthy that whenever he addressed cultured hearers, 
as, é.g., his various Roman judges, the Apostle seems to have com- 
manded great consideration and respect. His affliction would draw 
out the courtesy of such men, while with the vulgar it might excite 
derision. And it is said that such an affliction would affect the sufferer 
in different degrees at different times. 


72 


THe Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


deliverance. The more we study that wonderful personality, 
the more unsatisfactory will seem the common view that it 
was a mere “thorn in the flesh’—some minor trouble of the 
kind that many a suffering Christian bears without a murmur. 
We may confidently follow those who understand his graphic 
words as meaning nothing less than “the agony of impale- 
ment.”10 

“Behold, I show you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, 
but we shall all be changed”: with what a bounding heart 
the Apostle must have framed these words, as possibly he 
uttered them with twitching mouth, or penned them with 
shaking hand! And may we not in our little measure realize 
something of his calm, triumphant faith when, surveying his 
strangely tragic life, and recalling the vision of glory God 
had granted him, he wrote those further words, “I reckon 
that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be 
compared with the glory which shall be revealed to usward.”1 

Such are “the ways of God with men,” or at least with 
those whom He singles out for special honor. And Paul 


9II Corinthians 12. Bloomfield cites authorities for the conjecture that the 
trouble was “a paralytic and hypochondriac affection which occa- 
sioned a distortion of countenance and other distressing effects.” 

It has been urged upon me that this supposes an imperfect, an 

uncompleted, miracle of healing, for which there is no precedent in 
Scripture. But surely the Apostle’s words indicate that he knew his 
experience to be peculiar. To suffer from “a thorn in the flesh” has 
been the lot of multitudes of the people of God, but to suffer impale- 
ment, as it were, from the after effects of injuries divinely healed— 
this was so unique that he twice refused to accept the answer to his 
prayer for relief. 

10The word translated “thorn” means a stake for impaling, and then a 
thorn or splinter. Those who hold that ophthalmia was the Apostle’s 
affliction appeal to Numbers 33:55 (LXX). The ablest statement 
known to me of that view is Dean Farrar’s excursus in his “Life and 
Work of St. Paul.” But the Apostle’s references to his eyesight would 
all be accounted for if his trouble was of a kind that might be relieved 
by 2 present-day optician. 

11Romans 8:18. 


78 


Tue TESTIMONY OF PAUL 


was chosen to be not merely the foremost witness of the 
risen Christ, but the recipient of the highest revelations 
concerning Him, revelations which reached a climax in the 
“Captivity Epistles.” 

Treatises have been written to prove that in turning to 
Jerusalem when the Lord had sent him to the Gentiles, he 
was a second Jonah, and that his imprisonment in Rome was 
a divine judgment. But this ignores the character of that 
Pentecostal dispensation in which the Jew had a priority 
in the offer of grace. And moreover, if it were true, surely 
some veiled reference to it would be found in his later 
Epistles. But there is none. “An ambassador in chains,” and 
“the prisoner of the Lord’—such is his graphic description of 
his position in the imperial city; and this is not the language 
of a repentant Jonah. 

May we not rather believe that all his steps were “ordered 
of the Lord”? And may it not be due to our crude and 
shallow estimate of what “inspiration” means, that we fail to 
realize that it was that very discipline that fitted him to 
receive and impart the crowning revelation of Christ? Nor 
should we forget that his ministry in writing the Epistles 
which contain that revelation was incomparably more impor- 
tant even than his evangelistic labors. Of the churches which 
he founded scarcely a trace survives, but those Epistles 
‘remain, the priceless and imperishable heritage of the people 
of God. 

It is the intense and uncompromising monotheism of the 
Jew that gives such telling force to the incidental testimony 
which the Epistles supply to the Deity of Christ. And our 
knowledge of the personality and antecedents of the Apostle 
to the Gentiles lends immense weight to his words in this 
regard. A fanatical Pharisee in his unconverted days, and 
deeply versed in Rabbinical teaching, all his convictions and 
prejudices would have vetoed his using language which 


74 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


could be construed as an ascription of divine homage to any 
one but God. While, therefore, a phrase such as “Christ . . . 
who is over all, God blessed for ever,” if written by one of 
the Greek Fathers, might possibly admit of the ingenious 
glosses of Socinian exegesis, its use by the Apostle is proof 
that with him the Godhood of Christ was a divine truth.!? 


The opening salutations of his Epistles, and also his 
“apostolic benediction,” afford further proof of it, for in both 
the salutation and the benediction Christ is named as on 
the same level with God. “Grace to you, and peace from 
God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ”; “The grace of 
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the com- 
munion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all.” It is utterly 
inconceivable, I again repeat, that any man of Jewish training 
could have used such words unless the Lord Jesus Christ 
was enthroned in his heart as God. 


And with an even greater force, if possible, does the 
remark apply to the Apostle’s language in his later “captivity 
Epistles,” written at the close of his life. Take, for example, 
his words to Titus: “Looking for the blessed hope and 
appearing of the glory of our great God and Saviour Jesus 
Christ; who gave himself for us that he might redeem us 
from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a people for his 
own possession.”!* This cannot be evaded by rejecting the 
revised reading of the words; for, however they are con- 
strued, the Lord Jesus is here named with God in a way 


12] assume the correctness of the above rendering; and I am discussing 
the question without reference to inspiration. If the writings are 
inspired, there is no question left for discussion. 


18Titus 2:18. 
75 


Tue TESTIMONY OF PAUL 


that to the Jewish mind would savor of blasphemy if He 
be not God.4 


In this connection the charge to Timothy at the close 
of the first Epistle claims emphatic mention: “I charge thee 
in the sight of God . . . and of Christ Jesus . . . that thou 
keep the commandment, without spot, without reproach, 
until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ: which in its 
own times He shall shew, who is the blessed and only 
Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords; who only 
hath immortality, dwelling in light unapproachable; whom 
no man hath seen, nor can see: to whom be honour and power 
eternal. Amen.”!® 


Commentators discuss the question, to which of the 
persons of the Trinity do these words refer? And those who 
apply the whole passage to “the Son” can urge that “the 
only Potentate” is equivalent to “our only Master and Lord” 
in Jude’s Epistle, and that, in the Revelation, the title “King 
of kings and Lord of lords” is definitely given to Him whose 
“name is called the Word of God.”* But I venture to suggest 
that it is because of the controversies on the subject that here, 
as in many another passage, we raise a question which may 
have had no place whatever in the mind of the Apostle. 


14It is worthy of note that the identical words used of redemption by 
Jehovah in the Greek version of Exodus 19:5 are here quoted and 
applied to Christ. And also that the word “Saviour” occurs twice in 
each chapter of this Epistle, once of God and once of Christ. And 
though, of course, the word in itself does not connote Deity, it is 
incredible that the Apostle would have used it three times as a divine 
title, and three times in a lower sense when applied to Christ. The 
Christian will not doubt that it is used as a divine title in every one 
of its twenty-four occurrences in the New Testament, with the ex- 
ception, perhaps, of Ephesians 5:28, And in fifteen of these occurrences 
it is used of Christ. 

15. Timothy 6:13-16, R.V. 

16Revelation 19:13, 16. 


76 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


Not only in reading the Epistles, but even in their 
prayers, Christians often feel embarrassed by “the persons 
of the Trinity,” for the meaning of that term is much mis- 
understood; but no trace of any such embarrassment can be 
found in Scripture. Indeed, paradoxical though it may seem, 
the difficulty we find in interpreting this sublime doxology 
and other kindred Scriptures is proof that no difficulty of 
the kind presented itself to the mind of the Apostle. For 
with him “the Son” was “our great God and Saviour.” And 
in his words, therefore, there was no turning away from the 
Son to the Father; but by a natural transition his thoughts 
about “our Lord Jesus Christ” became merged in the thought 
of God. 

I conclude by quoting a passage from each of the three 
principal Epistles written during his first imprisonment. The 
following is his prayer for the Ephesians: 

“That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of 
glory, may give unto you a spirit of wisdom and revelation 
in the knowledge of him; having the eyes of your heart 
enlightened that ye may know what is the hope of his 
calling, what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in | 
the saints, and what the exceeding greatness of his power 
to usward who believe, according to that working of the 
strength of his might which he wrought in Christ, when 
he raised him from the dead, and made him to sit at his 
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all rule, and 
authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to 
come: and he put all things in subjection under his feet, 
and gave him to be head over all things to the church, which 
is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all (Eph. 
1:17-23). 

To the Philippians he writes: 

“Have this mind in you, which was also in Christ Jesus: 


77 


Tue TESTIMONY OF PAUL 


who, being in the form of God, counted it not a prize to 
be on an equality with God, but emptied himself, taking 
the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men; 
and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, 
becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death of the 
cross. Wherefore also God highly exalted him, and gave 
unto him the name which is above every name; that in the 
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, 
and things on earth, and things under the earth, and that 
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to 
the glory of God the Father” (Phil. 2:5-11). 

And in the following passage from the Epistle to the 
Colossians the revelation of Christ reaches its highest develop- 
ment: 

“The Son of his love; in whom we have our redemption, 
the forgiveness of our sins; who is the image of the invisible 
God, the firstborn of all creation; for in him were all things 
created, in the heavens and upon the earth, things visible 
and things invisible, whether thrones, or dominions, or princi- 
palities, or powers; all things have been created through him, 
and unto him; and he is before all things, and in him all 
things consist. And he is the head of the body, the church: 
who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in 
all things he might have the pre-eminence. For it was the 
good pleasure of the Father that in him should all the 
fulness dwell; and through him to reconcile all things unto 
himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross; 
through him, I say, whether things upon the earth, or things 
in the heavens” (Col. 1:13-20). 

To the unbeliever these words may seem the merest 
rhapsody. But the Christian accepts them as Divine. And 
to such I would appeal to read them again and again, and 
to ponder them till mind and heart are saturated with them. 
‘For I would say in the language of Ruskin—exaggerated 


78 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


language when used with reference to human writings, but 
true and apt when applied to Holy Scripture—“You must 
get into the habit of looking intensely at words, and assuring 
yourself of their meaning, syllable by syllable—nay, letter 
by letter.” And reading these Scriptures thus will dispel the 
last trace of unbelieving doubt as to who and what He is 
of whom they speak. 

For no one who is not either mentally deficient or spirit- 
ually blind can imagine that such words refer to a fellow- 
creature. 


79 


CHAPTER IX 


THE TESTIMONY OF THE REVELATION 


TO THE man of the world the Bible may seem to be 
merely a chance collection of religious writings, but the 
spiritual Christian finds abundant proof of its “hidden har- 
mony” and organic unity. The book of Genesis is, as it 
were, its opening chapter; and in the book of the Revelation 
it reaches its legitimate conclusion. Genesis introduces us 
to the dramatis persone of the sacred volume, and gives us 
an insight into its plot and purpose. There we have the 
record of the Creation and the Fall, the judgment of the 
Flood, the apostasy and scattering of the descendants of 
Noah, the call of Abraham, and the origin of the chosen 
people. And in the promise of “the seed of the woman,” 
and in the typology of the book we have the prophecy and 
pledge of Redemption. 

And here in the Revelation all the dropped threads of 
history and type and prophecy and promise, that lie scattered 
throughout the earlier Scriptures, are taken up and traced 
to their appointed consummation. Even in the opening 
sections of the book the successive promises of “him that 
overcometh” make cryptic reference to all the past. In 
Ephesus the “overcomer” shares with unfallen Adam the 
right to “the tree of life which is in the paradise of God.” 
In Smyrna he shares with Noah immunity from “the second 
death”—the judgment which brought the first “dispensation” 
to a close. In Pergamos he partakes with Moses of the 
hidden manna; and in Thyatira he exercises kingly rule with 
David. And Sardis speaks of the fellowship of the prophets, 


80 


THe REVELATION 


and the reward for those who witness a good confession in 
days of apostasy.t 

“The law and the prophets” were until John, whose 
mission it was to herald the coming of the Son of God. Then 
was ushered in a “dispensation” which, though brief as 
measured upon human calendars, was momentous beyond 
comparison—a_ transitional “dispensation” which, through 
Christian, was yet Jewish, and which ended with the destruc- 
tion of all the externals of Judaism. In Philadelphia, there- 
fore, the “overcomer” is called to share in the heavenly 
realities of which the temple that was the place of earthly 
worship, and the city which was the center of earthly blessing, 
were but shadows. In Laodicea, which represents the “dis- 
pensation” now drawing to a close, there is no reference to the 
past of Jewish symbolism or terminology; and the “over- 
comer” is a follower of Him who, as “the faithful and true 
Witness,” has reached the throne by the path which led Him 
to the cross.” 

All Scriptures is prophetic, because it is divine; but with 
special emphasis the Revelation is declared to be a prophecy. 
And as the main stream of prophecy always relates to 
Christ, the book fitly opens with a vision of His glory, and 
ends with a promise of His return. But by the majority of 
Christians both the vision and the promise are neglected or 
ignored. For His redeeming work is done and past, and 
therefore unspiritual men no longer need Him. And as the 
glory of His presence would put to shame the spiritual 
poverty and nakedness of those who profess to be His 
disciples, the thought of His return is embarrassing and 
unwelcome. 

We are reminded of the Apostle’s words, “Though we 
have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know Him 


1Revelation 2:7, 11, 17, 26, 27; 3:5. 
2Revelation 3:12, 21, 22. 


81 


Tue REVELATION 


so no longer.” Not that the Christian gives up one jot or 
tittle of the record of the Saviour’s earthly life, but that his 
faith rests upon his risen and _ glorified and coming Lord, 
and he reaches back from the Christ of the glory to the 
Christ of the humiliation. But “the Christian religion” is 
founded upon “Christ after the flesh”; and this influence 
governs the thoughts and the language even of spiritual 
Christians. Its deplorable effect upon our religious literature 
is apparent everywhere. Too many of our standard theological 
treatises, indeed, and of our popular “books of piety,” would 
seem almost unchristian if read in the light of the visions 
of glory vouchsafed to the Apostle John, or of the great 
doctrinal revelations entrusted to the Apostle Paul. And as 
these Scriptures would thus disturb habits of thought and 
speech “received by tradition from our fathers,” we ignore 
them, and cling to our “Christ after the flesh” religion. 

One result is that the old “Evangelicalism” gives way 
before the inroads of Rationalism and superstition. Under the 
pressure of aggressive skepticism many find rest by taking 
a deeper plunge into a false religion. Orthodoxy may thus 
be maintained by blindly obeying “the voice of the Church”; 
but orthodoxy is not faith, nor is the voice of the Church 
the Word of God. With the young, however, the lapse is 
usually toward “modernism,” and the skeptical movement 
which masquerades as “the Higher Criticism.” 

The men who—in this country at least—champion that 
crusade are not chargeable with intentional disloyalty to 
Christ, for they fail to understand its true character and 
ultimate aim. The imagery of the last chapter of Ephesians 
is borrowed from the battlefield; and one way in which 
military genius shows itself is in a capacity to detect the 
real objective of an enemy’s advance. The attack on Holy 


3II Corinthians 5:16. 


82 


THe Lorp FroM HEAVEN 


Scripture is but a feint, and these men are blindly fulfilling 
their part in a strategic movement which is directed against 
Christ. For it is only through the written Word that we can 
reach the Living Word; and if we give up the one, we lose 
both. 

But, it is said, how can the rejection of such a book 
as Daniel, for instance, affect our faith in Christ? If Daniel 
be jettisoned, the Revelation goes overboard along with it, 
and a signally important testimony to the Deity of Christ 
is lost to us. But more than this, if “Moses and the prophets” 
be discredited, we are confronted by the fact that the Lord 
identified Himself with their writings; and we are forced 
to conclude, either that the records of His teaching are 
unreliable, or else that He was Himself the dupe of false 
and superstitious beliefs. If the one alternative be accepted, 
the “rock of Holy Scripture” proves to be a quickstand. Or 
if, as the critics boast, the other alternative is “an assured 
result” of the new enlightenment, no one who is not hypno- 
tized by superstition will cling to the dogma of His Deity. 
Such passages as the first chapter of Colossians must be dis- 
missed as the rhapsody of an enthusiast, and the visions of 
the Apocalypse as the day-dreams of a brilliant mystic. 

But the theme of these pages is not the divine authority 
of Scripture, but the Deity of Christ; and what specially con- 
cerns us here is the testimony to that truth which the 
Apocalypse affords. 

In the preface to the book the whole is described as “the 
prophecy”; and while some expositors would exclude the 
Epistles to the Churches from that category, it is universally 
admitted that all which follows falls within it. And no careful 
reader can fail to see that if “the Lamb” of these visions be 
not God, He has everywhere supplanted God. From the 
fourth chapter to the end “the Father” is never named but 
once; and then it is not in contrast with “the Lamb,” but 


83 


THe REVELATION 


in closest union with Him. It occurs in the vision of the 
fourteenth chapter, where the Seer beholds the Lamb stand- 
ing on Mount Sion, “and with Him a hundred and forty-four 
thousand, having His name and His Father's name written in 
their foreheads.”4 

And so also in the later visions. Chapter 19 opens with 
the heavenly anthem, “Hallelujah, salvation, and glory, and 
honour, and power unto the Lord our God; for true and 
righteous are his judgments.” It is the doom of the apostate 
church on earth that evokes this burst of praise in heaven. 
And then, in response to a voice from the throne, the further 
anthem rises “as the voice of mighty thunders,” “Hallelujah; 
for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.” And, from an 
opened heaven there comes forth One whom now we know 
as the Saviour, but who is here revealed as the Avenger. 
“His eyes are a flame of fire, and upon His head are many 
diadems. . . . And He is arrayed in a garment sprinkled 
with blood, and His name is called the Word of God.” It 
is not “the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better things 
than that of- Abel,” but the blood of Isaiah’s prophecy of 
vengeance.® For now Isaiah’s words are about to be fulfilled: 
“The day of vengeance is in mine heart, and the year of my 
redeemed is come.” 

And the Seer adds: “He hath on His garment and on His 
thigh a name written, King of kings and Lord of lords.” 
This is the public title of Him whose mystery name is “the 
Word of God.” His identity is thus made clear. And let us 
keep steadily in view that the God of the Bible is One; and 
that He is manifested in Christ, and revealed by the Holy 
Spirit. 

More plainly still does this appear in the final vision of 
the heavenly City. There is no temple in the New Jerusalem, 


4Revelation 14:1, R.V. 
5Isaiah 68. 


84 


THe Lorp FROM HEAVEN ~ 


for “the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple 
thereof.” No need for sun or moon to shine on it, “for the 
glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light 
thereof.” “And the throne of God and of the Lamb shall 
be in it; and His servants shall serve Him, and they shall 
see His face, and His name shall be in their foreheads.” 

One throne, one temple, one light—God and the Lamb, 
inseparably One. So absolute the unity that “laws of thought” 
and “rules of grammar” are ignored; and though God and 
the Lamb are the burden of the vision, it is His name the 
redeemed are said to bear, and His face it is that they shall see. 

To drag these visions down to the level of religious 
controversy would be deplorable. Let us ponder them until 
our minds are saturated with the very words in which they 
are revealed, and all doubt will be dispelled as to the God- 
hood of the Christ who died for us. Or if the shadow of a 
doubt still lingers, the sequel may suffice to banish it. For 
when the Apostle prostrates himself in worship at the feet 
of the glorious being who has been his guide and teacher 
in these heavenly visions, he is peremptorily checked. “See 
thou do it not,” the angel exclaims; “I am a fellow-servant 
with thee and with thy brethren the prophets, and with 
them that keep the words of this book: worship God.” The 
highest of created beings is a fellow-servant with the humblest 
saint. And if Christ be not God, even He must stand on this 
same level, and all worship rendered to Him is idolatrous 
and sinful. 

And now, with this inexorable alternative in view, we 
turn again to the opening chapter. “The revelation of Jesus 
Christ” is the divinely given title of the book, and it governs 
the whole contents of it. In this light, then, we read the 
words, “I am the Alpha and the Omega, saith the Lord God, 
who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty.” 
Certain it is that “the Alpha and the Omega” is a title which 


85 


THe REVELATION 


belongs to God alone; and if any should doubt whether it 
here refers to the Lord Jesus, the fact remains that it is 
claimed by Him expressly in the concluding message of the 
book: “I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the 
last, the beginning and the end. . . . I, Jesus, have sent Mine 
angel to testify these things unto you for the Churches.” 
That same voice it was that summoned the Seer to behold the 
opening vision of the book. Here is the record of it: 

“I saw seven golden candlesticks, and in the midst of 
the seven candlesticks one like unto the Son of Man, clothed 
with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps 
with a golden girdle. His head and his hairs were white like 
wool, as white as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire; 
and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a 
furnace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. And 
he had in his right hand seven stars; and out of his mouth 
went a sharp two-edged sword: and his countenance was 
as the sun shineth in his strength. And when I saw him, I 
fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, 
saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the last: I am 
he that liveth and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for 
evermore, and I have the keys of hell and of death.”® 

“The simple and natural conclusion is that Jesus was 
the child of Joseph and Mary, and had an uneventful child- 
hood. 

Such is the alternative belief which the infidel offers 
us in exchange for the faith of Christ. And my apology for 
quoting words which cannot fail to outrage Christian feeling 
is that, in these days of levity and superficial thought, many 
who would resent a change of apostasy are in danger of 
drifting away from the faith of Christ; and therefore it is 
well to make them realize the peril which threatens them. 
6Revelation 1:12-18. 


86 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN * 


For to deny the Deity of the Lord Jesus Christ is to bring 
Him down to the level of mere humanity; and the foundations 
of Christianity being thus destroyed, the whole superstructure 
falls to pieces. The doctrine of an atoning death is gone. 
“Indeed the very suggestion is absurd,” the writer above 
quoted tells us. And Gethsemane and Calvary will thus 
find many a parallel, not only in the story of the martyrs, 
but in the sufferings of common men. For, he adds, “many 
a British soldier has died as brave a death as Jesus”; and 
“an immense amount of pious nonsense has been spoken 
and written about our Lord’s agony in Gethsemane... . 
Your agony would be just as great as that of Jesus.” 

The natural refinement and courtesy of writers such as 
the distinguished Rationalist quoted on the opening page 
of this volume lead them to conceal the legitimate deduc- 
tions from their misbelief, lest the statement of them should 
shock or wound Christian sentiment. But the writer above 
quoted is unrestrained by any considerations of the kind. 
And his words may do good if, just by reason of their wanton 
profanity and coarseness, they lead the trifler and the waverer 
to realize the nature of the abyss to which apostasy from 
Christ will lead them. 


87 


CHAPTER X 
“FOR THE SAKE OF HIS NAME” 


NO ONE who accepts the Scriptures as divine is entitled to 
deny that in His personal ministry the Lord Jesus laid claim 
to Deity. And the crucifixion is a public proof that He did 
in fact assert this claim. For we are told expressly that the 
reason why the Jews plotted His death was “because he not 
only brake the Sabbath but also called God his own Father, 
making himself equal with God.”! His claim to be “Lord 
even of the Sabbath” was in itself an assertion of equality 
with the God of Sinai. And as regards His declaring Himself 
to be the Son of God, the question is not what these words 
might convey to English readers today, but what He Himself 
intended His hearers to understand by them.? 

And this He made unequivocally clear. The charge 
brought against Him was one from which, if false, any 
godly Israelite would have recoiled with horror. But instead 
of repelling it He accepted it in a way which even common 
men could understand. For He immediately asserted such 
absolute unity with God that the Father was responsible 
for His every act, including, of course, the miracle which 
they had denounced as a violation of the divine law. He 
next claimed absolute equality with God as “the author and 
giver of life’—the supreme prerogative of Deity. And, lastly, 
He asserted His exclusive right to the equally divine preroga- 
tive of judgment.? 
1John 5:18. 

?See chapter IV. 
3See verses 19-22 of John 5. 


88 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


My object in recapitulating this now and here is to 
seize upon the words which follow, for they are words which 
may well cause searching of heart to the Christian in these 
days of ours. The reason why all judgment has been commit- 
ted to Him is, He declared, “in order that all may honour 
the Son even as they honour the Father.”* And to make this 
still more emphatic He added, “He that honoureth not the 
Son, honoureth not the Father which sent him.” 

Men of the world think of Him only as the great Buddha 
who once lived and died on earth. They know nothing of 
the living Lord who now reigns in Heaven. It seems natural 
to them, therefore, to speak of Him as “a man by the name 
of Jesus Christ,” or, with still more distressing freedom, as 
simply “Jesus.” But how is it that real Christians, who profess 
to honor Him “even as they honour the Father,” habitually 
offend in the same way? It is to be hoped that with very 
many the fault is due to mere thoughtlessness or ignorance; 
and if these pages should lead any such to clear themselves 
from this reproach, they will not have been written in vain. 

“Sanctify Christ in your hearts as Lord” is an exhortation 
we need to remember. And if He be enshrined in the heart 
as Lord, the confession of the lip will be a matter of course. 
This confession, indeed, is at once a characteristic and a 
proof of dicipleship; for “no one can say, “Lord Jesus’ but by 
the Holy Spirit.” Any lips, of course, could frame the 
words; but it is a fact of extraordinary interest that the 
unspiritual never do say, “Lord Jesus.” They may call Him 
4John 5:28. In English this might mean no more than honoring the 

Son in addition to honoring the Father. But the words used by the 
Lord imply rendering to the Son the same honor as is rendered to 
the Father. He uses the word eight times in chap. 17. (verses 2, 11, 
14, 16, 18, 21, 22, 28) and it always implies “even as,” “in the same 


way as.” 
5J Corinthians 12:8, 


89 


For His Name's SAKE 


“Jesus,” or “Jesus Christ,” or use some such term as “our 
Saviour”; but “the Lord Jesus”—never! 

In New Testament times the disciple thus declared 
himself by the way in which he named his Lord.® It was 
not that he followed a set rule, but that he obeyed a spiritual 
instinct. And so it ought to be with us. In the social sphere 
it is not by rule, but by an instinct of courtesy, that we 
address other people, and speak of them, in a becoming 
manner; and in this sphere our spiritual instincts would be 
a still more unerring guide if they were not deadened and 
depraved by the baneful influences which prevail around us. 

It is recorded in the Acts that “certain of the strolling 
Jews, exorcists, took upon them to name over them that had 
evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, I adjure thee 
by Jesus, whom Paul preacheth.” Mark the words. To the 
disciples He was “the Lord Jesus,” but to the vagabond Jews 
He was “Jesus.” And Christendom follows the example, not 
of the disciples, but of the vagabond Jews! 

But it is said, “Why should we not call Him ‘Jesus’? Is He 
not thus named hundreds of times in the Gospels?” Strange 
it is that people who contend vehemently for the inspiration 
of Scripture should thus give proof that they have no faith 
in it. For if it means anything, it implies a divine authorship 
of the sacred books, controlling the authorship of the human 
writers. 

If “The Letters of Queen Victoria” had been published 
anonymously, the mode in which they name the members of 
the Royal Family would in itself indicate the queen as writer. 
And the manner in which the “Son of His love” is named in 
the evangelistic records is one of the many incidental proofs 
that the Gospels are indeed “the Word of God.” What makes 
6This appears both from the Gospel narrative and from the Lord’s 


express commendation of the practice: “Ye call me Master and Lord, 
and ye say well” (John 13:18). 


90 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


this so especially significant is the fact that while in the main 

narrative the Lord is always “Jesus,” yet in every instance 

where the narrative introduces words spoken by the disciples 
as such, whether addressed to Him or to others about Him, 

a title of reverence is used. 

The case of the disciples with whom He went to Emmaus 
on the day of the resurrection may seem to be an exception, 
but it is a most significant one. They had hoped that “it was 
He who should redeem Israel,” but their hope had been 
shattered by the crucifixion. And now that He was dead, He 
was no longer “the Lord,” but merely “Jesus of Nazareth.”* 

It is idle to discuss this with any who seek excuses for 
refusing to render to Him the homage which He claims from 
His people. But the devout will recognize that in this matter 
they should be guided by the Lord’s own teaching, and by 
the example of those who received the teaching from His 
own lips. And here we are not left in doubt. His words, 
“Ye call me ‘Master’ and ‘Lord, and ye say well,” give proof 
of their invariable practice, and of His unqualified approval 
of it; and surely this should be enough for us. 

In this matter the testimony of the Epistles is of extra- 
ordinary interest. For while in the Gospels the Lord is named 
narratively as “Jesus” some six hundred times,® the simple 
name occurs only twenty-two times in the whole range of 
the Epistles. And it never once occurs by way of narrative 
mention: there is always a special reason for its use. 

“TLuke 24:19. During His life the Jews called Him “Jesus of Nazareth” 
merely as a distinctive name, and thus it was that Cleopas used it. 
But after His death it became a name of reproach—the name of the 
false Messiah who had been crucified as a blasphemer. And it is with 
this signification, as equivalent to “the despised and rejected of men,” 
that it was used by the Apostles in Acts 2:22, 10:38, and 26:9, and 


by the Lord Himself to Paul (Acts 22:8). 
8The disciples never call Him “Jesus,” whereas the main narrative 


always names Him thus. 


91 


For His NAMES SAKE 


If the relative dates of the New Testament books were 
different, a plausible explanation of this might be attempted. 
But in view of the facts it must be an insoluble enigma to 
those who deny the inspiration of the Scriptures. 

An illustrative instance will explain what is meant by the 
narrative use of the Lord’s human name. The Evangelists 
record that at the Last Supper “Jesus took bread”; but in the 
Epistle to the Corinthians we read “The Lord Jesus took 
bread.” In all the Apostle Paul’s Epistles, indeed, there are only 
eight passages in which the Lord is named as “Jesus”; and in 
each of these there is either a special emphasis or a doctrinal 
significance in the use of the name of His humiliation.® 

This appears in a very striking way in the only two 
passages in which “the simple name” occurs in all his six later 
Epistles, written in his Roman prisons. In Ephesians the 
Apostle writes: “Ye did not so learn Christ; if so be that ye 
heard Him and were taught in Him, even as truth is in Jesus.” 
Here the “Jesus” is emphatic; for the exhortation relates to 
the practical life of the Christian, which ought to be governed 
by the teaching of Christ as the truth was manifested in the 
example of His own life on earth in the time of His 
humiliation.1° 

And in writing to the Philippians, he presents in striking 
contrast the Lord’s humiliation on earth and His exaltation 
to the place of supreme glory and power in heaven. And it 
was because He humbled Himself that God exalted Him 
“The use of the simple name ‘Jesus’ is rare in the Epistles.” “Wherever 

it occurs it will be found to be distinctive or emphatic.” “The modern 
familiar use of the simple name ‘Jesus’ has little authority in Apostolic 


usage” (Bishop Ellicott’s “New Testament Commentary for English 
Readers”: Ephesians 4:21.) 


10Ephesians 4:21 (II Corinthians 4:10 is a similar passage). A misreading 
of this verse has given rise to the popular phrase, “the truth as it is 
in Jesus,” meaning thereby evangelical doctrine. In scriptural language 
that would be called “the truth of Christ.” And it is not doctrine, but 
practice, that is here indicated. 


92 


Tue Lorp FRoM HEAVEN 


thus, and “gave Him the name that is above every name.” 
Surely we cannot err in connecting this with His glory as 
exalted “above every name that is named, not only in this 
world, but also in that which is to come.” What can that 
name be but the great name of Jehovah? 

But it is “in the name of Jesus” that every knee shall bow. 
What can this mean but that it is as the man of Nazareth 
and Calvary that He will command the worship of every 
being in the universe, while all shall unite to own that He 
is Lord? 

The name of His humiliation is thus placed in marked 
antithesis to that of His glory; and the passage should teach 
us, not to call Him “Jesus,” but to confess that He is Lord." 


When reading these Epistles which were definnitely ad- 
dressed to Hebrew Christians, it is specially important to 
keep in mind the place which the Messianic title held with 
the Jew. If in I Peter, for instance, we read “Messiah,” or “the 
Christ,” in every place where “Christ” is used, and “Jesus 
the Messiah” wherever “Jesus Christ” occurs, the unfamiliar 
terms will, in some measure, bring to our minds what the 
words conveyed to Jewish ears. For I would take sides with 
those who refuse to believe that “Christ” is ever used merely 
as a proper name. With the Jew it was a sacred title of great 
solemnity; and it is hard to believe that a Hebrew Christian 
could have come to regard it in any other light.1? 
11The passages here cited are given earlier in this chapter. I would urge 

that, as the name of His glory is conferred on Him because He humbled 
Himself, it cannot be the name of His humiliation. And if the Apostle 
meant thereby the name of “Jehovah,” he used the only word which 
the Greek language supplied to express it. Alford’s exegesis amounts 
to this, that because He humbled Himself to become Jesus, God gave 
Him that same name with a new dignity attached to it. This seems to 
me to fritter away the meaning of the passage, and to ignore the force 
of verse 10. I need not say that bowing at the name is not its teaching. 


12The assumption, indeed, exemplifies the want of appreciation of Jewish 
thought and feeling that is so characteristic of “Gentile” exegesis. 


93 


For His NAME’s SAKE 


The Epistles of Peter give striking proof that the termi- 
nology of the Epistles in this respect was influenced by the 
proclivities of those to whom they were addressed. In his 
first Epistle for example, which was written expressly for 
Israelites, the Lord is named twelve times as “Christ,”!* and 
eight times as “Jesus Christ”; for with the Israelite the Mes- 
sianic title would carry its own solemn and sacred significance. 
But to Gentiles “Christ” might seem to be a proper name, 
and “Jesus Christ” merely a double name (like Simon Peter); 
and therefore, in his second Epistle, which was not addressed 
exclusively to Hebrews, he never once names Him by the 
simple title of “Christ,” and only once as “Jesus Christ.” In 
his opening salutation he describes himself as “the bondservant 
of Jesus Christ’—it seems to have been a regular apostolic 
formula—but in the very same sentence he goes on to designate 
Him as “our God and Saviour Jesus Christ,” and again as 
“Jesus our Lord.” Three times we have “our Lord Jesus 
Christ,"* and three times “our Lord and Saviour Jesus 
Christ,72° 

If these words were merely of a converted Jew they 
would be overwhelming proof of a belief in the Deity of 
Christ. For it is indeed “Gentile ignorance” to suppose that 
a devout Jew could use such language of any created being, 
however exalted. But they are the words of an inspired 
Apostle; and to reject such testimony is to undermine the 
authority of Holy Scripture. 

Upon the main subject of this chapter I would make a 
parting appeal. Tendencies are just now declaring them- 
selves in political and social life, which cause forebodings in 
the minds of thoughtful men. But these are of little moment 


13Following the Revised text, I include I Peter 5:10 and 14, where the 
A.V. reads “Christ Jesus”; and 3:15, where it reads “Lord God.” 

14JT Peter 8, 14 and 16. 

15] Peter 1:11; 2:20; and 8:18. 


94 


Tue Lorp From HEAVEN 


in comparison with the development of evils, as subtle as 
they are grave, in the religious sphere. The lists seem to be 
preparing for the great predicted struggle of the latter days 
between the apostasy of avowed infidelity and the apostasy 
which flaunts the name of Christ upon its banners. The one 
pays homage to “the historic Jesus,” who is primus inter pares, 
the best and greatest of mankind. The other worships a 
mythical “Jesus” who takes rank with a mythical “mother of 
God.” Both alike are opposed to Christ. For the truth that 
He is “God over all, blessed for ever,” which the one openly 
rejects, the other implicitly undermines. And these evils seem - 
to be daily gathering volume and force. Their influence is 
clearly manifest in our religious literature; and it is more and 
more corrupting the faith of Christians of every class and 
school. 

It would seem to me, therefore, that even if we could 
find a scriptural warrant—and I can find none—for liberty to 
name the Lord of Glory with the easy familiarity so common 
in these evil days, we should do well to forego that liberty, 
and to give proof by our very words, in season and out of 
season, that we are of the number of those who own Him as 
Lord, and who honor Him “even as they honor the Father.” 
The confession of Him thus as Lord is the very essence of the 
gospel. “For if thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, 
and sha]t believe in thine heart that God raised Him from the 
dead, thou shalt be saved.”2® 

But “the god of this world hath blinded the minds of 
the unbelieving, that the light of the gospel of the glory of 
Christ, who is the image of God, should not dawn upon them."” 

The gospel of a “Jesus” who is the image of man is his 
chief device to delude his votaries today. But “we preach 


16Romans 10:9, R.V. 
17JI Corinthians 4:4, R.V. 


95 


For His NAMeE’s SAKE 


Christ Jesus as Lord,” the Apostle immediately adds; and 
this the devil cannot tolerate, for it impugns “the lie” of which 
he is the father—the lie that he himself is the true “firstborn,” 
to whom the sovereignty of the world by right belongs.18 

18] make bold to read John 8:44 literally. “When he speaks the lie, he 


speaks of his own; for he is a liar, and the father of it.” And so also 
in II Thessalonians 2:11. For “the lie,” see Luke 4:5, 6. 


Cuarpter XI 


THE REVELATION OF GRACE, AND 
THE LIFE TO COME 


“THE SON of God is come!” The Eden promise of the 
woman’s seed was like the little rivulet far up a mountain side, 
to which men point as the beginning of a mighty river. Down 
through the centuries type was added to type, and prophecy 
to prophecy, enlarging its scope and unfolding its meaning, 
until the completed Hebrew Scriptures became a deep, broad 
stream of hope and promise. And when the fulness of the 
time had come, “God sent His only begotten Son into the 
world,” and promise and hope became merged in glorious 
fact. 

The primeval revelation was enshrined in the traditions 
of the human race, and took shape in many fantastic forms 
in the mythologies of the ancient world. But nothing in the 
wildest fancies of pagan religions or of classic poetry is so 
utterly incredible to the natural mind as is the truth of Christ. 
“The gods are come down to us in the likeness of men,” was 
a cry that excited but little either of skepticism or of wonder; 
for, having regard to the character of their gods, such a descent 
was natural and easy. But that God, who is spirit, has been 
“manifested in flesh”; that God, whom the heaven of heavens 
cannot contain, has revealed Himself on earth, and revealed 
Himself “in the likeness of men”;! that the Man of Nazareth, 
“the son of the carpenter,” the crucified Jew, was the Word 
who was in the beginning with God, and was Himself God, 
the Creator of all things that exist, and apart from whom 


1Mark the kinship of the words of the pagan idolaters in Acts 14:11, 
and of the inspired Apostle in Philippians 2:7. 


97 


GRACE, AND THE LIFE TO COME 


nothing that exists came into being—this seems to be outside 
the limits, not only of what is possible in fact, but of what is 
conceivable in human imagination. Hence the deep meaning 
of the words with which the Lord received the Apostle Peter's 
confession of His Deity: “Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-Jonah; 
for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but My 
Father which is in heaven.” Can we wonder at His declaring 
that “no one knoweth the Son save the Father”! 

We think of the Nazarene as He taught by the Lake of 
Galilee, or in the Temple courts, surrounded by peasants and 
fishermen, but shunned by all people of culture or repute not 
only in the social, but in the religious sphere; and we re- 
member that the last the world ever saw of Him was hanging 
on a gibbet between two common criminals. And as we 
ponder these things we begin to appreciate the meaning of 
the challenge, “Who is he that overcometh the world, but he 
that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God!” Jesus, “the 
despised and rejected of men,” the outcast heretic, the cruci- 
fied blasphemer—that He is the Son of God! The faith that 
thus takes sides with God against the world is a faith that 
overcomes the world, “For whosoever believeth that Jesus is 
the Christ is born of God.” Hence it is that God is “the justifier 
of him that hath faith in Jesus”; for “as many as received him, 
to them gave he the right to become children of God.” 
(I John 1:9). 

With the mass of men who profess the Christian creed, 
what passes for faith is but a surface current on the smooth 
and shallow stream of their religious impressions. Most of 
us “believe” that the earth is a sphere, and that it is twirling 
on its axis and spinning round the sun. This venerable 
hypothesis is scientifically useful, and, moreover, it is probably 
true. But if “science” should discover tomorrow that it is 
false, the discovery would not spoil our appetite for a single 
meal, or rob us of our sleep for a single night. And there 


98 


Tye Lorp From HEAVEN 


are multitudes of professing Christians who in recent years 
have bartered their conventional faith in Christ for the coarse 
profanity of the “New Theology,” or the pleasing and plausible 
fallacies and falsehoods of “Christian Science”; and the 
change has served only to increase their self-esteem and their 
enjoyment of existence. 

A mere creed orthodoxy has but little in common with 
true faith in Christ. And yet the many organized phases of 
latter-day apostasy could not work such havoc among pro- 
fessing Christians, were it not that orthodoxy is paralyzed 
by the crusade of recent years against the divine authority 
of Scripture. In the physical sphere, when life loses its 
aggressive power, and can no longer overcome the forces 
that produce decay, vital energy soon fails; and so it is 
here. Evangelicalism, attacked on one side by superstition 
and on the other by rationalism, has been content to stand 
upon the defensive, and to sacrifice truth for the sake of 
peace and so-called unity. The enthusiasm of faith has been 
killed by the spirit of compromise. 

Plain speaking is needed in times like these. “To him 
that overcometh” is the prevailing note in the Lord’s last 
messages of warning and cheer to His people upon earth. 
For when churches fail, He counts upon individual faith- 
fulness. And in these days of ours organized Christianity 
has failed, and the defense of the truth has become “a 
soldier’s battle.” In too many of our pulpits, indeed, the 
commonly received “doctrines of the Christian religion”—. 
man’s sin and ruin, redemption by blood, the resurrection of 
the dead, and eternal judgment—are openly assailed or 
implicitly denied. And from most of our pulpits the distinctive 
truths of Christianty are never heard. For doctrines such 
as those above enumerated are not distinctively Christian at 
all. As the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, they are a part 
of the divine revelation of Judaism. They are “the first 


99 


GRACE, AND THE LiFE TO CoME 


principles of the oracles of God,” or, in other words, the 
elements of revealed religion. 

But the Christian revelation is a revelation about Christ. 
Not that “a man of the name of Jesus Christ once stood in 
our midst,” that He worked great miracles, taught great 
truths, lived a holy life, and died a shameful death—all this 
a wayfaring man, though a fool, can discover for himself 
by human testimony; but that the man who thus lived and 
died on earth was the Son of God (and we have seen what 
that title signifies—“the Lord of Glory,” “our great God and 
Saviour”); and that He is now sitting on the throne of God, 
in all the glory of God, and with all power in heaven and on 
earth. In view of all this—seemingly so incredible, and yet so 
divinely true—we can understand His words, “When the 
Son of Man cometh, shall He find the faith upon the earth?” 

Though in the natural sphere we can put pressure on the 
sane and the intelligent to acknowledge facts and to yield to 
reason, we cannot compel belief in Christ, for spiritual truth 
is spiritually discerned. And yet we may be able to clear 
away mists of ignorance and barriers of error, that prejudice 
and blind the minds of men. The Christian revelation is 
apparently falsified by facts. If the Christ of the Ministry be 
indeed Almighty God, wielding all power on earth, what ex- 
planation can be offered of this world’s evil and hateful history 
throughout the Christian era? “The times of the restoration 
of all things,” or, in other words, the times when everything 
should be put right on earth, were the burden of Hebrew 
prophecy. But the hope was to be realized at the advent of 
Messiah; and yet, after nineteen centuries, it seemingly re- 
mains but a dream of poets and mystics. 

Platitudes about the goodness and wisdom of an inscrutable 
Providence will neither silence the infidel nor satisfy His suf- 
fering people. But the Lord’s words last quoted were spoken 
in connection with other words which point to the solution 


100 


Tue Lorp rroMm HEAVEN 


of the mystery. God will indeed avenge His own elect, though 
He is longsuffering respecting them. Or, as the Apostle Peter 
wrote, recalling, doubtless, these very words, “the Lord is 
not slack concerning his promise as some count slackness, 
but is longsuffering.” 

The great truth of grace was lost between the days of 
the Apostles and the age of the Patristic theologians. As the 
sun breaks forth on a typical April day, and then again be- 
comes veiled in clouds, this truth flashed out in the teaching 
of the Reformation, and then disappeared again. Though 
Luther was its foremost champion, the Church which bears 
his name systematically denies it; and it is practically ignored 
by the great theological schools of Calvin and Arminius. And 
yet it is the truth which alone will teach us to “justify the ways 
of God with men.” 

He to whom all judgment is committed, and who wields 
all power, is exalted to be a Saviour, and His reign is a reign 
of Grace. When in the synagogue of Nazareth He stood up 
to read the appointed lesson from the prophets, He closed the 
book at the middle of its opening sentence. “To preach the 
acceptable year of the Lord” were the last words He uttered. 
And as all eyes were fastened on Him—well might they stare 
in wonder—“He began to say unto them, This day is this 
Scripture fulfilled in your ears.” “And the day of vengeance 
of our God” were the words before Him on the page, but He 
left these words unread. 

And by reason of the longsuffering of God the dawning 
of that awful day is still deferred. It is not that the moral 
government of the world is in abeyance, but that divine judicial 
action is postponed until the day of grace shall have run its 
course. And this of necessity. For if all judgment is committed 
to the Lord Jesus Christ—all judicial and punitive action re- 


2Luke 18:7; II Peter 8:9. It is the same word in both passages. 
101 


GRACE, AND THE LIFE TO COME 


specting sin—the day of grace must run its course before the 
judgment can begin. The great amnesty has been proclaimed— 
forgiveness and peace for sinful men; and while this ministry 
of reconciliation lasts, judgment there cannot be. The functions 
of Saviour and Judge are incompatible. He must relinquish 
the throne of grace before He takes His place on the throne 
of judgment. 

“All power is of God,” but the power of rule on earth is 
now delegated to men, and men are incompetent and corrupt. 
But the day is coming when “the mystery of God shall be 
finished,” and the rule of this world shall become our Lord’s 
and His Christ’s. Then shall be heard the anthem, “We give 
Thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, because Thou hast taken 
to Thee Thy great power and hast reigned, and Thy wrath 
has come.” And then shall He give reward to His people and 
destroy them who destroy the earth.” 

A pandemonium ended by a bonfire might epigram- 
matically describe the divine government of the world, as 
travestied by our popular theology. But in the light of Scrip- 
ture all is clear and plain. True it is that this earth that has 
been the scene of the pandemonium, shall yet be given up to 
fire, but not till every word of Hebrew prophecy has been 
fulfilled; for no word can fail that God has ever uttered. “We 
according to His promise, look for new heavens and a new 
earth,” but this belongs to an eternity to come. It is in time 
as measured upon human calendars, and here on this earth 
of ours, now blighted by human sin, that divine goodness and 
power shall yet be displayed in righteous rule. 

Of the fulfilment of this hope “God hath spoken by all 
his holy prophets since the world began.” and “the mystery 
of God” is that its fulfilment is delayed. And yet by the mass 
of those who profess to believe the Scriptures it is treated as 


3Revelation 10:7; 11:15-18. 
4Acts 3:21. 


102 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


a dream of visionaries, and not a few there are who scoff at it. 
Though they pray “Thy kingdom come, Thy will be done 
on earth,” they refuse to tolerate the thought that the Lord 
will fufil the prayer which He Himself has given us. In the 
religious sphere, indeed, it would seem that men will believe 
anything except the truth of God, and thousands of our pulpits 
promote the delusion that the work of the churches will yet 
result in the conversion of the world. 

Were the subject not so solemn, ridicule would be our 
fittest weapon against a figment so grotesque. In the days 
of the Ministry the “professing church” on earth had been so 
thoroughly absorbed by the world that it was itself “the world” 
against which the Lord so strenuously warned His disciples. 
And in our day “the church” is not converting the world, but 
becoming assimilated to the world. Man is God’s creature, 
and therefore by nature a religious being. But he is a fallen 
creature, and therefore his religion always tends downwards. 
And the god of this world caters for the idiosyncrasies of his 
dupes. For one the lure is the elevation of humanity, for an- 
other, it is to bring the Deity down to his own level: rationalism 
and superstition—the cult of the Eden lie,° and the cult of 
the golden calf*—these are now the evangels of the Churches 
of the Reformation; and the men who keep to the old gospel 
are a dwindling minority. 

But the last note struck in these concluding pages shall 
not be controversy, but appeal and hope. “O fools, and slow 
of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken,” was the 
Lord’s rebuke to His disciples because their faith had given 
way under a strain such as none had ever known before, and 


5“Your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods” (Gen. 3:5). 
6Exodus 32:1-6. The calf was the victim in the great burnt-offering 
of the covenant (Exodus 24); and the idol was an outward symbol to 
represent the spiritual reality. It was worshipped at “a feast to the 
Lord” (verse 5) only in the sense in which altars and crosses are now 
worshipped. 


103 


GRACE, AND THE LIFE TO COME 


none could ever know again. He whom they had worshipped 
as Messiah had been crucified in shame; and was not His 
corpse lying in the tomb!’ Yet fools they were to doubt, 
even in face of facts so stern and so terrible, that the words 
of the prophets were divine, or to think that God could fail 
to fulfill them to the last jot and tittle. And we may well 
give heed to that rebuke, and take it to ourselves—we whose 
faith breaks down because, forsooth, in the longsuffering of 
God, with whom a thousand years are as one day, the ful- 
filment of the promise is delayed!® 

When toward the close of His ministry the Lord warned 
His people of times of trouble, which may now perhaps be 
near at hand, He spoke words well fitted to create feelings 
of despair. But His purpose was far different, for immediately 
He added, “When these things begin to come to pass, then 
look up, and lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth 
nigh.”® “Look up,” for our hope is in His coming. “The 
second advent” of our theology belongs to a future too remote 
to influence our lives; and, moreover, it is associated only 
with the thought of judgment. But His coming was the hope 
of His people in a bygone age, and it is the true hope of 
His people still. Upon His coming, indeed, depends their 
full redemption; for we have bodies as well as souls, and 
our bodies are still subject to that hideous outrage, death. 
For death is none the less an enemy because He has triumphed 
over it, and has given the victory to us. 


And beyond the hope of His believing people—that true 
church which He Himself is building—there lies the hope of 
Israel, yet to be restored to favor when the “professing 
TLuke 24:21, 25. 
8In his famous Birmingham address on “Science and Man,” Prof. Tyndall 

said, “The promise is a dream marred by the experience of eighteen 


centuries.” And Christians here take sides with the skeptic! 
9Luke 21:28, 


104 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


church” of this “Christian” age of ours shall have received 
its doom.1° And beyond the hope of Israel there lies the 
hope of this sin-blighted world, for the sovereignty of the 
world is to become His; and “even the creation itself shall 
be delivered from the bondage of corruption.”!2 And as our 
faith dwells upon this glorious vista of prophecy and promise 
yet to be fulfilled, let us remember that all is for the glory 
of Him whom we know as our Lord and Saviour, and (it 
cannot be repeated too often) that all awaits His coming. 
This is the age of His absence, but the coming age shall 
be characterized by His presence.!* Not an isolated event, 
albeit Scripture tells us that a series of manifestations of 
Christ will make its course, but a new attitude toward men— 
immediate divine action both in blessing and in judgment. 
For while the covert atheism of these days of ours scoffs 
at the thought that the prayer which He Himself has put 
into our lips could ever be fulfilled, His believing people 
know that His kingdom is certainly coming, and that His 
will shall be done on earth. 
These pages are a humble effort to unfold some of the 
many glories of our Lord Jesus Christ. To all the redeemed 
He is Saviour and Lord but He is also the Messiah, and King 
of Israel. More than this, and higher, He is the Son of Man, 
“King of kings and Lord of lords,” “the Heir of all things,” 
“the Firstborn of all creation.” And above and beyond all 
this is His supreme glory as the Son of God, the glory which 
He had with the Father before the world was. 
And there is but one Lord Jesus Christ. The Christ of 
Nazareth and Calvary is He who will consume the lawless 
10See Alford’s Commentary on Matthew 12:48-45. 
11Revelation 11:15. Basileia, translated “kingdoms” in A.V., means 
dominion or sovereignty. 

12Romans 8:2], R.V. 

13Such is the meaning of the word parousia, which our English Bible 
renders “coming.” 


105 


“GRACE, AND THE LIFE TO COME 


one by the breath of His mouth, and destroy him by the 
manifestation of His presence. And that same awful glory 
it was that overwhelmed the beloved disciple in the Patmos 
vision; for His eyes are as a flame of fire, and His countenance 
is as the sun shineth in its strength. Not even the holiest 
of mortal men can stand in presence of the glory of God; 
but so perfect is our redemption that we are called to rejoice 
in hope of it. And the time is coming when “this mortal shall 
have put on immortality’; and then shall be fulfilled the 
prayer of the betrayal night, for when thus “changed” it will 
be our privilege and joy to behold the glory of our glorious 
Lord and Saviour. 


106 


APPENDIX? 
NoTE To CHAPTER IV? 


“IF THE Father begat the Son, He who was begotten had 
a beginning of existence. So there was a time when the Son 
did not exist.” Thus Arius argued; and when inexorable logic 
deduces error from premises that are deemed true, it behooves 
us to test our premises again by an appeal to Scripture. And 
it is not a matter of opinion, but of fact, that neither in respect 
of His “eternal Sonship,” nor even of His human birth, does 
Holy Scripture ever speak of the Son as “begotten of the 
Father.”* And this is the more significant because the word 
is used so emphatically with reference to His resurrection 
from the dead. 

But, it will be asked, is He not called “the only begotten 
Son of God”? This question has been already answered (see 
p- 40 ante), and it only remains to notice a most deplorable 
and distressing inference that is based upon the misreading 
of the term. 

The language of theology on this subject is popularly 
misconstrued to mean that at the Incarnation the Deity took 


1This Appendix was not ready when the proofs were submitted to the 
Bishop of Durham. 

2T have written on this subject with hesitation, but under a pressing 
sense of the need of dealing with it. 

The time is near when “the Christian miracles” will be accepted as 
facts, but explained on natural principles; for the crassly stupid infi- 
delity of the past is dying out. (Dr. Harnack’s reference to miracles in 
“What is Christianity?” points to this.) I heard of a private meeting 
of medical men in London last winter at which it was gravely urged 
that a virgin birth was possible as a natural phenomenon! The 
Rationalist could thus admit that the Lord was born of a virgin, without 
admitting that He was “conceived of the Holy Ghost.” 

3Matthew 1:20 does not conflict with this statement. 


107 


APPENDIX 


the place of a husband to the Virgin Mary. In regard to such 
a mystery as the Incarnation our part is to keep to the very 
words of Holy Scripture; and the language of Scripture is 
unequivocal and plain. As to His human birth, the Lord was 
“the Seed of the Woman.” But it will be asked, how is that 
possible? The answer is supplied by Matthew 1:20 and 
Luke 1:35. The virgin birth was altogether miraculous; but 
if the popular belief were well founded, His birth would have 
been miraculous only in the sense of being unnatural. 

Those who have learned to look for absolute accuracy 
in the language of Scripture will not fail to mark the angel’s 
words: “Therefore that holy thing that shall be born of thee 
shall be called the Son of God.” That birth did not constitute 
Him Son of God, yet had it not been a virgin birth, Mary’s 
son could have had no possible claim to such a title. 

The Rationalist trades upon the fact that the virgin birth 
has no place in the teaching of the Epistles. And Christians 
often fail to understand the omission. But the reason of it is 
plain. While the rejection of the virgin birth would under- 
mine the faith, the acceptance of it (as Unitarianism abun- 
dantly proves) is incompatible with denying the Deity of 
Christ, and His Deity is the foundation truth of Christianity. 
The truth of His Sonship as implied in the virgin birth is 
merged in the truth that He was the Son of God in a vastly 
higher sense; and, as we have seen, that great truth is in the 
warp and woof of every part of the New Testament. 

But this is not all. Unless the Gospel narratives be alto- 
gether unreliable and worthless, it is certain that Mary's first- 
born was not the son of Joseph. The alternative to the virgin 
birth, therefore, would be that the Lord of Glory belonged to 
that unfortunate class which the divine law excluded from “the 
congregation of the Lord” (Deut. 23:2) and this being so, 
it is amazing that any one could expect to find an assertion 
of it in the doctrinal teaching of the Epistles. The whole ques- 


108 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


tion of the virgin birth is settled and silenced by the truth 
of the Lord’s Deity. 

The word “firstborn” claims notice here. In its ordinary 
use prétotokos means a woman’s first child, being a male. 
But Hebrews 12:23 gives proof that it acquired a figurative 
or spiritual significance, suggested by, but wholly apart from, 
its common meaning. For every individual in the particular 
company of the redeemed there designated is a “firstborn”; 
and it is clearly used as a title of special dignity and privilege. 
This being so, it would be ignorant and wrong to narrow its 
application to our Divine Lord be reference to the virgin 
birth, or to construe it as implying in any way a limitation 
of His Deity. 

The coincidence is striking that this word, like monogenes, 
occurs just nine times in Scripture. In Matthew 1:25 and 
Luke 2:7, it is used in its ordinary acceptation, the inference 
being that Mary had other children. In Hebrews 11:28 it is 
used by way of historic reference; and Hebrews 12:23 I have 
already noticed. The other passages where it occurs are 
Romans 8:29, Colossians 1:15, 18, Hebrews 1:6; Revelation 
1:5. In the sphere of creation the term “firstborn” can be 
applied to the Lord only as a title of dignity and glory. And 
this is presumably its significance in those passages also which 
relate to the resurrection. If there be any reference to the 
ordinary meaning of the word, it is noteworthy that the 
“order” indicated in I Corinthians 15:23 is priority of rank. 


109 


APPENDIX 


NOTE TO CHAPTER X 


“WHAT does he mean?” some may ask in laying down the 
tenth chapter of this book. To explain my meaning, there- 
fore, I take up at random four documents now before me. 

The first is a syllabus of services in a certain West End 
church which is noted for a true ministry. And among the 
subjects of addresses announced, I here find “The Parables 
of Jesus,” and “Scenes in the Life of Jesus.” Lectures were 
once announced under these same headings in a notorious 
“Hall of Science” in London. The profane infidel and the 
devout Christian thus agree in naming the Lord Jesus Christ 
in the same free and easy fashion. 

The next is a theological work by a Professor in one of 
the principal Theological Colleges in America. The author 
is a devout and enlightened student of Scripture, and his 
book is of great merit and real value. The present volume, 
indeed, has benefited by help derived from it. But the 
manner in which it habitually uses “the simple name” might 
suggest that some infidel had got hold of the MS. and had 
struck out every title of reverence. It is “Jesus” everywhere. 
Only twenty times is the Lord named as “Jesus” in all the 
Epistles of the New Testament, and yet He is so named 
twenty-two times in the two concluding paragraphs of the 
last chapter of this book. 

The third is a publisher’s circular about a work entitled 
“Jesus according to St. Mark,” by a clergyman who is a 
Fellow of an Oxford College, and Examining Chaplain to 
a Bishop. “It endeavors to answer the question, What kind 
of a person did St. Mark, or his informant, St. Peter, think 
Jesus to be? Under the heads of ‘Jesus’ family and friends,’ 
‘Jesus’ way of life, ‘Jesus’ mind,’ ‘Jesus’ social outlook,’ ‘Jesus’ 
morality,’ and ‘Jesus’ religion,’ it approaches the final subject 


110 


Tue Lorp rrom HEAVEN 


of ‘Jesus Himself.” Had the book been written by Tom 
Paine or Voltaire, the title and headings would have been the 
same, save that the “Saint” before the name of the Evangelist 
would probably have been omitted. “Jesus” always; but Saint 
Mark! Is it not plain that the “Jesus” of this deplorable book 
is the dead Buddha of the Rationalist? Could any one to 
whom our Lord Jesus Christ is a living person—“our great 
God and Saviour,” before whose judgment-seat we all shall 
stand—write of Him, or even think of Him, after this fashion? 


The last document in my list is a “book of piety” by an 
American writer who seems to be a persona grata on advanced 
evangelical platforms on both sides of the Atlantic. It is a 
deplorable book, the evil influence of which is all the greater 
because it is so subtle. It is fitted to promote a “Christ after 
the flesh” religion of a kind that charms the mere religionist, 
and deceives and corrupts even spiritual Christians—a religion 
which puts sentiment in place of faith, and the expression of 
that sentiment in the place of the divine revelation of the 
Lord Jesus Christ. 


Though a book of this kind enjoys a fleeting popularity 
because it panders to the desire of the natural man to bring 
“Jesus” down to his own level, it is happily short-lived. But 
it is otherwise with works such as find a place on the shelves 
of every theological library. And most of our recent theo- 
logical literature is so definitely “run in a rationalistic mould,” 
that it is unwholesome reading for Christians. And this is 
true even of books written by men who pose as champions 
of orthodoxy. Here, e.g., is a typical sentence from the pen 
of one such: “Jesus was a very complex character.” Can a 
man who writes thus have any real knowledge of the Lord 
before who he has to stand in judgment? 


1] am happy in the conviction that if I were in my grave, not even my 
own wife would write about me for publication after the fashion of this 
writer’s “Talks about Jesus.” 


lil 


APPENDIX 


The historian who has true historical genius studies the 
records of the past in order to put himself back, as it were, 
into the life of the people of whom he writes, that he may 
be able to think as they thought and feel as they felt. And 
if we study the New Testament in this spirit, we shall realize 
in some measure the amazement and distress which any one 
of the early disciples would feel, if he returned to earth today, 
at finding that Christians constantly name the Lord of Glory 
after the example of the vagabond Jewish exorcists of the 
Acts. In his day, he would tell us, people declared themselves 
at once as unbelievers or disciples by the way in which they 
spoke of Him. 

As proof that there can be nothing unseemly in speaking 
of the Lord as “Jesus,” or “Jesus Christ,”? it is often urged 
that many reverent and spiritual men habitually name Him 
thus. But were it not for this there would be no need to 
write upon the subject at all. And surely the question for us 
is not as to the habits and practices of Christian men, but 
as to the teaching of Scripture and the expressed will of the 
Lord Himself. 


If the question is to be settled by the practice of Chris- 
tians, it was settled in the days of the Fathers. Though here 
we should distinguish between “the Apostolic Fathers” and 
their successors. For writings such as Clement’s “Epistle to 
the Corinthians” and Polycarp’s “Epistle to the Philippians” 
definitely follow the New Testament tradition in the way 
they name the Lord; whereas later Patristic writings give 
proof that, in this as in other respects, the leaven was already 
working which (as Froude aptly expresses it somewhere) 
changed the religion of Christ into the Christian religion. 
In the days when I frequented club smoking-rooms I used to hear Him 

called “J.C.” And I believe, strange to say, that so far from this being 


intentionally profane, it was due to a perverted sense of reverence 
which shunned the use of the sacred name. 


112 


{ 


Tue Lorp FROM HEAVEN 


In the Gospels, as already noticed, the Lord is named 
narratively as “Jesus” some 600 times, but never once in the 
Epistles. Eight times in Hebrews, and in eight passages in 
the Epistles of Paul, He is called by His personal name; and 
in every instance its occurrence indicates some doctrinal 
significance or special emphasis. The following is the list 
of the passages in question. I will preface it merely by 
repeating that His disciples never spoke of Him to one another 
save as Master or Lord: 


Romans 3:26.—This is dealt with in Chapter X. 


Romans 8:11.—Here the emphatic reference to the humiliation appears 
plainly from the words which immediately follow. 


II Corinthians 4:5.—“Your servants for Jesus’ sake.” This is perhaps 
the only passage in the Epistles that presents a difficulty. And such being 
the case, surely it ought to be explained on the same principle. It is 
certainly not for the sake of euphony or rhythm that in the same sentence 
the Apostle calls Him “Jesus” and “Christ Jesus the Lord.” 


II Corinthians 4:10-14.—Here the emphatic contrast between “Jesus” 
and “the Lord Jesus” is evident. “The life of Jesus” is the life He lived 
on earth; the life of Christ would be the vital principle which He shares 
with His redeemed people. 

Ephesians 4:21.—This is dealt with in Chapter X. 

Philippians 2:10.—This is dealt with in Chapter X. 

I Thessalonians 1:10.-He is named three times in the preceding 
verses as the Lord Jesus Christ; here, as Jesus, God’s Son, from heaven. 
It is not really a case in point. (Cf. I John 1:7.) 

I Thessalonians 4:14.-The emphasis on the personal name is clear, 
and an intelligent exegesis of the passage will bring out its doctrinal 
significance. An excursus upon the subject here would be an undue 
digression, and the writer must take the liberty of referring to his book 
“The Way,” p. 118 and App. II. Our versions here give exposition, not 
translation, The Greek reads, “If we believe that Jesus died and rose 
again, even so them also who were put to sleep through Jesus will God 
bring with Him.” Which means that the Lord was the cause of their 
death; i.e. they were martyred because they were Christians. The words 
are not a doctrinal statement about the holy dead—that is the scope of 
verse 16—but a message of comfort expressly from the Lord Himself 
(verse 15) about those for whom the Thessalonians were mourning. The 
popular phrase, “sleeping in Jesus” is not scriptural. 


118 


APPENDIX 


The words “another Jesus” in II Corinthians 11:4 have 
obviously no bearing on the present question. Neither have 
the words of I Corinthians 12:4 as they appear in the original. 
“Anathema Jesus” was presumably used by profane Jews; and 
the Apostle contrasts it with “Lord Jesus”—the mode in which 
the disciples addressed Him and spoke of Him. 

The Revisers’ reading of Galatians 6:17 exemplifies the 
importance of accuracy in the use of the Lord’s names. Their 
devotion to the three oldest MSS.—the layman’s usual blunder 
in giving undue weight to “direct” evidence—has here led to 
a deplorable perversion of the Apostle’s words. 

“The stigmata of Jesus” must be explained (according 
to the well-known incident in the life of St. Francis of Assisi) 
as the wound-prints which “the Man of Sorrows” bore in His 
body. But however they may be interpreted, it seems incred- 
ible that such words could have been penned by the Apostle 
Paul. The meaning of his actual words—“the stigmata of the 
Lord Jesus’—is not doubtful. It was a practice with slave- 
owners to brand their slaves, and the scars of his sufferings 
for Christ's sake were to him the brand-marks by which his 
Divine Master claimed him to be His devoted slave. 

The passages in Hebrews are 2:9, 4:14, 6:20, 7:22, 10:19, 
12:2 and 24, and 18:12. (The R.V. adds 8:1.) 

Hebrews 4:14 may be eliminated, for, as we have seen, 
“Jesus, the Son of God,” was to the Israelite a title of the 
highest solemnity, connoting absolute Deity. And in 2:9, 
4:20, 12:2, and 18:12, the reference to the Lord’s humilia- 
tion and “witness unto death” is unmistakable. Hebrews 6:20 
(“the forerunner”) may be bracketed with 12:2; and 7:22 
with 4:14, 

These are the only passages in the Epistles of the New 
Testament in which the Lord is mentioned by His personal 
name. To use them as an excuse for the prevailing practice 
of naming Him with unholy familiarity is to bring Scripture 


114 


THE Lorp FRoM HEAVEN 


into contempt, for a gulf separates even our most solemn 
utterances from the inspired language of Holy Scripture. 


It is noteworthy that while “the simple name” is never 
used narratively in the Epistles, it is so used in the ‘first 
chapter of Acts (verses 1, 14, and 16), which is in a sense 
the conclusion of the Third Gospel. And two or three other 
passages may seem to be in the same category, though per- 
haps they ought to be otherwise explained. It is also remark- 
able that in Acts 1:11, as in Revelation 14:12 and 19:10, the 
Lord is thus designated by angels. And the Lord Himself 
used the name of His humiliation in arresting Saul of Tarsus 
(Acts 9:5), as He does again in Revelation 22:16. What has 
been said of the use of the name “Jesus” in the Epistles 
applies with special force to the Apostolic preaching recorded 
in Acts; as, é.g., in 2:32 and 86. And still greater emphasis 
attaches to “Jesus of Nazareth,” as a name not only of humilia- 
tion, but of reproach (see footnote 7 in Chapter X). 


”»> 


With reference to the few occurrences of “Jesus Christ 
in Acts, the remarks offered in Chapter X apply with full force. 
The Lord is never thus named to Gentiles (for the R.V. omits 
8:87). 

I would here repeat the words quoted on a preceding 
page, that “the modern familiarity of use of the simple 
name Jesus has little authority in Apostolic usage.” But in 
view of the foregoing analysis of Scripture, I would go 
further, and maintain that, to familiarity of use, the New 
Testament lends no sanction whatever. It is generally due 
to ignorance, indifference, or sheer carelessness. To call Him 
“Jesus” saves time and breath. Moreover, it is popular with 
hearers and readers—a Christ-after-the-flesh cult is always | 
popular—and if we like it, what does it matter? He is of no 
account whatever! 


115 


APPENDIX 


To call a fellow-man by his personal name betokens 
great familiarity; and if there be Christians who have gained 
such a position with their Lord and Saviour, it is not for us 
to judge them. But we who claim no such place must not 
allow ourselves to be betrayed by their example into thoughts 
or modes of speech which His presence would rebuke and 
silence. If we really desire “to sanctify Christ in our hearts 
as Lord,” we shall be careful and eager to own Him as Lord 
with our lips. And all influences that hinder the realization 
of that desire are unwholesome, and we do well to shun them. 


“Ye do show the Lord’s death till he come” (I Cor. 11:26). 
In these words we have the faith and hope of Christianity; 
and no one who lets go any part of the truth they express 
has any right to the name of Christian. For to reject the 
hope of the Coming is as really a mark of apostasy as to 
deny the Atonement. And no spiritual Christian will need 
to be reminded of the significance of the word, the Lord's 
death. “The death of Jesus” might mean merely the end of 
His earthly life in Judea long ago. This indeed is the ruling 
thought in the religion of Christendom, the crucifix being 
the symbol of it. But it is not through the slough of nineteen 
centuries of apostasy that we reach the Cross. Faith brings 
us into the presence of the Lord in His glory, and we rest 
upon His words—“I am he that liveth and was dead, and 
behold, I am alive for evermore” (Rev. 1:18). “We know 
that the Son of God is come’—that is the Christian’s past. 
“He is now at the right hand of God . . . for us”—that is his 
present. And as for the future, “We are looking for the 
Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ” (I John 5:20; Rom. 8:34; 
Phil. 3:20). 

Our hymn-books contain many a hymn which Christians 
would discard or alter if they knew what it meant “to sanctify 


116 


Tue Lorp rrom HEAVEN 


Christ in their hearts as Lord.” I take, for instance, the hymn 
beginning— 
“Sweet Saviour, bless us ere we go,” 
with the refrain at the end of every verse— 
“O gentle Jesu, be our light.” 


Who is the Being whom people are taught to address in such 
terms and in such a manner? One moment’s intelligent 
thought will satisfy any one that he is not our risen and 
glorified Lord and Saviour. His personal name occurs many 
hundreds of times in the New Testament, but never once with 
an adjective. Not even in the days of His humiliation did 
His chosen disciples ever address Him thus. The plain truth 
is that this “sweet, gentle Jesu” is a mere idol. The same 
tendency in human nature which leads some to worship a 
mythical Virgin Mary, declares itself in impersonating this 
mythical Jesus, who is an object of sentiment, and not of 
faith. And this tendency is so deep and general that in scores 
of hymns we find this utterly unchristian, “O Jesus,” when 
the rhythm of the verse is marred by it, and would be saved 
by the use of the Christian mode of address, “Lord Jesus.” 

“Ye call Me Master and Lord, and ye say well.” These 
are His own words; and surely this is enough for the true 
disciple! 

A friend of mine tells of the death-bed words of a 
revered Christian minister by whom he himself was brought 
to the Lord. In response to the inquiry, “Safe in the arms 
of Jesus?” the old saint opened his eyes, and replied with a 
smile, “No, no; at His feet.” It was the attitude of the beloved 
disciple in the Patmos vision. We should never allow a 
hymn-book to betray us into using words which we would 
not use if the Lord were present, or if we really believed 
that He was listening. 


117 


APPENDIX 


Safe in Jehovah’s keeping, 
Led by His glorious arm, 
God is Himself my refuge, 

A present help from harm. 
Fears may at times distress me, 
Griefs may my soul annoy; 
God is my strength and portion, 

God my exceeding joy. 


Safe in Jehovah’s keeping, 
Safe in temptation’s hour, 
Safe in the midst of perils, 
Kept by Almighty power. 
Safe when the tempest rages, 
Safe though the night be long; 
E’en when my sky is darkest 
God is my strength and song. 


Sure is Jehovah’s promise, 
Nought can my hope assail; 

Here is my soul’s sure anchor, 
Entered within the veil. 

Blest in His love eternal, 
What can I want beside! 

Safe through the blood that cleanseth, 
Safe in the Christ that died. 


118 


st BIL 251). AS7 
Anderson, Robert, 1841-1918. 


The Lord from heaven 
| 50098 
| 
Birecot AS? 


Anderson, Robert, 1841-1918. 
The Lord from heaven 


90098 


DEMCQ 


peat 
cs) 


ze 
oa 


aie. = 
Saat T 

py eaer prey sar sh 

aeca etal 


SEs 


pete 
ieee tes ade 


SSE ee 


