,$r;     I  /       WA  r?t  1~X  JJ? 


K.C.B. 


All    Saints'   Rectory 


LIBRARY 


TORONTO 


Shelf  No, 


Register  No.     I  2>  4  I  5~ 


19 


/*. 


"THE    WAY 


WORKS  BY   THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

THE    GOSPEL    AND     ITS     MINISTRY: 
a  Handbook  of  Evangelical  Truth. 

THE  COMING  PRINCE;  or,  The  Seventy 
Weeks  of  Daniel. 

HUMAN    DESTINY:   a    Handbook   of  the 

Eschatological  Controversy. 

THE  SILENCE  OF  GOD. 
DANIEL  IN  THE  CRITICS'  DEN. 
THE  BUDDHA  OF  CHRISTENDOM. 

THE     BIBLE     AND     MODERN     CRITI 
CISM.     With  a  Preface  by  the  Bishop  of  Durham. 

PSEUDO  -  CRITICISM  ;     or,    The     Higher 

Criticism  and  its  Counterfeit. 

"FOR  US  MEN":  Chapters  on  Redemption 
Truths. 

A     DOUBTER'S      DOUBTS     ABOUT 
SCIENCE  AND  RELIGION.     (Out  of  print.] 


"THE    WAY" 

CHAPTERS  ON  THE  CHRISTIAN 
LIFE 


BY 

SIR  ROBERT  ANDERSON,  K.C.B.,  LL.D. 


SECOND  EDITION 


EonUon 

JAMES    NISBET    &    CO.,    LIMITED 

21  BERNERS  STREET 

1905 


Printed  by  BALLANTYNE,  HANSON  <V  Co. 
At  the  Ballantyne  Press 


NOTE   TO   THE   SECOND    EDITION 

THAT  another  Edition  of  "THE  WAY" 
should  be  called  for  within  a  few  weeks 
of  its  first  appearance  is  most  gratifying 
to  the  Author. 

The  text  of  the  book  here  remains 
unaltered,  but  several  paragraphs  have 
been  added  to  the  Appendix  Notes. 

The  first  chapter  explains  the  title. 
Many  people  will  be  surprised  to  learn 
that  "  THE  A\rAY "  is  a  Scriptural  ex 
pression  which  was  in  common  use  in 
early  times  to  designate  the  Christian 
faith. 

R.  A. 


CONTENTS 


CHAP.  PAOK 

I.  "THE  WAY" 1 

II.  FOOLS 8 

III.  THE  LIFE  CHOICE 20 

IV.  WHAT  GRACE  TEACHES       ....  30 
V.  THE  SOBER  LIFE         .....  40 

VI.  THE  RIGHTEOUS  LIFE          ....        50 

VII.  THE  GODLY  LIFE 60 

VIII.  THE  FEAR  OF  GOD     .  ...       68 

IX.  ON  BEING  PILGRIMS 80 

X.  WHO  is  A  CHRISTIAN  ?  .          .          -95 

XI.  THE  CHRISTIAN  HOPE         .         .         .         .111 

XII.  THE  INTERMEDIATE  STATE  .         .         .         .126 

XIII.  CONCLUSION 138 

APPENDIX 
NOTE  I.    ...  .  .161 

NOTE  II.  ..  .     172 

vii 


THE   WAY 

CHAPTER   I 

"THE  WAY" 

THE  scene  is  laid  in  the  court  of  a  Roman 
procurator.  The  occasion  is  a  public  trial. 
The  prosecutors  are  the  religious  leaders  of 
the  Jews.  The  accused  is  a  man  of  their 
own  race  and  creed.  Once  a  true  and 
zealous  "son  of  the  Church"-— an  honoured 
and  trusted  disciple  of  their  strictest  and 
most  distinguished  school — he  has  lapsed 
from  orthodoxy  and  joined  "the  sect  of 
the  Nazarenes."  Worse  than  this  he  is  a 
ringleader  of  that  apostasy,  and  has  gone 
to  such  extremes  of  heresy  as  to  teach  that 
there  is  salvation  for  others  than  the  elect 
people  of  God.  "  Away  with  such  a  fellow 


2  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  i 

from  the  earth "  had  been  their  cry,  "  it 
is  not  fit  that  he  should  live."1  If  only 
they  were  free  he  would  receive  short  shrift 
at  their  hands ;  but  he  is  under  the  protec 
tion  of  Roman  law,  and  so  they  have  to 
suffer  the  indignity  of  being  compelled  to 
bring  him  before  a  court  of  their  Roman 
masters. 

But  on  what  charge  can  he  be  arraigned  ? 
The  figment  that  the  Nazarene  founded  a 
new  religion  has  not  yet  been  invented. 
Else  their  task  would  be  an  easy  one ;  for 
the  Empire  is  intolerant  of  new  religions. 
And  a  mere  lapse  from  doctrinal  orthodoxy 
within  a  religion  authorised  by  the  state, 
no  Roman  magistrate  will  deal  with.  So 
they  have  instructed  one  Tertullus,  a  pro 
fessional  pleader,  to  represent  them.  And 
Tertullus,  skilfully  masking  the  real  ground 
of  the  accusation,  charges  the  prisoner  with 
being  a  disturber  of  the  peace,  a  public 
pest,  and  a  man  tainted  with  sedition. 

Thus  it  was  that  his  co-religionists  de 
scribed  the  great  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles. 

1  Acte  xxii.  22. 


CHAP,  i]  "THE   WAY'1  3 

Destined  to  do  more  to  move  the  world 
than  all  the  "  Caesars  "  of  history,  he  stood 
there,  an  ugly  little  Jew,  not  only  friendless 
and  hated,  but  despised.  Oriental  cruelty 
had  a  mode  of  execution  more  horrible  even 
than  crucifixion.  Impaled  upon  a  stake 
planted  in  the  ground,  the  victim  was  left 
to  a  lingering  death,  in  the  public  view. 
And  such  is  the  figure  which,  in  the  Epistle 
to  the  Corinthians,  the  Apostle  uses  to 
describe  the  utter  wreck  of  his  physical 
being.  He  was  "given  a  stake  for  the 
flesh."  And  thus  impaled,  as  it  were,  he 
was  "  made  a  spectacle  unto  the  world, 
both  to  angels  and  to  men."  His  face 
was  battered  and  scarred,  and  his  muscular 
frame  wrenched  and  torn,  by  the  stoning 
at  Lystra,  when,  with  arms  nerved  by 
religious  hate,  his  cruel  enemies  had 
pounded  him  to  death.3  Till  then  he 

1  2  Cor.  xii.  7.    When  the  Apostle's  life  comes  to  he  written 
— and    the  task  still  awaits  a  master  mind — we  shall  hear 
no  more  of  the  "  thorn  in  the  flesh."     The  suggestion  that 
such  a  man  would  whine  ahout  a    splinter   is    utterly   un 
worthy  :    the  gloss  of  certain   Roman   Catholic  theologians 
is  absolutely  shameful. 

2  1  Cor.  iv.  9.  s  Acts  xiv.  19. 


4  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  i 

had  ranked  as  an  orator;1  but  now  he 
articulates  with  difficulty,  and  his  speech 
is  deemed  contemptible.2 

And  he  had  his  own  "  Gethsemane," 
when  thrice  he  put  up  the  prayer  that 
the  Almighty  power  which  God  had  per 
mitted  him  to  administer  in  healing  others 
might  be  used  to  bring  himself  relief. 
But  the  answer  came,  "  My  grace  is  suffi 
cient  for  thee,  for  My  strength  is  made 
perfect  in  weakness."  And  so  he  had 
learned  to  glory  in  his  infirmities.  His 
hideous  scars  were  "the  brand  marks  of 
the  Lord  Jesus,"  whose  slave  he  rejoiced 
to  be.3 

Sufferings  for  Christ's  sake  refine  and 
humble  a  man,  but  they  never  humiliate  or 
crush  him.  So  with  courage  undaunted, 
and  with  all  the  dignity  which  becomes  a 
servant  of  God,  he  confronted  both  his 
persecutors  and  his  judge.  And  after  tra 
versing  explicitly  the  charges  of  sedition 
and  disorder,  he  rolled  back  upon  his 

1  Actsxiv.  12.  2  2  Cor.  x.  10. 

3  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9 ;  Gal.  vi.  17. 


CHAP,  i]  "THE   WAY'1  5 

accusers  their  charge  of  heresy.  We  can 
picture  to  ourselves  his  look  and  gesture 
as,  pointing  to  those  recreant  Jews,  he 
exclaimed,  "  This  I  confess  unto  thee,  that 
according  to  '  The  Way '  (which  they  call 
a  sect)  so  worship  I  our  fathers'  God, 
believing  all  things  that  are  according 
to  the  law,  and  that  are  written  in  the 
prophets."1 

"  The  Way."  The  expression  indicates, 
as  Lange  tells  us,  "  a  certain  mode  of  life 
and  conduct " ;  or  as  Canon  Cook,  with 
greater  fulness,  gives  it,  "a  definite  and 
progressive  direction  of  the  inner  and  outer 
life  of  man."  On  the  Apostle's  lips  it 
means  the  true  Faith,  and  a  right  life. 
And  its  occurrences  in  the  Acts  of  the 
Apostles  give  proof  not  only  that  it  was 

1  Acts  xxiv.  14.  Our  Authorised  Version  entirely  misses 
the  meaning  of  the  expression,  "  The  Way/'  both  here  and 
in  the  other  places  where  it  occurs.  Among  them  Alford 
includes  Acts  xviii.  26,  which  he  reads  "  expounded  unto 
him  the  Way  more  perfectly." 

"  Our  fathers'  God  "  is  literally  "  our  ancestral  God  "  ;  a 
phrase  that  is  used  nowhere  else,  and  was  probably  chosen 
by  the  Apostle  as  being  one  that  would  appeal  specially 
to  a  Roman.  (The  word  occurs  also  in  Acts  xxii.  3,  and 
xxviii.  17.) 


6  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  i 

in  common  use,  but  that  it  was  a  phrase  of 
the  disciples'  own  choosing. 

What  first  led  the  Apostle  to  "  separate 
the  disciples"  was  that,  after  his  three 
months'  ministry  in  the  synagogue  at 
Ephesus,  certain  of  the  Jews  "  spake  evil  of 
the  Way."  At  Ephesus  it  was  too,  that, 
later  on,  the  pagan  idolaters  "  made  no  small 
stir  about  the  Way." '•  Nor  was  the  word 
unknown  to  Paul  in  his  unconverted  days. 
The  High  Priest's  commission  given  him 
in  view  of  his  Damascus  journey,  was  that 
"if  he  found  any  of  the  Way,  he  might 
bring  them  bound  unto  Jerusalem."3  And 
referring  to  this,  when  now  seized  and 
charged  by  the  Jerusalem  Jews,  he  re 
minded  them  that  he  had  "  persecuted  the 
Way  unto  the  death." '  The  last  occurrence 
of  the  word  is  where  we  read  that  Felix, 
"having  more  perfect  knowledge  of  the 
Way,"  refused  to  condemn  the  Apostle  on  the 
charges  so  cunningly  devised  against  him.5 

1  Acts  xix.  9.  2  Acts  xix.  23. 

3  Acts  ix.  2.  4  Acts  xxii.  4. 

6  Acts  xxiv.  22.  Felix  was  too  well  acquainted  with  the 
teaching  and  conduct  of  the  Christians  to  listen  to  the  charge 
against  Paul. 


CHAP,  i]  "THE   WAY'1  7 

At  a  recent  sale  of  a  bankrupt  nobleman's 
effects,  it  was  mentioned  that  a  beautiful 
little  crystal  goblet,  which  fetched  four 
thousand  guineas,  had  been  lying  for  years 
unnoticed  with  articles  of  common  glass, 
for  common  use.  And  so  it  is  with  this 
word  "  The  Way."  It  has  fallen  out  of 
notice,  and  lies  neglected  and  forgotten. 
And  yet  it  is  not  only  beautiful  but  useful, 
for  it  has  no  synonym  in  our  English 
tongue.1 

1  "The  Christian  religion"  is  the  explanation  of  it  offered 
in  Hastings'  "  Dictionary  of  the  Bihle."  But  the  phrase 
"the  Christian  religion"  is  both  equivocal  and  cumbersome. 
"The  Path  "  of  Buddhism  is  an  interesting  parallel. 


CHAPTER   II 

FOOLS 

GOD  has  no  pleasure  in  fools,  the  Book  of 
Eeclesiastes  tells  us — that  wonderful  treatise 
upon  the  philosophy  of  life. 

"  Be  more  ready  to  hear  than  to  give  the 
sacrifice  of  fools."  "  Be  not  rash  with  thy 
mouth,  and  let  not  thine  heart  be  hasty  to 
utter  any  thing  before  God  :  for  God  is  in 
heaven,  and  thou  upon  earth  ;  therefore  let 
thy  words  be  few."  "  When  thou  vowest 
a  vow  unto  God,  defer  not  to  pay  it  ;  for 
He  hath  no  pleasure  in  fools." l 

Fools  are  of  different  types  ;  and,  as  a 
reference  to  the  Hebrew  will  tell  us,  it  is 
"  the  fat  fool "  that  is  here  intended.  Not 
that  he  is  always  fat ;  and  if  any  one  as 
sumes  that  men  are  fools  because  they  are 

1  Ecclcs.  v.  1-6.     As  regards  the  enforcement  of  vows,  see 
p.  139,  post. 

8 


CHAP,  n]  FOOLS  9 

fat  he  will  soon  find  out  his  mistake.  But 
the  fat  fool  is  the  "type."  We  all  know 
him.  And  we  are  disposed  to  like  him ; 
for  he  is  generally  an  amiable  sort  of  crea 
ture,  with  no  malice,  and  not  a  little  good 
nature.  If  his  good  resolutions  were  real 
ised,  he  would  be  counted  a  saint ;  and  if 
he  carried  out  his  projects  he  might  pass 
for  a  genius.  But  he  has  neither  strength 
of  will  nor  force  of  character  for  achieve 
ments  of  any  kind. 

This  is  one  of  many  passages  of  Scripture 
intended  to  warn  us  against  trifling  with 
God.  It  tells  us  that  it  is  better  not  to 
make  vows  than  to  make  them  and  then 
leave  them  unpaid.  It  reminds  us,  more 
over,  that  the  God  of  revelation  is  the  God 
of  nature.  For  nature  is  stern  and  unpity- 
ing  with  fools. 

And  the  revelation  of  Grace  in  the 
Gospel  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  an  effort 
on  God's  part  to  make  amends  for  what 
they  deem  His  laches  and  mistakes  in  by 
gone  ages.  Neither  is  it  a  setting  aside  of 
the  great  principles  of  His  government. 


10  "THE   WAY11  [CHAP,  n 

On  the  contrary,  it  is  a  provision  for  bring 
ing  fallen  men  to  blessing  and  peace  by 
bringing  them  into  harmony  with  those 
eternal  principles.  God  has  no  pleasure  in 
fools.  And  Grace  has  failed  of  its  due 
effect  upon  the  heart  and  life  if  a  man  does 
not  cease  to  be  a  fool  when  he  becomes,  in 
the  true  sense  of  the  word,  a  Christian. 

"  But,"  some  one  will  exclaim,  "  are  we 
not  told  to  become  fools  for  Christ's  sake  ? " 
Yes,  and  people  are  apt  to  make  this  an 
excuse  for  playing  the  fool,  which  is  not  at 
all  what  it  means.  A  Christian  may  seem 
to  his  fellow-men  to  be  a  fool.  But  it  is 
one  thing  to  be  a  fool,  and  quite  another 
thing  to  seem  to  be  a  fool.  A  man  once 
built  a  great  ship  far  inland.  He  must 
have  been  reckoned  the  greatest  fool  of  his 
day  ;  but  as  events  proved,  he  was  the  only 
wise  man.  For  "things  not  seen  as  yet" 
were  realities  to  Noah.  Everybody  saw 
them  afterwards  when  it  was  too  late. 

I  remember  the  case  of  a  young  man 
who  married  a  moneyless  girl  and  then 
sailed  for  Australia,  taking  with  him  his 


CHAP,  n]  FOOLS  11 

bride  and  what  little  money  he  could  scrape 
together ;  it  was  only  about  £600.  When 
the  two  families  heard  that  he  had  used 
his  capital  in  buying  some  land  in  an  out- 
of-the-way  place,  they  said  he  ought  to 
be  shut  up  in  a  lunatic  asylum.  But  there 
was  gold  in  that  piece  of  land,  and  when, 
some  years  later,  I  met  him  in  London, 
he  was  very  rich ;  and  the  relatives  had 
given  up  talking  about  lunatic  asylums. 

The  Christian  is  a  follower  of  Him  who 
likened  Himself  to  a  man  that  parts  with 
all  that  he  has  in  order  to  buy  a  field, 
because  he  knows  there  is  treasure  hidden 
in  it.  The  Christian  acts  in  the  present 
with  a  view  to  the  future.  For  he  knows 
that  while  the  things  which  are  seen  are 
temporal,  the  things  which  are  not  seen 
are  eternal. 

But  the  "  fat  fool "  is  not  the  worst  type 
of  fool.  Though  his  "  thoughts  "  never  come 
to  anything,  he  means  well.  But  the  fool 
who  is  pilloried  in  the  fourteenth  and  fifty- 
third  Psalms  has  thoughts  that  are  positively 
evil,  and  they  govern  his  conduct.  "  The 


12  "THE    WAYr  [CHAP,  u 

fool  hath  said  in  his  heart,  There  is  no 
God."  In  his  heart,  mark  ;  for  the  Bible 
never  contemplates  folly  so  gross  as  to  say 
it  openly.  The  only  atheists  are  the  apos 
tates  ;  for  there  is  no  darkness  so  dense  as 
that  which  covers  us  when  some  strong 
clear  light  is  quenched. 

"  I  had  rather  believe  all  the  fables  in  the 
Legend  and  the  Talmud  than  that  this 
universal  frame  is  without  a  mind."  These 
were  Bacon's  words.  "  The  understanding 
revolts  at  such  a  conclusion,"  is  Darwin's 
repudiation  of  the  suggestion  that  "  blind 
chance "  could  account  for  "  that  grand 
sequence  of  events  "  of  which  biology  treats. 
Herbert  Spencer  proclaimed  this  sort  of 
academic  atheism  ;  but,  here  in  England  at 
least,  notwithstanding  the  efforts  of  a  clique 
of  second-rank  scientists,  Spencerism  is  as 
dead  as  its  author.  As  any  intelligent 
thinker  can  see,  his  objections  to  the  hypo 
thesis  of  creation  apply  with  far  greater  force 
to  his  figment  of  abiogenesis. 

The  word  used  for  "  fool "  in  these  Psalms 
of  David  has  no  kinship  with  Solomon's 


CHAP,  n]  FOOLS  13 

fool  in  the  passage  above  quoted  from 
Ecclesiastes.  I  wonder  whether,  when 
David  here  wrote  the  word  nabal,  his 
thoughts  glanced  back  to  his  wife  Abi 
gail's  first  husband,  the  man  of  whom  she 
said,  "  Nabal  is  his  name,  and  folly  is  with 
him  "  ;  the  man  who  was  "  very  great "  and 
very  rich,  but  who  was  "  churlish  and  evil 
in  his  doings,"  and  who  repelled  David's 
courteous  appeals  with  insult.  Proud  of 
his  wealth  and  greatness,  he  despised  David. 
That  same  night,  we  read,  "  he  held  a  feast 
in  his  house  like  the  feast  of  a  king."  "  But 
it  came  to  pass  about  ten  days  after  that  he 
died." 

In  one  of  his  parables  our  Divine  Lord 
pictures  for  us  a  fool  of  the  Nabal  type.1 
Such  an  one  is  "  he  that  layeth  up  treasure 
for  himself  and  is  not  rich  toward  God." 
God  has  a  place  in  the  creed  of  his  lips,  but 
the  creed  of  his  heart  is  atheistic  ;  and  the 
creed  of  his  heart  finds  expression  in  his 
acts.  So,  forgetting  the  Giver  of  all  his 
heaped-up  blessings,  he  lays  himself  out  for 

1  Luke  xii.  16-21. 


14  "THE    WAY11  [CHAP,  n 

a  life  of  ease  and  sensual  enjoyment.  "  But," 
the  parable  proceeds,  "  God  said  unto  him, 
Thou  fool :  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  re 
quired  of  thee."  For  such  a  man,  to  live  is 
self,  and  to  die  is  loss. 

The  sixteenth  chapter  of  Luke  brings 
before  us  fools  of  both  types.  It  is  one  of 
the  perverted  chapters  of  the  Bible.  The 
popularly  accepted  version  of  it  may  be 
summarised  as  follows  :  A  certain  rich  man 
had  a  steward  who  was  accused  of  robbing 
him.  So  he  gave  him  notice  of  dismissal. 
The  steward  then  set  himself  to  rob  him 
more  flagrantly  than  ever;  and,  mirabilc 
dictu,  his  master  commended  him  for  his 
cleverness. 

Never,  surely,  did  rustic  preacher  pro 
pound  anything  sillier  to  a  company  of 
yokels !  And  in  answer  to  the  ridicule 
which  it  naturally  excited,  the  Teacher 
then  propounded  another  parable,  with  the 
moral,  "  Woe  to  the  rich  ;  blessed  are  the 
poor" — thus  seeking  to  cover  mere  non 
sense  by  pestilent  error.  Indeed,  if  error 
and  nonsense  were  solid,  enough  has  been 


CHAP,  n]  FOOLS  15 

said  and  written  upon  the  sixteenth  chapter 
of  Luke  to  sink  the  biggest  ship  that  ever 
put  to  sea  ! 

In  these  parables  we  have  a  series  of  ex 
quisite  pictures  drawn  by  the  hand  of  the 
Master  to  illustrate  the  great  life-choice. 
In  the  prodigal  of  the  preceding  chapter 
we  have  the  case  of  one  who  "  wasted  "  his 
"  portion  of  goods  "  in  the  pursuit  of  selfish 
and  sinful  pleasure,  but  who  afterwards  re 
pented  and  was  restored.  In  the  steward 
we  have  the  case  of  one  who  wasted  his 
master's  "  goods "  by  unthrift  and  neglect, 
but  who  repented  and  was  forgiven.  And 
in  the  rich  man  of  the  closing  parable  of 
the  series,  we  have  one  who  lived  for  this 
world  and  died  impenitent. 

This  "  steward  "  was  a  typical  "  fat  fool." 
He  was  "  unrighteous  "  in  the  sense  that  he 
was  not  a  true  steward  ;  unrighteous  in  the 
sense  in  which  the  money  is  called  "  un 
righteous  mammon."  Not  because  it  was 
what  men  call  bad  money,  but  because  the 
best  of  good  money  is  not  "  the  true  riches." 
He  was  a  listless,  easy-going  man  who  let 


16  "THE    WAY11  [CHAP,  n 

things  slide,  leaving  debts  uncollected,  and 
allowing  accounts  to  run  on.  He  was  thus 
wasting  his  master's  property.  It  was  a  case 
of  habitual  carelessness,  not  of  definite  acts 
of  dishonesty.  His  dishonesty  was  of  the 
passive  kind. 

And  what  earned  for  him  his  employer's 
praise  was  not  his  dishonesty  at  all,  but  his 
action  when  brought  to  book,  and  dis 
honesty  of  any  kind  was  no  longer  possible. 
Instead  of  making  enemies  of  his  master's 
debtors  by  suddenly  forcing  payment  of 
long-standing  accounts,  he  set  himself  to 
make  them  his  friends — to  place  them  under 
obligation  to  him — by  giving  them  receipts 
in  full  for  payment  in  part,  making  good 
the  balance  from  his  own  money.  And 
this,  as  he  said,  in  order  that,  when  he  was 
put  out  of  the  stewardship,  they  might 
receive  him  into  their  houses. 

This  is  the  whole  point  of  the  parable.  Its 
lessons  are  explained  by  the  Lord  Himself : 
"  Make  to  yourselves  friends  by  means  of 
the  mammon  of  unrighteousness,  that  when 
it  shall  fail  ye  may  be  received  into  the 


CHAP.  11]  FOOLS  17 

everlasting  tabernacles."  It  is  not  meant 
to  teach  us  that  roguery  is  commendable. 
The  moral  is  akin  to  that  of  the  parable  of 
the  treasure  hid  in  a  field,  namely,  the  wis 
dom  of  incurring  a  seeming  loss  in  order  to 
secure  a  real  gain  ;  of  using  the  present  in 
view  of  the  future  ;  of  living  in  a  world 
which  is  "  passing  away,"  though  appar 
ently  so  real,  under  the  power  of  that  other 
world  which,  though  unseen,  is  abiding 
and  eternal. 

It  is  the  enforcement,  in  a  higher  sphere, 
of  that  which  is  a  common-place  with  "  the 
children  of  this  world."  For  no  man  ever 
achieves  success  who  has  not  learned  to 
make  "  to-day  "  subordinate  to  "  to-mor 
row,"  who  is  not  ready  to  yield  some  im 
mediate  advantage  in  order  to  secure  a 
prospective  gain.  It  is  the  philosophy  of 
the  man  who  foregoes  pleasure  for  the  sake 
of  business,  or  who  parts  with  his  money 
in  order  to  secure  a  provision  for  old  age. 
The  opposite  extreme  is  a  case  like  that  of 
Esau,  "  who,  for  one  morsel  of  meat,  sold 

his  birthright " — bartered  his  future  to  secure 

B 


18  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  n 

enjoyment  in  the  passing  hour.  And  the 
Esaus  are  many  in  every  age — men  and 
women  who  give  way  to  some  strong  pas 
sion,  or  even,  it  may  be,  to  some  passing 
whim,  at  the  cost  of  their  whole  life 
prospects. 

If  the  popular  reading  of  the  parable  were 
right,  the  words  which  follow  would  be 
quite  unmeaning.  Rogues  are  often  shrewd 
and  careful  in  dealing  with  their  ill-gotten 
gains  ;  but  many  a  man  who  may  be  trusted 
absolutely  with  what  belongs  to  others  is 
thriftless  and  careless  with  his  own.  And 
so  the  Lord  adds,  "  If  ye  have  not  been 
faithful  in  that  which  is  another's,  who  shall 
give  you  that  which  is  your  own  ? "  Spiri 
tual  gifts  are  our  own  :  the  mammon  is 
entrusted  to  us  as  stewards.  How  false, 
then,  is  the  notion  that  the  life  of  the  Chris 
tian  is  divided  into  watertight  compart 
ments,  the  religious  being  shut  off  from  the 
secular  !  The  Christian  is  as  really  God's 
servant  in  the  one  sphere  as  in  the  other. 

And  this  leads  to  the  final  lesson.  The 
Christian  is  to  me  the  world ;  but  if  he  is 


CHAP.  11]  FOOLS  19 

betrayed  into  using  it  excessively,  it  be 
comes  his  master.  And  though  mammon 
be  a  good  servant,  it  is  an  evil  master. 
Moreover,  "No  servant  can  serve  two 
masters.  .  .  .  Ye  cannot  serve  God  and 
mammon." 

But  with  the  money-loving  Pharisee  this 
via  media  is  the  ideal  life.  "  Making  the 
best  of  both  worlds,"  it  is  called.  But  this 
God  will  not  tolerate.  We  must  choose 
between  them,  and  the  next  parable  is  given 
to  guide  our  choice. 


CHAPTER   III 

THE    LIFE    CHOICE 

"There  was  a  certain  rich  man  which  was  clothed  in 
purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day  : 

"  And  there  was  a  certain  beggar  named  Lazarus  which 
was  laid  at  his  gate,  full  of  sores,  and  desiring  to  be  fed  with 
the  crumbs  which  fell  from  the  rich  man's  table :  moreover 
the  dogs  came  and  licked  his  sores." 

THIS  second  parable  was  the  Lord's  reply 
to  those  who  scoffed  at  His  words,  "  Ye 
cannot  serve  God  and  mammon."  The 
steward  of  the  first  parable  is  a  "  fat  fool " 
who  mends  his  ways ;  this  rich  man  is  a 
"  Nabal  "  who  dies  in  his  folly.  In  answer 
to  the  ridicule  of  those  who  claimed  to 
serve  both  worlds,  the  Lord  here  brings 
before  us  the  case  of  two  men  who  made 
choice  between  them.  The  rich  man, 
moreover,  "  fully  received  his  good  things  " ; 
nothing  failed  him  of  all  that  he  had  bar 
gained  for.  And  Lazarus  was  left  destitute 


.'.' 


CHAP,  in]        THE   LIFE   CHOICE  21 

and  desolate,  with  no  provision  but  the 
refuse  from  the  rich  man's  table,  no  bed 
but  the  roadway  by  the  rich  man's  gate, 
no  comforters  but  the  dogs  that  licked  his 
sores ;  for  he  was  not  only  a  beggar,  but 
loathsomely  diseased. 

It  is  "a  study  in  black  and  white,"  with 
no  colour-shading  in  it,  and  therefore  with 
no  exact  counterpart  in  real  life.  For 
wealth  will  not  buy  health,  or  peace  of 
mind  either.  And  without  a  good  diges 
tion  and  "  a  mind  at  leisure  from  itself,"  no 
amount  of  gold  will  enable  any  one  to  enjoy 
life — to  "  make  merry  sumptuously  every 
day."  And  so  it  has  come  to  pass  that 
princes  have  died  broken  -  hearted,  and 
millionaires  have  killed  themselves. 

And  in  the  case  of  Lazarus  the  "  black 
and  white "  is  still  more  pronounced.  "  I 
have  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor 
his  seed  begging  bread,"  is  an  experience 
that  some  of  us  who  have  seen  much  of  life 
in  many  phases  of  it  will  endorse.  Nor  can 
we  forget  the  Lord's  own  promise  to  those 
who  seek  His  kingdom  first  in  their  life  on 


22  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  m 

earth.  But  here  mammon's  man  is  pre 
sented  to  us  in  the  brightest  possible  light, 
and  God's  man  in  the  darkest  possible 
shadow ;  and  in  view  of  their  life-story 
we  are  bidden  to  make  choice  whom  we 
will  serve. 

But  to  guide  our  choice  the  veil  is  lifted 
which  shuts  out  the  unseen  world.  "  It 
came  to  pass  that  the  beggar  died,  and 
was  carried  by  the  angels  into  Abraham's 
bosom :  the  rich  man  also  died  and  was 
buried."  And  now  he  is  "  tormented  "  and 
Lazarus  is  "  comforted."  This  is  not  the 
award  of  the  day  of  judgment ;  it  is  but  the 
natural  sequel  to  their  life  choice.  There 
is  an  awful  solemnity  about  the  answer 
given  to  the  rich  man's  appeal — "  Son, 
remember  that  thou  in  thy  life  time  re- 
ceivedst  thy  good  things,  and  Lazarus  evil 
things."  The  word  used  expresses  the 
receipt  in  full,  "  the  exhaustion  of  every 
claim."1 

"  Woe  to  the  rich,  but  blessed  are  the 
poor,"  is  the  meaning  which  certain  eminent 

1  Alford,  in  loco. 


CHAP,  m]         THE   LIFE   CHOICE  23 

theologians  find  in  the  story.  But  this  only 
proves  their  ignorance  of  Christ  and  His 
teaching.  There  is  neither  merit  in  being 
poor  nor  woe  in  being  rich.  The  poor  man 
who  chooses  mammon  may  miss  the  "  good 
things"  he  has  bargained  for,  and  die  a 
pauper  at  the  last.  But  his  poverty  will 
avail  nothing  to  atone  for  the  sin  of  his 
life  choice ;  and  his  sin  can  have  but  one 
ending.  And  as  for  "  them  that  are  rich  in 
this  world,"  if  they  but  learn  "  not  to  be 
high-minded,  nor  trust  in  uncertain  riches, 
but  in  the  living  God,  who  giveth  us  richly 
all  things  to  enjoy,"  they  will  in  very  truth 
"  lay  hold  on  the  life  which  is  life  indeed," 
"  laying  up  in  store  for  themselves  a  good 
foundation  against  the  time  to  come." 

But  did  not  our  Lord  tell  the  young  man 
who  had  "  great  possessions  "  to  strip  him 
self  of  everything  and  to  come  and  follow 
Him  ?  Yes,  and  another  who  "  besought 
Him  "  for  leave  to  do  this  very  thing,  was 
bidden  to  return  to  his  own  house  and 
there  to  show  how  great  things  God  had 

1  1  Tim.  vi.  17,  10,  Revised  Version. 


24  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  m 

done  for  him.  And  there  was  a  Lazarus 
whom  He  loved,  who  was  not  a  beggar,  but 
a  wealthy  man ;  and  instead  of  telling  him 
to  sell  his  house,  the  Lord  became  his  guest 
there.  He  knows  each  heart  and  each  life, 
and  deals  with  each  in  infinite  wisdom.  To 
leave  houses  or  lands  for  His  sake,  and  the 
Gospel's,  is  to  gain  a  hundredfold  in  bless 
ing  even  in  this  life.  But  the  man  who 
pulls  down  his  barns  in  order  to  make  a 
fetich  of  poverty  is  as  great  a  fool,  and  may 
be  as  profane,  as  he  who  builds  them  up 
again  and  makes  a  fetich  of  wealth. 

No  generous  mind  will  sympathise  with 
pulpit  diatribes  against  the  godless  rich. 
Poor  creatures!  their  tenure  of  their 
"good  things"  is  very  brief  and  most 
uncertain:  why  should  they  not  enjoy 
them  while  they  may?  As  well  might 
we  grudge  his  special  comforts  to  the 
condemned  criminal  awaiting  execution. 
And,  after  all,  the  rich  man's  case  has 
much  to  be  said  for  it.  Draw  the  curtains 
of  time  so  close  around  him  as  to  shut 
out  the  light  of  Eternity,  and  his  lot  is 


CHAP,  m]        THE   LIFE   CHOICE  25 

an  enviable  one.  It  is  a  fine  thing  to 
be  well  clothed,  and  to  "  make  merry 
sumptuously  every  day."  But,  you  say, 
his  wealth  is  God's,  and  he  is  misusing  it. 
Yes,  it  is  God's,  but  it  is  not  yours ;  and 
it  is  no  business  of  yours  how  he  spends 
it.  He  is  a  better  citizen  than  the  man 
who  hides  his  sovereigns  in  a  cupboard  or 
under  the  floor.  In  spite  of  his  selfishness 
the  sumptuous  rich  man,  in  scattering  his 
money,  does  good  to  somebody.  But  if 
the  miser  and  his  piled  up  gold  were  flung 
into  the  sea  the  community  would  be  none 
the  poorer. 

The  godless  rich  man  is  indeed  con 
temptible,  but  not  quite  so  contemptible  as 
the  godless  poor.  Look  at  him  there  as 
he  passes  in  his  splendid  carriage,  or  as  he 
sits  at  his  luxurious  table,  and  answer 
the  question  honestly,  Has  he  not  some 
thing  to  show  for  his  evil  bargain  ?  But 
what  can  be  said  for  the  diseased  and 
hungry  beggar  lying  at  his  gate  ?  or,  to 
take  the  present  day  pattern,  see  that  miser 
able  wretch  cadging  about  the  streets  for 


26  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP.  HI 

a  crust  or  a  glass  of  beer,  and  picking  up 
cigar  ends  from  the  gutter !  The  one  has 
gained  this  world,  at  all  events  ;  and  so  long 
as  he  lives  in  this  world  he  can  hold  up 
his  head.  The  other  has  no  less  definitely 
chosen  this  world ;  but  what  a  bargain  he 
has  made !  In  view  of  eternity,  it  is  a 
question  which  of  them  is  most  to  be 
pitied ;  but  there  can  be  no  question  which 
of  them  is  most  to  be  despised.  The  god 
less  pauper — the  man  who  chooses  this 
world  and  is  tricked  out  of  his  bargain- 
is  the  most  utterly  pitiful  creature  upon 
earth. 

At  a  gospel  meeting  in  a  village  school- 
house,  years  ago,  I  noticed  a  leather-faced 
old  man  who  was  listening  with  eyes  and 
ears.  He  came  back  next  morning  to  hear 
an  address  on  prophetic  truth,  of  which  he 
took  notes  on  a  torn  piece  of  packing  paper, 
with  the  stump  of  a  carpenter's  pencil.  He 
told  me  he  was  a  travelling  knife-grinder, 
and  that,  straying  into  the  meeting  by 
chance  the  evening  before,  he  had  received 
Christ.  A  month  afterwards  a  letter  from 


CHAP,  m]         THE   LIFE   CHOICE  27 

him  reached  me,  which,  on  being  deciphered, 
testified  that  it  was  "  grand  to  be  a  knife- 
grinder,"  for  the  children  and  villagers  liked 
to  watch  him  at  his  work,  and  he  was  able 
to  tell  them  about  Christ.  I  heard  no 
more  of  him  till  the  following  winter,  when 
a  friend  found  him  in  a  workhouse.  "  It 
was  grand  to  be  in  a  workhouse,"  he  said, 
for  he  had  such  chances  of  "  telling  the 
others  about  Christ."  And  my  last  news 
of  him  was  that  he  was  dying  in  the 
infirmary  ;  but  full  of  joy,  because  the  man 
in  the  next  bed  had  been  brought  to  Christ 
by  his  talking  to  him.  Such  is  the  blessed 
ness  of  "  God's  poor,"  "  rich  in  faith  and 
heirs  of  the  kingdom."  What  a  contrast ! 

"  A  certain  rich  man,"  mark ;  he  is  a 
mere  millionaire,  and  his  name  is  of  no 
account.  But  "  a  certain  beggar,  named 
Lazarus."  God  knows  His  own,  and  their 
names  are  "  written  in  heaven."  But  why 
Lazarus  ?  His  whole  life-story  is  in  that 
name,  "  God,  my  help."  He  is  a  46th 
Psalm  man.  Dives  is  not  in  suffering  be 
cause  he  has  been  rich  ;  nor  Lazarus  com- 


28  "THE   WAY11  [CHAP,  m 

forted  because  he  has  been  poor.  Their 
condition  is  the  natural  sequel  to  their  own 
deliberate  life-choice.  The  rich  man  has 
already  received — received  to  the  full— 
everything  he  bargained  for  ;  but  Lazarus 
has  received  nothing — nothing  at  least  but 
"  evil  things."  As  we  have  seen,  there 
never  was  either  a  Dives  or  a  Lazarus  in 
real  life.  For  the  world  never  does  satisfy  ; 
and  God  never  does  desert  His  own. 
"  None  that  trust  in  Him  shall  be  deso 
late";  but  Lazarus  was  "desolate."  And 
now  the  one  is  in  suffering  and  the  other 
is  comforted. 

This  is  not,  I  repeat,  the  award  of  the 
great  Day.  The  one  has  yet  to  face  the 
judgment,  and  to  receive  due  punishment 
for  all  his  sins  ;  and  the  other  still  awaits 
the  glory  and  the  crown  of  faithfulness. 
And  though  the  Lord's  description  of  their 
life  on  earth  is  marked  by  the  sort  of 
hyperbole  inseparable  from  a  picture  in 
black  and  white,  there  is  no  element  of  the 
kind  in  His  words  about  the  under  world. 
In  this  present  world  Lazarus  receives 


CHAP,  m]        THE   LIFE   CHOICE  29 

nothing  but  evil  things,  and  in  that  world 
nothing  but  what  "  the  God  of  all  comfort " 
never  fails  to  bestow,  even  here  and  now, 
upon  those  who  trust  in  Him.  And  what 
awful  solemnity  there  is  in  the  very  tender 
ness  and  pathos  of  the  answer  to  the  rich 
man's  appeal :  "  Son,  remember  that  thou 
in  thy  lifetime  fully  receivedst  thy  good 
things,  and  Lazarus  in  like  manner  evil 
things  :  but  now  here  he  is  comforted,  and 
thou  art  sorrowing."1  The  equity  of  it 
all  is  perfect. 

It  is  as  though  the  Lord  put  the  challenge 
to  us,  "  Take  mammon's  balance-sheet  at 
its  ideal  best,  and  God's  at  its  lowest  and 
worst ;  and,  even  on  that  false  estimate, 
work  out  the  sum,  and  then  make  choice 
whom  you  will  serve." 

1  I  use  this  word  advisedly,  not  only  because  the  words 
rendered  "  torment "  and  "  tormented  "  are  wholly  different 
and  distinct,  but  also  because  the  English  word  has  such  a 
wide  range  of  meaning.  The  word  used  in  verses  28  and  28 
occurs  only  here  and  in  Matt.  iv.  24  ;  and  the  word  used  in 
verses  24  and  25  occurs  elsewhere  only  in  chap.  ii.  48,  and 
Acts  xx.  38,  where  it  is  rendered  "sorrowing." 


CHAPTER   IV 

WHAT    GRACE    TEACHES 

THE  Reformation  rescued  the  great  truth 
of  "  justification  by  faith  "  ;  "  justification 
by  grace"  was  the  characteristic  truth  of 
the  revival  of  the  nineteenth  century. 
"  For  by  grace  are  ye  saved,  through  faith," 
the  Apostle  Paul  wrote  to  the  Ephesians  ; 
"  and  that  not  of  yourselves  :  it  is  the  gift 
of  God."  Salvation  is  a  gift — God's  gift, 
bestowed  on  the  principle  of  grace,  received 
on  the  principle  of  faith. 

By  the  mission  and  death  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  kindness  of  God  and  His 
love  towards  man  were  "  manifested."  And 
more  than  this,  the  revelation  of  Divine 
wrath  against  sin,  and  of  Divine  righteous 
ness  in  forgiving  sin,  made  it  possible  for 
God  to  assume  a  new  attitude  toward  the 


CHAP,  iv]     WHAT   GRACE  TEACHES          31 

world.     "  For  the  grace  of  God  has  been 
manifested,  salvation-bringing  to  all  men" l 

Grace  is  the  fundamental  truth  of  Chris 
tianity  as  distinguished  from  Judaism.  And 
it  is  impossible  to  exaggerate  this  truth. 
It  may  be  expressed  in  words  that  are  un 
worthy  or  unwise  ;  it  may  be  so  divorced 
from  all  thoughts  of  the  holiness  and 
majesty  of  God  as  to  become  in  a  sense 
untrue  ;  but  overstated  it  cannot  be.  The 
Divine  sacrifice  of  Calvary  surpasses  the 
power  of  words  to  tell  it,  and  no  language 
can  do  justice  to  the  freeness  writh  which 
blessings  flow  to  the  believing  sinner  in 
virtue  of  the  death  of  Christ. 

Peace  has  been  made  by  that  death  ;  and 
God  now  stoops,  even  from  the  throne  of 
His  glory,  to  proclaim  the  peace  which  has 
thus  been  accomplished.  Heaven  is  thrown 
open  to  the  lost  of  earth.  There  is  none  too 
vile  to  enter  there.  "  Without  money  and 

1  Titus  ii.  11  ;  iii.  4.  firtcfxivT]  is  the  reading  in  both  verses. 
I  do  not  know  how  o-a>T7jptos  can  be  expressed  in  English, 
unless  by  some  such  phrase  as  "  salvation-bringing."  It  is  not 
the  statement  of  a  fact,  as  suggested  by  both  Authorised 
and  Revised  Versions,  but  the  description  of  the  aim  and 
tendency  of  grace.  (See  also  Rom.  i.  17,  18,  and  iii.  26.) 


32  "THE   WAYV  [CHAP,  iv 

without  price,"  without  condition  or  reserve, 
the  gift  of  life  eternal  is  bestowed.  "  The 
man  that  doeth  the  righteousness  which  is 
of  the  law  shall  live  thereby." 1  But  in 
contrast  with  this,  sinners  saved  by  grace 
can  testify  that  "  Not  by  works  done  in 
righteousness,  which  we  did  ourselves,  but 
according  to  His  mercy  He  saved  us.'" 

But  the  question  arises,  and  it  is  time  to 
press  it  earnestly  and  solemnly,  how  far  a 
sober,  righteous,  and  godly  life  characterises 
those  who  claim  to  have  been  thus  blessed. 
The  same  grace  which  brings  salvation 
trains  us  to  this  end.3  For  grace  is  not 

1  Rom.  x.  5,  R.V. 

2  Titus  iii.   5,  R.V.      I  do  not  finish   the  verse,  because 
the  words   which    follow   are    habitually  perverted.      "The 
Xovrpoj/  of  regeneration  "  is  to  be  explained,  not  by  the  pagan 
doctrine  of  baptismal  regeneration,  but  by  the  ritual  of  the 
great  sin-offering  of  Num.  xix.     This  is  dealt  with  in  "The 
Buddha  of  Christendom/'  App.    I.,  and  also  in   "For  Us 
Men,"  chap.  x. 

3  Titus  ii.  11,  12.     It  is  not  that  the  grace  teaches  us  to 
live  thus,  though  this  is  true,  but  that  it  trains  us  in  order 
tbat  (ii/a)  we  may  live  thus.     The  word  teach,  in  the  Autho 
rised  Version,  gives  too  limited  a  thought ;  and  the  Revised 
Version  reading  is  merely  an  instance  of  the  pedantry  of  dis 
placing  an  Anglo-Saxon  word  by  a  longer  Latin  word  of  the 
same  meaning.     The  word   used  in  Prov.  xxii.  6  seems  best 
to  express  the  idea  intended. 


CHAP,  iv]      WHAT  GRACE   TEACHES          33 

merely,  as  so  many  seem  to  think,  a  nega 
tion  of  something  else — a  setting  aside  of 
law — but  a  positive  and  active  principle  to 
mould  and  govern  the  Christian  life.  In 
writing  to  Titus,  himself  a  teacher,  the 
Apostle  states  the  doctrine  in  a  few  terse 
and  weighty  words ;  in  his  epistles  to 
Ephesus  and  Colosse,  he  unfolds  it  in  its 
bearing  on  the  duties  and  relationships  of 
common  life. 

And  the  difference  between  law  and 
grace  is  not  in  the  commandments  given, 
but  in  the  principle  on  which  they  are  pro 
mulgated  and  enforced.  The  life  and  death 
of  Christ  have  raised  the  standard  of  our 
relationships  with  God,  and  therefore  of  our 
obedience  to  Him.  Under  the  law  self-love 
was  the  measure  of  man's  love  to  man,  for 
no  higher  love  was  known  to  him  ;  but  now 
"  We  perceive  THE  LOVE  because  He  laid 
down  His  life  for  us,  and  ice  ought  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren"1  Such  is 
the  precept  grace  enjoins.  Law  has  a 
penalty  for  every  transgression ;  grace  has 

1  1  John  iii.  16. 


34  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  iv 

no  penalties.  Law  links  a  blessing  with  the 
commandment,  but  it  is  as  the  reward  for 
obedience  ;  with  grace  the  blessing  is  freely 
given,  and  is  itself  the  motive  to  obedience. 
We  need  to  distinguish  between  "  law  " 
as  a  principle  of  obedience,  and  "  the  law  " 
as  a  penal  code.  In  this  second  aspect  of 
it  "  the  law  is  not  made  for  a  righteous  man, 
but  for  the  lawless  and  disobedient." l  The 
real  people  of  God  were  never  under  it.2 
But  until  Christ  came  they  were  under  law 
as  "  a  schoolmaster." 3  Although  they  were 
sons  they  were  treated  as  children.  But 
the  school  of  grace  is  for  grown-up  sons. 
The  training  is  on  a  different  principle. 
For  the  essential  difference,  I  again  repeat, 
is  not  in  the  precepts  enjoined,  though  these 
do  differ,  but  in  the  principle  on  which  they 
are  enforced. 

1  1  Tim.  i.  9. 

2  Except,  of  course,  as  citizens  of  the  commonwealth  of 
which  it  was  the  judicial  code. 

3  Gal.  iii.   24.      The  difference  between  Gal.  iii.   13  and 
iv.  5  is  generally  ignored.     Christ  not  merely  redeemed  from 
the  curse  of  the  law,  but  He  came  to  redeem  them  that  were 
under  law  (vno  i>6p.ov),  in  order  that  they  might  receive  the 
adoption  of  sons. 


CHAP,  iv]      WHAT   GRACE   TEACHES          35 

And  this  leads  me  to  emphasise  the  much 
needed  truth  that  sin  is  not  become  less 
heinous  because  grace  is  reigning.  Nor  is 
the  moral  distance  less  immense  which 
separates  the  sinner  from  God.  This  dis 
tance  indeed  is  all  the  greater,  just  because 
of  the  intimacy  of  the  relationship  in  which 
the  believer  stands  to  Him.  If  these  words 
should  cause  surprise  to  any,  no  better  proof 
can  be  afforded  of  the  widespread  need  there 
is  to  enforce  the  truth  they  teach.  With 
many  it  is  to  be  feared  that  a  one-sided 
apprehension  of  grace  has  tended  to  levity 
in  their  dealings  with  God.  The  New  Tes 
tament  is  read  as  though  it  were  given  to 
supersede  the  Old,  and  the  grace  and  love 
of  God  are  used  to  set  aside  the  truth  of 
His  holiness  and  majesty. 

I  have  spoken  of  separation  between  the 
sinner  and  God.  Can  sin  then  avail  to 
separate  the  believer  from  Him  ?  The 
question  claims  a  twofold  answer.  The 
union  that  is  bought  with  the  blood  which 
cleanses  from  all  sin,  and  depends  only  on 
the  life  that  is  ours  in  Christ,  nothing  can 


36  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  iv 

disturb.  And  life,  moreover,  is  the  only 
ground  of  fellowship  with  God.1  But  fel 
lowship  is  possible  only  in  "  the  light "  as 
the  sphere  of  its  enjoyment ;  and  if  any 
one  claims  it,  while  walking  in  darkness, 
he  lies.2 

In  a  real  sense,  therefore,  sin  does  separate 
from  God.  Not  that  walking  in  the  light 
implies  a  sinless  course,  nor  yet  that  walking 
in  darkness  necessarily  implies  acts  of  moral 
evil.  The  claim  to  have  attained  a  sinless 
walk  is  proof  of  darkness,  and  "  the  light " 
is  the  true  sphere  in  which  the  believer 
mourns  his  sin,  and  judges  it  in  presence  of 
the  blood  which  was  shed  to  atone  for  it. 

But  what  we  need  to  remember  is  that 
the  bonds  by  which  God  has  bound  us  to 
Himself  only  serve  to  intensify  the  heinous- 
ness  of  sin,  and  therefore  to  widen  the  moral 
distance  which  separates  us  from  Him  when 
sin  marks  our  course.  Wantonly  to  strike 
another  is  an  outrage  ;  but  if  that  other  be 
a  benefactor,  the  wrong  is  far  more  griev 
ous  ;  and  if  not  only  a  benefactor  but  a 

1  1  John  i.  1-3.  2  1  John  i.  G,  7. 


CHAP,  iv]      WHAT   GRACE   TEACHES          37 

parent,  the  act  is  infamous.  The  relation 
ship  does  not  lessen — it  immensely  aggra 
vates  the  sin.  The  lasting  wonder  of 
redemption  is  that  sinners  can  approach  a 
holy  God ;  not  persons  who  have  been 
sinners,  but  those  who  are  such.  But  the 
danger  is  lest  this  should  become  divorced 
from  the  remembrance  of  the  provision  by 
which  alone  it  is  made  possible,  and  that 
thus  we  should  come  to  have  light  thoughts 
of  God,  and  to  forget  His  holiness  and 
majesty.  We  have  "  boldness "  to  ap 
proach  ;  but  boldness  is  far  removed  from 
levity. 

And  let  us  mark  the  ground  on  which 
this  confidence  is  based.1  It  depends  on 
the  perfectness  of  our  redemption,  the 
power  of  the  blood  to  sanctify  us,  the  fit 
ness  of  the  "  new  and  living  Way "  pro 
vided,  and,  above  all,  the  presence  of  a 
Priest,  and  such  a  Priest,  over  the  house  of 
God.  But  even  this  is  not  all,  and  the 
words  which  follow  are  precisely  those 
which  most  need  to  be  enforced  :  "  Having 

1  Heb.  x.  17-22. 


38  "THE   WAY11  [CHAP,  iv 

our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  conscience, 
and  our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water." 
The  reference  here  to  the  ritual  of  the  great 
sin-offering  of  the  nineteenth  chapter  of 
Numbers  is  unmistakable.  It  is  with  a 
heart  judged  in  the  presence  of  the  Cross,  and 
a  life  practically  purged  from  evil  (for  such 
was  the  typical  meaning  of  the  bath  which 
followed  the  sprinkling  of  the  water  of  puri 
fication),  that  we  are  bidden  to  "  draw  near." 
So  it  has  been  in  every  age.  The  tenth 
chapter  of  Hebrews  is  in  this  respect  but  the 
New  Testament  version  of  the  twenty-fourth 
Psalm  :  "  Who  shall  ascend  into  the  hill  of 
the  Lord  ?  or  who  shall  stand  in  His  holy 
place  ?  He  that  hath  clean  hands  and  a 
pure  heart"  —the  purged  heart  represent 
ing,  as  in  Hebrews,  the  attitude  of  the  soul 
to  God  ;  the  clean  hands,  the  actions  of  the 
outward  life.  God  demands  a  moral  fitness 
in  those  who  approach  Him.  "  I  will  be 
sanctified  in  them  that  come  nigh  Me"  is 
not  the  obsolete  precept  of  a  bygone  dis 
pensation,  but  an  eternal  principle  based 
upon  the  character  of  God. 


CHAP,  iv]      WHAT   GRACE   TEACHES          39 

How  important,  then,  that  we  should 
search  His  Word  to  learn  the  spirit  which 
becomes  us  as  we  seek  His  presence.  But 
let  no  humble  believer  be  offended  by  this  ; 
nor  should  the  exhortation  sadden  the  hearts 
of  any  who  are  contrite  :  "  For  thus  saith 
the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth 
eternity,  whose  name  is  Holy  :  I  dwell  in 
the  high  and  holy  place,  with  him  also  that 
is  of  a  contrite  and  humble  spirit,  to  revive 
the  spirit  of  the  humble,  and  to  revive  the 
heart  of  the  contrite  ones." l 

1  Isa.  Ivii.  15. 


CHAPTER    V 

THE    SOBER   LIFE 

THE  Bible,  on  its  human  side,  is  an  Eastern 
book,  abounding  in  imagery  and  figure ; 
and  when  we  are  told  that  grace  teaches 
us,  the  language,  of  course,  is  figurative. 
Whether  we  live  under  law  or  under  grace, 
God  is  the  teacher.  But  the  passage  em 
phasises  the  truth  that  it  is  on  the  principle 
of  grace  that  He  trains  us,  not  of  law.  And 
these  two  principles  are  wholly  incompatible. 
Both  are  good  and  right,  but  they  are 
inconsistent.  The  essential  characteristic 
of  law  is  the  assertion  of  rights  ;  the  essen 
tial  characteristic  of  grace  is  the  giving  up 
of  rights.  "  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  that 
He  might  redeem  us."  This  is  the  great 
manifestation  of  grace — the  self-sacrifice  of 
the  Son  of  God. 

And  it  is  on  this  principle  that  He  deals 


CHAP,  v]  THE   SOBER   LIFE  41 

with  us  as  now  redeemed.  It  is  a  thorough 
paradox  to  a  carnal  man  ;  but  the  philosophy 
of  the  heart  runs  deeper  than  that  of  the 
head.  An  illustration  may  be  useful  to 
mark  the  contrast  between  the  two  prin 
ciples.  "  Thou  shalt  not  steal "  was  the 
command  that  pealed  forth  from  Sinai ; 
and  a  curse  followed  upon  transgression. 
"  Let  him  that  stole  steal  no  more  "  is  the 
kindred  command  of  grace.  And  now  mark 
the  sequel :  "  But  rather  let  him  labour, 
working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  lie  may  have  to  give  to  him  that 
needeth."  Law  forbids  our  taking  what  is 
another's  ;  grace  goes  further,  and  enjoins 
our  giving  up  what  is  our  own.  And  so, 
through  all  the  practical  teaching  of  the 
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  the  warnings, 
even  against  sins  of  the  grossest  kind,  are 
based  upon  blessings  freely  given,  or  upon 
Divine  relationships  freely  formed. 

"  The  grace  of  God  trains  us."  In  three 
other  passages  of  the  New  Testament  this 
same  word  is  used  of  God's  dealings  with 
His  people,  and  in  these  it  is  rightly  rendered 


42  "THE   WAY11  [CHAP,  v 

chasten.  "  As  many  as  I  love  I  rebuke  and 
chasten,"  is  the  Lord's  word  to  Laodicea. 
And  in  the  solemn  warning  against  un 
worthily  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper, 
the  Apostle  writes  :  "  We  are  chastened  of 
the  Lord,  that  we  should  not  be  condemned 
with  the  world."1  Law  would  condemn; 
grace  chastens.  And  the  other  passage- 
Hebrews  xii. — marks  the  distinction  still 
more  clearly.  The  fifth  verse  takes  up 
the  very  words  of  the  warning  to  Lao 
dicea  :  "  Despise  not  the  chastening  of  the 
Lord,  nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of 
Him." 

And  mark  the  ground  on  which  the  chas 
tening  comes.  It  is  not  based  upon  sin 
committed,  but  upon  the  relationship  in 
which  the  sinner  stands  to  God.  "  For 
whom  the  Lord  loveth  He  chasteneth."2 
"  What  son  is  he  whom  the  Father  chas 
teneth  not  ? "  But  the  difference  does  not 
end  here.  Punishment,  strictly  so  called, 
has  relation  to  the  past ;  chastening  to  the 


1  1  Cor.  xi.  32. 
2  Compare  Rev.  iii.  19  again. 


CHAP,  v]  THE   SOBER   LIFE  43 

future.  Punishment  is  imposed  because  of 
sin  committed ;  chastening  is  inflicted  with 
a  view  to  the  good  of  him  who  is  the 
subject  of  it.  He  chastens  us  "  for  our 
profit,  that  we  might  be  partakers  of  His 
holiness." 

The  spirit  of  legality  that  is  indigenous 
to  our  hearts  has  no  more  common  or  subtle 
phase  than  that  of  regarding  chastisement 
as  necessarily  a  punishment  for  sin.  And 
the  teaching  of  the  twelfth  chapter  of 
Hebrews,  the  Divine  antidote  for  this 
error,  is  but  little  understood.  Indeed,  our 
beliefs  in  this  respect  are  but  the  old 
doctrine  of  Eliphaz  the  Temanite  :  "  Who 
ever  perished  being  innocent  ?  or  where  were 
the  righteous  cut  off? "  That  one  who  lay 
crushed  and  desolate  beneath  so  terrible  a 
storm  of  seemingly  unpitying  judgments 
could  be  "  a  perfect  and  upright  man  that 
feared  God  and  eschewed  evil,"]  was  a 
phenomenon  entirely  beyond  the  theology 
of  the  Temanite ;  and  so  he  and  his  com 
panions  only  forced  Job  back  upon  the 

1  Job.  i.  1. 


44  "THE  WAYV  [CHAP,  v 

assertion  of  his  own  integrity,  and  drove 
him  still  further  from  the  God  who  was 
seeking  thus  to  make  him  "  partaker  of  His 
holiness."  And  in  the  end  the  "  com 
forters  "  of  Job  had  to  seek  the  prayers  of 
Job  to  save  them  from  the  wrath  their 
words  had  kindled.1 

Grace  teaches  us.  The  Christian  course 
is  a  discipline.  And  the  result  is  a  sober, 
righteous,  and  godly  life  on  earth,  with 
heart  and  eye  fixed  upon  a  blessed  hope 
above  it  and  beyond  it.  "  Soberly,  right 
eously,  and  godly " :  these  words  represent 
the  threefold  aspect  of  life — to  a  man's  own 
spirit,  to  his  neighbour,  and  to  God.  And 
it  is  certain  that  these  qualities  are  not 
characteristic  of  the  age  we  live  in.  Sobriety 
— where  is  it  to  be  found  in  this  age  of 
display,  and  hurry,  and  greed  ? 

Just  as  a  nation's  commerce  may  be  esti 
mated  by  its  coinage,  so  its  thoughts  may 
be  judged  by  its  language ;  and  this  word 
"  sober "  has  so  long  been  run  in  a  special 
and  narrow  groove  that  now  it  almost  re- 

1  Job  xlii.  7,  8. 


CHAP,  v]  THE   SOBER  LIFE  45 

fuses  to  expand  to  the  thought  that  is  here 
intended.1  And  if  the  icord  be  wanting, 
we  may  be  sure  the  quality  it  expresses 
has  grown  rare.  Elsewhere  in  this  epistle 
this  same  word  is  rendered,  in  our  version, 
"  sober,"  "  temperate,"  and  "  discreet  "  ;  and 
it  embraces  all  this,  and  more.  Etymologi- 
cally,  it  means  possessed  of  a  sound  mind ; 
and  this  idea  always  clings  to  it.  It  im 
plies  a  habit  of  mind  opposed  to  extremes, 
and  most  of  all  to  levity.  He  who  has  been 
trained  in  the  school  of  grace  is  marked  by 
soundness  of  judgment  in  all  things.  Sobriety 
should  characterise  the  Christian,  not  only 
in  his  conduct  and  circumstances,  but  in  his 
language  and  his  thoughts. 

And  we  must  not  suppose  that  spiritual 
life  is  unaffected  by  the  world  without. 
Practical  Christianity  is  always  leavened 
by  the  prevailing  influences  of  the  time. 
Because  of  the  national  vices  of  the  Cretans, 
the  flock  among  whom  Titus  ministered 

1  Webster's  Dictionary  gives,  as  its  first  meaning,  "tem 
perate  in  the  use  of  spirituous  liquors,"  and  illustrates  it  by 
quoting  these  words  of  Titus  ii.  12. 


46  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  v 

needed  sharp  rebuke.1  They  were  a  men 
dacious,  carnal,  avaricious  race ;  hence  the 
weighty  precepts  of  the  Epistle.  This  word 
"  soberly,"  and  its  kindred  adjectives  and 
verbs  and  nouns,  are  used  but  sixteen  times 
in  the  New  Testament,  and  six  of  these  are 
found  in  this  brief  letter.  And  though  it 
may  be  disputed  whether  the  special  Cretan 
vices  mark  our  own  society  to-day,  no  one 
will  question  that  insobriety  is  specially  char 
acteristic  of  this  much-lauded  age  of  ours. 

Nor  is  this  true  only  of  "  the  City."  The 
baneful  influences  which  surround  us,  the 
haste  and  rivalry  which  mark  our  commer 
cial  life,  have  invaded  social,  and  even 
family  life.  What  is  said  of  the  wicked 
seems  true  of  all  together  now — they  are 
"  like  the  troubled  sea  when  it  cannot  rest." 
Life  is  becoming  a  scramble.  And  Chris 
tian  life  is  leavened  by  the  evil  influence. 
Many  an  earnest  worker  might  take  up  the 
sad  lament,  "  They  made  me  keeper  of  the 
vineyards,  but  mine  own  vineyard  have  I 
not  kept." 

1  Titus  i.  13. 


CHAP,  v]  THE   SOBER  LIFE  47 

And  such  may  need  the  discipline  of  the 
Father's  house.  But  this  must  never  be 
allowed  to  obscure  the  truth  of  the  be 
liever's  security  in  Christ.  "  Him  that 
cometh  unto  Me,"  the  Lord  declares,  "  / 
will  in  no  ivisc  cast  out"  These  words  are 
generally  read  as  a  "  Gospel  message."  But 
such  is  not  their  purpose.  It  is  not  that 
He  never  refuses  to  receive  a  repentant 
sinner,  but  that  He  never  expels  a  sinner 
whom  He  has  thus  received.  Most  true  it 
is  that  He  never  shuts  the  door  against  any 
one  who  comes  to  Him.  But  what  He  tells 
us  here  is  that  no  one  whom  He  once  has 
welcomed  shall  ever  be  put  outside  the  door 
again.  Even  if  the  words  themselves  were 
not  so  clear,  the  context  would  make  this 
plain.  For  He  goes  on  to  say,  it  is  the 
Father's  will  that  not  one  of  those  who 
come  to  Him  shall  be  lost.  And  He  adds, 
"  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day."1 

1  The  Scriptures  which  testify  to  the  security  of  the  be 
liever  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  are  abundant  and  explicit, 
and  passages  which  seem  to  conflict  with  this  truth  admit  of 
explanation.  The  case  of  Judas,  indeed,  seems  to  be  an 
exception,  but  if  so,  it  is  "  the  exception  which  proves  the 
rule  "  (John  xvii.  12).  John  xv.  0,  for  example,  is  misread.  It 


48  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  v 

But  this  only  serves  to  bring  into  greater 
prominence  the  need  of  chastening.  And 
"  the  chastening  of  the  Lord  "  may  explain 
what  sometimes  seems  capricious  and  even 
harsh  in  His  dealings  with  His  people.  For 
are  we  not  perplexed  and  distressed  at  times, 
when  the  most  earnest,  and  seemingly  the 
most  useful,  Christians  are  laid  aside  or  called 
away  ?  As  seen  by  us,  "  the  world  to  come  " 
stands  apart  from  "  this  present  world."  But 
it  is  not  so  with  God.  And  if  our  view  in 
cluded  both  worlds,  Divine  dealings  which 
now  seem  strange  or  harsh  would  appear  as 
proofs  of  His  wisdom  and  His  love. 

is  the  uselessness  of  the  unfruitful  Christian,  not  his  fate, 
that  the  Lord  is  there  illustrating  by  the  well-known  fact 
that  severed  vine  branches,  unlike  those  of  other  trees,  are 
good  for  nothing  (cf.  Ezek.  xv.  1-4).  The  unfruitful  believer 
is  "  taken  away,"  not  "  cast  into  the  fire  "  :  that  is  the  end 
of  useless  vine  branches. 

Hebrews  x.  2G-29,  is  misused  to  check  "  boldness,"  whereas 
its  purpose,  as  expressed  in  verse  35  (cf.  verse  19),  is  "  Cast 
not  away  therefore  your  boldness."  As  Alford  writes,  "  It  is 
the  sin  of  apostasy  from  Christ  back  to  the  state  which  pre 
ceded  the  reception  of  Christ,  viz.  Judaism.  This  is  the 
ground  sin  of  all  other  sins.  ...  It  is  not  of  an  act,  or  any 
number  of  acts,  of  sin,  that  the  writer  is  speaking,  which 
might  be  repented  of  and  blotted  out  ;  but  of  a  state  of  sin  in 
which  a  man  is  found  when  that  day  shall  come."  And  Heb. 
vi.  4-8  is  to  be  explained  in  the  same  way,  as  the  rest  of  that 
chapter  so  clearly  proves. 


CHAP,  v]  THE   SOBER   LIFE  49 

What  an  example  of  this  we  find  in  the 
case  of  one  who  is  perhaps  the  grandest 
figure  on  the  stage  of  Old  Testament  story. 
Turning  away  from  the  treasures  of  Egypt, 
and  all  the  power  and  pomp  of  the  throne 
of  the  Pharaohs,  Moses  threw  in  his  lot  with 
the  despised  and  suffering  people  of  God. 
A  stiff-necked  and  rebellious  people  they 
were  ;  but  he  bore  with  them,  interceding 
for  them  when  they  sinned,  and  guiding 
and  training  them  day  by  day,  during  all 
their  wilderness  wanderings,  until  they 
reached  the  land  of  promise.  And  yet 
for  one  hasty  act  of  unfaithfulness,  into 
which  he  was  betrayed  when  provoked  be 
yond  endurance,  he  was  refused  the  prize  of 
his  whole  life's  work.  What  relentlessness 
and  severity  was  this  !  But  "  judge  nothing 
before  the  time."  The  vision  of  "  the  holy 
mount "  reveals  to  us  that  Moses  was  singled 
out  for  extraordinary  privilege  and  blessed 
ness  and  glory.  And  thus  we  see  "  the  end 
of  the  Lord,  that  the  Lord  is  very  pitiful 
and  of  tender  mercy." 


i) 


CHAPTER   VI 

THE    RIGHTEOUS    LIFE 

IT  is  a  common  error  to  read  the  Old  Tes 
tament  as  though  the  blessings  promised  to 
the  righteous  were  now  the  birthright  of  the 
justified.  True  it  is  that  in  the  present 
economy  prominence  is  given  to  what  is 
spiritual— to  the  heart  as  distinguished  from 
the  outward  life,  whereas  the  converse  of 
this  was  necessarily  characteristic  of  a  dis 
pensation  of  law.  But  this  only  serves  to 
prove  more  clearly  that  "  the  righteous  "  of 
the  Psalms  are  those  who  are  practically 
upright.  Grace  has  not  changed  the  char 
acter  of  God,  nor  yet  the  principles  of  His 
moral  government.  "  Trust  in  the  Lord, 
and  do  good," l  is  not  an  obsolete  precept, 
inconsistent  with  grace ;  it  is  precisely  what 
grace  teaches. 

1   Fs.  xxxvii.  3. 

50 


CHAP,  vi]        THE   RIGHTEOUS   LIFE  51 

We  seem  in  danger  of  supposing  that 
"  believers  "  have  access  to  God  in  spiritual 
things,  and  a  right  to  expect  blessing  in 
temporal  things,  without  regard  to  the  char 
acter  of  their  life.  Grace  brings  life  eternal 
to  the  drunkard  or  the  thief ;  but  the  one 
does  not  celebrate  the  event  by  a  carouse, 
nor  does  the  other  steal  the  watch  of  the 
evangelist  who  has  ministered  the  Gospel  to 
him.  And  why  not  ?  Their  natural  instincts 
would  prompt  them  Lo  it.  Yes,  but  the 
same  grace  which  brings  them  life,  teachex 
them.  And  eternal  life  is  not  like  a  railway- 
ticket,  or  a  trinket,  that  a  man  may  lose  if 
he  have  a  bad  pocket,  or  fall  in  with  bad 
company.  If  they  have  been  saved,  they 
have  repented  and  have  been  born  again. 

It  is  not  that  the  one  has  reckoned  up 
the  bottles  he  has  drunk,  and  the  other 
the  pockets  he  has  emptied,  and  that  they 
have  mourned  and  wept  at  the  retrospect. 
The  repentance  of  the  Gospel  is  far  deeper 
than  repentance  for  sins,  which  is  the  lowest 
type  of  repentance.  Nor  is  it  a  change  of 
conduct  merely,  but  a  change  of  mind.  It 


52  "  THE    WAY v  [CHAP,  vi 

is  not  that  a  man's  acts  are  different,  but 
that  he  himself  is  different.  The  drunkard 
may  sit  before  his  empty  bottles,  and  cry, 
in  bitterness  of  soul,  "  Forgive  my  sins," 
and  yet  turn  to  his  drink  again  before  the 
week  is  over.  The  very  prayer,  moreover, 
often  contains  the  implied  assertion  that  a 
man  could  do  better  if  he  tried  ;  and  that  he 
will  do  better  if  only  the  past  be  forgiven. 
But  grace  goes  deeper  far  than  this.  Law 
bids  a  man  look  back  upon  his  life,  and 
plead,  "  Forgive  my  sins " ;  but  grace 
teaches  him  to  look  within,  and  to  cry, 
with  a  heart  laid  bare  before  a  holy  and 
righteous  God,  "  Be  merciful  to  ME  the 
sinner."  l 

A  holy  God  can  have  fellowship  with 
such  a  man ;  and  a  righteous  God  can 
crown  him  with  blessings.  But  grace  does 
not  suspend  the  action  of  the  principles  on 
which  God  governs  the  world ;  and  the 
sinner,  though  thus  blessed  and  saved,  may 
suffer,  all  his  days  on  earth,  the  consequences 
of  his  sins.  It  would  betray  strange  ignor- 

1  Luke  xviii.  13. 


CHAP,  vi]        THE   RIGHTEOUS   LIFE  53 

ance,  alike  of  doctrine  and  of  fact,  to  quote 
David's  words,  "  I  have  not  seen  the  right 
eous  forsaken,  nor  his  seed  begging  bread," 
and  to  argue  that  there  can  be  no  Chris 
tians  in  the  workhouse,  and  no  children  of 
Christians  on  the  streets. 

Not  that  adversity  is  proof  of  sin.  It 
may,  as  in  the  case  of  Job,  be  proof  of 
special  dealing  from  God,  to  lead  to  special 
blessing.  Indeed  the  thirty-seventh  Psalm, 
above  quoted,  is  pervaded  by  this  thought. 
But  the  great  public  principle  of  God's 
dealings  with  men  is  that  the  upright 
prosper.  Rogues  may  sometimes  become 
millionaires,  but  it  is  proverbial  that  ill- 
gotten  wealth  is  fleeting.  And,  moreover, 
even  in  this  life,  a  man's  balance  at  the 
banker's  is  not  the  only,  nor  even  the  truest, 
test  of  prosperity.  The  rule  is  that  in 
tegrity  reaps  its  reward.  If  a  Christian 
grocer  be  less  righteous  in  his  dealings  than 
his  atheist  rival  next  door,  God  will  not 
turn  men's  hearts  to  buy  his  tea.  On  the 
contrary,  the  man  will  probably  lose  his 
customers  and  become  bankrupt ;  and  his 


54  « THE    WAY "  [CHAP,  vi 

rival  will  probably  prosper.  And  the 
result  will  only  prove  that  the  God 
whom  the  atheist  denies  is  a  righteous 
God. 

But  it  will  be  urged,  "It  is  not  God  who 
does  this ;  it  is  merely  the  ordinary  course 
of  things."  Here  is  atheism  with  a  ven 
geance  !  "  The  ordinary  course  of  things  " 
means  just  the  ordinary  course  of  God's 
moral  government  of  the  world,  and  that 
is  that  righteousness  prospers.  It  is  not 
always  so,  as  we  have  seen ;  but  it  is  the 
rule.  If  a  man  walks  over  a  precipice,  God 
does  not  interfere,  either  to  save  or  to 
destroy  him.  But  the  catastrophe  which 
follows  is  the  result  of  natural  laws  which 
God  has  ordained.  The  laws  of  Nature  are 
so  seldom  suspended  that  when  the  pheno 
menon  occurs  we  describe  it  as  a  miracle. 
The  laws  of  Providence,  on  the  other  hand, 
have  many  a  disturbance,  many  an  excep 
tion.  But  yet  both  have  been  ordained  by 
the  same  God. 

And  these  principles  of  God's  moral 
government  display  his  character.  "  The 


CHAP,  vi]        THE   RIGHTEOUS   LIFE  55 

righteous  Lord  loveth  righteousness." 
"  What  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with 
unrighteousness  ? "  If  Christian  men  of 
business  descend  to  the  common  tricks  of 
trade,  will  God  accept  them  as  his  servants  ? 
Or  will  their  prayers  avail  ?  "  The  effectual 
fervent  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth 
much  " :  not  a  justified  man  merely,  but  a 
righteous  man. 

The  servants  of  Crete  were  exhorted  to 
"  adorn  the  doctrine  of  God."  And  how 
could  such  adorn  it  ?  Why,  by  obedience 
to  their  masters,  and  diligence  in  their 
work,  and,  as  the  Catechism  says,  by  keep 
ing  their  hands  from  picking  and  stealing, 
and  their  tongues  from  evil  speaking — "  not 
gainsaying,  not  purloining,  but  showing  all 
good  fidelity."  That  their  heathen  masters, 
marking  their  conduct  —  watching  them 
through  the  keyhole,  perhaps,  when  alone 
in  the  room,  with  the  cupboard  open 
— might  find  that  their  lives  were  not 
governed  by  outward  restraints,  but  by 
a  secret  principle  of  good  within,  and  thus 

1  Ps.  xi.  7.  2  2  Cor.  vi.  14. 


56  "  THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  vi 

learn  to  praise  the  doctrine  which  could 
produce  such  results.  They  thus  adorned 
the  doctrine.  It  was  not  that  the  servant 
was  valued  because  of  his  profession,  but 
that  his  creed  was  valued  because  of  his 
practice. 

And  praise  will  not  be  earned  as  cheaply 
in  Christian  England  as  it  was  in  heathen 
Crete.  The  standard  of  public  morality 
is  higher ;  and  keeping  clear  of  the  police 
man  will  not  avail  to  adorn  the  Gospel. 
It  is  not  that  the  clerk  does  not  forge 
cheques,  but  that  he  shows  high  Christian 
principle  in  husbanding  the  time  his  em 
ployer  pays  him  for.  It  is  not  that  the 
shopman  does  not  rob  the  till,  but  that 
no  reward  or  prospect  of  advancement  will 
induce  him  to  call  bad  good,  or  to  trick 
a  customer.  It  is  not  that  the  Christian 
groom  does  not  steal  the  oats,  but  that  his 
master's  horses  are  the  best  cared  for  in  the 
parish.  It  is  not  that  the  Christian  work 
ing-man  does  not  scamp  his  work,  but  that 
he  risks  persecution  and  loss  by  insisting, 
in  violation  of  trade-union  rules,  on  working, 


CHAP,  vi]        THE   RIGHTEOUS   LIFE  57 

not  as  a  men-pleaser,  but  "  with  good  will  as 
to  the  Lord."  In  a  word,  one  and  all,  their 
righteousness  exceeds  the  righteousness  of 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees ;  for  it  is  only  by 
"  showing  all  good  fidelity "  in  things  in 
which  others  fail,  that  the  child  of  grace 
can  be  distinguished. 

This  is  not  truth  for  one  class  only ;  it 
is  truth  for  all.  It  is  the  teaching  of  the 
Sermon  on  the  Mount :  "  Let  your  light  so 
shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your 
good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven."  And  how  many  a  humble 
and  dreary  lot  would  be  ennobled  and  glad 
dened  if  life  were  thus  lived  out  to  God, 
and  even  menial  acts  were  done  as  to  the 
Lord! 

The  righteous  living  which  grace  enjoins 
is  far  more  than  the  absence  of  dishonesty. 
"  Owe  no  man  anything  "  is  a  precept  which 
cannot  be  fulfilled  by  a  cheque-book  or  a 
purse  of  sovereigns.  Grace  is  as  ready  to 
observe  the  rights  of  others,  as  to  relinquish 
its  own.  It  has  nothing  in  common  with 

1  Matt.  v.  16. 


58  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  vi 

socialism.  But  in  our  day  the  baneful  prin 
ciples  of  the  Commune,  which  are  leavening 
society,  are  perverting  even  the  doctrine 
of  Christ.  The  Lord  of  glory  calls  us 
"Brethren,"  "Friends";  the  heart  that 
grace  has  taught  responds,  "  Master," 
"  Lord." 

And  so  also  in  all  the  relationships  of 
common  life.  Grace  exacts  homage  from 
none,  but  is  eager  to  render  it  wherever  it 
is  due.  The  peer  will  claim  the  peasant 
as  his  brother ;  the  peasant  will  reciprocate 
by  paying  all  the  deference  which  rank 
demands,  especially  when  joined  with  worth 
and  godliness.  The  same  grace  which 
teaches  a  man  to  pay  money  to  whom 
money  is  due,  teaches  him,  too,  to  "  render 
to  all  their  dues :  tribute  to  whom  tribute 
is  due ;  custom  to  whom  custom ;  fear  to 
whom  fear ;  honour  to  whom  honour." 
Righteous  living  implies  a  careful  obser 
vance  of  every  relationship,  and  a  careful 
discharge  of  every  obligation.  And  if 
Christians  do  not  take  heed  to  these  things, 

1  Rom.  xiii.  7- 


CHAP.  M]        THE   RIGHTEOUS   LIFE  59 

when  the  present  wave  of  blessing  begins 
to  ebb,  and  the  world,  cold-hearted  but 
clear-headed,  comes  to  take  stock  of  the 
results,  a  reaction  will  set  in  against  the 
loud  profession  of  the  day,  and  the  worthy 
Name  by  which  we  are  called  will  be 
blasphemed. 

This  is  not  in  keeping  with  the  spirit  of 
the  age.  But  it  pertains  to  "  the  things 
which  befit  wholesome  teaching : "  l  teach 
ing  which  is  little  known  in  days  when  even 
the  sublime  precepts  of  the  Sermon  on  the 
Mount  are  perverted  to  pander  to  a  maw 
kishly  unwholesome  socialism,  by  which 
even  true-hearted  Christians  are  betrayed 
into  conduct  that  is  utterly  un- Christian.2 

1  Titus  ii.  1. 

2  A  friend  of  mine  who  began  his  business  life  in  the  office 

of  Lord   ,  asked   me   once   whether   I   thought  he   was 

justified   as  a  Christian  in  raising-  his  hat  when  he  met  his 
lordship.      I  answered,  of  course,  that  to  be  a  Christian  was 
higher  than  to  he  a  gentleman,  and  that  he  was  not  even  a 
gentleman  if  he  omitted  to  do  it. 


CHAPTER    VII 

THE    GODLY    LIFE 

THE  Christian  is  redeemed  not  merely  from 
the  penalties  due  to  sin,  but  from  the  entire 
position  to  which  those  penalties  attach. 
He  is  not  in  the  position  of  a  reprieved 
criminal;  he  has  been  "justified" — "justi 
fied  through  the  redemption  that  is  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  for  he  is  made  one  with 
Him  in  His  death.  And  death  severs 
every  relationship,  puts  an  end  to  every 
obligation. 

But  in  maintaining  without  reserve  or 
compromise  that  the  Christian  has  been 
delivered  from  every  responsibility  as  a 
child  of  nature,  it  behoves  us  to  give  equal 
prominence  to  the  truth  that  he  has  new 
responsibilities  as  a  child  of  grace,  con 
nected  with  the  new  position  into  which 
grace  has  brought  him,  and  with  the  new 


CHAP,  vn]        THE   GODLY   LIFE  61 

relationships  pertaining  to  that  position. 
He  has  been  redeemed  from  law,  but  not 
that  he  may  be  lawless.  He  has  been 
redeemed  from  duty,  but  not  that  he  may 
be  irresponsible.  He  has  also  been  re 
deemed  from  that  which  made  duty  and 
law  oppressive  and  fatal  to  him.  He  has 
not  been  redeemed  from  the  penalties  of 
doing  his  own  will  in  order  that  self-will 

o 

may  have  full  scope ;  he  has  been  redeemed 
from  self-pleasing  as  well  as  from  its  con 
sequences.  "  Who  gave  Himself  for  us  that 
He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity" 
that  is,  from  all  lawlessness,  from  all  self-will.1 
Iniquity  in  its  activities  is  the  opposite 
of  righteousness :  essentially  and  in  its 
fruits  it  is  opposed  to  holiness.2  And  holi 
ness  rightly  understood  is  devotedness,  or 
separation,  to  God.  The  holy  man  is  not 
one  who  shaves  his  face,  puts  on  a  cowl, 
and  shuts  himself  up  in  a  monastery,  but 
one  who  "  yields  his  members  servants  to 
righteousness."  In  appearance  he  is  just 

1  Titus  ii.  14.     The  word  is  dvofjLia. 
2  See  Rom.  vi.  19. 


62  "  THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  vn 

like  other  people.  If  he  be  a  barrister, 
he  will  be  seen  in  court  in  a  black  gown 
and  a  horse-hair  wig ;  if  he  be  a  footman, 
he  may  have  powdered  hair  and  an  em 
broidered  livery.  But  in  either  case,  if 
he  be  a  holy  man,  his  life  is  directed  God- 
wards.  It  is  not  that  the  one  is  thinking 
about  texts  of  Scripture  when  his  duty 
to  his  client  demands  that  he  should  be 
absorbed  in  Acts  of  Parliament,  nor  that 
the  other  is  out  preaching  when  he  ought 
to  be  polishing  the  silver  plate ;  but  that 
both  are  men  who  may  be  trusted  to  do 
their  duty  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  for 
they  are  living  before  God,  and  not  before 
men.  Such  are  God's  people.  Not  as  a 
matter  of  profession,  nor  even  as  to  title 
and  privilege  merely ;  but  because  they  are 
"  redeemed  from  all  iniquity,"  from  all  self- 
pleasing,  and  thus  "  purified  unto  Himself 
a  peculiar  people,  zealous  of  good  works." 

"  Yes,"  some  one  will  here  exclaim,  "  we 
are  to  be  'a  peculiar  people,'  and  this  is 
quite  opposed  to  what  you  have  been 
saying."  An  illustrated  copy  of  "  The 


CHAP,  vn]        THE   GODLY   LIFE  63 

Pilgrim's  Progress  "  was  my  favourite  book 
in  early  childhood,  and  I  was  much  im 
pressed  by  the  fact  that  the  worldly  people 
wore  tall  silk  hats,  while  Christian  and  his 
friends  had  "  wide-awakes."  And  one  of 
the  truest  men  I  ever  knew — a  sensible  and 
successful  man  of  business — asked  me  once 
very  earnestly  whether  I  thought  it  was 
wrong  for  a  Christian  to  wear  evening 
dress !  My  answer  was  to  call  his  atten 
tion  to  the  Apostle's  words,  "  Whatsoever 
things  are  of  good  report,  if  there  be  any 
virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  take 
account  of  these  things."  Where  right 
and  wrong  are  in  question  the  Christian 
will  not  yield  one  iota  to  please  anybody ; 
but  in  matters  of  indifference  he  will  be 
ready  to  please  everybody.  No  matter 
how  humble  his  station  in  life,  the  Christian 
ought  to  be  gracious ;  for  grace  teaches 
people  to  be  gracious,  and  any  one  who  is 
thoroughly  gracious  has  the  essential  char 
acteristics  which  are  intended  by  the  term 
"  a  gentleman." 

1  Phil.  iv.  8. 


64,  "  THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  vn 

The  "peculiar  people"  heresy  has  many 
phases  and  innumerable  votaries.  It  often 
promotes  conduct  which  is  quite  unbecom 
ing  a  Christian,  while  it  leads  its  dupes  to 
think  that  in  thus  offending  they  are  pleas 
ing  God.  The  expression  is  taken  from  the 
Greek  version  of  Exodus  xix.  5  : l  "  All  the 
earth  is  mine,"  God  declared  to  Israel,  "  but 
ye  shall  be  to  me  a  peculiar  people  above 
all  nations."  And  our  English  word,  when 
rightly  understood,  is  full  of  meaning,  and 
none  fitter  or  worthier  could  be  chosen. 
As  Webster's  Dictionary  tells  us,  "peculiar 
is  from  the  Roman  peculium,  which  was  a 
thing  emphatically  and  distinctively  one's 
own,  and  hence  was  dear." 

A  single  word  sometimes  contains  a 
sermon.  And  what  a  sermon  we  have 
here !  To  be  "a  peculiar  people "  is  not 
to  be  a  queer  people.  Still  less  is  it  to  be 
a  people  noted  for  ungraciousness  or 
rudeness.  It  is  to  be  "  emphatically  and 
distinctively "  God's  own  people,  and 

1  Used  also  in  the  Septuagint  of  Deut.  vii.  6,  xiv.  2,  aud 
xxvi.  18. 


CHAP,  vn]        THE   GODLY   LIFE  65 

therefore    to    be    very    specially    dear    to 
Him. 

And  surely  God's  own  people  must  be 
the  best  people  in  the  world  for  any  place 
or  any  purpose.  Were  Christians  what 
they  ought  to  be,  the  history  of  Daniel 
would,  in  a  humble  way,  be  re-enacted  in 
the  lives  of  thousands.  If  the  captive 
Hebrew  was  promoted  to  the  highest 
office  at  Babylon,  it  was  because  he  proved 
his  fitness  for  the  position  by  sterling 
worth,  and  a  life  spent  in  the  fear  of  God. 
And  the  result  was  that  Daniel's  God 
became  known  from  one  end  of  that 
mighty  empire  to  the  other.  If  Christians 
were  known  to  be  men  of  unswerving 
integrity,  irreproachable  in  character  and 
unblameable  in  life,  their  services  would 
be  at  a  premium  in  the  world. 

It  was  not  always  so.  In  many  a  time 
of  bitter  persecution  the  people  of  God 
were  taught  "  that  we  must  through  much 
tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
God." l  But  the  age  in  which  we  live 

1  Acts  xiv.  22. 

E 


66  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  vn 

seems  rather  to  be  like  the  halcyon  Pente 
costal  days  when  the  disciples  "  had  favour 
with  all  the  people."  Exceptions  there  are, 
no  doubt,  for  some  know  what  it  means 
to  suffer  for  Christ's  sake,  and  others  for 
righteousness'  sake.  But  if  all  who  name  the 
name  of  Christ  "departed  from  iniquity,"  men 
would  "  glorify  their  Father  in  heaven." 

And  it  is  to  this  end  that  we  have  been 
redeemed.  And  such  are  the  present  re 
sponsibilities  of  our  standing  in  grace- 
responsibilities  which  are  definite  and  real, 
and  in  respect  of  which  account  has  to 
be  rendered.  In  the  recoil  from  the 
mediaeval  error  that  this  life  is  a  state  of 
probation  of  which  the  issue  awaits  the 
award  of  "the  day  of  wrath,"  we  are  in 
danger  of  forgetting  that  the  earthly  life 
of  the  redeemed  is  indeed  a  probation,  of 
which  the  result  shall  be  declared  at  the 
judgment-seat  of  Christ.  Blinded  by  the 
errors  from  which  they  had  been  so  recently 
delivered,  our  translators  perverted  the 
Apostle's  words.  The  Revisers  have  res- 

1  Acts  ii.  47.  2  iMatt.  v.  16. 


CHAP,  vn]         THE   GODLY   LIFE  67 

cued  them  for  us  thus  :  "  Wherefore  also  we 
make  it  our  aim,  whether  at  home  or  absent, 
to  be  well-pleasing  unto  Him.  For  we  must 
all  be  made  manifest  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ,  that  each  may  receive  the 
things  done  in  the  body,  according  to  what 
he  hath  done,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad." 

"  What !  "  some  one  will  exclaim,  "  Surely 
the  good  will  be  remembered  and  rewarded, 
but  the  bad  thrust  out  of  sight  and  hushed 
up  for  ever."  The  words  are  explicit, 
"  zchethcr  good  or  bad."  How  worthy  it  is 
of  human  nature  that  we  should  wish  to 
have  the  good  recalled  and  the  bad  for 
gotten  !  But,  thank  God !  that  worthy  and 
blessed  Name  shall  be  vindicated  from  all 
the  wrong  that  has  been  heaped  upon  it 
here,  while  all  true  service  and  godly  living 
shall  be  rewarded  to  the  full,  to  the  praise  of 
Him  to  whom  the  power  belongs.  For  the 
anthem  then  shall  be,  as  His  people  cast  the 
crowns  that  He  Himself  has  given  at  His 
feet,  "  Thou  art  worthy,  O  Lord,  to  receive 
the  glory  and  the  honour." 

2  C'or.  v.  0,  10. 


CHAPTER     VIII 

THE    FEAR    OF    GOD 

"  THERE  is  nothing  better  for  a  man  than 
that  he  should  eat  and  drink."  *  Such  was 
the  sad  judgment  upon  life  pronounced  by 
one  of  the  greatest  of  mankind.  Philosopher 
and  poet,  philanthropist  and  statesman,  and 
the  kingliest  king  who  ever  wore  a  diadem, 
Solomon  reasoned  out  the  problem  of  life, 
and  here  was  the  conclusion  he  arrived  at : 
"  There  is  nothing  better  for  a  man  than 
that  he  should  eat  and  drink  ! " 

But  is  there  nothing  better  than  this  for  a 
creature  who  is  to  live  through  death  into  an 
eternity  beyond  ?  Eternity !  Here  is  the 
factor  which  changes  the  entire  equation. 
And  this  affords  the  clue  to  the  argument 
of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes — that  wonderfu 
treatise  on  the  philosophy  of  life ;  so  little 

1  Eccles.  ii.  24. 


CHAP,  vm]        THE   FEAR  OF  GOD  69 

read,  so  little  understood.  If  the  grave  is 
to  be  the  end  of  us,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink, 
for  to-morrow  we  die."  The  wise  man  will 
turn  from  the  works  of  his  hands  and  the 
projects  of  his  brain,  for  "  under  the  sun  all 
is  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit."  But  let 
the  veil  be  raised  which  shuts  in  life  within 
this  narrow  span  ;  let  man  realise  that  he 
has  a  destiny  and  a  hope  beyond  the  world 
through  which  he  is  passing  here,  and  that 
"God  will  bring  every  work  into  judgment, 
with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good 
or  whether  it  be  evil "  ;  and,  as  "  the  con 
clusion  of  the  whole  matter,"  all  that  is 
worth  living  for  in  life  will  be  summed  up 
in  one  word :  "  Fear  God  and  keep  His 
commandments." 

"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  feareth  the 
Lord,  that  delighteth  greatly  in  His  com 
mandments."  2  Let  no  one  turn  away  from 
this,  as  though  it  savoured  of  legality  un 
worthy  of  our  liberty  in  Christ.  Many 
people  seem  to  think  that  love  has  sup 
planted  both  obedience  and  the  fear  of  the 

1  Eccles.  xii.  13,  14.  2  Ps.  cxii.  1. 


70  « THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  vm 

Lord.  "  He  that  hath  My  commandments 
and  keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  Me," 
was  the  word  of  Christ.  Not  "  the  ten 
commandments  "  merely.  It  is  not  Sinai  He 
is  speaking  of,  but  all  that  God  has  revealed 
to  us.  Indeed,  the  error  I  am  dealing  with 
is  but  a  natural  recoil  from  the  perverse  folly 
which  insists  on  claiming  for  "  the  ten  com 
mandments"  a  place  in  the  Christian  dis 
pensation  which  they  never  possessed,  and 
which,  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  they 
never  could  possess,  in  any  dispensation. 
"  Every  word  which  proceedeth  out  of  the 
mouth  of  God "  is  for  our  life,  and  the 
"commandments"  of  the  112th  Psalm  and 
the  14th  chapter  of  John  include  all  the 
"  words  "  that  God  has  given  us.  "  If  a 
man  love  Me  he  will  keep  My  words,"  the 
Lord  repeated,  and  "  he  that  loveth  Me  not 
keepeth  not  My  sayings."  Love  turns  the 
"  words  "-—the  "  sayings  " — of  the  Lord  into 
commandments,  and  is  eager  to  prove  itself 
by  keeping  them. 

But,  it  will  be  said,  though  love  be  con- 

1  John  xiv.  21-24. 


CHAP,  vm]        THE   FEAR   OF   GOD  71 

sistent  with  commandments,  surely  it  leaves 
no  room  for  fear.  And  is  not  this  the 
teaching  of  the  Scripture  which  says : 
"  There  is  no  fear  in  love,  but  perfect  love 
casteth  out  fear,  because  fear  hath  torment ; 
he  that  feareth  is  not  made  perfect  in  love  ?  " 
The  error  here  involved  is  one  of  many  which 
depend  on  putting  too  narrow  a  meaning 
upon  words.  This  word  fear  covers  the 
entire  range  of  emotions,  from  the  dread 
with  which  the  lost  will  flee  from  an 
offended  God,  to  the  reverence  with  which 
a  true  wife  regards  a  husband  worthy  of 
her  affection.1 

The  fear  which  springs  from  misgivings  as 
to  our  relationships  with  God,  or  as  to  our 
fitness  to  approach  Him,  has  no  place  in  the 
heart  which  knows  the  love  that  has  been 
revealed  in  Christ.  But  fear,  rightly  under 
stood,  is  the  essential  characteristic  of  god 
liness  in  every  age — holy  fear  which  springs 
from  a  due  appreciation  alike  of  the  mercies, 
and  of  the  majesty,  of  God.  It  is  not  His 
greatness  only  that  evokes  it,  but  His  grace 

1  Eph.  v.  33. 


72  « THE    WAY "  [CHAP,  vm 

"  There  is  forgive?iess  with  Thee  that  Thou 
mayest  be  feared"  was  the  utterance  of  a 
heart  that  revelled  in  the  deepest,  closest 
fellowship  with  God.1  So  also  when  David 
recounts  the  greatness  and  perfectness  of 
his  salvation,  he  adds,  "  Many  shall  see  it 
and  fear,  and  shall  trust  in  the  Lord." 2 

Indeed,  the  Psalms,  abounding  as  they 
do  with  the  highest  and  truest  experience 
of  hearts  brought  nigh  to  God,  are  full  of 
the  fear  of  the  Lord.  It  is  the  homage 
faith  delights  to  render ;  and  in  dark  and 
apostate  days  it  is  thus  that  faith  should 
declare  itself.  Profession  was  as  loud  in  the 
time  of  Malachi  as  it  is  to-day :  "  They 
wearied  the  Lord  with  their  words."  And 
His  sad  demand  to  Israel  might  well  be 
repeated  now,  "  Where  is  Mine  honour  ? " 
"Where  is  My  fear?"  "They  fear  not 
Me,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts."  But  in  con 
trast  with  all  this,  "  they  that  feared  the 
Lord  spake  often  one  to  another,  and  the 
Lord  hearkened  and  heard  it,  and  a  book  of 
remembrance  was  written  before  Him  for 

1  Ps.  cxxx.  4.  2  Ps.  xl.  3. 


CHAP,  vm]        THE   FEAR   OF  GOD  73 

them  that  feared  the  Lord,  and  that  thought 
upon  His  name."  For  "the  Lord  taketh 
pleasure  in  them  that  fear  Him." 

And  then,  before  the  prophet's  voice  be 
came  silent  in  Israel,  there  came  forth  the 
promise  that  was  to  cheer  the  true-hearted 
amid  the  ever-deepening  gloom :  "  Unto 
you  that  fear  My  name  shall  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  arise  with  healing  in  His 
wings."  For  centuries  that  word  still  lived 
in  believing  hearts,  and  when  its  near  fulfil 
ment  was  proclaimed  to  Mary  it  awoke  the 
echo,  "  His  mercy  is  on  them  that  fear  Him 
from  generation  to  generation."  "  From 
generation  to  generation  " ;  yes,  and  on  to 
an  eternity  to  come,  when  saints  redeemed 
from  earth  shall  stand  upon  the  sea  of  glass, 
and,  with  the  harps  of  God,  shall  sing  the 
song  of  Moses  and  the  Lamb,  "  Who  shall 
not  Jear  Thee,  O  Lord,  and  glorify  Thy 
name  ? " 2 

"  Walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and 
in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost "  is  the 

1  Mai.  i.  6 ;  iii.  16 ;  Ps.  cxlvii.  11. 
2  Rev.  xv.  4. 


74  "  THE  WAY r  [CHAP,  vin 

Divine  record  of  the  bright  and  happy  days 
which  followed  the  first  persecution  of  the 
Church.1  "  Perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear 
of  God  "  is  the  Apostle  Paul's  description 
of  the  true  effort  and  spirit  of  the  Christian 
life.2  And  when  the  Apostle  Peter  sums  up 
in  four  brief  precepts  the  whole  of  righteous 
and  godly  living,  "  Fear  God "  covers  all 
that  needs  to  be  said  to  guide  us  as  to  the 
Godward  aspect  of  our  life.3  Nor  can  we 
forget  the  solemn  exhortation  :  "We,  re 
ceiving  a  kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved, 
let  us  have  grace  whereby  we  may  serve 
God  acceptably  with  reverence  and  godly 
fear,  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire." 

And  is  there  not  special  need  in  the  days 
we  live  in  for  "  wholesome  words  "  like  these  ? 
Blatant  profession,  rather  than  godly  living, 
is  characteristic  of  the  age.  In  other  days, 
Christians  were  known  as  "  God-fearing 
men,"  now,  they  are  "  believers,"  or  "  be 
lievers  in  Jesus,"  for  thus  the  communism  of 
the  times  delights  to  speak  of  "  faith  toward 

1  Acts  ix.  31.  2  2  Cor.  vii.  1. 

3  1  Pet.  ii.  17.  4  Heh.  xii.  28,  29. 


CHAP.  VIH]        THE   FEAR   OF   GOD  75 

our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  lives  of  many 
give  proof  that  the  truth  of  the  Lordship  of 
Christ  has  almost  died  out  from  their  hearts. 
The  confession  of  His  name  ought  to  be  the 
answer,  rendered  "  with  meekness  and  fear," : 
to  those  who,  taking  notice  of  the  life  of 
the  Christian,  demand  a  reason  for  the  hope 
that  is  in  him. 

The  testimony  of  the  lips  ought  to  be  the 
articulate  expression  of  the  testimony  of  the 
life.  As  Cyprian  phrased  it,  the  Christian 
should  be  all  of  a  piece.  But  the  fear  of 
God  is  not  the  characteristic  of  the  age. 
Hence  the  prevailing  wildness  of  religious 
thought  and  religious  practice.  How  many 
Christians  there  are  who  are  coquetting 
with  Ritualism,  and  the  lies  by  which 
Priestcraft  would  decoy  us  back  to  mediaeval 
darkness  !  They  leave  God  out  of  account, 
and  seem  to  have  no  thought  of  the  judg 
ment-seat  of  Christ. 

Fear,  we  are  told,  belongs  to  a  bygone 
dispensation,  and  is  inconsistent  with  our 
position  in  Christ  as  sons.  But  what  of  the 

1  Acts  xvi.  31  ;  xx.  21,  &c.  2  1  Pet.  iii.  15. 


76  "THE    WAY r  [CHAP,  vm 

exhortation,  "  //'  ye  call  on  the  Father,  pass 
the  time  of  your  sojourning  here  in  fear  "  ?  * 
In  presence  of  the  evils  and  dangers  that 
beset  them,  the  Philippians  were  enjoined 
to  work  out  their  deliverance  "  with  fear 
and  trembling." 2  And  if  this  spirit  is  right 
in  regard  to  everyday  life,  it  ought  surely 
to  mark  our  bearing  and  conduct  in  the 
things  of  God.  Such  was  the  spirit  of  the 
Apostle  Paul,  who  knew  and  loved  and 
served  the  Master  as  few  besides  have  ever 
done.  It  was  the  spirit  of  the  Master  Him 
self.  He  was  "  the  only-begotten  Son,  in 
the  bosom  of  the  Father,"  and  yet  when  He 
prayed  in  Gethsemane  "  He  fell  on  His 
face."  And,  more  wonderful  still,  the 

1  1  Pet.  i.  17. 

2  Phil.  ii.  12.     The  use  of  the  word  "salvation"  here  is 
vetoed  by  the  doctrines  of  grace.     In  Acts  xxvii.  34,  it  was 
the  (deliverance  of  the  crew  from  shipwreck  that  was  pro 
moted  by  their  taking  food  ;  and  in  Phil.  i.  19,  it  was  the  de 
liverance  of  Paul  as  a  prisoner  that  was  promoted  by  the 
preaching  of  others.     So  here  it  was  their  deliverance  from 
the  perils  that  surrounded  them  that  had  to  be  "  worked  out." 
"  Work  out  your  own  deliverance  "  must  mean  in  contrast 
with  some  one  else  working  it  out  for  you.     The  Apostle 
could  no  longer'shepherd  them  while  he  was  in  prison  ;  and 
he  thus  appeals  to  them  to  act  on  the  preceding  exhortations 
of  the  Epistle. 

8  Matt.  xxvi.  39. 


CHAP,  vin]        THE   FEAR   OF   GOD  77 

Scripture  tells  us,  "  He  was  heard  for  His 
godly  fear  "  —the  very  word  of  the  exhor 
tation  to  us,  "  Let  us  have  grace  whereby 
we  may  serve  God  acceptably  with  godly 
fear  and  awe  ;  for  our  God  is  a  consuming 
fire."  2 

"He  fell  on  His  face."  The  Christian 
who  has  never  lain  prostrate  before  God 
in  prayer  has  but  a  poor  sort  of  spiritual 
experience.  The  Christian  who  knows  no 
other  attitude  must  be  a  stranger  to  "  the 
spirit  of  adoption."  Some  of  us  have  learned 
to  pray  as  Nehemiah  prayed.  While  dis 
charging  the  duties  of  his  high  office  at  the 
Persian  Court,  he  lifted  his  heart  to  God 
without  a  gesture  or  even  a  look  to  indicate 
that  he  was  praying.3  The  Christian  may 
pray  as  he  passes  along  a  busy  street  or  sits 
at  a  dinner-table  or  in  a  railway  carriage. 
The  liberty  of  worship  includes  all  this. 
And  even  in  prayer  of  the  most  formal 
kind  God  will  bear  with  bodily  weakness. 
For  He  is  ever  ready  to  "  pardon  every  one 

1  Heb.  v.  7.  2  Heb.  xii.  28-20.     (See  R.V.,  margin.) 

3  Neh.  ii. 


78  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP.  AIII 

that  prepareth  his  heart  to  seek  God."  But 
grace  will  teach  us  not  to  presume  on  this. 
When  we  see  people  lolling  in  their  seats 
during  public  prayer,  the  question  arises 
whether  their  attitude  bespeaks  the  freedom 
of  worshippers  whose  hearts  are  "  stablished 
with  grace,"  or  an  indifference  begotten  of 
failure  to  appreciate  what  is  due  to  God. 

The  ceremonial  which  surrounds  a  king  is 
very  real ;  but  how  utterly  trivial  it  is  in 
comparison  with  the  solemnities  essential  to 
access  into  the  Divine  presence.  Yet  in 
the  infinite  grace  of  God  these  dread 
solemnities,  instead  of  being  a  fatal  bar* 
become  an  encouragement  to  our  "  drawing 
near."  But  what  human  nature  makes  an 
excuse  for  levity,  grace  will  use  to  teach  a 
deeper  reverence. 

The  Lord  Jesus  "  fell  on  His  face  and 
prayed,  saying,  O,  My  Father."  And  it 
is  "  after  this  manner  "  that  He  bids  us  pray, 
"Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven"-— the 
same  Father  to  whom  He  prayed.  And 
yet  there  is  a  difference.  Witness  His  words 

1  Heb.  x.  22. 


CHAP,  vm]        THE   FEAR   OF  GOD  79 

to  His  disciples :  "  I  ascend,"  He  said, 
not  to  our  God  and  Father,  but  "  unto  My 
Father  and  your  Father,  My  God  and  your 
God." 

"  Our  Father."  That  sinful  men  should 
be  allowed  to  address  God  thus  in  prayer  is 
altogether  amazing.  The  pagan  devotee,  as 
he  lies  in  the  dust  before  his  idol,  is  not  more 
spiritually  blind  and  dead  than  is  a  pro 
fessing  Christian  who  has  no  sense  of  ador 
ing  wonder  at  the  grace  betokened  by  such 
access  and  such  a  thought.  And  yet  there 
is  a  still  higher  thought  and  a  still  worthier 
access,  and  the  Apostle  rose  to  it  when  he 
penned  the  words,  "  I  bow  my  knees  unto 
THE  FATHER  OF  OUR  LORD  JESUS  CHRIST." 


CHAPTER  IX 

ON     BEING     PILGRIMS 

THE  rich  man  in  the  parable  "  made  merry 
sumptuously  every  day."  His  counterpart 
in  real  life  pretends  to  this ;  but  unless 
he  be  sunk  so  low  as  to  have  no  thought 
beyond  the  present,  his  merrymaking  is 
always  marred  by  some  "  writing  on  the 
wall." 

Words,  like  coins,  become  defaced  by 
being  put  to  base  uses  ;  and  this  fine  old 
word  "merry"  is  now  scarcely  recognisable. 
"  Be  merry  in  God,"  Sir  Thomas  More 
wrote  to  his  household  when  trouble  came 
on  them.  And  the  degradation  of  the  word 
has  almost  robbed  us  of  the  exhortation,  so 
precious  to  the  Christian,  "  Go  thy  way, 
eat  thy  bread  with  joy,  and  drink  thy  wine 
with  a  merry  heart ;  for  God  now  accepteth 
thy  works."  * 

1  Eccles.  ix.  7- 
80 


CHAP,  ix]        ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  81 

Christians  should  eat  and  drink  to  the 
glory  of  God.  But  some  take  their  food  as 
if  it  were  physic ;  others,  as  though  their 
enjoyment  of  God's  gifts  were  a  godless 
pleasure.  The  disciples  of  Pentecostal  days, 
we  are  told,  "  did  eat  their  meat  with  glad 
ness  and  singleness  of  heart."  But  the 
"  vile  hody "  heresy  leads  us  to  mistake 
asceticism  for  sanctity.  Using  the  word 
"  merry "  in  its  good  old  sense,  the  Chris 
tian  should  have  "  a  merry  heart."  And 
"  he  that  is  of  a  merry  heart  hath  a  con 
tinual  feast."  Festival  keeping,  based  on 
redemption,  is  the  Divine  description  of  the 
Christian  life,  as  it  was  the  great  character 
istic  of  the  sacred  calendar  of  the  Divine 
religion  of  Judaism.  In  the  beginning  of 
the  year  was  the  Feast  which  immediately 
followed  the  Passover,  and  borrowed  its 
name.  And  so  we  read,  "  Our  Passover 
has  been  sacrificed,  even  Christ ;  therefore 
let  us  keep  festival."  Gladness  should 

1  Prov.  xv.  15. 

2  1  Cor.  v.  7,  8.     On  account  of  the  misrendering-,  "  Keep 
the  feast,"  this  verse  is  often  perverted  to  support  sacramen- 
talism.     Chrysostom's  gloss  upon  it  is  that  "  the  whole  of 

F 


82  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  ix 

mark  the  life  of  the  redeemed.  David's 
words  in  one  of  the  darkest  hours  of  his 
troubled  life,  when  he  was  a  fugitive  in  the 
Absalom  rebellion,  ought  to  be  the  experi 
ence  of  the  Christian : — 

"  Thou  hast  put  gladness  in  my  heart, 
More  than  they  have  when  their  corn  and  their 

wine  are  increased. 

In  peace  will  I  both  lay  me  down  and  sleep ; 
For   Thou,    Lord,    alone    makest    me    dwell    in 

safety." 1 

"  But,"  some  spiritual  dyspeptic  will  de 
mand,  "  does  not  the  Bible  enjoin  upon 
Christians  to  become  pilgrims  ?  "  The  an 
swer  is  an  emphatic  NO.  That  is  what 
human  religion  teaches  ;  for  the  effort  of 
religion  is  always  to  become  something  we 
are  not,  whereas  the  true  aim  of  the  Chris 
tian  life  is  to  realise  what,  by  God's  grace, 
we  are.  The  Christian  is  a  pilgrim,  and  it 
behoves  him  to  live  as  a  pilgrim. 

time  is  a  festival  to  Christians."  The  sacred  calendar  was  a 
prophecy,  each  festival  typifying  a  separate  dispensation  ;  and 
this  present  dispensation  is  represented  by  the  Feast  of  the 
Passover.  (See  "  The  Bible  and  Modern  Criticism,"  pp. 
238-245.) 
1  Ps.  iv.  7,  8,  Revised  Version. 


CHAP,  ix]         ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  83 

But  who  and  what  is  a  pilgrim  ?  Here 
is  the  answer  the  Dictionary  gives  :  "  (1) 
One  who  slowly  and  heavily  treads  his  way ; 
(2)  Especially  one  who  travels  to  a  distance 
from  his  own  country  to  visit  a  holy  place." 
But  we  must  not  read  dictionary  meanings 
into  Biblical  words.  The  Parepidemos  of 
the  New  Testament  is  one  who  is  living 
away  from  his  own  country  or  people. 
Our  relatives  in  India,  for  example,  are 
pilgrims.  No  matter  how  prolonged  their 
exile,  they  never  forget  that  England  is 
their  home.  It  is  a  fact  in  their  lives,  not 
a  theory  for  one  day  in  the  week  when  the 
English  mail  arrives.  There  may  be  nothing 
of  the  conventional  pilgrim  about  them ; 
but  in  this  true  sense  they  are  pilgrims. 

And  how  fitly  this  describes  those  who 
are  born  from  above,  and  whose  citizenship 
is  in  heaven !  Abraham  left  the  home  of 
his  family,  not  to  become  a  pilgrim,  but  be 
cause  his  faith-vision  was  filled  by  "  the 
city  which  hath  foundations,"  and  the 
"  better  country,"  and  his  coming  out  was 
a  confession  that  he  was  a  stranger  and  a 


84  « THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  ix 

pilgrim  upon  earth.1  The  First  Epistle  of 
Peter  is  addressed  to  "the  elect  who  are 
pilgrims  of  the  Dispersion."  And  to  such 
the  appeal  is  addressed,  "  I  beseech  you  as 
sojourners  and  pilgrims,  to  abstain  from 
fleshly  lusts."2 

And  here  we  have  exhausted  the  passages 
in  which  the  word  occurs.  But  though  it 
is  used  but  three  times  in  the  New  Testa 
ment,  the  truth  which  it  connotes  abounds. 
And,  strange  to  say,  it  is  precisely  in  the 
sphere  to  which  the  truth  is  specially 
applicable  that  the  votaries  of  the  religious- 
pilgrim  cult  are  false  to  it.  As  Abraham 
was  looking  for  the  city  which  hath  foun 
dations,  so  the  Christian  is  "  come  to  the 
Church  of  the  firstborn  who  are  enrolled  in 
heaven." ]  It  is  this  indeed  that  makes  him 
a  pilgrim.  But  when  the  Jewish  religionist 
had  built  a  city  for  himself,  he  forgot  the 

1  Heb.  xi.  10,  13. 

2  1  Pet.  i.  1,  and  ii.  11.     The  Revised  Version  capriciously 
renders  the  same  Greek  word  sojourners  in  the  one  place,  and 
pilgrims  in  the  other,  where  "  sojourner  "  represents  a  dif 
ferent  word  in  the  original.     For  "  dispersion,"  see  John 
vii.  35,  Revised  Version. 

3  Heb.  xii.  22,  23. 


CHAP,  ix]         ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  85 

city  "  whose  builder  and  maker  is  God." 
And  the  Christian  religionist  has  as  defin 
itely  given  up  his  pilgrimhood  by  substitut 
ing  the  Church  of  professing  Christians 
registered  on  earth  for  "  the  Church  of  the 
firstborn  ones  enrolled  in  heaven." 

That  Christ  founded  a  new  religion  is  a 
figment  of  theology.  Using  "  religion  "  in 
its  popular  sense  as  a  synonym  for  piety, 
the  suggestion  is  obviously  absurd.  And  in 
the  classical  and  Scriptural  acceptation  of 
the  word,2  the  statement  is  absolutely  false. 
He  came,  not  as  the  founder  of  a  new  reli 
gion,  but  as  the  realisation  and  fulfilment 
of  the  only  true  religion  the  world  has  ever 
known.  For  though  the  temple  of  Jeru 
salem  was  God's  house  in  a  wholly  peculiar 
sense,  it  was  a  type  and  shadow  of  heavenly 
and  eternal  realities ;  and  it  is  with  these 
realities  that  the  Christian  has  to  do.  No 
building  upon  earth  to-day  can  hold  the 
place  which  that  temple  held.  "  For  Chris- 

1  Of  course  the  ' '  pilgrimage "   of  a   Roman    Catholic  to 
Rome  or  of  a  Mahometan  to  Mecca  is  the  very  antithesis  of 
a  pilgrimage  in  the  true  sense. 

2  See  Archbishop  Trench's  "  English,  Past  and  Present." 


86  "  THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  ix 

tianity  has  no  special  sanctuaries."  Our 
"  places  of  worship  "  are  but  "  synagogues." 

That  Christ  founded  a  visible  Church  is 
true  in  a  sense,  but  not  in  the  sense  in  which 
the  term  is  usually  understood.  Christ  was 
"  a  minister  of  the  Circumcision  for  the 
truth  of  God";  but  when  "the  Circum 
cision"  finally  rejected  Him,  His  Apostles, 
under  Divine  guidance,  "  separated  the 
disciples  "  ;  and  thus  the  earthly  Church  of 
this  dispensation  was  constituted. 

A  treatise  on  the  Church  would  be  quite 
outside  the  scope  of  these  pages  ;  but  not 
a  warning  against  certain  errors  by  which 
Christians  are  betrayed  into  an  un-Chris- 
tian  position.  People  talk  of  "  the  Church  " 
as  they  talk  of  "  Science,"  as  though  it  were 
an  abstraction.  But  in  the  Greek  language 
a  Church  must  be  a  company  of  people. 
And  according  to  the  Divine  ideal,  the 
Church  on  earth  is  "  the  blessed  company 
of  all  faithful  people,"  or,  in  other  words, 
of  the  people  of  God.  And  God's  people 

1  Bishop  Lightfoot's  Philippians  ("  The  Christian  Min 
istry"). 


CHAP,  ix]         ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  87 

seek  to  fulfil  God's  will,  which  is  the 
exaltation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
When  therefore  the  Church  itself  is  made 
an  oracle  or  an  object  of  veneration,  it 
takes  the  place  of  Christ  and  becomes 
anti-Christian. 

"  The  company  of  all  faithful  people," 
mark.  For  another  popular  error,  quite  as 
ignorant  and  mischievous,  is  the  supposition 
that  "  the  Church  "  is  a  special  class  within 
the  company  of  the  faithful.  "  For  com 
municating  instruction  and  for  preserving 
public  order,  for  conducting  religious  wor 
ship  and  for  dispensing  social  charities,  it 
became  necessary  to  appoint  special  officers. 
But  the  priestly  functions  and  privileges  of 
the  Christian  people  are  never  regarded  as 
transferred  or  even  delegated  to  these  offi 
cers.  They  are  called  stewards  or  messen 
gers  of  God,  servants  or  ministers  of  the 
Church,  and  the  like ;  but  the  sacerdotal 
title  is  never  once  conferred  upon  them. 
The  only  priests  under  the  Gospel,  desig 
nated  as  such  in  the  New  Testament,  are 
the  saints,  the  members  of  the  Christian 


88  « THE    WAY v  [CHAP,  ix 

brotherhood.     As  individuals,  all  Christians 
are  priests  alike." 

Our  forefathers  seceded  from  the  Church 
of  Rome,  not  because  there  was  error  in 
that  Church — for  all  Churches  are  leavened 
with  error — but  because  its  errors  were 
deemed  so  vital  as  to  clash  with  loyalty  to 
Christ.  According  to  the  Reformers,  "  the 
visible  Church  of  Christ  is  a  congregation 
of  faithful  men,  in  which  the  pure  Word  of 
God  is  preached  and  the  Sacraments  duly 
administered  according  to  Christ's  ordin 
ance."  Finding  therefore  that  in  the  his 
toric  Church  of  Western  Christendom  the 
sacraments  had  become  "  dangerous  de 
ceits,"  and  the  pure  Word  of  God  was  not 
preached,  they  left  it  and  organised  the 
National  Church  as  "  a  congregation  of 
faithful  men."  They  recognised  that  a 
Church  may  apostatise,  and  that  "  faithful 
men"  should  separate  themselves  from  an 
apostasy.  That  "the  Church"  is  a  mys 
tical  entity,  the  continuity  of  which  is  un- 

1  Bishop   Lig-htfoot's  Philippians    ("The   Christian'  Min 
istry  "),  p.  182. 


CHAP,  ix]          ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  89 

affected  by  its  actual  condition,  is  one  of 
the  most  evil  and  silly  of  the  superstitions 
of  what  calls  itself  "  the  Christian  reli 
gion." 

A  generation  ago,  when  the  principles 
of  the  Reformation  were  still  paramount, 
we  used  to  hear  that  our  various  churches 
were  the  scaffolding  for  building  the  true 
Church.  In  building  operations  a  scaffold 
ing  is  needed ;  but  if  a  man  made  a  fetich 
of  his  scaffolding,  and  lavished  words  of 
veneration  upon  it,  he  might  well  be  com 
mended  to  the  care  of  his  friends  ! 

In  a  passage  of  striking  solemnity  and 
force,  Dean  Alford  shows  how  definitely 
and  how  soon  "the  Christian  Church" 
followed  the  course  of  Israel's  apostasy, 
and  how  certainly  it  is  now  drifting  to 
its  predicted  doom.1  And  in  the  same 
spirit  another  Anglican  theologian  writes : 
"  While  the  Apostle  wrote,  the  actual  state 
and  the  visible  tendencies  of  things  showed 
too  plainly  what  Church  history  would  be." 
And  again,  "  I  know  not  how  any  man,  in 

1  Greek  Testament,  Matt  xii.  43. 


90  "  THE    WAY r  [CHAP,  ix 

closing  the  Epistles,  could  expect  to  find 
the  subsequent  history  of  the  Church  essen 
tially  different  from  what  it  is."  The  later 
Epistles  "  breathe  the  language  of  a  time 
in  which  the  tendencies  of  that  history  had 
distinctly  shown  themselves ;  and  in  this 
respect  these  writings  form  a  prelude  and 
a  passage  to  the  Apocalypse." 

But  even  in  its  pristine  unity  and  purity 
the  Church  on  earth  never  held  the  place 
claimed  for  it  in  its  apostasy.  The  care 
of  "  the  oracles  of  God "  was  the  highest 
privilege  of  the  Jewish  Church ; 2  and  no 
greater  dignity  can  be  claimed  for  "  the 
Christian  Church"  than  to  be  "a  witness 
and  a  keeper  of  Holy  Writ." !  For  in  the 
Scriptures  of  the  New  Testament  God  spoke 
to  the  Church,  not  the  Church  to  the  world. 
They  were  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lord's 
promise  that  He  would  send  the  Holy  Spirit 
to  guide  them  into  all  truth — truth  which 
they  were  unable  to  receive  during  the 

1  The  late  Canon  Bernard's  "  Progress  of  Doctrine  in  the 
New  Testament,"  being  the  Bampton  Lectures,  1864. 

2  Rom.  iii.  1,  2.  3  Articles  of  Religion,  xx. 


CHAP,  ix]         ON   BEING  PILGRIMS  91 

ministry  of  His  humiliation.  But  in  these 
days  of  unbounded  intellectual  conceit 
combined  with  pitiable  superstition  and 
credulity,  this  promise  is  wrested  into  a 
place  for  setting  the  Church  above  the 
Scriptures.  And  the  rationalistic  crusade 
now  so  popular  dismisses  the  plainest  teach 
ing,  not  only  of  the  inspired  Apostles,  but 
of  the  Lord  Himself,  as  merely  ';  current 
Jewish  notions." 

Devout  men  whose  hearts  still  feel  the 
power  of  lost  truth,  shrink  back  from  the 
goal  to  which  this  evil  system  inevitably 
leads.  But  in  the  next  generation,  when 
"  the  assured  results  of  modern  criticism  " 
have  fructified  in  minds  uninfluenced  by 
the  Divine  Spirit,  and  unclouded  by  the 
superstitions  of  religion,  the  Deity  of  Christ 
and  the  Divine  authority  of  Holy  Scripture 
will  be  jettisoned  by  "  all  people  of  culture." 
And  then  the  way  will  be  prepared  for 
the  realisation  of  what  now  seems  but  a 
foolish  dream — the  reunion  of  Christendom. 

1  Hastings'  "  Bible  Dictionary,''  article  ' '  Old  Testament/' 
p.  601. 


92  "  THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  ix 

For  faith  will  then  have  given  place  to 
"  opinions  " ;  and  no  one  but  a  boor  would 
wish  to  force  mere  opinions  upon  others. 

Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate  became  friends 
through  agreeing  to  give  up  Christ  to  His 
enemies,  and  on  this  ground  alone  will  the 
Church  ever  be  reunited.  And  then,  aban 
doning  the  distinctive  truths  of  the  Divine 
revelation — including,  of  course,  "the  de 
grading  dogmas"  of  man's  guilt  and  ruin, 
and  the  atonement  of  Calvary — and  teach 
ing  the  universal  Fatherhood  of  God  and 
the  pure  and  beautiful  ethics  of  "  Jesus," 
the  Church  will  win  the  homage  and  com 
mand  the  admiration  of  the  world.  And 
then  shall  be  heard  "  another  voice  from 
heaven,  saying,  Come  out  of  her,  my 
people,  that  ye  be  not  partakers  of  her  sins 
and  that  ye  receive  not  of  her  plagues." l 

Meanwhile  the  Christian  may  use  his 
particular  Church  as  an  instrument  of 
Christian  good.2  But  let  it  not  be  for- 


1  Rev.  xviii.  4 ;  cf.  Jer.  li.  0,  45. 

2  "  Who  cares  anything  for  any  church  save  as  an  instru 
ment  of  Christian  good?"  (Chalmers). 


CHAP,  ix]          ON   BEING   PILGRIMS  93 

gotten  that  all  our  churches  form  part  of 
that  professing  Church  which,  as  a  whole, 
is  stained  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs — 
that  Church  whose  awful  doom  is  so  plainly 
foretold  in  Scripture.  In  its  apostasy  it 
is  no  longer  "  the  household  of  God," 
but  a  part  of  the  world  that  crucified  His 
Son.  In  no  sphere  does  the  Christian  need 
to  be  so  specially  reminded  that  he  is  a 
"  pilgrim,"  and  that  he  is  to  "  use  the  world 
as  not  using  it  to  the  full." 

This  is  no  new  experience  with  the 
people  of  God.  When  during  His  earthly 
ministry  the  Lord  Jesus  warned  His  dis 
ciples  against  the  world,  His  fears  were  not 
lest  they  should  take  to  the  theatre,  or 
their  wives  to  "  balls  and  parties,"  but  lest 
they  should  be  ensnared  by  the  religion 
which  surrounded  them.  They  were  associ 
ated  with  it,  for  in  its  origin  it  was  the 
Divine  religion ;  but  it  had  rejected  Him, 
and  therefore,  though  in  it,  they  were  in 
a  real  sense  not  to  be  of  it.  Their  attitude 
toward  it  was  to  be  that  of  pilgrims. 

1  1  Cor.  vii.  31,  Revised  Version,  mnrg. 


94  "THE    WAYr  [CHAP,  ix 

And  in  keeping  with  this  is  the  exhor 
tation  to  us  in  this  present  dispensation, 
"Let  us  go  forth  therefore  unto  Him  with 
out  the  camp."  This  figurative  language 
is  derived  from  Israel's  history.  After 
the  apostasy  of  the  golden  calf,  "  Moses 
took  the  tabernacle  and  pitched  it  without 
the  camp."  And  "  every  one  which  sought 
the  Lord  went  out  unto  the  tabernacle."  1 
He  had  his  place  in  the  camp,  but  he 
dissociated  himself  from  the  historic  con 
tinuity  of  evil.  He  no  longer  looked  to 
Israel  for  blessing,  but  only  to  the  God  of 
Israel.  He  did  not  cease  to  be  an  Israelite, 
but,  like  the  patriarchs,  he  declared  himself 
a  pilgrim.  And  in  this  sense  it  is  that  the 
Christian  is  enjoined  to  go  forth  unto 
Christ,  without  the  camp.'2 

1  Exod.  xxxiii.  7. 

2  With  reference  to  the  Church,  see  Appendix,  Note  I 
(p.  161,  post). 


CHAPTER    X 

WHO    IS    A    CHRISTIAN  ? 

WHAT  does  it  mean  to  be  "  a  Christian  "  ? 

In  Christendom  we  are  all  Christians,  for 
the  Christian  religion  prevails.  But  as 
every  one  who  has  even  an  elementary 
knowledge  of  history  is  aware,  "  the  Chris 
tian  religion  "  has  been  a  bitter  opponent, 
and  relentless  persecutor,  of  Christianity. 
We  distinguish,  therefore,  between  a  real 
Christian  and  a  person  who  merely  pro 
fesses  the  Christian  religion.  Scripture 
declares  that  "  he  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one 
outwardly." :  And  if  this  principle  obtained 
in  the  case  of  a  religion  in  which  such 
importance  attached  to  externals,  how 
much  more  applicable  it  must  be  to 
Christianity. 

But  there  are   other  distinctions  which, 

1   Horn.  ii.  28. 

96 


96  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  x 

though  not  so  obvious,  are  of  great  practical 
moment.  When  we  say  that  a  man  is  not 
a  gentleman,  we  usually  mean,  not  to 
impugn  his  social  status,  but  to  aver  that 
his  character  and  conduct  are  unworthy 
of  it.  And  when  we  assert  that  a  barrister 
is  no  lawyer,  or  that  a  military  officer  is 
no  soldier,  we  do  not  question  that  the  one 
was  duly  "  called,"  or  that  the  other  holds 
his  Majesty's  commission.  What  we  mean 
is  that  the  barrister  is  unversed  in  law,  and 
the  officer  is  ignorant  of  the  art  of  war. 
And  in  a  precisely  similar  sense,  if  a  man 
is  devoid  of  Christian  truth,  or  if  his 
conduct  is  un-Christian,  we  may  challenge 
his  right  to  be  called  a  Christian, 
without  claiming  in  the  least  to  decide 
whether  he  has  life  in  Christ,  or  is  a  mere 
professor. 

In  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians  the 
Apostle  Paul  puts  the  Christian  position 
in  a  single  sentence :  "  As  ye  have  received 
Christ  Jesus  the  Lord" — or  to  give  the 
words  more  accurately,  "As  ye  received 
the  Christ,  Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in 


CHAP,  x]      WHO   IS   A   CHRISTIAN?  97 

Him."1  With  the  Jew  the  divinity  of 
the  Christ  could  never  be  in  doubt.  In 
his  case,  therefore,  the  burden  of  the 
Gospel  testimony  was  "  that  Jesus  was 
the  Christ."  But  the  Gentile,  to  whom 
"  Jesus  Christ "  was  a  mere  name  which 
meant  no  more  than  Pontius  Pilate,  nor 
half  so  much  as  Julius  Caesar,  it  was 
necessary  to  unfold  the  meaning  of  the 
Christ,  and  to  enforce  the  truth  that  He 
was  Lord.  Hence  the  Apostle's  words  to 
the  Corinthians  :  "  We  preach  Christ  Jesus 
as  Lord."  To  the  Jew  the  emphasis  was 
on  "the  Christ";  to  the  Gentile,  on  "the 
Lord." 

An  attempt  to  limit  the  use  of  the  word 
"  Christian  "  would  be  mere  pedantry.  I>ut 
yet  in  its  highest  sense  the  title  belongs 
only  to  those  who  are  of  "  The  Way,"  or 
in  other  words,  to  those  who  combine 
Christian  doctrine  with  Christian  life  ;  or 
who,  in  the  language  of  the  Epistle,  have 
received  the  Christ,  Jesus  the  Lord,  and 
are  walking  in  Him.  There  is  much  to 

1  Col.  ii.  6.  2  2  Cor.  iv.  5,  Revised  Version. 

G 


98  « THE   WAY r  [CHAP,  x 

be  learned  from  Greek  tenses.  The  word 
is,  "As  ye  received  the  Christ,"  pointing 
back  to  a  definite  event  or  crisis  in  the 
life.  And  the  Apostle  adds,  "  so  walk  in 
Him " :  a  present  tense  this,  implying  not 
an  act,  but  a  course  of  living.  "  Walk 
about"  is  the  literal  rendering,  signifying 
the  whole  tenor  of  the  life.  But  how  can 
we  walk  about  in  a  person  ?  Though  the 
phrase  is  quite  un-English,  its  significance  in 
Greek  is  clear  and  simple.  It  means  that 
the  whole  life  is  to  be  characterised  by 
all  that  is  implied  in  receiving  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  As  some  one  has  sung  : — 

"  From  various  cares  my  soul  retires  ; 
Though  deep  and  boundless  its  desires, 
I've  now  to  please  but  ONE." 

Heaping  metaphors  together,  the  Apostle 
proceeds,  "  Rooted  and  being  continually 
builded  up  in  Him."  "  Rooted  "  is  in  the 
perfect  tense,  signifying  a  past  event,  con 
tinuous  in  its  effect.  A  baby's  idea  of  gar 
dening  is  to  plant  a  thing  one  week,  and  to 
pull  it  up  the  next,  to  see  if  it  is  growing. 
And  the  Christian  experience  of  some  people 


CHAP,  x]      WHO   IS  A   CHRISTIAN  ?  99 

is  very  like  a  baby's  gardening.  But  those 
who  have  really  received  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  are  rooted  in  Him  once  for  all. 

And  what  is  needed  now  is  to  be  continu 
ally  builded  up  in  Him,  and  continually 
established  in  the  faith.  "  Even  as  ye  were 
taught,"  the  Apostle  adds,  again  reverting 
to  the  aoiist  tense,  and  thus  pointing  back 
to  the  time  when  they  received  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  For  in  receiving  Him  they 
received  the  truth.  And  so  he  goes  on  to 
warn  them  lest  any  man  should  make  spoil 
of  them  "  through  his  philosophy  and  empty 
deceit."  For  a  heretic  is  always  a  cheat.  He 
defrauds  his  dupes  into  bartering  the  gold  of 
Divine  truth  for  the  tinsel  that  is  his  stock- 
in-trade.  And  then  follow  the  words,  "  For 
in  Him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  god 
head  bodily ;  and  in  Him  ye  are  made  full." 

One  sentence  has  been  omitted :  "Abound 
ing  in  thanksgiving."  If  the  walls  of  the 
city  of  God  are  salvation,  her  gates  are 
praise ; 2  and  to  abound  in  thanksgiving  is 
to  have  "  an  abundant  entrance  "  there. 

1  Col.  ii.  7,  Revised  Version.  -  Isa.  lx.  18. 


100  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  x 

Such,  then,  is  the  meaning  of  being  A 
CHRISTIAN. 

But  while  in  apostolic  times  the  converts 
"  received  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord,"  nowadays 
people  "  take  Jesus."  In  this  respect  Ritual 
ism,  Rationalism,  and  Revivalism  are  at  one 
— the  three  R's  by  which  Christianity  is  tra 
vestied.  Ritual  is  often  useful :  too  rational 
we  cannot  be  in  the  religious  sphere  ;  and 
every  true  Christian  delights  in  Revival. 
But  the  "ists"  and  "isms"  are  only 
evil. 

Unlike  the  Ritualist,  the  old  High 
Churchman  was  noted  for  devotion  to  the 
Lord  and  reverence  for  His  name.  And 
his  errors  were  mainly  due  to  a  "  Council 
of  Trent  "  conception  of  the  Church.  With 
most  Evangelicals  that  figment  is  but  a  vague 
theory  ;  while  with  him  it  was  not  only 
Divine  truth,  but  truth  of  principal  import 
ance.  But  errors  and  excesses  springing 
from  a  false  conception  of  the  Church  are 
not  quite  on  the  same  level  as  the  triviali 
ties  and  superstitions  of  mere  religion.  If 
the  Kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  meat  and 


CHAP,  x]      WHO   IS   A   CHRISTIAN  ?  101 

drink,  it  is  certainly  not  in  incense  and 
millinery. 

If  "  taking  Jesus  "  constituted  a  Christian, 
the  present-day  Rationalist  would  have 
an  indisputable  claim  to  the  title.  For 
Rationalism  is  no  longer  a  cloak  for  loose 
living.  The  teaching  of  "  Jesus,"  as  re 
corded  in  the  Gospels,  is  its  code  of  ethics, 
and  the  life  there  portrayed  is  its  practical 
ideal. 

Dr.  Harnack's  "  What  is  Christianity  ? " 
is  an  exquisite  presentation  of  the  system. 
Of  course  a  fallacy  pervades  it.  For  if  the 
Gospels  are  relegated  to  the  category  of 
merely  human  writings,  "  Jesus "  is  as 
obviously  the  creation  of  the  Evangelists 
as,  according  to  the  same  school,  Moses  is 
the  creation  of  the  priests  of  the  later  days 
of  the  monarchy.  Here  is  an  inexorable 
dilemma.  If  the  Fourth  Gospel  is  authen 
tic,  Rationalism  collapses  like  a  house  of 
cards.  And  if  not  authentic,  then  the  fact 
confronts  us  that  this  writer's  "  discourses  " 
(as  Dr.  Harnack  calls  them)  have  through 
out  the  whole  Christian  era  exercised  a 


102  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  x 

wider  and  profounder  influence  upon  the 
hearts  and  minds  of  men  than  the  say 
ings  of  "  Jesus  "  Himself. 

But  let  that  pass.  Dr.  Harnack's  treatise 
is  written  to  remind  us  "  that  a  man  of  the 
name  of  Jesus  Christ "  once  lived  and  taught 
upon  earth.  A  man  of  the  name  of  Judas 
Iscariot  betrayed  him,  and  a  man  of  the 
name  of  Pontius  Pilate  gave  him  up  to  be 
crucified.  And  that  was  the  end  of  him. 
And  yet  in  a  sense  he  lives  ;  for  the  resur 
rection  is  a  beautiful  "  idea,"  and  all  such 
ideas  contain  elements  of  truth.  Not  only 
so,  for  (under  the  influence  of  Spiritualism, 
no  doubt)  the  coarse  infidelity  of  the  past 
has  given  place  to  Rationalism,  and  Ration 
alism  is  not  quite  irrational,  nor  altogether 
devoid  of  sentiment ;  and  therefore  the  very 
miracles  may  now  receive  "  a  more  intelli 
gent  and  benevolent  judgment"  than  of 
old.1  Nor  is  this  all ;  even  the  doctrine  of  the 
Atonement  may  be  accepted,  for  it  "  belongs 
to  a  class  of  ideas "  that  "  respond  to  a 
religious  need."5 

i  p.  24.  2  p.  157. 


CHAP,  x]      WHO    IS   A   CHRISTIAN  ?  103 

This  is  the  sort  of  thing  that  now  passes 
for  Christianity  in  some  of  our  most  popular 
pulpits.  Its  exponents  pose  as  persons  of 
superior  intelligence  and  of  mental  indepen 
dence.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  their  "  religion  " 
is  borrowed  from  Germany,  and  the  only 
element  of  "  independence  "  they  display  is 
their  amazing  folly  in  still  clinging  to  belief 
in  the  Deity  of  Christ.  Which  only  proves 
that  a  Divine  truth  revealed  to  faith  may 
be  degraded  to  the  level  of  a  religious 
superstition.  These  teachers  give  proof 
that  "taking  Jesus"  is  not  a  synonym  for 
"  receiving  Christ." 

"  But,"  some  one  will  demand,  "  do  not 
these  men  live  beautiful  and  useful  lives, 
and  is  not  such  a  life  better  than  the  posses 
sion  of  an  orthodox  creed  ?  "  The  question 
is  legitimate  and  interesting,  but  it  is  quite 
irrelevant  here.  For  unless  the  words  are 
to  be  dismissed  as  meaningless,  "  receiving 
the  Christ "  implies  the  acknowledgment  of 
Him  as  the  One  "  of  whom  Moses  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets,  did  write."  As 

1  John  i.  45. 


104  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  x 

He  said  to  His  disciples  after  His  resurrec 
tion,  "  These  are  My  words  which  I  spake 
unto  you  while  I  was  yet  with  you,  how 
that  all  things  must  needs  be  fulfilled,  which 
are  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  and  the 
prophets,  and  the  Psalms,  concerning  Me." l 
"  The  Law,  the  Prophets,  and  the  Writ 
ings  "  is  the  title-page  of  the  Jewish  Bible. 
And  as  the  Psalter  comes  first  in  the  third 
division  of  the  Canon,  "  the  Psalms  "  stands 
colloquially  for  the  whole.  It  is  as  though 
He  said,  "  Which  are  written  in  all  the 
Scriptures."  This  indeed  is  precisely  the 
expression  used  in  a  preceding  verse : 
"  He  interpreted  to  them  in  all  the 
Scriptures  the  things  concerning  Himself."1 
To  receive  "  the  Christ "  meant  there 
fore  receiving  Him  "  in  the  full  and 
glorious  sense  in  which  that  term  was  pro 
phetically  known. "; 

If  men  to  whom  the  names  of  David  and 
Abraham  in  the  opening  sentence  of  the 
New  Testament  represent  merely  a  brigand 

1  Luke  xxiv.  44,  Revised  Version.  2  Verse  27. 

3  Acts  ii.  35  (Alford,  Greek  Testament). 


CHAP,  x]      WHO   IS   A   CHRISTIAN  ?  105 

chief  and  a  lunar  myth — men  who  have  got 
rid  of  "  Moses,"  and  who  explain  away  all 
the  Messianic  prophecies  and  Psalms,  are  to 
be  called  Christians  because  they  accord 
Him  the  highest  human  homage,  accept 
His  teaching  in  so  far  as  it  commends  itself 
to  them,  and  lead  pure  and  devout  lives, 
then  infidels  of  the  type  of  Renan  and  John 
Stuart  Mill  are  Christians.  And  indeed, 
having  regard  to  the  present  standard  of 
faith  and  clerical  morality,  there  is  no 
reason  why  such  men  should  not  become 
Ministers  of  Christian  Churches  and  Pro 
fessors  of  Christian  Universities.1 

1  The  above  notice  of  Dr.  Harnack's  "  What  is  Chris 
tianity?"  is  based  on  the  author's  reply  to  that  work 
("Christianised  Rationalism"  :  John  F.  Shaw  &  Co.),  a  copy 
of  which  the  German  Emperor  honoured  him  by  accepting' 
with  "  sincere  thanks."  The  page  references  are  to  Mr.  T.  B. 
Saunders's  translation. 

The  Satan  myth  of  the  Christian  religion  is  the  obscene 
monster  of  the  cult  of  ancient  Babylon.  But  the  Satan  of 
Scripture  is  that  marvellous  spiritual  being  who  "  fashions 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light,"  and  whose  ministers  "fashion 
themselves  as  ministers  of  righteousness"  (2  Cor.  xi.  14,  15, 
Revised  Version).  Ignorance  of  this  deludes  people  into 
assuming  that  a  man  of  "  spiritual "  power,  who  is  "  a  minis 
ter  of  righteousness,"  must  be  a  minister  of  Christ.  The  time 
maybe  near  when  "Christian"  pulpits  will  be  occupied  by 


106  "THE   WAYr  [CHAP,  x 

"  Revivalism "  may  be  described  as  the 
parodying  by  natural  methods,  and  in  the 
natural  sphere,  the  results  which,  in  a  true 
revival,  the  Spirit  of  God  produces  in  the 
hearts  and  lives  of  men.  To  attain  this 
end  it  hucksters  Divine  realities,  bringing 
everything  down  to  a  human  level. 

The  subject  is  embarrassing.  For  I  fear 
lest  my  words  should  be  misread  as  though 
they  were  aimed  at  men  who  abundantly 
approve  themselves  as  true  ministers  of 
Christ.  Some  such,  unfortunately,  incur 
the  unmerited  reproach  of  belonging  to  a 
camp  which  is  abhorrent  to  them.  They 
err  grievously,  for  example,  in  copying  the 
Rationalists  and  Revivalists  in  the  manner 
in  which  they  speak  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  In  this  respect  the  habitual  lan 
guage  of  their  lips  belies  the  reverence  of 
their  hearts.  For  not  only  do  they  name 
Him  in  a  way  that  seems  to  savour  of 
undue  freedom,  but  they  foster  this  habit 
in  others  who,  unlike  themselves,  are  de- 
demon-possessed  men.  For  another  popular  error  is  that  of 
supposing  that  evil  spirits  must  be  unclean  spirits.  See 
p.  147,  post. 


CHAP,  x]      WHO   IS   A   CHRISTIAN  ?  107 

void  of  the  worshipping  spirit  of  the  true 
disciple. 

It  is  not  strange  that  Rationalists  should 
habitually  call  Him  "Jesus"  or  "Jesus 
Christ,"  but  that  those  who  believe  in  His 
Deity  should  do  so  gives  proof  how 
thoroughly  the  leaven  of  the  apostasy  has 
spread.  Examples  of,  and  precedents  for, 
this  evil  practice  abound.  Having  regard 
to  the  spirit  of  our  newest  "  Bible  Dic 
tionaries"  and  "  Encyclopaedias,"  and  many 
other  theological  works,  we  are  not  sur 
prised  to  find  that  it  is  of  the  dead  Buddha, 
and  not  of  the  living  Lord,  that  the  writers 
speak.  And  in  their  references  to  our 
Divine  Lord,  even  the  authors  of  books 
of  a  wholly  different  class  generally  convey 
the  impression  of  being  under  the  influence 
of  a  great  personality,  rather  than  of  being 
conscious  of  a  Divine  presence.  They  turn 
our  thoughts  back  to  the  ministry  and  the 
Passion,  but  not  up  to  "the  Living  One," 
who  was  dead  and  is  alive  for  ever  more.1 

In  the  case  of  most  religious  books,  indeed, 

1  Rev.  i.  17,  18,  Revised  Version. 


108  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  x 

Mary's  lament  might  be  written  across 
the  page,  "  They  have  taken  away  my 
Lord."  And  too  often  it  happens  that 
true  ministers  of  the  Gospel  so  speak  of 
Him  as  to  leave  this  sense  of  injury  and 
sadness  in  the  hearts  of  many  of  their 
hearers. 

"Ye  call  Me  'Master,'  and  'Lord,'  and 
ye  say  well"  ought  surely  to  be  enough 
for  His  people.  And  the  significance  of 
the  words  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
Gospels  do  not  record  a  single  instance  in 
which  a  disciple  ever  spoke  of  Him  in  any 
other  way.  Yes,  there  is  a  solitary  excep 
tion.  The  Emmaus  disciples  "  had  trusted 
that  it  had  been  He  which  should  have 
redeemed  Israel."  But  from  that  bright 
dream  they  had  suffered  a  rude  awakening. 
For  the  chief  priests  and  their  rulers  had 
crucified  Him,  and  He  was  no  longer  their 
Lord  and  Master,  but  only  "Jesus  of 
Nazareth."1 

As  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  "  He  was  known 
to  the  world ;  and  if  one  of  the  Jews  had 

1  Luke  xxiv.  19-21. 


CHAP,  x]      WHO    IS    A   CHRISTIAN  ?  109 

been  sent  to  fetch  the  beast  to  cany  him 
in  His  entry  into  Jerusalem,  or  to  bespeak 
the  guest  chamber  for  the  paschal  supper, 
he  would  have  said  that  "  Jesus "  required 
it.  But  His  disciples  declared  themselves 
in  the  very  mention  of  His  Name.  With 
them  it  was,  "  The  Master  saith ; "  "  The 
Lord  hath  need  of  it." l 

Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  In  the 
narrative  of  the  Gospels  He  is  spoken  of 
by  His  personal  name,  because  God  is  the 
narrator.  But  when  the  narrative  intro 
duces  words  spoken  by  the  disciples  as  men, 
whether  addressed  to  Him,  or  to  others 
about  Him,  a  title  of  reverence  is  used. 

The  use  of  the  Lord's  name  in  the  later 
Scriptures  is  a  study  of  very  great  interest 
and  of  principal  importance.  But  it  is  too 
large  a  subject  for  discussion  here.  Suffice 
it  to  urge  that  the  Lord's  express  words, 
and  the  example  set  us  by  His  disciples 
under  His  teaching,  should  be  our  guide 
in  this  respect.  For  even  the  most  elevated 

1  Luke  xix.  31,84;  xxii.  11.  Note  that  the  words  were 
dictated  by  the  Lord  Himself. 


110  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  x 

and  solemn  of  mere  human  utterances  are 
separated  by  an  immeasurable  distance 
from  the  inspired  Scriptures.1 

1  Iu  our  Christian  literature  the  only  guide  known  in 
using  the  names  and  titles  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  euphony,  and 
the  writer's  reverence  (or  irreverence)  of  spirit,  whereas  in 
their  use  in  Scripture  there  is  an  unexplored  mine  of  deep 
and  important  teaching.  Unexplored,  I  say,  for  theology 
ignores  the  subject  altogether.  For  example,  there  is 
definite  significance  in  the  fact  that  the  title  of  Lord  is 
used  only  three  times  of  Christ  in  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews,  and  not  even  once  in  the  Epistle  of  John.  But 
Christians  notice  this  only,  if  at  all,  as  a  plea  for  their 
omitting  the  title  in  naming  Him. 

My  reference  to  this  subject  in  these  pages  is  only  by  way 
of  appeal  to  those  who  err  thoughtlessly  and  by  a  habit 
acquired  by  reading  theological  and  "  Christian  "  literature. 
I  am  not  confounding  them  with  the  Rationalists,  to  whom 
He  is  "  a  man  of  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ,''  nor  yet  with 
that  class  of  men  who  thus  offend  through  native  vulgarity 
and  slovenliness  of  mind  ;  who  call  Him  "  Jesus"  because  it 
costs  less  time  and  breath  than  "  the  Lord  Jesus,"  or  because 
they  have  never  learned  to  render  honour  to  whom  honour 
is  due. 

In  "The  Buddha  of  Christendom"  I  have  dealt  with  this 
whole  subject  at  some  length. 


CHAPTER    XI 

THE     CHRISTIAN     HOPE 

NATURAL  life  gravitates  to  the  grave : 
death  is  its  legitimate  catastrophe.  And 
yet  death  is  none  the  less  an  outrage. 
"  Death  thy  friend  "  is  mere  poetic  senti 
ment.  It  is  not  a  friend  but  an  enemy. 
"  The  last  enemy,"  Scripture  calls  it ;  and 
this  the  human  heart,  so  seldom  in  accord 
with  Scripture,  emphatically  endorses. 

One  of  the  greatest  of  philosophers  has 
said  that  it  is  as  natural  to  die  as  to  be 
born.  Yes,  as  natural  for  the  fallen 
creature  who  lies  under  the  Eden  sentence 
upon  sin.  But  man's  natural  instincts 
rebel  against  the  Divine  decree  that  has 
made  the  grave  the  goal  of  life.  And  the 
higher  and  truer  instincts  of  our  spiritual 
being  respond  to  the  promise  which  raises 
us  above  the  sentence.  The  life  which  is 


"THE    WAYV  [CHAP.  XT 

from  heaven  turns  upward  to  the  God  who 
gave  it. 

The  Christian  has  been  "  begotten  to  a 
living  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus 
Christ  from  the  dead."1  And  the  fulfil 
ment  of  that  hope  awaits  the  coming  of 
the  Lord.  But  here  "  the  Christian  re 
ligion  "  parts  company  with  Christianity. 
For  while  Christendom  believes  that  He 
has  come,  it  refuses  to  believe  that  He  is 
coming.  Or  if  a  "  Second  Advent "  be 
acknowledged  at  all,  it  is  dismissed  as  a 
mere  dogma,  too  vague  and  too  remote 
to  have  any  influence  upon  heart  or  life. 
The  doctrine  of  His  first  coming  is  con 
nected  with  public  facts  of  history,  but 
that  of  His  return  rests  upon  the  bare 
word  of  God.  Therefore  it  is  that  the 
one  is  accepted  while  the  other  is  refused. 

Therefore  it  is  also  that  the  hope  affords 
a  test  whether  belief  in  His  first  coming 
is  genuine  faith  in  God.  For  human  super 
stition  may  fasten  on  Divine  truth,  and 
bring  it  down  to  its  own  level ;  and  the 

i  1  Pet.  i.  3. 


CHAP,  xi]        THE   CHRISTIAN   HOPE         113 

basis  of  "  the  Christian  religion "  (as  con 
trasted  with  vital  Christianity)  is  Divine 
truth  which  has  been  thus  appropriated. 

Scepticism  about  the  promise  of  the 
Lord's  return  is  utterly  unintelligent.  In 
deed,  the  absence  of  such  a  promise  would 
go  far  to  discredit  belief  in  His  resurrection 
and  ascension.  If  it  be  true  that  He  who 
died  on  Calvary  was  raised  from  the  dead, 
and  sojourned  with  His  disciples  on  earth 
for  forty  days  before  He  ascended  to 
Heaven,  the  wonder  is,  not  that  He  is 
coming  back  again,  but  that  His  coming 
is  so  long  delayed. 

The  promise  of  His  first  coming  was 
so  utterly  incredible  that  it  may  well  have 
staggered  faith.  But  now  that  He  has 
been  upon  earth  and  gone  back  to  heaven, 
His  coming  again  seems  but  a  natural 
sequence  to  His  ascension.  So  much  so 
indeed,  that  if  we  were  left  to  reason  out 
the  matter,  we  should  expect  Him  to 
come,  not  once,  but  again  and  again.  And 
this  is  precisely  what  Scripture  tells  its  to 
look  for.  Common  sense  vetoes  the  sug- 

H 


114  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xi 

gestion  that  His  coming  as  Avenger  and 
Judge  is  the  event  described  as  "  that 
blessed  hope."  "  We  are  looking  for  the 
Saviour"  Then  again,  an  intelligent 
child  can  understand  that  the  angels'  words 
to  the  bewildered  disciples  on  the  Mount 
of  the  Ascension2  do  not  relate  to  the 
same  coming  as  the  Apostle's  words  to 
the  sorrowing  Thessalonians.3 

It  is  admitted  that  the  early  Christians 
expected  the  Lord  to  come  during  their 
own  lifetime,  and  that  belief  was  clearly 
based  on  Apostolic  teaching.4  And  this 
being  so,  it  is  certain  there  can  be  nothing 
to  bar  His  coming  in  these  days  of  ours. 
It  is  idle  to  plead  that  certain  events 
foretold  in  prophecy  may  intervene.  To 
maintain  that  they  must  intervene  is  to 
betray  ignorance  of  the  elementary  prin 
ciples  of  prophetic  interpretation.  For 
"  the  times  and  seasons "  belong  to  the 

1  Phil.  iii.  20.          2  Acts  i.  11.          3  1  Thess.  iv.  13-18. 

4  The  words  of  2  Peter  i.  14  afford  striking  proof  of 
this,  else  there  could  be  no  point  or  meaning'  in  the  state 
ment  of  a  special  revelation  to  tell  the  Apostle  that  he 
must  die. 


CHAP,  xi]        THE   CHRISTIAN   HOPE         115 

chronology  of  prophecy,  and  have  to  do 
with  earth  and  the  fortunes  of  the  earthly 
people.1 

But  the  error  which  the  Second  Epistle 
to  the  Thessalonians  was  designed  to  cor 
rect,  is  now  the  creed  of  Christendom ; 
the  coming  of  the  Lord  as  Saviour  is 
confounded  with  "  the  day  of  the  Lord " 

1  The  prophetic  period  relates  to  Israel's  national  existence 
as  God's  people,  and  is  therefore  interrupted  during  this  dis 
pensation  of  the  Church,  when  Israel  is  "  Lo-ammi"  (Hos. 
i.  9).  The  prophetic  period  of  Dan.  ix.  24-27  is  seventy 
weeks  (of  years),  dating  from  the  "going  forth  of  the  com 
mandment  to  rebuild  Jerusalem,"  which  afterwards  occurred 
in  Nehemiah's  time,  i.e.  B.C.  445.  This  period  is  divided 
into  three  parts  of  7 ,  G2,  and  1  =  70.  The  first  reached  to 
the  time  when  the  prophetic  voice  became  silent  in  Judah, 
i.e.  the  date  of  the  Book  of  Malachi.  The  next  period  of 
sixty-two  weeks,  or  434  years,  closed  with  "the  cutting  off 
of  Messiah  "  (verse  2G).  And  the  seventieth  week,  which 
is  all  that  remains  of  the  prophetic  period,  will  not  begin 
to  run  its  course  until  Israel's  national  position  is  restored, 
which  event  will  be  held  to  date  from  the  signing 
of  a  covenant  or  treaty  between  them  and  the  Prince  of 
verse  27,  who,  we  know  from  other  Scriptures,  is  the  last 
great  Emperor  of  Christendom.  The  course  of  unfulfilled 
prophecy  is  tided  back  till  Israel  is  restored  ;  and  not  one 
line  of  Scripture  intervenes  to  bar  the  realisation  of  the 
Church's  hope.  The  scheme  of  prophecy,  with  special  refer 
ence  to  the  seventy  weeks,  is  dealt  with  in  the  author's 
books,  "The  Coming  Prince,"  and  "Daniel  in  the  Critics' 
Den." 


116  "THE   WAY'  [CHAP,  xi 

— the  day  of  wrath — when  He  will  be 
manifested  as  Avenger  and  Judge.  The 
words  of  1  Thessalonians  v.  9  are  definite 
and  striking :  "  God  hath  not  appointed  us 
to  wrath,  but  to  obtain  salvation  by  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  For  "  salvation  "  read 
deliverance,  and  the  meaning  stands  out 
still  more  plainly.  It  is  ours  to  look  for 
ward,  not  to  the  day  of  wrath,  but  to 
obtaining  deliverance  from  that  awful  day 
by  the  fulfilment  of  the  promise  of  the 
preceding  chapter. 

To  appreciate  the  full  significance  of 
that  promise  we  must  take  note  of  the 
circumstances  in  which  the  Epistle  was 
written.  While  the  Apostle  was  still  at 
Athens  he  received  such  grave  tidings 
from  Thessalonica  that  he  deemed  it  neces 
sary  to  send  Timotheus  back  there  at 
once.  And  what  led  to  the  writing  of 
the  Epistle  was  the  report  which  Timothy 
brought  him  after  he  had  moved  to  Cor 
inth.  What  can  have  been  the  trouble 
which  produced  effects  so  momentous  ? 

His  stay  in  Athens  was  admittedly  briet. 


CHAP,  xi]        THE   CHRISTIAN   HOPE         117 

That,  in  such  a  small  community  as  the 
Thessalonian  Church,  any  deaths  should 
have  occurred  during  the  interval  was 
somewhat  remarkable.  And  that  a  few 
deaths  in  the  ordinary  course  of  nature 
would  have  so  shattered  their  faith  as  to 
imperil  the  results  of  the  Apostle's  labours 
among  them,1  is  quite  incredible.  How 
then  can  the  mystery  be  explained  ? 

We  learn  from  the  Epistle  that  a  storm 
of  persecution  had  passed  over  them.  And 
the  deaths  they  mourned  were  evidently 
connected  with  it.  The  inference  there 
fore  is  obvious  that  some  of  their  number 
had  been  martyred.  They  had  been  told 
that  the  Lord  had  "  all  power  in  heaven 
and  upon  earth,"  and  would  never  forsake 
His  people.  But  He  had  left  them  a  prey 
to  their  enemies.  Either  the  doctrine  was 
false,  or  else  their  lost  ones  had  fallen 
under  Divine  displeasure,  and  were  thus 
doubly  lost  to  them.  So  the  Apostle  be 
gins  by  reminding  them  of  the  warnings 
he  had  given  them — warnings  which,  doubt- 

1  See  chap.  iii.  5. 


118  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xi 

less,  had  been  as  unheeded  as  warnings 
always  are  in  bright  days  of  gladness  and 
hope.  And  then  he  goes  on  to  give  them 
a  special  message  of  comfort. 

Let  us  here  appeal  to  some  pagan  pundit 
who  will  translate  the  Greek  for  us  with 
out  any  doctrinal  bias.  He  will  tell  us 
that  the  Apostle  deplored  the  ignorance 
which  led  the  Thessalonians  to  grieve  with 
a  hopeless  grief  over  "  the  sleeping  ones." 
"  For,"  he  proceeds,  "  if  we  believe  that 
Jesus  died  and  rose  again,  even  so  them  also 
which  were  put  to  sleep  through  Jesus  will 
God  bring  with  Him."  Which  means  that 
it  was  by  His  agency  they  were  put  to  sleep, 
or,  in  other  words,  that  He  was  the  cause  of 
their  being  put  to  death.  For  so  our  pundit 
will  explain  this  plain  and  simple  phrase. 

A  new  light  will  now  illumine  the  whole 
passage.  For  this  was  precisely  what  must 
have  perplexed  and  distressed  the  Thessa- 
lonian  Church.  It  was  faithfulness  to  the 
Lord  that  had  brought  all  the  trouble  upon 
them.  They  had  been  true  to  Him,  but  He 
had  failed  them.  The  mystery  of  a  silent 


CHAP,  xi]        THE   CHRISTIAN   HOPE         119 

heaven  which  weighs  so  heavily  even  upon 
us,  to  whom  the  whole  story  of  the  Church's 
sorrows  is  an  open  page,  may  well  have 
staggered  faith  in  those  early  days.  And 
mark  the  infinite  grace  and  exquisite  ten 
derness  with  which  the  Lord  deals  with  the 
troubles  and  trials,  and  even  with  the  doubts 
and  murmurs,  of  His  people.  It  is  as  though 
He  said  to  them,  "  I  admit  all  you  say ;  I 
accept  the  responsibility  for  their  having 
been  put  to  death.  But  was  not  I  Myself 
put  to  death  ?  And  so  surely  as  I  was 
raised  from  the  dead,  they,  too,  shall  be 
raised.  God  will  bring  them  back  to  you 
with  Me  when  I  return.  There  will  be  no 
interval  of  separation ;  nor  will  you,  the 
living  who  remain  till  I  come,  have  any 
advantage  over  them." 

Could  this  have  been  written  if  His  re 
turn  had  been  fixed  as  a  far  distant  event  in 
the  Divine  chronology  ?  Could  it  have 
been  written  if  a  Divine  decree  had  inter 
posed  the  Great  Tribulation  of  Old  and 
New  Testament  prophecy  before  His  com 
ing  ?  The  accepted  theory  that  the  Apostle 


120  "  THE   WAY '  [CHAP,  xi 

blundered  is  a  disgrace  to  theology.  Such 
a  blunder  would  discredit  the  whole  Apos 
tolic  writings.  But  what  we  have  here  is 
not  merely  the  belief  of  an  inspired  Apostle, 
though  such  a  belief  ought  not  to  be  lightly 
dismissed.  "  We  are  saying  this  to  you  in 
the  word  of  the  Lord,"  he  declares.  And 
this  "  schoolboy  translation "  may  suggest 
what  the  Greek  original  explicitly  conveys, 
that  he  was  communicating  a  definite  mes 
sage  which  the  Lord  had  entrusted  to  him 
for  His  sorrowing  people. 

And  the  words  were  clearly  meant  to 
awake  in  them  the  hope  of  His  near  re 
turn.  How,  then,  can  the  lapse  of  centuries 
be  accounted  for  ?  The  forty  years'  sojourn 
of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  may  suggest  the 
answer.  Theirs  was  a  true  hope  who  fled 
from  Egypt,  with  their  faces  toward  the 
promised  land  which  lay  but  a  few  days' 
march  across  the  desert ;  and  yet  two  men 
alone  of  all  that  host  ever  planted  foot  upon 
the  soil  of  Palestine.1  And  why  ?  Because 

1  Of  the  "  men  of  war  "  of  the  Exodus,  Caleb  and  Joshua 
alone  entered  Canaan  (Num.  xiv.  28-  33). 


CHAP,  xi]        THE   CHRISTIAN   HOPE         121 

they  let  slip  the  hope,  and  in  heart  turned 
back  to  Egypt.  And  can  any  one  read  the 
later  Epistles,  and  the  Revelation,  and  fail 
to  mark  how  closely  the  Christian  Church 
followed  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Jewish 
people  ?  Can  we  wonder,  then,  that  "  the 
same  example  of  unbelief"  should  reap 
the  same  results  ?  Apostasy  on  earth,  and 
long-suffering  in  heaven,  afford  the  true 
solution  of  the  mystery  of  long  centuries  of 
desert  wandering  and  trial  for  a  Church 
which,  in  its  pristine  purity  and  life,  was 
called  to  wait  for,  and  expect  with  joyful 
confidence,  its  absent  Lord's  return. 

The  Thessalonians  "  turned  to  God  from 
idols  to  serve  the  living  and  true  God,  and 
to  ivait  for  His  Son  from  heaven." l  And 
so  absolutely  is  this  attitude  of  soul  the 
proof  and  test  of  faithfulness,  that  the  crown 
of  faithfulness  is  declared  to  be  for  '4  them 
that  love  His  appearing."  "  The  grace  of 
God  has  appeared,  teaching  us  that  we 
should  live  looking  for  that  blessed  hope ;  " 
and  if  Christians  are  not  looking  for  it,  it  is 

1  1  Thess.  i.  0,  10. 


122  "  THE    WAY "  [CHAP,  xi 

because  grace  has  not  had  its  due  influence 
upon  their  hearts. 

It  is  a  hope  to  strengthen  amid  trials,  to 
cheer  in  sorrow,  to  solemnise  in  days  of 
prosperity  and  ease,  and  to  keep  us  through 
the  even  tenor  of  an  uneventful  life.  "  Re 
joice,  inasmuch  as  ye  are  partakers  of 
Christ's  sufferings,"  was  Peter's  word  to 
the  saints  in  view  of  a  "  fiery  trial "  coming, 
"  that,  when  His  glory  shall  be  revealed, 
ye  may  be  glad  also  with  exceeding  joy." 
"  Therefore  comfort  one  another  with  these 
words,"  expressed  the  purpose  with  which 
Paul  unfolded  the  doctrine  to  the  Thessa- 
lonians.  And  it  needs  no  flight  of  fancy  to 
picture  the  "  beloved  disciple  "  taking  leave  of 
some  happy  home  circle  where  peace  and 
contentment  reigned,  with  the  words,  "  And 
now,  little  children,  abide  in  Him ;  that, 
when  He  shall  appear,  we  may  have  con 
fidence,  and  not  be  ashamed  before  Him 
at  His  coming."1 

But  the  hope  has  another  aspect ;  and  it 
is  one  which  claims  prominence  here,  not 

1  1  John  ii.  28. 


CHAP,  xi]         THE    CHRISTIAN    HOPE 

only  as  being  the  most  practical,  but  also 
the  least  noticed,  application  of  the  truth  of 
His  appearing.  With  most  of  us  heaven  is 
such  a  fools'  paradise  that  it  has  no  influence 
upon  our  life  on  earth.  Hearts  may  be  filled 
with  longings  for  the  rest  and  glory  it  will 
bring;  but  there  is  nothing  in  it  for  the 
conscience.  For  death  is  to  wipe  out  for 
ever  all  memories  of  earth,  and  the  white 
robes  and  harps  of  gold  and  ever-swelling 
hymn  are  to  banish  every  thought  of  our 
sojourn  here,  just  as  a  midnight  dream  is 
lost  when  the  sleeper  awakes  to  the  sunlight 
of  a  new  day.  What  a  fools'  paradise,  to 
be  sure !  For  he  to  whom  yesterday  is  a 
blank  is  but  a  fool,  and  in  entering  such  a 
heaven  we  should  pass  from  a  higher  to  a 
lower  elevation,  intellectually  and  morally. 

Strange  thoughts  they  have  of  heaven 
who  think  that  Martha  and  Mary  could 
forget  the  scene  around  their  brother's 
grave,  or  the  Magdalene  the  sins  by  which 
she  proved  and  gauged  the  depths  of  grace ; 
that  Paul  will  ever  cease  to  testify  that  once 
he  was  a  blasphemer,  or  Peter  to  recall  his 


124  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xi 

denial  of  his  Lord.  As  though  the  saints 
of  God  who  here  have  learned  to  love  and 
trust  Him  by  the  remembrance  of  the  many 
sins  forgiven,  and  of  the  waywardness  and 
wanderings  through  which  His  grace  has 
kept  them,  shall,  the  moment  their  eyes 
behold  Him,  be  swept  into  a  stream  that  is 
to  swamp  their  individuality  for  ever,  and, 
in  destroying  their  memories  of  earth,  to 
destroy  the  special  emphasis  with  which  on 
earth  they  praised  Him.  McCheyne's  well- 
known  hymn  suggests  a  truer,  healthier 
thought : — 

"  When  this  passing  world  is  done, 
When  has  sunk  yon  glaring  sun, 
When  1  stand  with  Christ  in  glory, 
Looking  o'er  life  s finished  story, 
Then,  Lord,  shall  I  fully  know — 
Not  till  then — how  much  I  owe." 

As  the  traveller  ascends  some  mountain 
side,  each  turning  in  the  path  shuts  out 
from  view  the  way  behind  him  ;  but  when 
the  summit  has  been  reached  he  sees  his 
track  mapped  out  from  first  to  last,  and 
can  in  thought  retrace  his  journey  even  to 
the  far-off  village  he  set  out  from.  And 


CHAP,  xi]         THE    CHRISTIAN    HOPE          125 

such  shall  be  the  change  from  earth  to 
heaven.  In  the  ceaseless  vicissitudes  and 
toils  of  life  the  narrow  present  too  often 
fills  our  thoughts,  and  the  past  slips  from 
us  as  each  "  to-day  "  falls  back  among  the 
forgotten  "  yesterdays " ;  but  when  the 
great  to-morrow  comes  we  shall  remem 
ber  all  the  way  which  the  Lord  our  God 
has  led  us,1  and  at  every  reminiscence  of 
it  we  shall  bless  the  Lord  our  God.2 

1  Deut.  viii.  2. 

2  With  reference  to  1  Thess.  iv.  13-17,  see  Appendix,  Note 
II.  (p.  172,  post). 


CHAPTER   XII 

THE    INTERMEDIATE    STATE 

DEATH  is  an  outrage,  and  all  healthy  life 
reaches  out  toward  what  lies  beyond  it. 
By  the  resurrection  of  Christ  the  Christian 
has  been  "  begotten  to  a  living  hope." l  For 
not  only  has  Christ  triumphed  over  death, 
but  He  has  given  the  victory  to  us.  By 
His  own  resurrection  He  has  become  the 
firstfruits  of  all  them  that  sleep.  Not 
that  the  resurrection  itself  is  the  Christian's 
hope.  The  hope  is  that  which  the  resur 
rection  is  to  bring,  but  which  will  be 
realised  apart  from  death  and  resurrection 
by  those  who  shall  be  living  upon  earth  at 
the  coming  of  the  Lord. 

But  what  of  the  intermediate  state  ?  Life 
on  earth,  though  full  of  mystery,  lies  open 
to  us ;  and  "  we  know  that  when  He  shall 


1  Pet.  i.  3. 

126 


CHAP,  xii]       INTERMEDIATE   STATE         127 

appear  we  shall  be  like  Him,  for  we  shall 
see  Him  as  He  is."  "  Yes,"  some  one  will 
plead,  "  all  this  we  know ;  but  what  we 
want  to  know  is  what  lies  between  ?  We 
have  seen  the  passing  of  loved  ones.  We 
have  heard  their  last  words.  We  have 
watched  them  as  their  last  look  of  recogni 
tion  ended  in  the  dull  vacant  stare  of  death. 
But  what  is  '  death '  ?  They  are  fallen 
asleep  in  Christ,  we  read,  but  what  does 
this  mean  ?  Is  it  the  Nirvana  of  the 
Buddhist  in  a  Christian  dress  ?  Have  these 
lost  ones  practically  ceased  to  exist  ?  Is  all 
the  interval  between  death  and  resurrection 
but  a  blank  ?  What  is  their  condition 
now  ? " 

If  we  are  prepared  to  accept  what  the 
Bible  teaches,  and  to  refuse  all  besides,  we 
shall  find  that  many  popular  beliefs  upon 
the  subject  must  be  dismissed  as  sentiment ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  real  per 
plexities  and  griefs  which  distress  so  many 
sorrowing  Christians  are  largely  due  to 
ignorance  or  neglect  of  Scripture.  To 
begin  with,  the  dead  can  have  no  share  in 


128  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xii 

the  activities  of  "  the  higher  service  above  " ; 
and  "  harps  "  and  "  crowns  "  and  manifested 
glory  must,  for  them,  await  the  resurrection. 
But  when  we  are  told  that  their  "  sleep " 
can  only  mean  a  state  of  absolute  uncon 
sciousness,  the  question  arises  whether  this 
may  not  be  the  merest  theory,  a  theory, 
moreover,  which  may  be  challenged  even 
on  the  basis  of  human  philosophy. 

But  "  what  saith  the  Scripture  ? "  In  the 
vision  of  "  the  fifth  seal,"  we  find  "  the  souls 
of  them  that  were  slain  for  the  Word  of 
God,"  l  crying  for  judgment  on  those  who 
had  shed  their  blood.  This,  no  doubt,  is 
but  a  vision.  But  the  visions  of  the  Reve 
lation  are  given  to  instruct  and  not  to  mis 
lead  us,  and  this  vision  clearly  teaches  that 
the  disembodied  dead  are  alive  to  the  events 
of  their  sojourn  here.  Nor  need  we  appeal 
to  the  facts  of  spiritualism — facts  which  its 
many  frauds  do  not  destroy — to  prove  that 
spirit  may  have  intercourse  with  spirit,  apart 
altogether  from  the  body.  Indeed,  if  we 
had  not  agreed  to  appeal  only  to  the  Scrip- 

1  Rev.  vi.  9,  10. 


CHAP,  xii]       INTERMEDIATE   STATE         129 

tures,  it  might  be  argued  that  in  regard  to 
such  intercourse  the  body  may  be  a  hindrance 
and  not  a  help. 

When  the  Apostle  Paul  records  that  he 
was  "  caught  up  into  Paradise,  and  heard 
unspeakable  words,"  he  says  expressly, 
"  Whether  in  the  body,  I  cannot  tell ;  or 
whether  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell." 
It  is  absolutely  certain  therefore  that  he 
believed  in  "  the  possibility  of  consciousness 
and  receptivity  in  a  disembodied  state." 

His  words  may  be  connected  with  his 
martyrdom  at  Lystra.2  Stoning  as  prac 
tised  by  the  Jews  was  a  terrible  death. 
And  after  the  stoning  his  murderers  dragged 
him  out  of  the  city.  And  though  both  the 
Jews  and  the  disciples  believed  him  to  be 
dead,  there  may  have  been  nothing  ex 
traordinary  in  the  fact  of  his  recovery.  Uut 
what  the  narrative  records  is  altogether 
extraordinary.  We  are  told,  not  that  he 
was  carried  into  the  town,  and  slowly 
nursed  back  to  life,  but  that  "  as  the  dis- 

1  2  Cor.  xii.  2-4.     See  Alford  in  lw-o. 
2  Acts  xiv.  19. 

I 


130  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xii 

ciples  stood  round  about  him,  he  rose  up, 
and  came  into  the  city  "  ;  and  the  very  next 
day  he  travelled  to  Derbe.  That  his  re 
covery  was  miraculous  is  clear,  and  he  may 
well  have  remained  in  doubt  whether  he 
had  not  actually  passed  the  gates  of  death, 
and  been  called  back  to  life  to  fulfil  his 
ministry.  But  the  fact  remains  that  he 
never  knew  whether  it  was  as  a  living  man 
or  as  a  disembodied  spirit  that  he  received 
that  amazing  revelation  of  which  he  speaks. 
Let  us  read  this  in  the  light  of  what  he 
has  already  said  in  the  fifth  chapter.  He 
there  enumerates  three  several  conditions 
of  existence — the  "  burdened  "  state  of  life 
in  the  body,  the  "  naked "  state  in  which 
death  leaves  us,  and  the  "  clothed-upon " 
state  which  is  our  proper  destiny.  The 
"  groan "  of  the  "  burdened  "  state  is  not 
a  morbid  craving  for  death,  but  a  longing 
for  the  realisation  of  that  for  which  God 
"  hath  wrought  us,"  and  of  which  the  gift 
of  the  Spirit  is  an  earnest.  But  to  be 
"  at  home  in  the  body "  is  to  be  "  absent 
from  the  Lord,"  and  to  be  "absent  from 


CHAP.  XTI]       INTERMEDIATE   STATE          131 

the  body "  is  to  be  "  at  home  with  the 
Lord."  And  to  be  at  home  with  the  Lord 
is  better  than  to  be  "  burdened "  here. 
For  this,  therefore,  he  expresses  a  prefer 
ence.1  But  as  the  second  verse  teaches,  it  is 
the  "earnest  desire" — the  longing  of  the  spiri 
tual  Christian — "  to  be  clothed  upon  with 
our  house  which  is  from  heaven  " ;  that  is, 
with  the  glorified  body  that  awaits  us. 

The  "  beliefs "  of  such  an  one  as 
the  Apostle  Paul  no  one  may  lightly 
dismiss ;  but  here  we  are  not  dealing 
merely  with  his  beliefs,  but  with  his 
teaching  by  Divine  inspiration.  And  this 
much  is  clear  and  certain,  that  at  death  the 
redeemed  sinner  passes  into  the  presence 
of  the  Lord,  not  in  some  vague  Pantheistic 
sense,  but  in  a  sense  which  implies  the 
conscious  enjoyment  of  His  presence. 

This  is  confirmed  again  by  the  Apostle's 
words  to  the  Philippians :  "  To  me  to  live 
is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  There  is 
immense  significance  here  in  the  change 
of  tense,  a  change  which  may  be  indi- 

1  "  Willing  rather,"  verse  8. 


132  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xn 

cated  by  the  somewhat  un-English  render 
ing  "  To  live  is  Christ ;  to  have  died  is 
gain."  To  hold  that  death  is  gain  is  the 
cowardly  and  evil  creed  of  suicides.  Such 
a  thought  is  foreign,  not  only  to  Christian 
teaching,  but  to  the  character  of  Paul. 
Can  any  one  imagine  that  such  a  man 
would  have  deemed  it  "  gain "  to  escape, 
even  from  a  Roman  prison,  by  a  plunge 
into  "  a  sea  of  stagnant  idleness " !  Far 
different  was  his  thought  as  he  balanced 
the  benefits  of  "  departing,"  or  of  "  abiding 
in  the  flesh."  "  To  depart "  *  was  "  to  be 
with  Christ " ;  and  this,  he  declared,  was 
"far  better."  Such  words  would  savour 
of  the  merest  sentiment  if  "  the  inter- 

1  In  Dr.  Bullinger's  Lexicon  this  word  is  construed  as  in 
Luke  xii.  36 — the  only  other  passage  where  the  verb  occurs — 
"  the  return,  viz.  of  Christ."  But  that  this  is  not  the  mean 
ing  of  it  here  is  proved  conclusively  by  verse  24,  which  shows 
that  what  he  was  thinking  of  was  a  departing  that  involved 
separation  from  the  Philippians,  and  leaving  them  on  earth 
without  his  ministry  and  help,  a  consideration  that  could 
not  have  arisen  if  his  thought  had  been  of  the  Lord's  return  ; 
for  then  all  would  have  been  taken  away  together.  The  TO 
upuXvtrat  is  clearly  the  dvd\varis  of  2  Tim.  iv.  6.  It  is  used,  as 
Dr.  Bullinger  tells  us,  of  "  the  breaking-up  of  a  banquet,  and 
also  of  the  body"  :  whence  our  English  word  "analysis." 


CHAP,  xnj       INTERMEDIATE   STATE         133 

mediate  state "  were  not  one  of  conscious 
enjoyment  of  the  Lord's  presence. 

Lastly,  we  have  the  teaching  of  the  Lord 
Himself.  And  His  teaching  is  clear  and 
conclusive.  From  the  parable  of  the  rich 
man  and  Lazarus  we  learn  that,  immedi 
ately  after  death,  the  lost  are  in  suffering, 
and  the  redeemed  are  "  comforted."  But, 
we  are  told,  the  parable  is  based  upon 
Rabbinical  beliefs.  Its  framework  may 
possibly  be  thus  explained,  but  this  affords 
no  warrant  or  excuse  for  rejecting  or 
evading  the  truth  that  it  was  given  speci 
ally  to  teach.  Nor  will  it  avail  to  plead 
that  the  "  flame,"  and  "  Abraham's  bosom," 
are  figurative  expressions.  Figures  must 
be  either  true  or  false,  and  the  test  of 
truth  is  whether  they  represent  realities. 
One  who  lives  for  this  world  passes  at 
death  to  a  state  of  suffering ;  and  one 
who  has  chosen  God  is  "  comforted." 
There  is  no  question  here  of  the  award 
of  the  Day  of  Judgment.  In  the  one  case 
as  in  the  other  the  after  death  condition 
is  the  sequel  of  the  great  life-choice. 


134  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xn 

The  parable  was  the  Lord's  answer  to 
the  ridicule  which  the  Pharisees  cast  upon 
His  solemn  words,  "  Ye  cannot  serve  God 
and  mammon " :  can  we  tolerate  the 
thought  that  He  was  merely  scoring  a 
point  against  them  by  appealing  to  their 
own  superstitions  and  false  beliefs  ? l 

The  question  at  issue  resolves  itself 
into  this,  whether  God  is  really  the  God 
of  the  departed,  or  whether,  for  the  time, 
they  have  practically  ceased  to  be.  And 
here  again  the  Lord's  teaching  is  definite 
and  full.  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the 
dead  but  of  the  living,"  He  declared ;  and 
in  proof  of  it  He  cited  the  words  spoken 
to  Moses  at  the  bush,  "  I  am  the  God 
of  Abraham  and  the  God  of  Isaac  and 
the  God  of  Jacob."  The  force  of  this  is 
lost  if  we  take  it  as  merely  an  assertion 
that  God  was  the  Patriarchs'  God  when 
they  lived  on  earth,  and  that  He  will  be 
again  their  God  at  the  resurrection.  The 
Lord's  use  of  these  words  was  to  teach 
that,  in  the  sense  in  which  the  Sadducees 

1  See  Chapter  III.  ante. 


CHAP,  xn]       INTERMEDIATE   STATE         135 

understood  death,  the  Patriarchs  were  not 
dead  but  living.  "  For,"  He  adds,  "  He 
is  not  a  God  of  dead  men,  but  of  living 
men ;  for  all  live  unto  Him.'" 

But  where  are  they  ?  some  one  perhaps 
will  querulously  demand.  To  faith  the 
question  is  already  answered  by  the  assur 
ance  that  they  are  "  with  Christ."  When 
the  Lord  comes,  we  are  told,  God  will 
bring  them  "  with  Him.'"  For  He  died 
for  us  "  that  whether  we  wake  or  sleep 
we  should  live  together  with  Him.'" 
"  Thou  shalt  be  with  Me  in  paradise " 
was  His  promise  to  the  dying  thief. 

But  does  the  "  where "  refer  to  locality 
in  space  ?  "  Thou  fool "  is  the  answer 
given  to  the  question  "  How  are  the 
dead  raised  up,  and  with  what  body 
do  they  come  ? "  And  no  better  answer 
can  be  given  here.  Heaven  is  popularly 
supposed  to  be  somewhere  beyond  the 
stars.  But  the  Lord  went  up  to  heaven  in 
a  cloud.  And  when  the  martyr  Stephen's 
eyes  were  opened,  he  "  looked  up  stead  - 

1  Matt.  xxii.  32  ;  Luke  xx.  38. 


136  "THE   WAY'1  [CHAP.  XH 

fastly  into  heaven,  and  saw  the  glory  of 
God,  and  Jesus  standing  at  the  right  hand 
of  God."  At  the  Lord's  call  Lazarus  came 
from  the  tomb  as  instantly  as  if  the  living 
man  had  been  imprisoned  there.  And 
Jairus'  daughter  "  rose  up  immediately," 
just  as  though  He  had  awakened  her  from 
sleep. 

If  we  refuse  to  believe  that  the  spirits 
with  whom  spiritualists  traffic  are  the 
departed  dead,  it  is  not  because  there  is 
anything  essentially  impossible  in  their 
being  close  at  hand,  but  because  Scripture 
does  not  warrant  the  belief  that  they  are 
permitted  to  appear  to  us,  and  the  facts 
of  spiritualistic  seances  point  to  the  con 
clusion  that  demons  personate  them.  And 
it  is  the  appeal  to  Scripture  which  leads 
us  to  reject  the  Nirvana  theory  that  the 
dead  are  sunk  in  an  unconscious  sleep.  We 
should  long  to  believe  that  such  is  the  con 
dition  of  the  impenitent ;  and  as  for  the 
redeemed,  there  is  nothing  in  the  thought 
to  distress  the  most  sensitive  mind  or  the 
most  loving  heart. 


CHAP,  xnj       INTERMEDIATE   STATE         137 

Here  then  is  the  answer  which  Holy 
Scripture  gives  to  the  fears  and  longings 
of  those  who  mourn  the  loss  of  loved 
ones  gone  from  earth.  They  are  "  with 
Christ,  which  is  far  better " ;  they  are 
"  comforted "  by  Him  who  is  "  the  God 
of  all  comfort "  ;  and  though  dead  to  earth, 
they  are  "  living  unto  Him." 

"  Thou  wilt  not  sever  us,  O  Lord  our  God, 

In  Thy  blest  mansions.      On  earth's  dreary  sod 
Our  hearts  are  torn  with  partings.     One  by  one 
The  loved  and  cherish'd  leave  us.     Every  stone 
The  cold,  damp  cemetery  holds,  is  faced 
With  lines  that  find  their  parallels  deep  traced 
Within  our  souls.     Thus  works  Thy  chisel,  Lord, 
In  strokes  severe.     Yet  be  Thy  name  adored 
For  all  Thy  dealings  !     In  Thy  purpose  deep 
A  blessing  lies,  unscann'd  by  us  who  weep 
Amid  these  shadows.     Night  will  soon  be  past — 
The  cloudy  night  of  time  that  ends  at  last 
In  heaven's  bright  morning.     Yet  a  little  while, 
And  we  shall  greet  that  blissful  morning's  smile 
With  hallelujahs.     Then  Thy  love's  deep  thought 
Shall  be  unfolded.     All  Thy  blood  has  bought 
Shall  come  with  Thee;  and  each  we  loved  and  knew, 
And  mourn'd  for  here,  shall  rise  upon  our  view 
In  brighter,  lovelier  form — akin  to  Thine — 
Thy  work,  Lord  Jesus  ! — perfect,  pure,  divine  ! — 
Thus  re-united,  through  eternal  days 
Our  joy  shall  be  Thyself- — our  theme  Thy  praise  !  " 


CHAPTER  XIII 

CONCLUSION 

"DON'T  be  a  fool."  Such  a  phrase  may 
seem  strangely  uncouth,  and  utterly  un 
worthy,  as  a  refrain  to  the  note  struck 
in  one  of  the  earliest  pages  of  this  book. 
And  yet  it  is  but  a  colloquial  rendering 
of  an  Apostolic  precept  addressed  to  the 
Ephesian  Church.  "  Be  not  unwise,"  our 
translators  give  it ;  but  "  fools "  is  their 
rendering  of  the  same  word  elsewhere : 
"  Be  not  unwise,  but  understanding  what 
the  will  of  the  Lord  is."1 

The  use  made  of  the  passage  in  Eccle- 
siastes,  above  referred  to,2  about  paying 
vows,  illustrates  the  need  of  this  Apos 
tolic  exhortation.  For  no  man  of  gene 
rous  mind  would  be  guilty  of  the  mingled 
cruelty  and  meanness  which,  in  this  matter, 

1  Eph.  v.  17.  2  Eccles.  v.  1-5.     See  p.  8,  ante. 

138 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  139 

"  the  Catholic  Church  "  attributes  to  God. 
The  enforcement  of  life  vows,  moreover, 
is  not  only  abhorrent  to  the  spirit  of 
Christianity,  but  opposed  even  to  the 
letter  of  the  Mosaic  law.1 

If  the  Apostle's  words  be  construed  pre 
cisely  as  he  wrote  them  they  will  read 
thus :  "  Take  heed  then  how  ye  walk 
strictly,  not  as  unwise  but  as  wise,  buy 
ing  up  for  yourselves  the  opportunity,  be 
cause  the  days  are  evil :  on  this  account 
be  not  fools,  but  understand  what  the  will 
of  the  Lord  is." 

There  are  different  types  of  folly  in  the 


1  If  ail  Israelite  who  bad  made  a  vow  desired  to  be  released 
from  it,  God  did  not  bold  bim  to  it.     Whatever  the  devoted 
thing  might  be — whether  the  man  himself,  or  his  house,  or 
his  land,  or  his  beast — its  capitalised  value  was  estimated, 
and  on  payment  of  that  sum  with  a  definitely  specified  addi 
tion,  the  vow  was  at  an  end  (Lev.  xxvii.).    The  law  has  passed 
away,  with  the  dispensation  to  which  it  belonged  ;  but  the 
Divine  principle  underlying  it  remains    for   our   guidance. 
And  the  principle  is,  that  God's  interests  must  not  suffer. 
Suppose,  e.g.,  that  a  Christian  who,  for  the  sake  of  God's 
work,  makes  a  vow  of  celibacy,  desires  to  be  released  from  it, 
he  is  to  see  to  it  that,  by  increased  faithfulness  in  his  changed 
circumstances,  God's  work  shall  not  lose,  but  gain. 

2  This   is   Alford's   rendering  (Greek  Testament,  Eph.   v. 
15-17),  save  that  for  "fools"  he  reads  "senseless.1' 


140  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

Christian  life.  The  man  who  walks  care 
fully  is  as  really  a  fool  as  the  man  who 
walks  carelessly,  if  with  all  his  care  he 
is  ignorant  of  the  Divine  will.  And  it 
is  this  kind  of  folly  that  often  does  the 
most  harm.  For  while  the  "  inconsistent " 
Christian,  who  openly  leaves  the  path,  is 
regarded  as  an  outsider,  the  earnest  re 
ligionist  who  is  wanting  in  intelligence 
misrepresents  God  and  misleads  men. 

In  no  sphere,  indeed,  is  the  exhortation 
which  heads  this  chapter  more  needed. 
For  in  all  that  pertains  to  religion,  men 
seem  ready  to  take  leave  not  only  of  the 
Bible,  but  of  their  brains.  And  yet  a 
book  might  be  written  on  the  appeals 
which  Scripture  makes  to  that  uncommon 
quality  called  common  sense.1  In  ad 
dressing  the  Athenians,  for  example,  the 
Apostle  Paul  appealed  to  it  in  proof  that 
"  God  who  made  the  world  and  all  things 
that  are  therein  "  does  not  live  in  a  house  of 
stone  or  brick,  "  neither  is  served  with  men's 

1  Our  Lord  Himself  appealed  to  it.     See,  e.g.,  Matt.  xv. 
16-20  ;  Luke  xii.  57. 


CHAP,  xiii]  CONCLUSION  141 

hands  as  though  He  needed  anything." 
And  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  he 
appeals  to  it  when  enjoining  that  even 
true  spiritual  impulses,  and  the  exercise 
of  genuine  spiritual  gifts,  are  to  be  made 
subordinate  to  the  practical  purpose  of 
edifying  others.  "  Let  all  things  be  done 
unto  edifying,"  and  "  Let  all  things  be 
done  decently  and  in  order : "  What  are 
these  maxims  but  an  appeal  to  the  ordi 
nary  intelligence  of  spiritual  men  ? 

And  the  great  principle  enunciated  in 
the  fifteenth  chapter,  that  the  natural  takes 
precedence  of  the  spiritual,3  has  a  wide  and 
general  application.  Natural  relationships, 
for  example,  have  priority  over  spiritual 
relationships.  Husband,  father,  master  ; 
wife,  child,  servant ;  these  are  not  merged 
in  the  higher  and  closer  bond  of  oneness 
in  Christ, — but  on  the  contrary,  unless 
where  loyalty  to  the  Lord  is  involved, 
they  take  precedence  of  it. 

1  Acts  xvii.  24,  25.  a  1  Cor.  xiv.  20,  40. 

3  "That  is  not  first  which  is  spiritual,  but  that  which  is 
natural"  (1  Cor.  xv.  46,  R.V.). 


142  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

Man's  ruin  by  the  fall  does  not  destroy 
the  fact  that  he  is  God's  creature.  The 
word  "natural,"  therefore,  has  a  double 
meaning.  It  may  stand  for  what  is  right 
and  good,  as  well  as  for  what  is  evil.  But 
Christians  forget  this ;  and  as  the  result 
they  often  become  unreal  through  wishing 
to  become  spiritual.  A  "  sanctimonious  " 
tone  of  speech,  for  example,  and  a  phrase 
ology  that  savours  of  cant,  are  studiously 
acquired  by  many  as  being  more  in  keeping 
with  truth  and  holiness  than  plain  words 
spoken  in  a  natural  voice.  In  this  matter, 
as  in  many  another  that  might  be  specified, 
the  Christian  cannot  be  too  "  natural."  l 

But  while  ordinary  intelligence  might 
save  us  from  many  of  the  follies  of  what 

1  Clergymen  and  preachers  generally  are  great  offenders 
in  this  respect.  Whether  with  Church  dignitaries  in  cathe 
dral  pulpits,  or  humble  "street-preachers,"  the  "holy  whine' 
is  in  evidence.  When  I  used  to  dine  in  hall  at  the  Middle 
Temple,  I  was  often  struck  by  the  contrast  when,  in  the  ab 
sence  of  the  Master  and  the  Reader,  our  magnificent  "  grace  " 
was  read  by  a  Bencher  in  his  natural  voice.  And  one  of  the 
memories  of  my  first  visit  to  Christ  Church,  Oxford,  was  the 
almost  electrical  effect  when,  after  a  prolonged  spell  of  the 
"  whine,"  Dean  Liddell's  fine,  manly  voice  rang  out  in  pro 
nouncing  the  benediction. 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  143 

passes  as  "  religion,"  there  are  errors  of 
another  kind,  more  subtle  and  more  evil, 
in  respeet  of  which  we  are  entirely  de 
pendent  on  "  the  word  of  the  Lord "  to 
teach  us  "  the  will  of  the  Lord."  Hence 
the  importance  of  making  Holy  Scripture 
the  test  and  touchstone  in  everything, 
whether  of  conduct  or  of  creed.  A  great 
Englishman  of  our  own  generation  said 
a  very  great  thing  when  he  declared,  in 
effect,  that  our  care  should  always  be  to 
fall  into  line  with  the  Divine  purpose. 
And  if  a  man  of  the  world  can  grasp  this 
principle,  it  ought  surely  to  be  the  Chris 
tian's  most  earnest  aim  to  "  understand 
what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is."  But  Chris 
tians  generally  seem  strangely  ignorant 
even  of  God's  supreme  purpose  in  re 
demption,  and  therefore  wholly  blind  to 
the  significance  and  solemnity  of  the  times 
we  live  in. 

The  materialism  which,  a  generation  ago, 
accepted  a  plausible  theory  of  the  origin  of 
living  matter  as  an  adequate  solution  of  all 
the  mysteries  of  life,  has  given  way  under 


144  « THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xm 

the  proofs  which  Spiritualism  affords  of  the 
existence  of  beings  to  whose  origin  evolu 
tion  can  supply  no  clue.  And  movements 
like  Spiritualism  and  Christian  Science, 
which  in  our  own  time  have  made  more 
converts  than  Christianity,  ought  surely  to 
have  a  voice  for  the  spiritual  Christian. 
But  while  even  men  of  science  have  come 
to  recognise  the  existence  of  a  spirit 
world,  the  attitude  of  most  Christians  to 
ward  that  world  is  one  of  scepticism  or 
indifference.  In  a  vague  way,  indeed,  they 
believe  in  a  devil — the  bogey  of  the  religion 
of  Christendom — but  of  the  Satan  of  Scrip 
ture  they  know  absolutely  nothing. 

"  Ye  are  of  your  father  the  Devil,"  was 
the  Lord's  scathing  reply  to  the  Jews  when, 
in  rejecting  His  teaching,  they  fell  back 
upon  that  figment  of  apostates,  the  father 
hood  of  God :  "  Ye  are  of  your  father  the 
Devil,  and  the  desires  of  your  father  it  is 
your  will  to  do.  He  was  a  murderer  from 
the  beginning,  and  has  not  stood  in  the 
truth  because  truth  is  not  in  him.  When 
he  speaketh  the  lie,  he  speaketh  of  his 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  145 

own,  for  he  is  a  liar  and  the  father 
of  it."1 

"  A  murderer  from  the  beginning."  The 
beginning  of  what?  Not  of  his  own  exist 
ence  ;  for  he  was  created  in  perfectness  and 
beauty.  Nor  of  the  existence  of  man ; 
for,  before  the  Eden  fall,  he  had  already 
dragged  down  others  in  his  ruin.  His 
being  a  murderer  connects  itself  imme 
diately  with  the  truth  which  he  refused, 
and  the  lie  of  which  he  is  the  father. 
These  words  of  our  Divine  Lord  give  us 
a  glimpse  into  a  past  eternity,  when,  to  the 
heavenly  intelligences,  the  great  mystery  of 
God2  was  first  made  known — the  purpose 
of  the  ages,  that  a  Firstborn  was  to  be 
revealed,  and  that  "  in  all  things  Lie  might 
have  the  pre-eminence."3 

The  greatest  of  those  heavenly  beings, 
whom  we  now  know  as  Satan,  claimed  that 
place,  and,  rebelling  against  the  Divine 
counsels,  he  set  himself  from  that  hour  to 

1  John  viii.  44. 

2  "The  mystery  of  God,  even  Christ"  (Col.  ii.  2,  R.V.). 
3  Col.  i.  18. 

K 


146  « THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xm 

thwart  them.  Therefore  it  was  that  he 
compassed  the  ruin  of  our  race.1  But  it 
is  in  the  temptation  of  Christ  that  he  and 
his  lie  are  fully  manifested.  He  claimed 
to  meet  the  Lord  on  more  than  equal 
terms.  Not  one  Christian  in  a  thousand 
realises  the  significance  of  the  narrative. 
Having  "led  Him  up,"  and  given  Him 
that  mysterious  vision  of  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world,  the  Devil  said  unto  Him,  "  To 
thee  will  I  give  all  this  power  and  the 
glory  of  them ;  for  it  hath  been  delivered 
unto  me,  and  to  whomsoever  I  will  I  give 
it.  If  thou  therefore  wilt  worship  me  it 
shall  be  thine." 

This  was  not  the  raving  of  profanity  or 
madness.  It  was  the  bold  assertion  of 
a  disputed  right.  Satan  claims  to  be  the 
Firstborn,  the  rightful  heir  of  creation, 
the  true  Messiah ;  and  as  such  he  claims 
the  homage  of  mankind.  Men  dream  of 
a  Devil  with  horns  and  hoofs,  an  obscene 

i  And  in  view  of  the  promise  to  Eve,  he  may  possibly  have 
thought  that  Cain  or  Abel  was  his  rival,  and  so  he  won  Cain 
over  to  his  side  and  compassed  the  death  of  Abel. 


CHAP,  xin]  CONCLUSION  147 

monster  who  tempts  the  depraved  to  acts 
of  atrocity  or  shame ;  but  the  Satan  of 
Holy  Writ  "  fashions  himself  into  an  angel 
of  light,"  and  "  his  ministers  fashion  them 
selves  as  ministers  of  righteousness."  Do 
angels  of  light  and  ministers  of  righteous 
ness  corrupt  men's  morals,  or  incite  them 
to  commit  acts  of  vice  or  crime  ? 2 

In  the  light  of  these  words  we  may 
read  the  Divine  warning  of  an  apostasy 
"  in  later  times,"  promoted  by  demons  of  a 
sensitive  spirituality,  and  a  more  fastidious 
morality  than  Christianity  itself  will  sanc 
tion.  "  All  Scripture  is  God-breathed." 
But  it  would  seem  that  sometimes  the 
revelation  was  made  with  special  definite- 
ness  ;  and  this  particular  warning  is  pre 
faced  by  the  words :  "  the  Spirit  saitfi 
escpressly."  And  it  relates  not  to  a  new 
development  of  wickedness  in  the  world, 
but  to  a  new  falling  away  from  tlic  jaitli 
in  the  Church — a  cult  that  will  prove  a 

1  2  Cor.  xi.  14,  R.V. 

2  These  paragraphs  about  the  Devil  are  based  on  the  chapter 
upon  the  subject  in  "  The  Silence  of  God." 


148  "  THE   WAY "  [CHAP,  xm 

peril  to  the  Christian  by  tending  to  draw 
him  away  from  Christ.1 

For  there  is  nothing  more  plainly  revealed 
in  Scripture  than  that  "  the  latter  days  "  are 
to  be  marked  by  a  development  of  evil  of 
unparalleled  subtlety — an  apostasy  of  such 
a  kind  that,  but  for  Divine  grace,  it  would 
"  deceive  the  very  Elect."  If  people  would 
use  their  brains  they  would  see  that  "the 
Elect "  could  only  be  deceived  by  evil  in 
the  guise  of  good ;  not  by  an  apostasy 
characterised  by  transparent  error  or  open 


1  1  Tim.  iv.  "  But  the  Spirit  says  expressly  that  in  later 
times  some  shall  depart  from  the  faith,  giving1  heed  to 
seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  demons  speaking  lies  in 
hypocrisy,  having  their  consciences  cauterised,  forbidding 
to  marry,  and  commanding  to  abstain  from  meats."  The 
Revised  Version  rendering,  "the  hypocrisy  of  men,"  suggests 
a  false  exegesis  of  this  passage,  which  is  supported  by  an 
arbitrary  punctuation.  And  consciences  cannot  be  branded, 
though  they  may  be  seared. 

It  is  certain  that  demons  were  aggressively  active  during 
our  Lord's  earthly  ministry.  And  we  have  the  clear  testi 
mony  of  Scripture  that  "the  latter  days"  will  be  marked  by 
even  greater  demoniacal  activity.  But  'during  this  Christian 
dispensation  the  activities  of  evil  spirits  have  apparently  been 
restrained  in  Christian,  though  not  in  heathen,  countries. 
And  this  may  be  explained  by  the  presence  of  the  Spirit  of 
God.  In  many  ways  the  close  of  the  dispensation  will  seem 
ingly  resemble  its  opening  days. 


CHAP,  xui]  CONCLUSION  149 

violence.  Thus  it  was  with  the  mother 
of  our  race.  For  Eve  was  "  thoroughly 
deceived " l  by  the  Devil's  craftiness  in 
persuading  her  that  wrong  was  right. 

The  mythical  devil  of  Christendom  is 
an  extraordinary  creature  who,  though 
omnipresent — for  he  is  always  at  the  side 
of  every  man  and  woman  and  child  of  all 
the  fifteen  hundred  millions  of  mankind- 
devotes  his  powers  to  making  children 
naughty  and  grown-up  people  vicious. 
But  the  Satan  with  whom  we  have  to 
do  is  "  the  old  Serpent "  of  Eden,  and 
"  the  Power  of  Darkness  "  of  the  betrayal 
and  crucifixion  of  the  Son  of  God ;  that 
awful  being  of  whom  Holy  Scripture  speaks 
as  "  the  prince  of  this  world  "  and  "  the  god 
of  this  world,"  who  controls  the  religion  of 
the  world.2 

He  appears  in  the  very  dawn  of  Revela 
tion  ;  and  in  its  closing  pages  he  fills  a  still 
larger  place.  For  while  he  has  seemed  to 

1  1  Tim.  ii.  14.     In  the  revised  reading  the  word  is  in  the 
intensified  form  as  regards  Eve.     The  same  word  is  used  in 
2  Cor.  xi.  3. 

2  Luke  xxii.  53 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4. 


150  « THE    WAY "  [CHAP,  xm 

be  the  victor  in  many  a  skirmish,  the 
voice  of  Divine  prophecy  is  full  and  clear 
that  the  great  battle  is  yet  to  come,  when 
he  will  enter  the  lists  in  a  final  effort  to 
thwart  the  supreme  purpose  of  God  in 
creation  and  redemption. 

And  what  is  that  purpose  ?  "  The  salva 
tion  of  sinners  "  is  the  reply  which  a  certain 
type  of  orthodoxy  will  offer.  "  The  eleva 
tion  of  the  race  "  will  be  the  testimony  of 
the  most  modern  and  popular  school  of 
theology ;  for  with  that  school  man  is  the 
spoiled  child  of  the  universe,  and  all  heaven 
is  dancing  attendance  on  him !  But  the 
answer  which  every  spiritual  Christian  will 
give  to  the  question  is,  "  the  exaltation  of 
Christ"  Man  is  but  "a  pawn  upon  the 
board."  Our  confidence  and  peace  depend 
upon  the  fact  that  our  salvation  is  linked 
with  that  great  purpose.  "  Kept  by  the 
power  of  God "  is  inscribed  upon  the  life 
record  of  every  sinner  who  believes  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  knows  his  own 
worthlessness  and  weakness,  but  he  knows 
also  that  "  HE  is  able  to  save  to  the 


CHAP,  xin]  CONCLUSION  151 

uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by 
Him."  l 

Just  as  a  drop  of  water  from  the  shal 
lowest  pool  upon  the  shore  is  the  ocean 
in  miniature,  so  the  spiritual  life-struggle 
of  the  humblest  of  the  redeemed  is  a  minia 
ture  of  the  great  spiritual  conflict  of  the 
ages.  This  it  is  that  gives  such  solemnity, 
and  lends  such  dignity,  to  the  life  of  each 
one  of  us  ;  for  the  true  aim  of  the  Christian 
life  is  to  be  ever  in  harmony  with  the 
Divine  purpose  of  exalting  Christ. 

And  now  we  can  appreciate  the  Apostle's 
words  in  their  application  to  the  times  in 
which  we  live.  The  days  are  evil :  "  on 
this  account  be  not  unwise."  No  Christian 
need  hesitate  to  own  that  both  materially 
and  morally  "the  world  is  getting  better." 
But  he  will  not  confound  the  moral  with 
the  spiritual  sphere,  nor  fail  to  see  that, 
with  increasing  prosperity  and  intelligence, 
there  is  a  marked  decline,  even  in  outward 
reverence  for  God. 

But  all  this  is  beside  the  question.     For 

1  Ileb.  vii.  '25. 


"  THE   WAY  '  [CHAP,  xin 

what  concerns  us  is  not  the  state  of  the 
world  as  such,  but  the  condition  of  the 
professing  Church.  Students  of  prophecy 
used  to  be  perplexed  by  the  seeming  in 
compatibility  of  predictions  of  a  revival 
of  the  historic  apostasy,  side  by  side  with 
a  new  departure  from  the  faith,  marked 
by  spiritual  power  and  a  high  moral  stan 
dard,  and  yet  by  a  turning  away  from 
Christ  and  Scripture — "  a  form  of  godli 
ness  but  denying  the  power  thereof."  But 
here  in  England  to-day  this  enigma  is 
being  solved  before  our  eyes.  The  National 
Church  is  lapsing  back  to  the  errors  and 
superstitions  of  pre-Reformation  times 
And  the  only  powerful  check  upon  this 
"  Catholic  revival "  is  essentially  rational 
istic.  As  for  the  "  Free  Churches,"  a 
feeble  evangelicalism,  bent  on  compromise, 
is  with  most  of  them  the  only  hindrance 
to  the  supremacy  of  the  new  apostasy. 
For  the  increasing  clericalism  which  char 
acterises  them  is  due  to  the  fact  that  in 
giving  up  what  is  Divine,  men  are  apt  to 

1  The  old  apostasy  is  certainly  uot  a  form  of  godliness. 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  153 

cling  more  closely  to  the  human  element 
in  religion. 

From  the  standpoint  of  our  national 
interests,  Rome  is  our  greatest  danger ; 
for  the  influence  of  the  Church  as  a 
political  power  has  been  always  evil.1  But 
the  Christian  may  be  pardoned  if  he  hesi 
tates  between  an  apostasy  which  embodies, 
even  in  the  most  corrupt  form,  the  vital 
truths  of  Christianity,  and  an  apostasy 
which  rejects  the  teaching  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  discredits  the  Scriptures 
which  speak  of  Him. 

Such  a  statement  may  seem  startling. 
But  let  us  cast  aside  prejudice,  and  test 
it  by  characteristic  manifestoes  of  the  two 
systems — the  Decrees  of  the  Council  of 
Trent,  and  Hastings'  "  Dictionary  of  the 
Bible."  In  the  one  we  shall  find,  beneath 
a  mass  of  superstition  and  error,  a  clear 
acknowledgment  of  the  deity  of  Christ, 
and  of  the  truth  and  Divine  authority 
of  Holy  Scripture.  The  prevailing  ten- 

1  I  do  not  stop  to  discuss  whether  this  was  so  in  the  early 
centuries. 


154  "THE    WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

dency  of  the  other  may  be  judged  by  the 
following  typical  extract  from  the  "  Dic 
tionary."  1  It  is  from  the  article  on  "  Satan," 
and  therefore  strictly  germane  to  the  subject 
of  this  present  chapter. 

"  From  the  preceding  exposition  of  the 
biblical  conceptions  respecting  Satan  we 
clearly  see  that  early  Christianity  shared 
in  the  prevailing  Jewish  beliefs  in  demons 
and  Satan.  .  .  . 

"Our  argument  by  no  means  implies 
that  Jesus  shared  in  all  the  current  con 
ceptions  respecting  demons.  The  problem 
is  a  complex  one.  We  have  to  give  due 
place  to  two  considerations :  ( 1 )  that 
Christ's  sayings  and  deeds  are  necessarily 
coloured  by  the  representative  human  media 
through  which  they  are  conveyed  to  us ; 
(2)  that  the  demonology  of  Christ's  belief 
is  scarcely  visible  in  the  Fourth  Gospel, 
though  His  belief  in  a  personal  Satan  is 

1  I  do  not  refer  to  the  Encyclopaedia  Biblica  because  Prof. 
Cheyne  is  the  enfant  terrible  of  the  "  Conservative "  critics 
of  the  Driver  school,  whose  ( '  Confession  of  Faith "  is  the 
"  Dictionary." 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  155 

clearly  apparent.  There  can,  however,  be 
no  scientific  Christology  which  does  not 
recognise  that  Christ's  humanity  was  so 
genuine  and  complete  that  He  shared  in 
the  cosmic  presuppositions  of  His  time. 
.  .  .  Now  demonology  was  a  necessary 
part  of  the  intellectual  apparatus  of  that 
period." 

This  extract  is  thoroughly  characteristic 
of  the  book  from  which  it  is  quoted,  and 
of  the  school  by  which  the  book  is  ac 
credited.  The  Buddha  of  this  system  was 
the  dupe  of  "  the  current  Jewish  notions  " 
of  an  ignorant  age. l  Therefore  it  was 
that  (to  quote  Dr.  Harnack)  He  believed 
in  "  stories  of  demons "  and  such  like 
"  absurdities " ;  therefore  it  was  that  He 

1  "Both  Christ' and  the  apostles  or  writers  of  the  New 
Testament  held  the  current  Jewish  notions  respecting  the 
Divine  authority  and  revelation  of  the  Old  Testament.  "- 
Hastings'   "  Bible    Dictionary,"    article    "  Old    Testament," 
p.  601. 

Dr.  Pusey  wrote  :  "  I  know  not  whether  the  open  blasphemy 
of  the  eighteenth  century  is  more  offensive  than  the  cold 
blooded  patronising  ways  of  the  nineteenth."  Personally  I 
feel  no  such  doubt.  I  would  vastly  prefer  open  infidelity  to 
the  tone  of  these  evil  books. 


156  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

accepted  and  accredited  the  Hebrew  Scrip 
tures,  and  especially  the  Pentateuch,  now 
known  by  "  all  people  of  culture "  to  be 
a  priestly  forgery ;  and  the  Books  of  Jonah 
and  of  Daniel,  now  rejected  as  an  allegory 
and  a  romance ! 

And  not  only  was  His  teaching  destitute 
of  any  Divine  sanction,  but  the  writings 
which  record  it  are  unreliable.  Neither 
the  doctrine  nor  the  records,  therefore, 
afford  any  sure  basis  for  Jaith.  Is  it  not 
clear  as  light  that  the  critic  and  the 
Christian  have  neither  the  same  Bible,1  nor 
yet  the  same  Christ  ? 

The  Kenosis  theory  by  which  these  men 
seek  to  justify  their  repudiation  of  the 
teaching  of  our  Divine  Lord  is  entirely 
inadequate  and  irrelevant.  For  what  has 
to  be  accounted  for  is  not  that  in  the 

1  Here  is  another  specimen.  As  above  quoted  (p.  147),  the 
Apostle  Paul  records  a  revelation  accorded  him  about  demons, 
prefaced  by  the  words,  "the  Spirit  saith  expressly."  "St.  Paul 
shared  the  conceptions  of  his  contemporaries  respecting 
demons,"  is  the  answer  of  Hastings'  "  Dictionary  "  as  to  this 
(article  "Demons").  Men  who  , write  thus  deserve  to  be 
branded  as  -  —  ;  well,  they  are  not  entitled  to  the  least 
respect  or  consideration. 


CHAP,  xin]  CONCLUSION  157 

ministry  of  His  humiliation  He  was  igno 
rant  and  deceived,  though  this  might  well 
offend  the  reverent  and  perplex  the 
thoughtful;  but  what  claims  explanation 
is,  that  with  extreme  solemnity  He  de 
manded  acceptance  of  His  false  teaching 
as  Divine  truth  ;  that  after  His  resurrection 
He  endorsed  it  with  the  utmost  definiteness, 
and  sent  out  His  Apostles  to  promulgate 
it ;  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  given  to  lead  His 
disciples  into  all  truth,  confirmed  them 
in  the  error ;  and  that  for  eighteen  centuries 
His  people  were  left  thus  deluded  and 
deceived,  till  a  set  of  foreign  rationalists 
exposed  the  fraud.  All  this  must  be  ac 
counted  for  before  we  can  accept  "the 
assured  results  of  modern  criticism." 

Still  more  irrelevant  is  it  to  plead  that 
the  English  exponents  of  the  so-called 
Higher  Criticism  are  men  of  earnest  piety 
and  devotion  to  truth.  For  what  concerns 
us  is  the  character,  not  of  the  men,  but 
of  the  system.  "  He  that  hateth  his  brother 
is  a  murderer,"  is  one  of  many  statements 
which  seem  to  savour  of  exaggeration  if 


158  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

we  forget  the  underlying  principle,  that 
an  influence  is  to  be  judged  by  its  legiti 
mate  tendencies  ;  a  road,  by  where  it 
leads.  We  must  not  judge  of  the  Higher 
Criticism,  therefore,  by  the  men  who  now 
father  it  in  England,  for  they  were  trained 
in  a  different  school,  and  still  feel  the 
power  of  the  truths  which  they  under 
mine.  But  what  about  those  who  shall 
come  after  them  ?  Already  there  are 
quasi-Christian  pulpits  occupied  by  "  min 
isters  of  righteousness "  whose  theology 
knows  no  Eden  Fall,  no  redemption  by 
blood,  no  atonement,  no  new  birth  by 
the  Holy  Spirit,  no  inspired  Scriptures, 
no  eternal  judgment,  no  hell  for  the  im 
penitent  ;  no  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ,  but  in  his  place  a  "  Jesus "  who 
is  "  the  ideal  of  almost  perfect  manhood." 

And  not  only  are  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
discredited,  but  the  Gospels  and  Epistles 
of  the  New  Testament  are  brought  down 
practically  to  the  level  of  mere  human 

1  These  words  are  quoted  from  one  of  the  most  recent  of 
the  evil  books  of  the  propaganda. 


CHAP,  xm]  CONCLUSION  159 

writings.  No  fair  man,  therefore,  whose 
mind  is  unclouded  by  the  superstitions  of 
religion,  will  deny  that  these  "ministers 
of  righteousness "  hold  the  only  position 
logically  tenable  if  the  Higher  Criticism 
is  to  prevail.  And  the  next  generation 
cannot  fail  to  recognise  this.  The  lists 
are  thus  preparing  for  the  great  predicted 
struggle  of  the  latter  days,  between  the 
cult  of  rationalistic  man-worship  and  the 
ancient  apostasy  of  Christendom.  If  the 
reader  fails  to  appreciate  the  origin  and 
significance  of  this  movement,  this  closing 
chapter  will  have  been  written  in  vain. 

But  in  the  midst  of  this  "  deepening 
gloom  "  let  the  Christian  recall  the  words 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  remind 
us  that  the  gathering  darkness  bears  the 
promise  of  coming  dawn :  "  When  these 
things  begin  to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up, 
and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  redemption 
is  drawing  nigh." 

And  as  the  teaching  of  this  system  is 
so  persistently  dinned  into  our  ears,  we 

1  Luke  xxi.  28. 


160  "THE   WAY"  [CHAP,  xm 

do  well  to  have  our  minds  steeped  in  the 
thoughts  and  words  of  Holy  Scripture 
about  Him  whom  we  worship  as  Lord 
and  Saviour — words,  for  instance,  such  as 
these,  expressly  given  to  save  us  from 
the  "  vain  deceit "  of  "  scientific  Christ- 
ologies  " l : — 

"  Who  is  the  image  of  the  invisible  God, 
the  firstborn  of  every  creature ; 

"  For  by  Him  were  all  things  created, 
that  are  in  heaven  and  that  are  on  earth, 
visible  and  invisible,  whether  they  be 
thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or 
powers ;  all  things  were  created  by  Him 
and  for  Him ; 

"  And  He  is  before  all  things,  and  by 
Him  all  things  consist. 

"  And  He  is  the  head  of  the  body,  the 
Church  :  who  is  the  beginning,  the  firstborn 
from  the  dead ;  that  IN  ALL  THINGS  HE 

MIGHT    HAVE   THE    PRE-EMINENCE." 
1  Col.  i.  15-18  ;  ii.  8. 


APPENDIX 

NOTE    I 
THE    CHURCH 

THE  Lord  Jesus  Christ  would  never  heave  been 
crucified,  neither  would  Stephen  have  been  mar 
tyred,  nor  Paul  imprisoned,  but  for  words  or  acts 
that  were  deemed  derogatory  to  the  Temple.  And 
in  these  days  a  man  may  with  impunity  deny  all 
the  vital  truths  of  Christianity,  and  reject  our 
Divine  Lord's  teaching  about  the  Scriptures  which 
He  came  to  fulfil ;  but  let  him  say  a  word  in  dis 
paragement  of  "  the  Church ""  or  of  any  human 
element  of  the  "  Christian  religion,11  and  he  is  at 
once  cast  out  of  the  synagogue. 

And  yet  false  conceptions  of  the  Church  are 
working  grave  mischief.1  Most  of  the  perverts 

1  The  case  of  Mr.  J.  N.  Darby,  the  greatest  of  the  very 
great  men  of  the  "  Brethren  "  movement,  is  a  notable  instance 
of  this.  Like  his  contemporaries  of  the  High  Church  move 
ment,  the  false  conception  of  the  Church,  which  obtains  in 
Christendom,  ensnared  him.  Quite  extraordinary  in  his  case, 
for  his  early  writings  bore  clear  and  emphatic  testimony 
against  it.  The  unity  of  the  Church  was  the  rock  on  which 
his  life  work  was  wrecked  ;  and  a  movement  which  might 
have  proved  a  blessing  to  all  the  churches  ended  in  adding 

another  to  their  number. 

101  , 


162  APPENDIX 

to  Rome  are  duped  by  them  ;  and  advocates  of  the 
sham  "  Higher  Criticism  "  appeal  to  them  to  justify 
their  rejection  of  Scripture.  For  with  mingled 
effrontery  and  folly  they  make  the  doctrine  of  the 
Spirit's  presence  in  the  Church  an  excuse  for  rejecting 
the  teaching  of  the  inspired  Apostles  and  prophets  of 
the  New  Testament.  These  false  conceptions,  more 
over,  are  a  fruitful  cause  of  unfaithfulness  to  Christ 
on  the  part  of  many  earnest  and  spiritual  Christians. 

It  is  essential  to  distinguish  between  "the 
Church1'  as  a  society  the  administration  of  which 
was  entrusted  to  men  on  earth,  and  "  the  Church  " 
as  the  Body  of  Christ,  dependent  only  upon  Him 
self  as  its  Lord  and  Head.  The  building  of  "the 
Church  which  is  His  Body "  is  His  own  work,  and 
it  cannot  fail.  But  surely  fanaticism  or  folly  alone 
can  refuse  to  recognise  that  "  the  gates  of  hell  " 
have  prevailed  against  the  organised  society  on 
earth — "the  outward  frame,"  as  Alford  calls  it, 
which,  in  its  full  and  final  development  of  evil,  will 
yet  appear  as  "  the  woman  drunken  with  the  blood 
of  the  saints  and  with  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  of 
Jesus  "  (Rev.  xvii.  6). 

The  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  deals  with  the 
Church  as  the  Body  of  Christ,  and  gives  the  provision 
for  its  perfecting  (chap.  iv.  8-12).  The  Epistle  to 
the  Corinthians  deals  with  the  Church  as  a  human 
society  (chap.  xii.  28).  In  Ephesians  we  have 
nothing  but  spiritual  ministry ;  and  evangelists  are 
prominently  named,  for  it  is  by  the  preaching  of  the 


APPENDIX  163 

Gospel  in  the  world  that  men  are  brought  to  Christ. 
Corinthians  omits  evangelists,  because  the  sphere 
of  their  ministry  is  the  world  and  not  the  Church ; 
and  it  includes  "  helps,  governments,"  &c.  &c., 
which  are  necessary  to  the  outward  society,  but 
not  to  the  vital  unity. 

And  here  I  venture  to  think  that,  through  over 
looking  this  distinction,  Bishop  Lightfoot,  in  his 
great  treatise  on  "  The  Christian  Ministry  "  (quoted 
on  p.  87,  ante],  unduly  disparages  the  ministry. 
For  the  New  Testament  clearly  distinguishes  be 
tween  office  in  the  Church,  and  spiritual  ministry. 
Bishops  (or  elders,  for  the  terms  are  interchange 
able)  :  had  to  do  with  the  administration  and  dis 
cipline  of  the  Society ;  ministers  with  the  spiritual 
needs  of  the  flock.  In  1  Tim.  v.  17,  we  read,  "  Let 
the  elders  that  rule  well  be  counted  worthy  of 
double  honour,  especially  they  icJw  labour  in  the 
word  and  doctrine.""  Their  essential  duty  was  con 
nected  with  rule ;  if  they  excelled  in  this,  they 
merited  double  honour;  and  that  honour  was  to 
be  greater  still  if  they  "  laboured  in  the  word  and 
doctrine.'"  It  was  not  a  case  of  "  two  orders,"  but 
of  a  combination  of  office  and  gift.  Timothy  him 
self  was  both  a  bishop  and  a  minister. 

The  elders  (or  bishops)  were  appointed  by  Apos- 

*  "It  is  a  fact  now  generally  recognised  by  theologians  of  all 
shades  of  opinion,  that  in  the  language  of  the  New  Testament 
the  same  officer  is  called  indifferently  'bishop'  or  'elder'  or 
'presbyter'"  (Lightfoot,  p.  97). 


164  APPENDIX 

tolic  authority,  but  not  the  ministers.  For  Ephe- 
sians  iv.  8-11  tells  us  that  evangelists  and  pastors 
and  teachers  were,  like  the  apostles  and  prophets, 
gifts  of  the  ascended  Christ.  And  1  Tim.  iii.  8-10 
tells  us  that  a  minister  was  to  be  tried  by  certain 
specified  tests,  and,  if  "found  blameless,"  he  was 
to  be  recognised.  The  injunction  is  not  "let  him 
be  ordained,"  but  "  let  him  minister" 

The  only  instance  given  in  the  New  Testament 
of  "ordaining"  ministers  of  the  Gospel,  is  the 
"  ordaining  "  of  the  Apostles  Barnabas  and  Paul  by 
the  Christians  of  Antioch  (Acts  xiii.  3).  The  lay 
ing  on  of  hands  was  a  Jewish  custom,  the  meaning 
of  which  is  not  doubtful.  When  the  Israelite  laid 
his  hands  upon  his  sin-offering,  he  made  himself 
one  with  it,  so  that  the  victim  died  in  his  stead. 
And  this  is  precisely  the  significance  of  the  act 
here.  The  Christians  of  Antioch  conferred  no  mys 
tical  powers — that  is  a  thought,  as  Bishop  Light- 
foot  shows,  unknown  to  Scripture ;  it  is  altogether 
pagan  —  but  they  identified  themselves  with  the 
Apostles.  They  said,  by  an  act  more  eloquent  than 
words,  "  We  are  going  forth  with  you  in  this 
mission  to  which  God  has  called  you."  And  when 
the  Apostles  conferred  spiritual  gifts  by  laying  on 
of  hands,  their  action  was  not  an  exception  to,  but 
a  further  instance  of,  this  same  principle  of  identi 
fication  ;  just  as  when  the  Lord  Jesus  touched  the 
leper,  and  laid  His  hands  upon  the  sick  (Matt.  viii. 
3,  15 ;  cf.  Luke  iv.  40). 


APPENDIX  165 

The  distinction  between  the  appointment  of  an 
elder  or  bishop  and  the  recognition  of  a  minister  may 
be  illustrated  by  the  analogous  case  of  the  priest  and 
the  prophet  in  Israel.  By  Divine  decree  none  but 
the  sons  of  Aaron  were  to  be  consecrated  as  priests. 
But  the  consecration  conferred  no  mystical  powers. 
There  was  nothing  which  even  the  high  priest  had 
to  do  that  any  Israelite  could  not  have  done.  But 
the  absurdity  of  appointing  a  man  to  be  a  prophet 
is  obvious.  The  prophet  declared  himself  by  the 
exercise  of  his  gift,  and  the  duty  of  the  people  was 
to  acknowledge  him.  No  less  absurd  is  the  sug 
gestion  that  human  appointment  could  constitute 
a  man  a  minister  in  the  spiritual  sense.  The  duty 
of  the  Church  was  to  recognise  him,  and  the  laying 
on  of  hands  was  merely  a  method  of  public  and 
formal  recognition.  There  is  no  evidence  that  in 
Apostolic  times  the  practice  prevailed  in  the  case 
of  ministers.  And  in  the  Church  of  the  Fathers 
the  practice  was  not  universal  even  in  the  appoint 
ment  of  bishops.  And  "  it  is  impossible  that,  if  it 
was  not  universal,  it  can  have  been  regarded  as 
essential."1 

1  Dr.  Hatch's  "Organisation  of  the  Early  Christian 
Churches,"  p.  131.  I  would  here  acknowledge  my  obliga 
tions  to  that  work.  Men  will  not  have  truth  when  it  clashes 
with  their  "religion"  ;  and  so  this  great  book  (The  Bamp- 
ton  Lectures,  1880)  is  "  boycotted."  The  reader  will  find 
in  it  historical  authority  for  many  of  my  statements  respect 
ing  the  Church. 

The   ordination   service  affords   striking  comfirmatiou  of 


166  APPENDIX 

I  use  the  jWord  "minister"  advisedly,  for,  of 
course,  that  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  Sid/covo? 
in  1  Tim.  iii.  8,  12.  The  word  occurs  thirty  times 
in  the  New  Testament.  It  means  primarily  a  ser 
vant  in  the  ordinary  sense ;  and  in  the  Gospels  it 
is  used  only  in  that  sense,  save  in  John  xii.  26. 
In  the  Epistles  it  is  the  equivalent  of  our  word 
"  minister.'1''  The  Apostle  Paul  uses  it  of  himself 
seven  times,  and  of  the  Lord  Jesus  once  (Rom. 
xv.  8).  It  is  never  applied  to  Stephen  and  his  fel 
lows,  with  whom  it  is  popularly  associated  (Acts  vi.). 
As  Dr.  Hatch  shows,  the  duties  temporarily  assigned 
to  them  were  essentially  those  of  the  bishops  when 
the  Church  was  fully  organised.  For,  as  Dean 
Alford  says  bluntly,  "  the  eVur/eoTrot  of  the  New 
Testament  have  officially  nothing  in  common  with 
our  bishops." l 

But  this  is  a  digression.  What  \ve  need  to  keep 
in  view  is  that  the  apostasy  of  "  the  visible  Church  " 
in  no  way  affects  the  Divine  provision  "  for  the  build 
ing  up  of  the  Body  of  Christ"  (Eph.  iv.  11,  12). 
"  The  visible  Church "  is  competent  to  select  and 
appoint  its  own  officers  to  administer  its  affairs ; 

what  is  here  urged.  Before  ordaining  the  candidate,  the 
bishop  must  have  an  affirmative  answer  to  the  question,  "Do 
you  think  that  you  are  truly  called,  according  to  the  will  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  the  ministry  ? "  For  the  call  to 
the  ministry  is  "  neither  by  man,  nor  through  man." 

1  Greek  Testament,  1  Tim.  iii.  1.  And  again  on  Acts  xiii. 
he  says,  "The  Episcopal  office,  in  its  ordinary  sense,  sprang 
up  after  the  Apostolic  times." 


APPENDIX  167 

but  in  this  other  sphere  its  duty  is  to  recognise  and 
honour  those  who  are  "  truly  called  to  the  ministry, 
according  to  the  will  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."" ] 
Having  regard  to  the  black  and  hateful  history  of 
Christendom,  God  help  us  if  we  are  dependent  for 
anything  upon  a  historical  succession.  But  here 
at  least  we  are  dependent  only  upon  our  Divine 
Lord. 

And  we  cannot  have  too  high  thoughts  of  Him, 
or  trust  too  implicitly  to  His  faithfulness  and  care, 
come  what  may  of  evil  or  of  peril.  But  of  the  Pro 
fessing  Church,  the  lowest  and  worst  estimate  we  can 
form  cannot  be  much  amiss.  Ordinary  Christians 
know  nothing  of  its  history,  and  Protestantism  stul 
tifies  itself  with  the  theory  that  its  corruptions  arc 
due  to  Rome.  Home  has  merely  systematised  the 
errors  of  the  "Primitive  Church"  of  the  Fathers; 
and  the  shameless  immorality  of  its  pre-Reformation 
days  will  bear  comparison  with  the  condition  of  the 
"  Primitive  Church.'1''  "  The  virgins  of  the  Church," 
held  in  special  honour  for  their  sanctity,  were  de 
nounced  by  Cyprian  for  violating  "  the  commonest 
dictates  of  feminine  modesty."  At  a  single  visita 
tion  the  great  Chrysostom  had  to  depose  no  fewer 

i  This  truth  is  ignored  by  the  two  extreme  sections  of 
Christendom,  Rome  relies  on  the  pagan  theory  of  a 
priesthood  with  mystical  powers  conferred  through  Apostolic 
succession;  while  the  Christians  called  "The  Brethren" 
though  they  boast  of  acknowledging  "  ministry "  fail  to 
recognise  "ministers" — a  position  which  is  at  once  un 
practical  and  unscriptural. 


168  APPENDIX 

than  thirteen  bishops  for  simony  and  licentious 
ness.  To  call  "  the  Catholic  Church  " — which  drove 
that  great  saint  into  exile  and  practically  to  death — 
the  Church  of  God  savours  of  profanity.  In  char 
acterising  "Saint""  Cyril  of  Alexandria,  nephew 
of  Theophilus,  one  of  Chrysostonfs  enemies,  Dean 
Milman  uses  the  words  ambition,  intrigue,  arro 
gance,  rapacity,  barbarity,  persecution,  bloodshed. 
And  this  evil  man  was  the  ruling  spirit  in  the  third 
of  the  "(Ecumenical"  Councils,  held  at  Ephesus 
(431),  to  deal  with  the  Nestorian  heresy.  Theology 
holds  that  this  Council  was  controlled  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  History  testifies  that  it  was  controlled  by 
a  hired  mob,  and  that  at  last  the  Emperor,  unable 
to  restrain  the  disorder  which  prevailed,  dismissed 
the  bishops  with  the  scathing  rebuke,  "  Return  to 
your  provinces,  and  may  your  private  virtues  repair 
the  mischief  and  scandal  of  your  meeting." 

The  great  names  of  Jerome  and  Augustine  have 
raised  a  glamour  round  the  Church  of  their  time. 
But  the  famous  treatise  of  their  contemporary, 
Salvian  of  Marseilles,  published  ten  years  after 
Augustine's  death,  discloses  what  the  state  of  the 
Church  actually  was  in  that  age.  I  will  not  soil 
the  page  with  details,  but  content  myself  with  a 
single  sentence,  in  which  he  sums  up  his  terrible 
indictment :  "  Almost  every  assembly  of  Christians 
has  become  a  sink  of  vices." 

Even  the  heathen  world  was  scandalised  by  the 
exhibition  of  immorality  and  hatred  presented  by 


APPENDIX  169 

what  is  profanely  called  the  Church  of  Christ. 
"  See  how  these  Christians  love  one  another  !  "  had 
long  given  place  to  "  See  how  these  Christians  hate 
one  another !  "  In  one  of  the  lights  for  the  bishopric 
of  Rome,  one  hundred  and  thirty-seven  corpses  were 
left  on  the  pavement  of  one  of  the  churches  in  a 
single  day.  What  wonder  that  a  Pagan  historian 
of  that  age — a  man  whose  writings  are  praised  for 
the  moderation  with  which  he  speaks  of  the  Chris 
tians — declared  that  no  savage  beasts  could  equal 
the  cruelty  of  Christians  to  one  another  !  What 
wonder  that  penal  laws  of  merciless  severity  were 
needed  to  keep  the  baptismal  ly  regenerated  Pagans 
from  turning  back  to  paganism  !  * 

Religious  superstition  is  deaf  both  to  Reason  and 
to  Scripture ;  but  people  who  are  guided  either  by 
their  Bibles  or  their  brains  will  take  account  of 
these  things.  And  they  will  recognise  that  no 
reasonable  compromise  is  possible  between  the 
superstitious  and  profane  traditional  view  of  "  the 
Church"  and  the  intelligent  and  Scriptural  view  of 
the  Reformers. 

1  Between  the  years  381  and  3'.)(],  six  enactments  of  the  kind 
were  added  to  the  code. 

These  last  paragraphs  are  based  upon  the  author's  "  Buddha 
of  Christendom,"  in  which  this  subject  of  "  the  Church  "  is 
dealt  with  at  some  length.  But  the  reader  is  referred 
specially  to  Taylor's  "Ancient  Christianity,"  which  is  an 
invaluable  exposure  of  the  conspiracy  of  silence  and  fraud 
by  which  Christians  are  deluded  respecting  the  "  Primitive 
Church."  See  also  Harrison's  "  Whose  are  the  Fathers." 


170  APPENDIX 

"  Clear  the  decks  "  is  one  of  the  first  orders  issued 
in  naval  warfare.  And  in  the  battle  for  the  faith, 
now  raging  so  fiercely,  our  safety  requires  that  we 
shall  ruthlessly  jettison  all  superstitious  beliefs  on 
this  subject.  In  his  Commentary  upon  Matt.  xii. 
43-45,  Dean  Alford,  after  noticing  the  application 
of  the  passage  to  "the  Jewish  Church,"  uses  these 
words : — 

"Strikingly  parallel  with  this  runs  the  history  of 
the  Christian  Church.  Not  long  after  the  Apostolic 
times,  the  golden  calves  of  idolatry  were  set  up  by 
the  Church  of  Home.  What  the  effect  of  the 
captivity  was  to  the  Jews,  that  of  the  Reformation 
has  been  to  Christendom.  The  first  evil  spirit  has 
been  cast  out.  But  by  the  growth  of  hypocrisy, 
secularity,  and  rationalism,  the  house  has  become 
empty,  swept,  and  garnished :  swept  and  garnished 
by  the  decencies  of  civilisation  and  discoveries  of 
secular  knowledge,  but  empty  of  living  and  earnest 
faith.  And  he  must  read  prophecy  but  ill,  who 
does  not  see  under  all  these  seeming  improvements 
the  preparation  for  the  final  development  of  the  man 
of  sin,  the  great  repossession,  when  idolatry  and  the 
seven  [more  wicked  spirits]  shall  bring  the  outward 
frame  of  so-called  Christendom  to  a  fearful  end." 

This  is  entirely  in  keeping  with  the  teaching  of 
the  Reformers.1  The  claim  of  the  Churches  of  the 

1  Their  teaching  must  be  taken  from  the  Articles,  and  not 
inferred  from  other  parts  of  the  service-book.  For  they  were 
free  in  framing  their  creed,  but  not  in  revising  the  liturgies, 


APPENDIX  171 

Reformation  to  be  Churches  of  Christ  depends  only 
upon  the  Scriptures,  and  upon  the  presence  of  Christ 
in  heaven  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  on  earth.  To  base 
it  upon  a  succession  from  the  historic  "  Christian 
Church  "  of  Christendom  is  to  incur  participation  in 
the  awful  guilt  and  doom  of  that  hideous  apostasy. 

The  only  true  "Holy  Catholic  Church"  is  the 
Church  of  the  Martyrs,  "  the  whole  company  of 
Christian  people  dispersed  throughout  the  whole 
world."  The  Catholic  Church  of  Apostolic  Suc 
cession  is  stained  with  the  martyrs'"  blood. 

If  "  the  validity  of  orders  "  depends  on  "  Apostolic- 
Succession,"  the  chain  includes  such  links  as  Pope 
John  XXIII.,  who  was  deposed  by  the  Council  of 
Constance  on  charges  of  "  piracy,  murder,  rape, 
sodomy,  and  incest " ;  and  of  Alexander  VI.,  whose 
vices  and  crimes,  albeit  he  was  never  deposed,  are 
declared  by  the  historian  to  be  "  totally  un 
mentionable." 

In  dealing  with  such  subjects  people  are  apt  to 
ignore  their  Bibles;  but  surely  they  might  be 
expected  to  have  some  respect  for  their  own  brains, 
and  to  maintain  diplomatic  relations  with  common 
sense. 

&c.  Article  XIX.  is  explicit,  that  the  Church,  as  therein 
defined — "a  congregation  of  faithful  men,  &c." — is  neither 
any  one  Church  in  an  exclusive  sense,  nor  yet  the  Professing 
Church  as  a  whole  (for  the  Church  of  Rome  is  expressly  ruled 
out).  And  Article  XX.  subordinates  the  Church  to  ' '  God's 
Word  written  ":  it  is  "  a  witness  and  keeper  of  Holy  Wrrit "  ; 
the  witness  and  keeper,  it  never  was. 


172  APPENDIX 

NOTE  II 

1  THESS.  iv.  13-17. 

"  WORDS  are  the  index  of  thoughts,  and  where  an 
unusual  construction  is  found,  it  points  to  some 
reason  in  the  mind  of  the  writer  for  using  it,  which 
reason  is  lost  in  the  ordinary  shallow  method  of 
accounting  for  it  by  saying  that  it  is  '  put  for '  some 
other  word."  This  sentence,  quoted  from  Dean 
Alford's  Commentary  (Greek  Testament,  John  i.  18), 
may  fitly  preface  the  present  note  upon  1  Thess. 
iv.  14 ;  for  our  translators  have  given  us,  not  what 
the  Apostle  wrote,  but  what  they  suppose  he  ought 
to  have  written.  But  the  authorised  rendering  is 
popular,  because  the  expression  "  sleeping  in  Jesus  " 
fosters  the  sort  of  sentiment  in  which  "•  religion  " 
delights.  No  one,  however,  who  has  made  a  study 
of  the  use  of  the  Lord's  names  in  the  New  Testament 
can  fail  to  recognise  that  it  is  foreign  to  Scripture. 
"  The  dead  in  Christ,"  and  "  the  dead  which  die  in 
the  Lord" — these  are  Scriptural  expressions;  but 
"  sleeping  (or  dying)  in  Jesus "  is  a  phrase  the 
Apostle  would  never  have  written.  And  a  kindred 
objection  applies  to  the  alternative  rendering,  "  that 
God  will  through  Jesus  bring  with  Him  the  sleep 
ing  ones."  "  A  clause  which  I  am  persuaded  the 
Apostle  could  never  have  written,"  is  Dean  Alford's 
comment  upon  it.  And  it  is  certain  that  no  English 
writer  would  pen  such  a  sentence. 


APPENDIX  173 

I  venture  to  think  that  commentators  have  erred 
in  taking  "  the  sleeping  ones"  of  verse  13  as  iden 
tical  with  "  the  dead  in  Christ"  of  verse  16.  Verse 
16  deals  with  the  righteous  dead  in  general ;  verses 
13  and  14  with  the  particular  individuals  whose 
death  they  were  mourning. 

And  the  first  eight  verses  of  chapter  iii.  indicate 
that  those  deaths  affected  them  so  deeply  that  the 
Apostle  feared  lest  their  faith  in  Christ  should  give 
way,  and  "his  labour  be  in  vain."  Will  the  reader, 
then,  carefully  peruse  the  first  chapter  of  the  Epistle, 
and  ask  himself  the  question,  Is  it  credible,  is  it 
possible,  that  Christians  such  as  are  there  described 
could  have  been  in  danger  of  apostatising  because 
some  of  their  number  had  died  in  the  ordinary 
course  of  nature  ?  It  is  absolutely  certain  that 
what  tried  their  faith  was  not  the  fact  that  deaths 
had  occurred,  but  the  circumstances  in  ic/tich  they  had 
occurred. 

And  what  were  the  circumstances  ?  The  reference 
to  martyrdom  in  chapters  ii.  14,  15,  and  iii.  3,  sup 
plies  the  obvious  clue.  For  obvious  that  clue  seems 
to  me  now;  and  yet  I  acknowledge  humbly  and 
gratefully  that  it  is  to  my  friend  the  Rev.  C.  H. 
Waller,  D.D.,  that  I  am  indebted  for  this  solution 
of  a  difficulty  which  perplexed  me  for  forty  years. 

To  recapitulate.  As  already  noticed  (see  pp. 
117-120  ante),  the  words  of  1  Thess.  iv.  15  are  not 
Apostolic  teaching  about  "the  dead  in  Christ  "in 
general,  but  a  definite  Divine  message  to  the  Thes- 


174  APPENDIX 

salonians  with  reference  to  the  death  of  certain 
definitely  known  persons — "the  sleeping  ones"  of 
verse  13.  Of  course,  the  words  Trepl  rwv  KOL^wfjievwv 
may  bear  the  meaning  given  them  by  the  Revisers. 
But  Dean  Alford's  translation,  "  them  which  are 
sleeping  "  (or,  as  we  should  say  in  colloquial  English, 
"  the  sleeping  ones ")  is  the  simple  and  natural 
rendering,  and  the  context  makes  it  clear  that  this 
is  what  is  intended.  If  the  Revisers'  gloss  were 
correct,  we  should  expect  the  repetition  of  the 
present  participle  in  verse  15. 

Now  a  general  statement  that,  at  the  Lord's 
coming,  the  righteous  dead  shall  not  be  at  a 
disadvantage  relatively  to  people  then  living  upon 
earth,  is  very  different  from  a  specific  statement  to 
the  Thessalonians  about  certain  individuals  whose 
death  they  were  mourning.  If  by  a  Divine  decree 
the  Coming  were  a  far-distant  event,  that  would 
not  affect  the  truth  of  the  one  statement,  whereas 
it  would  render  the  other  at  least  disingenuous. 

Certain  it  is,  therefore,  that  when  these  words 
were  written,  there  was  nothing  to  preclude  their 
fulfilment  at  the  time.  And  that  being  so,  it  is 
certain  there  can  be  nothing  in  prophecy  to  necessi 
tate  delay  in  these  days  of  ours.  For  the  question 
is  not  whether  any  foretold  events  may  intervene — 
that  may  be  conceded — but  whether  they  must  in 
tervene  ;  in  other  words,  not  whether  the  Coming 
may  be  further  delayed,  but  whether  delay  is 
inevitable. 


APPENDIX  175 

The  fact  that  the  promise,  "  Surely  I  am  coming 
quickly"  remains  unfulfilled,  does  not  clash  with 
the  truth  that  "  God  is  not  slack  concerning  His 
promise."  And  the  explanation  of  the  seeming 
paradox  is  to  be  sought  in  the  history  of  Christen 
dom  and  not  in  the  prophetic  Scriptures. 

"The  Apostolic  age  maintained  that  which  ought 
to  be  the  attitude  of  all  ages,  constant  expectation 
of  the  Lord's  return"  (Alford  :  1  Tim.  vi.  14). 


INDEX 


ALFORD,  Dean,   quoted,  22, 

48,  89,  139,  162,  170 
Apostasy  in  the  latter  days, 

the  character  of,  147-160 
Appendix — 

Note    I.— The   Church, 

161-169 
Note   II.— 1   Thess.   iv. 

13-17,  170 

Atheism,  Bacon  and  Darwin 
repudiate,  12 

BACON,  quoted,  12 
Bernard,  Canon,  quoted,  90 
Bible,  The— 

Attitude  of  Higher  Criti 
cism  towards,  156, 158 
Eastern   book     on    the 

human  side,  40 
To  be  the  test  for  every 
thing,  143 

Bishop  and  Elder,  inter 
changeable  terms  in  the 
New  Testament,  163 
Bishop  and  Minister,  funda 
mental  distinction  be 
tween,  165 


"  Brethren,  the,"  and  minis 
try,  161,  167 

Buddhism,  "  The  Path,"  7 
Bullinger,  Dr.,  quoted,  132 

CAIN  and  Abel,  146 
"  Catholic  Revival,"  The,  152 
Chalmers,  Dr.,  quoted,  92 
Chastening   v.    Punishment, 

42-44,  48,  49 
Cheyne,  Prof.,  154 
Choice    between     God    and 
Mammon.     Christ's  state 
ment     by     parable,     20- 
29 
Christ — 

Blessings  resulting  from 
the  life  and  death  of 
Christ,  30-39 
Higher    Criticism     and 
the       humanity       of 
Christ,  154-157 
Significance     of      titles 
used  in  the  New  Tes 
tament,  106-110 
The  Great  Temptation, 
146 


176 


INDEX 


177 


Christian  Life — 

A  discipline,  44 

Chastening,  not  punish 
ment,  42-44,  48,  49 

Christian,  what  consti 
tutes  a,  44,  95-100 

Danger  of  folly  and  lack 
of  common  sense.  140 

Fear  of  God  compatible 
with  love,  68-79 

Grace  and  law  different 
in  principle,  31,  40 

Holy  Scripture  to  be 
the  test,  143 

Joy  becoming  to  the 
Christian,  80 

Natural  relationships  to 
have  priority,  141 

"  Peculiar  people,"  term 
explained,  64 

Pilgrimage,  nature  of, 
82-85,  93,  94 

Present  to  be  used  in 
view  of  future,  17-19 

Responsibilities  of,  60- 
62,  66-69 

Righteous  life,  the  prin 
ciple  and  practice,  50- 
59 

Satan  as  an  angel  of 
light,  147-149 

Security  of  the  Christian, 
47 

"  Via  Media "  impos 
sible,  19 

Worldly  influences  af 
fect,  45 


Christian  science,  144 
Chrysostom,  quoted,  81 
Church,  the — 

Falling  away  from  origi 
nal  conception  and  its 
results,  86-94 
The  Church  as  a  Society 
and    the     Church    as 
the    Body  of   Christ, 
87,  161-169 
Professing  church,  The 

167 
Roman  Catholic  church. 

See  that  title. 
Common  sense  needed  in  the 

Christian  life,  140 
Cook,  Canon,  quoted,  5 
"  Council  of  Trent,"  the,  100 
Cyprian,  quoted,  167 

DANIEL — 

Example  of,  65 

The  "Seventy  Weeks" 

explained,  115 
Darby,  Mr.  J.  N.,  161,  167 
Darwin,  quoted,  12 
Death,  111 

Martyrdom  the  clue  to 
1    Thess.    iv.     13-17, 
11 6-1 22,  and  Note  II., 
Appendix 
Devil.     See  Satan 

ESAUS  of  life,  17,  18 

Eve  deceived  by  Satan,  149 

FKAR  of  God  consistent  with 
love,  70-79;  lack  of  "Godly 
fear  "  in  present  day,  75-78 
M 


178 


INDEX 


Fools,  various  types,  8-19 
"  Free  Churches,"  danger  of 
increasing  clericalism,  152 

GRACE — 

Doctrine  of,  9,  10,  30- 
40 

Does  not  suspend  ac 
tion  of  principles  on 
which  God  governs 
the  world,  52-55 

Law  and  Grace  different 
in  principle,  33,  40 

Teaches  by  chastening, 
not  punishing,  41-49, 
51 
Greek  tenses,  significance  of, 

98 
Greek  words — 

avdXvcrai,  dvd\v<ris,  132 

dvofiia,  61 

SIO.KOVOS,  166 

€TTf(f>dvr),  31 

«7r/crK07roi,  166 

ii>ii,  32 

Xovrpw,  32 

(rwTrjpios,  31 

VJTO  vofiovy  34 

HARNACK,  Dr.,  quoted,  101, 
155 

Hastings'  "  Bible  Diction 
ary,"  quoted,  7,  91,  154, 
155,  156 

Hatch,  Dr.,  quoted,  165 

Heaven,  remembrance  in, 
123 


Higher  Criticism,  the  trend 

of,  154-160 
Holiness,  meaning  of  term,  61 

INTERMEDIATE    state,     the, 
126-137 
Christ's  teaching,    133- 

135 

St.  Paul's  teaching,  129- 
132 

JOY,  becoming  to  the  Chris 
tian,  80 
Judgment-seat  of  Christ,  67 

"KENOSis"  theory,  156 
Knife-grinder,  story  of,  26 

LAW  and  Grace,  difference  in 
principle  and  standard,  33, 
40 

"  Laying  on  of  Hands,"  sig 
nificance  of  the  act,  164 

Lazarus.  See  under  para 
bles  :  Rich  man  and  Laz 
arus 

Lightfoot,  Bishop,  quoted, 
86,  88,  163 

Love  of  God  and  fear  com 
patible,  70-79 

MATERIALISM  gives  way  be 
fore  Spiritualism,  144 
M'Cheyne,  hymn  quoted,  124 
Milman,  Dean,  quoted,  168 
Ministry,  spiritual,  as  distin 
guished  from   "office,"  in 
the  Church,  163-167 


INDEX 


179 


More,  Sir  Thomas,  quoted,  80 
Moses,   the    chastening    of, 
49 

NABAL,  13 

Nehemiah,    an    example    of 

prayer,  77 
Noah,  10 

"  (ECUMENICAL      Councils," 

the,  168 
Ordination.     Xee  "  Laying  on 

of  Hands  " 
Ordination   Service,  quoted, 

166 

PAUL,  ST.:  describes  physical 
sufferings  for  Christ,  3  ; 
stoning  at  Lystra  and 
miraculous  recovery  after 
a  vision,  129,  130  ;  teach 
ing  concerning  state  after 
death,  130 
Parables — 

Prodigal  Son,  15 

Rich  man  and  Lazarus, 

20-29 
Treasure  hid  in  a  field, 

11,  17 

Unjust  steward,  14-19 
"  Peculiar  people,"  meaning 

of  the  term,  64 
Pilgrim,  true  interpretation 
of  the  word,  82-85,  93,  94 
Poetry — 

"  From  various  cares  my 
soul  retires,"  98 


Poetry — 

"Thou  wilt  not  sever  us, 

O  Lord  our  God,"  137 

"  When      this     passing 

world  is  done,"  124 
Poverty,  with  Godliness  and 

without  it,  25-27 
Prayer,  and   reverence,   77- 

79 
Priesthood — 

Of  Mosaic  Law,  165 
Under  the  Gospel,  87 
Prophetic        interpretation, 

limitation  of,  114 
Punishment    r.    chastening, 

42-44,  4*,  4!» 
Pusey,  Dr.,  quoted,  155 

RATIONALISM,  its  exposition 
in  "What  is  Christian 
ity?"  101-105.  S>-e  also 
"  Higher  Criticism  " 

Repentance,  51 

Revivalism,  dangers  of,  106 

Resurrection  of  Christ  and 
the  Christian,  126 

Reverence,  lack  of  in  present 
day,  78,  106-110 

Riches,  the  right  and  wrong 
use  of,  23 

Righteous  life,  principle  and 
practice,  50-59 

Ritualism,  100 

Roman  Catholic  Church — 
A  national  danger,  153 
Cause    of    Reformation 
secession,  88 


180 


INDEX 


Roman  Catholic  Church — 
Immorality   of   Pre-Re- 
fonnation   days,  167- 
169 

SALVIAN     OF    MARSEILLES, 

quoted,  168 
Satan  of  Scripture — 

Errors  concerning,  105 
Higher  Criticism,   atti 
tude  towards,  154 
Nature   of    rebellion   v. 

God,  144-154 

Second  Advent  of  Christ, 
112-122;  cause  of  delay 
suggested,  120 ;  Scripture 
teaches  more  than  one  re 
turn,  113 

"  Seventy  Weeks  "  of  Daniel 
explained,  115 


Sin- 
Not  less  heinous  because 

of  grace,  35 
Separates  between  God 

and  sinner,  35 
Spencer,  Herbert,  failure  of 

"  Spencerism,"  12 
,   Spiritualism,  128,  136 

"  VIA  MEDIA  "  impossible  in 

the  Christian  life,  19 
i  Vows,  release  possible  under 
Mosaic  law,  139 

i  WALLER,  D.D.,  Rev.  C.H.,  171 
!  "Way,  The,"  origin  of  the 

term,  5-7  ;  also  Prefatory 

Note 

i  Worldly     influences     affect 
I       Christian  life,  45 


SOME    OF    THE    PASSAGES     OF 
SCRIPTURE   EXPLAINED 


Exodus  xix.  5,  p.  64 

,,       xxxiii.  1,  p.  94 
Deuteronomy  vii.  6,  xiv.   -1, 

xxvi.  18,  p.  64 
Job  i.  1,  p.  43 

„    xlii.  7,  8,  p.  44 

Psalm  iv.,  pp.  11,  82 

„      xxiv.,  p.  38 


Psalm  liii.,  p.  1 1 
„     cxii.  1,  p.  69 

Eccl.  ii.  24,  p.  08 

„    v.  1-:.,  pp.  8,  138 

„    ix.  7,  p.  80 

„    xii.  13,  14,  p.  69 

Daniel  ix.  24-^7,  p.  115 


NEW   TESTAMENT 


Matt.  iv.  24,  p.  29 

„      viii.  3,  p.  164 
Luke  ii.  48,  p.  29 

„     xii.  16-21,  p.  13 

„     xii.  36,  p.  132 

„     xvi.  pp.  14-19,  20-29 

„     xix.  31,  34,  p.  109 

„     xxii.  11,  p.  109 

„     xxiv.  19-21,  p.  108 
John  viii.  44,  p.  145 

„     xiv.  21-24 

„     xv.  6,  p.  47 

„     xvii.  12,  p.  47 
Acts  xiii.  3,  p.  164 

„     xiv.  19,  pp.  3,  129 


Acts  xviii.  26,  p.  5 
„    xx.  38,  p.  29 
„    xxii.  3,  p.  f> 
„     xxiv.  14,  p.  5 
,,     xxiv.  -2-2,  p.  fj 
,,    xxviii.  17,  p.  5 
Romans  i.  17,  18,  p.  31 
„        iii.  26,  p.  31 
„        xv.  8,  p.  166 

1  Cor.  iv.  9,  p.  3 

„      v.  7,  8,  p.  81 
„      xi.  32,  p.  42 
„      xii.  28,  p.  162 
„      xiv.  26,  40,  p.  141 

2  Cor.  iv.  5,  p.  97 


181 


182 


PASSAGES   EXPLAINED 


2  Cor.  v.,  p.  130 
„     xi.  3,  p.  149 
„      xi.  14,  p.  147 
„-     xii.  2-4,  p.  129 
„     xii.  7,  p.  3 
Gal.  iii.  13,  24,  p.  34 

„    iv.  5,  p.  34 
Eph.  iv.  8-12,  pp.  162,  164 
„     v.  15-17,  pp.  138,  139 
Phil.  i.  pp.  131-133 
„     ii.  12,  p.  76 
„     iii.  20,  p.  114 
Col.  ii.  6,  7,  pp.  97-99 
1  Thess.— 

(Whole  epistle),  pp.  116- 

119 
iv.    13-17.       Appendix, 

Note  II. 
v.  9,  p.  116 


1  Tim.  ii.  14,  p.  149 

„   iii.  8-10,  p.  164 
„   iii.  8-12,  p.  166 
„   iii.  1,  p.  166 
„   iv.,  p.  148 
„   v.  17,  p.  163 
„   vi.  17-19,  p.  23 

2  Tim.  iv.  6,  p.  132 
Titus  i.  13,  p.  46 

„     ii.ll,12,iii.4,5,  pp.31, 32 
„     ii.  14,  p.  61 
Hebrews  vi.  4-8,  p.  48 
„        x.  17-22,  p.  37 
„        x.  26-29,  p.  48 
„        xii.  5,  p.  42 

1  Peter  i.  1,  p.  84 

„      ii.  11,  p.  84 

2  Peter  i.  14,  p.  114 
Rev.  vi.  9,  10,  p.  128 


THE    END 


Printed  by  BALLANTTNK,  HANSON  &  Co. 
Edinburgh  &*  London 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

The  Gospel  and  its  Ministry. 

A  Handbook  of  Evangelical  Truth.     Twelfth  Edition, 
Revised  and  Enlarged,  Cloth,  2s.  6d. 

"  The  chapters  on  '  Grace  '  and  '  The  Cross  '  are  worth  their  weight 
in  gold."  -The  Christian. 

"  In  every  way  an  uncommon  work.  It  cannot  fail  to  prove  of  great 
service  towards  the  more  accurate  knowledge  of  the  Word  of  God."— 
Rev.  EVAN  H.  HOPKINS  in  The  Christian  Pathway  of  Power. 

Daniel  in  the   Critics'  Den. 

A  Reply  to  Professor  Driver  and  the  late    Dean   of 
Canterbury.      Second  Edition,  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  net. 

"His  apparently  cogent  elucidation  of  the  vexed  question  of  the 
Seventy  \Yeeks." — The  Times. 

"In  its  cautious,  but  firm  weighing  of  evidence,  the  refutation  (of 
the  critics)  is  crushing." — The  Record. 

"  A  trenchant  exposure  of  the  assumptions  of  Higher  Criticism.  \Ve 
trust  this  volume  will  be  read  by  thousands." — Sword  and  Troicel. 

"It  pulverises  the  latest  attack  on  the  Book  of  Daniel." — English 
Churchman. 

"  To  the  unbiased  mind  which  has  studied  both  sides  of  the  question 
this  work  would  appear  to  be  unanswerable." — Sunday  Magazine. 

Pseudo-Criticism  ;    or,  The  Higher 

Criticism  and  its  Counterfeit.     Cloth,  3s.  6d. 

"Sir  Robert  Anderson  again  levels  his  lance  at  '  rationalistic'  criti 
cism." —  The  Times. 

"  A  valuable  piece  of  work." — The  Record. 

"  A  masterpiece  of  apologetics." — English  Churchman. 

"I  read  the  book  through  with  the  keenest  interest,  and  I  laid  it 
down  with  the  earnest  hope  that  God  would  use  it  very  widely  among 
precisely  the  men  for  whom  it  was  written  with  such  masterly  force.  "- 
THE  BISHOP  OF  DURHAM. 


LONDON  :  JAMES  NISBET  &  CO.,  LIMITED 

21    BERNERS    STREET,   W. 

And  may  be  Ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 

i 


WORKS  BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR 

The    Silence    of    God.     sixth  Edition,  cioth, 

2s.  6d. 

"  We  are  profoundly  grateful  for  this  most  striking  endeavour  to  move  a 
terrible  stumbling-block  out  of  the  way  of  many.  .  .  .  We  have  seldom  read  a 
book  so  compelling  in  its  logical  directness." — The  Record. 

"  Ingenious,  original,  and  in  earnest." — British  Weekly. 

"  An  ingenious  and  subtle  attempt  to  meet  scepticism  on  its  own  ground." — 
New  York  Tribune. 

"  A  book  which  has  astounded  religious  Europe." — New  York  Herald. 

The  Coming  Prince  ;  Or,  The  Seventy  Weeks 
of  Daniel.  With  an  Answer  to  the  Higher  Criticism.  Seventh 
Edition,  Cloth,  5s. 

"  There  are  few  books  on  prophecy  written  in  so  fair  and  impartial  a  spirit." 
—  The  Christian. 

"  The  book  is  written  with  great  ability." — London  Quarterly  Review. 

Human    Destiny.       A    Handbook   of  the   Eschato- 

logical  Controversy.     Being  an  answer  to  the  hooks  entitled 

"  Eternal  Hope,"  "  Life  in  Christ,"  "Salvator  Mundi,"  "  The 

Restitution  of  all  Things,"  &c.     Fifth  Edition,  Cloth,  3s.  6d. 

The  late  C.  H.  SPURGEON:  "The  most  valuable  contribution  on  the  subject 

I  have  ever  seen." 

"  Its  strength  lies  in  its  fidelity  to  revelation." — The  Christian. 
"  It  is  seldom  that  we  take  up  a  book  of  which  we  wish  that  it  had  been 
longer,  but  this  is  such  a  book." — The  Record. 

The   Buddha   of  Christendom.     A  Book  for 

the  Present  Crisis.     Cloth,  5s. 

"  A  powerful  plea  for  true  Christianity." — The  Rock. 

"  Emphatically  a  leading  book  of  the  century." — The  News. 

"No  more  important  work,  and  no  more  salutary  warning,  has  appeared  in 
our  clay." — The  Morning  Star. 

"  Every  page  bears  evidence  to  his  scholarship,  learning,  and  detestation  of 
sham  in  religion." — New  York  Tribune. 

The  Bible  and  Modern   Criticism,      with 

a  Preface  by  the  BISHOP  OF  DURHAM.     Fifth  Edition,  Cloth, 
7s.  6d. 

"A  vigorous  criticism  of  the  methods  of  the''  Higher  Critics.'." — The  Times. 

"  AJnoble  contribution  to  current  literature  on  this  momentous  subject." — The 
Record. 

"  A  work  of  singular  lucidity  of  style  and  of  remarkable  argumentative 
power." — New  York  Tribune. 

LONDON:  HODDER  &  STOUGHTON 

And  may  be  Ordered  of  any  Bookseller. 

"  For    US    Men."       Chapters  on  Redemption  Truths. 

Cloth,  2s.  6d.  net. 

"  Intended  to  help  those  who  are  seeking  peace  with  God,  or  who  desire  to 
lead  others  into  the  way  of  life." — Preface. 

LONDON :   MORGAN   &   SCOTT 

2 


