'I'''.' , 



'^•'^k '.-'r''.'-''r 









^; i- • ;. -.''. 



*1 '>''''''' '^ /■■ /, 



?/-■; 



F.''."''j'"-'' ' 



yMIVERSITY 
IJBRARV 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 





Cornell University 
Library 



The original of tliis book is in 
tine Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://archive.org/details/cu31924029353772 



Cornell University Library 
BV3797 .T69 1906 



Bible and its Ctirist: being noonday tallt 



olin 




3 1924 029 353 772 



tlhllltllll 



T mmmimiiww^^efi^ttr /ii^s to men" 



The Bible 
and Its Christ 



Being Noonday TalKs With Business 
Men on Faith and Unbelief 

By R. A. Torrey 

Superintendent Moody Bible Institute 




Fleming H. Kevell Company 

Na^r YorK Chicago Toronto 

Lvncion and Cdlnbur^H 



WORKS BY R. A. TORREY 

Stiferintendent of the Moody Bible Institute 

Anecdotes and Illustrations. 12mo, cloth, $1.00, net. 

How to Succeed in the Christian Life. 12mo, cloth, 
60 cents, net ; paper, 25 cents, net. 

The Bible and Its Christ. A new edition of " T^U^ t" 
Men." 12mo, cloth, 75 cents, net ; paper, 25 cents, net. 

Revival Addresses. 12mo, cloth, net $1.00. 

Real Salvation and Whole-Hearted Service. Bdnga 
Second Vol. of Revival Addresses. 12mo, cloth, net Sl.uw- 

What the Bible Teaches. Large 8vo, S2.50. 
How to Work for Christ. A compendium of effective 
methods. 8vo, cloth, $2.50. 

How to Promote and Conduct a Successful Revival. 

Edited by Mr. Torrey. 12mo, cloth, 353 pages, gilt top, 
$1.00, net. 

How to Bring Men to Christ. 12mo, cloth, 75 cents; 
paper, 25 cents, net. 

How to Study the Bible for Greatest Profit. The 

methods and fundamental conditions of Bible study 
that yield the largest results. 12mo, cloth, 75 cents. 

How to Pray. The need of prayer and the need of revi- 
val; their relation and effect. 12mo, cloth, 50 cents; 
paper, 15 cents. 

How to Obtain Fullness of Power in Christian Life 

and Service. 12mo, cloth, 50 cents. 

The Divine Origin of the Bible. Its authority and 
power demonstrated and difiRculties solved. 12mo, cloth, 
50 cents. 

The Gist of the Lesson (Annually). A vest-pocket 
exposition of the Sunday-school lessons. Leather, net, 
25 cents. 

The Baptismlwith the Holy Spirit. 12mo, cloth, 50 cents. 

A Vest-Pocket Companion for Christian Workers. 

Long 18mo, flexible leather, net, 25 cents. 

Ten Reasons Why I Believe the Bible is Word of 
God. 16mo, paper, 15 cents. 

Ought Christians to Keep the Sabbath ? Paper, net, 
10 cents. 



FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 

Publishers 



The ^ible and Its Christ 

Being Noonday Talks 
With Business Men on 
Faith and Unbelief 

By 
R. A. TORREY 

Author oj 
' H^hat the "Bible Teaches," " How to Pray," tU. 




New York Chicago Toronto 

Fleming H. Revell Company 

London and Edinburgh 



Copyright 1904-1906, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 



• }.■■ ■/ 






f^a ¥^f. 



New York: 1S8 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago : 80 Wabash Avenue 
Toronto : 27 Richmond Street, W. 
London : 21 Paternoster Square 
Ebinburgh ; 200 Princes Street 



CONTENTS 

rAGi 
I. One Reason Why I Believe the Bible to be 

THE Word of God .;...! 
II. Two More Reasons Why I Believe the Bible 

TO BE THE W^ORD OF GoD ... 17 

III. Four More Reasons Why I Believe the Bible 

TO BE the Word of God . . . .29 

IV. Three More Reasons Why I Believe the 

Bible to be the Word of God . . 43 
V "'D Jesus Christ Really Rise from the 

Dead ? 58 

VI. The Self-evident Truthfulness of the Gos- 
pel Stories of the Resurrection . . 70 
VII. The Circumstantial Evidence of the Resur- 
rection OF Christ 86 

VIII. What the Resurrection of Jesus from the 

Dead Proves 101 

IX. Infidelity : Its Causes, Consequences, and 

Cure 112 

X. Infidelity : Its Consequences and Cure . 125 



INTRODUCTION 

The addresses in this book have been delivered 
to large audiences of business and professional 
men in cities and large towns in Australia, New 
Zealand, Tasmania, England, Scotland, and Ire- 
land. Many who have been helped by them 
have urged me to put them into book form in 
order that they may be preserved for reference, 
and that they may be circulated among friends, 
hence this volume. 

In Melbourne the Town Hall was packed 
with 2500 men of all classes at the noon hour 
each day to listen to these addresses. In Sydney 
I am told that in the crowd that thronged the 
Centenary Hall there were many prominent busi- 
ness men and members of both Houses of the 
Legislature, who gave up their mid-day meal 
each day to attend. In Great Britain and Ire- 
land men very prominent in commercial and 
professional life, a large number of University 
men, both professors and students, have spoken 
to me of the help that has come to them from 
these addresses, not a few having been shaken 
in their faith by the critical discussions of the 
present day. Many agnostics, skeptics, Uni- 
tarians, and destructive critics have testified 
publicly to having been led by these lectures to 
Til 



yiii INTRODUCTION 

give up their former erroneous positions. I have 
been especially encouraged by the number of my 
brethren in the ministry who have testified in pub- 
lic and private of the help received. I pray 
that these addresses may be used in this printed 
form to lead many thousands more out into the 
light and strength that come from faith in the 
Bible and in the Christ of the Bible. 



FIRST TALK 

ONE REASON WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE TO BE 
THE WORD OF GOD 

The most important question in religious 
thought is, "Is the Bible the Word of God?" 
If the Bible is the Word of God, an absolutely 
trustworthy revelation from God Himself of 
Himself, His purposes and His will, of man's 
duty and destiny of spiritual and eternal realities, 
then we have a starting-point from which we can 
proceed to the conquest of the whole domain of 
religious truth. But if the Bible is not the Word 
of God, if it is the mere product of man's think- 
ing, speculating, and guessing, not altogether 
trustworthy in regard to religious and eternal 
truth, then we are all at sea, not knowing 
whither we are drifting, but we may be sure 
that we are not drifting toward any safe port. 

I did not always believe the Bible to be the 
Word of God. I sincerely doubted that the 
Bible was the Word of God. I doubted that 
Jesus Christ was the Son of God. I doubted 
whether there was a personal God. I was not 
an infidel — I was a skeptic. I did not deny — I 
questioned. I was not an atheist — I was an 
agnostic. I did not know, but I determined to 
find out. If there was a God, I determined to 



2 TALKS TO MEN 

find that out, and act accordingly. If there was 
not a God, I determined to find that out, and act 
accordingly. If Jesus Christ was the Son of 
God, I determined to find that out, and act ac- 
cordingly. If Jesus Christ was not the Son of 
God, I determined to find that out, and act ac- 
cordingly. If the Bible was the Word of God, 
I determined to find that out, and act accord- 
ingly; and if the Bible was not the Word of 
God, I determined to find that out, and act ac- 
cordingly. I found out. I found out beyond 
a peradventure that there is a God, that Jesus 
Christ is the Son of God, that the Bible is the 
Word of God. To-day it is with me not a mat- 
ter of mere probability, nor even of mere belief, 
but of absolute certainty. 

I am going to give you some of the reasons 
why I believe the Bible to be the Word of God. 
Not all the reasons — it would take months to do 
that ; not even the reasons which are most con- 
clusive to me personally, for these are of such a 
personal and experimental character that they 
cannot be conveyed to another. But I will give 
you reasons that will prove conclusive to any 
candid seeker after the truth, to anyone who 
desires to know the truth and is willing to obey 
it. They will not convince one who is deter- 
mined not to know the truth, or who is unwill- 
ing to obey it. If one will not receive the love 
of the truth, he must be left to his own deliberate 
choice of error, and given over to strong de- 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 3 

lusion to believe a lie. But if one is searching 
for the truth, no matter how completely he is 
in the fog to-day, he can be led into the truth. 

I believe the Bible to be the Word of God, first 
of all, because of the testimony of Jesus Christ 
to that fact. We live in a day in which many 
men say that they accept the teaching of Jesus 
Christ, but that they do not accept the teaching 
of the whole Bible ; that they believe what Jesus 
Christ says, but as to what Moses said, or is 
said to have said, and what Isaiah said, or is 
said to have said, and what Jeremiah said, and 
Paul said, and John said, and the rest of the 
Bible writers, they do not know about that. 
This position may at the first glance seem 
rational, but, in point of fact, it is utterly irra- 
tional. If we accept the teaching of Jesus 
Christ, we must accept the whole Bible, for 
Jesus Christ has set His stamp of His authority 
upon the entire Book, and if we accept His au- 
thority, we must accept all that upon which He 
sets the stamp of His authority. 

As to Christ's endorsement of the Old Testa- 
ment, turn first of all to Mark vii. 13. Jesus 
has just quoted from the Law of Moses, not 
merely from the Ten Commandments, but from 
other portions of the Law of Moses as well. He 
has set over against the teaching of the Law 
of Moses the traditions of the Pharisees and 
Scribes, and in this verse He says, You do make 



4 TALKS TO MEN 

"the Word of God of none effect throughout 
your tradition." Here He distinctly calls the 
Law of Moses the " Word of God." It is often- 
times said that the Bible nowhere claims to be 
the Word of God. Here Jesus Christ Himself 
distinctly asserts that the Law of Moses is the 
Word of God. If, then, we accept the authority 
of Jesus Christ, we must accept the Law of 
Moses as " the Word of God." Of course this 
only covers the first five books of the Old Testa- 
ment, but if we can accept this as the Word of 
God, we will have little difficulty with the rest 
of the Old Testament, for it is here that the 
hottest battle is being fought to-day. 

Turn again to Matthew v. i8. Here Jesus 
says, " Till heaven and earth pass away, one jot 
or one tittle shall in nowise pass from the law 
until all be fulfilled." Now every Hebrew 
scholar knows that a " jot " is the Hebrew char- 
acter " yodh," the smallest character in the He- 
brew alphabet, less than half the size of any other 
character in the Hebrew alphabet, and that a 
" tittle " is a little horn that the Hebrews put on 
their consonants ; and here Jesus asserts that the 
Law of Moses as originally given is absolutely 
infallible down to its smallest letter and part of 
a letter. If, then, we accept the authority of 
Jesus Christ, we must accept the authority of 
the Law of Moses as originally given, and as 
contained in the Old Testament Scriptures. 

Turn next to John x. 35. Jesus has just 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 5 

quoted in proof of a point which He is making 
from one of the Psalms, and adds, " The Scrip- 
ture cannot be broken," thus setting the stamp of 
His authority upon the absolute irrefragability 
of the Old Testament Scriptures. Turn again 
to Luke xxiv. 27, and you will read that Jesus, 
" Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, ex- 
pounded unto them in all the Scriptures the 
things concerning Himself " ; and in the 44th 
verse He says, " All things must be fulfilled 
which were written in the Law of Moses, and in 
the prophets, and in the Psalms." Now every 
scholar knows that the Jews divided their Bible 
(our present Old Testament Scriptures) into 
three parts: the law (the first five books of the 
Old Testament) ; the prophets (most of the 
books which we call prophetic, and some of those 
which we call historical) ; and the remaining 
books of the Old Testament, the Psalms or 
Sacred Writings. Jesus Christ takes up each 
one of these three recognized divisions of these 
Old Testament Scriptures and sets the stamp of 
His authority upon each of them. If, then we 
accept the authority of Jesus Christ, we are 
driven logically to accept the entire Old Testa- 
ment Scriptures. 

In Luke xvi. 31 Jesus says, " If they hear not 
Moses and the prophets, neither will they be per- 
suaded though one be raised from the dead," 
thus in the most emphatic way indorsing the 
truth of the Old Testament Scriptures. 



6 TALKS TO MEN 

In John V. 47 He says, " If ye believe not his 
[Moses'] writings, how shall ye believe My 
words ? " thus setting the stamp of His authority 
upon the teaching of Moses as being as truly 
from God as was His own. We must then, if 
we accept the authority of Jesus Christ, accept 
the entire Old Testament. 

But how about the New Testament? Did 
Jesus set the stamp of His authority upon it also ? 
He did. But how could He when not a book of 
the New Testament was written when He de- 
parted from this earth? By way of anticipation. 
Turn to John xiv. 26 and you will hear Jesus 
saying, " The Comforter, which is the Holy 
Ghost, whom the Father will send in My name. 
He shall teach you all things and bring all things 
to your remembrance whatsoever I have said 
unto you," thus setting the stamp of His au- 
thority, not only upon the Apostolic teaching as 
given by the Holy Ghost, but upon the Apostolic 
recollection of what He Himself had taught. 
The question is often asked, " How do we know 
that in the Gospel records we have an accurate 
reproduction of the teaching of Jesus Christ ? " 
It is asked, " Did the Apostles take notes at the 
time of what Jesus said ? " There is reason to 
believe that they did, that Matthew and Peter, 
from whom Mark derived his material, and 
James (from whom, there is reason to believe, 
Luke obtained much of his material) took notes 
of what Jesus said in Aramaic, and that John 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 7 

took notes of what Jesus said in Greek, and that 
we have in the four Gospels the report of what 
they took down at the time. But whether this be 
true or not does not matter for our present 
purposes, for we have Christ's own authority 
for it that in the ApostoHc records we have not 
the Apostles' recollection of what Jesus said, 
but the Holy Ghost's recollection of what Jesus 
said, and, while the Apostles might forget and 
report inaccurately, the Holy Ghost could not 
forget. 

Turn furthermore to John xvi. 12, 13, and you 
will hear Jesus saying, " I have yet many things 
to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now. 
Howbeit when He, the Spirit of truth, is come. 
He will guide you into all truth." Here Jesus 
sets the stamp of His authority upon the teach- 
ing of the Apostles as being given by the Holy 
Ghost, as containing all the truth, and as contain- 
ing more truth than His own teaching. He tells 
the Apostles that He has many things that He 
knows to tell them, but that they ar,e not ready 
yet to receive them, but that when the Holy 
Spirit comes, He will guide them into this fuller 
and larger truth. If then we accept the au- 
thority of Jesus Christ, we must accept the Apos- 
tolic teaching, the New Testament writings, as 
being given through the Holy Spirit, as contain- 
ing all the truth, and as containing more truth 
than Jesus taught while on earth. There are 
many in our day crying, " Back to Christ," by 



8 TALKS TO MEN 

which they usually mean, " We do not care what 
Paul taught, or what John taught, or what James 
taught, or what Jude taught. We do not know 
about them. Let us go back to Christ, the 
original source of authority, and accept what He 
taught, and that alone." Very well, "Back to 
Christ." The cry is not a bad one, but when 
you get back to Christ, you hear Christ Him- 
self saying, "On to the Apostles. They have 
more truth to teach than I have taught. The 
Holy Spirit has taught them all the truth. Listen 
to them." If then we accept the authority of 
Jesus Christ, we are driven to accept the au- 
thority of the entire New Testament. 

So then if we accept the teaching of Jesus 
Christ, we must accept the entire Old Testament 
and the entire New Testament. It is either 
Christ and the whole Bible, or no Bible and 
no Christ. There are some in these days who 
say that they believe in Christ, but not in the 
Christ of the New Testament. But there is no 
Christ but the Christ of the New Testament. 
Any other Christ than the Christ of the New 
Testament is a pure figment of the imagination. 
Any other Christ than the Christ of the New 
Testament is an idol made by man's own fancy, 
and whoever worships him is an idolater. But 
we must accept the authority of Jesus Christ. 
He is accredited to us by five unmistakable divine 
testimonies. 

First, by the testimony of the divine life that 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 9 

He lived, for He lived as never man lived. Let 
any man take the four Gospels for himself and 
read them carefully and candidly, he will soon 
be convinced of two things: — First, that he is 
reading the story of a life actually lived, that 
no man could have imagined the character there 
set forth unless the life had been actually lived, 
much less could four men have imagined a char- 
acter, each one of the four making his own ac- 
count of that character, not only consistent with 
itself, but consistent with the other three. To 
suppose that these four men who wrote the Gos- 
pels imagined the life here set forth would be to 
suppose a greater miracle than any recorded in 
the Gospels. He will see, in the second place, 
that the life here set forth is apart from all other 
human lives, that it stands by itself, that it is 
manifestly a divine life lived under human con- 
ditions. Napoleon Bonaparte was a good judge 
of men. He once said regarding the life of 
Jesus as recorded in the Gospels, which he had 
been reading, " I know men [and if he did not 
know men, who ever did?], and Jesus Christ 
was not a man." What he meant was, of course, 
that Jesus Christ was not a mere man. 

Second, Jesus Christ is accredited to us by the 
divine words that He spoke. If anyone will 
study the teaching of Jesus Christ with candor 
and faithfulness, he will soon see that it has a 
character that distinguishes it from all other 
teaching ever uttered on earth. 



10 TALKS TO MEN 

Third, Jesus Christ was accredited to us by the 
divine works that He wrought, not only healing 
the sick, which many others have done, but 
cleansing the leper, opening the eyes of the blind, 
raising the dead, stilling the tempest by a word, 
turning water into wine, and feeding 5000 with 
five small loaves and two small fishes, which was 
a creative act. These miracles of power are 
clear credentials of a God-sent Teacher. We 
cannot study them candidly and not come to the 
same conclusion as Nicodemus did, " We know 
that Thou art a Teacher come from God, for no 
man can do these signs that Thou doest, except 
God be with him." Of course, we bear in mind 
the fact that strenuous efforts have been made 
to eliminate the supernatural element from the 
story of the life of Jesus Christ, but all these 
efforts have resulted in failure, and all similar 
efforts must result in failure. The most able 
effort of this kind that was ever made was that 
of David Strauss in his " Leben Jesu." David 
Strauss was a man of remarkable ability and 
gifts, a man of real and profound scholarship, 
a man of notable genius, a man of singular 
power of critical analysis, a man of indomitable 
perseverance and untiring industry. He brought 
to bear all the rare gifts of His richly endowed 
mind upon the story of the life of Jesus with 
the determination to discredit: the miraculous 
element therein contained. He spent his best 
years and strength in this effort. If anvone 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 11 

could have succeeded in such an effort, David 
Strauss was the man, but he failed utterly. For 
a time it seemed to many that he had succeeded 
in his purpose, but when his life of Jesus was 
itself submitted to rigid, critical analysis it fell 
all to pieces, and to-day is utterly discredited, 
and those who wish to eliminate the miraculous 
element in the story of Jesus feel that they must 
make the attempt anew, since the attempt of 
David Strauss has come to nothing. Where 
David Strauss failed, Ernest Renan tried again. 
He had not, by any means, the ability and genius 
of Strauss, but he was a man of brilliant genius, 
of subtle imagination, of rare literary skill, of 
singular adroitness and finesse. His " Life of 
Christ " was read with interest and admiration 
by many. The work was done with fascinating 
skill. Some fancied that Ernest Renan had suc- 
ceeded in his attempt, but his " Life of Jesus " 
naturally enough was discredited even in a 
shorter time than that of David Strauss. All 
other attempts have met with a similar fate. It 
is an attempt at the impossible. Let any candid 
man take the life of Jesus and read it for him- 
self with attention and care, and he will soon 
discover that the life there pictured could not 
have been imagined, but must have been really 
lived; that the teachings reported as uttered by 
Jesus are no fictitious teachings put into the 
mouth of a fictitious person, but the real utter- 
ances of a real person. He will also discover 



12 TALKS TO MEN 

that the character and the teaching set forth in 
the Gospels are inextricably interwoven with the 
stories of the miracles. He will find that if you 
eliminate the miracles, the character and the 
teaching disappear, that the character and the 
teachings cannot be separated from the mirac- 
ulous element without a violence of treatment 
that no reasonable man will permit. To-day 
this much at least is proven, that Jesus lived and 
wrought substantially as is recorded in the four 
Gospel records of His life. Personally, I be- 
lieve that more than this is proven, but this is 
enough for our present purpose. If Jesus lived 
and wrought substantially as the Gospels record, 
cleansing the lepers, opening the eyes of the 
blind, raising the dead, stilling the tempest with 
His word, feeding the 5000 with the five small 
loaves and the two small fishes, then He bears 
unmistakable credentials as a Teacher sent and 
indorsed by God. 

Fourth, Jesus Christ is also accredited to us 
in the fourth place by His divine influence upon 
all subsequent history. Jesus Christ was be- 
yond peradventure one of three things: He was 
either the son of God in a unique sense, — a divine 
Person incarnate in human form, — or else He was 
the most daring impostor that ever lived, or else 
one of the most hopeless lunatics. That He 
claimed to be the Son of God in a unique sense, 
and that all men should honor Him even as they 
honored the Father (John v. 23), and that He 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 13 

and the Father were one (John x. 30), and he 
that had seen Him had seen the Father (John 
xiv. 9), of this there can be no honest doubt. 
He was then either the divine Person that He 
claimed to be, or the most daring impostor, or 
a most hopeless lunatic. Was His influence 
upon subsequent history the influence of a 
lunatic? No one but a lunatic would say so. 
Was His influence upon subsequent history the 
influence of an impostor? No one but one 
whose own heart was thoroughly cankered with 
deceit and fraud would think of saying so. Not 
an impostor, not a lunatic, we have only one 
alternative left — He was what He claimed to be, 
the Son of God. 

Fifth, Jesus Christ is accredited to us by His 
resurrection from the dead. Later on I shall 
present to you the evidence for the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ. We will see the historic evi- 
dence for the resurrection of Christ is absolutely 
convincing in its character, that the resurrection 
of Jesus Christ from the dead is one of the best 
proven facts of history. But the resurrection of 
Christ is God's seal to Christ's claim. Jesus 
Christ claimed to be the Son of God. He was 
put to death for making that claim. Before be- 
ing put to death He said that God would set His 
seal to the claim by raising Him from the dead. 
They killed Him ; they laid Him in the sepulcher ; 
they rolled a stone to the door of the sepulcher ; 
they sealed that door with the Roman seal, which 



14 TALKS TO MEN 

to break was death ; and when the appointed hour 
of which Christ had spoken came, the breath of 
God swept through the sleeping clay, and Jesus 
rose triumphant over death, and God spoke more 
clearly than if He should speak from the open 
heavens to-day and say, " This is My beloved 
Son. Hear ye Him." 

We must then, if we are honest, accept the 
authority of Jesus Christ; but, as already seen, 
if we accept the authority of Jesus Christ, we 
must accept the entire Old Testament and the 
entire New Testament as being the Word of God ; 
therefore I believe the Bible to be the Word of 
God because of the testimony of Jesus Christ 
to that effect. 

A school of criticism has arisen that assumes 
to set up its authority against the authority of 
Jesus Christ. They say, for example, " Jesus 
says that the iioth Psalm was by David, and was 
Messianic; but we say that the iioth Psalm is 
neither by David, nor is it Messianic." They 
ask us to give up the authority and infallibility 
of Jesus Christ and the Bible, and accept their 
authority and their infallibility in their place. 
Very well, but before doing it we demand their 
credentials. We do not yield to the claim of 
authority and infallibility of anyone until he 
presents his credentials. Jesus Christ presents 
His credentials. First of all, He presents the 
credential of the divine life that He lived. What 
have they to place in comparison with that ? We 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 15 

hear much about the beauty of the Hfe of some of 
this school of critics. We have no desire to deny 
the claim, but against the beauty of their lives we 
put the life of Jesus. Which suffers by the com- 
parison? If there is any force in the argument, 
" If a man's life is in the right, his doctrine can- 
not be in the wrong " — and there is force in the 
argument — it bears immeasurably more for the 
authority of Jesus Christ than it does for the 
authority of any critic or school of critics. 

Second, Jesus presents the credential of the 
divine words that He spoke. What have they 
to put up against that? The words of Jesus 
Christ have stood the test of eighteen centuries, 
and shine out with greater luster and glory 
to-day than ever. What school of criticism 
has ever stood the test of eighteen years? If 
one has to choose between the teaching of Christ 
and that of any school of criticism, it will not 
take any thoroughly sane man long to choose. 

Third, Jesus Christ presents His third creden- 
tial, the divine works that He wrought, the un- 
mistakable seal of God upon His claims. What 
has this school of criticism to put up against 
that? Absolutely nothing. It has no miracles 
but miracles of literary ingenuity in the attempt 
to make the preposterous appear historical. 

Fourth, Jesus Christ presents the credential 
of His influence upon human history. We all 
know what the influence of Jesus Christ has 
been, how benign and how divine. Everything 



16 TALKS TO MEN 

that is best in modern civilization, everything 
that is best in national, domestic, and individual 
life, is due to the influence of Jesus Christ. Alas ! 
we also know the influence of this school of 
criticism. We know that it is weakening the 
power of ministers and Christian workers every- 
where. We know that it is emptying churches. 
We know that it is depleting missionary treas- 
uries. We know that it is paralyzing missionary 
effort in every field where it has gone. I know 
this by personal observation, and not by hearsay. 
This may not be their intention. With some of 
them it is not their intention, but none the less 
it is a fact. The influence of Jesus has been 
thoroughly beneficent. The influence of this 
school of criticism is utterly bad. 

Fifth, Jesus presents His fifth credential. His 
resurrection from the dead. What has this 
school of criticism to set up over against 
that? Nothing whatever. Jesus Christ estab- 
lishes His claim. The opposing school of criti- 
cism stands dumb. Therefore we refuse to bow 
to the assumed and unsubstantiated authority 
and infallibility of any school of criticism, of 
any priest, or pope, or theological professor, but 
most gladly do we bow to the authority and 
infallibility of Jesus Christ, so completely proven, 
and upon His authority accept the entire Old 
Testament and the entire New Testament as 
the Word pf God. 



SECOND TALK 

TWO MORE REASONS WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE TO 
BE THE WORD OF GOD 

In the address of yesterday, we saw that if we 
accepted the authority of Jesus Christ we must 
accept the entire Old Testament and the entire 
New Testament, because He set the stamp of 
His authority on both; that it was either Christ 
and the whole Bible, or no Bible and no Christ. 
We saw, in the second place, that we must ac- 
cept the authority of Jesus Christ because He 
was accredited to us by five unmistakably divine 
testimonies. First, the testimony of the divine 
life that he lived. Second, the testimony of the 
divine words that he spoke. Third, the testi- 
mony of the divine works that He wrought. 
Fourth, the testimony of His divine influence 
upon all subsequent history. Fifth, the testi- 
mony of His resurrection from the dead. 

We saw, in the next place, that there was a 
school of criticism that assumed to set its au- 
thority up against that of Jesus Christ, that this 
school of criticism demanded that we should give 
up the infallibility of Christ and the Scriptures, 
and accept in the place of them the infallibility 
of this school of criticism. Before yielding to 
17 



18 TALKS TO MEN 

their demand, we demanded their credentials. 
We saw that Jesus presented His credentials, 
which were convincing, but that this school of 
criticism had absolutely no credentials to present 
over against those of Jesus Christ. Therefore 
we refused to bow to their claim of authority 
and infallibility, but most gladly bowed to the 
fully proven authority and infallibility of Jesus 
Christ. 

My second reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of its fulfilled 
prophecies. The average infidel knows abso- 
lutely nothing about fulfilled prophecy, and this 
is not to be wondered at, for the average Chris- 
tian knows nothing about fulfilled prophecy, and 
even the average preacher knows practically 
nothing about fulfilled prophecy. The sub- 
ject of prophecy is a large one, and to go 
into it thoroughly would take many days, but it 
Can be presented in outline in a few moments 
with sufficient fullness to show the overwhelm- 
ing weight of the argument. There are in the 
[Bible two kinds of prophecy: first, the explicit 
verbal prophecies, and second, the prophecies of 
the types and symbols. 

We will take up first the explicit verbal proph- 
ecies. These are of three kinds; first, prophe- 
cies regarding the coming Messiah; second, 
prophecies regarding the Jewish people; third, 
prophecies regarding the Gentile nations. We 
will limit ourselves this morning to prophecies 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 19 

regarding the coming Messiah, and take only 
five of them by way of illustration. Isaiah liii. 
(the entire chapter) ; Micah v. 2 ; Daniel ix. 
25-27; Jeremiah xxiii. 5, 6; Psalms xvi. 8-1 1. 
In the passages cited we have predictions of a 
coming King of Israel. We are told the exact 
time of His manifestation to His people, the 
exact place of His birth, the family of which He 
should be born, the condition of the family at 
the time of His birth (a condition entirely differ- 
ent from that existing at the time the prophecy 
was written, and contrary to all the probabilities 
in the case), the manner of His reception by His 
people (a reception entirely different from that 
which would naturally be expected), the fact, 
method, and details regarding His death, with 
the specific circumstances regarding His burial. 
His resurrection subsequent to His burial, and 
His victory subsequent to His resurrection. 
These predictions were fulfilled with the most 
minute precision in Jesus of Nazareth. 

An attempt has been made by the rationalists 
to show that Isaiah liii. does not refer to the 
coming Messiah. It is natural that they should 
attempt this, for if it does refer to the coming 
Messiah, the case of the rationalists is hopeless. 
That it does refer to the coming Messiah is evi- 
dent from the fact that this chapter was taken 
to be Messianic by the Jews themselves until its 
fulfillment in Jesus of Nazareth, and their un- 
willingness to accept Him as the Messiah drove 



20 TALKS TO MEN 

them into the attempt to show that it was not 
Messianic. Furthermore, the desperate straits 
to which those who deny its Messianic applica- 
tion are driven show the hopelessness of their 
case. When asked who the sufifering One of 
Isaiah liii. is, if He is not the Messiah, the best 
answer they can get is that it refers to suffering 
Israel; but anyone who will carefully read the 
passage will see that this interpretation is im- 
possible. The sufferer of Isaiah liii. is repre- 
sented as suffering for the sins of others than 
Himself, and those for whom He is suffering 
are represented as " My people," that is, Israel 
(verse 8). Now, if the sufferer is suffering for 
sins of others than Himself, and the others than 
Himself for whom He is suffering are Israel, 
then surely the sufferer Himself cannot be 
Israel. 

You can bring the prophecies citied down to 
the very latest date to which the most daring 
destructive critic ever thought of assigning them, 
and still they are hundreds of years before the 
birth of Jesus of Nazareth. How are we going 
to account for it, that this Book has the power of 
looking into the future hundreds of years and 
predicting with most minute precision things to 
come to pass then, and that these predictions are 
fulfilled to the very letter? Facts demanding 
accounting for. You are business men — theolo- 
gians may weave their theories out of their own 
inner consciousness without regard to facts, but 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 21 

business men must face facts, and here are facts. 
There is but one rational explanation of it. Any 
book that has the power of looking hundreds of 
years into the future, and predicting with minute 
precision as to person, place, time, circumstances, 
detailed things to occur at that remote period, 
must have for its author the only person in the 
universe who knows the end from the beginning 
— that is God. Of course, it is quite possible 
for a far-seeing man to look a few years into 
the future, and, by studying causes now operant, 
predict in a general way some things that will 
occur. But this is not at all our problem with 
the Bible. It is not a few years into the future, 
but hundreds of years into the future; not in a 
general way, but with minute and specific full- 
ness. It is not of things the causes of which are 
now operant and discernible, but things the 
causes of which are not discernible at the 
present time, and these predictions fulfilled to 
the letter. To a mind willing to bow to facts 
and their necessary meaning, it is conclusive 
evidence of the Divine origin of the Book. 

A noteworthy fact regarding the prophecies of 
the Bible is that oftentimes there are two seem- 
ingly contradictory lines of prophecy, and it 
seems as though if the one line of prophecy were 
fulfilled, the other could not be; and yet these 
two seemingly contradictory lines of prophecy 
will converge and be fulfilled in one Person. 
For example, in the Old Testament we have two 



22 TALKS TO MEN 

lines of prophecy concerning the Messiah; one 
Hne predicts a suffering Messiah, " despised and 
rejected of men," " a man of sorrows and ac- 
quainted with grief," whose earthly mission 
should end in death and ignominy. The other 
line of prophecy predicts with equal clearness 
and dcfiniteness an all-conquering Messiah, who 
should rule the nations with a rod of iron. How 
can both of these lines of prophecy be true ? The 
best answer the ancient Jew had;, before the ful- 
fillment of both lines in Christ, was that there 
were to be two Messiahs, one a suffering Mes- 
siah of the tribe of Joseph, and one a con- 
quering Messiah of the tribe of Judah ; but in the 
actual fulfillment both lines of prophecy meet in 
the one Person, Jesus of Nazareth, who at His 
first coming is the suffering Messiah, making 
atonement for sin by His death upon the cross, 
as so often predicted in the Old Testament, and 
at His second coming He will come as a con- 
quering King to rule the nations. 

But the prophecies of the types and symbols 
are even more conclusive than the explicit verbal 
prophecies. If you ask the ordinary, superficial 
student of the Bible, how much of the Old Testa- 
ment is prophetical, he will reply something hke 
this, " Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and the 
Minor Prophets are prophetical," ancj may add 
that there are also prophetical passages here and 
there in the Psalms and Pentateuch. But if 
you ask a thorough-going student of the Bible 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 23 

how much of the Old Testament is prophetical, 
he will tell you that the entire book is propheti- 
cal, that its history is prophetical, that its per- 
sonages are prophetical, that its institutions, 
ceremonies, offerings, and feasts are prophetical. 
If you are incredulous (as you have a right to 
be until you have investigated, but you have no 
right to remain incredulous unless you do in- 
vestigate), but will take time, he will sit down 
and take you through the whole Book from the 
first chapter of Genesis to the last chapter of 
Malachi, and will show you everywhere unmis- 
takable foreshadowings of things to come. He 
will show you in the lives of Abraha.m, Isaac, 
Joseph, David, and Solomon unquestionable 
foreshadowings of the truth regarding Christ. 
He will show you in every sacrifice and offering, 
in every feast, in every institution, in the taber- 
nacle, and in every part of the tabernacle, its 
outer court. Holy Place and Most Holy Place, 
brazen altar, golden candlestick, table of shew 
bread, golden altar of incense, the veil that hung 
between the Holy Place and Most Holy Place, 
ark of the convenant, in its boards, bars, sockets 
and tenons, and the very coverings of the taber- 
nacle, the clearest setting forth of every truth 
about Christ— His Person, His nature, His char- 
acter. His atoning death. His resurrection, His 
ascension and coming again, and of all the facts 
of Jewish and Christian history. He will show 
you every profoundest truth vt'hich was to be 



24 TALKS TO MEN 

fully revealed in the New Testament prefigured 
in the types and symbols of the Old Testament. 
At first, this very likely will seem to you like a 
mere happy coincidence, but as you go on verse 
after verse, chapter after chapter, book after 
book, if you are a fair-minded man, you will at 
last be overwhelmingly convinced that this was 
the thought and intention of the real author; 
and as you see in this ancient history, and in this 
legislation ordained to meet the immediate needs 
of the people, the setting forth of all the pro- 
foundest truths of Christian doctrine, and the 
perfect foreshadowing of all the facts of the his- 
tory of Christ, the Jewish people and the Church, 
you will be driven to recognize in it the mind 
and wisdom of God. The modern critical theo- 
ries regarding the construction of Exodus, Le- 
viticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy go all to 
pieces when considered in the light of the mean- 
ing of the types of the Old Testament. I have 
never known a destructive critic that knew any- 
thing to speak of regarding the types. One can- 
not study them thoroughly without being pro- 
foundly convinced that the real author of the 
Old Testament, back of the human authors, is 
God. 

My third reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the unity of the 
Book. This is an old argument, but a good one. 
The Bible is composed, as I suppose you know, 
of sixty-six parts or books. It is oftentimes said 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 25 

that the Bible is not a book, but a library. This 
is partly true, partly false. It is true the Bible 
is a library, but at the same time it is the most 
intensely one book of any book extant. The 
sixty-six books which compose the Bible were 
written by at least forty different authors. They 
were written in three different languages, He- 
brew, Aramaic, and Greek. The period of their 
composition extends over at least 1500 years. 
They were written in countries hundreds of miles 
apart. They were written by men upon every 
plane of political and social life, from the king 
upon the throne down to the herdman and shep- 
herd and fisherman and the petty politician. 
They display every form of literary structure. 
In the Bible we find all kinds of poetry, epic 
poetry, lyric poetry, didactic poetry, erotic poetry 
— elegy and rhapsody. We find all kinds of 
prose as well — historic prose, didactic prose, 
theological treatise, epistle, proverb, parable, 
allegory, and oration. In a book so composite, 
made up of such divergent parts, composed at 
such remote periods of time, and under such 
diverse circumstances, what would we naturally 
expect? Variance and discord, utter lack of 
unity. In point of fact, what do we find? The 
most marvellous unity. Every part of the Bible 
fits every other part of the Bible — one ever- 
increasing, ever-growing thought pervades the 
whole. 

The character of this unity is most significant. 



26 TALKS TO MEN 

It is not a superficial unity, but a profound unity. 
On the surface, we often find apparent discrep- 
ancy and disagreement, but, as we study, the 
apparent discrepancy and disagreement disap- 
pear, and the deep underlying unity appears. 
The more deeply we study, the more complete do 
we find the unity to be. 

The unity is also an organic one — that is, it is 
not the unity of a dead thing, like a stone, but of 
a living thing, like a plant. In the early books 
of the Bible we have the germinant thought; as 
we go on we have the plant, and further on the 
bud, and then the blossom, and then the ripened 
fruit. In Revelation we find the ripened fruit 
of Genesis. 

How are we to account for it? Here is an- 
other fact that demands accounting for, and as 
business men you have to deal with facts, not 
theories ; realities, and not fine-spun speculations 
of cloistered theologians, dreaming apart from 
the substantial realities of life. There is one 
easy and simple way of accounting for it, and 
only one rational way of accounting for it at 
all, and that is, that back of the forty or more 
human authors was the One all-governing, all- 
controlling, all-superintending, all-shaping mind 
of God. 

Suppose it were proposed to build in our capi- 
tal city in America, Washington, a temple that 
should represent the stone products of every 
State in the Union. The stones were to come 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 27 

from every State in the Union; some from 
the marble quarries of Marlboro, N. H., others 
from the granite quarries of Quincy, Mass., 
some from the brownstone quarries of Mid- 
dletown. Conn., some from the white marble 
quarries at Rutland, Vt., some from the 
gray sandstone quarries at Berea, Ohio, some 
from the porphyry quarries below Knoxville, 
Tenn., and some from the redstone quarries near 
Hancock, Mich., some from the brownstone 
quarries at Kasota, Minn., some from the 
gypsum quarries of the Far West; some stones 
from every State in the Union. The stones were 
to be of all conceivable sizes and shapes — some 
large, some small, some medium, some were to 
be cubical, some spherical, some cylindrical, 
some conical, some trapezoidal, and some rec- 
tangular parallelopipedons. Each stone was to 
be hewn into its final shape at the quarry from 
which it was taken. Not a stone was to be 
touched by mallet or chisel after it reached its 
destination. Finally the stones are at Washing- 
ton, and the builders go to work. As they build, 
they find that every stone fits into every other 
stone, and into its place. It is found that there 
is not one stone too many, or one stone too few, 
until at last the builders' work is done and there 
rises before you a temple with its side walls, its 
buttresses, its naves, its arches, its transepts and 
its choirs, its roof, its pinnacles, and its dome, 
perfect in every outline and in every detail, not 



28 TALKS TO MEN 

one stone too many and not one stone too few, 
not one stone left over, and no niche or corner 
where one stone is lacking, and yet every stone 
hewn into its final shape in the quarry from 
which it was taken. How would you account 
for it ? There is one very simple way to account 
for it, and only one to account for it at all, 
namely, that back of the individual quarrymen 
was the master architect who planned the whole 
building from the beginning and gave to each 
individual quarryman his specifications for the 
work. Now this is precisely what we find in 
that temple of eternal truth which we call the 
Bible, the stones for which were quarried in 
places remote from one another by hundreds of 
miles, and at periods of time 1500 years apart; 
stones of all conceivable sizes and shapes, and 
yet every stone fitting into its place and fitting 
every other stone, until when the Book is finished 
there rises before you this matchless temple of 
God's truth, perfect in every outline and every 
detail ; not one stone too many and not one stone 
too few, and yet every stone cut into its final 
shape in the quarry from which it was taken. 
How are you to account for it ? There is but one 
rational way to account for it, and that is, that 
back of the human hands that wrought was the 
master-mind of God that thought and gave to 
each individual workman his specifications for 
the work. You can't get around it and be honest 
and fair. 



THIRD TALK 

FOUR MORE REASONS WHY 1 BELIEVE THE BIBLE TO 
BE THE WORD OF GOD 

I HAVE given you thus far three reasons why I 
believe the Bible to be the Word of God. First, 
because of the testimony of Jesus Christ to that 
effect. We saw that Jesus Christ set the stamp 
of His authority upon the entire Old Testament 
and the entire New Testament, and that if we 
accepted the authority of Jesus Christ we had 
to accept the entire Bible as of divine origin 
and authority. Then we saw that we must ac- 
cept the authority of Jesus Christ, for He was 
accredited to us by five unmistakable divine 
testimonies. My second reason was because of 
its fulfilled prophecies. We saw that the Bible 
had the power of looking into the future and 
predicting with minuteness and exactness things 
which were to occur hundreds of years ahead, 
and that these prophecies were fulfilled to the 
letter, and that a Book which had this power of 
looking into the future and telling with minute- 
ness, exactness, and precision things that were 
to come to pass must have for its author the only 
One in the universe who knows the end from 
the beginning — that is God. Our third reason 
39 



30 TALKS TO MEN 

for believing the Bible to be the Word of God 
was because of the unity of the Book. We saw- 
that though the Bible was composed of sixty-six 
books, written by at least forty human authors, 
the period of their composition extending over 
at least 1500 years, and displaying every form 
of literary structure, that there was one all-per- 
vading thought and purpose through the entire 
Book, that every part of the Book fitted into 
every other part, and that the Bible was the most 
thoroughly one Book of any book extant, and 
that the only way of accounting for this undenia- 
ble and remarkable phenomenon was that back 
of the many human authors was the one all- 
governing, all-controlling, all-superintending, 
all-shaping mind of God. 

My fourth reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the immeasurable 
superiority of its teachings to those of any other 
or all other books. It was quite the fashion when 
I was studying in theological halls to compare the 
teachings of the Bible with those of ethnic seers 
and philosophers, with the teachings of Socrates, 
Plato, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Epictetus, 
Isocrates, Seneca, Buddha, Zoroaster, Con- 
fucius, Mencius, and Mohammed. This is get- 
ting to be the fashion again. Anyone who in- 
stitutes such a comparison and puts the Bible in 
the same class with ,hese other teachers must be 
either ignorant of the teachings of the Bible or 
of the teachings of these ethnic seers and philoso- 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 31 

phers, or what is more frequently the case, igno- 
rant of both. There are three points of radical 
difference between the teachings of the Bible 
and those of any other book. 

First, these other teachers contain truth, but 
truth mixed with error. The Bible contains noth- 
ing but truth. There are gems of thought in 
these ethnic writers, but as Joseph Cook said 
years ago, " Jewels picked out of the mud." 
For example, we are often asked: " Did not Soc- 
rates teach most beautifully how a philosopher 
ought to die ? " He did_, but they forget to tell 
us that he also taught a woman of the town how 
to conduct her business that was not quite so 
nice. Again they ask us : " Did not Marcus 
Aurelius Antoninus teach most excellently about 
clemency ? " He did. It is well worth reading ; 
but they forget to tell us that he also taught that 
it was right to put people to death for no other 
crime than that of being Christians, and being 
himself Emperor of Rome, and, having power to 
do it, he practised what he preached. " Did not 
Seneca," they ask, " discourse finely about the 
advantages of poverty ? " He did, but they for- 
get to tell us that Seneca himself was at the time 
one of the worst spendthrifts in Rome, the onyx 
tables alone in his mansion costing a fabulous 
fortune. Moreover, he was the tutor under 
whose influence the most infamous emperor that 
Rome ever had, Nero, was brought up. " Did 
not Confucius," they ask again, " set forth ad- 



32 TALKS TO MEN 

mirably the duty of children to parents?" He 
did, but they forget to tell us that Confucius also 
taught that it was right to tell lies on occasion, 
and unblushingly tells us that he himself prac- 
tised lying on occasions. And there is perhaps 
nothing in which his most devoted followers, 
the Chinese, have followed so closely in the foot- 
steps of their great master as in this matter of 
lying. The Chinese have reduced lying to a fine 
art, and a typical Chinaman will tell anything 
" to save his face." 

The second point of difference is that these 
other writings contain part of the truth, while the 
Bible contains all the truth. There is not a sin- 
gle known truth on moral or spiritual subjects 
that cannot be found within the covers of the 
Bible. This is a most remarkable fact — the 
Bible is an old Book, and yet man in all his think- 
ing before and since the Bible was written has 
not discovered one single truth on moral or spir- 
itual subjects that cannot be found in substance 
within the covers of the Bible. In other words, 
if all other books were destroyed and the Bible 
left, we would suffer no essential loss on moral 
and spiritual subjects, but if the Bible were de- 
stroyed and all other books left, the loss would 
be irreparable. Why is this, if the Bible is men's 
book as other books are men's books? Often- 
times I have challenged anyone in my audiences 
to bring forward one single truth on moral or 
spiritual subjects that I could not find within the 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 33 

Bible, — it is quite conceivable that someone 
should succeed in doing this, for I do not pretend 
to know everything that is in the Bible; I have 
only been studying it a little over a quarter of a 
century, — but no one has been able to do it yet. 

The third point of radical difference is this, 
that the Bible contains more truth than all other 
books put together. You can go to all literature, 
ancient and modem, the literature of ancient 
Greece, ancient Rome, ancient India, ancient 
Persia, and ancient China, and all modern liter- 
ature as well, cull out of it all that is good, throw 
away all that is bad or worthless, bring together 
the result of your labor into one book, and even 
then you will not have a book that will take the 
place of this one Book. Why is it, if the Bible 
is men's book as other books are men's books, 
that in all the thousands of years of men's think- 
ing, in all the millions of books that they have 
produced, men have not been able, all of them put 
together, to produce so much of real and price- 
less wisdom as is contained in this one Book? 
The answer is plain — other books are men's 
books, the Bible stands alone as God's Book. 

My fifth reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the history of the 
Book, its omnipotence against all men's attacks. 
What man has made, man can destroy. But 
eighteen centuries of most strenuous and deter- 
mined assault have been unable to destroy or un- 
dermine intelligent faith in the Bible. Scarcely 



34 TALKS TO MEN 

was the Bible given to the world before men dis- 
covered three things about it : First, that it con- 
demned sin. Second, that it demanded renun- 
ciation of self. Third, that it laid human pride 
in the dust. Men were not willing to give up 
sin, not willing to renounce self, not willing to 
have their pride laid in the dust, therefore they 
hated the Book that made these demands. Man's 
hatred of the Bible has been most intense and 
most active. It determined on the destruction 
of the Book that it hated. Man after man has 
arisen with the determination to destroy this 
Book. Celsus tried it, with the brilliancy of his 
genius, and he failed. Then Porphyry tried it, 
with the depth of his philosophy, and he failed. 
Lucien tried it, with the keenness of his satire, 
and he failed. Then Diocletian came on the 
scene of action and tried other weapons; he 
brought to bear against the Bible all the military 
and political power of the strongest empire the 
world ever knew at the height of its glory. He 
issued edicts that every Bible should be burned, 
but that failed. Stronger edicts were issued — 
that those who owned Bibles should be put to 
death, and that failed. For eighteen centuries 
the attack upon the Bible has gone on. Every 
engine of destruction that human wisdom, hu- 
man science, human philosophy, human wit, 
human satire, human force, and human brutality 
could bring to bear against a book have been 
brought to bear against this Book, and the Bible 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 35 

still stands. At times all the great of earth have 
been against it and only an obscure remnant for 
it, but still the Bible has more than held its own. 
It has to-day a firmer hold upon the confidence 
and affection of the best and wisest men and 
women than it ever had before in the world's his- 
tory. If the Bible had been man's book, it would 
have gone down and been forgotten centuries 
ago; but because there is in this Book not only 
the hiding of God's wisdom, but the hiding of 
His power, it has wonderfully fulfilled the words 
of Jesus, " Heaven and earth shall pass away, 
but My words shall not pass away." 

At times it has seemed to some, amid the deaf- 
ening roar of the enemies' artillery and the dense 
smoke of battle, as if the Bible must have gone 
down; but when the smoke has rolled up from 
the field of conflict this impregnable citadel of 
God's eternal truth has reared its lofty head 
heavenward, unscathed, without one stone dis- 
lodged from foundation to highest parapet. Each 
new assault upon the Bible has simply served to 
illustrate anew the absolute omnipotence of this 
God-given Book. In a way, I rejoice in every 
new attack that is made upon the Bible. I trem- 
ble for certain weak-minded men and women 
who are willing to swallow anything that they 
are assured is the consensus of the latest schol- 
arship; but for the Bible itself I have no fears. 
A Book that has successfully withstood eighteen 
centuries of assault of the devil's heaviest artil- 



36 TALKS TO MEN 

lery is not going down before the air-guns of 

modern criticism. 

Sixth. My sixth reason for believing the Bible 
to be the Word of God is because of the influence 
of the Book, its power to lift men up to God. 
Every candid man must see and admit that there 
is a power in this Book to brighten and gladden 
and beautify and ennoble human lives, to lift 
men up to God, that no other book possesses. A 
stream can rise no higher than its source, and a 
Book that has a power to lift men up to God 
that no book possesses, must have come down 
from God in a way no other book has. In liter- 
ally millions of cases this Book has demonstrated 
its power to reach down to men and women in 
the deepest depths of iniquity and degradation 
and lift them up, up, up, up, until they were fit 
for a place beside the Christ upon the throne. I 
recall a man of brilliant parts, but stupefied and 
brutalized and demonized by drink, and this man 
was an agnostic. I urged him to accept the 
Bible and the Christ of the Bible, but with a 
hollow laugh he said : " I don't believe in your 
Bible or your Christ. I am an agnostic." But 
at last, sunken to the lowest depths of ruin, he 
threw his agnosticism to the winds and accepted 
this Book and the Christ of this Book, and by 
the power of this Book was transformed into one 
of the truest, noblest, humblest men I know. 
What other book could do it? This Book has 
power, not only to lift individuals, but nations 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 37 

Godwards. We owe all that is best in our mod- 
ern civilization, in our political, commercial, and 
domestic life, to the influence of this Book. The 
man who attacks the Book is attacking the very 
foundations of all that is best in modern civili- 
zation. The man who attacks the Bible is the 
worst enemy that an individual or society has. 

Seventh, I believe the Bible to be the Word of 
God, because of the character of those who ac- 
cept it as such, and because of the character of 
those who reject it. Two things speak for the 
Divine origin of this Book — the character of 
those who are sure that it is the Word of God, 
and the character of those who deny it. Often- 
times when some man or woman says to me, " I 
believe firmly the Bible to be the Word of God," 
and when I look at the purity, the beauty, the 
humility, the devotion to God and man that 
there is in their character, how near they live to 
God, I feel like saying, " I am glad that you do 
believe the Bible to be the Word of God. The 
fact that one who lives so near God, and knows 
God as well as you do, believes the Bible to be 
His Book, is a confirmation of my own faith 
that it is." On the other hand, oftentimes when 
men with a self-confident toss of the head say, 
" I do not believe the Bible is the Word of God," 
and when I look at the sinfulness or selfishness 
or smallness or sordidness of their lives, how far 
they live from God, I feel like saying, "I am 
glad that you do not. The fact that a man who 



38 TALKS TO MEN 

is living upon the plane that you are living, living 
so far from God, and knows God so little, doubts 
that the Bible is the Word of God, is a confirma- 
tion of my own faith that it is." Do not misun- 
derstand me. I do not mean by this that every 
man who professes to believe in the Bible is bet- 
ter than every man who rejects the Bible; but 
what I do mean is this, show me a man who is liv- 
ing a life of absolute surrender to God, living un- 
der the control of the Spirit of God, living a life 
of devotion to the highest welfare of his fellow- 
men, a life of humility and of prayer, and I will 
show you every time a man who believes the 
Bible to be God's Word. On the other hand, 
show me a man who denies or persistently ques- 
tions whether the Bible is the Word of God, and 
I will show you a man that is leading either 
(mind you, I say " either," not " all ") a life of 
greed for gold, or of lust, or of self-will, or of 
spiritual pride. I challenge any man to furnish 
me an exception. I have been looking for one 
literally around the world, and I have never 
found one. An attempt to furnish an exception 
has been made a number of times, but it is sim- 
ply laughable to think of the men suggested as 
leading lives of " humility and prayer," or to 
think of them as not leading lives of " self-will." 
Anyone who has not surrendered absolutely to 
God is leading a life of "self-will." In other 
words, all who live nearest God and know 
God best are sure that the Bible is God's Word. 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 39 

Those who have most doubts about it are those 
who are living farthest from God and know God 
least. Which will you believe? Suppose that 
there were discovered in the city of Boston a 
manuscript which purported to be by Oliver 
Wendell Holmes, but that there was great dis- 
cussion among the critics as to whether or not 
Oliver Wendell Holmes were the real author. 
Finally it was submitted to a committee of critics 
for decision, and it was discovered that all those 
critics who knew Oliver Wendell Holmes best, 
who lived in most intimate fellowship with him, 
who were most in sympathy with his thought, 
were absolutely unanimous in their declaration 
that the manuscript was by him, and that those 
who questioned it were those who knew Oliver 
Wendell Holmes the least, and had the least fel- 
lowship with him, and were least in sympathy 
with his thought, which would you believe? 
That is a very simple question in literary criti- 
cism, much simpler than that which our modern 
critics so confidently undertake to solve, namely, 
as to who may be the seven diflferent authors of 
a single verse in a book written thousands of 
years ago, as is attempted in that monumental 
joke book of the nineteenth century, the Poly- 
chrome Bible. Now this is the precise case with 
the Bible; all who live nearest God and know 
God best, all who are in most intimate fellowship 
with Him, are of absolutely one accord in say- 
ing that the Bible is His work. Those who have 



40 TALKS TO MEN 

the most doubts about it are those who live far- 
thest from Him and know God least. 

There is another significant fact, that the 
nearer men get to God, the more confident they 
become that the Bible is His Word. The far- 
ther they drift from God, the more doubts enter 
their hearts. The following is a case of con- 
stant occurrence, that a man who is a sinner and 
an unbeliever, by the mere fact of giving up his 
sin without further argument is delivered from 
his unbelief. Can anyone cite one single in- 
stance of an opposite kind, where one was a sin- 
ner and a believer, and by the fact of his giving 
up his sin lost his faith ? 

Furthermore, how often does it occur that a 
man, who at one period was living a life of con- 
secration, of nearness to God, and enjoyed a 
serene and undisturbed faith that the Bible was 
God's Word, begins to prosper in the things of 
this world, the love of money enters his heart, 
he drifts away, from the out-and-out separation 
of his life to God, and as he drifts from God he 
drifts into doubt and into lax views about the 
Bible. We see this to-day upon every hand — 
men who are becoming lax in their morals also 
becoming lax in their doctrine. Broad morals 
and broad theology go hand in hand; they are 
twin brothers. So true is this that oftentimes 
when men tell me that they are getting into 
doubt, I put to them the question, " What have 
you been doing?" Once, walking in a univer- 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 41 

sity town, I saw a little way ahead of me on the 
street a young fellow that I knew. I caught up 
with him and said to him, " Charlie, how are you 
getting on ? " and with a self-satisfied look he 
said, " Well, to tell you the truth, Mr. Torrey, I 
am getting somewhat skeptical." I said, " Char- 
lie, what have you been doing ? " The poor 
fellow blushed and dropped his head. Charlie 
had been sinning, and sin had begotten doubt. 
This is the history of the genesis of doubt in the 
hearts of thousands of men to-day. 

Where is the stronghold of the Bible ? The 
pure, happy, unselfish home. Where is the 
stronghold of infidelity? The public-house, the 
race-course, the gambling hell, and the brothel. 
Suppose that I should come, a stranger to your - 
city, and should go into one of your public- 
houses with a Bible under my arm, lay my Bible 
down upon the bar, and order a glass of whisky 
straight, and add, " Make it big," what would 
happen? There would be great surprise. Quite 
likely the bartender would say, " Pardon me, 
but what is that book? Is not that the Bible? " 
" Yes." " And what did you ask for — a tum- 
bler of whisky straight ? " " Yes, and make it 
large." He would not know what to make of 
it. But suppose I should enter the public-house 
and lay upon the bar a copy of any work of In- 
gersoll or of Bradlaugh, a copy of the Clarion, 
or the Agnostic Journal, or Freethinker, or the 
most respectable infidel book or paper that there 



42 TALKS TO MEN, 

is, and order a glass of whisky straight, I would 
get it without a question or a look of surprise. 
It would be just what they would expect. The 
Bible and whisky don't go together. Infidelity 
and whisky do go together. When I was in 
Belfast I made this remark, and at the close of 
the address a physician came to me laughing, 
and said : " We had yesterday an illustration of 
just what you said. After your afternoon Bible 
reading my mother went into a licensed grocer's 
to get a little brandy for a friend who was ill. 
She had her Bible in her hand, and, without 
thinking, was trying to put it into the bag that 
she carried. The clerk who was waiting upon 
her said : ' That is right, madam, hide it. The 
two don't go well together.' " 



FOURTH TALK 

THREE MORE REASONS WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 
TO BE THE WORD OF GOD 

In the three previous addresses I have given you 
seven reasons why I believe the Bible to be the 
Word of God. First, because of the testimony 
of Jesus Christ to that effect. We saw that 
Jesus Christ set the stamp of His authority upon 
the entire Old Testament and the entire New 
Testament, and that if we accepted the author- 
ity of Jesus Christ we were obliged to accept the 
entire Bible as to divine origin and authority. 
We next saw that we must accept the authority 
of Jesus Christ, for He was accredited to us by 
five unmistakably definite testimonies. First, by 
the testimony of the divine life that He lived; 
second, by the testimony of the divine words that 
He spoke ; third, by the testimony of the divine 
works that He wrought ; fourth, by the testimony 
of His divine influence upon all subsequent his- 
tory ; and fifth, by the testimony of the resurrec- 
tion from the dead, which was God's divine at- 
testation to the claims of Jesus Christ. The 
second reason I gave was because of its fulfilled 
prophecies. We saw that the Bible had the 
43 



44 TALKS TO MEN 

power of looking into the future, and predicting 
with minuteness, accuracy, and precision things 
which were to occur hundreds of years ahead, 
and that these prophecies had been fulfilled to 
the letter. We concluded that a book which had 
this power of looking into the future and telling 
with minuteness, accuracy, and precision things 
that were to come to pass centuries afterwards 
must have for its Author the only One in the uni- 
verse who knows the end from the beginning — 
that is, God. The third reason I gave for believ- 
ing the Bible to be the Word of God was because 
of the unity of the Book. We saw that though 
the Bible was composed of sixty-six books, writ- 
ten by at least forty human authors, the period 
of their composition extending over at least 
1500 years, and displaying every form of liter- 
ary structure, that there was one all-pervading 
thought and purpose through the entire Book, 
that every part of the Bible fitted into every other 
part, and that the Bible was the most thoroughly 
one Book of any book extant. We saw that the 
only way to account for this undeniable and re- 
markable phenomenon was that back of the hu- 
man authors was the one all-governing, all-con- 
trolling, all-superintending, all-shaping mind of 
God. The fourth reason for believing the Bible 
to be the Word of God was because of the im- 
measurable superiority of its teachings to those 
of any other book, or all other books. We saw 
that there were three points of radical difference 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 45 

between the Bible and all other books : ( i ) That 
other books contain truth, but truth mixed with 
error, but the Bible contained nothing but truth ; 
(2) that other books contained part of the truth, 
but the Bible contained all the truth; (3) that 
the Bible contained more truth than all other 
books together. The fifth reason was because of 
the history of the Book, its omnipotence against 
all men's attacks. We saw that what man had 
produced man could destroy; but that eighteen 
centuries of assault upon the Bible had utterly 
failed to destroy the Book, or to undermine con- 
fidence in it. Our sixth reason for believing the 
Bible to be the Word of God was because of its 
power to lift men up to God. We saw that the 
Bible has a power to lift men up to God that no 
other book possesses, and must therefore have 
come down from God in a way no other book has. 
Our seventh reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God was because of the character 
of those who accepted it as such and those who 
rejected it. We saw that with absolute unanim- 
ity all the men and women who lived nearest 
God, and knew God best, believed the Bible to be 
His Word, and that those who had the most 
doubts about it were those who lived farthest 
from God and knew God least. 

My eighth reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the inexhaustible 
depth of the Book. What man has produced 
man can exhaust. But eighteen centuries of 



46 TALKS TO MEN 

study on the part of tens of thousands of the 
ablest minds have been unable to exhaust the 
Bible. Many men of strongest intellect, of mar- 
vellous powers of penetration, of broadest cul- 
ture, have given a lifetime to the study of thfe 
Bible, and no man who has really studied it has 
ever dreamed of saying that he had gotten to the 
bottom of the Book. Indeed, the more pro- 
foundly one digs into the Book, the more clearly 
he sees that there are still unfathomable depths 
of wisdom beneath him in this inexhaustible mine 
of truth. Not only is this true of individuals, 
it is true also of generations of men. Thousands 
of men in co-operation with one another have 
delved into this mine, but, so far from exhaust- 
ing it, there are still new treasures of truth 
awaiting each new student of the Word. New 
light is constantly breaking forth from the Word 
of God. How are we to account for this un- 
questionable fact? The human mind has been 
progressing during these eighteen centuries — we 
have outgrown every other book that belongs to 
the past, but so far from outgrowing the Bible 
we have not yet grown up to it. The Bible is 
not only up to date, but always ahead Of date. 
The best interpretation of the most recent events 
of our own day is found in this old Book. If 
this Book were man's book we would have fath- 
oined it centuries ago, but the fact that it has 
proved itself unfathomable for eighteen cen- 
turies is positive proof that in it are hidden the 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 47 

infinite treasures of the wisdom and knowledge 
of God. A brilliant Unitarian writer in Amer- 
ica has given utterance to one of the keenest 
sentences that was ever spoken or written from 
the standpoint of the denial of the inspiration of 
the Bible. He says : " How irreligious to accuse 
an infinite God with having put His whole wis- 
dom in one so small a Book ! " I submit that 
that is keen, but this writer did not see how the 
keen edge of his Damascus blade could be turned 
against himself. What a testimony to the di- 
vine origin of this Book that such infinite wis- 
dom can be packed in so small a compass ! The 
Bible is not such a very large Book (I have a 
copy that I carry in my vest pocket), but yet in 
a Book that can be printed in so small a com- 
pass there are packed away such treasures of 
wisdom that eighteen centuries of study by the 
world's best minds have been unable to exhaust 
it. How are we to account for it ? There is no 
one but God who could pack such infinite treas- 
ures of truth in so small a compass. 

My ninth reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the fact that as I 
grow in knowledge and in character, in wisdom 
and in holiness, I grow toward the Bible. The 
nearer I get to God the nearer I get to the Bible. 
When I began the real study of the Bible I had 
the same experience with it that every thought- 
ful student has had in the beginning of his stud- 
ies. I found things in the Bible that were diffi- 



48 TALKS TO MEN 

cult to understand, others that seemed incredible. 
I found that the teachings of one part of the 
Book seemed to flatly contradict the teachings of 
other parts of the Book. It seemed clear to 'me 
that if one teaching of the Bible were true, that 
some other could not be, and like so many 
another, I accepted so much of the Bible as was 
wise enough to agree with me. But as I went 
on studying the Bible, and as I went on growing 
in likeness to God, I found that my difficulties 
were disappearing; at first, one by one, then by 
twos, and then by scores, ever disappearing more 
and more. I found constantly that the nearer I 
got to God, the nearer I got to the Bible; then 
nearer still to God meant nearer still to the 
Bible; and nearer yet to God meant nearer yet 
to the Bible. What is the inevitable mathemati- 
cal conclusion? Two lines always converging 
as they draw near to a given point must meet 
when they reach that point. The nearer I got 
to God, the nearer I got to the Bible; the nearer 
I got to God, the nearer I got to the Bible; the 
nearer I got to God, the nearer I got to the Bible. 
When I and God meet, I and the Bible will meet. 
That is, the Bible was written from God's stand- 
point. There is no honest escaping of this 
conclusion. 

Suppose I were to pass through a vast, dark, 
and dangerous forest for the first time. Before 
starting upon this perilous tour a guide was 
brought to me who had often been through the 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 49 

forest before, and had conducted many a party 
through in safety, and had never led a single 
party astray. Under his leadership I began my 
journey through the forest. We got on very 
nicely together for a ways, but after a time we 
came to a place where two roads diverged. The 
guide said to me : " The path to the right is the 
right path to take." But my judgment and rea- 
son passing upon the phenomena observable by the 
senses saw clear indication that the road to the 
left was the road to take. I say to the guide: 
" I know that you have been through this forest 
time and again; that you have conducted many 
a party through in safety, and I have great con- 
fidence in your judgment upon that account, but 
in the present instance I believe you are wrong. 
My reason and judgment passing upon the phe- 
nomena that I can observe by my senses see 
clear indications that the road to the left is the 
road to take. Now I have never been through 
this forest before, and you have, and I know that 
my reason and judgment are not infallible, but 
they are the best guide that I have, and I cannot 
throw them overboard. I must follow them." 
So I take the road to the left. I go about a mile 
and then come to an impassable morass, and 
have to go back and take the way the guide said. 
We get on well together again for a ways, but 
again we come to a place where two paths di- 
verge. This time the guide says : " The road to 
the left is the road tg take." But my reason and 



60 TALKS TO MEN 

judgment passing upon the phenomena observ- 
able by my senses see clear indication that the 
road to the right is the road to take, and again we 
have our little parley. Again I say to the guide : 
" I know that you have passed through this forest 
time and again, and that you never led a party 
astray, and I have great confidence in your judg- 
ment on that account, but my reason and com- 
mon sense passing upon the phenomena observ- 
able by my senses tell me that the road to the 
right is the road to take. Now, I know that my 
reason and common sense are not infallible, but 
they are the best guide that I have, and I cannot 
throw them overboard." So again I go the way 
my reason and common sense passing upon the 
phenomena observable by my senses suggest. I 
go about half a mile, and then run up against an 
impassable barrier of rock, and have to go back 
and go the way the guide said. Suppose that 
this should happen fifty times, and every time the 
guide proved right, and my reason and common 
sense, passing upon the phenomena observable 
by the senses, proved wrong, do you not think 
that about the fifty-first time I would have rea- 
son and common sense enough to throw my ever- 
erring judgment to the winds and go the way 
the guide said ? This has been my exact experi- 
ence with the Bible. Time and time again I 
have come to the parting of the ways, where the 
Bible said one thing and my reason and common 
sense seemed to say another, and, fool that I was. 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 51 

I threw the Bible overboard and went the way 
that my reason and common sense said, and 
every time I have had to come back and go the 
way the Bible said. I trust that the next time 
when I and the Bible differ I will have common 
sense enough to throw my ever-erring reason 
and judgment overboard and go the way the 
Bible says. The most irrational thing in the 
world is what we call rationalism. Rationalism 
is an attempt to subject the teachings of infinite 
wisdom to the criticism of our finite judgment. 
Could anything possibly be more irrational than 
that? It never seems to occur to the rationalist 
th^t God can have a good reason for saying or 
doing a thing if he, the rationalist, cannot see 
the reason. One of the greatest discoveries that 
I ever made was one day when it dawned upon 
me that God might possibly know more than I 
did, and that God might possibly be right, when 
to me He appeared to be wrong. 

My tenth reason for believing the Bible to be 
the Word of God is because of the testimony of 
the Holy Spirit to that fact To the one who 
puts himself in the right attitude toward God 
and truth, the Holy Spirit bears direct testimony 
that the voice that speaks to him from the Bible 
is the voice of God. One will often meet a godly 
old woman, of no very wide reading or culture, 
who still has a firm faith that the Bible is the 
Word of God. If you ask her why she believes 
the Bible to be the Word of God, she will reply: 



52 TALKS TO MEN 

" I know the Bible to be the Word of God." But 
again if you ask, " Why do you believe it to be 
the Word of God ? " she will reply : " I know it to 
be the Word of God." And if still again you 
ask : " Why do you believe it to be the Word of 
God ? " again she will reply : " I know it to be 
the Word of God." Very likely you will say: 
" Well, I will not disturb the old lady's faith " 
(no fear, you couldn't if you would), " but she is 
beneath argument." You are mistaken, she is 
above argument. Jesus Christ says : " He that 
is of God heareth God's words " (John viii. 47). 
Again Jesus Christ says : " My sheep hear my 
voice " (John x. 27). She is one of God's chil- 
dren, and knows her Father's voice, and she 
knows that the voice that speaks to her from the 
Bible is the voice of God. She is one of Christ's 
sheep, and she knows that the voice that speaks 
to her from the Bible is the voice of the true 
Shepherd. 

I can tell you how anyone of you can come to 
that same position, where you will be able to dis- 
tinguish God's voice, and to know that the voice 
that speaks to you from the Bible is the voice of 
God. Jesus Christ Himself tells us this in John 
vii. 17, R.V. : " If any man willeth to do His will, 
he shall know of the teaching whether it be of 
God, or whether I speak from myself." The 
surrender of the will to God opens the eyes of 
the soul to see the truth of God. Jesus Christ 
does not demand that a man shall believe with- 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 63 

out evidence, but He does demand that a man 
shall put himself in that moral attitude toward 
God and the truth that makes him competent to 
appreciate evidence. There is nothing that so 
clarifies the human mind as the surrender of the 
will to God. Some years ago I was lecturing to 
our students in Chicago on how to deal with 
skeptics and infidels. Our lecture room in Chi- 
cago is open to all kinds and conditions of men, 
and oftentimes it is a motley crowd that gathers 
together — Christian and Jew, Roman Catholic 
and Protestant, believers, skeptics, infidels, ag- 
nostics, and atheists. At the close of this lecture 
the wife of the late Dr. A. -f. Gordon of Boston 
came to me and said : " Did you see the man 
sitting near me as you spoke?" I had noticed 
the man, because I had had some little conversa- 
tion with him before. " Well," she added, 
" while you were speaking I heard him say, ' I 
wish he would try it upon me.' " " I would be 
glad to." " Well, there he is over in the corner." 
I did not need to go to him, for when the others 
had gone out he came to me and said : " Mr. 
Torrey, I do not wish to say anything discour- 
teous, but really my experience contradicts 
everything that you have said to these students 
this morning." I replied : " Have you done what 
I told these students to get the infidel or skeptic 
to do, and guaranteed if they would do it they 
would come out of their doubt and unbelief into 
a clear faith in the Bible as the Word of God 



54 TALKS TO MEN 

and Jesus as the Son of God?" "Yes, I have 
done it all." " Now," I said, " let's be definite 
about this." So I called my secretary and dic- 
tated something like this : " I believe that there 
is an absolute difference between right and 
wrong" (I did not say, I believe that there is a 
God, for this man was an agnostic, and neither 
affirmed nor denied the existence of God, and 
you have to begin where a man is), " and I 
hereby take my stand upon the right to follow it 
wherever it carries me. I promise to make an 
honest search to find if Jesus Christ is the Son 
of God, and if I find that He is, I promise to ac- 
cept Him as my Saviour, and confess Him pub- 
licly before the world." My secretary brought 
two copies of this, and I handed them to him and 
said : " Are you willing to sign this ? " He re- 
plied : " Certainly," and signed them both. He 
folded one and put it in his pocket. I folded the 
Other and put it in my pocket. Then he added: 
" There is nothing in it. My case is very pecul- 
iar." (His case was peculiar. He had been 
through Unitarianism, Spiritualism, Theosophy, 
and pretty much all other isms, and was now an 
out-and-out agnostic.) "Another thing," I 
added, " do you know that there is not a God ? " 
" No," he said, " I don't know that there is not a 
God. Any man is a fool to say he knows that 
there is not a God. I am an agnostic ; I neither 
affirm nor deny." I said : " Well, I know that 
there is a God, but that won't do you any good. 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 55 

Do you know that God does not answer prayer ? " 
" No, I do not know that God does not answer 
prayer. I do not believe that He answers prayer, 
but I do not know that He does not answer 
prayer." " Well," I said, " I know that He does 
answer prayer, but that will not do you any good ; 
but here is a possible clue to knowledge. You 
are a graduate of a British University ? " "Yes." 
" You know the method of modern science ? 
The method of modern science is this, if one 
finds a possible clue to knowledge, to follow that 
possible clue to see what there may be in it. 
Here is a possible clue. Will you adopt the 
methods of modern science in religious investi- 
gation? Will you follow out this possible clue 
to see what there may be in it? Will you offer 
this prayer, ' Oh, God, if there be any God, show 
me if Jesus Christ is Thy Son or not, and if Thou 
showest me that He is Thy Son, I promise to 
accept Him as my Saviour, and confess Him as 
such before the world?'" "Yes," he said, "I 
will do that, too ; but there is nothing in it. My 
case is very peculiar." " One more thing," I 
said. " John says in John xx. 31 : ' These are 
written that ye might believe that Jesus is the 
Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye 
might have life through His name.' Now John 
tells us here that the Gospel of John is written 
to show men the proof that Jesus is the Christ, 
the Son of God. Will you read the proof ? Will 
you read the Gospel of John?" "I have read 



56 TALKS TO MEN 

it again and again," he replied; "I can quote 
parts of it to you if you wish to hear them." 
" No," I said, " but I wish you to read it this time 
in a new way. Each time before you read offer 
this prayer, ' Oh, God, if there be any God, show 
me what of truth there is in the verses I am 
about to read, and what you show me to be true, 
I promise to accept and take my stand upon.' 
Now don't read too many verses at a time. 
Don't try to believe or disbelieve. Simply be 
open to conviction to the truth; pay careful at- 
tention to what you read; and when you have 
finished the Gospel report to me the result." 
"Yes," he said, "I will do it all; but there is 
nothing in it. My case is very peculiar." 
" Never mind," I said, and went over again the 
three things he had promised to do, and we sep- 
arated. About two weeks after I was speaking 
on the South Side, and I saw this man in the hall. 
At the close of the meeting he came to me and 
said : " There was something in that." I replied : 
" I knew that before." " Well," he said, " ever 
since I have done what I promised I would do, 
it is just as if I had been caught up and was 
being carried along by the Niagara River, and 
the first thing I know I shall be a shouting Meth- 
odist." I became a Methodist for the occasion, 
and said : " Praise the Lord ! " I went East to 
lecture at some schools in Massachusetts. When 
I came back there was a reception, and this man 
was present al; the reception, and he came to me 



WHY I BELIEVE THE BIBLE 57 

and said: " Are you busy? " " Not too busy to 
speak to you," I replied. We went into another 
room, and he said : " I cannot understand it. I 
cannot see how I ever Hstened to these men " 
(mentioning a number of infidel and Unitarian 
writers and speakers'). "It is all nonsense to 
me now." " Oh," I said, " the Bible explains 
that in I Cor. ii. 14: ' The natural man receiveth 
not the things of the Spirit of God : for they are 
foolishness unto him : neither can he know them, 
because they are spiritually discerned.' You 
have taken the right attitude towards truth, and 
God has opened your eyes to see the truth." He 
came out into a clear faith in Jesus Christ as the 
Son of God, and the Bible as the Word of God. 
If any of you doubt this story, try it for yourself, 
and you will have one of your own to tell. 

Gentlemen, the Bible is the Word of God. The 
voice that speaks to us from this Book is the 
voice of God. But someone will say : " Suppose 
it's the Word, what of it ? " Everything of it ! 
If the Bible be the Word of God, then Jesus 
Christ is the Son of God, and there is no salva- 
tion for any of us outside of a living faith in 
Him that leads us to put all our trust for pardon 
in His atoning work on the cross of Calvary, 
and to surrender our wills and our lives abso- 
lutely to His control. Have you done this? 
Will you do it now? 



FIFTH TALK 

DID JESUS CHRIST REALLY RISE FROM THE DEAD? 

The resurrection of Jesus Christ is in many re- 
spects the most important fact in history. It is 
the Gibraltar of Christian evidences, the Waterloo 
of infidelity. If it can be proven to be a historic 
certainty that Jesus rose from the dead, then 
Christianity rests upon an impregnable founda- 
tion. Every essential truth of Christianity is 
involved in the resurrection. If the resurrection 
stands, every essential doctrine of Christianity 
stands. If the resurrection goes down, every 
essential doctrine of Christianity goes down. 
Intelligent skeptics and infidels realize this. A 
leading skeptic has recently said that there is no 
use wasting time discussing the other miracles; 
the essential question is, Did Jesus Christ rise 
from the Dead? If He did, it is easy enough 
to believe the other miracles. If He did not, 
the other miracles must go. I am confident that 
this skeptic has correctly stated the case. 

There are three separate lines of proof of the 
truthfulness of the statements contained in the 
four Gospels regarding the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ. 

6S 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 59 

First, the external evidence for the authenticity 
and truthfulness of the Gospel narratives. This 
is an altogether satisfactory argument, but we 
shall not enter into it at this time. The argu- 
ment is long and intricate, and it would take 
many days to discuss it satisfactorily. The 
other arguments are so completely sufficient that 
we can do without this, good as it is in its place. 

Second, the second argument is based upon 
the internal proofs of the truthfulness of the 
Gospel records. This argument is thoroughly 
conclusive, and we shall proceed to state it briefly. 
We shall not assume anything whatever. We 
shall not assume that the four Gospel records 
are true history. We shall not assume that the 
four Gospels were written by the men whose 
names they bear. We shall not even assume 
that they were written in the century in which 
Jesus is alleged to have lived, died, and risen 
again, nor in the next century, nor in the next. 
We will assume nothing whatever. We will 
start out with a fact which we all know to be 
true, namely, that we have the four Gospels to- 
day, whoever wrote them. We shall place the 
four Gospels side by side and see if we can dis- 
cern in them the marks of truth or of fiction. 

The first thing we notice as we compare these 
Gospels one with the other is that they are four 
separate and independent accounts. This ap- 
pears plainly from the apparent discrepancies in 
the four different accounts. These apparent dis- 



60 TALKS TO MEN 

crepancies are marked and many. It would 
have been impossible for four accounts to have 
been made up in collusion with one another and 
so many and so marked discrepancies be found 
in them. There is a harmony between the four 
accounts, but the harmony does not lie upon the 
surface, but only comes out by protracted and 
thorough study. It is just such a harmony as 
would exist between accounts written by several 
different persons, each looking at the events 
recorded from his own standpoint. It is just such 
a harmony as would not exist in four accounts 
manufactured in collusion. In four accounts 
manufactured in collusion, whatever of har- 
mony there was would have appeared on the 
surface, whatever discrepancy there was would 
only have come out by minute and careful study ; 
but the case is just the opposite. The fact is, 
that the harmony comes out by minute and care- 
ful study ; the apparent discrepancy lies upon the 
surface. Whether true or false, these four ac- 
counts are separate and independent from one 
another. The four accounts supplement one 
another, a third account sometimes reconciling 
apparent discrepancies of two. 

It is plain that these accounts must be either a 
record of facts that actually occurred, or else 
fictions. If fictions, they must have been fabri- 
cated in one of two ways, either independently of 
one another, or in collusion with one another. 
They cannot have been made up independently; 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 61 

the agreements are too marked and too many. 
They cannot have been made up in collusion; as 
already seen, the apparent discrepancies are too 
numerous and too noticeable. Not made up in- 
dependently, not made up in collusion, therefore 
it is evident that they were not made up at all. 
They are a true relation of facts as they actually 
occurred. 

The next thing that we notice is that these 
accounts bear striking indications of having been 
derived from eye-witnesses. The account of an 
eye-witness is readily distinguishable from that 
of one who is merely retailing what others have 
told him. Anyone who is accustomed to weigh 
evidence in court, or in historical study, soon 
learns how to distinguish the account of an eye- 
witness from mere hearsay evidence. Any care- 
ful student of the Gospel records of the resur- 
rection will readily detect many marks of an eye- 
witness. Some years ago, when lecturing at an 
American University, a gentleman was intro- 
duced to me as being a skeptic. I asked him 
what course of study he was pursuing. He re- 
plied that he was pursuing a post-graduate course 
in history with a view to an historical professor- 
ship. I said : " Then you know that the account 
of an eye-witness diflfers in marked respects 
from the account of one who is simply telling 
what he has heard from others ? " He replied : 
" Yes." I then asked : " Have you carefully 
read the four Gospel accounts of the resurrec- 



62 TALKS TO MEN 

tion of Christ?" He answered: "I have." 
" Tell me, have you not noticed clear indications 
that they were derived from eye-witnesses?" 
" Yes," he replied, " I have been greatly struck 
by this in reading the accounts." Anyone else 
who carefully and intelligently reads them will 
be struck by the same fact. 

The third thing that we notice about these 
Gospel narratives is their naturalness, straight- 
forwardness, artlessness, and simplicity. The 
accounts indeed have to do with the supernatural, 
but the accounts themselves are most natural. 
There is an absolute absence of all attempt 
at coloring and effect. The simple, straight- 
forward telling of facts as they occurred. It 
sometimes happens that when a witness is on 
the witness stand that the story he tells is so art- 
less, so straightforward, so natural, there is such 
an entire absence of any attempt at coloring 
and effect, that his testimony bears weight inde- 
pendently of anything we may know of the char- 
acter or previous history of the witness. As we 
listen to his story we say to ourselves : " This 
man is telling the truth." The weight of this 
kind of evidence is greatly increased, and reaches 
practical certainty, when we have several inde- 
pendent witnesses of this sort, all bearing testi- 
mony to the same essential facts, but with va- 
rieties of detail, one omitting what another tells, 
and the third unconsciously reconciling apparent 
discrepancies between the two. This is the pre- 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 63 

cise case with the four Gospel narratives of the 
resurrection of Christ. The Gospel authors do 
not seem to have reflected at all upon the mean- 
ing or bearing of many of the facts which they 
relate. They simply tell right out what they 
saw, in all simplicity and straightforwardness, 
leaving the philosophizing to others. Dr. Wil- 
liam Furness, the great Unitarian scholar and 
critic, who certainly was not overmuch disposed 
in favor of the supernatural, says : " Nothing 
can exceed in artlessness and simplicity the four 
acounts of the first appearance of Jesus after His 
crucifixion. If these qualities are not discern- 
ible here, we must despair of ever being able to 
discern them anywhere." 

Suppose we should find four accounts of the 
battle of Monmouth. Nothing decisive was 
known as to the authorship of these accounts, 
but when we laid them side by side we found 
that they were manifestly independent accounts. 
We found, furthermore, striking indications that 
they were from eye-witnesses. We found them 
all marked by that artlessness, simplicity, and 
straightforwardness that carry conviction; we 
found that, while apparently disagreeing in 
minor details, they agreed substantially in their 
account of the battle — even though we had no 
knowledge of the authorship or date of these ac- 
counts, would we not in the absence of any other 
account say : " Here is a true account of the 
battle of Monmouth? " Now this is exactly th? 



64 TALKS TO MEN 

case with the four Gospel narratives ; manifestly 
separate and independent from one another, 
bearing the clear marks of having been derived 
from eye-witnesses, characterized by an unri- 
valled artlessness, simplicity, and straightfor- 
wardness, apparently disagreeing in minor de- 
tails, but in perfect agreement as to the great 
essential facts related, if we are fair and honest, 
are we not logically driven to say : " Here is a 
true account of the resurrection of Jesus ? " 

The next thing that we notice is the uninten- 
tional evidence of words, phrases, and accidental 
details. It oftentimes happens that when a wit- 
ness is on the stand the unintentional evidence 
that he bears by words and phrases which he 
uses, and by accidental details which he intro- 
duces, is more convincing than his direct testi- 
mony, because it is not the testimony of the wit- 
ness, but the testimony of the truth to itself. 
The Gospel stories abound in evidence of this 
sort. 

Take as a first instance the fact that, in all 
the Gospel records of the resurrection, we are 
given to understand that Jesus was not at first 
recognized by His disciples when He appeared to 
them after His resurrection {e.g., Luke xxiv. i6; 
John xxi. 4). We are not told why this is so, but 
if we will think a while over it we can soon dis- 
cover why it is so. But the Gospel narratives 
simply record the fact without attempting to 
explain it. If the stories were fictitious, they 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 65 

would never have been made up in this way ; for 
the writers would have seen at once the objec- 
tion that would have arisen in the minds of 
those who did not wish to believe in the resur- 
rection ; that is, that it was not really Jesus whom 
the disciples saw. Why then is the story told in 
this way? For the very evident reason that the 
evangelists were not making the story up for 
effect, but recording events precisely as they oc- 
curred. This was the way it occurred, and 
therefore this is the way in which they told it. 
It is not a fabrication of imaginary incidents, 
but an exact record of facts accurately observed 
and accurately recorded. 

Take a second instance. In all the Gospel 
records of the appearances of Jesus after His 
resurrection there is not a single recorded ap- 
pearance to an enemy or opponent of Christ ; all 
the appearances were to those who were already 
believers. Why this was so, we can easily see 
by a little thought, but nowhere in the Gospels 
are we told why it was so. If the stories were 
made up, they certainly would never have been 
made up in this way. If the Gospels are, as 
some would have us believe, fabrications con- 
structed ICO, or 200, or 300 years after the al- 
leged events recorded, when all the actors were 
dead and gone, Jesus would have been repre- 
sented as appearing to Caiaphas and Annas, and 
Pilate and Herod, and confounding them by his 
reappearance from the dead; but there is no sug- 



66 TALKS TO MEN 

gestion of anything of this kind in the Gospel 
stories. Every appearance is to one who is al- 
ready a believer. Why is this so? For the very 
evident reason that this was the way that things 
occurred, and the Gospel narratives are not con- 
cerned with producing a story for effect, but 
simply with recording events precisely as they 
occurred and as they were observed. 

We find still another instance in the fact that 
the recorded appearances of Jesus after His re- 
surrection were only occasional. He would ap- 
pear in the midst of His disciples and disappear, 
and not be seen again perhaps for several days. 
Why this was so we can easily discern. Jesus 
was seeking to wean His disciples from their old- 
time communion with Him in the body, and to 
prepare them for the communion in the Spirit of 
the days that were to come. We are not, how- 
ever, told this in the Gospel narrative ; we are 
left to discover it for ourselves. It is doubtful 
if the disciples themselves at the time realized 
the meaning of the facts. If they had been 
making up a story to produce effect, they would 
have represented Jesus as being with them con- 
stantly, as living with them, eating and drinking 
with them day after day. Why then is the story 
told as recorded in the four Gospels? Because 
this is the way that it had all occurred, and the 
Gospel writers are simply concerned with giving 
an exact representation of the facts as witnessed 
by themselves and by others. 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 67 

We find another very striking instance in what 
is recorded concerning the words of Jesus to 
Mary at their first meeting, in John xx. 17. 
Jesus is recorded as saying to Mary, " Touch me 
not, for I am not yet ascended to My Father." 
We are not told why Jesus said this to Mary. 
We are left to discover the reason for ourselves, 
if we can. The commentators have had a great 
deal of trouble discovering it. They vary widely 
from one another in their explanations of the 
words of Jesus. Go to the commentaries and 
you will find that one commentary gives one rea- 
son, and another another, and another another. 
I have a reason of my own that I have never 
seen in any commentary, but which I am per- 
suaded is the true reason ; but I have never been 
able to persuade others that it was the true rea- 
son. Why then is this little utterance of Jesus put 
in the Gospel record without a word of explana- 
tion, and which it has taken eighteen centuries 
to explain, and which is not altogether satis- 
factorily explained yet? Certainly a writer 
making up a story would not put in it a little 
detail without apparent meaning and without any 
attempt at an explanation of it. Stories that are 
made up are made up for a purpose ; details that 
are inserted are inserted for a purpose, a pur- 
pose more or less evident ; but eighteen centuries 
of study have not been able to find out the pur- 
pose why this is inserted. Why, then, is it there ? 
Because this is exactly what happened. This 



68 TALKS TO MEN 

is what Jesus said ; this is what Mary heard ; this 
is what Mary told; and therefore this is what 
John recorded. We have here not a fiction, but 
an accurate record of words spoken by Jesus 
after His resurrection. 

Another incidental detail that is introduced 
in the Gospel narrative, and which is decisive 
proof of its historical accuracy, is found in John 
xix. 34. We are told that when one of the sol- 
diers pierced the side of our crucified Lord with 
a spear, that straightway there came out blood 
and water. The reason of this we are not told. 
In fact, the writer could not have known the 
reason. There was no man on earth at the time 
who had sufficient knowledge of physiology to 
have told the reason. It was only centuries after- 
wards that the physiological reason was dis- 
covered. The distinguished medical authority. 
Dr. Simpson, of Edinburgh University, the dis- 
coverer of chloroform, wrote during his lifetime 
an able brochure, in which he showed on scien- 
tific grounds that Jesus Christ died from what 
is called in scientific language " extravasation 
of the blood," or, in popular language, " a 
broken heart." When one dies in this way the 
arms are thrown out (of course Jesus' arms 
were already stretched out on the Cross), there 
is a loud cry (such as Jesus uttered, " My God, 
My God, why hast Thou forsaken Me?"), the 
blood escapes from the pericardium and prevents 
the heart from beating. Then the blood stands 



DID JESUS RISE FROM THE DEAD 69 

for a short time, it separates into serum (the 
water) and clot (the red corpuscles, blood). 
When the soldier pierced the bag (pericardium) 
the blood and water flowed out. This is the 
scientific explanation of the recorded fact, but 
John did not know this explanation. No one 
then living knew it, no one knew it for centuries 
afterwards. Is it conceivable that a writer in 
fabricating an account of events that never oc- 
curred should have made up and inserted a fact 
that has a strict scientific explanation, fitting 
precisely into the various facts recorded, but an 
explanation which neither he nor anyone living 
at the time could possibly have known? How, 
then, does it come to be recorded in this way? 
Because this is precisely what occurred, and 
though John did not know the explanation, he 
observed the fact, and recorded the fact as 
observed, and left it for time and scientific dis- 
covery to conclusively demonstrate the historical 
accuracy of what he told. Beyond a peradven- 
ture we have here no fiction, but an exact record 
of something that occurred and was observed 
precisely as recorded. In my next address I 
will give you many more and more striking illus- 
trations of the self-evident and indubitable truth- 
fulness of the Gospel accounts of the resurrec- 
tion of Christ. 



SIXTH TALK 

THE SELF-EVIDENT TRUTHFULNESS OF THE GOSPEL 
STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 

In our address of yesterday we began the con- 
sideration of the question, "Did Jesus really rise 
from the dead ? " We started out without as- 
suming anything whatever ; we did not assume 
that the four Gospels were true; we did not as- 
sume that the four Gospels were written by the 
men whose names they bear; we did not even 
assume that they were written in the century in 
which the events recorded were alleged to have 
occurred, nor the next century, nor the next. 
We started with the well-known fact that we 
have the four Gospels. Whether true or false^ 
and whoever may have written them, we cer- 
tainly have them. We laid these four Gospels 
side by side and tried to discover from the study 
of them whether they were the record of events 
that actually occurred or whether they were 
fiction. The first thing that we discovered was 
that they were separate and independent ac- 
counts. We saw that they must either be a true 
record of facts or else fiction ; that if fiction they 
must have been fabricated in one of two ways, 
70 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 71 

either independently of one another, or else in 
collusion with one another. We saw that they 
could not have been fabricated in collusion, the 
apparent discrepancies were too numerous and 
too noticeable ; we saw that they could not have 
been made up independently, the agreements 
were too marked and too many. Not made up 
in collusion, not made up independently, then 
not made up at all — that is, they contain a true 
relation of facts as they actually occurred. We 
saw, in the next place, that each of the Gospel 
accounts bore striking indications of having 
been derived from eye-witnesses. We noted, in 
the third place, their artlessness, straightfor- 
wardness, and simplicity. We saw that it often 
happens that when a witness is on the stand, 
the story he tells is so artless, straightforward, 
simple, and natural that it carries conviction re- 
gardless of any knowledge we may have of the 
witness or of his previous character. We saw 
that each one of the Gospel stories had these char- 
acteristics which were clear proof of the truth- 
fulness of the stories recorded. We noticed, in 
the next place, the unintentional evidence of 
words, phrases, and accidental details. We saw 
that it often happens that when an eye-witness 
is on the stand that the unintentional evidence 
he bears by words, phrases, and accidental de- 
tails is more effective than his direct testimony, 
because it is not the testimony of the witness, 
but the testimony of the truth to itself. We 



72 TALKS TO MEN 

gave a number of illustrations of this; we are 
to give still more to-day. 

Turn to John xx. 24, 25, " But Thomas, one 
of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with 
them when Jesus came. The other disciples 
therefore said unto him. We have seen the Lord. 
But he said unto them. Except I shall see in His 
hands the print of the nails, and put my finger 
into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand 
into His side, I will not believe." How true 
this all is to life. It is in perfect harmony with 
what is told us of Thomas elsewhere. Thomas 
was the chronic doubter in the apostolic com- 
pany, the man who always looked upon the dark 
side, the man who was governed by the testimony 
of his senses. It was he who, when Jesus said 
in John xi. 15 that he was going again into 
Judea, despondently said, " Let us also go that 
we may die with Him." It was he again who, 
in John xiv. 4, 5, when Jesus said, " Whither I 
go ye know the way," replied, " Lord, we know 
not whither Thou goest, and how can we know 
the way ? " And it is he that now says, " Ex- 
cept I shall see in His hands the print of the 
nails, and put my finger into the print of the 
nails, and thrust my hand into His side, I will 
not believe." Is this made up, or is it life? To 
make it up would require a literary art that im- 
immeasurably exceeded the possibilities of the 
author. 

Turn again to John xx. 4-6: "So they ran 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 78 

both together: and the other disciple did outrun 
Peter, and came first to the sepulcher. And he, 
stooping down and looking in, saw the linen 
clothes lying ; yet went he not in. Then cometh 
Simon Peter following him, and went into the 
sepulcher." This is again in striking keeping 
with what we know of the men. Mary, return- 
ing hurriedly from the tomb, bursts in upon the 
two disciples, and cries, " They have taken away 
the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not 
where they have laid Him." John and Peter 
spring to their feet, and run at the top of their 
speed for the tomb. John was the younger of 
the two disciples. We are not told this in the 
narrative, but we learn it from other sources. 
Being younger, he was fleeter of foot and outran 
Peter, and reached the tomb first; but, man of 
retiring and reverent disposition, he did not enter 
the tomb, but simply stooped down and looked 
in. But impetuous older Peter comes lumbering 
along behind as fast as he can, but when once 
he reaches the tomb he never waits a moment 
outside, but plunges headlong in. Is this made 
up, or is it life? He was indeed a literary artist 
of consummate ability who had the skill to make 
this up if it did not happen just so. There is 
also incidentally a touch of local accuracy in the 
report. When one visits to-day the tomb which 
scholars now accept as the real burial place of 
Christ, he will find himself unconsciously obliged 
to stoop down to look in. 



74 TALKS TO MEN 

Turn again to John xxi. 7 : " Therefore that 
disciple whom Jesus loved saith unto Peter, It 
is the Lord. Now when Simon Peter heard that 
it was the Lord, he girt his fisher's coat unto 
him (for he was naked), and did cast himself 
into the sea." Here again we have the unmis- 
takable marks of truth and life. Recall the cir- 
cumstances. The apostles have gone at Jesus' 
commandment into Galilee to meet Him there. 
Jesus does not at once appear. Simon Peter, 
with the fisherman's passion still strong in his 
bosom, says, " I go a-fishing ! " The others say, 
" We also go with thee." They fished all night 
and caught nothing. In the early dawn Jesus 
stands upon the shore, but the disciples do not 
recognize Him in the dim light. Jesus says to 
them, " Children, have ye aught to eat ? " And 
they answer, " No." He bids them cast the net 
on the right side of the boat and they will find. 
When the cast was made, they are not able to 
draw it for the multitude of fishes. In an instant 
John, the man of quick, spiritual perception, 
says, " It is the Lord." No sooner does Peter, 
the man of impulsive action, hear this, than he 
grips his fisher's coat and throws it about his 
naked form, and throws himself overboard and 
strikes out for shore to reach his Lord. Is this 
made up, or is it hfe? This is no fiction. If 
some unknown author of the' fourth Gospel made 
this up, he is the master literary artist of the 
ages, and we should take down every other name 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 75 

from the literary pantheon and place his above 
them all. 

Take another illustration, John xx. 15 : " Jesus 
saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? 
whom seekest thou? She, supposing Him to be 
the gardener, saith unto Him, Sir, if thou have 
borne Him hence, tell me where thou hast laid 
Him, and I will take Him away." Here is 
surely a touch that surpasses the art of any man 
of that day, or any day. Mary had gone into 
the city and notified Peter and John that she had 
found the sepulcher empty. They start on a run 
for the sepulcher. As Mary has already made 
the journey twice, they easily far outstrip her; 
but wearily and slowly she makes her way back 
to the tomb. Peter and John have been long 
gone when she reaches it. Broken-hearted, 
thinking that the tomb of her beloved Lord has 
been desecrated, she stands without, weeping. 
There are two angels sitting in the tomb, one 
at the head and the other at the foot where the 
body of Jesus had lain, but the grief-stricken 
woman has no eye for angels. They say unto 
her, " Woman, why weepest thou ? " She re- 
plies, " Because they have taken away my Lord, 
and I know not where they have laid Him." A 
footfall is heard in the leaves at her back, and 
she turns herself about to see who is coming. 
She sees Jesus standing there, but, blinded by 
tears and despair, she does not recognize her 
Lord. Jesus says unto her, " Why weepest 



76 TALKS TO MEN 

thou? Whom seekest thou?" She supposes it 
is the gardener .who is talking to her, and says, 
"Sir, if thou have borne Him hence, tell me 
where thou hast laid Him, and I will take Him 
away." Now remember who it is that makes 
the offer, and what she offers to do; a weak 
woman offers to carry away a full-grown man. 
Of course she could not do it, but how true to 
a woman's love that always forgets its weakness 
and never stops at impossibilities. There is 
something to be done, and she says, " I will do 
it." " Tell me where thou hast laid Him, and 
I will take Him away." Is this made up? 
Never! This is life! This is reality! This is 
truth ! 

Take still another illustration, Mark xvi. 7: 
" But go your way, tell His disciples and Peter 
that He goeth before you into Galilee: there 
shall ye see Him, as He said unto you." " But 
go your way, tell His disciples and Peter." 
What I wish you to notice here are the two 
words, " and Peter." Why " and Peter? " Was 
not Peter one of the disciples? Surely he was, 
the very head of the apostolic company. Why 
then " and Peter " ? No explanation is vouch- 
safed in the text, but reflection shows that it was 
the utterance of love towards the despondent, 
despairing disciple, who had thrice denied his 
Lord. If the message had simply been to the 
disciples, Peter would have said, " Yes, I was 
once a disciple, but I can no longer be counted 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 77 

such; I thrice denied my Lord on that awful 
night with oaths and cursings ; it doesn't mean 
me," but our tender, compassionate Lord 
through His angeHc messengers sends the mes- 
sage, " Go, tell His disciples, and whoever you 
tell, be sure you tell poor, weak, faltering, 
broken-hearted Peter." Is this made up, or is 
this a real picture of our Lord? I pity the man 
so dull that he can imagine that this is fiction. 
Incidentally let it be noticed that this is recorded 
only in the Gospel of Mark, which, as is well 
known, is Peter's Gospel. As Peter dictated to 
Mark what he should record, with tearful eyes 
and grateful heart he would turn to him and say, 
" Mark, be sure you put that in, ' Tell His dis- 
ciples and Peter.' " 

Turn now to John xx. 27-29 : " Then saith 
He to Thomas, Reach hither thy finger, and be- 
hold My hands ; and reach hither thy hand, and 
thrust it into My side: and be not faithless, but 
believing. And Thomas answered and said unto 
Him, My Lord and my God. Jesus saith unto 
him, Thomas, because thou hast seen Me, thou 
has believed: blessed are they that have not 
seen, and yet have believed." Note here both 
the action of Thomas and the rebuke of Jesus. 
Each is too characteristic to be attributed to the 
art of some master of fiction. Thomas had not 
been with the disciples at the first appearance of 
our Lord. A week has passed by, another Lord's 
Day has come. This time Thomas makes sure 



78 TALKS TO MEN 

of being present ; if the Lord is to appear he will 
be there. If he had been like some modern 
skeptics he would have taken pains to be away, 
but doubter though he was, he was an honest 
doubter, and wanted to know. Suddenly Jesus 
stands in the midst. He says to Thomas, 
" Reach hither thy finger, and behold My hands ; 
and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into 
My side: and be not faithless, but believing." 
Thomas' eyes are opened at last. His faith long 
dammed back bursts every barrier, and sweep- 
ing on carries Thomas to a higher height than 
any other disciple had gone yet — exultingly and 
adoringly he cries, as he looks up into the face 
of Jesus, " My Lord and my God." Then Jesus 
tenderly, but oh, how searchingly, rebukes him. 
" Thomas," He says, " because thou hast seen 
Me, thou hast believed: blessed are they" (who 
are so eager to find and so quick to see and so 
ready to accept the truth that they do not wait 
for ocular demonstration, but are ready to take 
truth on sufficient testimony) "that have not 
seen, and yet have believed." Is this made up, 
or is this life? A record of facts as they oc- 
curred or a fictitious production of some master 
artist? 

Turn now to John xxi. 21, 22 : " Peter seeing 
him saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man 
do? Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry 
till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou 
Me." Let us get the setting of these words. The 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 79 

disciples are on the beach of Galilee, breakfast 
is over, Jesus has told Peter how he is to glorify 
Him in a martyr's death. Jesus then starts to 
walk down the beach, and says to Peter, " Fol- 
low Me." Peter starts out to follow, but look- 
ing back over his shoulder to see what others 
were doing he sees John also following. With 
characteristic curiosity he says, " Lord, if I am 
to die for Thee, what shall this man do ? " Jesus 
never answered questions of mere speculative 
curiosity regarding others, but pointed the ques- 
tioner to his own duty. On another occasion 
(Luke xiii. 23, 24), when one came to Him with 
the question, " Are they few that be saved ? " 
He replied to the question by telling them to 
see that they are saved themselves. So now He 
points curious Peter away from questions that 
do not concern him regarding others to his own 
immediate duty. He says, " If I will that he 
tarry till I come, what is that to thee ? follow 
thou Me." Is this made up, or is this life and 
reality ? 

Turn to other verses in the same chapter, 
John xxi. 15-17: "So when they had dined, 
Jesus saith to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonas, 
lovest thou Me more than these? He saith 
unto Him, Yea, Lord ; Thou knowest that I love 
Thee. He saith unto him. Feed My lambs. He 
saith to him again the second time, Simon, son 
of Jonas, lovest thou Me? He saith unto Him, 
Yea, Lord ; Thou knowest that I love Thee. He 



80 TALKS TO MEN 

saith unto him, Feed My sheep. He saith unto 
him the third time, Simon, son of Jonas, lovest 
thou Me? Peter was grieved because He said 
unto him the third time, Lovest thou Me? And 
he said unto Him, Lord, Thou knov^rest all 
things; Thou knowest that I love Thee. Jesus 
saith unto him, Feed My sheep." What I wrish 
you to note especially here are the words, " Peter 
was grieved because He said unto him the third 
time, Lovest thou Me ? " Why did Jesus ask 
Peter three times "Lovest thou Me?" And 
why was Peter grieved because Jesus did ask 
him three times. We are not told in the text, 
but if we read it in the light of Peter's thrice- 
repeated, threefold denial of His Lord, we will 
understand it. As Peter had denied his Lord 
thrice, Jesus three times gives Peter an oppor- 
tunity to reassert his love, but this all, tender as 
it was, brings back to Peter that awful night 
when in the courtyard of Annas and Caiaphas 
he had thrice denied his Lord, and Peter was 
grieved because He said unto him the third time, 
"Lovest thou Me?" Is this made up? Did 
the writer make it up with this fact in view? If 
he did, he surely would have mentioned it. No, 
this is no fiction, this is simply reporting what 
actually occurred. The accurate truthfulness of 
the record comes out even more strikingly in the 
Greek than in the English version. Two dif- 
ferent words are used for love. Jesus, in asking 
Peter " Lovest thou Me ? " uses a strong word 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 81 

of a higher form of love. Peter replying, 
" Lord, Thou knowest I love Thee," uses a 
weaker word, but a more tender word (I am 
fond of Thee). Jesus the second time uses the 
stronger word, " Lovest thou Me ? " and a 
second time Peter replies, using the weaker 
word. In His third question Jesus comes down 
to Peter's level, and uses the weaker word that 
Peter had used, and Peter replies, " Lord, Thou 
knowest all things ; Thou knowest that I love 
Thee," using the same weaker word. 

Notice again the appropriateness of the way 
in which Jesus revealed Himself to different per- 
sons after His resurrection. To Mary He re- 
veals Himself simply by calling her by name. 
Read John xx. i6, " Jesus saith unto her, Mary. 
She turned herself and saith unto Him, Rabboni ; 
which is to say, Master." What a delicate 
touch of nature we have here. Mary, as we saw 
a few moments ago, is standing outside the tomb 
overcome with grief. She has not recognized 
her Lord, though He has spoken to her; she 
has mistaken Him for the gardener. She has 
said, " Sir, if thou hast borne Him hence, tell 
me where thou hast laid Him, and I will take 
Him away." Then Jesus utters just one word ; 
He says, " Mary." As that name came trem- 
bling on the morning air, uttered with the old 
familiar tone, spoken as no one else had ever 
spoken it but He, in an instant her eyes are 
opened, she falls at His feet and tries to clasp 



82 TALKS TO MEN 

them, and looks up into His face and cries, 
"Rabboni; my Master." Is that made up? 
No, this is Hfe, this is Jesus, and this is the 
woman who loved Him. No unknown author 
of the second, third or fourth century has pro- 
duced such a masterpiece as this. We stand 
here unquestionably face to face with reality, 
with life, with Jesus and Mary, as they actually 
were. 

To the two on the road to Emmaus He made 
Himself known in the breaking of bread. Read 
Luke xxiv. 30, 31, " And it came to pass, as He 
sat at meat with them. He took bread, and blessed 
it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes 
were opened, and they knew Him : and He 
vanished out of their sight." They knew Him 
in the breaking of bread. Why? The evan- 
gelist ventures no explanation, but it is not hard 
to read between the lines and find the explana- 
tion. In each one of the Gospels emphatic men- 
tion is made of Jesus returning thanks at meals. 
There was something so characteristic in the way 
He returned thanks at meals, so real, so different 
from the way in which they had ever seen any 
other man do it, there was such an evident ap- 
proach into the very presence of God so utterly 
unlike the formality and unreality of others at 
such a time, that the moment Jesus lifted up 
His eyes and gave thanks, their eyes were opened 
— and they knew Him. This top is reality and 
life, not fiction. 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 83 

To Thomas, the man governed by the senses, 
He made Himself known by exhibiting the very 
print of the nails in His hands and the hole in 
His side. To John and Peter, He made Him- 
self known as at the beginning in the miraculous 
draught of fishes. Everywhere in each minute 
detail the narrative has a consistency and a truth 
to life that makes the supposition of fiction 
impossible. 

Take one more illustration. Read carefully 
John XX. 7, " And the napkin that was about His 
head, not lying with the linen clothes, but 
wrapped together in a place by itself." How 
strange that' such a little detail as this should be 
added to the story with absolutely no attempt of 
saying why, but how deeply significant this little 
unexplained detail is. When I was studying in 
the theological seminary an upper classman 
came home one Sunday afternoon from his Bible 
class much disgusted. He had a class of work- 
ing girls about twenty years of age. He said, 
" One of my scholars asked me a stupid ques- 
tion to-day; she asked me if there was any 
significance in the napkin being wrapped to- 
gether in a place by itself. How stupid, as if 
there was any significance in that!" But in 
reality it was not stupid working girl, but stu- 
pid theologue. There is the deepest significance 
in it. Jesus Christ is dead. For three days 
and three nights, from Wednesday evening at 
sunset till Saturday evening at sunset, His 



84 TALKS TO MEN 

body has Iain cold and silent in the sepulcher, 
as truly dead as any body was ever dead, but 
at last the appointed hour has come, the breath 
of God sweeps through the sleeping and silent 
clay, and in that supreme moment of His own 
earthly life, that supreme moment of human 
history, when Jesus rises triumphant over death 
and Satan, there is no excitement upon His part, 
but with that same majestic self-composure and 
serenity that marked His whole career, the same 
divine calm that He displayed upon storm-tossed 
Galilee when His afifrighted disciples shook Him 
from His slumbers and said, " Lord, carest Thou 
not that we perish ? " and He arose serenely on 
the deck of the tossing vessel and said to the 
raging waves and winds, " Be still ! " and there 
was a great calm, so now again in this sublime, 
this awful moment. He does not excitedly tear 
the napkin from His face and throw it aside, but 
absolutely without human haste or flurry or dis- 
order. He takes it calmly from His head, rolls 
it up and lays it away in an orderly manner by 
itself. Was that made up? Never! Never! 
We do not behold here a delicate masterpiece of 
the romancer's art — we read here the simple nar- 
rative of a matchless detail in a unique life that 
was actually lived here upon earth, a life so ex- 
quisitely beautiful that one cannot read it with 
an honest and open mind without feeling the 
tears coming to his eyes. 
But someone will say: "These are little 



STORIES OF THE RESURRECTION 85 

things." True, but it is from that very fact that 
they gain very much of their significance. It is 
in just such httle things that the fiction would 
disclose itself. Fiction displays its difiference 
from the fact in the minute. In the great out- 
standing outlines you can make fiction look like 
truth, but when you come to examine it minutely 
and microscopically you will soon detect that it 
is not reality, but fabrication; but the more mi- 
croscopically we examine the Gospel narratives, 
the more we become impressed with their truth- 
fulness. The artlessness and naturalness and 
self-evident truthfulness of the narratives down 
to the minutest detail surpasses all the possi- 
bilities of art. 

In our next Talk we shall consider the circum- 
stantial evidence for the resurrection of Christ. 



SEVENTH TALK 

THE CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE OF THE 
RESURRECTION OF CHRIST 

In our last two addresses we have been consider- 
ing some of the internal proofs of the truthful- 
ness of the Gospel story. We started out writhout 
assuming anything. We took the four Gospels 
without assuming them to be true, or to have 
been written by the men whose names they bear, 
or to have been written in the first century, or 
second, or third. We assumed nothing what- 
ever, but simply laid the Gospels side by side tc 
see what we could learn from a consideration of 
the documents themselves as to whether they 
were the record of facts that actually occurred, 
or fictions. We first discovered that the four 
Gospels contained separate and independent ac- 
counts of the resurrection of Christ. We next 
saw that these Gospel stories must be either a 
record of facts that actually occurred, or else 
fiction ; that if fiction, they must have been fabri- 
cated in one of two ways — either independently 
of one another, or in collusion with one another. 
We saw that they could not have been fabricated 
independently of one another, as the agreements 

86 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 87 

were too marked and too many. We saw that 
they could not have been fabricated in collusion, 
the apparent discrepancies were too numerous 
and too noticeable. Not fabricated independ- 
ently, not fabricated in collusion, we were there- 
fore driven to the conclusion that they were not 
fabricated at all, but a true record of facts that 
actually occurred. We saw, in the next place, 
that each one of the four Gospels bore the clear 
marks of having been derived from eye-wit- 
nesses. We noted, in the next place, the artless- 
ness, straightforwardness, and simplicity of the 
narratives, the entire absence of all attempt at 
coloring or effect, the certain mark of a true 
witness. We noted, in the next place, that it is 
often the case when a witness is on the witness 
stand that the unintentional evidence of words 
and phrases which he uses, and accidental details 
which he introduces, is more conclusive than the 
direct testimony of the witness, because it is not 
the testimony of the witness, but the testimony 
of the truth to itself. We then took up a large 
number of instances of this kind, conclusively 
showing that the Gospel stories could not have 
been made up; that beyond a peradventure they 
were the accurate representation of things that 
actually occurred. 

To-day we take up the circumstantial evidence 
for the resurrection of Christ. I presume you 
all know what is meant by circumstantial evi- 
dence. By circumstantial evidence we mean 



88 TALKS TO MEN 

certain proven or admitted facts or circumstances 
which demand for their explanation the other 
fact which we are seeking to prove. For ex- 
ample, a man was once found murdered; the 
only clue to the murderer was the point of a 
knife-blade which was found broken off in the 
heart. With this clue the detectives went to 
work. A knife was found with a broken blade. 
The jagged edges of the broken blade fitted ex- 
actly into the notches in the point that had been 
found in the heart. Moreover, there were traces 
of blood upon both point and blade, and the 
traces of blood on the point fitted exactly the 
traces of blood on the blade. It was held to be 
proven that the murder was committed with that 
knife. Take another illustration. A bolt of 
cloth was stolen from a certain manufacturer; 
search was made for the bolt of cloth. A bolt of 
cloth was found, which the manufacturer claimed 
was his stolen bolt; but the man in whose pos- 
session the bolt was found claimed that the bolt 
came from an entirely different factory. But 
when the bolt of cloth was taken to the factory 
from which the bolt had been stolen, the holes 
at each end of the bolt of cloth fitted exactly 
upon the tenter-hooks of the factory from which 
it was alleged to have been stolen. But when it 
was taken to the factory from which the man 
claimed to have obtained it, it was found that 
the holes in the end of the bolt of cloth did not 
at all fit upon the tenter-hooks of that factory. 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 89 

On this evidence it was held to be proven that 
the bolt of cloth had come from the factory 
where it fitted upon the tenter-hooks. There is 
abundant evidence of this character as to the 
certainty of the resurrection of Christ from the 
dead. There are certain proven and admitted 
facts that demand the resurrection of Christ to 
account for them. 

(i) Beyond a question, the foundation truth 
preached in the early years of the Church's his- 
tory was the resurrection. This was the one doc- 
trine upon which the Apostles were ever ringing 
the changes. Whether Jesus did actually rise 
from the dead or not, it is certain that the one 
thing that the apostles constantly proclaimed was 
that He had risen. 

Why should the Apostles use this as the very 
corner stone of their creed if not well attested 
and firmly believed? Furthermore, they laid 
down their lives for this doctrine. Men do not 
lay down their lives for a doctrine which they do 
not firmly believe. They stated that they had 
seen Jesus after His resurrection, and rather 
than give up their statement died for it. Of 
course, men may die for error, and often have; 
but in this case they would know whether they 
had seen Jesus or not, and they would not merely 
have been dying for error, but dying for a state- 
ment which they knew to be false. This is not 
credible. Furthermore, if the Apostles really 
firmly believed, as is admitted, that Jesus rose 



90 TALKS TO MEN 

from the dead, they had some facts upon which 
they founded their belief. These are the facts 
they would have related in recounting the story, 
and not have made up a story out of imaginary 
incidents. But if the facts were as recounted in 
the Gospels, there is no possible escaping the 
conclusion that Jesus actually arose. 

Furthermore, if Jesus had not arisen, there 
would have been some evidence that He had not. 
His enemies would have found this evidence. 
But the Apostles went up and down the very city 
where He had been crucified and proclaimed 
right to the face of the slayers that He had been 
raised, and no one could produce evidence to the 
contrary. The best they could do was to say the 
guards went to sleep and the disciples stole the 
body while the guards slept. Men who bear 
evidence to what happens while they are asleep 
are hardly credible witnesses. Further still, if 
the Apostles had stolen the body, they would have 
known it themselves, and would not have been 
ready to die for what they knew to be a fraud. 

(2) Another known fact is the change in the 
day of rest. The early Church came from among 
the Jews. From time immemorial the Jews had 
celebrated the seventh day of the week as their 
day of rest and worship; but we find the early 
Christians, in the Acts of the Apostles, and also 
in early Christian writings, assembling on the 
first day of the week. Nothing is harder than 
to change a holy day that has been celebrated for 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 91 

centuries, and is one of the most cherished cus- 
toms of the people. What is especially signifi- 
cant about the change is that it was changed by 
no express decree, but by general consent. Some- 
thing tremendous must have happened that led 
to this change. The Apostles asserted that what 
had happened on that day was the resurrection 
of Christ from the dead, and that is the most 
rational explanation, in fact, the only reasonable 
explanation of the change. 

(3) But the most significant fact of all is the 
change in the disciples — the moral transforma- 
tion. At the time of the crucifixion of Christ 
we find the whole apostolic company filled with 
blank and utter despair. We see Peter, the 
leader of the apostolic company, denying his 
Lord three times with oaths and cursings. But 
a few days later we see this same man filled with 
a courage that nothing could shake. We see 
Peter standing before the very council that had 
condemned Jesus to death, and saying to them: 
" Be it known unto you all, and to all the people 
of Israel, that in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, 
whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the 
dead, doth this man stand before you whole " 
(Acts iv. 10). A Httle further on, when com- 
manded by this council not to speak at all nor 
teach in the name of Jesus, we hear Peter and 
John answering : " Whether it be right in the 
sight of God to hearken unto you more than 
unto God, judge ye. For we cannot but speak 



92 TALKS TO MEN 

the things which we have seen and heard " 
(Acts iv. 19, 20). A little later still, after arrest 
and imprisonment, in peril of death, when 
sternly arraigned by the council, we hear Peter 
and the other Apostles answering their demand 
that they should be silent regarding Jesus : " We 
ought to obey God rather than man. The God 
of our Fathers raised up Jesus whom ye slew 
and hanged on a tree. Him hath God exalted 
with His right hand to be a Prince and a Sav- 
iour, and we are His witnesses of these things " 
(Acts V. 29, 32). Something tremendous must 
have happened to account for such a radical and 
astounding moral transformation as this. Noth- 
ing short of the fact of the resurrection, of their 
having seen the risen Lord, will explain it. 

These unquestionable facts are so impressive 
and so conclusive that even infidel and Jewish 
scholars now admit that the Apostles believed 
that Jesus rose from the dead. Even Ferdinand 
Baur admits this. Even David Strauss says: 
" Only this much need be acknowledged, that 
the Apostles firmly believed that Jesus had 
arisen." Strauss evidently does not wish to ad- 
mit any more than he has to, but he feels com- 
pelled to admit this much. Schenkel goes fur- 
ther yet, and says : " It is an indisputable fact 
that in the early morning of the first day of the 
week following the crucifixion the grave of Jesus 
was found empty. It is a second fact that the 
disciples and other members of the apostolic 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 93 

communion were convinced that Jesus was seen 
after the crucifixion." These admissions are 
fatal to the rationahsts who make them. The 
question at once arises, Whence this conviction 
and belief? Renan attempts an answer by say- 
ing that " the passion of a hallucinated woman 
[Mary] gives to the world a resurrected God" 
(Renan's "Life of Jesus," p. 357). By this 
Renan means that Mary was in love with Jesus. 
After His crucifixion, brooding over it, in the 
passion of her love she dreamed herself into a 
condition where she had a hallucination that she 
had seen Jesus arisen from the dead; she re- 
ported her dream as fact, and thus the passion of 
a hallucinated woman gave to the world a resur- 
rected God. Cut, we reply, the passion of a hal- 
lucinated woman was not competent to this task. 
R-emember the make-up of the apostolic com- 
pany. In the apostolic company were a Mat- 
thew and a Thomas to be convinced and a Saul 
outside to be converted. The passion of a 
hallucinated woman will not convince a stubborn 
unbeliever like Thomas, nor a Jewish tax-gath- 
erer like Matthew. Who ever heard of a tax- 
gatherer, and, most of all, a Jewish tax-gatherer, 
who could be imposed upon by the passion of a 
hallucinated woman? Neither will the passion 
of a hallucinated woman convince a fierce and 
conscientious enemy like Saul of Tarsus. We 
must find some saner explanation than this. 
Strauss tries to account for it by inquiring 



94 TALKS TO MEN 

whether the appearances might not have been 
visionary. To this we reply that, first of all, 
there was no subjective starting-point for such 
visions. The Apostles, so far from expecting to 
see the Lord, would scarcely believe their own 
eyes when they did see Him. Furthermore, who 
ever heard of eleven men having the same vision 
at the same time, to say nothing of five hundred 
men (I Cor. xv. 6) having the same vision at 
the same time? Strauss demands of us that we 
give up one miracle and substitute five hundred 
miracles in its place. Nothing can surpass the 
credulity of unbelief. 

The third attempt at an explanation is that 
Jesus was not really dead when they took Him 
from the cross, that His friends worked over 
Him and brought Him back to life, and what 
was supposed to be the appearance of the risen 
Lord was the appearance of one who had never 
been really dead, but only apparently dead, and 
was now merely resuscitated. To sustain this 
view appeal has been made to the short time 
Jesus hung upon the cross, and to the fact that 
history tells us of one in the time of Josephus 
taken down from the cross and nursed back to 
hfe. But to this we answer, first, remember the 
events that preceded the crucifixion, the agony 
in the garden of Gethsemane, the awful ordeal 
of the four trials, the scourging, and the conse- 
quent physical condition in which all this left 
Jesus. Remember, too, the water and the blood 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 95 

that poured from the pierced side. In the second 
place, we reply, His enemies would have taken, 
and did take, all necessary precautions against 
such a thing as this happening (John xix. 34). 
We reply, in the third place, if Jesus had been 
merely resuscitated. He would have been so 
weak, such an utter physical wreck, that His re- 
appearance would have been measured at its real 
value, and the moral transformation in the dis- 
ciples, for which we are trying to account, would 
still remain unaccounted for. The officer in the 
time of Josephus, who is cited in proof, though 
brought back to life, was an utter physical wreck. 
We reply, in the fourth place, if brought back to 
life, the Apostles and friends of Jesus, who are 
the ones who are supposed to have brought Him 
back to life, would have known how they brought 
Him back to Hfe, and that it was not a case of 
resurrection, but of resuscitation, and the main 
fact to be accounted for, namely, the change in 
themselves, would remain unaccounted for. The 
attempted explanation is an explanation that does 
not explain. We reply, in the fifth place, that 
the moral difficulty is the greatest of all. If it 
was merely a case of resuscitation, then Jesus 
tried to palm Himself off as one risen from the 
dead, when He was nothing of the sort ; He was 
an arch-imposter, and the whole Christian sys- 
tem rests on a fraud as its ultimate foundation. 
Is it possible to believe that such a system of 
religion as that of Jesus Christ, embodying such 



96 TALKS TO MEN 

exalted precepts and principles of truth, purity, 
and love, " originated in a deliberately planned 
fraud " ? No one whose own heart is not can- 
kered by fraud and trickery can believe Jesus to 
have been an impostor, and His religion to have 
been founded upon fraud. 

We have eliminated all other possible suppo- 
sitions. We have but one left, namely, Jesus 
really was raised from the dead the third day 
as is recorded in the Gospels. The desperate 
straits to which those who attempt to deny it are 
driven are themselves proof of the fact. 

We have then several independent lines of ar- 
gument pointing decisively to the resurrection of 
Christ from the dead. Some of these taken sep- 
arately prove the fact, but taken together they 
constitute an argument that makes doubt of the 
resurrection of Christ impossible to the candid 
man. Of course, if one is determined not to 
believe, no amount of proof will convince. Such 
a man must be left to his own deliberate choice 
of error and falsehood, but any man who really 
desires to know the truth and is willing to obey 
it at any cost, must accept the resurrection of 
Christ as a historically proven fact. 

There is really but one weighty objection to 
the doctrine that Christ arose from the dead, that 
is, that " there is no conclusive evidence that any 
other ever arose." To this a sufficient answer 
would be, even if it were certain that no other 
ever arose, it would not at all prove that Jesus 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 97 

did not rise ; for the life of Jesus was unique, His 
nature was unique, His character was unique. 
His mission was unique. His history was unique, 
and it is not to be wondered at, but rather to be 
expected, that the issue of such a Hfe should 
also be unique. After all, this objection is sim- 
ply David Hume's exploded argument against 
the possibility of the miraculous revamped. Ac- 
cording to this argument, no amount of evidence 
can prove a miracle, because miracles are con- 
trary to all experience. But are miracles con- 
trary to all experience? To start out by saying 
that they are is to beg the very question at issue. 
They may be outside of your experience and 
mine ; they may be outside the experience of this 
entire generation, but your experience and mine 
and the experience of this entire generation is 
not all experience. Every student of geology 
and astronomy knows that things have occurred 
in the past which are entirely outside the experi- 
ence of the present generation. Things have 
occurred within the last four years that are en- 
tirely outside the experience of the fifty years pre- 
ceding. True science does not start out with an 
a priori hypothesis that certain things are impos- 
sible. It simply studies the evidence to know 
what has actually occurred. It does not twist 
its observed facts to make them accord with a 
priori theories, but seeks to make its theories 
accord with facts as observed. To say that 
miracles are impossible and that no amount of 



98 TALKS TO MEN 

evidence can therefore prove a miracle is to be 
supremely unscientific. Within the past few 
years in the domain of chemistry, for example, 
discoveries have been made regarding radium 
which seemed to run counter to all previous ob- 
servations regarding chemical elements and to 
well-established chemical theories, but the scien- 
tist has not therefore said that these discoveries 
about radium cannot be true. He has rather 
gone to work to find out where the trouble was 
in his previous theories. The observed and re- 
corded facts in the case before us prove that 
Jesus rose from the dead, and true science must 
accept this conclusion and conform its theories to 
this observed fact. 

In the day of the great triumph of Deism in 
England two of the most brilliant men in the 
denial of the supernatural were the eminent legal 
authorities, Gilbert West and Lord Lyttleton. 
These two men, who were put forward to crush' 
the defenders of the supernatural in the Bible, 
had a conference together. One of them said 
to the other that it would be difficult to maintain 
their position unless they disposed of two of the 
alleged bulwarks of Christianity, namely, the 
alleged resurrection of Jesus from the dead and 
the alleged conversion of Saul of Tarsus. Lyt- 
tleton undertook to write a book to show that 
Saul of Tarsus was never converted as is re- 
corded in the Acts of the Apostles, but that his 
alleged conversion was a myth, if Gilbert West 



CIRCUMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE 99 

would write another book to show that the 
alleged resurrection of Christ from the dead was 
a myth. West said to Lyttleton : " I shall have 
to depend upon you for my facts, for I am some- 
what rusty in the Bible," to which Lyttleton re- 
plied that he was counting upon West, for he 
too was somewhat rusty in the Bible. One of 
them said to the other : " If we are to be honest 
in the matter, we ought at least to study the evi- 
dence," and this they undertook to do. They 
had numerous conferences together while they 
were preparing their works. In one of these 
conferences West said to Lyttleton that there 
had been something on his mind for some time 
that he thought he ought to speak to him about, 
that as he had been studying the evidence he was 
beginning to feel that there was something in it. 
Lyttleton replied that he was glad that he had 
spoken about it so, for he himself was somewhat 
shaken, as he had been studying the evidence for 
the conversion of Saul of Tarsus. Finally, when 
the books were finished and the two men met. 
West said to Lyttleton : " Have you written your 
book?" He replied that he had, but he said: 
" West, as I have been studying the evidence and 
weighing it by the recognized laws of legal evi- 
dence, I have become satisfied that Saul of Tar- 
sus was converted as is stated in the Acts of the 
Apostles, and that Christianity is true, and I 
have written my book on that side." The book 
can be found to-day in first-class libraries. 



100 TALKS TO MEN 

" Well," said West, " as I have studied the evi- 
dence for the resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead, and have vi^eighed it according to the 
acknowledged laws of evidence, I have become 
satisfied that Jesus really rose from the dead as 
recorded in the Gospels, and have written my 
book on that side." This book also can be found 
in our libraries to-day. Let any man of legal 
mind, any man who is accustomed and compe- 
tent to weigh evidence, yes, any man with fair ■ 
reasoning powers, and, above all, with perfect 
candor, sit down to the study of the facts regard- 
ing the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead, and he will become satisfied that beyond a 
peradventure Jesus rose from the dead as is re- 
corded in the Gospels. But supppose He did 
rise from the dead, what of it? We will take 
that question up in our next address. 



EIGHTH TALK 

WHAT THE RESURRECTION OF JESUS FROM THE 
DEAD PROVES 

In our last three addresses we have seen con- 
clusive evidence that Jesus Christ rose from the 
dead. We have followed a number of inde- 
pendent lines of argument. Several of these 
taken alone satisfactorily prove the fact of the 
resurrection, but taken together they constitute 
an argument that makes doubt of the resurrec- 
tion of Christ impossible to a candid mind. But 
suppose He did rise from the dead, what of it? 
What does His resurrection prove? It proves 
everything that most needs to be proved. It 
proves everything that is essential in Chris- 
tianity. 

I. First of all, the resurrection of Christ from 
the dead proves that there is a God, and that the 
God of the Bible is the true God. Every effect 
must have an adequate cause, and the only ade- 
quate cause that will account for the resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ is God, the God of the Bible. 
When Jesus was here upon earth. He proclaimed 
the God of the Bible "the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob," the God of the Old Testament 
as well as the New. He claimed that after men 
had put Him to death the God of Abraham, 

101 



102 TALKS TO MEN 

Isaac, and Jacob, the God of the Bible, would 
raise Him from the dead the third day. This 
was a stupendous claim to make, apparently 
an absurd claim. For centuries men had come 
and gone ; they had lived and died, and as far as 
human observation went, that was the end of 
them; but Jesus claimed that after all these cen- 
turies of men living, dying, and passing into 
oblivion, that God, the God of the Bible, would 
raise Him from the dead. Jesus died; He was 
crucified, dead, and buried ; the appointed hour at 
which he had claimed God would raise Him 
from the dead came. God did raise Him from 
the dead, and thereby Jesus' astounding claim was 
substantiated, and it was decisively proven that 
there is a God, and that the God of the Bible is 
the true God. For centuries men have been 
seeking for proofs of the existence and char- 
acter of God. There is the teleological argu- 
ment, the argument from the marks of creative 
intelligence and design in the material universe ; 
a good argument in its place. There is the 
argument from the intelligent guiding hand of 
God in human history ; the ontological argument, 
and other arguments, all more or less convincing ; 
but the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead provides us with a solid, scientific founda- 
tion for our faith in God. In the light of the 
resurrection our faith in God is built upon 
observed facts. In the light of the resurrection 
of Jesus atheism and agnosticism have no longer 



WHAT RESURRECTION PROVES 103 

any standing ground. Well might Peter say, 
" We through Him are believers in God, who 
raised Him from the dead, and gave Him glory " 
(I Pet. i. 21). My beHef in the God of the Bible 
is not a felicitous fancy. It is a fixed faith 
resting upon an incontrovertibly firm fact. 

2. In the second place, the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead proves that Jesus is a 
teacher sent from God, who received His mes- 
sage from God, that He was absolutely inerrant, 
that He spoke the very words of God. This 
was Jesus' claim for Himself. In John vii. i6 
He says, " My teaching is not Mine, but His 
that sent Me." In John xii. 49 He says, " I 
have not spoke of Myself ; but the Father which 
sent Me, He gave me a commandment, what I 
should say, and what I should speak." In John 
xiv. 10, II He says, " Believest thou not that I 
am in the Father, and the Father in me? the 
words that I speak unto you I speak not of My- 
self: but the Father that dwelleth in Me, He 
doeth the works. Believe Me that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in Me : or ejse believe Me 
for the very works' sake." In John xiv. 24 
He says, " The word which ye hear is not mine, 
but the Father's which sent Me." His claim 
was that His words were the very words of God. 
This, too, was a stupendous claim to make. 
Others have made similar claims, but the dif- 
ference between their claims and that of Jesus is 
that Jesus substantiated His claim, and no one 



104 TALKS TO MEN 

else has ever substantiated his. God Himself 
unmistakably set His seal upon this astounding 
claim of Jesus Christ by raising Him from the 
dead. In the light of the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead, that school of criticism 
that assumes to question the absolute inerrancy 
of Jesus Christ as a teacher, and to set its au- 
thority up above that of Jesus, has absolutely 
no standing ground. Yea, further, that school 
of criticism, by putting forward its unsubstan- 
tiated claims in opposition to the demonstrated 
claims of Jesus Christ, makes itself a laughing- 
stock in the eyes of thoughtful men. 

3. In the third place, the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead proves that He is 
the Son of God. The Apostle Paul says, in 
Rom. i. 4, that He is " declared to be the Son 
of God with power by the resurrection from the 
dead," and anyone who will stop to think will 
see that this is beyond a peradventure true. 
When Jesus was here ttpon earth He claimed to 
be divine in a sense in which no other man w^as 
divine. He taught that while even the greatest 
of God's prophets were only servants. He was 
a Son, an only Son (Mark xii. 6, note context). 
He claimed that He and the Father were one 
(John X. 30), and that all men should honor 
Him, even as they honored the Father (John v. 
23) ; that He was so completely and fully in- 
dwelt of God, such a perfect and absolute incar- 
nation of God, that he that had seen Him had 



WHAT RESURRECTION PROVES 105 

seen the Father (John xiv. 9). This was a most 
amazing claim to make, a claim which, if not 
true, was rankest blasphemy. He told men that 
they would put Him to death for making this 
claim, but that after they had put Him to death 
God Himself would set His seal to the claim by 
raising Him from the dead. They did put Him to 
death for making this claim ; the disbelievers in 
the deity of Jesus Christ of that day caused Him 
to be nailed to the cross of Calvary for claiming 
to be divine (Matt. xxvi. 63-66) ; but when the 
appointed hour had come the breath of God 
swept through the sleeping clay, and God Him- 
self, as Jesus claimed He would, set His seal 
to Christ's assertion of His own deity by raising 
Him from the dead, and God thus proclaimed to 
all ages, with clearer voice than if He should 
speak from the open heavens to-day, " This is 
My only-begotten Son, the One in whom I dwell 
in all My fullness, so that he that hath seen Him 
hath seen the Father." In the light of the resur- 
rection of Jesus Christ from the dead Unitarian- 
ism has absolutely no logical standing ground. 

4. In the fourth place, the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead proves that there is a judg- 
ment day coming. On Mars Hill Paul declared 
" God hath appointed a day in which He will 
judge the world in righteousness by that Man 
whom He hath ordained, whereof He hath given 
assurance unto all men in that He hath raised 
Him from the dead," thus making the resurrec- 



106 TALKS TO MEN 

tion of Christ the God-given assurance of the 
coming judgment. But how does the resurrec- 
tion of Christ give assurance of coming judg- 
ment? When Jesus w^as upon earth, He declared 
that the Father had committed all judgment unto 
Him. He declared further that the hour was 
coming in which all that were in their graves 
should hear His voice and come forth ; they that 
that had done good unto the resurrection of life, 
and they that had done evil unto the resurrection 
of judgment (John v. 22, 28, 29). Men ridi- 
culed His claim, hated Him for making the claim, 
put Him to death for making the claim, and the 
other claim involved in it, that of deity, but God 
set His seal to the claim by raising him from the 
dead. The resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead, which is an absolutely certain fact of 
history in the past, points with unerring finger 
to an absolutely certain coming judgment in the 
future. Belief in a coming judgment day is 
no guess of theologians. It is a positive faith 
founded upon a proven fact. In the light of 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead 
the man who continues in sin, flattering himself 
with the hope that there will be no future day of 
reckoning and of judgment, is guilty of madness. 
Jesus will sit in judgment, and everyone of us 
must give account to Him of the deeds done in 
the body. 

5. In the fifth place, the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead proves that every believer 



WHAT RESURRECTION PROVES 107 

in Christ is justified from all things. We read 
in Rom. iv. 25 (R. V.) that Jesus "was de- 
livered up for our trespasses, and was raised for 
our justification." More literally, " He was de- 
livered up because of our trespasses (that is, 
becavtse we had trespassed), and was raised be- 
cause of our justification (that is, because we 
were justified)." The resurrection of Jesus 
Christ proves decisively that the believer in Him 
is justified. But how? When Jesus was on 
earth He said that He would oflfer up His life a 
ransom for many (Matt. xx. 28). The hour 
came, He offered up His life on the cross of Cal- 
vary as a ransom for us. Now the atonement 
has been made, but there still remains a question, 
" Will God accept the atonement which has thus 
been offered ? " For three nights and three days 
this question remains unanswered. Jesus lies in 
the grave, cold and dead. The long predicted 
hour comes, the breath of God sweeps through 
that sleeping clay, and Christ rises triumphant 
from the dead and is exalted to the right hand 
of the Father, and God proclaims to the whole 
universe, " I have accepted the atonement which 
Jesus made." When Jesus died, He died as my 
representative, and I died in Him; when He 
arose, He rose as my representative, and I arose 
in Him ; when He ascended up on high and took 
His place at the right hand of the Father in the 
glory. He ascended as my representative and I 
ascended in Him, and to-day I am seated in 



108 TALKS TO MEN 

Christ with God in the heavenlies. I look at 
the cross of Christ, and I know that atonement 
has been made for my sins ; I look at the open 
sepulcher and the risen and ascended Lord, and 
I know that the atonement has been accepted. 
There no longer remains a single sin on me, no 
matter how many or how great my sins may 
have been. My sins may have been as high as 
the mountains, but in the light of the resurrec- 
tion the atonement that covers them is as high 
as heaven. My sins may have been as deep as 
the ocean, but in the light of the resurrection the 
atonement that swallows them up is as deep as 
eternity. " Be it known unto you therefore, 
brethren, that through this Man is proclaimed 
unto you remission of sins, and by Him every 
one that believeth is justified from all things." 

6. In the sixth place, the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead proves that all zuho 
are united to Christ by a living faith shall live 
again. Paul says, " If we believe that Jesus died 
and rose again, even so them also which sleep 
in Jesus will God bring with Him" (I Thess. 
iv. 14). The believer is so united to Christ by 
a living faith that if Christ rose, we must. If 
the grave could not hold Him, it cannot hold us. 
For centuries men have been seeking proofs of 
immortality; we have had the dreams of poets 
and the speculations of philosophers to cheer us 
with the hope that we shall live again, but the 
best of philosophical arguments only point to 



WHAT RESURRECTION PROVES 109 

the probability of a future life. In a matter like 
this, the human heart craves and demands some- 
thing more than a probability. In the resur- 
rection of Jesus Christ from the dead we get 
something more than probability — we get abso- 
lute certainty ; we get scientific demonstration of 
life beyond the grave. The resurrection of 
Jesus Christ removes the hope of immortality 
from the domain of the speculative and the 
probable into the domain of the scientifically 
demonstrated and certain. We know there is a 
life beyond the grave. 

A popular preacher has recently said, " Not a 
few are not at all sure that there is any life be- 
yond the grave. They wish it could be proven. 
So do I. But we can do no more than infer it from 
the moral constitution of the universe." Thank 
God, this popular preacher is wrong. Before 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ, perhaps, we 
could " do no more than infer it from the moral 
constitution of the universe," but in the light of 
the resurrection it is no longer left to uncertain 
inferences from the moral constitution of the 
universe, it is proven. No further proof is 
needed. It is scientifically demonstrated, and 
to anyone who will candidly ponder the facts 
regarding the resurrection of Christ, unbelief or 
agnosticism in regard to the future life becomes 
an impossibility. In the light of the first Easter 
morning I go out into the cemeteries where lies 
the sleeping dust of father and mother, brother. 



110 TALKS TO MEN 

child, and all my tears are brushed away, for I 
hear the Father saying, Thy father shall live 
again; thy mother shall live again; thy brother 
shall live again ; thy child shall live again. 

7. In the seventh place, the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead proves that it is the 
believer's privilege to have daily, hourly, con- 
stant victory over sin. We are united not only 
to the Lord who died, and thus made atone- 
ment for our sin, and thus delivered us from 
the guilt of sin; we are united to the Lord who 
rose again, who " ever liveth to make interces- 
sion for us," and who has power to save to the 
uttermost, power to keep us from falling day by 
day, and to present us faultless before the pres- 
ence of His glory with exceeding joy (Heb. vii. 
25; Jude 24). I may be weak, utterly weak, 
unable to resist temptation for a single hour, but 
He is strong, infinitely strong, and He lives 
to give me help and deliverance every day and 
every hour. The question of victory over sin 
is not a question of my weakness, but of His 
strength, His resurrection power, always at my 
disposal. He has all power in heaven and on 
earth, and what my risen Lord has belongs to 
me also. In the light of the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead, failure in daily living 
is unnecessary and inexcusable. In His resur- 
rection life and power it is our privilege and our 
duty to lead victorious lives. Four men were 
once climbing up the slippery side of the Matter- 



WHAT RESURRECTION PROVES 111 

horn, a guide and a tourist, a second guide and 
a second tourist, all roped together. The lower 
tourist lost his footing and went over the side. 
The sudden pull on the rope carried the lower' 
guide with him, and he carried the other tourist 
with him. Three men are now dangling over 
the dizzy cliff. But the guide who was in the 
lead, feeling the first pull upon the rope, drove 
his pike into the ice, braced his feet, and held 
fast; three men dangling over the awful abyss, 
but three men safe, because tied to the man that 
held fast. The first tourist regained his place 
upon the path, the guide regained his, and the 
lower tourist regained his, and on and up they 
went in safety. As the human race ascended 
the icy cliffs of life, the first Adam lost his foot- 
ing and swept over the abyss. He pulled the 
next man after him, and the next, and the next, 
and the next, until the whole race hung over the 
abyss; but the second Adam, the Man in the 
glory, stood fast, and all who are united to Him 
by a living faith, though dangling over the awful 
precipice, are safe, because tied to the Man in 
the glory. 



NINTH TALK 

INFIDELITY : ITS CAUSES, CONSEQUENCES, AND 
CURE 

The profession of infidelity is very common in 
our day. I am constantly meeting with those 
who give as their reason for not being Chris- 
tians that they do not believe in the Bible. There 
are many preachers, most excellent and gifted 
men, who think that infidelity is not worthy of 
attention, that_ the proper way to treat it is to 
ignore it. I do not agree with them. Infidelity 
is common enough, and active enough, and de- 
structive enough to demand attention. While I 
do not for a moment think that the cause of 
Christ or the Bible has anything to fear from 
infidelity, I do know that individuals and com- 
munities are being greatly injured by it, and we 
owe it to them to expose its real character, 
to point out its consequences, and to show its 
cure. 

I have had no greater joy now for some years 
than to be able to lead many men out of the con- 
fusion and wretchedness of infidelity into the 
clear light and abounding joy of an intelligent 
faith in Christ and the Bible. 
112 



INFIDELITY 113 

I. Causes of Infidelity. 

What are the causes of infidelity? 

I. The first cause, and one of the commonest, 
is misrepresentatio7i of Christianity by its pro- 
fessed disciples. There are two kinds of mis- 
representations, (i) Misrepresentations in doc- 
trine. (2) Misrepresentations in daily living. 
Let us look first at the misrepresentations in doc- 
trine. Take, for example, what has been preached 
as Christianity for generations in France, Spain, 
Italy, the Philippine Islands, Mexico, and the 
South American republics. Of course we know 
that this is only the grossest caricature of the 
Christianity of the Bible ; but the common people 
of these lands do not know this. They suppose 
that the Christianity preached by the priests is 
the Christianity of the Bible ; and is it any won- 
der that they reject it and become out and out 
infidels? If what is thus preached as Chris- 
tianity were Christianity, I would reject Chris- 
tianity myself. But many so-called Protestant 
representations of Christianity, if not so grossly 
false, are still false. There is a wide difference 
between the God of the Bible and the God of 
much so-called Protestant teaching, between the 
Christ of the Bible and the Christ of much of the 
so-called Protestant teaching, and between the 
Christian life as set forth in the Bible and the 
ethics set forth in the pulpit. But the grossest 



114 TALKS TO MEN 

misrepresentation of Christianity on the part of 
its professed disciples are the misrepresentations 
in daily living. The life of many professed 
Christians is so widely at variance with the life 
taught in the Bible that it leads many observers 
into rank infidelity. Take, for example, the 
professed Christian who oppresses his employees 
in their wages. How many a professed Chris- 
tian employer there is to-day who grinds his 
employees almost beyond endurance. Is it any 
wonder that these employees say that they have 
no use for Christianity? Look at the professed 
Christians in business who qre dishonest in trade, 
who misrepresent their goods, who use all man- 
ner of dishonorable means to get ahead of their 
competitors in business and to drive them to the 
wall. Is it any wonder that people looking on 
are led to give up Christianity thus misrep- 
resented? On one occasion, at the wedding of 
a young man in business in the city of Chicago, 
after the ceremony I began to speak to him 
about becoming a Christian, but he replied, 
" You need not talk to me about that, I work 
for . These men are very promi- 
nent in the church, and we know how they carry 
on their business, as we are in their employ. I 
have no desire to be a Christian." Look at the 
professed Christian who rolls up his millions and 
lives in lavish luxury while the poor are starving 
at his doors. You may say to me that these mis- 
representations of Christianity are no sufficient 



INFIDELITY 115 

excuse for infidelity, that men and women ought 
to learn to distinguish between real Christianity 
and its counterfeit, and this I admit. Of course 
a really intelligent man never refuses good money 
because there is counterfeit money in circula- 
tion. But many men do not distinguish. They 
do not read the Bible for themselves, and their 
only idea of Christianity is from what they see 
in the lives and teachings of its professed dis- 
ciples, and they say, " If that is Christianity, I 
do not want it," and so they become infidels. 
One of the most noted infidels of modern times 
claimed that it was the inconsistent living of 
his own father, who was a Baptist preacher, that 
first led him into infidelity. Whether his picture 
of his father's character is true or not, or 
whether to defend his own infidelity he was 
guilty of gross misrepresentation of his own 
father, as I have heard it alleged that he was, 
I cannot say, but this I do know, that beyond a 
question in many instances the inconsistencies of 
professedly Christian parents have led their chil- 
dren into utter infidelity. Misrepresentation of 
Christianity by its professed disciples in their 
teachings, and especially in their lives, has done 
more to manufacture infidels than all the writ- 
ings and speeches that all the Paines and Vol- 
taires and Ingersolls ever gave to the world. 

2. The second cause of inHdelity is igno- 
rance; ignorance of what the Bible contains and 
teaches, ignorance of history, and ignorance of. 



116 TALKS TO MEN 

true science. The average infidel knows almost 
nothing about the Bible. He has caught up a 
few difficulties here and there from the writings 
or speeches of other infidels, but of the real con- 
tents of the Bible he knows practically nothing. 
I once asked a man if he would become a Chris- 
tian; he replied, No, that he was an infidel. 
" Why are you an infidel ? " " Because the Bible 
is so full of contradictions." " Well," I said, 
" if the Bible is full of contradictions, please show 
me one." " Why," he said, " it is full of them." 
" If it is full of them, you ought at least be able 
to show me one." " Why, it is full of them." 
" Well, show me one." " Well, it is in the book 
of Psalms." I handed him my Bible to find it, 
and he began looking for the Psalms in the back 
part of the New Testament. " Let me find the 
Book of Psalms for you." When I found the 
Psalms for him, he began to fumble around for 
awhile, then he said, " If I had my Bible here I 
could show it to you." " Will you bring your 
Bible to-night and meet me here at the close of 
the meeting ? " He promised that he would. 
The appointed hour came, and I was at the ap- 
pointed place, but my infidel friend did not 
appear. I had taken the precaution of taking 
his address, and went to the address he had 
given, and found it a public-house, but did not 
find my man. Months afterwards, in one of our 
after-meetings, one of my students called to me 
and said, " Come here — here is a man who says 



INFIDELITY 117 

the Bible is full of contradictions." I went over, 
and behold it was the same man. The man evi- 
dently thought I would not recognize him, but 
I did, and said, " You are the man that lied to 
me." He dropped his head and said, " Yes." 
Another smart young infidel once said to me, 
" I don't believe the Bible." I asked him why 
not. He replied, " I don't believe that passage 
where it speaks about Christ calling down fire 
from heaven to destroy His enemies." When 
I assured him that there was no such passage in 
the Bible, he would not believe me. An infidel 
in Edinburgh asked me to explain the passage 
where it said, " Cain went into the land of Nod 
and took to himself a wife." When I said the 
Bible does not say so, he offered to bet me £ioo 
that it did. Colonel Ingersoll, the high-priest of 
the cheaper and more superficial infidelity of the 
day, is an illustration of this ignorance of the 
Bible. He said in one of his lectures, " There 
is not a single kind and loving sentiment 
attributed to Christ but was uttered by Buddha 
at least 500 years before Christ was born." I 
would like to know where he finds any utterance 
of Buddha similar to John xiii. 34, "A new com- 
mandment I give unto you. That ye love one 
another; as I have loved you, that ye also love 
one another." Or John xv. 12, 13, " This is My 
commandment, That ye love one another, as I 
have loved you. Greater love hath no man than 
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends." 



118 TALKS TO MEN 

Or Matt. XX. 28, "Even as the Son of man 
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, 
and to give His life a ransom for many." In 
another place Colonel IngersoU said, " If Christ 
ever lived on the earth. He was an infidel in His 
time." I would like to know what Colonel In- 
gersoU does with such statements as that of 
John X. 35, " The Scripture cannot be broken " ; 
or Matt. v. 18, " Till heaven and earth pass, one 
jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the 
law, till all be fulfilled." Or Mark vii. 13, where, 
speaking of the law of Moses, He calls it the 
Word of God. Or with Luke xxiv. 27, 44, " And 
beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he ex- 
pounded unto them in all the scriptures the 
things concerning Himself. . . . And He said 
unto them. These are the words which I spake 
unto you, while I was yet with you, that all 
things must be fulfilled which were written in 
the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in 
the Psalms concerning Me." If this is infidelity, 
then I am an infidel. But all intelligent men 
know this is not infidelity, and that Colonel In- 
gersoU was simply parading his ignorance when 
he uttered his statement. One of the leaders 
of English infidelity some years ago in an article 
in one of the secularist journals, spoke of Mat- 
thew as a " dispenser of liquors." He knew so 
little of the Bible that he supposed the word 
" publican " used of Matthew in the Bible meant 
publican in the sense of a keeper of a public- 



INFIDELITY 119 

house. Perhaps the most prominent exponent 
of materiahstic infidehty among the Germans is 
so ignorant of the historic discussions of Chris- 
tian doctrine that he speaks of the virgin birth 
of our Lord as " the immaculate conception " ; 
and one of the most prominent exponents of in- 
fidehty in England does the same thing. 

3. The third cause of infidelity is conceit. 
Many men tell us that they are infidels because 
they find things in the Bible which they cannot 
understand, and because there are in it appar- 
ent contradictions which they cannot reconcile. 
To say that a thing cannot be true because I 
cannot understand it, to think that God could 
utter nothing that would be beyond my under- 
standing, is the most consummate conceit. It is 
to assume that I know all things, that I know as 
much as God knows, and that therefore God 
could not possibly utter anything that I could 
not understand. To think that because I cannot 
find the solution of a difficulty that therefore 
none can be found, is to think that I know all 
things, that my mind is infinite ; it is to think that 
I am God. Suppose I should take my little child 
out about sunset, and say to the child, " Do you 
see the sun yonder?" "Yes." "Well, my 
child, that sun is over 92,000,000 miles away." 
Then suppose the child should look up into my 
face in her mature wisdom of nine years and say, 
" Father, I know that is not true. The sun is 
just behind the barn yonder." .Would this be 



120 TALKS TO MEN 

a revelation of the child's wisdom, or its ignor- 
ance and conceit? The oldest, wisest philoso- 
pher compared with the Infinite is less than a 
child compared to the wisest of men ; and for us 
to challenge our Father's statements, because 
they seem to us untrue, does not reveal us to be 
philosophers worthy of admiration and applause, 
but to be foolish children who ought to be sent 
to bed. If we find difficulties in the Bible that 
we cannot explain, a moderate degree of modesty 
on our part would lead us to say, " If I knew 
a little more, I might be able to readily explain 
this difficulty," rather than lead us to say, " This 
Book that contains a difficulty which I cannot 
explain surely cannot be from God." When in 
Birmingham, a man who parades his infidelity by 
having quotations from various infidels at the 
head of his note paper wrote me saying that 
the Bible could not be the Word of God, as it 
was full of contradictions ; that he could send me 
hundreds of them, but one or two would suffice, 
as they could not be answered. The difficulties 
sent were very easy of solution, and I wrote him 
the solution; but instead of being staggered in 
his conviction that the difficulties he held were 
insoluble, he wrote that he was sorry that he had 
been so unfortunate in his choice of difficulties 
before, but would now send me some more. 
These were quite as easy of solution. But this 
did not seem to suggest to him that his other 
apparently unanswerable difficulties would be as 



INFIDELITY 121 

easy of solution as these formerly upanswerable 
difficulties, if he only knew a little more. 

4. The fourth cause of infidelity is sin. This 
is the commonest and most fundamental cause 
of infidelity. Sin causes infidelity in two ways; 
first, men sin and betake themselves to infidelity 
to find comfort in their sin. There is no book 
that makes men so uneasy in sin as the Bible, 
and if they can only make themselves believe 
that the Bible is not true, it gives them some 
solace in the pursuit of sin. Men tell you that 
they have many objections to the Bible; but with 
the great majority of them their greatest objec- 
tion to the Bible, if they would confess the truth 
to themselves and to others, is that it condemns 
their sin, and makes them uneasy in their sin. 
Second, sin blinds men's eyes to the truth of 
the Bible, and makes it appear foolishness. 
There is nothing that blinds the mind to truth 
like sin. I was once called to deal with an in- 
fidel. I sat down, and he told me that the reason 
that he could not be a Christian was because of 
a difficulty he had with the Bible. I asked him 
what his difficulty was. He replied that he could 
not see where Cain got his wife. I said, " Will 
you come to Christ if I tell you where Cain got his 
wife?" "Oh," he said, "I will not promise 
that." " But," I said, " if that is your difficulty 
that keeps you from coming to Christ, and if 
you are an honest man and I remove that diffi- 
culty, you will come to Christ." " No, I will 



122 TALKS TO MEN 

not promise that." I then went at the root of 
the matter. I found out that his real difficulty 
was not about Cain's wife at all, but about an- 
other man's wife. It is surprising how often 
young men who fall into sin and into lax ways 
of living fall also into infidelity. I have found 
through conversation with young men who en- 
tertain infidel views, that there are two specific 
sins which are the commonest cause of unbelief. 
My former colleague, Prof. W. W. White, was 
speaking one time in Chicago on the " Mistakes 
of Ingersoll." At the close of the lecture a fine- 
looking man approached him and said, " Pro- 
fessor White, you have no right to say what you 
have said to-day. You are a Christian, and I 
am an infidel. I have just as much right to my 
opinion as you have to yours." Professor White 
then put to him a pointed question, " Is your life 
pure ? " The man replied, " That is none of 
your business. My life is just as pure as yours 
is." Then Professor White asked him his name. 
The man said, " That is none of your business." 
" But," said Professor White, " I want to look 
up your record." The man declined to give it, 
and began to back out. But there were those in 
the company that gathered around that knew the 
man's name, and gave it to Professor White. 
Within two years from that time that man was 
found dead in a Boston hotel, side by side with 
a young woman, not his wife, whom he had be- 
guiled into infidelity, and who had gone off with 



INFIDELITY 123 

him to lecture on infidelity. They were found 
dead together in this Boston hotel with the gas 
turned on. Gentlemen, the statement of this 
fact will make some of you angry, but look into 
your own hearts and lives and see if there is not 
some sin at the root of your infidelity. I do not 
say that all infidelity comes from sin, but I do 
say, after long and careful observation, that a 
very large share of the current infidelity of the 
day has sin for its ultimate cause. 

5. The fifth cause of infidelity is resistance to 
the Holy Spirit. This is a very common cause 
of infidelity. The Spirit of God moves upon the 
hearts of men, inclining them to accept Christ. 
They will not yield to the Spirit of God. They 
resist the Holy Ghost, and the light which He 
gives to the soul is darkened, and they fall into 
skepticism or unbelief. In one of my pastorates 
there was a lawyer of excellent abilities, who 
was a most bitter opponent of Christianity, doing 
what he could to oppose it by bringing infidel 
lecturers to the town. I looked into this man's 
previous history. I found that there was a time 
in the very church of which I was pastor when 
he was under conviction of sin, and hesitating 
as to whether he should come out and accept 
Christ, and when pressed upon the subject he 
replied, " No, I cannot be a Christian and suc- 
ceed in my business, and I must support my 
family." The light that was dawning upon his 
soul went out, and darkness and unbelief settled 



im TALKS TO MEN 

down upon him, exercising such a blighting in- 
fluence over his life that he lost the confidence 
of his fellowmen, lost his law practice, and the 
last I knew his wife was teaching school to help 
support the family, while he was doing such odd 
jobs as came to him. In one of our western col- 
leges there was a revival of religion. Two 
young men in the college set themselves against 
it. They were determined not to yield. They 
made an agreement together to meet on a cer- 
tain evening and go into the chapel and blas- 
pheme the Holy Ghost. They met at the ap- 
pointed hour, but the heart of one of the young 
men failed him, and he was afterwards con- 
verted. The other went into the college chapel 
alone. What he did in there no one knows, but 
he came out white as a sheet. He drifted into 
infidelity, and became a leader in one of the se- 
cular societies in one of our large cities. Oh, 
you men who are resisting the Holy Spirit, if 
we come back five years from now, we will most 
likely find you infidels, and if we come back ten 
years from now, in all probability we will find 
you drunkards. In the city of Melbourne more 
than one man came to me, a moral wreck, whq 
said that his fall was due to the influence of the 
noted infidel in that place. 

In our next address we will take up the con- 
sequences and cure of infidelity. 



TENTH TALK 

infidelity: its consequences and cure 

In our last address we saw that the causes of in- 
fidelity were — first, misrepresentations of Chris- 
tianity on tlie part of its professed adherents; 
second, ignorance of the Bible, and of history, 
and of science; third, conceit; fourth, sin; and 
fifth, resistance of the Holy Spirit. 

We are to-day to take up the consequences and 
cure of infidelity. 

II. Consequences of Infidelity. 

I. The iirst consequence of infidelity is sin. 
Infidelity breeds sin, there is no doubt of that. 
It is caused by sin, and in turn it begets a pro- 
geny like unto its ancestry. Sin first entered 
into human histoi-y through questioning God's 
Word. When the devil sought to lead Eve into 
disobedience to God, he began by throwing out 
an insinuation that the Word of God was not 
true. He first said, "Hath God said," and then 
he flatly denied what God said. The devil was 
the first infidel lecturer. He had an audience of 
but one, but he reached millions through that 
lecture. He saw at once the effectiveness of this 
125 



126 TALKS TO MEN 

mode of attack upon man's moral integrity. 
From that day to this the devil has been trapping 
men into sin by sowing the seeds of unbelief in 
their hearts. He well knows what sort of a crop 
that seed brings forth. When a young man or a 
young woman falls into infidelity, look out for 
their morals. Infidelity forms a very rickety foun- 
dation for an upright character. A former Presi- 
dent of the British National Secular Society, a 
man well known here in Bolton, who in fact was 
elected to Parliament from the Bolton district, 
said, " I have seen the dreadful effects which 
infidelity produces on men's characters; I have 
had proof of its deteriorating effects in my own 
experience; its tendency is to utter debasement." 
Occupying the position that he did, Joseph 
Barker certainly knew infidelity, and knew its 
consequences, and this testimony of his to its 
destructive effects upon character is beyond 
question true. 

2. The second consequence of infidelity is 
anarchy. Anarchists are necessarily always in- 
fidels. It is impossible for a man who believes 
in the Bible to be an anarchist. When the mis- 
erable French vagabond and anarchist Vaillant 
stood upon the gallows, he boasted of his in- 
fidelity. His infidelity and his anarchy went 
hand in hand. Louis Blanc, one of the great 
leaders of anarchy, is reported to have said, 
" When I was an infant I rebelled against my 
nurse ; when I was a child I rebelled against my 



INFIDELITY 127 

tutors and my parents; when I was a man I' 
rebelled against the Government; when I die, 
if there is any heaven and I go there, I will rebel 
against God." The acceptance of Christianity 
would do away with anarchy on the one hand, 
and it would do away with the oppression of the 
poor by the rich that leads to anarchy on the 
other hand. 

3. The third consequence of infidelity is 
wretchedness and despair. God has created us 
for fullness of joy, and has made fullness of 
joy possible for each one of us ; but fullness of 
joy such as God intends for man, and which 
alone can satisfy a soul made in God's image, 
can only come from a living faith in Jesus as the 
Son of God, and in the Bible as the Word of 
God. Infidels are never profoundly happy. 
There may be surface joviality, but it is not, as 
everyone knows who knows them well, deep and 
satisfying. One night as .1 closed an address in 
a New Zealand town a man somewhat beyond 
middle life passed in front of the platform as he 
made his way out of the building. He looked 
up at me and scowled and said, " I am an in- 
fidel." I replied, " You do not need to tell us 
that; your face shows it. You are one of the 
most miserable-looking men I have ever seen." 
I received a letter from him next day saying that 
he was miserable. Did you ever know a joyous 
old infidel? Jolly they may be, at least at times 
when in company, but did you ever see that deep, 



128 TALKS TO MEN 

continuous, overflowing joyfulness that is so 
characteristic of the aged Christian? On the 
day of the death of a noted American infidel I 
was with a friend of his, and we got to talking 
about him. He said to me, " Every time of late 
when I have gone to see him his wife has said 
to me, ' Don't tell him that he is growing old ; it 
makes him very angry.' " But it does not make 
the aged Christian angry to tell him he is grow- 
ing old, for he knows he is but ripening for a 
better world. Infidelity not infrequently begets 
despair and suicide. Even the best of pagan 
writers taught the propriety of suicide. For ex- 
ample, Epictetus says, " The door is open. When 
you will you can leave off playing the game of 
life." Mrs. Amelia E. Barr, who has made a 
study of suicide, says, " The advent of Chris- 
tianity made self-destruction a crime." She 
further says that the infidel revival in France at 
the time of the Revolution caused the abolition 
of the civil and canon laws against suicide. She 
still further says, " The great underlying cause 
of the advance of modern suicide is the advance 
of lax or skeptical religious views." Infidelity 
leads logically to pessimism and despair. Inger- 
soll himself wrote an editorial in a New York 
paper in defense of suicide. This editorial was 
followed in New York and the neighborhood 
by a harvest of suicides. The man who wrote 
the editorial was directly responsible for its con- 
sequences, and it is not to be wondered at that 



INFIDELITY 129 

the editorial raised a storm of protest and indig- 
nation ; but his article was the logical outcome of 
his infidelity. There came to Chicago at the 
time of the World's Fair a poor but brilliant 
young woman from one of the Southern States. 
Her intellectual gifts were so great that she was 
introduced into the best society, where she spoke 
upon the new woman. She was led into in- 
fidelity by an able advocate of unbelief in Chi- 
cago, but her career as an infidel was but brief. 
She soon met a suicide's death in an Eastern city, 
and one branch of the infidels of America to-day 
meet annually at her grave to commemorate her 
death. Her broken-hearted father also died by 
his own hand. Such is the legitimate fruit of 
unbelief. 

4. The fourth consequence of infidelity is a 
hopeless grave. Colonel Ingersoll once said, 
" The pulpit has cast a shadow over the cradle 
and a gloom over the grave." If this is true, it 
is a most remarkable fact that people, even pro- 
fessedly infidel people, are so anxious to have 
Christian preachers conduct their funerals. 
There is a gloom over the grave by nature and 
by sin, but the Bible dispels the shadow. Throw 
away the Bible and you do not get rid of the 
gloom, but you do get rid of the light that illu- 
mines it. Infidelity shrouds the grave in gloom, 
and the only rays of light are those stolen from 
Christianity. Colonel Ingersoll, at his brother's 
grave, delivered an address, eloquent in words, 



130 TALKS TO MEN 

but sad beyond description. As he drew towards 
the close of that address he said that through 
the darkness hope sees the glimmering of a star ; 
but he was not honest enough to say that that 
star was the Star of Bethlehem. On the other 
hand, D. L. Moody, at his brother's grave, 
sounded forth a note of joy and exultation. 
Looking into the grave he cried, " O death, 
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy vic- 
tory ? The sting of death is sin ; and the strength 
of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, which 
giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." 

Two men died the same year in America, 
Colonel Ingersoll, the acknowledged leader of 
American infidelity, and D. L. Moody, the leader 
of Christian activity. Compare the deaths and 
funerals of these two men, and see for yourselves 
whether the Christian's death or the infidel's is 
the gloomy one. The death of Colonel Ingersoll 
was sudden, and without a ray of cheer and 
brightness, his funeral unutterably pitiful. His 
wife and daughter, who loved him, could not bear 
to have the body taken from the house until the 
beginning of corruption made it an absolute ne- 
cessity. It was all they had, and despairingly 
they clung to that body, now decaying. The 
scene at the crematory, as described in the daily 
papers, was enough to make the heart of any 
one ache, no matter how little one might be in 
sympathy with the views of the unfortunate man 



INFIDELITY 131 

who passed into eternity. On the other hand, 
the death and funeral of Mr. Moody were trium- 
phant in every detail. Early on the morning of 
his departure from this world his eldest son was 
sitting beside his bed. He heard his father 
speaking in a low tone of voice, and he leaned 
over to listen, and these were the words that he 
heard : " Earth is receding ; heaven is opening ; 
God is calling." " You are dreaming, father," 
said the son. " No, Will, this is no dream. I 
have been within the gates. I have seen the 
children's faces." The family were summoned. 
Mr. Moody rallied. A while after he began to 
sink again, and he was heard to say, " Is this 
death ? This is not bad ; there is no valley. This 
is bliss. This is glorious." " Father," said his 
daughter, " you must not leave us. We cannot 
spare you." The dying man replied : " I am not 
going to throw my life away if God has any 
more work for me to do, I will get well and do 
it ; but if God is calling, I must up and off." He 
rallied again. He gained sufficient strength to 
arise from the bed and walk over to the window, 
and sat down in a chair and talked with his fam- 
ily. He began to think he would recover, and 
was contemplating sending for his pastor to 
pray for his recovery, but beginning to sink 
again, he asked them to help him back to the bed. 
As he was sinking his daughter knelt by the bed 
and commenced to pray for his recovery, but he 
said : " No, no, Emma, don't pray that. God 



132 TALKS TO MEN 

is calling. This is my coronation day. I have 
been looking forward to it," and the heroic war- 
rior swept up into the presence of the King. 
At the funeral all was triumphant. His son said 
to me before the service : " Remember there is 
to be nothing of sadness in the service. We 
want nothing but triumph here to-day." The 
body was borne to the church by students from 
one of the schools that he had founded. It lay 
in an open casket in front of the pulpit. Right 
in front of it, with unveiled faces, sat his wife 
and daughter and sons listening with peaceful 
faces to the words that were spoken, and join- 
ing in the hymns of gladness and praise and vic- 
tory. When others had ceased speaking, the 
eldest son arose and gladly gave testimony for 
his father and the power of his faith. Is it 
Christianity that throws a gloom over the grave ? 
Is the Christian's grave the gloomy one, and the 
infidel's the bright one? Who ever heard of a 
Christian repenting on his deathbed that he had 
been a Christian? It is not at all uncommon for 
infidels to repent on their deathbed that they 
have been infidels. 

5. The fifth consequence of inHdelity is eternal 
ruin. We are told in Mark xvi. 16, " He that 
believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he 
that believeth not shall be condemned." We 
are told in John iii. 36, " He that believeth in the 
Son hath everlasting life, but he that believeth 
not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of 



INFIDELITY 133 

God abideth on him." We have all sinned, and 
the only way to find pardon is by the acceptance 
of the Sin-bearer whom God has provided. If 
we prefer to be infidels and reject Him, there is 
no hope. Jesus is the only Saviour who has 
ever proved competent to save men from the 
power of sin here, so we may rest assured He is 
the only One who will prove competent to save 
men from the consequences of sin hereafter. But 
there are many who do not profess to be infidels, 
who are not theoretically so, but are practically 
so. All who reject Christ are practically infi- 
dels, and they will be lost. As Ethan Allen, a 
brave soldier but hopeless infidel, stood at his 
daughter's deathbed, she turned to him and 
asked whether she should accept his unbelief or 
her mother's faith, and the humbled man ad- 
vised her to accept her mother's faith in that 
trying hour. 

III. The Cure for Infidelity 

We come now to the cure for infidelity. 

I. The great cure for infidelity is Christian 
living on the part of professed Christians. 
There is no argument for Christianity like a 
Christlike life. Many a skeptic and infidel has 
been won by the life of one who not merely intel- 
lectually believed in Christ, but who lived like 
Him in his daily walk. McAll lay dead in his 
coffin in Paris. A workman of Paris, a former 



134- TALKS TO MEN 

anarchist, stood by his coffin weeping. " Was 
he a relative?" "No." "Why, then, do you 
weep ? " " He saved me." " What did he say ? " 
" He said nothing," repHed the former anarchist, 
" it was his face." The ChristUke character 
shining out in a ChristHke countenance had saved 
this man. I was once asked to call upon a woman 
of brilliant gifts who was an unbeliever. " But," 
she said, " there is one thing I cannot get around, 
that is my father's life." Not long after, by the 
power of the truth as exemplified in her father's 
life, leading her to a deeper study of the Bible, 
she came out as an openly professed follower of 
Jesus Christ. 

2. In the second place, the cure for inHdelity is 
a surrendered will on the part of the infidel. 
Jesus says, " Whosoever willeth to do His will, 
he shall know of the teaching, whether it be of 
God or whether I speak from myself " (John vii. 
17, R.V.). Any man afflicted with the malady of 
skepticism can find a remedy if he wishes it in 
this simple prescription. Nothing so clarifies 
the spiritual vision as a surrendered will. By 
this simple act of the surrender of the will to 
God many a man has found the mists of his un- 
belief scatter in a moment. When I was in New 
Zealand a well-known and well-educated com- 
mercial traveler came to me and said: '^"My 
friends wish me to speak to you. I am an agnos- 
tic, but I know that you cannot help me." I 
told him that I thought that I could, but he was 



INFIDELITY 135 

sure that I could not. " What do you beHeve? " 
I said. " I don't know as I beHeve anything." 
" Do you not beHeve that there is an absolute dif- 
ference between right and wrong? " " Yes, I do." 
" Will you take your stand upon the right to fol- 
low it wherever it carries you ? " "I think I am 
doing that now." " Will you definitely here to-day 
take your stand upon the right to follow it wher- 
ever it carries you, no matter what it costs ? " He 
said : " I will." " You do not know that God does 
not answer prayer ? " " No, I do not know that 
God does not answer prayer." " Well, here is a 
possible clue to knowledge. Will you follow it? 
Will you pray this prayer? Oh God, if there is 
any God, show me if Jesus Christ is Thy Son, and 
if you show me that He is, I promise to accept 
Him as my Saviour and confess Him before the 
world?" "Yes," he said, "I wiU do that, but 
it won't do any good." " Now John tells us in 
John XX. 31, ' These are written, that ye might be- 
lieve that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God ; and 
that believing ye might have life through His 
name.' Will you take the Gospel of John and 
read it? Read carefully, slowly and thoughtfully. 
Do not try to believe it nor do not try to disbelieve 
it, simply be willing to be convinced of the truth. 
Before you read kneel down and ask God to show 
you what of truth there may be in the verses you 
are about to read, and promise Him that whatever 
He shows you to be true you will take your stand 
upon." This he also agreed to do, parting from 



1S8 TALES TO MEN 

me, assuring me that nothing would come of it. 
Siome weeks after in Dunedin this man's v/ife 
came to me and said : " I have had a letter from 
my husband which I do not understand. He 
.said I might show it to you." In the letter he 
said that he thought he was converted, but he 
was not quite sure yet, that she could show this 
letter to me and to the minister, but not to any- 
one else until he was perfectly sure of his posi- 
tion. He afterwards came out fully as a behever 
in the Bible and in Christ. 

3. The third part of the cure for inftdelity is 
the study of the Word of God. Men do not need 
to study books of Christian evidences. The Bible 
is its own best proof. Let any candid seeker 
after the truth, anyone who sincerely desires to 
know the truth, and is willing to obey it what- 
ever it costs, get down to the earnest study of the 
Bible, and he will soon become convinced that it 
is the Word of God. In my first pastorate there 
was a member of my church who had a brother a 
lecturer on scientific subjects, but an infidel. 
Sometimes he would lecture on the contradictions 
between science and the Bible. She came to me 
and asked if I would pray for him that he might 
be converted. This I agreed to do. Some time 
after this she came to me and said that her 
brother had written her a letter, saying that he 
had become a Christian. In this letter he gave 
her the reason for his conversion. It was this: 
" I have been recently studying the Bible, and 



INFIDELITY 137 

have become convinced that it is the Word of 
God." It would have been well if he had studied 
the Bible before he lectured upon it and the con- 
tradictions between it and science. 

In one of my pastorates I had a friend who 
lived across the street from me who was an ag- 
nostic. Though he was an agnostic and I a 
Christian minister, we were intimate friends, for 
I believe that a Christian and a Christian minis- 
ter should rub up against all classes of men. I 
do not believe at all in the division of society into 
men, women, and ministers. I think a minister 
should be a man among men. How can we ex- 
pect to influence men unless we touch elbows 
with them? Our Master was not too good to 
associate with all kinds and conditions of men, 
even the most depraved and outcast. Ought we 
to be better than our Master? I read in my 
Bible that Christians are the salt of the earth. 
How on earth can we expect the salt to exert its 
preservative influence upon the meat if we put 
-he salt in one barrel and the meat in another? 
So I have always cultivated the friendship, not 
merely of orthodox Christians, but of all kinds 
of " heretics " and unbelievers. This man and I 
were good friends. We often met and talked 
together. One night we were standing together 
on his front lawn just as the sun went down, 
when he suddenly said : " Mr. Torrey, I am sixty- 
six years of age. I cannot live many more years. 
I have no one to leave my money to, and I cannot 



138 TALKS TO MEN 

take it with me. I would give every penny of it 
if I could believe as you do." I replied : " That 
is very easy. I can tell you how." We went 
into the house, and I asked his wife for a sheet 
of paper, and I wrote upon it the following 
words : " I believe that there is an absolute dif- 
ference between right and wrong " (I did not say 
I believe that there is a God, for this man was an 
agnostic, neither affirming nor denying the exist- 
ence of God, and you have to begin where a man 
is), " and I hereby take my stand upon the right 
to follow it wherever it carries me. I promise to 
make an honest search to find if Jesus Christ is 
the Son of God, and if I find that He is, I prom- 
ise to accept Him as my Saviour, and confess 
Him as such before the world." Having written 
this out, I handed it to my friend and said: 
" Will you sign that? " He replied: " Why, any- 
body ought to be willing to sign that. You only 
ask me to agree to do what my own conscience 
tells me I ought to do. Anybody ought to be 
willing to sign that." "Will you sign it?" I 
asked. " Why," he added more earnestly, " any- 
body ought to be willing to sign that." I said : 
"Will you sign it?" Still more earnestly he 
said : " Anybody ought to be willing to sign it." 
" Will YOU sign it ? " "I will think about it," he 
said. He never signed it. He died as he had 
lived, without God, without Christ, without hope. 
He went out into the darkness of a Christless 
eternity. He told the truth about one thing. He 



INFIDELITY 139 

did not take one penny of his money with him. 
They laid him in a Christless grave. He is now 
in a Christless eternity, but whose fault was it? 
A way was shown him out of darkness into light, 
a way that he admitted his own conscience told 
him he ought to take, and he would not take it. 
Men, the same way has been shown to you. Fol- 
low it, and it will lead you as it has thousands of 
others, out of the uncertainty and restlessness and 
the ultimate despair of unbelief into the certi- 
tude, the joy, the victory, and the ultimate glory 
of an intelligent faith in the Bible as the Word 
of God, and in Christ as the Son of God. 



EVANGELISTIC. 



The £van^elistic Note a study ol needs and methods, 

together with a series of diiect appeals. 

3rd Edition. lamo. Cloth, net 81,25. W. J. DAWSON 

"One of the most remarkable and stirring of recent books. It is 
really the story of a great crisis in the life of a great preacher. Mr. 
Dawson's experience in his own church has justified his faith, and his 
book is a most stimulating treatise on homiletics and pastoral theol- 
ogy. It is epoch-making in character." — The Watchman. 



Torrey and Alexander ^'ir„l'°v;^<fi Revival 

A record and study of the work and personality of the Evangelists 
DR. R. A. TORREY. D. D., and CHARLES M. ALEXANDER. 
Illustrated, izmo, Cloth, net f ik» . GEORQB T. B. DAVIS 

The multitudes who have followed the marvellous progress of the 
religious awakening in Australasia, India, and Great Britain, accom- 
panying the efforts of these evangelists will eagerly welcome this 
glimpse from the inside of their career, personality and work. Mr. 
Davis has been associated in a confidential capacity with the work 
of the two evangelists, and writes with keen appreciation of the 
interesting facts in stirring language. 

Real Salvation and Whole-Hearted Ser- 

Yice ■^ second volume of Revival Addresses. 
i2mo, Cloth, net Si.oo. R. A. TORREY 

The multitudes led to decision in connection with the preaching 
of these sermons, gives assurance that their influence will be extended 
far beyond the reach of the speaker's voice. Positive conviction and 
a loving plea as from a God-sent messenger, are the marked features 
of this new volume. 

Talks to Men About the Bible and the Christ of the Bible. 
i2mo. Cloth, net 750. R. A. TORREY 

"The directness, simplicity, with wide scholarship and literary 
charm of these talks, and unhesitating claim for the highest and 
fullest inipiration. inerrancy and authority for the Bible, make them 
trumpet calls to faith. "—iV: Y. Observer. 

The Passion for Souls 

i6mo, Cloth, netsoc. J. H. JOWETT 

Seven sermons on tenderness, watchfulness, companionship, rest 

and vision of the apostle Paul's i)assioB for human souls.^ This little 

volume shows his keen, reverent insight at its best and is made rich 

with abundant and well chosen illustrations. 

The Worker's Weapon if^ Perfection. Authority 

i6mo. Cloth, net 35 cents. JOHN H. ELLIOTT 

"A fine presentation of the unquestionable authority of God's 
Word and pointed and clear directions and illustrations of how to 
tudy and use the Bible." 



IMPORTANT ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES 

The Universal Elements of the Christian 
Reliction 

zamo, Cloth, net $1.25. CHARLES CUTHDCRT tlALL 

Amid the flood of books on the subject of religion there appears 
every few years one booK that dwarfs all others, one that crystalizes 
the thinking of the Christian world. Such is this book. This man 
separates himself from the bewildering crossed paths and standing 
free, grasps clearly the course that is being followed by the Christian 
age of which he is a part. His knowledge is cosmopolitan and accur- 
ate, his logic is clean cut and simple, and his conclusions convincing 
and optimistic, springing from a faith at once simple and profound in 
its certainty thatjesus Christ is the Saviour of the world of men who 
are his possession. 

Paths to Power 

2nd Edition. i2mo. Cloth, net §1.25. P. \V. GUNSAULUS 

"Not till now has Dr. Gunsaulus put a volume of bis discourses 
into print. On reading them one is disposed to concede hLs right to 
the place assigned him by Prof. Wilkinson in the list with such men as 
Belcher, Brooks and Spurgcon. Dr. Gunsaulus resembles Dr. Joseph 
Parker in the vivifying imagination which he brings to the exposi- 
tion of his texts, and is a master in allegorizing from them, fresh 
and profound lessons." — The Outlook, 

Humanity and God ^nd other sermons. 

i2mo. Cloth, EctSi.so- SAMUEL CHADWICK 

"In every sermon the preacher looks at man in the light of God 
and strives to show that in the visitation of God in Christ the hope of 
humsnity centres. The author treats with p^eat force and freshness 
a suhjcct on which plain practical teaching is in our own time much 
needed." — Methodist Times, 



Loyalty: The Soul of Religion 

ismo, Cloth, net $1.00. J, Q. K. McCLURB 

"Dr. McClure sets forth the idea with a clearness not surpassed in 
terature, and tn a great Tariety of illustrativn, argument and appeal. 
... a great book to give to a young man of the college type. It takes 
him as he is and takes hold of best possibilities in him," — N. V. Ob- 
%fr'uer . 



Our Attitude as Pastors i^Jf/iSlS. 

Paper, net loc PROF. LOUIS RUFFET 

An address to the students of the TheolopJcai Seminary of ;)ic 
free Eyangelical Church, of Geneva, SwiUciland. 



IDEALS OF LIFE AND CONDUCT 



The Choice of the Highest §L?JXf ""'''^'^ 

i2nio. Cloth, netii.oo. REGINALD J. CAMPBeLl, M.A. 

"These messages to the great audiences of men of bui^iness nre of 
a high level of thought and expression. They are especially (l;rc<,icd 
to young men, and present ideals of life and conduct in winning ap- 
pr.als. Mr. Campbell is a virile thinkerwith a fineness of fttiliog, 
which makes him a power in the pulpit which he holds." — Christian 
Intellij^incer, 

Christianity as Taught by Christ 

A series of discourses on the teachings of Jesus, 
izmo. Cloth, net Sj.ss. HENRY STILES BRADLEY 

"Because he knows the present conditions of New Testament 
lore HTtd is alert with the spirits of modern life. Dr. Bradley's dis- 
courses possess a value both unique and practical Stirring, in- 
structive, simple, easy to read and easy to understand, appealing to 
faith and iuciiiug to Dractice" — Atlanta Censtitutian. 

Christ and Men 

12010. Cloth, net $1.20 DAVID J, BURRELL 

Dr. Burrell's sermons have a standard quality that marks all of his 
vrritiag. This series of sermons is intended to set out the human side 
of Jesus' character as shown in his interviews with men, his tact, his 
discernment, his delicate handling of people. 

The Apostle Peter cSrari««'w ^V-S.!);^!:"'' 

i2mo, Cloih, net5i-25- W. H. GRIFFITH THOMAS 

"An excellent example of what Biblical analysis should he and 
should lead to. It is scholarly, logical, perspicuous, and SKlb forth llie 
main truths of each passage treated in a particularly exact and lum- 
inous way." — Advance, 

The Culture of SimpUcity ?„''i*AS'mooiei."" "'■'^" 

2nd Edition, umo. Cloth, net tLoo. nALCOLM J. McLEOD 
"Ths first suspicion of imitation is (yiickly dispelled. The book 
stands on its own merits. More vivacious^ more practical for the 
American reader than Charles Wagner's _ 'The Simple Life.* It ex- 
plains more clearly how the life may be lived, and reaches the toot of 
tliin5s in the Gospel of C\ma."—Congrtgationalist. 

ElimS of Life And other sermons. 
i2mo, Cloth, net «i. 00. J. D. JONES 

"Mr. Jones is of the general type of thought with which Mr, 
Dawson of London has made so many American audiences familiar. 
In these discourses the form is plain and lucid, the aim is practical." — 
Thi Outlook. 

Young Men Who Overcame 

i2mo, Cloth, net $1.00. ROBERT E. SPEER 

"'These fifteen condensed biographies exhibit the power and 
beauty of Christian principle in strong and active natures, who made 
their mark in whatever they undertook— athletics, scholarsMp, bcisi. 
ness. Christian missiOBS. — Tht O»thoh. 



STUDIES ON BIBLICAL THEMES 



The Witness of Sin a Theodicy 

i2mo. Cloth, net $x.oo. NATHAN ROBINSON WOOD 

A splendidly thought-out presentation of the problem presented 
by the presence of sin in a world dominated by God. Some sort of a 
theodicy, some conception of the solution of this question is necessary 
to any religious thinking. Mr. Wood's work is a marked addition lo 
present-day theology. 

The Walk, Conversation and Character 
of Jesus Christ Our Lord 

i2mo, Cloth, net $1. so. ALEXANDER WHYTE 

"Rich and glowing meditations on the life of our Lord. A genuine 
contribution to Christology. What distinguishes it most is the author's 
singularly clear perception of Christ alone without sin. While always 
in touch with real life, Dr. Whyte has that power of separating himself 
from the Stream of things which is essential to a great religious 
teacher." — British Weekly [Robertson Nicoll, Editor. ) 

Jesus of Nazareth, the Anointed of God 

Or, The Inner History of'a Consecrated Life. 
i2mo, Cloth, net 75c. P. COOK» H.A. 

"As a brief and concise summary, a bird's-eye view of the life of 
Jesus this volume will be of value." — Re/onned Church Messenger. 

The Divine Tragedy a Drama of the Christ 

lamo. Cloth, net, $1,00. PEYTON H. HOGE 

The author's ambition is *'to tell in the most vivid and practical 
form for men living in the world to-day the story of Jesus of Nazareth 
in its culminating scenes." One could exhaust adjectives in praise of 
the author's management of the dramatic form and his blank verse. 
It is a wonderful work. The dedicatory poem alone is of such sur- 
passing beauty that one will never forget it. 

The Directory of the Devout Life 

A Commentary on the Sermon on the Mount, 
lamo, Cloth, net fii.oo. P. B. MEYER, M.A. 

'•In many respects the best writings Mr. Meyer has issued. They 
are eminently practical, and the pointed and piercing ideas of the 
Master are explained and brought home to personal character and life 
in an illuminating and stimulating way." — Waichntan. 

With the Sorrowing a Pastor's Handbook. 

i6mo, Cloth flex., net 75 cts. Edited by F, W. PALflER 

Presented with confidence to pastors, misFionaries and other vis- 
itors In the Ijomes of sorrow, as likely to prove a most valuable aid in 
their trying experiences. Although primarily a service book for 
funerals, it is vastly more than this. With Scripture selections of ex- 
ceptional Ruggestive values and a collection of poems of comfort both 
rare and striking the little volume will be greatly prized. 



WORKS BY R. A. TORREY, 

SMperintiminl <>f (Ke" Moody BiSTe InstMle^Vhicafo' 

Ho-w to Succeed in the CHristian Life. 

With health, strength and joyousness. izroo, cloth, ■ 
50 cents, net; paper, as cents, net. ' 

Th'e^Bibls and Its Christ. Being noon day V 
talks with Business Men on faith and unbelief. > ; 
umo, cloth, 75 cents, net; paper, 25 cents, net. 

Kevival Addresses. lamo, cloth, net Ji.oo. 

Heal Salvation and Whole - Hearted 
Service. Being a Second Volume of Revival Ad- 
dresses, ismo, cloth, net $!.«>. 

'What the Bible Teaches. A thorough and com- 
prehensive study on what the Bible has to say con- 
cerning the great doctrines of which it treats. l,arge 
8vo, 560 pages, $2.50. 

How to WorK for Christ. A compendium of effee- 
tive methods. Uniform with " What the Bible 
Teaches,'! 8vo, cloth, $2,501 

He^7 to Promote and Conduct a Succesafur 
Revival. Edited by Mr. Torrey. lamo, cloth, 353. 
pages, gilt top, |i. CO, net. 

Ho-w to Brin^ Men to Christ. lamo, cloth 75 
cents; paper, 25 cents, net. 

How to Studx the Bible for Greatest Profit. 

Tlie methods and fundamental conditions of Bible 

study that yield the largest results. i2mo, cloth, 

75 cents. 
How to Fray. The need of prayer and the need of 

revival; their relation and effect. X2mo, cloth, 50 

cents; paper, 15 cents. 
Ho-^v to Obtain dullness of Poorer in 

Christian Life and Service, i2mo, cloth, 

50 ce^ts. 

The Divine Origin of the Bible. Its author- 
- Ity and power demonstrated and difficulties solved, 
iimo, cloth, so cents. 

The Cist of the Lesson (Annuallx.) A 

vest-pocket exposition of the Sunday- school leuans. 
I,eather, net, 35 cents. 

The Baptism with the Holy S|>lrlt. ismo, 
cloth, so centd. 

A, Vast-PocKet Companion for Christian 
WorKers". I<ong i8mo, flexible leather, net, 25 
cents; interleaved, gilt edges, net, 50 cents. 

Ten Reasons "Why I Believe the Bible is 
Word of God. i6mo, paper, 15 cents. 

Ou^ht Christians to Keep the Sabbath 7 

Paper, net, 10 cents. 






iaitU,m%i',:.hi ii 



