Google 



This is a digital copy of a book lhal w;ls preserved for general ions on library shelves before il was carefully scanned by Google as pari of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

Il has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one thai was never subject 

to copy right or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often dillicull lo discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher lo a library and linally lo you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud lo partner with libraries lo digili/e public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order lo keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial panics, including placing Icchnical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make n on -commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request thai you use these files for 
personal, non -commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort lo Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each lile is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use. remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 

countries. Whether a book is slill in copyright varies from country lo country, and we can'l offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through I lie lull lexl of 1 1 us book on I lie web 
al |_-.:. :.-.-:: / / books . qooqle . com/| 



KCiWf 




^^jfl»4h> 



"Few books of recent years are better adapted to in- 
struct and help Christians than those of this author. 
He is a man mighty in the Scriptures"— D L. Moody, 



WRITINGS O F REV. F. B. MEYER. 

We have learned to take up with eagerness whatever 
bears the name of this author.— Standard. 

Eminently the offering of a heart full of the love of God. 
— Magazine of Christian Literature. 

He will point out to many a reader unsuspected truth 
and beauty in the Scriptures.— Watchman. 

The Life and Light of Men $i oo 

Tried by Fire. Expositions of ist Peter, i oo 

Moses: The Man of God i oo 

Israel: A Prince with God i oo 

Abraham; or, The Obedience of Faith, i oo 
Elijah, and the Secret of His Power, i oo 

The Shepherd Psalm 50 

Christian Living __ 50 

Present Tenses of the Blessed Life, 50 



ENVELOPE SERIES OF BOOKLETS. 



The Chambers of the King. 
With Christ in Separation. 
Seven Rules for Daily Living. 
The Secret of Victory over 

Sin. 
The First Step into the Blessed 

Life. , , 

Words of Help for Christian 

Girls. _ 

The Filling of the Holy Spirit. 
The Stewardship of Money. 
In the Secret of His Presence. 



Where am I Wrong? 
Young Men, Don't Drift! 
The Lost Chord Found, 
Why Sign the Pledge? 
The Secret of Power. 
The Secret of Guidance 
Peace, Perfect Peace 
How to Read your Bible. 
Burdens, and What to 

with Them. 
The Blessed Dead. 
Not Eradication. 



Do 



com- 



n the Secret of His Presence. Not Eradicatioi 

20c. per dozen, or $1.50 per 100. 

Choice Extracts from Mr. Meyer's writings, 
piled by Rev. B. Fay Mills, 5c. or 35c. per doz. 

Any of the above sent post-free to any address on re* 
ceipt of price. 

FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY. 



THE PRESENT TENSES 



OF 



THE BLESSED LIFE. 



BY 



F. B. MEYER, B. A., 



Author of "Abraham: or The Obedience of Faith;" 

"Elijah: and the Secret of His Power;" "Israel: 

a Prince with God;" etc., etc. 



Fleming f). Uevell Company 

Chicago: | New York: 

?«8-1»0 madison street. | 80 union square east.. 

• 1 1 pnblfeber of Evangelical literature ; ; • 



KCH^lj 



ooLwaas 



i/i A-l iT3 



Entered according to Act of Congress, in the year 1892, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY, in the Office of the 
Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C. 



PREFACE. 




•N a true and deep sense, all who 
.believe have already entered upon the 
Eternal State. They have stepped 
across the frontier line into that glori- 
ous state of being, in which the 
changes of this mortal existence can- 
not affect the permanence of their life 
or blessedness. "He that believeth on 
the Son hath eternal life." 

And it is important for us to remem- 
ber, that our position does not depend 
on our experience of it, or on our 
emotions. These, alas, fluctuate per- 
petually, now waxing to the full, and 
again waning to a crescent streak. But 
we are independent of them on two 



PREFACE. 



conditions, which are fundamental to 
all rest and peace. 

In the first place, we must learn to 
live in our will; and in the second 
place, we must accustom ourselves to 
realize — not what we are to God, but 
— what God is to us, unchangeably, 
constantly, and in the fulness of a 
present blessing, which was never less 
than now in the past, and can never 
be less in the future. "He abideth 
faithful." Thus we shall find a quiet 
habitation in the Present Tenses of 
God's dealing with us — the present 

TENSES OF THE BLESSED LIFE. 

F. B. MEYER. 



CONTENTS. 



1. "I Am With You" 9 

II. "My Peace I Give. " 18 

III. "Cleanseth. " 28 

IV. "WORKETH." 36 

V. "Strengtheneth. " 44 

VI. "Liveth." 53 

VII. "LOVETH." 62 

VIII. "Reigneth." 70 

IX. "Teacheth." 77 

X. "COMFORTETH. " 86 

XI. "The Four-fold Cluster.".. 94 

XII. "Our God is a Consuming 

Fire" 104 



CONTENTS.- -Continued. 

XIII. The Spirit's Help." 115 

XIV. "The Spirit Lusteth 

AGAINST THE FLESH. " 1 23 

XV. "Upbraideth Not." 130 

XVI. "All Things are Yours." 137 

XVII. "Working Together for 

Good. " 146 

XVIII. "I am the First and txw 

Last." < x$y 



THE PRESENT TENSES OF THE 
BLESSED LIFE. 



i. 
"5 am TOlttb Kou. 



it 



Matt, xxviii. 20. 

fWO hundred years ago, there lived 
in the Carmelite Monastery in Paris, 

a simple-minded man, *who, though a 
cook by profession, was one of God's 
rarest jewels. At the age of eighteen, 
when wandering through a wood, in 
the depth of winter, the thought was 
suddenly flashed into his mind, that 
those very trees, which stood before 
him naked and bare, would ere long be 
clothed in all the glory of luxuriant 
leafage, quivering in the summer 
breeze. In a moment, he realized that 
God must be there; and if 'there, also 

* Brother Lawrence. 



io "J Hm TKflttb ffiou." 

everywhere; and he said to himself, 
"He is here, close beside me; and He 
is everywhere; so that I can never 
again be out of His holy presence." 
This sense of the nearness and presence 
of God became thenceforth one of the 
formative thoughts of his soul ; it nev- 
er left him for long; and he carefully 
cultivated it, so that it moulded and 
fashioned his whole inner being. 

It was a noble thought, and it would 
be of immense assistance to each read- 
er of these lines to acquire an habitual 
experience of the same kind. But be- 
fore we can do so, we need a strong 
foundation on which we can build it 
up; and surely it would be impossible 
to find one more suited to our purpose 
than that contained in those precious 
words with which our Lord parted 
from His disciples: "Lo, I am with 

YOU ALL THE DAYS, EVEN UNTO THE CON- 
SUMMATION OF THE AGE. " 

How full of meaning is that present 



XCbou Hrt Hear, © Xor £>♦ 1 1 

tense ! It is not that He was with us, 
or will be with us; but that He is 
with us. We may not always see Him, 
or realize His presence; we may be 
blinded by our tears, or dazzled with the 
false glare of this evil world; we may 
even, like the Lord Himself, in mo- 
ments of crushing sorrow, reckon our- 
selves forsaken, and cry out for fear, 
like startled babes in the dark, who do 
not know that their mother is sitting 
by their side; or, like silly children, 
we may look for our Friend through a 
reversed telescope, removing Him to 
an infinite distance by our way of re- 
garding Him. But all this will not 
alter the fact that He is with us, pity- 
ing us, yearning over us, and awaiting 
the moment when, by a gesture — as to 
the two at Emmaus — or by the tone of 
His voice — as to Mary, weeping by the 
empty grave — He may make us start 
with the glad consciousness that He is 
near. Happy the soul which has learnt 



i2 "$ Hm mitb &ott." 

to say by faith, when it cannot say by 
feeling, "Thou art near, O Lord." 
(Psalm cxix. 151.) 

"All the Days" — in winter days, 
when joys are fled; in sunless days, 
when the clouds return again and again 
after rain; in days of sickness and 
pain; in days of temptation and per- 
plexity — as much as in days when the 
heart is as full of joy as the woodlands 
in spring are full of song. That day 
never comes when the Lord Jesus is 
not at the side of His saints. Lover 
and friend may stand afar; but He 
walks beside them through the fires; 
He fords with them the rivers; He stands 
by them when face to face with the 
lion. We can never be alone. We 
must always add His resources to our 
own, when making our calculations. 
We may always imagine we hear Him 
saving, as Alexander did, when his 
soldiers complained of the overwhelm- 



"SU Ube ©ass." 13 

ing numbers of the enemy, "How many 
do you count Me for?" 

Now, can we not somehow acquire 
the habit of recollecting this glorious 
fact, and of living in its mighty cur- 
rent? I think we may, if we follow 
these simple directions. 

(1) We should never leave our pray- 
er-closets in the morning, without hav- 
ing concentrated our thoughts deeply 
and intensely on the fact of the actual 
presence of God: there with us, en- 
compassing us, and filling the room as 
literally as it fills heaven itself. I,t 
may not lead to any distinct results at 
first; but as we make repeated efforts 
to realize the presence of God, it will 
become increasingly real to us. And, 
as the habit grows upon us— when 
alone in a room; or when treading the 
sward of some natural woodland tem- 
ple; or when pacing the stony street; 
in the silence of night, or amid the 
teeming crowds of daylight — we shall 



i4 "5 am WLitb ®ou." 

often find ourselves whispering the 
words: "Thou art near; Thou art here, 
O Lord." 

(2) Then again, we should try to re- 
call the fact of the presence of God 
whenever we enter upon some new en^ 
gagement; or sit down to write a let- 
ter; or start on a journey; or prepare to 
meet a friend. To the man of whom 
we spoke at the beginning of this chap- 
ter, the kitchen was as holy a place as 
a church. All his work was wrought 
in God. Daily he had sweet talk 
with Him, as he went about his hum- 
ble service. He began every part of 
his duties with silent prayer. As the 
work went forward, he would lift up his 
heart again in prayer; and when it was 
finished, he would give thanks for help 
received, or confess the sin of his fail- 
ure. Thus the fireside, with its pots 
and pans, its heat and smells, became 
like the gate of heaven to him; and 
his soul was as much united to God 



TOflalftina Wftb $cto. is 

amid the tasks of the kitchen, as when 
he was in his private room. 

By practice, remembering God as 
much as we can, and asking Him to 
forgive when we had passed long hours 
in forgetfulness of Him, this habit 
would become easy and natural to us 
— a kind of second nature. 

(3) Then again, we might do much 
to fix this habit, by cultivating the 
practice of talking to God aloud, as 
we would to a friend, in the most nat- 
ural way, and about the most trivial 
incidents of life. How much they 
miss, who only speak to God from 
their knees, or on set occasions ! There 
must be such times for us all; but we 
may link them together by a perpetual 
ripple of holy and loving converse with 
Him, who counts the hairs of our heads 
in His minute microscopic interest in 
bur concerns; . 

It Was surely thus that Enoch walked 
with God. Arid it was this which en* 



i6 "J mm With &ou." 

abled Bishop Taylor to say, "I am a 
witness to the fact that the Lord Jesus 
is alive; that He is a person; and 
though invisible, accessible. I have 
been cultivating personal acquaintance 
with a personal Saviour for more than 
forty-three years." 

There are special times when we 
may fall back with an emphasis of com- 
fort on this majestic consciousness. In 
prayer, Psalm cxlv. 18; in deep sor- 
row for sin, Isaiah 1. 8; in anguish of 
grief, Psalm xxxiv. 18; in hours of per- 
plexity, Lukexxiv. 15; in days of peril, 
2 Kings vi. 16; in the approach of 
temptation, Psalm cxix. 151, 152. 

And we may ever count upon the 
ready help of the Holy Ghost, whose 
mission is to remind us of what we 
should otherwise forget, and to make 
to us what, through the imperfection 
of our nature, might become blurred 
and indistinct. This at least may be 
our comfort, in these days of our pil- 



Walking Mitb Oofe. 17 

grimage, that His presence is ever go- 
ing with us, as it went with Moses; 
and that presence is manna and water, 
guidance and protection, deliverance 
and rest. "In Thy presence is fulness 

• 

of joy. At Thy right hand there are 
pleasures forevermore. n 

"I AM WITH YOU ALL THE DAYB. " 



\\ 1C ,- : : mw&xmt&^, ■ i^ ' C 



;i \\ '^%masB6&8£3 : \ ' ' r /i \\ 




II. 

"QtoQ peace 5 ©toe*" 

John xiv. 27. 

•HESE words from such lips, and at 
such a time, were something more 
than a common Eastern salutation. They 
contained Christ's parting benediction 
to those whom He loved better than 
His life. And at the moment of speak- 
ing, He did forever allot to His be- 
loved disciples, and to the believers 
of all time, a legacy of Peace, such as 
filled His own breast with unruffled 
calm. They might not realize all 
that His word involved; but their fail- 
ure did not annul the wealth or glory 
of the bequest. 



fovQivenc&s. 19 

And, as the years passed on, they 
only revealed more and more of the 
depths of meaning which lay concealed 
in these unfathomable words. 
. We should carefully accentuate that 
pronoun, "My." It is not so much of 
the Peace that He purchased with His 
blood, nor of the Peace of heaven — 
that our Saviour h -re speaks: but of 
the very peace that filled His own 
glorious nature, and kept it so calm 
and still amid the storms that swept 
around His pathway through the world. 
This Peace He waits to give. Stand- 
ing beside some reader of these lines 
— who, it may be, is careworn and anx- 
ious, the head aching with anxious 
thought, the heart sick, and the brow 
furrowed with deep lines of care — He 
speaks and says, "My peace I give unto 
thee." Let us take Him at His word, 
and appropriate the gift with rejoicing 
faith. 

If we now turn to John xx. 19, 21, 



20 "ADb peace 5 Oive" 

26, with its threefold benediction of 
peace, we may be able to distinguish 
some three further shades of meaning 
in the peace which Jesus offers. 

I. There is, First, The Peace of 
Forgiveness (19th verse). 

This is the peace of the Evening. 
When the day is done, with its rush 
of business and care, its multitudin- 
ous demands on heart, and head, and 
hands, what a relief it is to shut the 
doors, to exclude all intruders, and to 
meet with beloved and familiar faces! 
And yet, even at such times, there are 
thoughts which we cannot exclude. 
The disciples might shut the doors of 
the upper chamber, for fear of the 
Jews; but those doors could not ex- 
clude the memory of their late un- 
faithfulness and cowardice, their 
treachery and desertion. And these 
bitter thoughts were more terrible to 
endure than their fear of hostile intrud- 



j 



fovQiveness. 21 

ers. Such is often our own experience. 
The day that opened so bright and 
fair has become marred by many sad 
and painful incidents, which we have 
been able to disregard amid the im- 
petuous rush of life, but which refuse 
to be longer ignored, and return to op- 
press and sadden our hearts, like a re- 
curring nightmare, as we sit down to 
rest in the quiet of our own chambers, 
beneath the fall of night. 

Some impatience or outburst of irri- 
tability; an unkind word; a look of 
annoyance; a selfish preference of our- 
selves to others whom we really love ; 
some indulgence, however momentary, 
of evil imagination and unholy desire; 
some acts of meanness or overreaching 
in our business. Ah, it all comes back 
to us afresh! What would we not 
give not to have yielded so weakly; or 
to be abla to live the time over again ! 
But, alas! it is beyond recall. And 
our only comfort is in the presence of 



-± 



22 "flby peace 5 <Bft>e*" 



the Peace-giver, who, standing bej?de 
us, says gently, "My peace I give unto 
you; " and shows us His hands and His 
side, marked still by the wound-prints 
of Calvary, the pledge and guarantee 
of forgiveness through His blood. At 
such times let us gratefully accept 
what He brings; and wrap ourselves 
about in the mantle of His tender, for- 
giving grace, as the dark brown earth 
of winter wraps itself in the mantle of 
soft, white snow. 

The great enemy of peace is the 
consciousness of sin. He who would 
give us peace must deal with that first. 
And our Saviour is equal to the task, 
coming fresh from Calvary, "a Lamb as 
it had been slain: " revealing the war- 
rant and ground of Justification; so 
that we may say with the Apostle, "Be- 
ing justified by faith, we have peace 
with God; " and may lay down to sleep 
with the Angels of peace and forgive- 



TTbe EnentB of peace* 23 

ness watching us through the hours of 
unconsciousness. 

II. There is, next, Peace in Serv- 
ice (21st verse). 

This is the Peace of the Morning. 
We should never leave our room until 
we have seen the face of our dear Mas- 
ter, Christ, and have realized that we 
are being sent forth by Him to do His 
will, and to finish the work which He 
has given us to do. He who said to 
His immediate followers, "As My 
Father hath sent Me, even so I send 
you," says as much to each one of us, 
as the dawn summons us to live an- 
other day. We should realize that we 
are as much sent forth by Him as the 
angels who "do His commandments, 
hearkening unto the voice of His word." 
There is some plan for each day's 
work, which He will unfold to us, if 
only we will look up to Him to do so; 
some mission to fulfill; some minis- 



24 "Obv I>eace 3 &t9t>* 



try to perfotn?; some irksome task to 
do better for His sake; some Jesson 
patiently to learn, that we may be 
able "to teach others also." 

Is it not very helpful to hear Him 
say, morning by morning, as He re- 
veals His plan, and gives His strength, 
and sends us forth, "My peace I give 
unto thee!" And that Peace the world 
cannot take away. Amid its wildest 
alarms and tumults "the peace of God, 
that passeth all understanding," senti- 
nels the heart and mind. "In the 
world ye shall have tribulation: these 
things I have spoken unto you that in 
Me ye might have peace." 

Our peace is often broken by the 
demands of service, and in two direc- 
tions. On the one hand, we do not 
exactly know what to do\ and on the 
other, we are doubtful as to whether 
we have adequate strength for the ful- 
filment of the task set us. But each 
of these breakers of peace can be met 



peace in Service* 25 

and silenced by the words before us. 
As to our plans we need not be anx- 
ious; because He who sends us forth 
is responsible to make the plan, ac- 
cording to His infinite wisdom; and 
to reveal it to us, however dull and 
stupid our faculties may be. And as 
to our sufficiency, we are secure of 
having all needful grace; because He 
never sends us forth, except He first 
breathes on us and says, "Receive ye 
the Holy Ghost. " There is always a 
special endowment for special power. 
The breath is so gentle and light, that 
we are often ignorant of it ; it passes 
as the zephyr over the flowers and is 
gone. But it is not withheld from any 
true heart, who is eager to do Christ's 
work on Christ's plan, and in His 
strength. 

III. There is, Lastly, Peace in Sor- 
row (26th verse). 

This is the peace of Dark Hours. 



26 «aby> peace J <Mt>e. 



tt 



Such sorrow has seldom darkened hu- 
man hearts as that which settled on 
these men, and especially on Thomas. 
The agony of his doubt was in pro- 
portion to the strength and tenderness 
of His love (John xi. 16.) He could 
not believe. And sometimes we have 
passed through phases of experience 
which have enabled us to understand 
the bitterness of his soul. When a 
whole storehouse of blessings has 
awaited our turning the key of faith 
in the golden lock, but we seem to have 
utterly lost it, and can only lie help- 
less at the feet of Christ, bemoaning 
our inability to believe — at such times 
Jesus comes to us, and stands beside 

us, within reach ("Reach hither," John 
xx. 27,) if not within sight ("have 
not seen," verse 29.) He suits Him- 
self to our need; and stoops to fulfill 
our conditions; and tenderly lifts up 
the bruised and broken soul; whis- 
pering as He does so, "My peace I 
give unto thee," 



peace in Sojjow. 27 

Dark hours eome to us all; and if 
we have no clue to a peace that can 
pass unbroken through their murky 
gloom, we shall be in a state of con- 
tinual dread. Any stone flung by a 
chance passer-by may break the crys- 
tal clearness of the Lake of Peace, and 
send disturbing ripples across it, un- 
less we have learnt to trust in the per- 
petual presence of Him who can make 
and keep a "great calm" within the soul. 
Only let nothing come to you, which 
you shall not instantly hand over to 
Him; all petty worries; all crushing 
difficulties; all inability to believe. 
Tell them all to Him, "who knows 
all, and loves us better than He knows. " 
And, in response, He will hush our 
troubled heart, and drive away its 
fears, lulling us as a mother soothes 
her babe. "Let not your heart be 
troubled, neither let it be afraid. 
Peace I leave with you; My peace I 
give unto you." 









PT 




III. 

"Gleansetb," 

i John i. 7. 

NE of the most precious chapters 
in the New Testament tells us that 
on the eve of His departure to His 
Father, while His heart was brimming 
with high thoughts of His origin and 
destiny, our Lord Jesus left the lowly 
meal, and girded Himself with a tow- 
el, and began to wash the feet of His 
disciples. (John xiii.) He refused to 
do more than this when Peter asked 
Him; because He said that those who 
had recently bathed, needed to do no 
more than cleanse their feet; which, 
after the Eastern fashion, were unpro- 



XTbe EvetAiviriQ TTeacber* 29 

tected, save by open sandals, from the 
dust and grit of the roads. He washed 
their feet therefore, and they were 
clean, every whit. 

This incident, in which Divine Maj; 
esty shone forth in Divine humility, 
is not only a part of the Gospel, a 
story of eighteen hundred years ago; 
it is a fact of the living present. 
Judged by the Divine arithmetic, which 
reckons a thousand years as one day, 
it only happened on the evening of 
the day before yesterday. Judged by 
the reckoning of faith, it is taking 
place to-day. 

There are two ways of reading the 
narratives of the Gospels. We may 
study them, with adoring wonder, as 
the story of what Christ was; or we 
may look up from each verse to Him, 
and feel it to be the record of what 
He is. Each view is right; and we 
need to blend them: but, as a matter 
of fact, we more often look on the 



3 o M <rieansetb/' 



evangelists as historians of the past, 
than as chroniclers of the present. We 
forget that Jesus Christ is the same 
to-day, when He is sitting on the 
throne, as He was yesterday, when He 
trod the pathway of our world. And 
in this forget fulness how much we 
miss! What He was, that He is. What 
He said, that He says. The Gospels 
are simply specimens of the life that 
He is ever living; they are leaves 
torn out of the diary of His unchange- 
able Being. 

To-day He is sitting on the Mountains 
of Beatitudes to teach, whilst all na- 
ture, like an open book, lies before 
His eye to give Him parables that 
shall make the eyes of children glis- 
ten, whilst they instruct the most pro- 
found. To-day He is working miracles 
of healing on the crowds of suffering 
ones; passing down infirmary wards, 
visiting fever-houses, standing in sick 
rooms, with His Talitha cumi, and His 



XLbc &ves*livit\Q TTeacber* 31 

healing touch. To-day He rides in low- 
ly triumph, amid the love of troops of 
children and of loyal friends, while 
the Pharisees and Sadducees mock Him 
to scorn. To-day, also, He is engaged 
in washing the feet of His disciples, 
soiled with their wilderness journey- 
ings. Yes, that charming incident is 
having its fulfillment in thee, my 
friend, if only thou dost not refuse the 
lowly loving offices of Him whom we 
call Master and Lord, but who still 
girds Himself and comes forth to serve. 

And we must have this incessant 
cleansing if we would keep right. It 
is not enough to look back to a cer- 
tain hour when we first knelt at the 
feet of the Son of God for pardon; 
and heard Him say, "Thy sins, which 
are many, are all forgiven." We need 
daily, hourly, cleansing — from' daily, 
hourly sin. 

Learn a lesson from the eye of the 
miner, who all day long is working 



32 "Cleanaetb." 

' ■■■■ ■ _^^______ J ^___^^__ 

amid the flying coal-dust. When he 
emerges in the light of day, his face 
may be grimy enough; but his eyes 
are clear and lustrous, because the 
fountain of tears, in the lachrymal 
gland, is ever pouring its gentle tides 
over the eye, cleansing away each speck 
of dust as soon as it alights. Is not 
this the miracle of cleansing which 
our spirits need in such a world as 
this? And this is what our blessed 
Lord is prepared to do for us, if only 
we will trust Him. 

The Blood of Jesus is always speak- 
ing for us before the throne of God. 
It was sprinkled there for us by our 
great High Priest, when He entered 
as our forerunner; and its presence 
there is our only plea for mercy. But 
that same Blood is ever needed by us 
for the purposes of inward purity. It 
is not enough to quote it, in the past 
tense, as "having cleansed." We need 
to quote it in a perpetual present; and 



©uc plea foj fl>e$ci?* 33 

to say, // cleanseth. Whenever you 
shudder at the evil of your old nature 
asserting itself, in some hideous thought 
or desire, look up and claim the cleans- 
ing of the precious Blood. 

Whenever you are assailed by the 
tempter who, as he knocks at the door 
of your soul, soils the clean doorstep 
with his tread, look up again, and 
claim the office of your Saviour, to 
efface each footprint, and to remove 
each stain. 

Whenever you are horrified in contem- 
plating the immense distance between 
your best and the ideal manhood of 
Jesus, and the sense of shortcomings 
appals your soul, there is but one re- 
sort that can avail you; it is not the 
brazen altar, where the sacrifice was 
slain, but the laver where the priests 
may wash as often as they need. 

Whenever you have been betrayed into 
sudden sin, do not wait till the even- 
ing, or for a more convenient time and 



34 "Cleansetb," 

place; but there, just where you are, 
lift up your heart to your compassion- 
ate Saviour, and ask Him to wash you 
and make you whiter than snow. 

Before entering the House of God; 
before participating in any act of serv- 
ice; before undertaking any work of 
ministry — it is our bounden duty to 
seek the cleansing away of all that may 
have stained our raiment, and fouled 
our hearts. In all quiet moments it 
becomes us to consider our need of 
washing our feet. If we lived thus, 
we should find that our communion 
would be unbroken ; and that the Great 
Master would constantly take us in 
His hands to employ us in His work. 
What Jesus wants is not gold or silver 
vessels, but clean ones. And though 
a vessel be earthenware, if only it is 
clean, He will use it; whilst He will 
pass by the one of chastest pattern, 
which is impure, or difficult to handle. 

It is impossible to exaggerate the 



Tflseful Vessels. 35 

importance of these words. Lie as a 
stone in the bed of the cleansing grace 
of Christ; no impurities can penetrate 
thither. Remove each drop of acid as 
it alights on the burnished steel. And 
let this present tense become the 
watchword of a Blessed Life: "The 
Blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, 
cleanseth me from all sin." 



\N '£'-. . ■ :::>ms&&MX&& ■■. K\ fZ' 



y / \\ -•^sff^arasasv: ■ ; vj \\ 




IV. 

"Xiraorfeetb*" 

John v. 17. 

OD is the great Worker in the 
!World. Though He entered into His 
rest on the seventh day, yet His rest 
has been full of work. He works in 
rest, and rests in work. The opera- 
tions of Nature, the course of Provi- 
dence, and the evolution of an evident 
plan in history; all these are living 
tokens of His unwearying activity. "Of 
Him, and through Him, and to Him, 
are all things; to whom be glory for- 



ever. " 



We must be very careful not to hide 
this fact of God's personal activity 



Ube Sujjen&erefc t>eajt 37 

under the veil of the Reign of Law. 
Men speak much of Law, as if they 
considered that laws were forces ; when, 
in point of fact, a law is simply the un- 
varying method in which the force works 
which is behind it, mysterious and 
ineffable. Talk of Law, and you have 
explained nothing as to the essence of 
the force itself. And if you demand 
what that force is, there is but one re- 
ply, adequate to the enquiry; and it is 
given in the one all-containing word — 
God. 

God's workshop is the Universe; but 
you may also find it in the surrendered 
heart. There is a beautiful illustra- 
tion of this in the life of our Lord. 
When His enemies found fault with 
Him for having healed the paralytic 
man on the Sabbath day, He answered, 
"My Father worketh hitherto, and I 
work." This deep answer to the ques- 
tion is not always understood or ap- 
preciated. The usual explanation is, 



3 8 "TRflorftetb. 



» 



that deeds of mercy no more broke the 
Sabbath than the incessant workings of 
God interfered with His rest. But 
there is something still deeper. The 
in-workings and promptings of the 
Father had been stirring within our 
Saviour's spirit, even up to that mo- 
ment, and to that miracle; and there- 
fore He, as the Servant and Son, had 
no alternative 1 than to obey. If then 
they found fault at all, it should not 
be with Himself, but with that ener- 
gising Will, which had moved Him 
to the act that had aroused their hate. 
Now, in a lesser degree, but on the 
same lines, God works in all loving 
and obedient hearts; so that the Apos- 
tle could say, "Work out your own sal • 
vation with fear and trembling! for it 
is God that worketh in you both to will 
and to do of His good pleasure." 
(Phil. ii. 12, 13.) The same truth 
appears in many other places. "His 
working, which worketh in me might- 



Ube fceat>enlB Mother* 39 

ily." "Working in you that which is 
well-pleasing in His sight." 

What a weight of staggering thought 
is excited by these words ! Stay, my 
soul, and wonder, that the Eternal 
God should stoop to work within thy 
narrow limits — filthy as a stable; dark 
as a cellar; stifling as an over-crowded 
room. Is it not a marvel indeed, that 
He, whom the heavens cannot contain, 
and in whose sight they are not clean, 
should trouble Himself to work on ma- 
terial so unpromising, and amidst cir- 
cumstances so uncongenial? How care- 
ful should we be to make Him wel- 
come, and to throw no hindrance in 
His way! how eager to garner up all 
the least movements of His gracious 
operation — as the machinist conserves 
the force of his engine; and as the 
goldsmith, with miserly care, collects 
every flake of gold-leaf! Surely we 
shall be sensible of the /ear oi holy 
reverence and the trembling of eager 



4 o "TKttorhetb," 



anxiety; as we "work out," into daily 
act and life, all that God our Father 
is "working in." 

Of course, in one sense our salvation 
is complete; but in another it is still 
in process. "We are being saved." 
We were saved from the condemnation 
and penalty of sin, when Jesus died; 
we are being saved from indwelling 
sin, through the gracious renewal of 
the Holy Ghost; and we shall yet be 
saved, so far as the emancipation of 
the body is concerned, when the trum- 
pet of the archangel has given the sig- 
nal of Resurrection. It is of the mid- 
dle term in this series, that we are 
thinking now; of that salvation 
which consists in delivering us from 
the power of indwelling sin, and in 
fashioning us into the likeness of the 
Son of God. 

The agent in this work is God Him- 
self. He dwells in the surrendered 
heart; and He drives all evil before him, 



TTbree agencies* 4* 

as the first beams of light expelled the 
brooding chaos from the universe. But 
He does not perform His work mechan- 
ically, irresistibly, or by iron force. 

He works by promptings, movings, 
checkings, suggestions, inspirations, 
touches light as a feather and soft 
as an angel's. If we treat these 
workings with neglect, they subside; 
and the soul resembles one of those 
deserted pits, in which the machinery 
and debris tell of the busy tides of 
workmen that have long since ebbed 
away. If, on the other hand, we care- 
fully obey them, they become more 
powerful ; and our obedience makes 
their effect permanent in our charac- 
ters. Obedience to a divine prompt- 
ing transforms it into a permanent ac- 
quisition- It is a new piece of work- 
manship, whether of gold, silver, 01 
precious stones, built into the fabric 
of the spiritual nature. 

There is one important matter, how- 



42 "Xraorfeetb," 



ever, which we must bear carefully v.s 
mind. If we attend only to the inner 
working and striving of God's Holy 
Spirit, we may become confused as 
to what is really His; for Satan will 
simulate it, that he may annoy us, 
transforming himself into an angei of 
light. We should therefore remember 
that God educates human spirits by 
three agencies: by the Word, by the 
Spirit, and by the events of Providence, 
And these three always agree in one; 
they never clash. Whensoever, there- 
fore, we are sensible of a mighty striving 
within our hearts, we should test it by 
the Word of God on the one hand; 
and on the other we should await the 
opening of circumstances. If we 
follow the inner light without the 
Bible, we shall become visionaries. 
If we follow the inner light without 
awaiting ,the unfolding of circum- 
stances, we shall be unpractical. 
Let it be our chosen attitude CC 



©lorffs <3ofc* 43 

open our whole being increasingly to 
the in working of God. We were or- 
iginally "His workmanship, created 
unto good works." And now, let us 
ask Him to work in us to will those 
good works, so that our will, without 
being impaired in its free operation, 
may be permeated and moulded by 
His will; just as light suffuses the 
atmosphere, without displacing it. 
And let us also expect that He will 
infuse into us sufficient strength that 
we may be able to do His will unto 
all pleasing. Thus, day by day, our 
life will be a manifestation of those 
holy volitions, and lovely deeds, 
which shall attest the indwelling and 
in working of God. And men shall see 
our good works, and glorify our Father 
which is in Heaven. 



W£ 



VAX 




44 



V. 

Strengtbenetb," 

Philippians iv. 13. 

*|fT was a marvellous statement for a 
jjjtman to make : "I can do all things." 
At first sight we suppose the speaker 
had either had but very little experi- 
ence of the world with its varying con- 
ditions ; or that he was some favoured 
child of fortune, who had never known 
want, because possessing an abundant 
supply of wealth and power. 

But closer consideration removes 
each supposition ; and we find our- 
selves face to face with a prisoner 
bound to a Roman soldier, who had run 
through the whole scale of human 
experience, now touching its abundant 
fulness, and anon descending to its 



3 can Do all Zbings. 45 

most abject want; one who said him- 
self: "I know how to be abased, and 
I know also how to abound; in every- 
thing and in all things have I learned 
the secret both to be rilled and to be 
hungry, both to abound and to be in 
want." It was, therefore, after a very 
profound experience of the extremes 
of human life, and of all the variations 
between, that the Apostle made that 
confident assertion: "I can do all 
things." 

It is a temper of mind which we 
might well covet. To be superior to 
every need; to bear prosperity without 
pride, and adversity without a mur- 
mur; to feel that there is no earthly 
circumstance that can disturb the 
soul from its equilibrium in God; to 
be able to yoke the most untamable 
difficulties to the car of spiritual pro- 
gress; to have such a sense of power 
as to laugh at impossibility and to 
sing in adversity; to help the weak, 



4 6 "Strengtbenetb," 

even though we might seem to need 
every scrap of power for ourselves; to 
feel amid the changing conditions of 
life as a strong swimmer does in the 
midst of the ocean waves, which he 
beats back in the proud consciousness 
of power — all this, and much more, is 
involved in the expression, "I can do 
all things." 

And when we ask for the talisman, 
which has given a frail man this mar- 
vellous power, it is given in the words: 
"in him that strengtheneth Me." The 
Old Version gave through Christ; the 
New alters it to "In Him*" And at 
once we see the connection with all 
that line of inner teaching, of which, 
to the careful student, the Bible is 
so full. Those words are the keynote 
of Blessedness^ first struck by our 
Lord, and repeated with unwearying 
persistence by His immediate follow^ 
ers, to whom they were the secret of 
an overcoming life. The one main 



THnfon wttb Cbrtet 47 

ihought of them is this — that the 
strength that we covet, is not given to 
us in a lump, for us to draw upon as 
we choose, like electricity stored in 
boxes for use; it is a life, and it is 
only to be obtained so long as we are 
in living union with its source. Apart 
from Him we can do nothing. Whilst 
we are abiding in Him, nothing is im- 
possible. The one purpose of our life 
should therefore be to remain in living 
and intense union with Christ, guard- 
ing against everything that would 
break it, employing every means of 
cementing and enlarging it. And just 
in proportion as we do so, we shall 
find His strength flowing into us for 
every possible emergency. We may 
not feel its presence; but we shall 
find it present whenever we begin to 
draw on it. Or if ever we are more 
than usually sensible of our weakness, 
one moment of upward looking .will 



4« "Strengtbenetb/' 

be sufficient to bring it in a tidal 
wave of fulness into our hearts. 

There is no temptation which we can- 
not master; no privation which we 
cannot patiently bear; no difficulty 
with which we cannot cope; no work 
which we cannot perform; no confes- 
sion or testimony which we cannot 
make — if only our souls are living in 
healthy union with Jesus Christ, for 
as our day, or hour, is, so shall our 
strength be: so much so, that we shall 
be perfectly surprised at ourselves, as 
we look back on what we have accom- 
plished. 

Dwell on the present tense, Strength* 
eneth. Hour by hour, as the tides of 
the golden sun-heat are quietly absorb- 
ed by flowers and giant trees — so will 
the strength of the living Saviour 
pass into our receptive natures. He 

will stand by us; He will dwell in 
us; He will live through us — strength- 
ening us with strength in our souls. 



TKHattfuG on ©ok 49 

The dying patriarch told how his 
favourite child would be made strong, 
by the mighty God of Jacob putting 
His Almighty hands over his trem- 
bling fingers; as an archer might lay 
his brawny skilled hands on the deli- 
cate grasp of his child, teaching him 
how to point the arrow, and enabling 
him to pull back the bow string. Oh 
what beauty there is in the compari- 
son! Who would not wish to be such 
a favoured one, feeling ever the gentle 
touch of the hands of God, empower- 
ing us, and working with us! Yet 
that portion may be thine, dear 
reader, and mine. To the prayer first 
offered by Nehemiah — "O God, strength- 
en my hand," God answers Himself: 
"I will strengthen thee." "Wait on 
the Lord, and He shall strengthen 
thine heart." "They that wait upon the 
Lord shall change their strength," *". e. 
they shall exchange one degree of 
strength for another, in an ever ascen- 



50 "Stjengtbenetb," 

ding scale. The strength of Christ is 
never found in the heart that boasts its 
own strength. The two can no more co- 
exist, than light and darkness can co- 
exist in the same space. And there- 
fore the Apostle used to glory in any 
thing that reminded him of his utter 
helplessness and weakness. This 
thought made him even acquiesce 
willingly to the thorn in his flesh. It 
was at first his repeated prayer that it 
might be removed; but when the Lord 
explained that His strength could only 
be perfected in weakness, and that the 
presence of the thorn was a perpetual 
indication and reminder of the weak- 
ness of his flesh, driving him to the 
Strong for strength, and making him a 
fit subject for the conspicuous mani- 
festations of God's might at its full — 
jhen he protested that he would most 
gladly glory in his weakness, that 
the strength of Christ might rest 
upon him; for when he was 



Df faculties an& TTjials* 51 

weak, in his own deep consciousness, 
then he was strong in the strength of 
the strong Son of God. (2 Cor. xii. 9.) 

It would be a great help to us all if 
we could look at difficulties and trials 
in this way. Considering that they 
have been sent, not to grieve or annoy 
us, but to make us despair of our- 
selves, and to force us to make use of 
that divine storehouse of power, 
which is so close to us, but of which 
we make so little use. Difficulties are 
God's way of leading us to rely on 
His almighty sufficiency. They are 
none of them insurmountable ; they are 
the triumphs of His art; they are meant 
to reveal to us resources of which, had 
it not been for their compulsion, we 
might have lived in perpetual igno- 
rance — just as hunger has led to many 
of the most wonderful inventions. 

What glorious lives might be the 
lot of the readers of these lines, if 
only they would abjure their own 



52 "Strengtbenetb." 

strength — be it wisdom, wealth, sta- 
tion, or any other source of creature 
aid; and if they would learn that the 
true strength is to sit still at the 
source of all might and grace, receiv- 
ing out of His fulness, and mingling 
the song of the psalm, with the glad 
affirmation of the Apostle: "I will 
love Thee, O Lord, my strength; " "I 
can do all things through Christ that 
strengtheneth me!" 




VI. 

"Xh>etb." 

Revelation ix-18. 
•IFE is triumphant! That is the 
.glad witness of the New Testament, 
and especially of the Apocalypse. It 
was a revelation indeed to the world, 
on which it broke, as tidings of great 
joy. Up to that moment, the majority 
of men, including some of the foremost 
of the race, had thought that death, 
and night, and chaos, would end all. 
And some of the sublimest concep- 
tions of the ancient world embody this 
sad foreboding for all time — the 
Prometheus, in which man struggles 
heroically but hopelessly, whilst the 
eagle of irresistible destiny feeds upon 
his vitals; or the Laocoon, in which 



54 "Xtvetb. 



» 



man, in his sinewy strength is involv- 
ed with slender youth, in the coils of 
the serpents of fate, against which 
they struggle in vain. Children were 
born to die. Flowers bloomed to 
fade. The glory of the spring smiled 
but for a transient hour, amid the 
marble of their temples and beside the 
deep azure of their ocean waves. All 
things at last seemed doomed to be 
overcome by the dark elements, which 
waged perpetual war against life, 
and beauty, and joy. 

Into the nlidst of such a world the 
tidings came that Life was the might- 
ier force; and that Life was victor. 

And when men asked the reason for 
an assertion so confident and so glad, 
the answer was given in some such 
terms as these: — "There lived in Pal- 
estine One, who, during His brief life, 
was the assailant of death in all its 
varied forms. He beat back, by His 
touch and word, its approach. He 



Ube IDfctoj. 55 



v »" 



compelled it to lay down the young 
life which it had only just taken up. 
He brought from the grave those who 
had long passed from the bourne of the 
living world. And yet, though He 
might have seemed impervious to death, 
at last He too succumbed to its power ; 
and the brightest hopes that had ever 
been born in human hearts seemed 
destined to hopeless destruction. But 
it was only for an instant. Three 
days were long enough to show that 
He could not be holden by death. 
He broke from its prison-house, and 
came forth victor over its supremest 
efforts. He made Himself known to 
His friends as the Living One; speak- 
ing and talking to them as of old. 
And to the purged eye of him whom 
He loved He gave one last glorious 
vision of Himself in the sea-girt isle 
of Patmos, saying, as He did so: 
"Fear not; I am the first and the 
last, and the living one; and I was 



56 "Xftetb." 



dead, and behold I am alive for ever- 
more, and I have the keys of death 
and of Hades." (Rev. i. 18, R. V.) 

This was the keynote of the gladness 
of the early Church: "We know that our 
Redeemer liveth." And as the centur- 
ies have slowly rolled away, they have 
not been able to rob the Church of her 
faith. Year after year she has cele- 
brated Easter with songs. And in 
the darkest time she has saluted the 
living Saviour with the words: "When 
Thou hadst overcome the sharpness of 
death, Thou didst open the Kingdom 
of Heaven to all believers." 

Who can fathom all the consolation 
which we enjoy, and which is due to 
the fact that our Lord Jesus is living 
in an eternal present, never more to 
see corruption? 

He lives as our High Priest. There 
was a fatal defect in the Jewish priest- 
hood, because they were not able to 
continue, by reason of death. As soon 



Ha trtgb priest 57 

as a High Priest became thoroughly 
versed in his duties, and familiar with 
his charge, he had to follow the steps 
of his great predecessor, who died on 
the summit of Mount Hor. But this 
Marty because He continueth ever, hath 
an unchangeable Priesthood. "Where- 
fore also He is able to save to the 
uttermost them that draw near unto 
God through Him, seeing He ever 
liveth." What music is in those words! 
When we come to God, it is by a living 
way. Nor should we be content to 
leave our morning or evening prayer, 
till we have had living contact with 
the Living One Himself. Prayer may 
be a law; but it is equally a direct 
converse with a real living personal 
friend — the Prince who is our Brother 
— the King who is of near kin to us. 
And this is surely the happy experi- 
ence of the Blessed Life. To know 
that there is no cloud between Him 
and the soul ; and to repeat again and 



58 "Xivetb. 



♦♦ 



again vows of loyalty and devo- 
tion, spoken not into the responseless 
air, but into the living ear of One 
whose heart responds in unutterable 
tenderness to the stillest whisper of 
affection and trust. 

He lives as the Source of our Life. "Be- 
cause I live, ye shall live also." This 
teaching was borrowed faom His own 
deep inner life. His life, in a very 
significant sense, was not His own; it 
was His Father's. He said that the 
words He spoke, and the works He did, 
were not His, but were the outcome 
of His Father's indwelling. "The 
living Father hath sent Me, and I live 
by the Father." Thus it happened, 
that all who saw Him, saw His Father; 
and His life has been, for all the ages, 
a manifestation of the unseen God. 

Similarly, for us who have believed, 
and, in believing, have received the 
germ of eternal life, He is willing to 
be all that His Father was to Him. 



as tbe Source of life, 59 

He is our life. To us to live is Christ. 
The Son of God liveth in us. The 
life of Jesus is manifest in our mor- 
tal flesh. As, in the olden vision, the 
precious oil came through the golden 
pipes to feed the temple-lamp, so does 
His life come through our faith to 
feed our spirits. 

Hapj^ Jire they who are dead to their 
own life; who steadily ignore it and 
ieny it — that the life of Jesus may 
have free scope in them to rise up into 
all the beauty and glory of perfect 
life! With Him is the fountain of 
life; would that all our 'fresh springs 
were ever consciously also in Him ! 
We do not need to concern ourselves 
about the progress of His life within 
us, if only we are careful to mortify that 
other life, our own; and to obey all the 
throbbings and promptings of His life 
which is ever pining for fuller mani- 
festation within us. Give yourself 
wholly up to Him, that He may live 



6o "Xtvetb. 



*» 



through your being, until He shall 
even quicken your mortal body, and 
raise it up in resurrection-glory. 

He lives to lead on the Ages to all the 
Possibilities of Life. What lies before 
us we cannot tell — what glory, what 
radiant bliss, what rapture! We only 
know that He spake, not only of life, 
but of life "more abundantly." And 
we are told that He will lead us "Unto 
fountains of waters of life." George 
Fox tells of his dream, in which he 
saw the ocean of life sweep away the 
inky waters of death forever; but who 
shall fathom that ocean, or tell its 
expanse, its depth, its shores? 

This is at least true — that He will 
never rest until He has enlarged our 
capacities to comprehend, and our 
hearts to receive, the fulness of His 
life. We are only learning its alpha 
bet. We are like a brood just out of 
the egg, lying close in the nest, taking 
only what is given us, and utterly 



XCbe jfulness of Dis Xife. 61 

ignorant of the undeveloped powers of 
flight, which shall enable us to flash 
in the sunny air. But the time is 
coming when we shall drink of His 
life, and live for ever with Himself. 

Till then let us eat of His flesh, in 
rapt meditation on His words ; and let 
us drink of His blood, in loving com- 
munion with His sacrifice and death ; 
that so we may have His life abiding 
in us, and in the most emphatic sense 
may live by Him, until mortality 
shall be swallowed up of life. And 
of this let us be sure, that our spirit- 
ual life, though tried and tested, can 
never be extinguished, because it is 
guaranteed by One who 

"EVER LIVETH." 




VII. 

"Xovetb." 

Rev. i. 5. 

•HAT a wealth of meaning is 
brought out by the Revised 
Translation of the Doxology, caught 
from the minstrelsy of Heaven, with 
which the Apostle John opens the book 
of Revelation ! We have been accus- 
tomed to read, "Unto Him that loved 
us;" but we now find it translated 
from the past tense to the present, 
" Unto Him that loveth us. " The love 
of Jesus to His own is an eternal 
noon; a perpetual present; an ocean 
fulness without tide or shadow of turn- 
ing 

Of course, He loved us, and bore us 
on His heart, before the worlds were 



TUncbangfng Xot>e, 63 

— - — — - ...... . ._ — 

made. It was for love of us that He 
emptied Himself, and became obedient 
to the death of the Cross. Yes, and 
He will love us, with the love of the 
Bridegroom towards the Bride, through 
those golden ages which we are to 
spend with Him, dating from the 
marriage feast, and ending never. But 
this is the most priceless thought of 
all — that He loves us now. If He 
loved me when He gave Himself for 
me, it is certain that He loves me 
equally to-day; because He is the 
same in the to-day of the present, as 
He was in the yesterday of the past, 
and as He v/ill be in the for-ever of 
the future. He is always "this same 
Jesus." (Acts i. n.) Time, which 
changes all things else, is foiled 
when it approaches the heart of Christ. 
The flight of ages cannot lessen, or 
chill, or affect His Love. "This Man 
because He continueth ever hath an 
unchangeable priesthood". 



64 "Xovetb, 



ft 



We are so apt to judge of the Love 
of Christ to us by our appreciation 
and enjoyment of it. It is easy to 
believe in it when we are bright in 
spirits and well in health; when the 
atmosphere is clear, and the air is in- 
vigorating, and the sun shines bright- 
ly; or when we are living in happy 
obedience, and conscious fellowship. 
It needs no great effort, under such 
circumstances, to be sure of the Love 
of Christ. But when our sky is over- 
cast, and our way lies through a 
tangled jungle; when they are increased 
that trouble us, and misfortunes tread 
on each other's heels; when we are 
conscious of failure and sin — it is not 
natural to us then to calculate on the 
unchanged love of Christ. Yet we 
might as well suppose that the heat 
given out by the sun varied with the 
temperature of our fickle northern 
climate, as think that the Love of 
Christ changes with every variation 



©o& Xoves flbe. 65 

in ourselves. It is a constant quantity. 
It is not turned away by our sins. It 
is not lessened by our coldness or 
neglect. Like some perennial spring, 
it cannot be bound by frost, or re- 
duced by drought, or exhausted by the 
demands of generations. 

The truant servant, lying spiritless 
on the desert sands; the headstrong 
apostle venting denials and oaths in 
the midst of the servants of his Mas- 
ter's foes; the back-slider, reaping the 
bitter harvest of his ways; the dis- 
couraged exile, mourning in the land 
of the Hermonites over the happy past 
— all these may look up to the empyr- 
ean of the love of Christ, and be sure 
that He loveth with a constant and 
unwavering attachment. Write this 
on the tablets of your heart, reader; 
that neither sin, nor depression, nor 
height, nor depth, nor things present, 
nor things to come, shall be able to 
alter the fulness and constancy of the 



*/ 



66 "Xwetb. 



»f 



love of Christ to you. If only Christ- 
ians would really grasp this great 
truth, and would dare, in frequent con- 
tradiction to their own feelings, to 
believe in and affirm the unchanging 
love of God, they would reach a firm 
standing ground from which the great 
adversary of souls could never dis- 
lodge them. 

"I am feeling loneless and depressed ; 
but God loves me!" "I am groping 
my way through the darkness ; but God 
loves me!" "I have fallen, and am 
no better than others; but God loves 
me!" "I am passing through a season 
of sore chastening; but this makes me 
only more sure that my Father loveth 
me! " This is the secret of victory 
and rest. 

Our Lord bade us abide in His 
love. "If ye keep my commandments, 
ye shall abide in My love; even as I 
have kept My Father's commandments, 
and abide in His love" — of course. 



Sewn (Bolften "Rules, 67 

this means in the consciousness of 
His love. It is one thing to be in 
the light, and quite another thing to 
know it. There is a sense in which 
we are all living in the light of 
Christ's love; but we do not all enjoy 
it as a living practical experience. 
"Keep yourselves in the love of God. 
/. <?., cultivate an habitual conscious- 
ness of the love of God toward you. 

There are seven golden rules for 
acquiring and maintaining this con- 
sciousness. 

(1) Never leave your room in the 
morning without a distinct apprehen- 
sion of the fact that "the Father Him- 
self loveth you." (John xvi. 27.) 

(2) Ask the Holy Spirit — who sheds 
abroad the love of God in the heart, 
and who brings all things to our 
remembrance — that you may hear the 
whispers of His still, small voice, 
perpetually reminding you that God 
loves you. 



68 ."Xovetb." 



(3) Accept all lovely things — gentle 
words; kindly acts; gleams of sun- 
light ; the songs of birds and the scent of 
flowers — as being the token of His love; 
and look up with a smile to Him, as 
you say, "I thank Thee." 

(4) Avoid all things that are inconsis- 
tent with the fact of your being God's 
beloved child; all irritableness and 
fretfulness; all petulance and anger; 
all ill-speaking, and uncharitableness. 

(5) Do the meanest and most trivial 
things for the love of God, as one con- 
strained by that love not to live to 
self, but to Him; and let 3'our one 
aim be to do all things as one whom 
God loves. 

(6) Let no commandment, of which 
you are aware, lie on the page of 
Scripture unobeyed. "He that hath 
My commandments and keepeth them 
he it is that loveth Me; and he that 
loveth Me shall be loved of My 
Father; and I will love him, and will 



Seven (Bolften "Rules* 6 9 

manifest Myself to him." (John xiv. 
21.) 

(7) Cultivate a spirit of disinter- 
ested love and kindness to all. "He 
that dwelleth in Love, dwelleth in 
God, and God in him." 

Rooted and grounded in love to 
others, we comprehend best the love 
of God to ourselves. 

It was the charm of our Saviour's 
life, that He was able to say, the 
Father loveth the Son. (John v. 20.) 

Unloved and un welcomed by those 
whom He came to save, He found 
solace and a home in the unchanging 
love of God. On the eve of His death, 
He could wish for us nothing better 
than that we should enjoy the love 
wherewith the Father had loved Him. 

Let us not miss our heritage by 

supineness or neglect. But let us 

live, as He did, beneath the spell of 

this sweet and heart-stirring strain — 

"He loveth us." 



*J> 






V£VV£ 



VIS\VIV\ 



\&** 




VIII. 

"Itefgnetb." 

Rev. xix. 6. 
HAT a mirror of human life and 
history is the Book of the Revela- 
tion I One seems to be standing in a 
great battlefield; all around armed 
legions break in battle-shock; shining 
legions locked in deadly conflict with 
the dark hosts of hell; the cries of the 
down-trodden, the dying, and the 
martyred victims wail aloud upon the 
breeze: but amid all the din and 
tumult, ever and again rise up the sweet, 
clear-voiced choruses of redeemed 
and victorious ones, who cheer the 
fainting and rally the desponding, and 
hail the growing symptoms of Heav- 
en's ultimate victory. Such a chorus 



Zbe Song of Wctojs* 71 

rings out upon our ear and heart in 
the words before us (Rev! xix. 6). 

The previous chapters are full of 
agony and conflict; the ploughshare of 
war is driven through the world; and 
the Apostate Church meets her doom. 
As a millstone might be dashed by 
a strong angel into the ocean, so is 
Babylon thrown down, never to be 
found any more. And as she sinks 
down to her doom, there is heard a 
great voice of much people in heaven, 
saying, "Alleluia! " And again they 
say, "Alleluia!" And yet again the 
four-and-twenty elders and the four 
living creatures say, "Amen, Alleluia !" 
And then there issues once more a 
solitary voice from out of the throne, 
calling for yet further praise; and 
in response, the Apostle John tells 
us, "I heard as it were the voice of a 
great multitude, and as the voice of 
mighty thunderings, saying, "Alleluia; 
for the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth ! " 



72 "IRetgnetb," 

Yes, there is always a Halielujah 
Chorus, whenever the Lord reigns. 

We shall join in that song of vict- 
ory and triumph ere long. Every 
sunrise brings it nearer. But we need 
not wait for the establishmenc of the 
millennial kingdom, ere we hear or 
raise the ringing cry of "Hallelujah!" 
We may catch it ringing even now 
around the earth; we may hear it 
breaking gladly from redeemed heart, 
and surrendered lives, which have 
learnt that the reign of Jesus is always 
associated with the Hallelujah Chorus. 

Even the Old Testament teaches 
this, in three memorable Psalms, lying 
almost on the same page — xciii., xcvii., 
xcix. The first teaches His Kingdom 
over Nature. We hear the break of 
the waves, the mighty waves of the 
sea, lifting up their voices. But the 
Lord on high is mightier than the 
mightiest. "The Lord reigneth; Hal- 
lelujah!" 



Ttbe Ujf umpbant fdng, 7 3 

The second teaches His kingdom 
over men. His enemies, and Judah's 
daughters, alike own His sway. The 
most careless and rebellious are sub- 
servient to His designs. "He doeth 
according to His will in the army of 
Heaven and among the inhabitants of 
the earth." Men plot and scheme as 
they will; but they only do what 
His hand, or His counsel, determined 
before to be done. And as we con- 
sider the reality of the glory of His 
sway — not less a fact because unreal - 
izied by its subjects — we again cry: 
"The Lord reigneth; Hallelujah!" 

The third teaches us that His king- 
dom is over saints. "The Lord is great 
in Zion. " The saints recognize but 

one supreme headship of the Church; 
and as they look up to Him who is 
guiding her course, and governing 
her politics, unaffected by the appar- 
ent contrarieties and disunion amongst 
us, again they cry, "The Lord reign- 
eth; Hallelujah!" 



74 "IRefgnetb* 



a 



But surely all this applies most 
closely to our own individual experi- 
ence. We never knew what true joy 
was until the meek and lowly Saviour 
rode in triumph as King over our 
hearts. But before that moment we 
had been distracted with riot and 
revolt; with bitter experiences of 
failure and disappointment; with a 
weary sense of an anarchy, which we 
could not put down. But when He 
entered to set up His reign, the cry 
of "Hosannah! " rang through the 
citadel of our inner being; and it 
seemed as if angel-voices sang to us, 
"Rejoice greatly! fear not, for thy 
King cometh !" 

Ah! the devil's lie has been but too 
successful in leading men to think 
that Christ's reign means misery and 
privation. It is because they have 
believed it that so many have excluded 
themselves from it altogether; or 
have submitted only a part of their be- 



ftallelujabt 75 

ing to his blessed empire, giving Him 
the environs, whilst they reserve the 
citadel, the Zion, for themselves. 
But those who know what it is to 
yield their whole being to His gov- 
ernment, know that where there is 
the increase of His government, there 
is also the increase of peace, and of. 
each there need be no end (Isaiah 
ix. 7.) 

Would that some who have been 
living a sad and bitter life, might 
haul down the flag of revolt, and 
welcome the King whose reign is 
founded on His priesthood, the true 
Melchizedek, the Priest-king; and as 
the King of Glory passes the uplifted 
gates, and His standard flies from the 
citadel of the will, there shall ring 
out the cry, "Hallelujah! the Lord 
God omnipotent reigneth. " 

You have only to open the gates to 
Him, and He will subdue all author- 
ity and power; He will bring every 



76 "IRefflnetb." 

thought into captivity; He will keep 
down the rebellious nature. 

Remember He is omnipotent — om- 
nipotent to conquer; omnipotent to 
keep; omnipotent to reign. Life then 
shall become one long Hallelujah, 
growing deeper and sweeter as the 
years roll on. No event will disturb 
or perplex, because in each incident 
we shall see the result of our king's 
appointment; and whether we like it 
or not, whether it causes us pain or 
joy, whether it shine or showers, we 
shall be able to cry, 

"Hallelujah! 

for the Lord God omnipotent 
reigneth. " 



W£> ■,■/:-£ 




■^^^z^^^^^^mbbmj&v'ctv. a. yva^MHi^^^ 


ViW 





W£ 



VA> 




IX. 

"Geacbetb," 

i John ii. 27. 
HAT was a true word spoken by the 
prophet when he said, "All thy chil- 
dren shall be taught of the Lord; and 
great shall be the peace of thy chil- 
dren." (Isaiah liv. 13.) It is certain 
that the amount of peace which we 
enjoy will be largely in proportion to 
the amount of teaching which we 
receive, and appropriate, at the hands 
of the Lord. 

The untaught Christian is destitute 
of the deep and unbroken peace which 
is the inalienable heritage of those 
who have graduated in Christ's school- 
As the many objects of fear which, 
in the mind of the savage, people all 



78 "tteacbetb. 



tt 



lonely places, disappear when he is 
instructed in truer science: so do 
doubts and misgivings vanish, as the 
soul comes to understand its true 
standing in Jesus. 

It is very beautiful to mark the 
direct teaching agency of the Lord in 
this passage, and to remember that it 
is vouchsafed to all His children. 

There is no teaching, to compare 
with that of a father. The profes- 
sional schoolmaster is apt to become 
mechanical. He looks on his pupils 
as so many brains which he must cram 
for examination. He finds, therefore, 
a peculiar charm in the bright and 
clever ones, who will repay his care; 
as the virgin soil of the Western 
States responds luxuriantly to the first 
scratch of the plough. He is in dan- 
ger of underrating the value of those 
who may be dull because they need 
better food — or because they have 
come of a race of dullards, stupified 



XCbe f aitbf ul TTeacber* 79 

by generations of lethargy. The little 
tired maiden, worn out by nursing the 
new-born infant; the dull and stupid 
child; the boy who cannot fix his 
thoughts; the under-fed and the ill- 
clad offspring of poverty — these are 
often scantily attended to. But there 
is no such partiality with a father; 
and it has no lodgement in the heart 
of God. All His children are taught. 
He takes equal care over each. He 
perhaps takes most care over the stupid 
ones; putting the lesson in successive 
modifications, that it may be brought 
down to their capacity. It is His 
chosen business to make you know His 
will; and if He cannot do it in one 
way, He will in another. "Line upon 
line; precept upon precept; here a 
little, there a little." 

We are oftenest taught by chastening. 
As the Psalmist fitly says: "Blessed 
is the man whom Thou chastenest, O 
Lord, and teachest him out of Thy 



8o "Geacbetb," 



law." (Psalm xciv. 12.) It may be, 
that there would be less need for this 
chastening, if only we would learn 
the same lessons in the easier forms 
in which they are first presented to us. 
It is when all other means fail that 
chastening is employed. But surely 
it is also true that there are some 
lessons which can only be learnt in 
the Garden, and beneath the Shadow 
of the* Cross. The most deeply taught 
Christians are generally those who 
have been brought into the searching 
fires of deep spul -anguish. If you 
have been praying to know more of 
Christ, do not be surprised if He takes 
you aside into a desert place, or leads 
you into a furnace of pain. God : s 
private mark is always burnt into the 
spirit in a furnace. 

But after all, there is no text more 
clear or helpful in its teaching on this 
matter than the one referred to at the 
heading of this chapter: "The anoint- 



TEbe Wise tteacber* Si 

ing which ye have received of Him 
abideth in you, and ye need not that 
any man teach you; but as the same 
anointment teacheth you of all things, 
and is truth." 

Many amongst us are not able to 
attend any of those Conferences for 
the promotion of # Christian living, 
which are so characteristic of the 
present day, and which are helping to 
prepare the Bride for the coming of 
her Lord. And there is sometimes a 
fear entertained by such, that they 
will fail to acquire some of those 
blessed truths, which in these days are 
being so marvelously unfolded to our 
ken. But let all suck hush their fears, 
and be encouraged by the assurance of 
this passage, that the loving and 
obedient soul need not want any other 
teacher than the dear Lord Himself. 

If the education of the inner life be 
intrusted to Him, He undertakes that 
nothing shall be lacking which ought 



82 "Tteacbetb." 

to be known; and that no time should 
be spent on superfluous or needless 
studies. The believer, who has the 
private tuition of the Saviour, will 
not be less proficient than those who 
have sat in the highest seats in the 
school of the church. Yes, and when 
Christ teaches, He needs no fee or re- 
ward. He demands only willingness to 
obey and perform, as each new item of 
truth is presented. If we will only 
put into immediate practice the truths 
He imparts, there is simply no limit 
to the blessed lore in which He will in- 
struct us. "Who teacheth like Him?" 
* There are three points to notice in 
closing. 

i. Christ teaches by the Holy Ghost, 
It is unmistakable that the Spirit is 
referred to in this passage as "the 
anointing which we have received." 
The inspired symbol for the Holy 
Ghost, throughout the Bible, is Oil. 
The oil that was poured on Aaron's 



XTbe fx>l2 TTeacber* 83 

head, and descended to the skirts of 
his garments, spake of Him. The 
Holy Spirit is, so to speak, the me- 
dium by which Jesus dwells in the 
surrendered heart, and operates through 
it, and in it. Thank God, we have re- 
ceived the Spirit from His hands. 
And when He gives, He never takes 
back. There can never be any with- 
drawal of that which has been be- 
stowed. He abideth in you. But 
though the Spirit can never be with 
drawn, He may be quenched and 
grieved to our unutterable loss. Let 
us yield to Him, that He may put 
forth in us all His gracious might. 

2. This teaching is inward. There 
are doubtless many lessons taught by 
Providence. But after all, the mean- 
ing of outward events is a riddle, until 
He opens "the dark sayings on the 
harp." And the teaching is therefore 
so quiet, so unobtrusive, so hidden 
that many an earnest seeker may think 



84 "XTeacbetb. 



» 



that nothing is being taught or ac- 
quired, as the months go on. But we 
cannot gauge the true amount of pro- 
gress which we are making from year 
to year. The teaching is so thorough- 
ly a secret matter between God and the 
Spirit. But when some . great crisis 
supervenes, some trial, some duty; and 
the spirit puts forth powers of which 
it had seemed incapable — there is a 
swift discovery of the results, which 
had been slowly accruing during long 
previous hours. 

3. The main end of this teaching is to 
secure our abiding in Christ. "Even as 
it hath taught you, ye shall abide in 
Him." All Christian progress begins, 
continues, and has its fruition here. 
Severed from Jesus, we can do nothing. 
Abiding in Jesus, we partake of "the 
root and fatness" of His glorious life. 
All His fulness slowly enters into us. 
What wonder then, that the whole 
bent of the Holy Spirit's teaching is 



Ube Ucacbcvs ©bject* *s 

to insist upon this prime necessity! 
And we may well study hard to be 
proficient in this sacred lore, learning 
how to abide in Christ, because all 
Heaven is there. It is thus that God 
is waiting to teach each of us, His 
little children. "If thou criest after 
knowledge, and liftest up thy voice 
for understanding; if thou seekest her 
as silver, and searchest for her as hid 
treasures — then shalt thou find the 
knowledge of God." (Prov. ii. 3-5.) 



VM>£ 



7hN 





x. 
"Comfortetb." 

2 Cor. i. 4. 

•HAT a word is this! There is 
music in the very mention of it. 
And there is not one of us that cannot 
appreciate its meaning and worth. In 
the prophecies of Isaiah, God calls on 
others to comfort His people and speak 
comfortably to His chosen; but here 
He is described as being the sole com- 
forter of His saints. It is as if He re-, 
fused to wait the consummation of 
all things, before beginning to wipe 
away all tears from our eyes, and were 
already prepared to comfort us as a 
mother comforteth her first-born. 

In God there is the mother-nature, 
as well as the Fatherhood. All love 



XCbe Soujce of Comfort 87 

was first in Him, ere it was lit up in 
human hearts. The fires that burn so 
brightly on the altars of motherhood 
the world over, were lit in the first in- 
stance from the Heart of God ; and He 
keeps them alight. And therefore the 
love that is so quick to detect and so 
swift to hush the wail of the babe; 
which is so sensitive to discover that 
something ails the troubled hcarl; 
which is so inventive of little meth- 
ods of solace, now by tender touch, 
and again by delicate suggestion — this 
love is in the great heart of God, and 
awaits our need to enwrap us in the 
embrace of an infinite sympathy and 
comfort. 

The apostle had known this many a 
*ime; and when he tells out his expe- 
riences on this matter, we feel we are 
listening to one who knew whereof he 
spake. Few have suffered more than 
be did, from the moment that he gave 
up all for Christ, to the hour in 



88 "Comfortetb. 



tt 



which he died a martyr for the faith — 
the break with old friends; the physical 
sufferings of his lot; the homelessness, 
and privations, and continual journey- 
ings; the care of all the churches, 
the opposition of false brethren. 
Every epistle bears some evidence of 
the anguish constantly being inflicted 
on his noble and tender heart. And 
yet he said, God comfort eth us. "Who 
comforteth in all our tribulations, 
that we may be able to comfort them 
which are in any trouble, by the com- 
fort wherewith we ourselves are com- 
forted of God." (2 Cor. i. 4.) 

There are many ways in which "the 
God of all comfort" comforts us. 
Sometimes He shoots a ray of cheer 
over the darkened life by a verse of 
Scripture, sent on a card, or written 
by a friend; sometimes a passage of 
Scripture rings in our memory like a 
sweet refrain, rising and falling as 
a peal of distant bells heard across a 



©o&'s 1RWSB of Comfort 8 9 

wide valley. Sometimes a gift — 
which shows that some one is thinking 
tenderly of us — comes into our 
hands; and we value it not for its 
intrinsic worth, but because of the love 
which prompted it, and which is the 
symptom of a tenderer love behind. 
Sometimes an unexpected friend comes 
into our home, with a bright face and 
a warm grasp of the hand; and we are 
comforted of God by the coming of a 
Titus. (2 Cor. vii. 5, 6.) There is 
no day so dark, no lot so sad, but that 
unto it God contrives to put a little 
scrap of comfort; not enough perhaps 
to take away the pain, which we need 
as discipline; but just enough to carry 
us through the sad hours which move 
so heavily. 

Let us look out for God's rays of 
comfort. There is never sorrow with- 
out its attendant comfort. Only we 
are often so deeply exercised and en- 
grossed with the sorrow, that we miss 



90 "Comtortetlx" 



the solace. We are so downcast, that 
we do not see the angel-form waiting 
by our side. We are too monopolized 
by grief to be aware of aught beside; 
and so the light fades from the land- 
scape unobserved, and the sweet singer, 
who had come to cheer us, steals un- 
noticed out of our homestead for 
want of a word of recognition, and a 
look of grateful acknowledgment. 

It is sometimes a mystery why we 
should be troubled as we are. Why is 
every chord of sorrow struck within 
us? Why do we surfer on so many 
sides of bur nature? Why are we 
touched in the property, which melts 
before our gaze; and in the home, which 
becomes darkened by death; and in the 
person, the body suffering, the heart 
lacerated and torn? Some go through 
life without all this. But they are 
not the noblest characters. No great 
picture has ever been produced with- 
out shadows lurking somewhere on the 



• 



Octo's Obetbobs. 91 

canvas. No master composer in music 
or poetry can touch the heart of 
humanity without having suffered first* 
But there is a yet deeper reason : some 
of us are permitted to pass through all 
kinds of tribulation, that God may 
have a chance of comforting us; and 
that we may learn the divine art of 
comfort, so as to "be able to comfort 
them which are in any trouble, by the 
comfort wherewith we ourselves have 
been comforted of God." 

Shall not this thought comfort us 
when we next pass through any sorrow? 
The one thing in sprrow which makes 
it sometimes almost unbearable is its 
apparent aimlessness. Why am I made 
to suffer thus? What have I done? 
Hush, impatient spirit ! thou art in 
God's school of sorrow for a special 
purpose. Be careful to notice how He 
comforts thee. Watch His methods. 
See how He wraps up the broken spirit, 
with touch so tender, and bandage so 



92 "Comfortetb/' 

accurately adjusted. Remember each 
text which He suggests — put them 
down so as not to be forgotten: there 
will come a time in your life when 
you will be called on to comfort an- 
other afflicted just as you are. Your 
special sorrow is sent because that 
which you will be called on to solace, 
will be of quite an unique and uncom- 
mon kind; and your comfort will be 
required. Without this special dis- 
cipline yourself, you would be totally 
non-plussed at the difficulty of your 
task; but you will have no difficulty 
henceforth. When the agonized heart 
comes to you and lays bare its grief, 
bitterly thinking that it is alone and 
incomprehensible in its anguish, it 
will be comforted by hearing that you 
have traversed the over-shadowed path- 
way, down the deep glen; and you will 
be able to tell out, step by step, the 
way in which God comforted you. 
O Christian . workers, who long to 



XCbe Constant Comtojter* 93 

become adepts in the art of minister- 
ing to souls diseased! — be not aston- 
ished if your education be long and 
costly. And since there is no one 
else to practice on, be prepared to 
find that God is teaching you how tcf 
comfort, by first giving you the pain, 
and then the comfort 'which is fitted 
to allay it. No tongue can tell the ten- 
derness of God. Only let us go to Him 
more freely; opening up the agony of our 
hearts. The very telling will relieve us. 
But in addition to this, we shall be 
sensible of delicate alleviations and 
palliatives, suggested by the ingenuity 
of a Divine tenderness, which will 
enable us to endure. And God is never 
wearied by our querulousness or pro- 
tracted sufferings. He lingers beside 
us through the years. He fainteth not, 
neither is weary. And this shall be 
true of every hour, however dark — and 
of every path, however rugged — 
"He comforteth us." 




XL 

Ube f oui*tf 0I6. Cluster* 

John x. 3. 4. 

>HE figure is borrowed from a fold 
in some mountain valley, where the 
flock has rested through the hours of 
darkness, protected from robbers by 
the deputy-shepherd {the porter), and 
from the wolves by the barriers of the 
enclosure. 

At last the morning arrives, and 
with it the shepherd. He comes to 
the portal. The porter knows his step, 
and voice, and knock; and opens to 
him without a moment's hesitation. 

The very sheep, more docile and 
sagacious than those of our northern 
climes, gave evident signs that they, 
too, know that their own true shep- 



"f>e calletb an& Xea&etb," 95 

herd has come, for "they hear his 
voice. 

The shepherd then proceeds to call 
them out by name. For each has some 
special name, often suggested by a de- 
formity or a peculiarity in its appear- 
ance. And as he mentions it, the 
bearer, proud to be noticed, comes 
from among the eager pressing crowd, 
and passes out from the fold to where 
the shepherd awaits it, beyond its con- 
taining walls. "He calleth his own 
sheep by name, and leadeth them out." 

Thus at last the whole flock emerge 
from the fold and stand there, in the 
wild mountain-pass; while the giant 
forms of the hills, hushed with un- 
broken silence, covered by blacken 
and gorse, and haunted by wild game, 
rise around. 

When the shepherd thus put forth 
his own sheep, "he goeth before them, 
and the sheep follow him; for they 
know his voice, And a stranger will 



96 TH>e tfoutytfolfc Cluster* 

they not follow, but will flee from 
him; for they know not the voice of 
strangers." It is said that cases 
of dispute about the ownership of 
sheep are still settled in the East by 
putting the flock in the midst of 3 
large field, and by letting the rival 
claimants call to them from opposite 
sides, it being a well-known fact that 
a sheep will always run to that side of 
the field on which the true shepherd 
stands. 

In all this there is an exquisite 
parable of the dealings of the Saviour 
with us. 

Who is there that does not know 
something of the shelter and comfort 
of the Fold? That home, with all its 
calm and happy associations; that 
situation, held so long that its duties 
have become a sort of second nature; 
that competence, hardly earned, and 
large enough to promise years of ease — 
these are instances of sheltering folds 



"Ibis ©wn Sbeep," 97 



in which we rest. But we may not 
rest in them forever. The grass about 
a fold is eaten down, and worn with 
incessant treading; and it is therefore 
very different to that which, bathed in 
dew, carpets the mountain sides. And 
so the true Shepherd comes at length, 
to bring us out of the fold to where 
the fresh, bright, mountain breezes 
breathe freely, and life is luxury in 
the exhilarating air. It is a matter 
of daily experience. Changes are 
permitted to pass and repass over our 
lives, -which break up our homes, 
scatter our nests, shatter our schemes, 
and drive us forth to the untried and 
novel experiences which we dread. 
But in all these changes there is 
always the personal presence and 
superintendence of the Good Shepherd, 
who neither slumbers nor sleeps. 

"He calleth His own sheep by name." 
It is a searching inquiry for us each 
— Am I one of His own sheep? For 



98 XCbe tfoutytfolfc Cluster* 

if that is settled in the positive, it in- 
volves an untold wealth and weight of 
blessing. Given to Him, in the eter- 
nal ages, by the Father; rescued from 
the wolf at the cost of the Shepherd's 
life; endowed with eternal life, so that 
they can never perish; safe within the 
hollow of the guarding hand of Jesus, 
from which neither man, nor devil, can 
pluck them forth; known intimately 
and familiarly by Him who loves un- 
utterably; led in to rest, as well as out 
to work — no mortal tongue can tell or 
human mind imagine all that Jesus is 
or does for those whom He designates 
as His own sheep. But this is clear 
and unmistakable, that the Good Shep- 
herd has an intimate and individual 
knowledge of us each. He knows us 
by our name. 

In the wilderness wanderings, the 
Almighty God uttered words to Moses 
which have ever seemed to me to in- 
volve a weight of meaning far greater 



Ube tfrten&sbtp ot 0ot>, 99 

than appears upon their surface. "And 
the Lord said to Moses, I will do this 
thing also that thou hast spoken: for 
thou hast found grace in My sight, 
and I know thee by name." There is a 
depth of significance in those words 
which cannot be expressed, and can 
only be realized by the glad soul to 
whom they are spoken. What inti- 
macy! what familiarity! what dignity 
and glory! None but a friend could 
call his friend by name! And what 
must it not be, to be the friend of 
the Deity itself! Yet all this is sure 
for any one of us, whom Jesus knows 
and calls by name. 

The prophet compares the starry 
hosts to a flock of sheep, scattered 
through the fields of space. "Lift up 
your eyes on high, and behold who 
hath created these, that bringeth out 
their host by number: He calleth 
them all by names, by the greatness of 
His might, for that He is strong of 



ioo TH>e tfoua^tolfc Clustej, 

power; not one faileth. " But surely 
one, for whom Christ died, is worth 
more to Him than all the hosts of 
heaven! And if the stars are so safe, 
because He is responsible to maintain 
and guide them, shall not we too be 
equally safe, whom He calleth by name? 
Would He have entered into such inti- 
mate relationship with us, if that were 
not to issue in an eternal union? 

There is one sure sign of the true 
sheep: "they know His voice. 1 * They 
can distinguish its sweet tones among 
all other sounds; and to hear is to obey, 
"He leadeth them out." In heaven He 
is said to feed the redeemed as a flock, 
and to lead them to living fountains of 
water; *'. e., from one fountain to 
another, deeper and deeper into the 
heart of Heaven. But this gracious 
ministry is equally His work on earth. 
He is always leading us out— out 
from the old into the new; out from 
the familiar to the untried; out from 



"f>e Ooetb JBefore Zbem" 101 

the attained to the unattained; out 
from experiences and confessions, which 
have become familiar, to the glorious 
possibilities of Christian living. These 
leadings come in many delicate and 
tender ways — by circumstances, by 
friendships, by books, by passages of 
Scripture; but when they come, it will 
well repay us to obey and follow. 
There is no experience in the Blessed 
Life into which Jesus will not lead us, 
if only we are faithful to the slightest 
intimation of His will. 

" He putteth forth His own sheep. " Ah, 
this is bitter work for Him and us — 
bitter for us to go; but equally bitter 
for Him to cause us pain. Yet it 
must be done. It would not be con- 
ducive to our true welfare to stay 
always in one happy and comfortable 
lot. He therefore puts us forth. The 
nest is broken up, that the young 
fledglings may be compelled to try 
their wings and learn to fly. The fold 



102 xtbe tfoutyfolfc Cluster* 

is deserted, that the sheep may wander 
over the bracing mountain slope. The 
labourers must be thrust out into the 
harvest; else the golden grain would 
spoil. Take heart! — it could not be 
better to stay, when He determines 
it otherwise. And if the loving hand 
of our Lord puts us forth, it must be 
well. On, in His name, to green past- 
ures, and still waters, and mountain 
heights! 

"He goeth before them. Whatever 
awaits us is encountered first by Him 
— each difficulty and complication; 
each wild beast or wilder robber; each 
yawning chasm or precipitous path. 
Faith's eye can always discern His 
majestic presence in front; and when 
that cannot be seen, it is dangerous to 
move forward. Bind this comfort to 
your heart : that the Saviour has tried 
for Himself all the experiences 
through which He asks you to pass; 
and He would not ask you to pass 



"f>e Ooefb JSefoje ttbem," 103 

through them unless He was sure that 
they were not too difficult for your 
feet, or too trying for your strength. 
The Breaker always goes up before us. 
The Woodsman hews a path for us 
through the trackless forest. The 
broad-shouldered Brother pushes a way 
for us through the crowd. And we 
have only to follow. 

This is the Blessed Life — not anxious 
to see far in front; not careful about 
the next step; not eager to choose the 
path; not weighted with the heavy 
responsibilities of the future: but 
quietly following behind the Shep- 
herd, one step at a time. 





XII. 

"©nr 0o& is a Consuming fffre," 

Hebrews xii. 29. , 

►HAT comfort there is in these 
words! Once they only filled us 
with alarm: now they are the tidings of 
great joy. 

It made a great difference, on the 
shores of the Red Sea, on which side 
of the cloud the hosts were placed. 
To be on the one side meant terror 
and dismay: "The Lord looked unto 
the host of the Egyptians through the 
pillar of fire and of the cloud, and 
troubled the host of the Egyptians." 
But to be on the other side mean com- 
fort and hope: "It was a cloud and 
darkness to them; but it gave light by 
night to these." Similarly, a great 



Ss a IRefiner's jffte, 105 

difference is made by our position to- 
wards God, as to whether the words at 
the head of this chapter will be a 
comfort or a cause of anxiety. If we 
are against God — enemies in our mind, 
by wicked works sinning against His 
gentle, Holy Spirit — we can look for 
little relief in considering the majestic 
symbolism of the passage. But if we 
are on His side, sheltered under His 
hand, hidden in the cleft of the Rock, 
conscious that we are in Him that is 
true — then we may rejoice with ex- 
ceeding great joy that "our God is a 
Consuming Fire." 

In Scripture Fire is the invariable 
symbol of God's nature and character. 
It was as a lamp of Fire that the 
Almighty passed between the pieces of 
Abraham's sacrifice. It was as fire, 
which needed not the wood of the 
acacia-bush for its maintenance, that 
He appeared to Moses in the wilder- 
ness, to commission him for his life- 



106 "H Consuming jffre," 

work. It was as fire that His pres 
ence shone on Mount Sinai, in the 
giving of the law. The Divine accept- 
ance of the sacrifices throughout the 
ancient ritual was betokened by the 
fire that fell from heaven, and fed 
upon the flesh of slain beasts. Mal- 
achi said that Christ would come as a 
refiner' s fire ; and when the forerunner 
announced His advent, he compared it 
to the work of the ruddy flame, which 
destroys and purifies: "He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost and with 
fire." "He will burn up the chaff 
with unquenchable fire. " It was, there- 
fore, also in perfect harmony with the 
entire range of scriptural symbolism, 
that the Pentecostal descent of the 
Holy Ghost was accompanied by 
cloven tongues, like as of fire. 

Of course, we must not, and would 
not, deny that there is a punitive and 
terrible side to all this. It is no light 
matter to persist in sin. "In flaming 



XCbe JEvil in tbe 1>ea$t 107 

fire." He will take "vengeance on 
them . . . that obey not the Gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ." "He is terri- 
ble in His doing toward the children of 
men." Fire — which is our most useful 
ally; which labours for us day and 
night in our furnaces and fire-places — 
is harmless and helpful, so long as we 
obey its laws and observe its condi- 
tions: but when once we disobey those 
laws, and contravene those conditions 
that which blessed begins to curse, and 
leaps forth upon us, carrying devasta- 
tion to all our works, so that . the 
smiling fields become a blackened 
waste, and our palaces a heap of ruins. 
So it is with the nature of God. H€ 
is gentle, loving, and forbearing: but 
if a sinner persists in sin, shutting 
his eyes to the light, and closing his 
heart to the love of God, then he 
must needs discover that "with the 
froward He will show Himself for- 
ward." "Kiss the Son, lest He be 



108 "fi Consuming jffre," 

i r~- 

angry, and ye perish from the way 
when His wrath is kindled but a little." 

But let us turn now to some of those 
gracious thoughts, which are enshrin- 
ed in this passage: 

Fire searches. Surely this is one of 
our greatest needs. There is so much 
of selfishness and sin in the very best 
of us. Sometimes we get a glimpse of 
what we are, and turn our thought 
swiftly away from the horrid spectacle. 
And what we ourselves dare not con- 
template, we carefully hide from the 
gaze of our tenderest friends. Ah, 
what pride, what vanity, what self- 
conceit, are ours! — fretful, if not suffi- 
ciently admired; jealous, if outshone; 
mean enough to take advantage of 
another, if only we can do it without 
being found out; capable of the same 
vile sins which flame out as beacon- 
lights in those who are not restrained 
by the same outward bonds as we are. 

No malioious critic with biting 



purification* 109 

words has ever touched the inveterate 
evil of our hearts, or said a tithe of 
the truth of us. We have never our- 
selves realized how bad we are. We 
need not be surprised at any further 
discoveries that may rise up to con- 
front us with shame and agony. But 
it is well to be searched. The ancient 
motto bade men know themselves. The 
discovery of what we are will drive 
us most quickly to God for His 
cleansing and grace. We need not 
wish to dwell upon our sins, as though 
health could come by considering dis- 
ease; but we may gladly accept the 
searching of the fire of God. Let us 
know the evil things that are within 
us. Let us be taught how much wood, 
hay, and stubble been have built on* that 
foundation, which has undoubtedly 
been laid in our hearts. Let us sub- 
mit to the discoveries of disease, 
which the stethoscope, the searching 
finger, the probing-knife, will disclose. 



no «b Consuming .^fre/' 

O God, who art as fire, search me 
and know my heart; try me and know 
my thoughts! 

Fire cleanses. Yonder metal is min- 
gled with many inferior ingredients: 
the earth, in which it has lain for 
centuries, clings to it; dross depre- 
ciates its value. But plunge it into 
the glowing furnace; raise the heat 
until the gleaming light is almost 
intolerable to the gaze; keep it in 
that baptism of flame — ere long the 
metal will be cleansed of its impuri- 
ties, freed from alloy, and fitted for 
any mould into which you may desire 
to pour it. Is it not thus that God 
will deal with us? He is a consum- 
ing fire. 

In the olden vision, when Isaiah 
lamented his uncleanness, there flew 
unto him one of the seraphim, who 
had taken a live coal from off the 
altar, which he laid upon his lips, say- 
ing, "Lo! this hath touched thy lips; 



iff re {Transforms* m 

— t . 

and thine iniquity is taken away, and 
thy sin purged." And will not God 
do as much for us again? We have 
been cleansed from the stains of our 
many transgressions: but do we not need 
this deep, this thorough, this fiery 
purification? 

There are three agents in purifica- 
tion — the Word of God; the Blood of 
the Son of God; and the Fire of God, 
which is the Holy Ghost. We know 
something of the two former: do we 
know the meaning of the latter? We 
have been purified by the Water and 
the Blood: have we passed also 
through the Fire? "He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Ghost, and with 
Fire" We cannot define, in so many 
words, the manner of this sacred 
operation — it is a matter for holy con- 
sciousness: but the heart knows when 
it has experienced it. It is not that 
temptation ceases to assail; or that 
there is no possibility of again yield- 



n2 "B Consuming fire," 

ir g to sin; or that the evil tendencies 
ol the old nature are eradicated: but 
that there is a burning up and con 
sumption of evil things which had 
been too long permitted to hold sway, 
and to mar the glory of the work of 
God in the heart. There is deliver- 
ance, where there was bondage; there 
is purity, where there was corruption; 
there is love, where there was malice, 
envy, ill-will. 

This blessed operation of the Holy 
Ghost may be experienced by those 
who will take no denial, and who by 
faith claim all that He waits to do for 
them. Let us, then, appropriate that 
expressive prayer of Wesley's hymnr 

"Refining Fire, go through my heart !" 

Fire transforms* That poker lying 
in your fender is hard, and cold, and 
black; but if you place it for a few 
moments in the heart of the fire, it 
becomes soft, intensely hot, and glow- 



iff re Transforms* 113 

ing with the whiteness of incandes- 
cence. Take it out again, and all its 
old qualities will re-assert themselves; 
but whilst in the fire, they cannot be 
manifested: the iron is transformed 
into the likeness of the flame in which 
it is bathed. 

Thus is it with ourselves. By nature 
we too are hard, and cold, and black; 
and the tendency of our nature will 
always be in these directions; waiting 
to re-assert itself, when left to its own 
devices. 

But if only we can for ever dwell 
with the devouring fire, and dwell 
with the everlasting burnings of the 
Love and Light and Life of God 
— a wonderful change will pass over 
us; and we shall be changed into the 
same image, from glory to glory. No 
longer hard, we shall be moulded 
into any shape He selects. No longer 
cold, we shall glow with love to God 
and man. No longer black, we shall 



H4 "B Consuming Jffje," 

be arrayed in the whiteness of a purity, 
which is that of intensest heat. 

Too long have we shrunk from the 
burning, fiery furnace, which is not 
sorrow, or trial, or pain — but God. 
Let us get into God. Let us open our 
nature, that God, the Holy Ghost, may 
fill us: then shall we become like 
Himself; our grosser natures shall 
seem to ascend to heaven in horses and 
chariots of flame. In God's Fire we 
shall become Fire. 








XIII. 

XTbe Spirit's ftefe 

Romans viii. 26. 
IfrN that sublime chapter, which 
T^. touches the whole gamut of the 
Blessed Life, from the first No Con- 
demnation to the final No Separation, 
we have a cluster of Present Tenses, 
which tell of the incessant working of 
the Holy Ghost. And we need to pon- 
der them well; because the crying 
need of the present day among Chris- 
tians, is a clearer apprehension of the 
gracious ministry of the Third Person 
in the ever-blessed Trinity. 

The spirit leads us (verse 14). 

This is a very dark and difficult 
world, in which we might soon lose our 
way, if we were left to ourselves with- 



n6 XTbe Spirit's 1>elp, 



out some inner voice to prompt us 
and direct our steps. And it would 
hardly be like our Heavenly Father to 
leave us to grope our way in the dark. 
Is it not just what we should have ex- 
pected, to find that the need is met by 
the inner promptings of the Holy 
Ghost? "Led by the Spirit of God" 
(verse 14). Those leadings may be 
given in the concurrence of events, in 
the call of circumstances, or in the 
application of some verse of Scripture 
to our hearts; but oftener still, per- 
haps, in that inner light, and that 
still, small voice, of which the secret 
heart is alone aware. 

These leadings are never withheld 
from any perplexed child of God who 
really needs them, and awaits them in 
unwavering expectancy. At first they 
may not be very distinct: but they will 
glimmer out into light. It is well to 
wait till they become perfectly clear. 
"The vision will come; it will not 



Xn>e Spirit's Witness* 1 1 7 

tarry." The only condition to be ful- 
filled by us is to divest our hearts of 
all prejudice and self-will; to wean 
ourselves from natural impulses, as 
little children; to hold ourselves open 
to take any course which He may sug- 
gest: and we shall know, by glad and 
certain experience, the leadings of the 
Holy Spirit. 

The Spirit bears witness that we are 
children of God (verse 16). 

The method of this witness has been 
often misunderstood. Men have list* 
ened for some mystic Voice, which 
should speak within their heart, say- 
ing, "Thou art a child." And because 
they have listened for it in vain, they 
have been ready to despair. But this 
blessed witness is rather an impression 
than a voice; a conviction wrought 
into the fabric or texture of the spirit; 
an assurance which, as the years go by, 
testing it, becomes a bulwark on 



n8 XLbc Spirit's 1>elp* 

which the waves of doubt break harm- 
lessly into clouds of spray. 

And the subject-matter of which the 
Spirit witnesseth is not, primarily, 
that we are children, but that God is 
our Father. He teaches us to call 
God "Father." He moulds our lips 
into the child-like cry, Abba* He 
compels us to launch away from the 
thought of our childship on to the 
ocean of His Fatherhood. Beneath 
His searching, God in Christ becomes 
infinitely lovable and delightful; per- 
fect love casteth out fear; the heart 
turns to Jehovah with the -freedom of 
a child to a father, and thus insensibly 
our attitude towards God becomes the 
best evidence that we are His children. 

The Spirit helpeth our infirmities 
(verse 26). 

Never do we feel them more than at 
the hour of prayer. Sometimes our 
thoughts scatter like a flock of sheep; 



XCbe Spirit' s Iteip* 1 1 9 

or flag and faint before the spiritual 
effort of stirring ourselves up to take 
hold on God. Who does not have 
times, when (to use Jeremy Taylor's 
similitude) prayer is like the rising 
of a lark against an east wind? We 
even tire in maintaining the attitude 
of devotion: and how much more its 
spirit! We know not what to pray 
for; we are ignorant of the best argu- 
ments to employ; we ask amiss; we 
cannot keep in the perpetual spirit and 
temper of devotion; we lack that calm 
faith, which can leave its burden at 
the mercy-seat, and be at rest. 

In all th!s the Spirit helpeth us. 
He "helpeth our infirmities." Know- 
ing the mind of God, He is aware of 
those things which it will please our 
Father to bestow, and which indeed are 
only waiting for us to ask them at 
His hand. These He suggests to us; 
for these He excites strong and pas- 
sionate desire; with respect to these 



i2o xcbe Spirit's Iteip, 



He leads us to pour out our souls in 
importunate and prevailing prayer. 
When next you are sensible of a 
mighty tide of desire rising up in 
your heart, bearing you forward on its 
bosom toward God, yield to it; let it 
have its blessed way with you. Though 
there be almost pain in the unuttera- 
ble passion of desire, dare not to re- 
strain it; for the Holy Spirit is then 
taking you up into the purposes of 
God, and is leading you to ask those 
things which lie near His heart, and 
which brood over you as clouds of 
blessing ready to break. This is true 
prayer: the attempt on the part of 
man to tell out the deep, unutterable 
thoughts, which the Spirit is inspir- 
ing within. 

The Spirit maketh intercession with 
groanings that cannot be uttered (verse 
26). 

Goethe said, that when he stood 
alone amid the scenes of nature, she 



XCbe Spirit's Iteip, 121 

seemed to be like an imprisoned cap- 
tive sighing to be redeemed. Some 
such thought seemed present to the 
Apostle, when he spoke of the groan- 
ing of creation, and the groaning of 
the saints. 

But how passing wonderful to be 
told of the groaning of the Spirit! — 
not the groans of death; but the travail 
groans of birth, ushering in a new crea- 
ation. Ah! no one can estimate the 
pain which our sins and sorrows cost 
God. "It grieved Him to His heart." 
"I know their sorrows." "In all their 
affliction, He was afflicted." And out 
of all this spring the intercessions 
which the Spirit maketh in and for the 
saints; and which sometimes almost 
break down the human spirit in which 
they strive for utterance. What do 
we not owe to those mighty and unut- 
terable pleadings? How many a time 
have they brought untold blessings 
into our hearts and lives! We did 



122 xcbe Spirit's Itelp* 

not realize their source: but had we 
realized it, we would have prized 
more gratefully those gentle yet 
hiighty operations. 

All the mightiest and saintliest of 
God's children have been most aware 
of the infinite distance between their 
noblest attainments in experience of 
prayer, and the ultimate splendour and 
fulness of God. The biography of 
one of the best is entitled "Confes- 
sions."* He knows little of the 
Christian life, who is always conscious 
of being able to express all he feels. 
The joy is sometimes unspeakable; 
the peace passeth all understanding. 

But all these are signs of the pres- 
ence of the Holy Spirit in the heart. 

And all He is doing there, unutterable 
and glorious as it is, is the outcome 
of the will of God, and therefore 
certain to be realized some day in fact. 

"He maketh intercession for the 
saints according to the will of god. m 

♦Augustine. 



iVV£VU£ f 



■7i\\7A\i. 



£ 




XIV. 

tCbe Spirit Xustetb against tbe 

riesb." 

Galatians v. 17. 

>E are not in the flesh; but the 
flesh is in us. This seems to be 

the incontrovertible testimony of 
Scripture and experience. 

Writing to the Galatian Christians, 
the Apostle makes use of an expres- 
sion which shows that, in his estima- 
tion, taught by the Holy Ghost, there 
was no eradication of the principle of 
the old nature, known as the flesh. He 
says: "The flesh lusteth against the 
spirit." Evidently, therefore, it was a 
matter of continual experience, with 
Him and t}*em: he speaks of it as a 



124 "TCbe Spirit Xustetb," 

matter concerning which there can be 
no dispute. 

Those who teach the eradication of 
the self -life, often beg the question by 
asking if God, who has done so much, 
could not also root out the old fleshly 
principle of the self-life. To this 
question there is but one answer: of 
course He could. But to ask the ques- 
tion is to raise a false issue. It is 
not what God can do, but what He 
chooses to do. And so far as I can 
understand the Bible, it does not teach 
that the eradication of the flesh is 
God's intention for us on this side of 
the gates of pearl. 

But this is God's intention, as 
clearly taught in Romans vi. — we who 
believe are accounted as one with 
Jesus: 

"One when He died; one when He rose; 
One when He triumphed o'er His foes; 
One when in heaven He took His seat, 
And Heaven rejoiced o'er Hell's defeat." 

Therefore, having died in Him, we 



"Hecfcon yourselves 2>ea&/' 125 

have, by death, passed out of the realm 
of sin. "He that is dead is freed from 
sin." In God's thought and intention, 
we are where Christ is, on the other 
side of death; and therefore for ever 
delivered from the bondage arid claims 
of sin. And now it is our duty by 
faith to make God's thought ours. 
We must reckon ourselves to be dead 
indeed unto sin, and alive unto God. 
It is not that the sin-principle (the 
old man) is dead in us; but we must 
be dead to it. Whenever it arises, 
we are to account ourselves as being 
insensible to its claims: as a corpse is 
to the tears of warm affection, or to 
the winsome embraces of a love that 
cannot part. 

Does not this command, Reckon your- 
selves dead, prove that the old man has 
not ceased to exist? If it had, then 
it would have been needless to reckon 
ourselves dead to it. The necessity 
of reckoning ourselves dead proves 



i26 "Gbe Spirit Xusfetb," 



that it is still present within us, re- 
quiring from us an attitude of con- 
stant denial and abhorrence and disre- 
gard. 

But how can we take up and main- 
tain' this attitude? It is an impossi- 
bility to those who have not learnt to 
live in the power of the Holy Ghost. 

Listen to these striking testimonies 
of Scripture: 

"The law of the spirit of life in 
Christ Jesus hath made me free from 
the law of sin and death." (Rom. 
viii. 2.) 

"If ye through the spirit do mor- 
tify the deeds of the body, ye shall 
live." (Rom. viii. 13.) 

"Walk in the spirit, and ye shall 
not fulfil the lust of the flesh." (Gal. 
v. 16.) 

We have also the assurance of the 
succeeding verse, that if the flesh 
lusteth against the Spirit, the Spirit 
lusts back again, and more mightily, 



flcsb an& Spirit 127 

against the flesh, so that we may not 
do the things which otherwise we 
should. (See Gal. v. 17, r. v.) How 
gladly may we dwell upon this glorious 
present tense! Where the Christian 
is living in the fullness of the Spirit, 
the flesh has no chance. It is within 
him; it may strive to entice him 
(James i. 14); it may even stretch out 
its hands in answer to the solicitation 
of the devil from without; but it is 
carefully watched by the Holy Ghost. 
Its every movement is resisted. It is 
kept down by His gracious energy. It 
is quelled so instantly that the spirit 
is hardly conscious of its strivings. 
And the power of the flesh, as the 
years go past, becomes so broken, that 
it is but the attenuated skeleton of its 
former self. Thus we are kept from 
doing what otherwise, and if left to our- 
selves, we should be certain to do. 
Nothing but the divine power of the 
Holy Ghost could keep us from being 



i28 "Gbe Spirit Xustetb," 



swept away before the lustings of the 
flesh. 

Some years ago, I lived in a house, 
the underground kitchen of which was 
so damp that, when we failed to keep up 
a vigorous fire, the floor was encrusted 
with white mould, so much so that the 
maid could fill her dust-pan with it; 
but when the fire was burning bright 
and warm, the bricks and walls were 
kept perfectly dry. There was always 
the latent tendency to produce damp; 
but it was kept in abeyance by the 
heat, so it could not do as it other- 
wise would. So when the Holy Ghost, 
as fire, works mightily within the 
heart, those tendencies to sin, which 
are, alas! natural to us, are overcome 
and thwarted, and kept in the place 
of death. 

In an infected house, the carbolic 
acid plentifully distributed in basins 
and on sheets acts as an antiseptic 
to the germs coming from the patient's 



XCbe Spfjft's 3n& welling 129 

body, so that they are prevented doing 
what otherwise they would to healthy 
subjects. The blessed Spirit is the 
antiseptic to the evil of the old nature. 

The Holy Ghost is in every Chris- 
tian. "If any man have not the Spirit 
of Christ, he is none of His." But in 
many He is cribbed into a narrow space ; 
confined in an attic or a cellar of their 
souls; and therefore He cannot do foi 
them what He would. If that has been 
so, and if, therefore, your life has been 
one of failure and disappointment, open 
every department and room of your be- 
ing to His gracious operations. 

And as mercury, when poured into a 
glass of water, will expel the water 
and take its place, so will the Holy 
Spirit take possession of your being, 
filling you, as on the day of Pentecost 
He filled the waiting disciples: and 
then He will dwell within you mightily; 
keeping pure and holy the body, 
which is His peculiar Temple. 



w/: 



?/W_ 




XV. 

Xllpbraf&etb Hot 

James i. 5. 

"tifS not that like God? It is much 
J|jfor Him to give; more for Him to 
give liberally; most for Him not to 
upbraid the suppliants — because it is 
just here that so many well-meaning 
men brush off the exquisite bloom 
from the luscious fruits of their gifts. 
We upbraid. We upbraid men that 
they are not more provident; that they 
come so often; that they ask so much. 
We make our aid the occasion for a 
reprimand or a lecture. We keep sup- 
pliants waiting until we have admin- 
istered the reproof which we imagine 
their case demands; or have reminded 
them of the many instances of past 



Jibe prctofgaL 131 

ingratitude and sin. But there is 
nothing like that in God. 

We may go to Him a thousand 
times in a single day; but He will 
never upbraid us with coming too 
often. We may go to Him with 
needs immense as the ocean's bed; 
but He will never upbraid us with 
asking too much. We may go to Him 
after years of ingratitude and neglect; 
but He will never upbraid us with the 
past. It will never be so much as 
mentioned by Him; though His loving- 
kindness will bring it more to our 
minds than His severest censures. 

What a blessing it was for the prod- 
igal that he did not meet his elder 
brother before his father! Had the 
two, by any sad mischance, met face 
to face in the field, it is certain that 
the ragged wanderer would never have 
gone another step. His brother would 
have upbraided him with leaving 
home, and wasting his patrimony, and 



1 32 "Tnpbrat&etb Hot/' 

coming back in so disgraceful a state. 
Assuredly he would not have killed 
the fatted calf; but he would have 
killed all hope in that sad and sin- 
stained soul. With one farewell 
glance at the dear old home, the peni- 
tent would have turned back to the 
far-country and the swine. Those up- 
braid ings would have broken the 
bruised reed, and quenched the smok- 
ing flax in densest midnight. 

But mercifully the prodigal first met 
his father, whose heart had never 
ceased to yearn for him, and whose 
eye strove against the blinding touch 
of grief and years, that it might still 
scan the road along which that prodi- 
gal child had gone. Was there up- 
braiding in his look or tone? Never! 
Was there upbraiding mingled with 
the first glad notes of welcome? Not 
a trace! Not a word about the long 
absence, the unbroken silence, the 
wasted wealth, the wild and evil life! 



0ot> fbe Olvet. 133 

If the son had had his way, he would 
have carried his confession to the end, 
and chosen for himself the servant's 
lot; but even in that he was stopped, 
and silenced with the warm rush of 
his father's love. "He gave liberally, 
and upbraided not. " 

This is a true picture of God. He 
gives, and gives again. He gives 
tears and blood. He gives His dar- 
ling and His All. And yet when men 
ask more, and demand from Him years 
of forbearance and patience, He still 
gives without flinching or chiding; in 
the firm desire to give the sinner no 
loop-hole for excuse, no ground for 
persistence in sin. 

Tender love has sometimes changed 
to gall; and turning on the one to 
whom once it clung, but who has 
abused its trust, has bitterly upbraided 
the neglect, the abuse, the cruelty of 
years, in words which sting like fire. 
But the love of Godbeareth all things, 



i34 "TUpbrat&etb Hot." 

believeth all things, hopeth all things, 
endureth all things — and "upbraideth 
not. " Do not stay away, then, because 
your heart condemns you, or because 
you have abused His gifts in the past: 
the only upbraidings you need fear are 
those that may be uttered by your own 
heart for not having come before. 

These words ("upbraideth not") were 
principally spoken in reference to 
our need of wisdom — an incessantly 
recurring need! We are as little 
children groping in the dark. We 
have never before been along this road. 
We are daily being tested by difficul- 
ties we cannot master, and problems 
we cannot solve. How can we thread 
our way through a maze so intricate as 
this wondrous human life? Where 
is the man who is so reliant on his 
own sagacity as to be perfectly able 
to trust his own decisions? Do we 
not need some wise and ever-accessible 
Mentor and Friend, who shall teach 



TIBllB&om Oiven. 135 

us just how to act when the road forks, 
and the sign-posts are wanting? 

What a comfort, then, it is to know 
that whenever we lack wisdom we may 
come to God for it! We may have 
come very often before; but we may 
come again. We may need a great 
deal of patient teaching; but we need 
not be abashed. We may be very 
stupid, and require to have things put 
very simply and clearly, as to an idiot 
child; but God will never count the 
trouble one whit too much. We may 
not have previously acted on the ad- 
vice given us; but we may come again, 
as though for the first time, sure of 
a hearty welcome, a sympathetic hear- 
ing, a liberal supply of wisdom. "He 
upbraideth not." 

The wisdom may not be given in 
advance, or in the form we might have 
thought; but it will be given just 
when the answer must be returned, or 
the step taken. It shall be given in 



136 "Tflpbraf&etb Hot." 

the strong impression on the heart; in 
the clear conviction of duty; in the 
concurrence of circumstances; in the 
indication of slight symptoms which 
could only be discerned by the eye 
fixed steadfastly or the* eye of God. 
"It shall be given. ' None will be 
able to gainsay, or refute, or resist the 
wisdom thus bestowed. It will be 
like that gift whose presence in Solo- 
mon instantly betrayed itself to the 
world. "They saw that the wisdom 
of God was in him." 

And the time will never come, when 
in this or any other respect, there shall 
be any lack to those who seek the 
Lord ; for 

'He giveth to all liberally, 
and upbraideth not." 



=*5 





XVI. 

"Bll XTbtnQB Ere Kouxs," 

i Corinthians iii. 21. 
LL things serve the man that serves 
Jesus Christ, the great Servant of 
God. That seems to be something 
like the meaning of the words with 
which St. Paul closes his argument 
here. We may not follow now the suc- 
cessive steps of that argument, which 
has been forged in his glowing heart; 
but we may appropriate this sublime 
conclusion: "All are yours; and ye 
are Christ's; and Christ is God's." 

The primary thought is not posses- 
sion or proprietorship; for though 
that is true of the relation between us 
and Christ, it is not true of the rela- 
tion between Christ and the Father. 



138 "Hll ZbitiQB are ^ours," 

And evidently these clause-links are 
constructed upon the same model, be- 
cause those whom they connect stand 
in the same relation to one another. 
What then, is that common relation 
which binds all things to us, in the 
same way as we are bound to Christ, 
and Christ to God the Father? 

There is but one common ground 
on which these clauses stand; and that 
is Ministry, or service — the golden 
thread that runs through all creation, 
making it one. The ancient fable 
told that all things were bound by 
golden chains about the feet of God: 
and surely the real, deep connection of 
which the fable spoke is to be found 
in the service which each lower order 
of creation renders to the one above — 
the service becoming rarer and more 
refined as the pyramid of existence 
tapers to a point. 

As the Son of Man, our Lord was 
aiso the Servant of God. " Behold My 



"Mb one tbat Sen>etb," 139 

Servant whom I uphold." "The God 
of our fathers hath glorified His Serv- 
ant Jesus." (Acts iii. 13, r. v.) And 
His august service is surely sketched 
in words which foretell that He will 
put down all rule and authority, and 
power, and deliver up the Kingdom to 
God, even the Father. He was amongst 
men "as one that serveth. " But His 
service is continued still. He girds 
Himself with a towel to wash our 
feet; He breaks again the bread of 
His own life, and puts to our lips the 
chalice of His own blood, He busies 
Himself in our cares, and wants, and 
work. And in ministering to us, He 
is surely fulfilling also the will of the 
Father, with whom He is one — God as 
well as man, in the ever-blessed Trin- 
ity. In such senses the life of our 
blessed Lord is even now one of in- 
cessant ministry. 

In this same sense, we are His serv- 
ants- "Ye are Christ's." We are, of 



140 "Hll ZbitiQB are H>ou$s/' 

course, His, in the sense of being 
owned by Him: He made us; He 
bought us; He claims us. But how 
many of us resemble Onesimus, the 
runaway slave of Philemon! — who 
probably bdre the brand of his master, 
and had certainly been purchased by 
his gold; but who withheld from him 
his service, following the bent of his 
own wayward will, and herding with 
the most abandoned of the populace, 
that rotted in the criminal quarters of 
ancient Rome. We too have been 
bought by the Lord, at priceless cost; 
but we are far from serving Him with 
the same sort of loyal and whole- 
hearted ministry with which He, in 
His unwearied solicitude for us, serves 
God. 

We know little of those high themes 
which now engross Him; but we can 
understand a little better the aims 
and character of His early life. Let 
us take these as our model, day by 



" IRabbont ! " hi 

day. He had no plan or pattern of 
His own, but was content to work out 
the will of His Father: let us work 
out His will, hourly suggested to us. 
He, as it were, suppressed His own 
glorious Self, that the Father who 
dwelt in Him might work through 
Him: let us no longer live, but let 
Christ live His life in us. He sacri- 
ficed all, that He might finish the 
work of Him who sent Him: let us 
count nothing too great a sacrifice if 
only we may hear Him say, "Well 
done, good and faithful servant!" In 
these and in many ways we may make 
His service a model of our own. Nay, 
better still, we may let Him repeat 
His life of ministry through us, and 
fulfil in us His perfect ideal. 

But whenever we get into this right 
attitude towards our Lord Jesus we 
shall find that all things begin to 
minister to us in a constant round of 
holy service. Each event or circum- 



i42 "HU ZbttiQS aje JXjovlvb." 

stance in life becomes an angel, laden 
with blessed helpfulness, bringing to 
us the gifts of our beloved Master. 

That title, "Rabboni, Master," the 
sweetest name by which the prostrate 
soul can address its Saviour, does 
not degrade or demean it; but enables 
it, like the babe Christ, to be the 
recipient of costly presents sent from 
afar — gold and spices, frankincense, 
and myrrh. If you have been chafing 
at your lot, thinking that time and 
things are robbing you, you may be 
sure that you are not as you should be 
towards Christ; and the true cure will 
be to get as a slave to His feet. Then 
all things will be "yours" in this 
deep sense. 

11 Whether Paul, or Apollos, or 
Cephas" Each of these names stands 
foi a distinct species of teaching — 
the argumentative, the eloquent, the 
hortative. Do not pass any of them by; 
from those with whom you have least 



"©c Xife, or 2>eatb." 143 

sympathy, you may glean something. 
Each disciple brings some bits of 
bread and fish. Each stone flashes 
some colour needed by the prism to 
effect the beam of perfect light. Each 
flower may furnish some ingredient for 
the common store of honey. 

"Or the world. " This is our school, 
hung with maps, and diagrams, and 
simple lessons. There is not a single 
flower, nor a distant star, nor a mur- 
muring brooklet, nor a sound sweet or 
shrill; there is not a living creature, 
or a natural process, that may not 
serve us; not only by meeting some 
appetite of sense, but of teaching us 
such deep lessons as those which 
Jesus drew from the scenes around 
Him, saying, "The kingdom of heaven 
is like. 

" Or life, or death: When life is 
lit up in some new young being, it may 
seem to involve you in a perpetual 
service, for which you obtain no 



144 "BU TTbtngs are JXjovlvs." 

adequate return. But this is in the 
outward seeming only: there is a yet 
deeper sense in which that tiny babe 
ministers to you; in suggesting deeper 
thoughts of life, and its meaning and 
destiny; in revealing to you something 
of the tie between God and your own 
soul, which calls Him Father. And 
death, though it appear to rob you, 
really enriches you — by making perma- 
nent feelings of resignation, arid trust, 
and anticipation, which are t not natural 
to man. 

"Or things present, or things to 
cotne." How quickly the incidents of 
daily life are gliding over us! and as 
they pass, to our weak gaze they steal 
from us so much that we hold dear — 
the elastic step, the clear vision, the 
strong nerve, the beloved friend, the 
hard-earned gold. 

Sometimes the}' manifestly enrich us. 
For the young there is a constant sense 
of acquisition. One good and perfect 



Hbot>e Circumstances* 145 

gift follows swiftly on the heels of 
another. But when we have crossed the 
summit of life's hill there is an inces- 
sant consciousness of loss. 

Yet, in God's sight, and in the 
spiritual realm, these distinctions van- 
ish and pass away as mists under the 
touch of the sun: and we find that all 
incidents come to bless us; all winds 
waft us to our haven; all tribes bring 
their tribute into the throne-room of 
our inner being. 

We are not the creatures of circum- 
stances; but their masters, their kings, 
their lords. All these things are the 
servants and tutors appointed by our 
Father, to wait on and minister to us, 
His heirs. 

"All things are yours. " 




XVII. 

TKflorfttng XCogetber for <&oo&* 

THE KEEN SIGHT OF LOVE. 
Romans viii. 28. 
•T is not given to all men to look 
.behind the phenomena of daily life, 

and to see into the methods and pur- 
poses of God. This is the prerogative 
of those who love. 

Love is quick to catch the meaning 
of a hint, a gesture, a whisper. Love 
has an instinctive apprehension of 
secrets, too deep for words to convey. 
Love can afford to wait the unfolding 
of those deepest thoughts, which eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, nor the 
heart of man conceived. Love is the 
befitting atmosphere in which the 
Spirit of Love can brood, who is also 



Sett*5earcbfng, 147 

the spirit of knowledge and revelation, 
and who teacheth as none other can. 
If you would know, you must love. 

Do you love? Can you answer with- 
out a moment's doubt the question — 
"Lovest thou Me?" The materials for 
the answer cannot be discovered in 
emotion or ecstacy, which may some 
day disappear — as light dying off the 
hills; or a tropical stream suddenly 
absorbed into the volcanic hollows 
beneath its bed. Not there, but here, 
is there a growing sense of God's 
personal love to you, and of His pa- 
rental care? Are you more sensitive 
to the presence of sin in yourself and 
others? Do His commandments in- 
spire you with a more quiet and entire 
obedience? His day — His book — His 
people — are these more to you than 
once the scenes of worldly pleasure? 
If so, you love Him; and that love 
will grow. 

And as it grows in lengthening 



i 4 8 TKflorfting XCogetber for ©oo&. 

years, you will become aware that, 
after all, it is not yours, but His — the 
reflection of His love, the beam of 
His love, which has smitten your heart 
and been flashed off; as a ray of sun- 
shine will sometimes strike a pane in 
the window of a distant cottage, and 
shine there as a point of light, seen 
from the distance of many miles. It 
is the outcome of His eternal pur- 
pose, which he purposed in Himself in 
the eternal ages. Oh, marvellous 
origin of the love of our poor hearts, 
which has wrought through our calling; 
and has effected such a result in those 
who otherwise had been loveless in- 
deed — unloving and unloved! 

Love discerns the working of God's 
plan when all seems most still. 

" We know that things work* " How- 
ever stationary the stars appear to be 
in the blue heavens, we know that they 
are really sailing onward, with great 



Silent progress, 149 

velocity, in their destined courses. 
The ocean may seem to sleep at our 
feet, but in reality it is in a state of 
incessant activity; its tides and cur- 
rents perpetually passing to and fro 
on their appointed ministries. There 
is not a silent nook within the deep- 
est forest glade, which is not the scene 
of marvellous activity, though detected 
only by the educated sense of the 
naturalist. 

So there are times when our lives 
lack variety and incident. The stream 
creeps sluggishly through the level 
plain. Monotony, common-place, dull 
routine, characterize our daily course. 
We are disposed to think that we are 
making no progress; learning no fresh 
lessons; standing still as the sun over 
Gibeon; or going back as the shadow 
on the dial of Ahaz. The child gets 
impatient, because every day it has to 
play the same scales. 

Then love steps in, and sees that God 



i5° Worfctng XCogetbcr for (Book 



is busily at work, maturing His de- 
signs, and leading the life forward, 
though insensibly, into regions* of 
experience, which surpass all thought. 
The day is breaking; the ice is giving; 
the picture is advancing; things are 
moving. God is working all things 
after the counsel of His own will. 

Love discerns the comprehensive- 
ness of God's plan. 

" We know that all things work* " 
Men are fond of distinguishing be- 
tween general and particular provi- 
dences. They are willing to acknowl- 
edge the finger of God in some striking 
event; or in the swift flashing out of 
God's sword of justice. They do not 
hesitate to admit that life as a whole 
is under God's direction; but they 
hesitate to say that He is concerned 
with its ordinary common-places, value- 
less as the sparrow's fall, slight as 
the hair of the head. Miles if you 
like; but not steps. 



In Oob's f>anfc* 151 

^— — * 

But love refuses to believe this 
teaching. It looks on it as practical 
atheism. It feels that God cannot af- 
ford to let the thread of its life pass 
from His hands for a single moment. 
The fabric of the character cannot for 
an instant be taken from God's 
looms. The moment when God ceased 
to hold a work would be the moment 
of irreparable wreckage and harm. 
Besides, love refuses to believe that its 
destinies can be absent from the hand 
and heart of God, though but for the 
twinkling of an eye; or that a single 
thing could happen except as He plan- 
ned, and determined, and permitted. 
Her quick eye sees Him ever about her 
path, and her lying down, and ac 
quainted with all her ways. 

The spirit thus seems no longer to 
deal with persons and things; but 
only with God. It sees no more second 
causes; because its range of view is 
filled by the Great First Cause. It 



152 TKaor fttng XCogetbet for ©oofc* 

— i i 

finds the will of God, si ther permitting 
or enacting, in every event, however 
trivial, that crosses its path. Every- 
thing becomes the vehicle through 
which God comes near and speaks; 
everything is intended for some wise 
and loving purpose; everything is one 
of the turns of the wheel in the hand 
of the great Potter, who is fashioning 
rough clay into a vessel for the royal 
palace. 

Love discerns the harmony of 
God's plan. 

" We know that all things work to- 
gether." To the eye of sense, things 
seem contrary the one to the other: 
the North wind against the South; the 
frost against the spring's outburst in 
bud and blossom; tears against smiles. 
But love detects the harmony of all 
things; and sees that they work to- 
gether like the wheels of some huge 
machinery, which revolve in different 
directions, cog in cog, but which are 



XCbe Great pbpstcian, 153 

hastening forward an identical result. 

When the physician has prescribed 
some medicine, you go to the chemist 
to have it made up; and he takes one 
ingredient from this phial, and another 
from that, and another from elsewhere: 
any one of these, taken alone, might 
kill you outright ; but when they have 
been well compounded and mixed, they 
work together for a perfect cure. 

Do not ask in dark suspicion how 
this one thing can be for your good. 
Wait to see the other things with 
which the great Physician is about to 
balance it. There are wondrous com- 
pensations in His dealings with His 
children. It is not one thing by itself; 
but one thing put with another thing, 
and that with a third, and that with 
a fourth, and all these together, that 
work your good. 

You cannot see the beauty in those 
sombre tints; but wait till they are 
relieved by dashes of colour. You 



154 TKaorftiitQ XCogetber for (Book 

shiver before the wintry blast; but that 
will work with summer zephyrs to 
produce the autumn fruit. You refuse 
to be comforted beneath some afflict- 
ing blow; but if you can only hush 
your impatience till you seethe bless- 
ing with which it is to be combined, 
you will feel that it was well worth 
your while to have the bitter, if it were 
needed, as the basis of a wine of life, 
so sweet to the taste. 

Love discerns the benevolence of 
God's plan. 

" We know that all things work together 

for good." Disastrous indeed, and 

adverse, does God's Providence some- 

times seem. Stroke on stroke. Blow on 

* 
blow. Tidings on tidings of dismay. 

And as the loved ones carry Lazarus 

to the grave, though they dare not 

speak out what they think, they cannot 

help feeling it to be a little hard that 

they should be allowed to suffer thus, 

by One who had never been known to 



Jfaitb an& Xo\>e* 15s 

tarry, when sickness or death needed 
His help. Can all this be for good? 
What good can such things bring? 

Then Faith comes to the aid of 
Love, and reasons of God's Love and 
Faithfulness. He gave His Son: can 
He withhold any good thing? He is 
good: can He give aught but good and 
perfect gifts? He loves: can He per- 
mit any hurt to come to those who are 
dear to Him as the blood of Calvary? 
Have not all His dealings in the past 
been only good? Is not the united 
testimony of the saints of all ages to 
the invariable beneficence of His deal- 
ings, when they have been allowed to 
work themselves out to their golden 
conclusion? Does not the Word of 
God guarantee the "peaceable fruit of 
righteousness" to those who Submit 
lovingly to His chastisement? 

And thus Love is reassured, and 
looks away from the discipline to the 
face of Him that uses the scourge; 



156 Worfctng Zogetbet for ©oofc* 

and as she watches it closely, she sees 
beneath the frown, which He wears as. 
a visor, the glances of answering love, 
the falling of pitying tears. It is 
hard for Him to maintain the disguise. 
He could not do as He does unless He 
loved with a love which is wise, and 
firm, and strong, just because it is so 
deep. And thereafter love does not 
hesitate to pronounce of everything, 
however dark: "Even so, Father: it 
seemeth good to Thee, and it is also 
good to me." 

Even in this life we may live to 
reap the far-off harvest of good, the 
product of the sowing of tears. But 
if not, we may surely reckon on doing 
so in that world where God will un- 
veil to us His plan; and tell us His 
reasons; and explain to us His 
hidden meaning; and wipe away all 
tears from our eyes. 






* 




XVIII. 

5 am tbe jf ttst an& tbe Xast 

Revelation i. 17. 

»E have attempted an impossible 
task in discussing the theme 

which has stood at the head of this 
series of articles. And so at last we 
relinquish our attempt, declaring our- 
selves defeated — and well we may; be- 
cause God lives in the Present Tense: 
He is the I Am: He knows not a Past, 
and anticipates no Future: He is the 
same yesterday, to-day, and forever. 

All His dealings and promises move 
on the pivot of the word now: and 
therefore, to discuss the Present Tenses 
of the Blessed Life — is to attempt to 
pour the ocean of His infinity into the 
narrow earthen cup, which we have 



158 "Zbc Jffrst an& ttbe last." 



held to the thirsty lips of His chil- 
dren in these few chapters. 

And yet, as we turn away from our 
unworthy attempt, we cannot forbear 
saying a few broken words on one of 
the noblest of them all; and one which 
seems to comprehend them all, as a 
ray of sunlight comprehends, inter- 
woven in its texture, the seven-fold 
beams which make up the prismatic 
band. 

It was the lone isle of Patmos, 
washed by the iEgean : the light of the 
sun seemed brighter to the exiled Apos- 
tle, because it shone upon the day of 
resurrection: and as he thought of the 
loved circle, which was meeting on 
the other side of the dissevering sea, 
and longed for the world where the sea 
should be no more, he was startled by 
the glory of a light beyond that of the 
meridian sun: and there stood before 
him the form of One on whose bosom 
he had leaned in earlier days, with 



"JSefore HU TLbing*." 159 

confiding love; but who was now mar- 
vellously and gloriously changed. 

That voice, which once faltered in 
dying agony, had in it a volume of 
sound like many waters. The face once 
marred with bitter anguish, shone as 
the sun. Those feet once nailed to the 
bitter cross, were bright with the glory 
of burnished brass. In those hands 
that once were bound by cruel thongs, 
glistened the stars of the Churches. 
Whilst the breast on which St. John 
had been wont to lean, was girt about 
with the insignia of the dignity of His 
office* Was it wonderful that the be- 
loved Apostle fell at His feet as one 
dead, and needed to be raised by those 
hands and re-assured by that voice? 

What music there was in those 
words! — "Fear not: I am the First and 
the Last!" What infinite conceptions 
cluster around those simple words, far- 
reaching as eternity, and infinite as 
God! Jesus Christ is the sum of all 



160 "Zbe jfirst an& Ube %astr 

being\ the alphabet of all existence; 
the Creator and the Final Cause of alj 
creation. "He is before all things;" 
and "fo/ His pleasure they are and 
were created." The first germ of be- 
ing was originated by His creative 
hand; and when this frame of nature 
has run its course, and fulfilled its 
purpose, it is He who will speak the 
word of dissolution, and bid it cease, 
and sink back into the nothingness 
from which it came. 

Is He not equally the First and the 
Last in the Scheme of Redemption? 
When the first thought of it arose 
in the heart of God (speaking after 
the manner of men), Christ was there. 
Every step in the unfolding of the 
mighty scheme bears the mark of His 
finger. No other hand has been per- 
mitted to intrude into the execution 
of this masterpiece of Love. He laid 
the foundations of salvation in the 
depths of His agony; and every sue- 



"Jfearflotr 161 



ceeding course in the structure has 
been laid by Him: and He will bring 
forward the top- stone, amidst shout- 
ing of "Grace, Grace unto it!" 

And this is also true in the history 
of our personal salvation. It was He 
who originated the first desire for 
better things — as the first ray of light 
in the chaos of the primeval ages. And 
it is to His grace that we must attrib- 
ute every virtue we possess; every holy 
aspiration; and every blessed lesson in 
the divine life. Yes, and beneath His 
hand we are to develop in growing 
years, till we come to the dividing- 
line between time and eternity: then 
He who was the Author of faith in us, 
will be its Finisher; His face will 
shine as the bright day-star heralding 
the eternal morning. And whatever 
height of blessedness we attain, He 
will ever be before us, as a something 
beyond our highest attainment, beck- 
oning us forward: for He must ever 



1 62 «Gbe first atrt> JSbt Xast 



tt 



be the Last to those for whom He has 
been the First. 

"Fear not! " says this Glorious One. 
"Fear not! you will need nothing out- 
side of Me. Fear not! I am all- 
sufficient. Fear not! all others may 
drop away, leaving you as the sole 
survivor of your generation: but I will 
be always the same, and remain with 
you to the last. Fear not! Time, and 
Life, and Earth, may pass away; but 
I will be at the end of all, as I was 
at the beginning. All things seen may 
dissolve as the phantasmagoria of 
cloud and, from which the hues of 
sunset have faded; but I shall remain, 
as the Rock of Eternity, which can 
never move from its solid base, or 
know the shadow of a change. Fear 
not! Fear not! Fear not! I will never, 
never leave thee; I will never, no 
never, no never, forsake thee!" 

Oh, who shall fear, when He stands 
by, uttering such words as these! 



Hlpba an& ©mega. 163 

But before we can derive from them 
their full weight of comfort, we need 
f:o make Him the First and the Last 
of every enterprise; of every act of 
every day — aye, of every hour. Let 
everything be begun, continued, and 
ended, in Him. Let His counsel be 
sought on the threshold; His succour 
on the prosecution; and His blessing 
at the close. Let Him be the star of 
every morning and of every eve. No 
man need fear when that is so; for He 
is impregnable. We may well fear 
when we step out on a new enterprise, 
or initiate a new scheme, or begin a 
new day, without Him; and close 
without His benediction of peace. 

But when He is the Alpha and 
Omega of all; First, and Last, and 
Midst; "all and in all"; then heart 
may fail, and flesh may faint, and diffi- 
culties gather; but the spirit may 
still press on with undaunted courage, 
whilst He whispers "Fear not! " 



V> 




