a


Wiraeingiese
Go


Su nmeie
Kaas


MOBERGEBR ESO GEG:


POSCU alone c


GMM Gee cel needs


Pept


Deen ie


BOMGeoueK


SECON


Ot


oe


BGs


ir) sohchas
totecape eetaponeerie
: opal wunea tated aecat
wanedeibapuuuas
MASI ahcainbuEednehun
ep ator ols


Sadaiew
nian
Neadatene


HeMNouean) seLskedan ute


Wahegdecy.
basausleand


aiden


Baia sc tie
vente ginited

Bareeotn

OL Le


Rea es
ear


eisera-
a


pape
geastnes


“atukts
ites
t


Sites
ac eanaas


ii doereltaaiy
youu


seognigoay
te
SitelhiGyacniqius


te


heilandostdeniguaucs


HA jonetiee
Byenatibid asl
idviseerge


NaN ab early


ignigts
eUatern gy


Sealy
NGA bet


De tal eleetirrat ccs


dean)


Wd LD castle lids riiatien


ahs
Sat
Saree


5


ee


ei
fe PDO EEOpS


Peepers
ce
vee


A
oe


THE


PULPIT COMMENTARY,


EDITED BY THE


VER VeREV t= DiMO SPENCE D.D.,


DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ;


AND BY THE


REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.


WITH
INTRODUCTIONS
BY THE


VEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.—RIGHT REV. H. COTTERILL, D.D.
F.R.S.E.—_VERY REY. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.—REY. CANON G.
RAWLINSON, M.A.—REYV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D.


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY


NEw YORK AND TORONTO.


THE


PULPIT COMMENTARY,


EDITED BY THE
VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,
DEAN OF GLOUCESTER;
AND BY THE


REV a OSERH)S EXELL MA.


UWA AD Se base i dfey


Exposition :
By REV. W. J. DEANE, M.A.,


RECTOR OF ASHEN ;


fjoniletics :


By REV. T. WHITELAW, D.D.


fjomilies by Various Anthors:


REV. PROF. J. R. THOMSON, M.A. REV. W. CLARKSON, B.A.
REV. J. WILLCOCK, M.A., B.D.


FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY


New YORK AND TORONTO,


&
XY


KCCLESTASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.


— tee


INTRODUCTION.


=O =


§ 1. Trrte or rae Book.


Tae book is called in the Hebrew Koheleth, a title taken from its opening
sentence, “The words of Koheleth, the son of David, King in Jerusalem.”
In the Greek and Latin Versions it is entitled ‘ Ecclesiastes,’ which Jerome
elucidates by remarking that in Greek a person is so called who gathers
the congregation, or ecclesia. Aquila transliterates the word, KwA¢0 ; what
Symmachus gave is uncertain, but probably Haporpiacrys, ‘ Proverb-monger.’
The Venetian Greek has ‘H’ExxAyoudorpia and ‘H "ExxdAyordfovea. In modern
versions the name is usually ‘ Ecclesiastes; or, The Preacher.’ Luther
boldly gives ‘The Preacher Solomon.’ This is not a satisfactory rendering
to modern ears; and, indeed, it is difficult to find a term which will
adequately represent the Hebrew word. Koheleth is a participle feminine
from a root kahal (whence the Greek xaAéw, Latin calo, and English “ call”),
which means, “ to call, to assemble,” especially for religious or solemn pur-
poses. The word and its derivatives are always applied to people, and not
to things. So the term, which gives its name to our book, signifies a female
assembler or collector of persons for Divine worship, or in order to addres:
them. It can, therefore, not mean “Gatherer of wisdom,” “ Collector oi
maxims,” but “‘ Gatherer of God’s people” (1 Kings viii. 1) ; others make it
equivalent to “Debater,” which term affords a clue to the variation of
opinions in the work. It is generally constructed as a masculine and with-
out the article, but once as feminine (ch. vii. 27, if the reading is correct),
and once with the article (ch. xii. 8). The feminine form is by some
accounted for, not by supposing Koheleth to represent an office, and therefore
as used abstractedly, but as being the personification of Wisdom, whose
business it is to gather people unto the Lord and make them a holy
congregation. In Proverbs sometimes Wisdom herself speaks (e.g. Prov. i.
20), sometimes the author speaks of her (eg. Prov. viii. 1, etc). So
KOOLESIASTES. 6


ii INTRODUCTION TO


ee


Koheleth appears now as the organ of Wisdom, now as Wisdom herself,
supporting, as it were, two characters without losing altogether his identity.
At the same time, it is to be noted, with Wright, that Solomon, as personi-
fied Wisdom, could not speak of himself as having gotten more wisdom
than all that were before him in Jerusalem (ch. i. 16), or how his heart had
great experience of wisdom, or how he had applied his heart to discover
things by means of wisdom (ch. vii. 23, 25). These things could not be
said in this character, and unless we suppose that the writer occasionally
lost himself, or did not strictly maintain his assumed personation, we must
fall back upon the ascertained fact that the feminine form of such words
as Koheleth has no special significance (unless, perhaps, it denotes power
and activity), and that such forms were used in the later stage of the
language to express proper names of men. Thus we find Sophereth,
“scribe” (Neh. vii. 57), and Pochereth, “hunter” (Ezra ii. 57), where
certainly males are intended. Parallels are found in the Mishna. I, as is
supposed, Solomon is designated Koheleth in allusion to his great prayer
at the dedication of the temple (1 Kings viii. 23—53, 56—61), it is strange
that no mention is anywhere made of this celebrated work, and the part he
took therein. He appears rather as addressing general readers than
teaching his own people from an elevated position; and the title assigned
to him is meant to designate him, not only as one who by word of mouth
instructed others, but one whose life and experience preached an emphatio
lesson on the vanity of mundane things.


§ 2. AurHor axp Dare.


The universal consent of antiquity attributed the authorship of Ecclesi-
astes to Solomon. The title assumed by the writer, “ Son of David, King
in Jerusalem,” was considered sufficient warrant for the assertion, and no
suspicion of its uncertainty ever crossed the minds of commentators and
readers from primitive to medisval times. Whenever the book is referred
to, it is always noted as a work of Solomon. The Greek and Latin Fathers
alike agree in this matter. The four Gregories, Athanasius, Ambrose,
Jerome, Theodoret, Olympiodorus, Augustine, and others, are here of one
consent. The Jews, too, although they had some doubts concerning the
orthodoxy of the contents, never disputed the authorship. The first to
throw discredit upon the received opinion was Luther, who, in his ‘Table
Talk,’ while ridiculing the traditional view, boldly asserts that the work
was composed by Sirach, in the time of the Maccabees. Grotius followed
in the same strain. In his ‘Commentary on the Old Testament’ he unhesi-
tatingly denies it to be a production of Solomon, and in another place assigns
to it a post-exilian date. These opinions attracted but little notice at the
time; but towards the clcse of the last century, three German scholars,
Déderlein, Jahn, and Schmidt, revived the objections urged by Luther and
Grotius, and henceforward a continuous stream of criticism, opposed to the


ECCLESIASTES; OB, THE PREACHER, i


earlier tenet, has flowed forth both in England, America, and Germany.
The array of writers on both sides is enormous. The discussion has evoked
the energies of innumerable controversialists, though the opponents of
Solomon have in late years far outnumbered his supporters. If the more
ancient opinion is upheld by Dr. Pusey, Bishop Wordsworth, Mr. Johnston,
Mr. Bullock, Motais, Gietmann, etc., the later view is strongly supported
by Keil, Delitzsch, Hengstenberg, Vaihinger, Hitzig, Nowack, Renan, Gins-
burg, Ewald, Davidson, Noyes, Stuart, Wright, ete. The question cannot
be settled by the authority of writers on either side, but must be calmly
examined, and the arguments adduced by both parties must be duly
weighed.

Let us see what are the usual arguments for the Solomonic authorship.
We will endeavour to set them forth very briefly, but fairly and intelligibly.

1. The first and most potent is the unanimous verdict of all writers who
have mentioned the book from primitive times to the days of Luther,
whether Christian or Jewish. The common opinion was that the three
works, Canticles, Proverbs, and Ecclesiastes, were composed by Solomon;
the first, as some said, being the production of his earlier days, the second
written in his maturity, and the third dictated at the close of life, when he
had learned the vanity of all that he had once valued, and had repented of
his evil ways and turned once more to the fear of the Lord as the only
stable comfort and hope. St. Jerome, in his ‘Commentary,’ gives the
opinion which was prevalent in his day: “‘ Itaque juxta numerum vocabu-
lorum tria volumina edidit : Proverbia, Ecclesiasten, et Cantica Canticorum.
In Proverbiis parvulum docens et quasi de officiis per sententias erudiens ;
in Ecclesiaste vero mature virum etatis instituens, ne quicquam in mundi
rebus putet esse perpetuum, sed caduca et brevia universa que cernimus ;
ad extremum jam consummatum virum et calcato seculo preparatum, in
Cantico Canticorum sponsi jungit amplexibus.”

2. The book purports to be written by Solomon; the writer speaks con-
tinually in the first person; and as the work is confessedly inspired and
canonical, any doubt as to the literal accuracy of the inscription throws
discredit on the truth and authority of Scripture. In a treatise of this
nature it is altogether unlikely that the author should attribute his own
sentiments to another.

3. There is nothing in the contents whieh militates against the Solomonic
authorship.

4, There is nothing in the language which is not compatible with the
time of Solomon.

5. It is a composition of such consummate skill and excellence that it
could have proceeded from no one but this wisest of men.

6. There are such a multitude and variety of coincidences in expression
and phraseology with Proverbs and Canticles, which are confessedly more
or less the work of Solomon, that Ecclesiastes must proceed from the same


author.


aes INTRODUCTION TO


Such are the grounds upon which Ecclesiastes is attributed to Sclomon.
The opinion has a certain attraction for all simple believers, who are content
to take things on trust, and, provided a theory makes no very violent demands
on credulity, to accept it with unquestioning confidence. But in the present
case the arguments adduced have not withstood the attacks of modern
criticism, as will be seen if we take them seriatim, as we proceed to do.

1. The universal consensus of uncritical antiquity concerning authorship
is of little value. What was not questioned was not specially examined ;
the conventional opinion was regarded as certain; what one writer after
another, and Council after Council, actually or virtually stated, was accepted
generally and without any controversy. So the authorship, being taken for
granted, was never criticized or investigated. Of how small importance in
such a matter are the opinions of the Fathers, we may learn from their view
of the Book of Wisdom. Unhesitatingly many of them attribute this
work to Solomon. Clemens Alexandrinus, Cyprian, Origen, Didymus, and
others express no doubt whatever on the subject; and yet no one nowadays
hesitates to say that they were absurdly wrong in holding such an opinion.
Similarly, many Councils decreed the canonicity of Wisdom, from the third
of Carthage, a.p. 397, to that of Trent; but we do not give our adhesion to
their decision. So we may reject tradition in discussing the question of
authorship, and pursue our investigation independently, untrammelled by
the utterances of earlier writers. As to the assertion that Solomon penned
this treatise in sorrowful repentance for his idolatry and licentiousness and
arrogant selfishness, it must be said that there is no trace of any such change
of heart in the historical books; as far as we are told, he goes to his grave
after he had turned away from the Lord, in that hard, unbelieving temper
which his foreign alliances had produced in him. Not a hint of better
things is anywhere afforded; and though, from the commendation generally
accorded to him, and the typical character which he possessed, one would
be inclined to think that he could not have died in his sins, but must have
made his peace with God before he departed, yet Scripture supplies no
ground for such an opinion, and we must travel beyond the letter to arrive
at such a conclusion. He records his experience of evil pleasure, relates
how he revelled in vice for a time, took his fill of luxury and sensuality,
with the view, as he says, of testing the faculty of such excesses to give
happiness; but he never hints at any sorrow for this degradation; not a
word of repentance falls from his lips. ‘I turned, and tried this and that,”
he says; but we find no confession of sin, no remorse for wasted talents. He
learns, indeed, that all is vanity and vexation of spirit; but this is not the
cry of a broken and contrite heart; and to ground his repentance upon this
declaration is to raise a structure upon a foundation that will not bear its
weight.

2. There can be no doubt that the writer intends to assume the name
ane characteristics of Solomon. He calls himself in the opening verse
‘son-of David” and “Kino im Jerusalem.” Such a description applies


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. v
ee


only to Solomon. David, indeed, had many other sons, but none except
Solomon could be designated “ King in Jerusalem.” It is true also that
the first person is continually used in narrating experiences which are
especially appropriate to this monarch; e.g. “I am come to great estate, and
have gotten more wisdom than all that were before me” (ch. i. 16); “I
made me great works; I builded me houses” (ch. ii. 4); “ All this have I
proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise” (ch. vii. 23). But not thus is
Solomon demonstrated to be the actual author ; cleverly personated author-
ship would use the same expressions. And this is what we conceive to be the
fact. The writer assumes the réle of Solomon in order to emphasize and
add weight to the lessons which he desired to teach. The idea that such
personation is frandulent and unworthy of a sacred writer springs from
ignorance of precedents or a misunderstanding of the object of such substi-
tution. Who thinks of accusing Plato or Cicero of an intention to deceive
because they present their sentiments in the form of dialogues between
imaginary interlocutors? Who regards the author of the Book of Wisdom
as an impostor because he identifies himself with the wise kingP So
common was this system of personation, so widely spread and practised,
that a name was invented for it, and Pseudepigraphal was the title given to
all such works as assumed to be written by some well-known or celebrated
personage, the real author concealing his own identity. Thus we have the
‘Book of Enoch,’ the ‘ Ascension of Isaiah,’ the ‘ Assumption of Moses,’ the
‘ Apocalypse of Baruch,’ the ‘ Psalter of Solomon,’ and many more, none of
them being the production of the person whose name they bear, which was
assumed only for literary purposes. A moralist who felt that he had some-
thing to impart that might serve his generation, a patriot who desired to
encourage his countrymen amid defeat and oppression, a pious thinker
whose heart glowed with love for his fellow-men,—any of these, humbly
shrinking from obtruding upon notice his own obscure personality, thought
himself justified in publishing his reflections under the mantle of some
great name which might gain for them credit and acceptance. The ruse
was so well understood that it deceived nobody; but it gave point and
definiteness to the writer’s ]ucubration, and it also had the effect of making
readers more ready to accept it, and to look in its contents for something
worthy of the personage to whom it was attributed. There is nothing
in this derogatory to a sacred writer, and no argument against the persona-
tion can be maintained on the ground of its incongruity or inappropriate-
ness. And when we more carefully examine the language of the book
itself, we see that it contains virtual, if not actual, acknowledgment that it
is not written by Solomon. His name is not once mentioned. Other of
his reputed writings are inscribed with his name. The Canticles begin
with the words, “'The song of songs, which is Solomon’s;” the Proverbs
are, ‘The proverbs of Solomon, son of David, King of Israel.” Ps, Lxxii.
is entitled, “A Psalm of Solomon.” But our author gives himself an
enigmatical appellation, which by its very form might show that it was


wi INTRODUCTION TO


ideal and representative, and not that of an existing personality. To sup-
pose that Solomon uses this name (which may be interpreted “ Gatherer ”)
for himself, with the abstruse idea that he who had scattered the people by
his sins now desired to gather them together by this exhibition of wisdom,
is to task the imagination beyond limit, and to read into Scripture notions
which have no existence in fact. There can, indeed, be no adequate reason
given why Solomon should have desired thus to conceal his identity; the
plea of humility and shame is a mere invention of commentators anxious
to account for what is, in their view, really inexplicable. He calls himself
“King in Jerusalem ’’—an expression occurring nowhere else, and never
applied to any Hebrew monarch. We read of “ King of Israel,” “ King
over all Israel,” how that Solomon “reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel ;”’
but the title “ King in Jerusalem” is unique, and seems to point to a time
when Jerusalem was not the only royal city, after the disruption of the
kingdom, that is, subsequent to the epoch of the historical Solomon.

The same conclusion is reached by the occasional wording of the text
itself, which speaks of Solomon as belonging to the past age. “I was king,”
the monarch is made to say (ch. i. 12), speaking, not as a reigning monarch
himself would speak, but rather as one who, from the other world, or by the
mouth of another, was relating his past earthly experiences. Solomon was
king to the day of his death, and could never have used the past tense in
reference to himself. Delitzsch and Ginsburg have called attention to a
Talmudic legend based on this expression. According to this story, Solomon,
driven from his throne on account of his idolatries and other sins, roamed
through the country lamenting his follies, and reduced to the extremity of
want, ever crying, with miserable iteration, “I, Koheleth, was King over
Israel in Jerusalem!” The legend is noticeable only as conveying the
significance of the preterite tense found in the text. This tense cannot, in
view of the immediate context, be translated, “I have been and still am
king ;” nor is he saying that he was king when he applied his mind to
wisdom. He is simply introducing himself in his assumed character, not
comparing his present with his past life, but from his standpoint, as once
an earthly and powerful king, giving the weight of his experiences. In
another passage (ch. i. 16) he talks of having gotten more wisdom than all
that were before him in Jerusalem. Now, this city did not fall into the
possession of the Hebrews till some years after the accession of David:
how could Solomon refer to previous kings in these terms, when really only
one had preceded him? And that his reference is to rulers, and not to
mere inhabitants, is denoted by the use of the preposition al, which ought
to be translated “over,” not “in” Jerusalem. Commentators have
endeavoured to answer this objection by asserting that Solomon hereby
indicates the ancient Canaanitish kings, such as Melchizedek, Adonizedek,
Araunah; but is it likely that he would thus introduce the thought of
these worthies of past generations as though he and his father were
their natural successors P Would he condescend to compare himself with


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. vil


euch? and would his readers be impressed by a superiority to these

princelets, mostly heathens, all of them beyond the pale of Israel, and, with
one exception, in no respect celebrated? It is surely much more probable
that the author for the moment forgets, or throws aside, his assumed
character, and alludes to the long succession of Jewish monarchs who had
reigned in Jerusalem up to his own time. A further intimation that a
fictitious use is made of the name of the great king is given in the epilogue,
supposing it, as we do, to be an original portion of the work. Here (ch. xii.
9—14) the real author speaks of himself and the composition of his book;
he is no longer “the Koheleth,” the Solomon, who hitherto has been the
speaker (as in ver. 8), but a koheleth, a wise man, who, founding his style
on his great predecessor, sought to please and edify the people of his
generation by means of proverbial sayings. This is the way in which he
describes his undertaking, and in which it is impossible that the historical
Solomon should have written: ‘‘ Moreover, because Koheleth was wise, he
still taught the people knowledge; yea, he pondered, and sought out, and
put in order many proverbs,” and, as the next verse implies, he adopted a
form and style which might make the truth “ acceptable” to his hearers.

3. Besides the notice mentioned above, there are many statements in the
book wholly irreconcilable with the circumstances of Solomon’s reign and
epoch. In ch. iii. 16; v. 8, etc., we read of oppression of the poor and
high-handed perversion of judgment, and are bidden not to wonder thereat.
That such a condition of things obtained in the time of Solomon is not con-
ceivable ; if it did exist, one would have expected that this powerful monarch
would immediately have set about a reformation, and not contented himself
with urging patience and acquiescence. But the writer appears to have no
power to redress these crying wrongs, which, if he is king, must have been
owing to his neglect or misgovernment. He tells what he has seen,
sympathizes with the sufferers, offers advice how to make the best of such
trouble, but gives no hint that he considers himself answerable for this
miserable state of things, or could in any way alleviate or remove it. If,
as alleged, this book is the result of Solomon’s repentance, the outcome of
the revulsion of feeling caused by the warnings of the Prophet Ahijah and
the grace of God working in his softened heart, here, surely, was an oppor-
tunity of expressing his changed sentiments, acknowledging the wrong-
doing which occasioned the disorders in the administration of government,
and avowing a determination of redress. But there is nothing of the kind.
He writes as an uninterested observer, one who had no hand in producing,
and possesses no influence in checking, oppression. So, too, Solomon could
not have written of his own class and country in such terms as we read in
ch. x. 16, “ Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes
eat in the morning!” It is doing violence to language, if not to common
sense, to argue that Solomon is alluding to his son Rehoboam, who must
have been more than forty years old at this time; and it does not speak
well for the king’s repentance if, knowing that his son would turn out so


vifi INTRODUCTION TO


badly, he made no effort for his reformation, nor, following the precedent
observed in his own case, attempted to nominate a more worthy successor.
Here and in other remarks about kings (e.g. ch. x. 20) the writer speaks,
not as though he himself were a monarch, but merely as a philosopher or
student of human nature. If he introduces the great king as uttering the
sentiments, they are his own experiences which he records (ch. x. 4—7) :
the spirit of the ruler rising against a subject, a fool set in high dignity
and the rich debased to low places, servants upon horses, and princes
walking as servants upon the earth;—such circumstances one can ill
imagine the historical Solomon to have known and recorded, though they
might readily enough have been witnessed by one who made him the
vehicle of his life-history.

Again, can one suppose that Solomon would call the heir to his throne
“the man that should be after” him (ch. ii. 18), and hate his labour because
its fruits would fall into such unworthy hands? Or that, being well aware
who his successor would be, he should speak as if it were quite uncertain—
one of those future contingencies which no one could determine (ch. ii. 19) ?
To minimize the force of the objection here made, some critics assert that
Solomon utters this sentiment after Jeroboam’s attempted rebellion, and
with the fear of this restless and unscrupulous leader’s success lying heavy
on his mind; but there is no historical ground for this notion. As far as
we know, no dread of a revolution troubled his last days. Jeroboam had
been driven into exile; and it is quite a gratuitous assumption that the fear
of his return and forcible seizure of the throne dictated the words in the text,

There are other incongruities in connection with the relation of monarch
and subject. The passage ch. viii. 2—5, 9 contains advice, not from a
ruler to his dependents, but from a subject to his fellow-subjects: “I counsel
thee to keep the king’s commandment,” etc. It is a prudent exhortation,
showing how to behave under a tyrannical government, when “one man
ruleth over another to the other’s hurt,” and could never have emanated
from great David’s greater son.

Again, is it compatible with the modesty of a refined disposition that
Solomon should boast unrestrainedly of his intellectual acquirements (ch.
i. 16), his possessions, his greatness (ch. ii. 7—9)? Such exultation might
proceed naturally enough from a fictitious person, but would be most
unseemly in the mouth of the real character. Is he satirizing himself when
he denounces the royal spendthrift, glutton, and debauchee, and describes
the misery which he brings on the land (ch. x. 16—19)? Is it not much
more likely that Koheleth is drawing from his own experience of licentious
rolers, which concerns not Solomon at all? Then, again, the course of
philosophical investigation into the swmmum bonum depicted in the book is
wholly incompatible with the historical Solomon. There is no evidence
whatever that he entered into any such inquiry and pursued it with the
view herein intimated. The writer gives a fair account of many of the
king’s great undertakings—his palaces, gardens, reservoirs, his feasts, sensu-


EOCOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. iz


ality, and carnal enjoyments; but there is no hint in the history that these
things were only parts of a great experiment, steps on the path that might
lead to the knowledge of happiness. Rather they are represented in the
annals as the outcome of wealth, luxury, pleasure-seeking, selfishness. It
is impossible, too, that, in recounting his performances, Solomon should have
omitted all mention of that which was the chief glory of his reign—the
erection of the temple at Jerusalem. Yet his connection with it is not
noticed by the remotest allusion, though there is possibly some mention of
the worship there (ch. v. 1, 2): “Keep thy foot when thon goest to the
house of God.”

Further, if, as we have seen, the references to Solomon himself are often
inconsistent with what we know of his history, the state of society presented
by intimations scattered here and there is certainly not that which obtained
in his reign. We read of violent oppression and wrong, when tears of
agony were wrung from the persecuted, whose misery was so great that
they preferred death to life under such intolerable circumstances (ch. iv.
1—3) ; whereas, in these palmy days of the kingdom, all was peace and
plenty : “Judah and Israel were many, as the sand which is by the sea in
multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry ” (1 Kingsiv. 20). Two
more antagonistic scenes could scarcely have been depicted, and we cannot
suppose them to refer to the same period. It is true that after Solomon’s
death the people complained that his yoke had been grievous (1 Kings xii.
4); it is also true that he dealt sternly with the strangers and the remnant
of the idolatrous nations left in the land (2 Chron. ii. 17, 18; viii. 7, 8) ;
but the former allegation was doubtless exaggerated, and referred chiefly to
the taxes and imposts laid upon the people in order to supply the means for
carrying out magnificent designs ; there was no complaint of oppression or
injustice; it was relief from excessive taxation, and perhaps from enforced
labour, that was demanded. The typical character of Solomon’s reign
would not have afforded a theme of prophetical representation of Messiah’s
kingdom, had it been the scene of violence, turbulence, and unhappiness
which stands before our minds in Koheleth’s page. With regard to the
possible sufferings of the aboriginals, from whom was exacted bond-service
(1 Kings ix. 21), we have no record that they were treated with undue
severity ; and itis certain that, in any case, Koheleth would not be thinking
of them in recounting the misery which he had witnessed. No Hebrew,
indeed, would take them into consideration at all. Hewers of wood and
drawers of water they became in the nature of things, and of them nothing
more was to be said.

Another aspect of affairs, incongruous with Solomon’s time, is seen in
an allusion to the system of espionage practised under despotic govern-
ments (ch. x. 20), where the writer warns his readers to beware how they
utter a word, or even cherish a thought, in disparagement of the ruling
power; walls have ears; a bird shall carry the word ; and punishment is
sure to follow. Can we believe that Solomon used such a system? And is


x INTRODUCTION TO


it credible that, if he did encourage this odious practice, he would explain
and dilate upon it in a popular work P Once more, it must have been at a
much later period that the admonition against unsanctified and diffuse
study was needed (ch. xii. 12). The national literature in Solomon’s tit
must have been of the scantiest nature; the warning could have been
applicable only when the theories and speculations of Greece and Alexandria
had found their way into Palestine (Ginsburg).

' Farther, it must be noticed that, though God is spoken of continually, it
is always by the name of Elohim, never by his covenant appellation,
Jehovah. Is it conceivable that the historical Solomon, who had experi-
enced such remarkable mercies and special endowments at the hands of
Jehovah, should ignore this Divine relation, and speak of God merely as the
Maker of the world, the Governor of the universe ? In Proverbs the name
Jehovah occurs nearly a hundred times, Elohim hardly at all; it is pre-
posterous to account for this difference by asserting that Solomon wrote one
work while in a state of grace, and hence used the covenant name, and the
other after he had fallen, and felt himself unworthy of God’s favour. As we
said before, there is no trace of repentance in his life; and the picture of
“the aged, penitent king, stung with poignant anguish of mind for his sins,
and unable to utter the adorable name,” if true to nature (Wordsworth), is
not true to history. Rather, one would have expected one who had been
betrayed into idolatry to be careful to use the name of the true God in
contradistinction to that which was common to the false and the true.

Other discrepancies might be pointed out, such, for instance, as the
absence of all allusion to idolatry, which the king, if repentant, could not
have refrained from mentioning; but enough has been said to show there
are many statements which are unsuitable to the character, epoch, and
circumstances of the historical Solomon.

4, The allegation that the language of the book is wholly compatible
with the time of Solomon would require too great space to be examined in
detail. We should have to enter into technicalities which could be appre-
ciated by none but Hebrew scholars, and only by those few who were fully
acquainted, not merely with the writings of the Old Testament, but also
with the language of Targums, etc., the rabbinic literature which came
into existence by slow degrees after the Babylonish captivity. Suffice it
to say generally that the language and style of the book have marked
peculiarities, and that many words and many forms of expression either
occur nowhere else in the Bible, or are found solely in the very latest books
of the sacred canon. Delitzsch and Knobel and Wright have given lists of
these hapax legomena and words and forms which belong to the later period
of Hebrew. The catalogue, which extends to nearly a hundred items,
has been closely examined by various scholars, and careful criticism has
eliminated a very large number of the incriminated expressions. Many of
these are abstract words, formed from roots naturally enough, though not
occurring elsewhere; many have derivatives in the earlier books; many


EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER |


cannot be proved to belong exclusively to the Chaldee, and may have been
common to other Semitic dialects. But after making all due allowances,
there remain enough instances of late and rabbinical words and phrases to
prove that the work belongs toa period posterior to Solomon. Certainly it
is quite possible to press the grammatical and etymological argument too
far, and to lay too much stress on details often most difficult to dissect, and
frequently more questions of taste and delicate judgment than of stern and
indubitable fact; but the present case does not rest on isolated examples,
some of which may be found faulty and weak, but on a large induction of
particulars, the cumulative importance of which cannot be set aside.

How is this argument attempted to be met? The linguistic peculiarities
cannot be wholly denied, but it is argued that the Aramaisms and foreign
expressions are owing to Solomon’s wide intercourse with external nations,
and the bent of his mind, which inclined to comprehensiveness, and led him
to prefer what was rare and removed from the intercourse of common life.
Some suppose that this was done with the view of making the work more
acceptable to non-Israelites. Others deem that the subject-matter neces-
sitated the peculiar phraseology employed. Such allegations, however,
will not account for grammatical peculiarities and verbal inflections, which
are found rarely or never in earlier books, or for the absence of forms which
are most common elsewhere. Foreign words might be introduced here and
there in a work of any age; but it is different with changes in syntax and
inflection; these denote another epoch or stage in language, and cannot be
adequately explained by any of the above arguments. The assertion that
the writer desired to commend his treatise to external nations is entirely
unsupported by evidence, and is negatived by the fact that idolatry, the
crying sin of other peoples, is never alluded to. Compare the bold denun-
ciations of the Book of Wisdom, and it will at once be seen how a true
believer deals with those who are enemies to his religion and worship.
There is another consideration which supports the view for which we
contend, The whole style of the work is indicative of a later development.
Critics point to the very frequent employment of conjunctions to express
the most diverse logical relations, which were not needed in the simpler
lucubrations of early times. Then there is the pleonastic use of the personal
pronoun after the verbal form; the mode of expressing the present by the
participle, often in connection with a personal pronoun ; the almost entire
absence of the imperfect with vay conversive ; and many other peculiarities
of a similar nature, all of which indicate neo-Hebraism.

5. That no one but Solomon could have written a book of such consum-
mate excellence is, of course, # mere assumption. We know so little of the
literary history of those days, and our information concerning writers and
educationists is so scanty, that it is impossible to say who could or who
could not have composed such a work. Because we can fix the authorship
definitely upon no other person, we are not compelled to subscribe to the
traditional view. One of equal mental capacities and attainments with the


xii INTRODUCTION TO


A E


writer of Job might, under inspiration, have produced Koheletii; and, like
the other, have remained unknown. The apocryphal compositions of post-
exilian days show a large amount of literary talents, and the age which
gave them birth might have been fruitful in other authors.

6. The coincidences between Ecclesiastes, Proverbs, and Canticles may
be explained without resorting to the supposition that the three works are
the production of one author, and that author Solomon. Not to discuss
the genuineness of the Song of Songs, the Book of Proverbs is confessedly
derived from many sources, and quotation from its pages would not serve
to establish the Solomonic origin of the passage cited. All that can be
decided from the parallelism with the other books attributed to Solomon is
that the author had evidently read those works, as he certainly had perused
Job, and perhaps Jeremiah, and, consciously or unconsciously, borrowed
sentiments and expressions from them. And, on the other hand, there are
confessedly such marked variations of style between those writings and
Ecclesiastes, that it is difficult to allow that they came from the same pen,
though wielded, as is said, at different ages of life.

From these premisses it must be concluded that the Solomonic authorship
cannot be maintained, and that the book belongs to a much later epoch than
that of Solomon. Surrendering the traditional opinion, we are, however,
at once cast upon an ocean of surmises, which are wholly derived from
internal evidence as this strikes different readers. In assigning the date
of the book, critics are hopelessly divided, some giving B.0. 975, others
B.0. 40, and between these dates others have, on various grounds, taken
their respective stand. But eliminating theories which the work itself
contravenes, we find that most reliable authorities are divided between the
times of Ezra and Nehemiah, the Persian, and the Greek epochs. The theory
of its composition in the time of Herod the Great, enunciated by Gritz,
needs no refutation, and is only noticeable as showing, by the legend on
which it is based, that at that day Koheleth was generally regarded as an
integral portion of Holy Scripture. The first period mentioned would take
us to the time of the Prophet Malachi, B.c. 450—400. But that seer writes
much purer Hebrew than Koheleth, and the two could hardly have been
contemporaneous. At any rate, we cannot be wrong in taking the genera-
tion after Malachi as the terminus a quo of our inquiry. The terminus ad
quem seems to be defined by the use made of Ecclesiastes by the author of
the Book of Wisdom. That the latter is the later of the two is evident
from its Hellenistic form and environment, of whioh Koheleth shows no
trace, and from its exhibiting a development of the doctrines of wisdom and
eschatology far beyond what is found in our book. Koheleth complains
that increase of wisdom brings increase of trouble (ch. i. 18); the later
pseudo-Solomon asserts that to live with Wisdom hath no bitterness, but
is stable joy and gladness (Wisd. viii. 16). On the one hand, we read that
there is no remembrance of the wise man more than of the fool for ever
(ch. ii. 16); on the other hand, it is maintained that wisdom makes the


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xifi
eee OS
memory of its possessor ever fresh, and confers upon him immortality
(Wisd. viii. 13; vi. 20). If one argues sadly that the good and the evil
have the same fate (ch. ix. 2), the other often comforts himself by thinking
that their destinies are very different, and that the righteous are at peace,
and live for evermore, and their reward is with the Most High (Wisd. iii. 2,
etc. ; v. 15, etc.), And generally the future judgment which Koheleth inti-
mates vaguely and indefinitely, has, in the later book, become a settled belief,
and a recognized motive of action and endurance. Both writings virtually
assume the authorship of Solomon; and many passages of the later work,
especially ch. ii, seem to be designed to correct erroneous impressions
gathered by some minds from Koheleth’s unexplained statemonts. There
is good reason to suppose that certain free-thinkers and sensualists in Alex-
andria had ventured to support their immoral opinions by citing the
authority of the wise king, who in his book urged men to enjoy life, accord-
ing to the maxim, “Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die.” This
misapprehension of inspired teaching the author of Wisdom unhesitatingly
condemns and confutes. The passages referred to are noted as they occur
in the Exposition. But a comparison of the reasoning of the materialists
in Wisdom with the statements in ch. ii, 18—26; iii. 18—22; v. 18, 20, will
show whence was derived the perverted view of life which needed correction.

Now, the Book of Wisdom was composed not later than B.c. 150; so the
limits between which lies the production of Ecclesiastes are B.c. 400 and
B.c. 150. The nearer definition must be determined by other considerations.
Mr. Tyler and Dean Plumptre have traced a connection between Hcclesiastes
and Kcclesiasticus, and, by a series of contrasted citations, have endeavoured
to prove that Ben-Sira was well acquainted with our book, and used it
largely in the composition of his own. Plumptre also considers that the
name Ecclesiasticus was given to Ben-Sira’s work from its connection with
Ecclesiastes, following the track there set. But be this idea well founded,
it will not help us much, as the date of Hcclesiasticus is still a disputed
question, though most modern critics assign it to the reign of Euergetes II.,
commonly called Physcon, B.c.170—117. This, if it is accepted, gives the
same result as the previous supposition. But a surer criterion is found in
the social and political circumstances revealed incidentally in our book.

We read of the arbitrary exercise of power, the corruption, the dissolute-
ness and luxury of rulers (ch. iv. 1, etc. ; vii. 7; x. 16) ; perversion of justice
and extortion in provinces (ch. v. 8); the promotion of base and unworthy
persons to high positions (ch. x. 5—7) ; tyranny, despotism, revelry. These
doings are graphically depicted by one who knew from experience that
of which he wrote. And this condition of affairs points with much cer-
tainty to the time when Palestine lay under Persian rule, and irresponsible
satraps oppressed their subjects with iron hands. For the same con-
clusion makes also the comparison of the inexorable law of death to the
cruel obligation of military service which obtained among the Persians,
and which allowed of no evasion (ch. viii. 8); so, too, the allusion to spies


xiv INTRODUCTION TO


and the trade of the secret informer (ch. x. 20) suits the government of
the Achwmenidw. The oppressive rule under which the Palestinians
groaned led to a widespread disaffection and discontent, to a readiness
to seize any occasion to revolt, and rendered suitable the caution against
hasty action and the exhortation to patience (ch. viii. 3,4). The social
and political condition induced two evils—first, a reckless disregard to
moral and religious restraint, as though God took no care of men and
paid no heed to their welfare; secondly, a scrupulous attention to the
externals of religion, as though by this one could constrain Heaven to
favour him—the offering of perfunctory sacrifices, the making of vows
as a barren duty. This state of things we know to have been existent
from the age of Nehemiah and before the Maccabzan period; and many
observations of Koheleth are directed against these abuses (ch. v. 1—7).
The remark about the multiplication of books (ch. xii. 12) could not have
applied to any period previous to the Persian. The absence of any trace
of Greek influence (which we shall endeavour to prove further on)
removes the writing from Macedonian times; nor could it be reasonably
attributed to the Maccabean epoch. There is no trace of the patriotic
feeling which animated the Hebrews under the tyranny of the Syrians.
The persecutions then experienced had made future retribution no longer
@ vague speculation or a dim hope, but an anchor of patience—a practical
motive for constancy and courage. This was a great advance upon the
misty conception of Koheleth. The conclusion at which we arrive is that
Ecclesiastes was written about B.c. 300.

In deciding thus we are not precluded from considering that many
of the proverbs and sayings contained herein come from an earlier age,
and may have been popularly attributed to Solomon himself. Such time-
honoured sentences would be readily inserted in a work of this nature and
would favour its reception and currency. The author must be deemed
wholly unknown; he has so completely veiled his identity that any attempt
to draw him from his purposed obscurity is hopeless. That he wrote in
Palestine seems most probable. Some have fancied that the expression
(ch. xi. 1), “Cast thy bread upon the waters,” etc., refers to the sowing
of seed on the inundated banks of the Nile, and that, therefore, we are
justified in considering Alexandria as the scene of our author’s labours.
But this interpretation of the passage is inadmissible; the words have
nothing to do with Egyptian cultivation, and give no clue to the writer’s
domicile. Indeed, there are allusions to rainy seasons and the dependence
of the land for fertility, not on the river, but on the clouds of heaven
(ch. xi.3; xii. 2), which pointedly debar any notion of Egypt being
intended, and plainly indicate another country subject to very different
climatic influences. The peculiarities of the Palestinian weather are
characterized in ch, xi. 4, “He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and
he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap.” Such warnings would have
no significance in a land where rain rarely ever fell, and no one ever con<


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xv


sidered whether or not the wind was in what we call a rainy quarter.
Again, no one but a Jew living in his own country would talk familiarly
of frequenting the temple-worship (ch. v. 1); of seeing evil men honoured
in the holy place, Jerusalem (ch. viii. 10); of a fool not knowing the way
to “the city ” par excellence (ch.x.15). Such expressions indicate a dweller
in or near Jerusalem, and such we consider the author to have been—
one who addresses his countrymen in their own language, as it was spoken
in his time and locality. Had he lived in Egypt, he would doubtless
have used Greek as the vehicle of his instructions, as did the writer of
the Book of Wisdom; but dwelling in Palestine, he, like the composer
of Ecelesiasticus, published his lucubrations in the native Hebrew. At
the same time, his travels had probably extended beyond the limits of his
own country, and made him in some sort familiar with foreign courts.
Dean Plumptre has arranged his idea of the author, plan, and purpose of
the book in the form of an ideal biography, which indeed seems to solve
many of the vexed questions that meet the student, but is evolved entirely
from internal considerations, and is invented to support the writer’s fore-
gone conclusions. It is very ingenious and captivating, and worthy of
study, whether one agrees with the view taken or dissents from it. Conceiv-
ing Ecclesiastes to be the production of an unknown author writing about
B.c. 200, and, in spite of the personation of King Solomon, really uttering
his autobiographical confessions, the dean proceeds to delineate Koheleth’s
life and character from the hints contained, or thought to be contained, in
his pages. According to his biographer, Koheleth, an only son, was born
somewhere in Judea (not Jerusalem), about B.c. 230. Well taught in the
usual lore, he early learned to reverence Solomon as the pattern of wisdom
and wise experience—in this respect being superior to the mass of his coun-
trymen, who, neglecting their own history and their own sacred books, were
inclined rather to follow the modes of thought of the Greeks and Syrians,
with whom they were brought in contact, and if they conformed to the
national religion, it was rather from conventionality and a regard to routine
than from heartfelt conviction and devout feeling. Koheleth saw and
marked this vain ceremonialism and lip-worship, and learned to contrast
such pretenders with those who really feared the Lord. As he grew up, his
father, though wealthy, made him take his share in the labours of the vine-
yard and corn-field, and taught him the happiness of a life of activity. But
he was not long content with this quiet existence ; he panted for a wider
sphere, larger experience ; and, with his parents’ consent, and with ample
means at his disposal, he set out on foreign travel. Alexandria was the
place to which he directed his steps. Here, having good introductions, he
was admitted to the highest society, saw the life of courts, joined in the
revelry prevailing there, indulged in all the enervating luxury and immo-
rality which made the life of the pleasure-seeking inhabitants of this corrupt
city. Satiety produced disgust. While staining his soul with degrading
passions, he had preserved the memory of better things, and the struggle


xvi INTRODUCTION TO


between the opposing elements is faithfully retraced in his book. On
the one side, we have the weariness and pessimism of the blasé profligate ;
on the other, the revolt of the higher nature leading to a truer view of life.
The course of his experience conducted him to a friend who was pure and
sinecre, and to a mistress who was beyond measure abandoned and false;
and while he could thank God for the gift of the former, who had proved
to be a wise and loving counsellor, he was no less thankfal for being
enabled to tear himself from the snares of the latter, whom he had found
“ more bitter than death.” Deceived and disappointed, and dissatisfied with
the scanty literature of his own nation, he turned for solace to the literature
and philosophy of Greece; her poets supplied him with language in which
to clothe the sentiments which arose from his new experiences ; philosophers,
Epicureans and Stoics, for a time charmed him with their teaching concern-
ing nature, morality, life, and death. Such doctrines confirmed the notion
of the vanity of most of the objects that men eagerly pursue, and encour-
aged the opinion that it was one’s duty and interest to enjoy moderately all
the pleasures that are available. Koheleth now discovered that there was
something better than sensuality; that charity, benevolence, reputation,
afforded joys more comforting and lasting. Admitted a member of the Museum,
he joined in the philosophical discussions which were there carried on ; heard
and talked much about the swummum bonum, happiness, immortality, free-will,
destiny ; but here was little to satisfy his cravings, though for the time he
was interested and cheered by this intellectual activity. And now his
excesses and his close study told upon his constitution, sapped his strength,
and condemned him to premature old age. Partly paralyzed, weakened in
body, but with the brain still active, he sat waiting the inevitable stroke,
musing upon the past, and learning from the reflection that the soul
could be satisfied by nothing but religion. Childhood’s teaching came
back with new force and meaning; God’s love, justice, and power were
living and energizing truths; the Creator was also the Judge. These
verities, which he at length was compelled to acknowledge, were such as
ought not to be kept unrevealed. Others, like himself, might have passed
the same ordeal, and might need the instruction which he could give. How
better could his enforced leisure be employed than in presenting to his
countrymen his experiences, the course of thought which carried him through
the pessimism of the sated sensualist, the wisdom of the Epicurean thinker,
to the faith in a personal God? So he writes this record of a soul's con-
flicts, under the pseudonym of Koheleth, “the Debater,” “the Preacher,”
shielding himself under the wgis of the great ideal of wisdom, Solomon
King of Israel, whose life of enjoyment and late repentance, as tradition
affirmed, bore a close analogy to his own.
It will be seen that there are many utterances in Ecclesiastes which
spring naturally from the mouth of one situated as Koheleth is supposed to
be, and which are readily explained. by the above theory. It is also easy so
to analyze the work, and so to interpret the allusions, as to give strong


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER xvi


ground for its acceptance. And Dean Plumptre deserves great credit for
the invention of the story, and its presentation in a most fascinating form.
But regarded by sober criticism, does it satisfy the requirements of the
case P Is it necessitated by the language of the book? Is there no other
theory, less novel and violent, which will equally or better meet the
circumstances ? The objections to the “ideal biography” may here be
very briefly stated, as we shall have occasion to discuss many of them moxe
fally in our. account of the plan and object of our book. The whole
romance is based on the assumption that the work is replete with Grecisms,
traces of Alexandrian thought, echoes of Greek philosophy and literature.
Remove this foundation, and the beautiful edifice crumbles into dust. Our
study of the book has led to a very opposite conclusion from that enter-
tained in this very ideal biography. The alleged Hellenisms, the Stoicism
and Epicureanism, do not stand the test of unprejudiced criticism, and are
capable of being explained without going so far afield. The particular
examination of these items we defer to another section, but thus much may
be here said—the adduced expressions and views are the natural outcome
of Hebrew thought, have nothing extraneous in their origin, and are
analogous to post-Aristotelian sentiments, not because they are consciously
derived from this fount, but because they are the produce of the same human
mind, reflecting upon problems which have perplexed thinkers in every age
and country. Restless speculation, combined with a certain infidelity, was
rife among men; Koheleth reflects this mental activity, this endeavour to
grapple with difficult questions, and to offer solutions from varying poiuts
of view: what wonder that, in the course of his disquisition, he should
present parallels to the opinions of the Stoic or Epicurean, who hal gone
over the same ground as himself? There is no plagiarism, no borrowing
of ideas here; the evolution is, as it were, inspired by the subject.


“ We do not make our thoughts; they grow in us
Like grain in wood: the growth is of the skies ;
The skies, of nature; nature, of God. The world
Is full of glorious likenesses; and these
Tis the bard’s task, beside his general scope
Of story, fancy framed, to assort, and make
From the common chords man’s heart is strung withal,
Music; from dumb earth heavenly harmony.”
(Bailey, ‘ Festus,”)


In short, the book is a product of the chokma literature, practically
religious, and more concerned with the life and circumstances of man
generally than with man as a member of the commonwealth of Israel.
The Hebrew, in this and similar works, divests himself in some degree of
his peculiar nationality, and speaks as man to man, as one of the great
human family, and not as an item in a narrow fraternity. Not that
revelation is ignored, or the writer forgets his theocratical position; he
simply places it in the background, takes it for granted, and, virtually

EOGLESMASTES, @


xviii INTRODUCTION TO


grounding his Iucubrations thereon, does not bring it forward prominently
and distinctly. So Koheleth, in all his warnings of the vanity of earthly
things, shows that beneath this sad experience and melancholy view lies a
firm faith in the justice of God, and belief in the future judgment, which
could be derived only from the inspired history of his people.


§ 3. Conrents, Pian, and Osjeor.


The following is an analysis of our book as it lies before us :-—

After announcing his name and position, “‘ Koheleth, son of David and
King in Jerusalem,” the author puts forth the thesis which forms the
subject of his treatise: “ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity.” Man’s labour
is profitless; nature and human life repeat themselves in monotonous
succession, and all must fall ere long into oblivion. Nothing is new,
nothing is lasting (ch. i. 1—11). This is the prologue; the rest of the
book is taken up with the writer’s various experiences and deductions
therefrom.

He had been king, and had tried to find some satisfaction in many
pursuits and under various circumstances, but in vain. The striving for
wisdom is a feeding on wind; there is always something that eludes the
grasp. There are anomalies in nature and in human affairs that men are
powerless to comprehend and to rectify; and sorrow grows with increasing
knowledge (ch. i. 12—18). He takes a new quest; he tries pleasure, he
tests his heart with folly: in vain. He turns to art, to architecture, horti-
culture, kingly state and magnificence, luxury, and the amassing of wealth;
there was no profit in any of them (ch. ii. 1—11). He studied human
nature in its manifold phases of wisdom and folly, and he learned thus
much, that the former excels the latter as light excels darkness; yet with
this came the thought that death levelled all distinctions, placed wise man
and fool in the same category. Besides this, be one never so rich, he must
leave the results of his labours to another, who may be unworthy to succeed
him. All this bitter experience forces the conclusion that temperate
enjoyment of the goods of this life is the only proper aim, and that this
is entirely the gift of God, who dispenses this pleasure or withholds it
according to man’s actions and disposition. At the same time, this limita-
tion impresses on man’s labour and enjoyment a character of vanity and
unreality (ch. ii. 12—26). Now, man’s happiness depends upon God’s will,
and he has arranged all things according to immutable laws, so that even
the minutest matters have each their proper time and season. General
experience proves this; it is useless to struggle against it, however inex-
plicable it may seem to be; man’s duty and comfort is to recognize this
providential government and practically to acquiesce therein (ch. iii, 1—
15). There are injustices, disorders, anomalies in the world, which man
cannot remedy by any exertion of iia own, and which impede his peaceful
enjoyment; but, doubtless, there shall be a day of retribution, when all


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xix


such iniquities shall be punished and corrected, and God allows them for
a time to continue, with the view of proving men, and to teach them
humility, that in one sense they are not superior to brutes. (For man and
brate succumb to the universal law of death; and that there is a distinction
in the destination of their spirits, though it may well be believed, is
incapable of proof.) Hence man’s happiness and duty consist in making
the best of the present life, and improving the opportunities which God
offers, without anxious care for the future (ch. iii. 16—22). He gives
further illustrations of man’s inability to secure his own happiness. See
how man is oppressed or wronged by his fellow-man. Who can remedy
this? And in face of such things, what pleasure is there in life? Success
only leads to envy. Yet labour is necessary, and none but the foo! sinks
into apathy and indolence. Turn to avarice for consolation, and you are
isolated from your fellows, and haunted with a sense of insecurity. High
place itself has no assurance of permanence. Foolish kings are supplanted
by young and clever aspirants; yet the people do not long remember their
benefactors or profit by their meritorious services (ch. iv. 1—16). Turn
to popular religion: is there any satisfaction or comfort to be found there ?
Nay, all is hollow and unreal. The house of God is entered thoughtlessly
and irreverently ; verbose prayers are uttered with no feeling of the heart;
vows are made only to be broken or evaded; dreams take the place of
piety, and superstition stands for religion (ch. v.1—7). In the political
life, too, there is much that is disheartening, only to be supported by the
thought of an overruling Providence (ch. v. 8, 9). The pursuit and
possession of wealth give no more satisfaction than other mundane things.
The rich are always wanting more; their expenses increase with their
wealth; they are not happy in life, and may lose their property at a stroke,
and leave nothing to the children for whom they laboured (ch. v. 10—17).
All this leads again to the old conclusion that we should make the best of
life such as it is, seeking neither riches nor poverty, but being content to
enjoy with sobriety the good that God gives, remembering that the power
to use and enjoy is a boon that comes solely from him (ch. v. 18—20).
We may see men possessed of all the gifts of fortune, yet unable to enjoy
them, and soon obliged to leave them by the inexorable stroke of death
(ch. vi. 1—6). If desires were always accomplished, we might have a
different tale to tell; but they never are fully satisfied; high and low, wise
and foolish, are equally victims of unsatisfied cravings (ch. vi. 7—9). These
desires are profit!ss, because circumstances are not under man’s control ;
and, not being able to forecast the future, he must make the best of the
present (ch. vi. 10—12).

Koheleth now proceeds to apply to practice the truths which he has been
establishing. As man knows not what is best for him, he must accept what
is sent, be it joy or sorrow; and let him Jearn hence some salutary lessons.
Life should be solemn and earnest; the house of mourning teaches better
than the house of feasting ; and the rebuke of s wise man is more whole-


~~


"2 INTRODUCTION TO
ee
some than the mirth of fools (ch. vii. 1—7). We must learn patience and
resignation ; it is no wisdom to quarrel with things as they are or to praise
the past in contrast with the present. We cannot change what God has
ordered; and he sends good and evil that we may feel our entire depend-
ence, and not disquiet ourselves about the future, which must be wholly
unknown to us (ch. vii. 8—14). Anomalies occur; all excesses must be
avoided, both on the side of over-righteousness and of laxity; true wisdom is
found in the observance of the mean, and this is the only preservative from
errors in the conduct of life (ch. vi. 15—22). Having thus far been aided
by Wisdom, he desires, by her assistance, to solve deeper and more mysterious
questions, but is wholly baffled. But he learned some further practical
truths, viz. that wickedness was folly and madness, that of all created things
woman was the most evil, and that man was made originally upright, but
had perverted his nature (ch. vii. 23—29). His experience now leads him
to consider man as a citizen. Here he shows that it is useless to rebel ; true
wisdom counsels obedience even under the worst oppression, and submission
to Providence. Subjects may well be patient, for sure retribution awaits the
tyrant (ch. viii. 1—9). But he is troubled by seeming anomalies in God’s
moral government, noting the contradiction to expected retribution in the
case of the good and evil. God’s abstention and the impunity of sinners
make men incredulous of Providence; but in spite of all this, he knows in
his heart that God is just in reward and punishment, as the end will prove,
Meantime, unable to solve the mystery of God’s ways, man’s right course is,
as before said, to make the best of existing circumstances (ch. viii. 1O—15),
This conclusion is confirmed by the fact that one fate awaits all men, and
that the dead are cut off from all the feelings and pursuits and interests of
life in the upper world (ch. ix. 1—6). Hence the lesson is repeated that
man’s wisest course is to use his earthly life to the best advantage, without
being greatly disturbed by the inscrutability of the moral government of
the world (ch. ix. 7—12). Wisdom, indeed, is not always rewarded, and
the wise man who has done good service is often forgotten; but there is a
real power in wisdom which can effect more than physical strength (ch. ix.
13—18). On the other hand, a little folly mars the effect of wisdom, and is
quite sure to manifest itself in word or conduct (ch. x. 1—8). Koheleth
then gives his experience of what he has seen in the case of capricions
rulers, who often advanced to high stations the most incompetent men;
and he offers some advice for conduct under such circumstances (ch. x,
4—17). Wisdom teaches cantion in all undertakings, whether in private or
political life; a man should count the cost and make due preparation before
attempting reformation in government or any other important matter (ch,
x.8—11). See the strong contrast between the gracious words and acts
of the wise man, and the objectless prating and useless labours of the fool
(ch. x, 12—15). The lesson of caution undcr the government of dissolute
and unprincipled rulers is strongly enforced (ch. x. 16—20). Drawing
towards the eonclusion of his werk, Koheleth gives some direct practical


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. P|
erent se AM Sate Se ae


advice under three heads. We should leave unanswerable questions, and
endeavour to do our duty with diligence and activity ; especially we ought
to be largely beneficent, as we know not how soon we ourselves may meet
with adversity and need help (ch. xi. 1—6). This is the first remedy for
impatience and discontent; the second is found in a spirit of cheerfulness,
which enjoys the present discreetly and moderately, with a due regard to the
future account to be rendered (ch. xi. 7—9). The third remedy is piety,
which ought to be practised from early years; life should be so guided as
not to offend the laws of the Creator and Judge, and virtue should not be
postponed till the failure of faculties makes pleasure unattainable and death
closes the scene. The last days of old age are described under various
images and analogies, which contain some of the most beautiful traits in
the book (ch. xi. 10—xii. 7), The conclusion of the whole is the echo of
the beginning, ‘‘ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity” (ch. xii. 8).

The book ends with an epilogue (ch. xii. 2—14), commendatory of the
writer, explaining his standpoint and the object of his work. The real
Koheleth here speaks, tells of the care with which he has prepared himself
for his task, and assumes the gift of inspiration. It is better to know a
little well than to weary one’s self with reading many things; and the whole
course of the discussion in the present case tends to give one lesson, viz. that
man’s true wisdom lies in fearing God and looking forward to the judgment,

Such are the contents of this work as presented by the writer. But
never was there a book whose plan, design, and arrangement were more
widely disputed. While some enthusiastic admirers have found herein an
elaborate artistical structure, a formal division into sections rhythmically
distributed, others have deemed it a mass of loose thoughts heaped together
without any attempt at coherence or logical system. Others, again, give
the work a colloquial character, hearing in it the language of two voices
—that of the wearied and exhausted seeker, and that of the warning and
correcting teacher. Tennyson’s poem, ‘The Two Voices,’ has been used in
illustration of this view of Koheleth. By others the unity of the book is
wholly denied, and it is considered to be derived from many authors, being,
in fact, a collection of philosophical and didactic poems, interspersed with
gnomes and proverbs, hard questions, and some solutions of the same,
Few will now be found to uphold this theory, the identity of thought
throughout, and the orderly progress of the one underlying reflection, being
conspicuous to any unprejudiced reader, and (if we regard the closing
verses as an integral portion of the treatise) leading to a grand and
satisfying conclusion. ;

Among the various theories concerning the design of the author in
presenting this work, we may mention a few very briefly. Rosenmiiller
divides it into two parts—a theoretical (ch. i—iv.) and a practical
(ch. v.—xii. 7) ; the former showing the vanity of human pursuits and gene-
rally of mundane things, and the latter directing men’s life to worthy
objects, and giving rules for obtaining pleasure and contentment. Tyler


xxii INTRODUCTION TO


and Plumptre see in it a struggle between revealed religion and the theories
of Greek philosophies, in the form of an autobiographical confession with-
out any regular plan. Renan looks upon the author as a sceptic; Heine
calls the book ‘The Canticle of Scepticism ;’ these critics consider that
the leading thought of the vanity of human affairs, and the call to enjoy
life, point to a disbelief in a present Providence and a future retribution.
Schopenhauer and his school read pessimism in every utterance concerning
the shortness of man’s life, the vanity of his pursuits, the disorders which
prevail in nature and in society. One critic deems that the treatise points
out the vanity of everything of earth; another, that its object is to indicate
the summum bonum; another, that the point proved is the immortality of
the soul; and yet another, that the author labours to show the limits of
philosophy, and the excellence of religion in comparison therewith.

One school of interpreters sees in our book a discussion between @ pious
Israelite and a Sadducee, or a youth vexed by his daily experiences and a
senior who tries to allay his misgivings and calm his excitement. Others
find a Hebrew, under the guise of Solomon, employing Greek sophisms,
and a Jewish believer refuting him by citing maxims and proverbs; or a
Solomon objecting to the common theory of Divine providence and placing
man’s happiness in sensual pleasure, and a prophet arguing for the moral
government of the world and assigning its right position to human
enjoyment. In this view all apparent contradictions are explained away;
all unorthodox sentiments appertain to the caviller, while the correction is
that which the Holy Spirit would enforce. We may say at once that it is
impossible to support this idea by reference to the text. There is no trace
of different interlocutors; objections have no immediate answer, and what
are regarded as replies present no connection with preceding statements.
The idea of dialogue must be considered as wholly chimerical. Equally
without foundation is the theory of the “two voices.” What are regarded
as the utterances of fatalist, materialist, Epicurean, are not refuted or
retracted ; the voice that should have taken the opposite side in the con-
troversy is obstinately silent, and the poison—if poison it be—is left to
work its dire effect.

Of course, those who maintain the traditional view of the authorship
hold a totally distinct opinion concerning its scope and object. With them
it is the result of a late repentance, seeking to atone for past follies, and to
enforce the warnings of a bitter experience, and thus to gather together the
people whom Solomon foresaw would be scattered by his sins. Having
prescience of the fate that awaited Israel after his death, he thus endeavours
to comfort his countrymen in the evil days that were coming. He teaches
the vanity of earthly things—things “under the sun ”’—that the blessedness -
of vternity may be realized; union with God implies detachment from the
world. He surveys nature, he recalls his own varied experience, he looks
ahroad: there is nothing satisfying in this view. He thinks of his successor,
Rehvboam, @ youth of weak intellect, but strong passions, and finds no


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xxii!


comfort there; he owns his infatuation, he calls himself an old and foolish
king” (ch. iv. 13), and already he sees the throne occupied by Jeroboam,
“the poor and wise child ” who should usurp his seat. He remembers his
countless wives and concubines, who had led him astray, and exclaims that
women are the pest of the world, and that not one in a thousand is good.
He anticipates times of confusion and misrule, and counsels obedience and
submission. Then, at the close of the book, he pictures himself aged,
enfeebled, laid on his death-bed, and in solemn tones he urges early piety,
the emptiness of everything apart from God, and utters the moral of his
wasted life, and sums up man’s duty in the weighty climax of the book. If
the treatise were Solomon’s, such, indeed, might have been the course of
thought.

Before we offer our own opinion concerning the purpose of the book, let
us look at the views which others have formed respecting Koheleth’s
standpoint and sentiments.

First of all, is our author a pessimist, as many suppose? Does he take
the worst view of things, find no benevolence in the Creator, see no hope
of happiness for man? Certainly, his ever-recurring cry is, “ Vanity of
vanities; all is vanity; ” certainly, he affirms that death is better than life,
that the lot of those is most to be envied who never have been born, that
men’s labours and aims and ambitions end in disappointment, that the
pursuit of wisdom, or art, or wealth, or pleasure is alike unsatisfying; but
these and such-like mournful utterances must not be considered apart from
their context and the place which they occupy inthe treatise. They do not
represent the object or teaching of the book ; they occur as passing obser-
vations which met the thinker in the course of his investigation, and which
he notes in order to trace the line taken by his inquiry. His pessimism,
such as it is, is only a cloud seeming to obscure for a time the heaven of
his faith, and dissipated by the clear shining behind it. When he speaks
in desponding tones of mundane objects, he desires to call attention to the
weak point in all such things, the fault that underlies them all. Men’s
mistake is to think that they can secure happiness by their own efforts,
whereas they are conditioned by a higher power, and can neither achieve
success nor enjoy it when won except by the gift of God. If he affirms
that the day of death is preferable to the day of birth, he is virtually repeat-
ing Solon’s celebrated gnome that no man can be accounted happy till he
has closed his life happily—that the new-born infant has a time before him
full of trial and trouble, the course and end of which no one can foresee,
while with the dead all is over, and we can calmly judge of his career.
His faith in God’s justice and benevolence is the exact contradictory of
Schopenhauer’s school. His word is, “ God hath made everything beautiful
in its time” (ch. iii. 11); he believes in the moral government of the
universe ; he acknowledges the reality of sin; he looks to a life beyond the
grave. He would not paralyze exertion, and hold back from work ; he
recommends diligence in one’s own duties, beneficence towards others; he


xxiv INTRODUCTION TO


leads men to expect happiness in the path on which God’s providence leada
them. There is no real hopelessness, no cynical despair, in his utterances
taken as a whole. If he lacks the bright faith of the Christian, he in his
measure feels that all works together for good for them that love God, if
not in this world, yet assuredly in another. So the charge of pessimism
falls to the ground when the treatise is considered in its totality, and not
estimated by isolated passages.

A strong plea for the prevalence of traces of Gentile teaching has been put
forward by modern critics. Let us, then, examine the grounds on which
rests the idea of the potent influence of Greece (for the external influence
means Hellenism) in the foundation and expression of Koheleth’s sentiments.
First, as to language, we have certain phrases cited which are alleged to
be derived Greco fonte. In ch. iii. 11 ha-olam, translated “the world” in
our version, is supposed to be the Greek aidy, whereas it is truly Hebraic
in form and signification, and is probably not used in the sense of ‘“‘ world”
in the Old Testament. In the next verse the phrase, “‘ to do good,” is taken
as equivalent to eb mpdrrew, “to fare well, to prosper; ” but this is not its
use in the Bible, and itis best taken in the ethical sense of being beneficent,
etc. The phrase, xadds xaya0ds, is found in the “good and comely” of ch.
v. 18, tob asher-yapheh, where, however, the correct rendering is, “ Behold,
what I have seen as good, which is also beautiful,” and the Hellenistic
source is wholly unrecognizable. Pithgam, “sentence,” is not $0éypya, but
a Persian word Hebraized. ‘‘I gave my heart to seek and search ont,” “I
considered in my heart,” etc. (ch. i. 18; ix. 1),—such-like expressions do
not imply a formal course of philosophizing, but simply the mental process
of an acute observer and thinker. “That which is” (ch. vil. 24) is not
76 tt éatwy, the real nature of things, but that which is in existence. Dean
Plumptre deems the book to be “throughout absolutely saturated with
Greek thought and language.” His chief proofs are such as these: the
phrase, ‘under the sun,” to express all human things (ch. i. 9, 14; iv. 15,
etc.); “seeing the sun,” for living (ch. vi. 5). But what more natural term
could be found than “under the sun” ? And why should it be borrowed ?
And the periphrasis for life, or its equivalent, is found in Job and the
Psalms. ‘“ Be not over-righteous or over-wise” (ch. vii. 16) is a maxim,
regarded contextually, by no means identical with the gnome pd dydy,
ne quid nimés, The proverbial warning respecting the bird of the air report-
ing a secret (ch. x. 20) surely need not have been derived from the story
of Ibycus and the cranes; as stimulating the mind under teaching it was
more natural for a Hebrew to speak of “ goads” than a Greek (ch. xii. 11),
We need not go to Euripides or the social life of Hellas to account for
Koheleth’s disparagement of women; his own country and age, cursed
with the evils of polygamy and the degraded condition of the female sex,
gave him reason enough for his remarks. Some other instances are adduced
by critics who see what they desire to see; but they are all capable of easy
explanation without recourse to a foreign origin being necessary. So we


‘ EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xxv
ee ee ee ee
may safely conclude that the language of our book exhibits no trace of
Greek parentage.

An apparently strong case has been produced by those who see evidences
of Greek philosophy in Ecclesiastes. Echoes of Stoical teaching are heard
in the language that speaks of the endless recurrence of the same phenomena
in the life of man (ch. i. 5—7, 11, etc.), which is paralleled by the theory
of the cycles of events presented by history, as M. Aurelius says (xi. 1),
“There will be nothing new for posterity to gaze at, and our ancestors stood
upon the same level of observation. All ages are uniform and of a colour,
insomuch that in forty years’ time a tolerable genius for sense and inquiry
may acquaint himself with all that is past and all that is to come.” There
is similarity, doubtless, in the ideas of these authors, but no greater than
might be expected in two thinkers writing of a consideration of facts which
struck them in reviewing the past. The thought of the vanity of man’s
life and labour, his aims and pleasures, is deemed to be derived from the
apathy of the Stoic and his contempt for the world; whereas it springs
from the teaching of bitter experience which needed no foreign stimulus to
animate its expression. The fatalism characteristic of Stoic doctrine, which
to a superficial reader seems to obtrude itself constantly, is really not found
in our book. The writer is too religious to fall into any such error. The
sad refrain, ‘“ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity. What profit hath a man of
all his labour ?” seems to some to savour of that philosophic fatalism which
regards man as the prey of blind destiny. Now, the things of which
Koheleth predicates vanity are wisdom, wealth, pleasure, power, specula-
tion; and why? Not because they are the working of irresponsible and
uncontrollable destiny, but because they fail in themselves to bestow that
for the sake of which they are pursued, or accrue only to those persons
whom Providence thus blesses. He recounts his own experience and his
attempts to find satisfaction in various pursuits, and he concludes that all
such strivings are vain, in go far as all are conditioned by the dispensation
of God, who permits enjoyment and possession according to his good
pleasure. The things themselves cannot secure and are not the cause of any
‘happiness which accompanies them; this is solely the gift of God. Man,
too, does not know what is best for him, and often seeks eagerly for what
is pernicious; Providence overrules his efforts and controls the final result.
Providence governs the most minute as well as the most important events
of man’s life (ch. iii. 1—8); everything is thus regulated according to
mysterious rules which are beyond our ken. But this profound conviction
does not lead Koheleth to regard man as & mere machine, possessed of no
free-will, whose liberty of action is entirely controlled by higher power,
who is as completely under the rule of necessity as the external physical
world. He does allow that, ag there are laws that direct the forces of
material nature, so there are laws that control man’s intellectual and moral
nature; and it is from his obedience or disobedience that happiness or pain
ensues. The infringement of these laws does not always bring punishment


xxvi INTRODUCTION TO


in this world, nor their observance reward, but retribution is certain in the
life beyond the grave (ch. xi. 9) ; and the Preacher counsels men to fear
God and to practise piety and virtue, not as though they were the victims of
cruel destiny, but as responsible beings who in many respects had their
life in their own hands.~- The second division of the book (ch. vii.—ix.)
contains a collection of practical suggestions how to make the best of the
present in remembrance of the omnipotent control of Providence. If the
fatalist pronounces that all is left to chance, and that God hides his face
and cares nought for human concerns, Koheleth warns against the error of
supposing that, because retribution is delayed or falls in some unexpected
way, Heaven takes no interest in mundane matters. Moral government
does certainly exist, and seeming exceptions only show that we cannot
understand its course, while we must submit to its decrees. If, again,
unbelief asserts that human efforts are vain and sterile, the Preacher, on
the contrary, urges men to do their part with energy, to use with profit the
time granted to them, to make the best of their position ; not that they can
always command success, but generally wisdom is more powerful than
physical force, ani at any rate diligence and action are man’s duty, and
results may be left in higher hands. ‘'he vexed question of free-will and
omniscience is not handled; man’s liberty and God’s decree are both main-
tained, but their compatibility is not explained. They are set side by side,
and both are taken into account, but there is no formal attempt at recon-
ciliation; it is enough to hold, on the one hand, that Providence rules
supreme, and, on the other, that piety and wisdom are better worth than
folly or greatest natural power. The bitter and reiterated cry of “ Vanity ”
does not argue disbelief in man’s free-will or in God’s providential care; it
issues from a soul that has learned its own weakness and its dependence
upon God; that has learned that happiness is his gift and is dispensed
according to his good pleasure.

Another loan from Stoic teaching is supposed to be found in the frequent
combination of “madness and folly” (ch. i. 17; ii. 12, etc.), which is com-
pared with the view that regarded all weaknesses and delinquencies as
forms of insanity. But Koheleth is offering no definition of human frailty ;
his intention is to show how he pursued his investigation. As contrarits
contraria intelliguntur, he learned wisdom by watching the results of
unwisdom, confusion of thought and purpose (“madness”); that he thus
designates moral error is natural to one taking a philosophical view of
human nature. Why he should have borrowed the expression from the
Stoics is hard, indeed, to see.

The alleged Epicureanism is equally unfounded. That parallels are met
with can surely be explained without supposing that the Preacher “drank
from a common source” with Lucretius and Horace. With regard to
physical science, had Koheleth to go to Epicurus that he might learn the
mystery of the daily rising and setting of the sun, or that rivers flow into
the sea, or that the waters somehow find their way back again? These


-


EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER » guvii


are matters of observation which must strike any thinker. Is the doctrine
concerning the dissolution of man’s compound being at death derived from
Lucretius P cclesiastes says that men and beasts have one destiny ; they
have a living principle, and, when this is withdrawn, their bodies crumble
into dust. He learned this great fact from his own sacred books; if Greek
philosophers taught it, they evolved the idea from their own minds and obser-
vation, or it was a traditionary knowledge handed down from antiquity.
But Koheleth sees a difference between the spirit of man and that of the
lower animals, in that the former goeth, as he holds, upward (ch. iii. 21),
returns to God (ch. xii. 7), the latter goeth downward to the earth. He
is here not thinking of the absorption of man’s spirit in the anima mundi;
he has been taught that God breathed into Adam the breath of life, and
that at death that “breath,” the living soul, goes back to its source, not
losing its identity, but coming more immediately in connection with its
Creator, retaining its personality, and, as the Targum paraphrases,
“returning to stand in judgment before him who gave it.” Concerning
the ignorance of what comes after death, our author is quite in accord with
the reticence of the Old Testament, and has not learned from a Greek
school to speak in this cautious manner. But it is in regard to the
enjoyment of life that Ecclesiastes is said to have chiefly borrowed from
Epicurean teaching. That, as some have supposed, he recommends a
coarse sensuality needs no refutation ; but even the ‘“‘ modified Epicureanism ”
which some read in his pages has no place there; the misconception arises
from a false interpretation of certain phrases, especially as taken in con-
nection with their context. There is one which often occurs, 6g. “It is
good and comely for one to eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all
his labour that he taketh under the sun all the days of his life” (ch. v. 18;
comp. ch. ii. 24; iii. 22; viii. 15). This expression, “to eat and drink,” had
not, to the ears of a Hebrew, simply the lower meaning which it carries
now, a8 if it implied only the enjoyment of the pleasures of the table.
Reproaching Shallum for his declension from righteous ways, Jeremiah
(xxii. 15) asks, “Did not thy father eat and drink, and do judgment
and justice, and then it was well with him?” Does the prophet signify
that Josiah pleased God by his Epicurean life? Is it not evident that the
phrase is a metaphor for prosperity, ease, and comfort? When Koheleth
inquires (ch. ii. 25), “Who can eat, or who can have enjoyment, more
than I?” he means that no one has had better opportunities than he for
enjoying life generally. One would have thought it scarcely necessary to
insist on the extended signification of this metaphor. The bountifulness of
Jehovah is thus expressed: “The Lord is the Portion of mine inheritance
and of my cup;” “Thou preparest a table before me” (Ps. xvi. 5; xxiii. 5) ;
and the joys of heaven are adumbrated by terms appropriate to a glorious
banquet: “I appoint unto you a kingdom,” said Christ (Luke xxii. 29),
“that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom;” “Blessed is he
that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God,” cried one, in reference to the


xxvili' INTRODUCTION TO


life of glory beyond the grave (Luke xiv. 15; comp. Rev. xix. 9). In this
and similar phrases used by the Preacher, such as “to rejoice,” “to see
good,” etc., the idea intended is not to encourage the selfish sensuality of
the voluptuary, but a well-regulated contentment with and enjoyment of
the good which God gives. Nothing more than this is in man’s power, and
to this he ought to confine his aim; that is, he ought to make the best of
the present, knowing that he is not the architect of his own happiness, but
that this is the gift of God, to be thankfully accepted as a boon from
heaven, whenever and in whatever fashion it may come. It is true that
the good and the evil often seem to be and are treated in the same manner
(ch. ix. 1, 2); but this is no reason for despair and inaction; nay, as the
present life is the only time for work, it behoves us to use it in the best
way: “ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.” Here
is no counsel of Epicurean drapagia, a passionless tranquillity. which
disturbs itself about nothing, but rather a call to an active performance
of duties as the best guarantee of happiness. The only other passage which
seems to favour licence and immorality is one towards the end (ch. xi. 9):
“ Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight
of thine eyes.” These words at first sight, and taken by themselves, do
seem to encourage youth to give free scope to its passions; but they must
not be separated from their solemn conclusion: ‘‘ But know thou, that for
all these things God will bring thee into judgment.” And the advice really
comes to this: youth is the time for enjoyment, while the senses are keen,
and the taste is unimpaired, and you do well to make the best of this time ;
this is your portion and lot given by God; but in all that you do, remember
the end, remember the account which you will have to give; take your
pleasure with this thought always before you.

That Ecclesiastes cannot be justly accused of scepticism has been already
shown incidentally. This and such-like errors are imputed by readers who
regard isolated expressions divorced from the context, and neglect the
general tone prevalent in the treatise. The idea is supported by such
passages as ch. i. 8, 12—18; iii. 9; and viii. 16, 17, in which Koheleth
professes man’s inability to understand God’s doings, and the uselessness
of wisdom in satisfying human aspirations. He does not affirm that man
can know nothing, apprehend nothing; he is not a disciple of agnosticism—
that mean excuse for declining to assent to revealed truth—he asserts
that human reason cannot fathom the depth of God’s designs. Reason
can receive facts, and compare and arrange and argue from them; but it
cannot explain everything; it has limits which it cannot pass; perfect
intellectual satisfaction is beyond mortals’ attainment. Is this equivalent
to denying to man the power of gaining any certitude or mastering any
verity P Again, when he intimates the vanity of wisdom and knowledge,
he is stating the truth that the course of events is beyond man’s control,
that no human wisdom can secure happiness, which is absolutely the gift


EOCOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xxix


of God. A profound belief in a governing Providence underlies all his
utterances; it is the mysterionsness, the secret working, of this govern-
ment that arrests his attention and leads him to contrast with it man’s
ignorance and impotence, and to lay skill, prudence, science, under the feet
of the great Disposer of hearts and circumstances. In all this he is not
speculative ; there is no theorizing or philosophizing; it is wholly practical,
tending to rules of daily life, not to questions of metaphysics or minute
theology.

There is another point on which the Preacher is said to exhibit the taint
of scepticism, and that is on the question of the immortality of the soul.
Some would make him a predecessor of the Sadducees; some cannot find a
trace of the orthodox doctrine in his pages, and indeed consider it to have
been unknown at his epoch; others venture to say that he had not even the
Greek’s idea of the soul and immortality, and held that man, in the matter
of life, differed nothing from the beast, had nothing to expect after death.
Without entering upon the general question how far the Old Testament
countenances the dogma of the immortality of the soul, we will see what
Koheleth says upon this absorbing topic. The first passage which bears
upon the subject is found in the last five verses of the third chapter, where
the destiny and being of men are compared with those of beasts. Properly
translated and explained, the words enunciate certain unimpeachable facts.
First they say that man, regarded as a mere animal, irrespectively of the
relation in which he stands to God, has no more power than the lower
creatures ; is, no more than they, master of his own fate. Then it is added
that the lot of men and beasts is the same; both have the breath of life;
when this is withdrawn, both die; so in this respect man has no advantage
over the beast—both come from dust and both return to dust. There is no
question here of the soul’s continued existence; the animal life alone is
spoken of, the physical breath or power which gives life to all animals of
whatever nature they may be; and all are placed in the same category by
having to succumb to the law of death. There is no scepticism thus far; but
round the twenty-first verse controversy has gathered. This is rendered in
the Revised Version, ‘‘ Who knoweth the spirit of man whether it goeth
upward, and the spirit of the beast whether it goeth downward to the
earth?” If we surrender the Authorized translation, “ The spirit of man
that goeth upward,” etc., which states a truth not before enunciated, we
must see whether the charge of scepticism is sustained by the Revised
Version, which has the authority of the Septuagint, Vulgate, Syriac, and
Targum. Now, it may be that Koheleth merely affirms that there are but
few who arrive at any knowledge on the subject, or he may say that no
one knows for certain anything about the respective destinies of the life of
man and brute; but he does not deny, if he refrains here from expressly
affirming, the continued existence of the personal soul. If we conceive that
he is referring only to the animal life, he intimates that in the manner of
death no one can:tell what difference there is between the withdrawal of


xxx INTRODUCTION TO


life from man and from brute. If he refers to the spirit, the ego of man,
his question implies belief in a continued existence after death; if it was
annihilated, if it perished with its earthly tabernacle, there could be no
inquiry as to what became of it. To assert that no one can track its
course is to certify that it has a course before it, though this be not
capable of demonstration. Plainly, too, he differentiates the fate of man
and beast. The vital principle of the latter may go with the body to the
dust; the spirit of the former may, as he says later (ch. xii. 7), return to
the God who gave it ; to hold the impossibility of attaining to certainty in
this mysterious subject by human reason or senses, does not make a man a
sceptic. The stage of the argument required this unsatisfying statement
of the case; it is net till the close of the book that doubt is cleared away,
and faith shines forth undimmed. There is a further difficulty in the final
clause of this paragraph: ‘For who shall bring him [back] to see what
shall be after him P ” Some have explained this clause, “ What shall become
of him after his death ?” by which may be signified a doubt whether he has
any future or not. But what is intended is either the thought that we
caunot tell whether after death we shall have any knowledge of what passes
on earth, or else that we cannot foresee what will happen to us or to any
one in the future in this world. In either case there is no denial of the
great verity of the immortality of the soul. But what is Koheleth’s view
of the judgment to come ? In ch, ix. he speaks of the dead thus: “ To him
that is joined with all the living there is hope: for a living dog is better
than a dead lion. [For the living know that they shall die: but the dead
know not anything, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory
of them is forgotten. As well their love as their hatred. . .is now perished;
neither have they any more a portion for ever in anything that is done under
the sun. . . Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol whither
thou goest.” The existence of the soul after death is here presupposed ; its
condition in the other world is the point elaborated. This is considered in
accordance with the view that obtains in Job, the Psalms, and other writings
of the Old Testament. Sheol is a place beneath the earth, gloomy, awful,
whither go, the souls of the dead. In the utterances of the poets it has
its gates, bars, valleys; its inhabitants are called rephaim, ‘the weak.”
Their mode of existence differs from that of their brethren in the upper
world. They know nothing; they are cut off from action; they have no
scope for the exercise of passion or affection ; they are joyless, deprived of all
that made life worth living; but they retain their individuality and have
to undergo a particular judgment. That Koheleth believed in this last
event has been questioned, and passages which seem to warrant the idea
have been distorted and explained away, or boldly dismissed as interpola-
tions. But taking for granted the integrity of the book as it has come
down to us, we cannot fairly escape from such inference. Thus, in view of
the partiality and iniquity of men in high position, our author comforts


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. zaxi


himeelf with the reflection that in good time God will judge the righteous
and the wicked (ch. iii. 16, 17). The vague but emphatic “there ”—
“there is a time there’—implies the world beyond the grave, the adverb
referring probably to God, who is named in the preceding clause. This
same thought enables the wise man to endure affliction patiently, “for to
everything there is a time and judgment” (ch. viii. 6)—the oppressor shall
meet with his reward. It is plain that retribution in the present life is
not meant; for Koheleth’s complaint is that moral government is not
invariably enforced in this world; he must therefore refer to another state
of existence, wherein full justice shall be done. This is made quite clear
by the warning to the young in ch. xi. 9, ‘“ Know thon, that for all these
things God will bring thee into judgment;” and the solemn close of the
whole treatise, “God shall bring every work into judgment, with every
hidden thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.” This judgment
is supposed to take place when the soul returns to God. Of its course and
details nothing more is said; neither Koheleth nor any Old Testament
scribe throws any light upon this mysterious subject, in this respect differ-
ing materially from the heathen who have treated of the same. Had he
borrowed from the works of Egyptians, Greeks, or Romans, he would have
been at no loss for descriptions of Hades and its denizens; the mythologies
of those peoples would have supplied prolix details. But a sacred reti-
cence restrains our author; he speaks as he is moved, and gives no rein to
his imagination. Human thought could not pierce the darkness which
enveloped the abode of the dead, and could deal only in vague conjecture
or unsubstantial dreams, contrasted with earthly, sensible realities. So at
this stage of revelation seers could describe the future only on its negative
side, as the privation of the joys, emotions, and pursuits of this present life.
To elucidate the positive side of this state, further revelation was needed.
Only of the great fact the writer is absolutely certain, and he employs the
truth as a consolation in trouble, as an explanation of God’s long-suffering,
as a motive for restraint and self-denial, as an event which shall solve the
difficulties and remove the anomalies which are found in the course and
constitution of this world.

Having thus endeavoured to relieve Ecclesiastes from the misapprehensions
to which it has been subjected ; having, as we hope, shown the unfounded
nature of the accusations of Stoicism, Epicureanism, fatalism, scepticism,
Hellenism,—we are in a position to state briefly our own view of the plan
and scope of the book. What do we gather to have been the circumstances
under which it was composed ? The case seems to have been the following:
The period was a trying one. Oppression and injustice reigned; fools and
proletarians were promoted to high positions; wise and pious men were
wronged and crushed. Where was that moral government which the Law
of Moses enunciated, and which had been the guide and support of the
Hebrew people in all their early history ? Did injustice meet with the
punishment which they had been taught to expect? Did the good and


xxxif INTRODUCTION TO


obedient prosper and live long in the land? Did not daily experience give
the lie to the promise of temporal retribution set forth in Scripture? And
if revelation was false in this respect, why not in others alsoP By this
doubt the very foundation of religion was sapped; the hopes that the
exiles had brought with them, on their return to their native land, were
cruelly crushed, and the bitter cry arose, “Is there a God that judgeth the
earth P?’? Malachi had been gathered to his rest; no prophet was there to
lead the way to better things or to console the desponding people for the
falsification of their expectations. What was the result ? Some took refuge
in simple unbelief, saying in their hearts, “There is no God ;” some, laying
aside all consideration of the future, revelled in the present, lived in
debauchery and sensuality, with the thought, “ Let us eat and drink; for
to-morrow we die ;” others, as if to constrain God to fulfil old prophecies,
and to grant their temporal desires, practised a scrupulous observance of
the outward duties of religion, a formal rigorism which anticipated that
later Pharisaism which meets us in the gospel history. These tendencies
are reflected in Ecclesiastes, and are more or less corrected herein. This
rectification is not effected in a formal, logical method. The work is by no
means a regular treatise, moral or religious. Some have likened it to
St. Augustine’s ‘Confessions,’ or to Pascal’s ‘ Pensées.’ It is, perhaps, not
quite analogous to either of these, especially as it is written under an
assumed name; but it does unveil the author’s hidden self, and teaches by
recounting personal experiences, and may thus be termed ‘ Confessions,’ or
‘Thoughts,’ rather than a dissertation or poem. Its subject is the vanity
of all that is human and earthly, and by contrast and implication the
steadfastness and importance of the unseen. The writer desires, in the first
place (virtually, though not expressly), to comfort his countrymen under
their present depressed circumstances, to teach them not to set their hopes
on earthly success, or to fancy that their own efforts could secure happi-
ness, but to make the best of the present, and to receive with thankful-
ness the good that God sends or permits. He also urges the avoidance of
externalism in religion, and shows wherein true devotion consists. And, in
the second place, he warns against despair or reckless licence, as though it
mattered not what one did, as if there were no higher Power that'regarded ;
he solemnly asserts his faith in an overruling providence, though ‘we cannot
trace the reason or course of its working ; his conviction that all is ordered
for the best ; his unswerving faith in the life everlasting and in a’future
judgment, which shall remedy the seeming anomalies of this present exist-
ence.. In all the problems of life, in all the disappointments and difficulties
that meet our best and noblest efforts, there is nothing to cling to, no
anchor on which to rest, but the fear of God and obedience to his commands.
Whatever happens, or however things may seem to go contrary to one’s
wishes and aspirations, amid the outward prosperity of the wicked and’ the
humiliation of the good, he triumphs in the assurance that he knows
certainly that it shall be well with them that fear God (ch. viii.12). To


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. xxxiil


convey this instruction the author does not compose a carefully ordered and
well-arranged dissertation, nor does he propound a moral discourse; he
takes another method; he puts forth his views under the mask of Solomon,
the king whose name had become proverbial for wisdom. He makes this
celebrated personage recount his wide experiences, and, under this veil,
hiding his own personality, he presents his peace offering to his contem-
poraries. No one had such varied knowledge of man’s powers and circum.
stances as Solomon; no one like him could command attention and respect
at the hand of the Hebrew people; the impersonation secured an audience,
and enabled the writer to say much to them that would have come with
less grace and weight from another. Though the work has acertain unity,
and its great subject is continually recurring, the writer does not confine
himself within narrow Hmits; he takes occasion to give rules of life; he
mingles practice with theory. It is as though he commenced his work with
some idea of writing formally and methodically, and then, carried away by
the influence of his subject, overwhelmed by the thought of the nothing-
ness of human endeavour, he cannot get beyond this reflection, and while
uttering maxims of wisdom and parables of common sense, he connects
them with his predominant view, mingling aphorisms and confessions with
some incongruity. It seemed good to him to record the opinions which
crossed his mind at various times, and the modifications which he felt
constrained to admit; thus he shows the progress of his thought towards
the great conclusion which closes the treatise. This conclusion is the clue
vo the interpretation of the whole. Resting on this rock, Koheleth could
relate his doubts, perplexities, disquietudes, without fear of being mis-
understood or leading others astray.

The work has its natural place in the teaching of revelation and the
progress of true religion. If the literal tendency of Mosaic legislation was
in the direction of the strong belief in temporal rewards and punishments,
and if this notion cramped all higher aspirations and set the heart on gross
earthly hopes, it was Koheleth’s business to introduce a spiritual element
in these expectations, to supplement the earlier reticence concerning the
life beyond the grave by giving expression to the belief in immortality,
By showing the inapplicability of the ancient idea to all the circumstances
of the present life, he led men to look to another life, and to see another
meaning in those antique utterances which spake of temporal rewards and
punishments, earthly success, earthly calamity. It was ordered by Provi-
dence that religious knowledge should be communicated gradually, that it
should be revealed as men were able to bear it, here a little, there a little,
Each book adds something to the store of dogma, just as each saint in old
story reflects some feature of perfect manhood, and helps the conception of
the character of Jesus Christ. The doctrine of future retribution, which is
taken for granted in the New Testament, forms a very slight portion of the
teaching of the earlier Scriptures; and the Holy Spirit has allowed the
writers of Job, Psalms, and Ecclesiastes to express the sense of perplexity

BOOLESIASTES, d


suuiv INTRODUCTION TO


which the apparent anomalies in moral government presented to the
thoughtful observer. Our author, indeed, finds a solution; but it is only by
an exercise of faith in God’s justice and goodness that he rises superior to
the depressing effect of experience; and beyond this conviction of the
ultimate victory of goodness he has nothing definite to offer. The way to
the fuller revelation of the gospel is thus laid open. The mental struggles
of this ancient Hebrew seer are a lesson for all time, and point to a need of
further explication, which was duly to be given. And as the same questions
have always been a source of solicitude and disquieted men’s minds in
every age, it has seemed good to Divine Providence to set these trials of
faith in the pages of Scripture, that others, reading them, may see that they
stand not alone, that their doubts have been the experience of many minds,
and that as such as Koheleth, with imperfect knowledge and a partial
revelation, rose superior to difficulties and let faith conquer mistrust, so
Christians, who are better instructed, who stand in the full light of com-
pleter knowledge, should never for a moment feel misgiving concerning
the: dealings of God’s providence; but in unswerving trust “commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Oreator,”
easting all their care upon him, knowing that he careth for them.


§ 4. Canomiorry, Unity, anp Inrecriry.


Ecclesiastes has been received without controversy in the Christian
Church as a book of the Bible. In all the extant catalogues, conciliar and
private, it occurs undisputed. The Jewish Church, however, has not been
quite so unanimous in its full acceptance; for although it is found in all
the lists of sacred books,’and had its place among the five rolls (Megilloth),
there was, towards the end of the first Christian century, some hesitation
in rabbinical schools to recognize its complete inspiration, and to commend
Sts public recitation. Objections were made on the ground of apparent
contradictions contained in different parts, of its want of harmony with
other portions of Holy Scripture, and of certain heretical statements. Of
these objections it is to be observed that they regard rather the retention of
the book in the canon than its admission therein; and that, appearing
first in the first Christian century, they show that up to that time, at any
rate, Ecclesiastes had been included in the sacred catalogue. The seeming
contradictions and discrepancies arise from a partial view of the contents,
from taking isolated passages uncorrected and unexplained by other state-
ments and the general tendency. For instance, Koheleth is said, in ch. ii,
2 and viii. 15, to commend mirth; and in ch. vii. 3 to prefer sorrow to
laughter; in one place to praise the dead (ch. iv. 2); in another to prefer a
live dog to a dead lion (ch. ix. 4). So again we read, “ Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart ” (ch. xi. 9), whereas
Moses warns against seeking after one’s own heart and one’s own eyes
(Wamb. xv. 89). These misapprehensions were soon set at rest, the ortho-


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, xx1¥
TSE EE Se eee eee


doxy of the final verses could not be questioned, the inspiration of the work
was acknowledged, and it has ever since been received alike by the Jewish
and Christian Churches. That it is not quoted in the New Testament, and
is thus far deprived of the authorization afforded by such reference, detracts
in no respect from its Divine character, nor is this affected by the trans-
ference of its authorship from Solomon to an unknown writer. The
grounds on which it has been admitted into the sacred canon are inde-
pendent of any such external confirmation, and the Holy Spirit compels
recognition at the hands of the Church by evidence that is self-revealing
andindubitable. It is clear also that, in our Lord’s time, Ecclesiastes formed
one of the twenty-two books of the Hebrew Scripture, most of which were
endorsed by citation, and a virtual sanction was thus given to the rest of
the collection.

The unity and integrity of our book have been called in question, chiefly
by those who have noted the apparent contradictions which it contains,
gnd have failed to apprehend the author’s standpoint, and his reason for
the introduction of these anomalies. Thus exception is taken by some
against the seeming want of connection between ch. iv. 18, 14 and verses
15, 16; others have discovered dislocations in various passages, and wished
to arrange the work in different fashion, according to their view of the
writer’s intention. Others, again, have detected interpolations and later
additions. Thus Cheyne, having made up his mind that Koheleth did
not believe in future retribution, strikes out as spurious all passages that
favour the idea of a coming judgment; in a similar spirit Geiger and
Noldeke affect to see late insertions in ch. xi. 9 and xii. 7. But all this
is surely uncritical. There is no pretence of proving that the incriminated
passages differ toto celo in language and treatment from the rest of the
work, or that they could not have been written by the author. An opinion
concerning Koheleth’s dogma is adopted and boldly asserted, and any
expression which opposes this idea is at once attributed to a later editor,
who foisted his own sentiments into the text. If this free handling of
ancient documents is allowed when they seem to be in advance of what
® perhaps shallow criticism deems to be the spirit of the age, how are we
to maintain the genuineness of any unfettered thinker’s work? Con-
cerning the epilogue, however, there is a little more difficulty made by
those who do not look upon it as the crown and conclusion of the whole,
without which the work would be unsatisfactory and lack completion.
The objections to this paragraph are twofold—linguistio and dogmatic.
It is said that it contains expressions deviating from those that occur in
the former parts. The discussion seems to end at ver. 8 of the last
chapter; and the final passage differs in style and other particulars from
the rest. But an examination of the language shows that it can be
paralleled in every particular from the earlier pages, and the difference
in style is necessitated by the subject. In this appendix, or postscript,
the writer reveals himself, in propria persona, no longer under the veil of


uxxvi INTRODUCTION TO


rr


Solomon, but taking the reader, as it were, into his confidence, showing
what he really is, and his claim to attention. Far from being superfluous,
the addition puts the seal to the whole production. Speaking of Koheleth
in the third person, he virtually acknowledges the fictitious use of
Solomon’s authority. At the same time, he maintains that the work has
not lost its value because it cannot vindicate its authorship at the hands
of the great king. He himself has been inspired to write it; the same
“ Shepherd ” who guided the pens of Solomon and other wise men directed
him likewise. As to the momentous conclusion, every one who thinks
with us concerning the religious views of the writer, and the design of
his work, will agree that it is most apposite, and is the only conceivable
summing-up that satisfies the requirements of the treatise. It is alsoin
full accord with what has preceded. The solution of the anomalies in
life, offered by the fact of a future judgment, has been intimated more
than once in other parts of the book; it is here only presented again
with more emphasis and in a more striking position. We may add that
no doubt concerning the genuineness of the epilogue was ever raised by
the Jewish schools which hesitated to allow full inspiration to Ecclesiastes.
Indeed, it was the undoubted orthodoxy of the closing verses which finally
overcame all opposition.


§ 5. Lrrerarors.


The literature connected with Ecclesiastes is of enormous extent. We
can here only enumerate a few of the most useful commentaries and
kindred works.


Among the Fathers we have these: Origen, ‘Scholia;’ Gregory Thaumaturgus,
‘ Metaphrasis ;’ Gregory Nyssen., ‘Conciones;’ Jerome, Versicn and ‘Commentary ;’
Olympiodorus, ‘ Enarratio.’ The medieval and later expositicus are innumerable:
Hugo A. §. Victore, ‘ Homiliw ;’ the Jews, Rashi, Rashbam, and Ibn Ezra; Luther,
‘ Annotationes;’ Pineda, ‘Commentarii;’ Cornelius & Lapide; Grotius, ‘ Annota-
tiones ;’ Reynolds, ‘ Annotations ;’ Smith, ‘ Explicatio; ’ Schmidt, ‘ Commentarius ;’
Mendelssohn, ‘ D. Buch Koheleth ;? Unibreit, ‘ Uebers. und Darstell., and ‘ Koheleth
Scepticus ;’ Knobel, ‘Comment. ;’ Herzfeld, ‘Uebers. und Erlaut.;’ Hitzig, ‘ Erklar-
ung;’ Stuart, ‘Commentary ;’ Vaihinver, ‘Uebers. und Erklar.;’ Hengstenberg
‘ Auslegung;’ Ginsburg, ‘ Koheleth;’ Plumptre, ‘ Ecclesiastes ;’ Wright, ‘ Book of
Koheleth;’ Tyler, ‘ Keclesiastes;’ Renan, ‘L’Ecclésiaste Traduit ;’ Zéckler, in
Lauge’s ‘ Bibelwerk,’ and edited by Tayler Lewis; Delitzsch, in Clarke’s ‘ For. Library ;*
Gratz, ‘Kohélct;’ Gietmaun, in ‘Cursus Script. Sacr.’ (1890); Motais, ‘Solomon et
I’cclésiaste,” and in ‘La Sainte Bible avec Cummeutaires;” Nowack, in ‘ Kurzgef.
Exeg. Handbuch ;’ Volck, in ‘ Kurzge!. Kommentar’ (1859); Bishop Wordsworth, ‘ Bible
with Notes ;’ Bullock, in ‘Speaker’s Commentary ;’ Salmon, in Bishop Ellicott’s
‘Commentary for English Readers ;’ Cox, ‘ Expository Lectures,’ and ‘ Book of Ecclesi-
astes’ (1891).


§ 6. Division reto Sections.


The attempts to dissect the book and to arrange ita contents methodi-
cally have been as numerous as the editors themselves. Every exegete


EOOLESIASTES; OB, THE PREACHER. exe
Deectee


has tried his hand at this work, and the difference of the results arrived
at is at once a proof of the difficulty of the subject. Between the idea, on
the one hand, that the book is a rough mass of materials, without form,
argument, or method, and that which regards it as a well-balanced poem,
with strophes and antistrophes, etc., there is wide scope for disagreement
and dispute. Rejecting as arbitrary and unwarranted the transposition of
verses, to which some critics have had recourse, we note a few of the most
feasible arrangements offered by those who recognize the unity of the
work, and the existence of a central idea which throughout is kept more or
less prominently in view.

Many. divide the book into four parts. Thus Zéckler, Keil, and
Vaihinger: I. ch. i, ii.; II. ch. iii—v.; III. ch. vi. 1 —viii. 15; IV. ch.
viii, 16—xii. 7; epilogue, ch. xii. 8—14, So Ewald, except that his second
division comprises ch. iii. 1—vi. 9, M‘Clintock and Strong: I. ch.
i, ii.; IL. ch. iii, 1—vi. 9; III. ch. vi. 10—viii. 15; IV. ch. viii. 16—xii. 8,
According to Tyler, the work separates into two chief parts—the first, ch.
i, 2—vi. 12, being the negative side, exhibiting the author’s disappoint-
ments; the second, ch. vii. 1—xii. 8, the positive side, giving the philosophy
of the matter, with some practical rules of life. Kleinert, in Herzog and
Plitt’s ‘Real-Encyclop.,’ analyzes thus: I. ch. i. 12— ii. 23, inductive
proof of vanity from experience; II. ch. ii. 24—iii, 22, God’s ordering;
III. ch. iv.—vi., a collection of shorter sentences, expressing partly the result
of I. and II.; IV. ch. vii. 1—ix. 10; V. ch. ix. 11—xii. 8. Ginsburg gives,
prologue, four sections, and epilogue, viz.: prologue, ch. i. 2—11; IL.
ch. i, 12—ii. 26; IL. ch. iti. —v. 19; III. ch. vi. 1—viii. 15; IV. ch. viii.
16—xii. 7; epilogue, ch. xii. 8—14.

From the above given details it will be seen that it is no easy matter to
systematize the treatise, and to force it into logical periods. It was plainly
never intended to be so taken, and cannot, without violence, be made te
assume precise regularity. There is, indeed, no designed plan; it has a
theme which gives it consistency and adherence; but, satisfied with this
central idea, the author allows himself a certain liberty of treatment, and
often branches off into collateral subjects. We think, however, that it con-
tains two main divisions, the first of which conveys the extended proof of
the vanity of earthly things, obtained by personal experience and obser-
vation; while the second deduces certain practical conclusions from the
previous considerations, presenting warnings, counsels, and rules of life.
Taking this view, we divide the book in the following manner :—


Trrze of the book. Ch. i, 1.
Protoeuz. Vanity of earthly things, and their oppressive monotony. Ch. i, 2—11.


Division I. Proof of the vanity of earthly things from personal experience and
general observation. Ch. i. 12—vi. 12. ;
Section 1. Vanity of striving after wisdom and knowledge. Ch. i, 12—18.
Section 2. Vanity of striving after pieasure and wealth. Oh, ii, 1—11.
Section 8. Vanity of wisdom, in view of the fate that awaits the wise and the fool,
and the uncertainty of the future. Ch. ii. 12—26.


xxxviii INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


Section 4. The impotence of man before the providence of God, and the consequent
duty to make the best of the present. Ch. iii. 1—22. .
Section 5. Things which interrupt or destroy men’s happiness, such as oppression,
envy, useless toil, isolation, fickle popularity. Ch. iv. 1—16.

Section 6. Vanity in popular religion, worship, and vows. Ch. v. 1—7.

Section 7. Dangers in # despotic state, and the unprofitableness of wealth. Oh. ¥.
8—17.

Section 8. Man should enjoy all the good which God gives him. Ch. v. 18—20,

Section 9. Vanity of wealth without power of enjoying it. Ch. vi 1—6.

Section 10. The insatiability of desire. Ch. vi. 7—9

Section 11. Man’s short-sightedness and powerlessness against Providence. Oh. vi.
10—12.


Division II. Deductions from the above-named experiences, with warnings and rules
of life. Ch. vii. 1—xii. 8

Section 1. Practical rules of life set forth in proverbial form, recommending earnest-
ness in preference to frivolity. Ch. vii. 1—7.

Section 2. True wisdom is shown in resignation to the ordering of God’s providence,
Ch. vii. 8—14.

Section 8. Warnings against excesses, and praise of the golden mean. Ch. vil. 15—22,

Section 4. Wickedness is folly ; woman is the most evil thing in the world; man has
perverted au originally good nature, Ch. vii. 23—29.

Section 5. True wisdom counsels obedience to the ruling powers, however oppressive,
and submission to the decrees of Providence, Ch. viii. 1—9.

Section 6. The difficulty concerning the prosperity of the evil and the misery of the
righteous in this world: how to be solved and met. Ch. viii. 1O—15,

Section 7. The course of God’s moral government is inexplicable. The uncertainty
of life and the certainty of death ought to lead man to make the best of the
present. Ch. viii. 16—ix. 10.

Section 8. The issues and duration of life cannot be calculated upon. Oh. ix. 11,12,

Section 9. Wisdom is not always rewarded when it does good service. Oh. ix.
13—16.

Section 10, Some proverbs concerning wisdom and folly. Ch. ix. 17, 18

Section 11. Wisdom is marred. by the intrusion of a little folly. Ch. x. 1—8

Section 12. Illustration of wise conduct under capricious rulers. Ch. x. 4—7.

Section 13. Proverbs intimating the benefit of prudence and caution. Ch. x.8—1L

Section 14. Contrast between words and acts of the wise man and of the fool.
Ch. x. 12—15.

Section 15. The misery of a state under a foolish ruler, and advice to subjects thus
cursed. Ch. x. 16—20.

Section 16. The first remedy for the perplexities of life: the duty of benevolence;
one should do one’s duty diligently, leaving results to God. Ch. xi. 1—6.

Section 17. The second is a cheerful and contented spirit. Ch. xi. 7—9.

Section 18. The third is piety practised in early life, and before the faculties are
numbed by the approach of age. The last days of the old man are graphicall
described under certain images and analogies. Ch. xi. 10—xii. 7. The we
ends with the refrain, “ All is vanity.” Ch. xii. 8.


Epi.oeus. Observatiors commendatory of the author, explaining his standpoint, the
object of the boo", and the grand conclusion to which it leads) Ch, xii. 9—14,


ao 4


a feminine noun formed froma

verb kalal, “to cali” (see Introduction, § 1),
fh ion better rendered “ Convener” or
It is found nowhere else but in
this book, where it oceure three times in this
chapter (vers. 1,2, 12), three times in ch. xii
8, 9,10, and once in ch. vii. 27. In all but
one instance (viz. ch. xii %) it ie used with-
out the article, as 2 proper name. Jerome,
in his commentary, translates it, ‘ Concio-
nator, in bis version ‘ Ecclesiastes’ It
would seem to denote one who gathered
ground him a congregation in order to in-
struct them in Divine The feminine
form ie explained in various ways. Either
it is used abstractedly, as the designation of
an office, which it seems not to be; or it is
formed as some uther words which are found
with a feminine termination, though de-
ing the names of men, indicating, ae
Gesenius notes (§ 107, 3), a high degree
of activity in the of the partienlar
ality signified by the stem; ¢.g. Alemecth,
saat (1 Chron. viii. 26; iz.42), Puche-
wth (Ezra ii 57), Sophereth (Neb. vii. 57);
or, a8 is most probable, the writer desired to
identify Koheleth with Wisdom, though it
wust be observed that the perzouality of the
suthor often eppesrs, as in ch. i 16—18;
Vil Z, Ac.; the rélz of Wisdom being forthe
nonce forgotten. The word “king” in the


| title is shown by the aecentuation to be in


sppition to “ Kobeleth ” not to “ David;”
and there can be no doubt thet the description


is intended to denote Solomon, though his '


RCCLESUASTES.


nowhere actually given. as it is in
the two other cectrnigonsa St him (Prov.
i.1; Cant.i.1). Other intimations of the
aseusuption of Solomon’s mality are
found in ch. i. 12, *I Koheleth was king,”
ec.; #9 in describing his consummate wisdom
(ch. i. 12, 16; ii. 15; comp. 1 Kings iii 12;
vy. 12), and in his being the author of many
proverbs (ch. xii. 9; comp. 1 Kings iv. 22) —
accomplishments which are not noted in the
case A any other of David’e descendants.
Also the picture of luxury and magnifi-
ence presented in ch. ii enitse no Jewi-h
tsonarch but Solomon. The origin of the
bame applied to him may probably be
traced to the historieal 2a mentioned in
1 Kings viii. 55, ete., where Solomon gathers
all Israel together to the dedication cf the
temple, and utters the remarkable prayer
which contained blessing and teaching and
exhortation. As we have shown in the
Introduction (% 2), the aseumption of the
bane ie a mere literary device to give weight
and importauce to the treatise to which it
appertains. The term, “ King in Jerusalem,”
or, a8 in yer. 12, “ King over Israel in Jern-
sealers,” is unique, and occurs nowhere elec in
Seripture. David is said tu have reigind in
Jerusalem, when this sat of guverniuunt is
spoken of in contrast witl: that at Hebron
(2 Sam. v. 5), and the same expres-ion is
used of Solomon, Echoboam, and cthiers
(i Kings xi. 42; xiv. 21: xv. 2,10); and
the phrase probably dinotes a time when
the government bad become divided, and
Ierael had a different eapital from Judah.

Vers. 2—11.—Prowerze. The vanity of
all human end mundane things, and the
oppressive monotony of their continued re
eurrence.


Ver. 2,—Vanity of vanities, saith the
&


3


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(on, 1 1—18.


Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is vanity
(comp. ch. xii. 8). “Vanity” is hebel,
which means “ breath,” and is used meta-
phorically of anything transitory, frail, un-
satisfying. We have it in the proper name
Abel, an appropriate designation of the youth
whose life was cut short by a brother’s
murderous hand. “ Vanity of vanities,”
like “ heaven of heavens” (1 Kings viii. 27),
“song of songs” (Cant. i. 1), etc., is equiva-
lent to a superlative, “most utterly vain.”
Tt is here arn. exclamation, and is to be re-
garded as the key-note of the whole subse-
quent trextiee, which is merely the develop-
ment of thiz text. Septuagint, paradrns
pBataorhrar , other Greek translators, aruls
atpldwy, “vapour of vapours.” For “saith ”
the Vulgate gives dixit; the Septuagint,
elrev; but se there is no reference to any
previous utiwrance of the Preaclier, the
present is more suitable here. In affirming
that “all is vanity,” the writer is referring
to human and mundane things, and directs
not his view beyond such p! enomena. Such
a reflection is common in sacred and profane
writings alike ; such experience is universal
(comp. Gen. xlvii. 9; Ps. xxxix. 5—7; xe.
8—10; Jas. iii. 14). “ Pulvis et umbra
sumus,” says Horace (‘Carm.,’ iv. 7. 16.
“O curashominum! O quantum estin rebus
inane!” (Persius, ‘Sat.’ i. 1). If Dean
Plumptre is correct in contending that the
Book of Wisdom was written to rectify the
deductions which might be drawn from
Koheleth, we may contrast the caution of
the apocryphal writer, who predicates vanity,
not of all things, but only of the hope of the
ungodly, which he likens to dust, froth, and
smoke (see Wisd. ii. 1, etc.; v. 14). St
Paul (Rom. viii. 20) seems to have had
Ecclesiastes in mind when he spoke of the
creation being subjected to vanity (77
paradrnti), a8 a consequence of the fall of
man, not to be remedied till the final restitu-
tion of all things. ‘ Buta man will say, If
all things are vain and vanity, wherefore
were they made? If they are God’s works,
how are they vain? But it is not the works
of God which he calls vain. God forbid!
The heaven is not vain; the earth is not
vain: God forbid! Nor the sun, nor the
moon, nor the stars, nor our own body. No;
all these are very good. But what is vain?
Man’s works, pomp, and vain-glory. These
came not from the hand of God, but are of
our own creating. And they are vain be-
cause they have no useful end. .. . ‘That is
ealled vain which is expected indeed to
possess value, yet possesses it not; that
which men call empty, as when they speak
of ‘empty hopes,’ and that which is fruit-
Jess. And generally that is called vain
which is of no use. Let us see, then,
whether all human things are not of this


a TT


(St. Chrysostom, ‘Hom. xii. in
Ephes.’).

Ver. 3.— What profit hath a man of all his
labour which he taketh under the sun? Here
begins the elucidation of the fruitlessness of
man’s ceaseless activity. The word rendered
“profit” (yithron) is found only in this
book, where it occurs frequently. It means
“that which remains over, advan ma
meptooel(a, as the LXX. translates #t As the
verb and the substantive are cognate in the
following words, they are better rendered,
tn all his labour wherein he taboureth. So
Euripides (Androm.” 184) has, °f uédy@or
noxGeis, and (‘ And. Fragm.,’ vii. 4), Tots
mox@odc: udxbous evtuxa@s cuverméver. Man
is Adam, the natural man, unenlightened
by the grace of God. Under the sun is an
expression peculiar to this book @=amp. vers.
9, 14; ch. ii, 11, 17, ete.), but is not in-
tended to contrast this present with a
future life; it merely refers to what we call
sublunary matters. The ;hrase is often
met with in the Greek poets. Eurip.,
‘ Alcest..’ 151—


Turi t dplorn ray id’ HAlp paxpg.
“ By far the best of all beneath the sun.”
Homer, ‘ Iliad,’ iv. 44—
At yap ia’ heAl@ re Kal odpayg dorepderri
Nacerdovoi wédnes emixBovlwy avoparer.
“ Of all the cities occupied by man
Beneath the sun and starry cope of heaven.”
(Cowper.)
Theognis, ‘ Parosm.,’ 167—


“OABios ovdels
*AvOpéxev, éxécous héAwos Kabopa.


“ No mortal man
On whom the sun looks down is wholly blest.”


In an analogous sense we find in other pas-
sages of Scripture the terms “under heaven”
(ver. 13; ch. ii. 3; Exod. xvii. 14; Luke xvii,
24) and “upon the earth” (ch. viii. 14, 16;
Gen. vill. 17). The interrogative form of
the verse conveys a strong negative (comp.
ch. vi. 8), like the Lord’s word in Matt. xvi.
26, “ What shall a man be profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, aud forfeit his
soul?” The epilogue (ch. xii. 13) furnishes
a reply to the desponding ing\ 3y.

Ver. 4—One generation passeth away,
and another generation cometh. The trans-
lation rather weakens the force of the
original, which is, a generation goeth, and
@ generation cometh. Man is only a pil-
grim on earth; he soon passes away, and
his place is occupied by others. Parallelisms
of this sentiment will occur to every reader.
Thus Ben-Sira, “ All flesh waxeth old as a
garment: for the covenant from the begin-
ning is, Thou shalt die the death. As of the


om. 1. 1—18.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 3


——— NT


green leaves on a thick tree, some fall and
some grow; so is the generation of flesh
and blood, one cometh to an end, and another
is born. Every work rotteth and consumeth
away, and the worker thereof shall go
withal ” (Ecelus. xiv. 17, ete. ; comp, Job x.
21; Ps.xxxix.13). The famous passage iu
Homer, ‘ Iliad,’ vi. 146, ete., is thus rendered
by Lord Derby—


“The race of man is as the race of leaves :
Of leaves, one generation by the wind
Is scattered on the earth; another soon
i le luxuriant verdure bursts to
igut.
So with our race: these flourish, those
decay.”


(Comp. ibid., xxi. 464, ete.; Horace, ‘ Ars
Poet.,’ 60.) But (and) the earth abideth for
ever. While the constant sucecssion of
generations of men goes on, the earth re-
mains unchanged and immovable. If men
were ax permanent as is their dwelling-place,
their labours might profit; but as things
are, the painful contrast between the two
makes itself felt. The term, “for ever,” like
the Greek <is rby aidva, does ot necessarily
imply eternity, but often denotes limited or
conditioned duration, as when the slave is
engaged to serve lis master “for ever”
(Exod. xxi. 6), or the hills are called “ ever-
lasting ” (Gen xlix, 25). This verse gives
one instance of growth and decay in contrast
with insensate continuance. The following
verses give further examples.

Ver. 5.—The sun also ariseth, and the sun
goecth down. The sun is another instance
of evér-recurring change in the face of an
enduring sameness, rising and setting day
by day, and resting never. The legendary
‘Life of Abram’ relates how, havine been
hidden for some years in a cave in order
to escape the search of Nimrod, when he
emerged from his concealment, and for the
first time beheld heaven and earth, he began
to inquire who was the Creator of the
wonders around him. When the sun arose
and flooded the scene with its glorious light,
he at once concluded that that bright orb
must be the creative Deity, and offered his
prayers to italldaylong. But when it sank
in darkness, he repented of his illusion,
being persuaded that the sun could not have
made tlie world and be itself subject to
extinction (see ‘Abraham: his Life and
Times, p. 12). And hasteth to his place
where he arose; literally, and panteth
(equivalent to hasteth, long-th to go) to its
place arising there; ic. the.sun, sinking in
the west, eagerly during the night returns
to the east, duly to rise there in the morning.
The “ place” is the region of reappearance.
The Septuagint gives, “The sun arises, and
the sun sets, and draws (¢A«ce:) unto its


place;” and then carrics the idea into the
following verse: “ Arising there, it proceedeth
southward,” etc. The Vulgate supports the
rendering; but there is no doubt that the
Authorized Version gives substantially the
sense of the Hebrew text as accentuated.
The verb xv (shaaph), as Delitzsch shows,
implies “ panting,” not from fatigue, but in
eager pursuit of something; and all notions
of panting steeds or morning exhalations are
quite foreign from the conception of the
passage. The notion which Koheleth desires
to convey is that the sun makeg no real
progress; its eager panting merely brings it
to the old place, there to recommence its
monotonous routine. Rosenmiiller quotes
Catullus, ‘Carm.,’ v.4—6, on which Doerinz
cites Lotich., ‘ Eleg.,’ iii. 7. 23—


“Ergo ubi permensus celum sol occidit,
idem
Purpureo vestit lumine rursus humum;
Nos, ubi decidimus, defuncti munere vitse,
Urget perpetua lumina nocte sopor.”


But our passage does not contrast the re-
vival of the sun every morning with man’s
eternal sleep in death.

Ver. 6.—The wind goeth toward the south,
and turneth about unto the north; literally,
going towards the south, and circling towards
the north. These words, as we have seen
above, are referred to the sun by the Septua-
gint, Vulgate, and Syriac; but it is best to
make this verse refer only to the wind—a
fresh example of motion continually re-
peated with no real progress to an end.
Thus each verse comprises one subject and
idea, ver. 4 being concerned with the earth,
ver. 5 with the sun, ver. 6 with the wind,
and ver. 7 with the waters. There seems
to be no particular foree in the naming of
north and south, unless it be in contrast to
the sun’s motion from east to west, mentioned
in the preceding verse. The words following
show that these two directions are not alone
intended. Thus the four quarters are virtu-
ally included. It whirleth about continu-
ally. The-original is more forcible, giving
by its very form the idea of weary monotony.
The subject is delayed till the last, thus:
Going towards the south. . . circling, cireling,
goeth the wind ; i.e. it blows from all quartcrs
at its own caprice. And the wind returneth
again according to his circuits. And on tts
circlings returneth the wind; it comes back
to the point whence it started. The wind, -
seemingly the freest of all created things,
is bound by the same law of immutable
changeableness, insensate repetition.

Ver. 7.—All the rivers run into the sea;
yet the sea is not full. Here is another
instance of unyarying operation producing
no tangible result. The phenomenon men-
tioned is often the subject of remark and


é ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


speculation in classical authors. Commen-
tators cite Aristophanes, ‘ Clouds,’ 1293—


Adrn piv (80. 4 OdAarra) ovdty ylyveras
"Em ppedvtay Tay woTapav tAclwy.


“The sea, though all the rivers flow therein,
Waxetli no greater.”


Lucretius attempts to account for the fact,
*De Rer. Nat.,’ vi. 608—


“Nunc ratio reddunda, augmen quin nesciat
sequor. <
Principio mare mirantur non reddere majus
Naturam, quo sit tantus decursns aquarum,
Omnia quo veniant ex omni flumina parte.”


This Dr. Busby thus versifies—


® Now in due order, Muse, proceed to show
Why the deep seas no augmentation know,
In ocean that such numerous streams dis-
charge
Their waters, yet that ocean ne’er enlarge,”
etc.


No particular sea is intended, though some
have fancied that the peculiarities of the
Dead Sea gave occasion to the thought in
the text. Doubtless the idea is general, and
such as would strike every observer, however
little he might trouble himself with the
reason of the circumstance (comp. Ecclus.
xl. 11). Unto the place from whence the
Yivers come, thither they return again;
Father, unto the place whither the rivers go,
thither they go again. As Wright and
Delitzsch observe, DY after verbs of motion
has often the signification of MaY; and the
idea is that the streams continue to make
their way into the sea with ceaseless itera-
tion. The other rendering, which is sup-
ported by the Vulgate unde, seems rather
to favour the Epicurean poet’s solution of
the phenomenon. Lucretius, in the passage
cited above, explains that the amount of
water contributed by rivers is a mere drop
in the ocean; that a vast quantity rises in
exhalations and is spread far and wide over
the earth; and that another large portion
finds its way back through the pores of the
ground to the bed of the sea. Plumptre
considers that this theory was known to
Koheleth, and was introduced by him here.
The rendering which we have given above
would make this opinion untenable; it like-
wise excludes the idea (though that, indeed,
may have been entertained by the Hebrews,
Ps. civ. 10 and Prov. viii. 28) of the clouds
being produced by the sea and feeding the
springs. Thus Ecclus. xl. 11, “All thines
that are of the earth do turn to the earth
again; and that which is of the waters doth
return into the sea.”

Ver. 8.—All things are full of labour,
Taking the word dabar in the sense of
“word” (compare the Greek fjjua), the


(on. 1. 1—18,


LXX. translates, “All words are weari-
some;” ¢.e. to go through the whole catalogue
of such things as those mentioned in the
preceding verses would be a laborious and
unprofitable task. The Targum and many
modern expositors approve this rendering.
But besides that, the word yaged implies
suffering, not causing, weariness (Deut.
xxy. 18; Job iii. 17); the run of the sen-
tence is unnecessarily interrupted by such
an assertion, when one is expecting a con-
clusion from the instances given above.
The Vulgate has, cunctz res difficiles. The
idea, as Motiis has seen, is this—Man’s life
is constrained by the same law ag his sur-
roundings; he goes on his course subject to
influences which he cannot control; in spite
of his efforts, he can never be independent.
This conclusion is developed in succeeding
verses. In the present verse the proposition
with which it starts is explained by what
follows. All things have been the object
of much labour; men have elaborately ex-
amined everything; yet the result is most
unsatisfactory, the end is not reached;
words cannot express it, neither eye nor
ear can apprehend it. This is the view of
St. Jerome, who writes, “Non solum de
physicis, sed de ethicis quoque scire difficile
est. Nec sermo valet explicare causas natu-
rasque rerum, nec oculus, ut rei poscit dig-
nitas, intueri, nec auris, instituente doctore,
ad summam scientiam pervenire. Si enim
nunc ‘ per speculum videmus in snigmate ;
et ex parte cognoscimus, et ex parte pro-
phetamus,’ consequenter nec sermo potest
explicare quod nescit; nec oculus in quo
cxcutit, aspicere ; nec auris, de quo dubitat,
impleri.” Delitzsch, Nowack, Wright, and
others- render, “All things are in restless
activity ;” ¢.e. constant movement pervades
the whole world, and-yet no visible conclu-
sion is attained. This, however true, doe
not seem to be the point insisted on by the
author, whose intention is, as we have said,
to show that man, like nature, is confined
to a circle from which he cannot free him-
self; and though he uses all the powers with
which he is endowed to penetrate the enigma
of life and to rise superior to his environ-
ments, he is wholly unable to effect anything
in these matters. Man cannot utter it. He
cannot explain all things. Koheleth does
not affirm that man can know nothing, that
he can attain to no certitude, that reason
will not teach him to apprehend any truth;
his contention is that the inner cause and
meaning elude his faculties, that his know-
ledge is concerned only with accidents and
externals, and that there is still some depth
which his powers cannot fathom. The eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled
with hearing. Use his sight as he may,
listen to the sounds around him, attend to


on. & 1—18.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 6


ne SNES creel


es
the instructions of professed teachers, man
-mukes no real advance in knowledge of the
mnysteries in which he is involved; the
paradox is inexplicable. We have, in Prov.
xxvii. 20, “Sheol and Abaddon are never
satisfied; and the eyes of man are never
satisfied.” Plumptre quotes Lucretius’s ex-
pression (ii. 1038), “ Fessus satiate videndi.”
“ Remember,” says Thomas & Kempis (‘ De
Initat.,’ i. 1. 5), “ the proverb, that the eye
is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing. Endeavour, therefore, to withdraw
thy heart from the love of visible things,
and to transfer thyself to the invisible. For
they that follow their sensuality do stain
their conscience and lose the grace of
God.”


Ver. 9.—The thing that hath been, it is
that which shall be. The LXX. and the
Vulgate render the first clauses of the two
parts of the verse in both cases interroga-
tively, thus: “What is that which hath
been? The very thing which shall be.
And what is that which hath been done?
The very thing which shall be done.”
What has been affirmed of phenomena in
the material world is now affirmed of the
events of man’s life. They move in an
analogous circle, whether they are concerned
with actions or morals. Plumptre sees here
an anticipation or a reproduction of the Stoic
doctrine of a recurring cycle of events, such
as Virgil mentions in his fourth ‘Eclogue’—


“Magnus ab integro seclorum nascitur
ordo,” ete.


But Koheleth is speaking merely from ex-
perience, and is indulging in no philosophi-
cal speculations. There is no new thing
under the sun, ‘The Vulgate transfers this
clause to the next verse, which, indeed, sup-

rts the assertion. From classical authors
commentators have culled examples of the
same thought. Thus Tacitus, ‘Annal.,’ iii.
55, “ Nisi forte rebus cunctis inest quidam
velut orbis, ut quem ad modum temporum
vices, ita morum vertantur.” Sencea,
‘ Epist.,’ xxiv., “ Nullius rei finis est, sed in
orbem nexa sunt omnia; fagiunt ac sequun-
tur... . Omnia transeunt ut revertantur,
nihil novi video, nihil novi facio. Fit ali-
quando et hujus rei nausea.” M. Aurelius,
‘Medit.,’ vi. 37, “He that sees the present
has seen all things, both that which has
been from everlasting and that which shall
be in the future. All things are of one birth
and one form.” Again, vii. 1, ‘‘There is
nothing new; all things are common and
quickly over;” xii. 26, “Everything that
comes to pass was always s0 coming to pass,
and will take place again.” Justin Martyr,
* Apol.,’ i. 57, has, perhaps, a reminiscence
of this passage when he writes, Od yap
Sedelnaper Cdvaver’ vos sdytes éxolaveiy


Suoroyoupévov, wad undevds BAAov Kawwod GAA”
trav abrav ev THde TY SioKhoes Byrwv.

Ver. 10.—Is there any thing whereof it
may be said, See, this is new? The writer
conceives that objection may be taken to his
statement at the end of the preceding verse,
so he proceeds to reiterate it in stronger
terms. “Thing” is dabar (see on ver. 8).
Septuagint, “He who shall speak and say,
Behold, this is new,” scil. Where is le?
Vulgate, “ Nothing is new under the sun,
nor isany one able to say, Lo! this is fresh.”
The apparent exceptions to the rule are mis-
taken inferences. It hath been already of
old time, which was before us. In tho vast
eons of the past, recorded or unrecorded,
the seeming novelty has already been known.
The discoveries of earlier time are forgotten,
and seem quite new when revived; but
closer investigation proves their previous
existence,

Ver. 11.—There is mo remembrance of
former things; rather, of former men—per-
sons who lived in former times. As things
are considered novel only because they had
been forgotten, so we men ourselves shall
pass away, and be no more remembered.


' Bailey, ‘ Festus’—


“ Adversity, prosperity, the grave,

Play a round game with friends. On some
the world

Hath shot its evil eye, and they are passed

From honour and remembrance; and a
stare ,

Is all the mention of their names receives;

And people know no more of them than
they know

The shapes of clouds at midnight a year
hence.”


Neither shall there be any remembrance of
things that are to come with those that shall
come after; rather, and even of later gene-
rations that shall be there will be no remem-
brance of them with those that shall be in the
after-time. Wright quotes Marcus Aurelius,
who has much to say on this subject. Thus:
cap. ii. 17, “ Posthumous fame is oblivion;”
cap. iii. 10, “ Every man’s life lies all with-
in the present; for the past is spent and
done with, and the future is uncertain; ”
cap. iv. 33, “Those words which were for-
merly current and proper are now become
obsolete and barbarous. Alas! this is not
all: fame turnishes in time, too, and men
grow out of fashion as well as language.
Those celebrated names of ancient story are
antiquated; those of later date have the
same fortune; and those of present celebrity
must follow. Ispeak this of those who have
been the wonder of their age, and shined
with unusual lustre; butas for the rest, they
are no sooner dead than forgotten” sg
Wiad. ii. 4). (On the keen desire to live


6 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


the memory of posterity, see Eoclus. xxxvii.
26; xliv. 7, etc.)

Ver. 12—ch. vi. 12.—Division I. Proor
OF THE VANITY OF HARTHLY THINGS FROM
PrrRsoNAL EXPERIENCE AND GENERAL OB-
SERVATION.


Vers. 12—18,—Section 1. Vanity of striving
for wisdom and knowledge.


Ver. 12.—I the Preacher was king over
Israel in Jerusalem. Koheleth relates his
own experience as king, in accordance with
his assumption of the person of Solomon.
The use of the past tense in this verse is
regarded by many as strong evidence against
the Solomonic authorship of the book. “I
nave been king” (not “I have become king,”
as Gratz would translate) is a statement
introducing the supposed spvaker, not as a
reigning monarch, but as one who, in time
past, exercised sovereignty. Solomon is
represented as speaking from the grave, and
recalling the past for the instruction of
his auditors. In a similar manner, the
author of the Book of Wisdom (viii. 1—13)
speaks in his impersonation of Solomon.
That king himself, who reigned without
interruption to his death, could not have
spoken of himself in the terms used here.
He lost neither his throne nor his power;
and, therefore, the expression cannot be
paralleled (as Mr. Bullock suggests) by the
complaint of Louis XIV., unsuccessful in
war and weary of rule, “ When I was king.”
Solomon redivivus is introduced to give
weight to the succeeding experiences. Here
is one who had every and the most favour-
able opportunity of seeing the best side of
things; and yet his testimony is that all is
vanity. In the acquisition of wisdom, the
contrast between the advantage of learned
leisure and the interruptions of a laborious
life is set forth in Ecclus xxxviii. 24. ets.
King over Israel. ‘The expression indicates
atime before the division of the kingdom.
We have it in 1 Sam. xv. 26, and occasionally
elsewhere. The usual phrase is “ King of
Israel.” (For tn Jerusalem, see on ver. 1.)

Ver. 13.—I gave my heart (ver. 17; ch.
vii. 25; Dan. x. 12). The heart, in the
Hebrew conception, was the seat, not of the
affections only, but of the understanding
and intellectual faculties generally. So the
expression here is equivalent to ‘I applied
my mind.” To seek and search out. The
two words are not synonymous. The former
verb (#17, darash) implies penetrating into
the depth of an object before one; the other
word (71n, tur) taking a, comprehensive sur-
vey of matters further away; so that two
methods and scopes of investigation are
signified. By wisdom; ¢v 77 copia (Septu-
agint), Wisdom was the means or insirue


(ox. 1. 1—18.


ment by which he carried on his researches,
which were directed, not merely to the col-
lecting of facts, but to investigating the
causes and conditions of things, Concerning
all thines that are done under heaven; 4.6.
men’s actions and conduct, political, social,
and private life. We have “under thesun” in
ver. 9, and again in ver. 14. Here there is no
question of physical matters, the phenomena
of the material world, but only of human
circumstances and interests. This sore
travail (rather, this ie a sore travail that)
God hath given to the sons of man to be
exercised therewith. The word rendered
“travail” (3y, tnyan) occurs often in this
book (e.g. ch. ii. 23, 26, ete.), and nowhere
else in the Old Testament. The same root
is found in the word translated “exercised ;”
hence Wright has, ‘It is a woeful exercise
which God has given to the sons of men
wherewith to exercise themselves.” If we
keep to the word “ travail,” we may render,
“to travail therein.” It implies distracting
business, engrossing occupation. Septuagint,
mepiomacuov; Vulgate, occupationem. Man
feels himself constrained to make this
laborious investigation, yet the result is most
unsatisfactory, as the next verse shows.
“God” is here Alohim, and so throughout
the book, the name Jehovah (the God of the
covenant, the God of Israel) never once
occurring. Those who regard Solomon aa
the author of the book account for this on
the plea that the king, in his latest years,
reflecting sadly on his backsliding and fall,
shrank from uttering with his polluted lips
the adorable Name once so often used with
filial reverence and beloved. But the true
reason is found in the design of Koheleth,
which was to set forth, not so much Israel’s
position under the covenant, as the con-
dition of man in the face of the God of
nature. The idiosyncrasies and peculiar
features of the chosen people are not the
subject of his essay; he deals with a wider
sphere; his theme is man in his relation to
Divine providence; and for this power he
uses tllat name, common alike to the true
and false religions, Elohim, applied to the
Supreme Being by believers and idolaters.
Ver. 14.—Here is the result of this exami-
nation of human actions. I have seen all
the works that are done under the sun, In
his varied experience nothing had escaped
his notice, And behold, all is vanity and
vexation of spirit; reuth ruach; afféctio
spiritus (Vulgate) ; mpoatpeois mvetuaros,
“choice of spirit,” or, “ wind” (Septuagint) ;
vouh avénov (Aquila and Theodotion); Bécnn-
ots dvéuou, “feeding on wind” (Symmachus).
This last translation, or “striving after
wind,” seems to be most agreeable to the
etymology of the word my}, which, except
in this book (ch. ii, 11, 17, 26, eto.), occurs


ou. L 1—18.]


elsewhere only in the Chaldeo portion of
Ezra (v. 17; vii. 18). Whichever sense is
taken, the import is much the same. What
is implied is the unsubstantial and un-
satisfying nature of human labours and
endeavours. Many compare Hos. xii. 2,
“ Ephraim feedeth on wind,” and Isa. xliv.
20, “He feedeth on ashes.” In contrast,
perliaps, to this constantly recurring com-
plaint, the author of the Book of Wisdom
teaches that murmuring is unprofitable and
blasphemous (Wisd. i. 11). Bailey, in
‘Festus,’ sings—


“ Of all L/fe’s aims, what’s worth the thought

we waste on’t?

How mean, how miserable, seems every
care |

How doubtful, too, the system of the mind!

And then the ceaseless, changeless, hope-
less round

Of weariness, and heartlessness, and woe,

And vice, and vanity! Yet these make
life—

The life, at least, I witness, if not feel.

No matter, we are immortal.”


Ver. 15.—That which is crooked cannot be
made straight. This is intended as a con-
firmation of ver.14. By the utmost exercise
of his powers and faculties man cannot
change the course of events; he is con-
stantly met by anomalies which he can
neither expluin nor rectify (comp. ch. vii. 13).
The above is probably a proverbial saying.
Knobel quotes Suidas: BvAoyv ayxvaAoy obde-
mor’ opédv. The Vulgate takes the whole
maxim as applying only to morals: “ Per-
verse men are hardly corrected, and the
number of fools is infinite.” So too the
Syriac and Targum. The Septuagint rightly
as the Authorized Version, The writer is
not referring merely to man’s sins and de-
linquencies, but to the perplexities in which
he finds himself involved, and extrication
from which is impracticable. That which
is wanting cannot be numbered. The word
}709, “loss, defect,” is drat Acyéuevov in
the Old Testament. We cannot reckon
where there is nothing to count; no skill in
arithmetic will avail to make up for a sub-
stantial deficit. So nothing man can do is
able to remedy the anomalies by which he
is surrounded, or to supply the defects which
are pressed upon his notice.

Ver. 16.—Koheleth now arrives at his first
conclusion, that wisdom is vanity. I com-
muned with mine own heart. ‘The expres-
sion suggests, as it were, an internal dialogue,
as the Greek Venetian puts it, AvefAceyua
eyo tiv rH Kapdla ou (comp. ch. ii. 1, 15).
Lo, I am come to great estate. If this be
taken by itself, it makes Kobeleth speak of
his power and majesty first, and of bis pro-
grtesa in wisdom afterwards; but it is beat


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ’
re ee


to connect it with what follows, and to con-
fine the clause to one idea; thus: “I have
obtained great and ever greater wisdom ”—
I have continually added to my stores of
knowledge and expericnce. Than all they
(above all) that have been before me in
(over) Jevusalem. Who are the rulers
alluded to? Solomon himself was only tlie
second of the Israelite kings who reigned
there; of the Canaanite princes who may
have made that their capital, we have no
knowledge, nor is it likely that Solomon
would compare himself with them. The
Targum has altered the approved reading,
and gives, “ Above all the wise men that were
in Jerusalem before me.” The reading, “in
[instead of ‘over’] Jerusalem,” has indeed
some manuscript authority, and is confirmed
by the Septuagint, Vulgate, and Syriac, but
it is evidently a correction of the text by
critics who saw tlie difficulty of the autho-
rized wording. Motais and others assert
that the preposition in the Masoretic text,
by (al), often means “in,” as well as “ over,”
when the reference is to an elevated spot;
e.g. Isa, xxxviii. 20; Hos. xi. 11, But even
granting this, we are still uncertain who
are the persons meant. Commentators point
to Melchizedek, Adonizedek, and Araunah
among rulers, and to Ethan, Heman, Chalcol,
and Darda (1 Kings iv. 81) among sages,
But we know nothing of the wisdom of the
former, and there is no tangible reason why
the latter should be desiguated “ before me
in Jerusalem.” Doubtless the words point
to a succession of kings who had reigned in
Jerusalem, and the writer, involuntarily,
perhaps, betrays his assumed character, ine
volving an excusible anachronism, while
giving to the personated monarch a position
which could not belong to the historical
Solomon, Yea, my heart had great experi-
ence of (lath seen abundantly, kata mord
Venetian) wisdom and knowledge. 7237
used alverbially qualifies the word before
it, “hath seen.” The heart, as we have
observed (ver, 13), is considered the seat of
the intellectual life. In saying that the
heart hath seen wisdom, the wiritcr means
that his mind has taken it in, apprekended
and appropriated it (comp. ch. vill. 16; Job
iv. 8). Wisdom and knowledge; chokmah
and daath; copiay nal yvaou (Septuagint),
the former regarding the ethical and prac-
tical side, the latter the speculative, which
leads to the other (comp. Isa. xxxiii. 6;
Rom. xi. 33).

Ver. 17—And I gave my heart. He re-
iterates the expression in order to empliasize
his earnestness and energy in the pursuit of
wisdom. And knowing, as St. Jerome says,
that “ contrariis contraria inteiliguntur,” he
studies the opposite of wisdom, and learns
the truth by contrasting it with error. And


8 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


[on. x. 1—18.


to know madness and folly (ch. ii. 12). The
former word, holeloth (intensive plural),
by its etymology points to a confusion of
thought, ¢.e. an unwisdom which deranges
all ideas of order and propriety; and folly
(here oikluth), throughout the sapiential
books, is identified with vice and wicked-
ness, the contradictory of practical godli-
ness. The LXX. has mwapaSoAas nal ém-
othuny, “parables and knowledge,” and
some editors have altered the Hebrew text
in accordance with this version, which they
consider more suitable to the context. But
Koheleth’s standpoint is quite consistent.
To use the words of St. Jerome in his
*Commentary,’ “ Aqualis studii fuit Salo-
moni, scire sapientiam et scientiam, et e
regione errores et stultitiam, ut in aliis
appetendis et aliis declinandis vera ejus
sapicntia probaretur.”” On the other band,
Ben-Sira gives a much-needed - warning
against touching pitch (cclus. xiii. 1), and
argues expressly that “the knowledge of
wickedness is not wisdom ” (Hcclus. xix. 22),
Plumptre unnecessarily sees in the use of
the term “ madness” an echo of the teaching
of the Stoics, who regarded men’s weak-
nesses as forms of insanity. The moralist
had no need to travel beyond his own ex-
perience in order to learn that sin was the
acme of unwisdom, a declension from reason
which might well be called madness. The
subject is handled by Cicero, ‘ Tuse. Disput.,’
iii, 4,5. We are reminded of Horace’s ex-
pression (‘ Carm.,’ ii. 7. 27)—


“ Recepto
Dulce mihi furere est amico.”


And Anacreon’s (xxxi.), @éAw, 0éAw pavijvat
Thus far we have had Koheletli’s secret
thonght:—what he communed with his own
heart (ver. 16). The result of his studies
was most unsatisfying. I perceived that
this also is vexation of spirit; or, a striving
after wind, as ver. 14, though the word is
somewhat different. All such labour is
wasted, for man cannot control issues.

Ver. 18.—For in much wisdom is much
grief. ‘I'he more one knows of men’s livis,
the deeper insight one obtains of their
actions and circumstances, the greater is the
cause of grief at the incomplete and un-
satisfactory nature of all human affairs. He
that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow;
not in others, but in himself. With added
experience and more minute examination,
the wise man becomes more conscious of his


| own ignorance and impotence, of the un-


sympathizing and uncontrollable course of
nature, of the gigantic evils which he is
powerless to remedy; this causes his sor-
rowful confession (ver. 17b). St. Gregory,
taking the religious view of the passage,
comments, “The more a man begins to
know what he has lost, the more he begins
to bewail the sentence of his corruption,
which he has met with” (‘Moral.,’ xviii. 65);
and, “ He that already knows the high state
which he does not as yet enjoy is the mora
grieved for the low condition in which he is
yet held” (ibid., i. 34). The statement in
our text is paralleled in Ecclus. xxi. 12,
“There is a wisdum which multiplieth
bitterness,” and contrasted in Wisd. viii. 16
with the comfort and pleasure which true
wisdom brings,


HOMILETICS,


Vera, 1, 12.—Koheleth, the Preacher. I. THz PreacnER’s NAME. Koheleth, signify-
ing: 1. The Assembler, or Col:ector (Delitasch, Bleek, Keil), not of sentencés (Grotius)
but of people. Hence: 2. Zhe Preacher (Delitzsch, Wright), since the object for which
he calls or convenes the assembly is to address it with words of wisdom (ch. xii. 9).
3. The Debater (Plumptre), since “the Kcclesiastes was not one who called the
ecclesia or assembly together, or addressed it in a tone of didactic authority ; but
rather an ordinary member of such assembly (the political unit of every Greek state)
who took part in its discussions” (ibid.).

II, THe Preacuer’s PERSON. 1, Solomon. In support of this, the traditional view
may be urged: (1) That the work is, or seems to be, ascribed to him by the writer
por 1). (2) That the experiences assigned to the Preacher (ch. ii. 1—38), the works

eclared to have been wrought by him (ch. ii. 4, 5), and the wisdom represented as
possessed by him (ver. 17), are in perfect accord with what is known of the historical
Solomon. (3) That the composition of this book cannot be proved to have been beyond
the ability of Solomon (1 Kings iii, 12; x. 3,4; xi. 41; 2 Chron. i. 12; ix. 22 23).
(4) That the writer obviously wished his words to be accepted as proceeding "from
Solomon. (5) That if Solomon was not the author, then the author is unknown—
which is, to say the least, unfortunate. 2. A late writer, belonging to the Persian
period (Delitzsch, Bleek, Keil, Plumptre, Hengstenberg, Wright, Cox). Arguments
in support of this view are: (1) The author expressly distinguishes himself from


on. L 1—18,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 9
SSS


Solomon (ch. xii. 9—14), which, however, assumes that the Preacher could not have
spoken about himself in the third person. (2) The Preacher writes of himself in the
past tense (ver. 12), which Solomon would not have done, it is thought, though a late
writer might have done so, putting his words into Solomon’s mouth. This argument
loses part of its validity if “was” is taken as equivalent to “was and still am ” (Professors
Douglas and Given), o: if Solomon wrote towards the end of his reign (Fausset). (3) The
Preacher taiks of kings as having been before him in Jerusalem (ver. 16; ch. ii. 9), ©
whereas anterior to Solomon only David reigned in Jerusalem. But a late writer
could just as little as Solomon have used the expression cited, since it was Solomon
whom the late writer intended to represent as speaking. Besides, as Jerusalem had
been a royal city from the days of Melchizedek, it was open quite as much to Solomon
to take into his mouth as to a post-exilic author to put into his mouth the words
alluded to. (4) The real Solomon could not have written as the Preacher represents
(ch. iv. 1; v. 8; x. 4, 7, 16, 20); which once more assumes that Solomon could only
write of what he beheld in his own dominions, and not of what he may have learnt
concerning other peoples with whom he had come into contact. (5) The language
bears the stamp of the post-exilic period, being fullof Aramaisms or Chaldaisms (see
Exposition). If this be undeniable, it is partly counterbalanced by the fact that
Ecclesiastes contains Solomonic words occurring in Proverbs—which may certainly
have been derived by a late writer from a study of pre-existing Solomonic writings, but
which may also be explained by common authorship—and partly accounted for by
supposing that Solomon adopted them from pre-existing Aramaic writings, “owing to
the Aramaic influences which surrounded and pressed upon him, and owing to the
influence which he desired to exert throughout his widely extended dominions, which
embraced the whole of the Aramaic communities as far as the Euphrates” (Professor
Douglas, in Keil). (6) “The gloomy view of the world, and the philosophy of life
which meet us in it, point us at once to the times after the exile” (Keil); but similar
views and philosophies have more or less characterized all‘periods. (7) The complaint
about much book-making must have issued from a late age (Bleek). Probably the
preponderance of argument will be held as lying on the side of the non-Solomonie
authorship of tae book; though froin the considerations just advanced two things will
appear—/irst, that the Solomonic authorship is not destitute of foundation; and second,
that the non-Solomonic authorship is not absolutely unassailable.

Ili, Toe Preacuer’s cuanacrer. 1, Not an atheist. Since besides making frequent
(thirty-seven times) mention of the name of God, he expressly recognizes God as the
true God, exalted above the world (ch. v. 8), the Object of man’s fear (ch. v.7; xii. 13)
@eo worship (ch. v. 1, 2), and the Disposer and Governor of all (ch. vii. 13); acknow-
sedges the existence in man of a spirit (ch. xii. 7), and of such things as truth and
error, right and wrong, holiness and sin (ch. v. 4—6; vii. 15, 16; ix. 2, 3); places the
sum of duty as well as the secret of happiness in fearing God and keeping his com-
mandments (ch. xii. 13); and hints his belief in the coming of a day when God will
bring the secrets of all into judgment (ch. xi. 9). 2. Not a pantheist. The God he
believes in is a personal Divinity, distinguished from the works he has made (ch, iii.
11) and the man he has created (ch. xii. 1); who issues commandments (ch. xii. 13),
and can be worshipped by prayer, sacrifice, and vows (ch. v. 1—7); who should be
feared (ch. v. 7), and who can accept the service of his intelligent creatures (ch. ix. 7).
3. Not a pessimist. Though at times seeming to indulge in gloomy views of life, to
imagine that all things on earth are going to the bad, that the sum of human happiness
is more than counterbalanced by that of human misery, that life is not worth living,
and that the best a wise man cau do is to escape from it in the easiest and most com-
fortable way he can; yet that these were not his deliberate opinions may be gathered
from the frequency with which he exhorts men to cultivate a cheerful mind, and to
enjoy the good of all their labour which God giveth them under the sun (ch. ii, 24—26 ,
iii, 12; ix. 7; xi. 9), and from the emphatic manner in which he repudiates morose
conclusions concerning the degeneracy of the times (ch. vii. 10). 4. Not @ libertine.
This notion (Plumptre) may appear to derive countenance from what the preacher says
of himself (ch. ii. 1—3); but his language hardly warrants the conclusion that the
author of this book had in his lifetime been a person of dissolute morals and profligate
manners, If he was, before he penned this work he must have seen the error of his


10 ECCLESIASTES; OB, THE PREACHER, _—[om. 1. 1—18.


way, 6. But a deeply thinking and religious man. When he looked upon the mystery
of life he felt perplexed. He saw that, apart from God and religion, life was an emptiness
and vanity. Yet was he not thereby driven to despair, or impelled to renounce life as
an unmixed evil; but rather offered it as his opinion that man’s highest duty was to
fear God and keep his commandments, to accept whatever good Providence might pour
into his cup, bear with equanimity and submission whatever trials might be mingled
in his lot, and prepare himself for the moment when he should pass into the unseen to
render an account for the things done in the body (2 Cor. v. 10).

IV. Tue Preacusn’s aim. Neither: 1. To expound the doctrines of pessimism—to
show “ that the past has been like the present,” and “ the present like that which is to
come,” that “the present is bad,” that “the past has not been better,” and “ that the
future will not be preferable” (Renan), Nor: 2. To furnish an autobiographical con-
Session (ideal, but based on personal experiences) of the progress of a Jewish youth from
scepticism through sensuality to faith (Plumptre). But possibly: 8. To comfort God's
people, the Hebrew Church, under oppression—that of Persian rule, e.g., supposing the
book to be a late composition, by showing them the vanity of earthly things, and
exhorting them “ to seek elsewhere their happiness; to draw it from those inexhaustible
eternal fountains, which even at that time were open to all who chose to come”
(Hengstenberg), And certainly: 4. To ewhibit the true secret of felicity in the midst of
life's vanities, which consisted, as above explained, in fearing God and keeping his
commandments.

Lessons. 1. The inspiration of a Scripture not dependent on a knowledge of its date
or author. 2. The value of the Bible as a key to the problem of the universe. 8, The
succession of Heaven-sent preachers that have appeared all down the centuries.


Vers. 2—11.—* Vanity of vanities.’ I. THE UNPROFITABLE CHARACTER OF ALL
HUMAN LABOUR. (Ver. 3.) Passing over the pathetic picture these words instinctively
call up of human life as a ceaseless round of toil—a picture which modern civilization,
with all its appliances and refinements, has not obliterated, but rather, in the experience
of many, painted in still more lurid colours; a picture which has always possessed for
poetic minds, sacred (Job vii. 1, 2) no less than profane (Thomas Hood, ‘Song of the
Shirt '), a peculiar fascination—readers may note the melancholy truth to which the
Preacher here adverts, viz. that the solid outcome of human labour, in the shape of
permanent advantage to cither society at large or the individual, is comparatively
small. 1. This cunnut mean that labour is wholly useless (ch. v. 19), since without
labour man caunot find that bread which is needful for his bodily sustenance (Gen. iii.
19). It would be misconceiviug the Preacher to suppose he disapproved of all that has
been effected by human industry and genius to enrich, enlighten, and civilize the race,
or desired to teach that men had better times of it on earth when they lived like savages
upon the spontaneous fruits of the earth. 2. Nor is it likely that he designed to glance
at what has been a sore evil under the sun ever since men began to divide themselves
into labourers and capitalists, viz. the small portion of lubour’s fruits which usually
fall to the former, without whom there would be little or no truits at all. 3. It is rather
probable that the writer was thinking, not of labourers so called, to the exclusion of
other workers, but of all toilers without distinction, when he said that the outcome of
ao activity, so far at least as attaining to felicity was concerned, was practically
nothing.

I], ‘THE UNCEASING CHANGE TO WHICH ALL MUNDANE THINGS ARE SUBJECT. (Vers.
4—7.) 1. Illustrated in four particulars. (1) The passing by of human generations,
in comparison with which the globe seems stable (ver. 4); (2) the daily revolution of
the sun (ver. 5); (3) the circling of the wiuds (ver. 6); and (4) the returning of the
rivers to the seas (ver. 7), The writer means not to assert that these different cycles
have no uses in the economy of nature—which uses may be here illustrated; merely
he pitches upon what belongs to them in common, the element of changcfulness, to
him a picture of man’s condition on the earth generally. 2. Laplained by four olatiecs
It is as if he said, “ Look around and behold! All things on earth are perpetually on
the move—the sun in the sky, the winds in the firmament, the clouds in the air, the
waters in the ocean, the rivers on the meadow, man himself upon the surface of the
globe, Nothing bears the stamp of finality. Everything is shifting. Nothing remains


ou.% —18.} ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 11


—


long in one stay. ‘All things are full of labour and weariness; man cannot utter it:
the eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor is the ear filled with hearing’ ” (ver. 8)—by
which he means that the changeful condition is never done; there never comes a time
when the eye says, “ Enough!” or the ear repeats, “ Behold! Iam full.” This view ot
life had occurred to many before the Preacher’s day (Gen. xlvii. 9; 1 Chron. xxix. 15;
Jobiv. 19, 20; vii.6; viii. 9), as it has occurred to some since—to the Greek philosophers
who described nature as in a state of perpetual flux, to modern poets such as Shakespeare,
and to sacred writers like John (1 John ii. 17) and Paul (1 Cor. vii. 31.)

III, THE WEARISOME MONOTONY oF LIFE. (Vers. 9, 10.) 1. What the Preacher
could not have meant. That no new occurrence ever happens on the earth, that no
new contrivance ever is devised, that no new experience ever emerges. Because since
the Preacher’s day multitudes of new discoveries and inventions have been made in all
departments of science; while in the sphere of religion at least one new thing has
taken place, viz. the Incarnation (Jer. xxxi. 22), and another will take place (Isa. lxv.
17), 2. What the Preacher did mean. That the general impression made by life upon
beholders is that of sameness. Going back to the above illustrations, he would have said,
“See how it is in nature. No doubt one new day succeeds another, one gale of wind
follows another, and one body of waters hastens after another. But every day and always
it is the same thing over again; the same old sun which reappears in the east; and the
same gusts of wind to which we are accustomed that blow from the north to the south,
and whirl about continually to all points of the compass; and the same stream that
keeps on filling up its fountains and sending forth its waters to the sea, And if you will
look at the world of humanity it is the same. A new generation appears on the globe
every thirty years, and every hour of every day new individuals are being born; but
they are substantially the same old men and women that were here before. ‘Fed by
the same food, hurt by the same weapons, warmed and cooled by the same summer
and winter’ as those who preceded them, they go through the same experiences their
fathers and mothers went through before them.” This feeling of monotony is even
more emphasized when attention is fixed on the individual. Try to think of how
monotonous and wearisome an ordinary human life is! An attempt to realize this will
awaken surprise.

IV. THE UNIVERSAL OBLIVION INTO WHICH MEN AND THINGS MUST EVENTUALLY
gINK. (Ver. 11.) So obvious is this that it scarcely needs illustration, Consider
what a smal! portion of the earth’s incidents during the past six thousand years have
survived in history, and how few of the world’s great ones have left behind them
more than their names, The memory has been preserved of a Flood, but what about
the ordinary words and actions that make up everyday life during the years between
the Creation and the Deluge? A few particulars have been preserved of the histories
of an Abraham and a David, a Sennacherib and a Nebuchadnezzar, an Alexander
and a Cesar; but what about the myriads that formed their contemporaries? How
much has been transmitted to posterity of the history of these islands? How few of
the events of last year have been recorded? How many of those who th .2 died-are
still remembered ? ‘This is, no doubt, all as it should be; but still it is a proof of the
vanity of things below, if these be regarded simply in themselves.

Conctusion. This view of life shonld not be possible to a Christian who enjoys the
fuller and clearer lizht of the New Testament revelation, and views all things in their
relations to God, duty, and immortality,


Ver. 15.—-Concerning crooked things and things wanting. I. IRREGULARITIES AND
DEFECTS EXIST IN THE WORLD’s PROGRAMME. ‘This the teaching of the two proverbs,
that crooked things cannot be straightened, i.e. by man, or wanting things numbered.
To the secker after wisdom, who surveys all the works that are done under the sun,
and gives his heart to search into and to seek out by wisdom with regard to these what
is their end and issue, there appear in the physical, mental, and moral worlds
anomalies, irregularities, excrescences, deviations from the strai cht line of natural order,
as well as defects, wants, imperfections, gaps, cleavages, interruptions, failures to reach
completeness, which arrest attention and excite astonishment. 1, Of irregularities or
crooked things, such phenomena as these may be cited: (1) In the pkysical world,
storms, tempests, accidents, diseases, sudden and unexpected calamities, (2) In the


B ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREAOHER. [on. 1. 1~18,


nr LD


mental world, perverted judgments, erroneous beliefs, false conclusions. (3) In the
moral world, wicked principles and depraved actions, sins of every kind, transgressions
ef human and Divine law. 2. Of things wanting or defects, may be reckoned these:
(1) In the material realm, scenes where some element is wanting to complete their
beauty or utility, as ¢g. a Sahara without a green leaf to refresh the eye, or a well at
which to quench the thirst; or forms of life that never attain to maturity, as e.g. buds
that drop before ripening into flowers or fruit. (2) In the intellectual sphere, ignor-
ance, limited knowledge, defective education, one-sided apprehension of truth, narrow
and imperfect views. (3) In the moral domain, actions that, without being wholly
wrong, yet fall short of being fully right, as e.g. where one tells a half-truth, or does
less in particular circumstances than duty demands of him.

II. SucH IRREGULARITIES AND DEFECTS ARE BEYOND THE POWER OF MAN TO
BEMOVE OR REMEDY. This, at least, is the doctrine of the above two proverbial
sayings. 1, The doctrine, however, is not absolutely and universally true. In the
physical, mental, and moral worlds, man can do something to straighten what is
crooked and supply what is lacking. For instance, by skill and foresight he can guard
himself to some extent against the virulence of disease, the violence of storms and
tempests, the destructiveness of unexpected calamities; by education he ean protect
himself and others against the perils arising from defective knowledge and erroneous
judgments; by personal cultivation of virtue he can at least diminish the quantity of

8 opposite, vice, in the world. If he cannot straighten out all the crooks, he can even
some; if he cannot remedy every defect, he can remove a few. 2. Yet the doctrine is
true in the sense intended by the Preacher. This is, that after man has done his utmost
there will remain anomalies that baffle him to explain, a sense of incompleteness which
nothing he can attempt will remove. Let him prosecute his investigations ever so
widely and vigorously, there always will be “ more things in heaven and earth than
are dreamt of in his philosophy ”—enigmas he cannot solve, antinomies he cannot
reconcile, defects he cannot fill up.

TI]. THE EXISTENCE OF SUCH IRREGULARITIES AND DEFECTS SUGGESTS SOME
IMPORTANT LEssons. As: 1. That the present system of things is not final. Nothing
that is imperfect can be final. The crooked things that want straightening and the
lacking things that need supplying contain a dim prophecy of a future and better
order, in which the crooked things will be straightened and the defective things
supplied. 2. That man’s power of apprehending things is incomplete. From this
probably arises not a little of that sense of disorder and incompleteness in the outer
world of which he complains. 3. That things impossible to man may be possible to
God. Though man’s faculties are limited, it does not follow that God’s power is. The
crooked things that man cannot straighten, God can straighten if it seem good to his
wisdom. 4. That man’s duty meanwhile is to submit and wait. Instead of fretting
at what he cannot rectify, he should aim at extracting from it that moral discipline
which, doubtless, it is intended to impart; and instead of rushing to hasty conclusions
from what he only imperfectly apprehends, he ought in a spirit of hopefulness to wait
for further light.


Ver. 18.—Jncrease of knowledge, increase of sorrow. I. BECAUSE NOT WITHOUT
LABOUR AND PAIN, OFTENTIMES PROTRACTED AND ACUTE, CAN KNOWLEDGE OF ANY
KIND BE INCREASED. No royal road to wisdom any more than to wealth. He who
would acquire knowledge must dig for it as for hidden treasures (Prov. ii. 4), Those
who have attained to greatest distinction, as philosophers, poets, astronomers, etc.,
have all been hard workers. The information that renders them so wise and their
society so agreeable has been slowly and painfully collected by diligent snd unremitting
effort, sustained through years, often amid hardships, and by means of self-denials
which would have caused them to abandon their enterprises had they been common
men, sometimes at the expense of restless days and sleepless nights, and im the midst
of bodily infirmities not soothed but aggravated by close and severe study. No doubt,
to one inspired with a love of knowledge, such labours and anxieties are more than
compensated by the knowledge so acquired; but the proposition of the Preacher is that
the largest amount of wisdom one may gather is an insufficient requital for all thia
toil and anxiety, if the knowledge be only earthly and secular—ée. has no connec-


om, 1, 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 18


rr


es oe God, duty, or immortality—and one cannot help asking if the Preacher is not
right.

Il. Because, A8 THE CIRCLE OF KXOWLEDGE WIDENS, THE SPHERE OF IGNORANCS
APPEARS TO ENLARGE. One is prone to imagine that, as the circle of information
widens, that of ignorance contracts—which it does in the sense that, the more one knows,
the sum of what remains to be known diminishes; but in another and important
sense the amount of what remains to be known increases. As in mountain-climbing,
the higher one ascends he sometimes discovers heights beyond of which previously he
had no suspicion, so in footing it up the steep and difficult slopes of Parnassus, one
ectually comes to see that the more extensive the boundaries of this knowledge become,
the vaster grow the regions beyond into which he has not yet penetrated. A child, for
instance, looking up for the first time into the evening sky, imagines he has understood
it all at a glance; but afterwards, when he has learnt the elementary truths of
astronomy, there rushes on him the conviction that what he knows is but a small part
of a very large whole; and as he prosecutes his search into the wonders of star-land, he
realizes that the more he knows of it the more there remains to be known, till he feels
that with respect to this, at least, “ he that increases knowledge increases sorrow.” Nor
is this experience confined to one department of knowledge, but in every department
it is thesame ; the larger and clearer one’s acquaintance becomes with it, it only seems
to open up untrodden realms beyond, the bare contemplation of which exercises on the
mind a strangely depressing influence.

II]. BECAUSE AS ONE EXTENDS HIS KNOWLEDGE HIS DIFFICULTIES SEEM TO MUL-
TIPLY. Especially in dealing with the problem of existence. Contrast the states of child-
hood and manhood, of ignorance and learning, of savage peoples and of civilized nations,
The child is unconscious of anxieties that oppress the parental bosom. The peasant,
innocent of geology, biology, astronomy, and history, is not troubled with mental,
moral, and religious difficulties such as perplex those acquainted with these themes.
The heathen, with crude and ill-defined ideas of God, duty, and immortality, are incapable
of appreciating those questionings concerning the future life that proceed in Christian
minds. Not that it is not better to increase in knowledge, even should such increage
awaken and foster doubts; only to increase in knowledge does not necessarily bring
peace to the heart or happiness to the soul. It enables one to discern dark problems
where none were discerned before; it pushes one on to inquire after solutions for those
problems which, nevertheless, constantly elude the grasp. In the region of morals
and religion especially it burdens one with a sense of weariness and pain, because of the
endless questionings it raises and cannot answer. One who has never been launched
upon this sea of doubt can hardly appreciate the wretchedness of those who have been
tossed by its raging billows. Those who can hold on by ideas of God, duty, and
immortality for the most part escape these perplexities; the man who tries to solve the
problem of the universe without these fundamental and regulative conceptions does not,
but becomes entangled in a labyrinth of difficulties, and commonly ends by finding
himself “‘in wandering mazes lost.”

IV. BecavusE AS ONE EXTENDS HIS KNOWLEDGE, HE EXTENDS AT THE SAME TIME
HIS ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE WORLD’s sorrow. Often said, “ One half of the world
knows not how the other half lives.” How tnuch, e.g., does the civilized Briton know of
the degradation of “ darkest Africa; ” or the religiously educated youth or maiden of the
sin that runs rampant in modern society ; or the well-fed, well-clothed, and well-housed
citizen of the aching hearts and miserable lives of the houseless and breadless poor who
herd in great cities? Because these things are not known, the Christians of Great
Britain are comparatively indifferent to the sad and sorrowful condition of the poor and
criminal classes at home, and of the heathen abroad. Did they properly consider these
things, they would be filled with sorrow. Should this be adduced as a reason why one
should not trouble himself with such disagreeable subjects, the answer is that if
God, duty, and immortality are fictions, it is perhaps better to let the world stew im
its own wretchedness and profligacy, and to guard one’s felicity from being invaded by
such disquieting influences; but if God, duty, and immortality are realities, it may be
perilous to exhibit such indifference towards the world’s wretchedness and sin.

V. BECAUSE INCBEASE OF KNOWLEDGE AUGMENTS MAN’S POWER BOTH OF CAUSING
AWD OF FEELING soRRow. Knowledge is power. Insight into nature’s laws enables


14 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. 7. 1—18,


one to apply these to mechanical uses which, in the absence of such insight, would be
impossible. A person of large intelligence and mature experience can do things
transcending the capacity of youth, Yet this increased efficiency, which springs from
increased knowlege, does not always augment the sum of happiness, Ifit helps man
to multiply instruments for good, it also enlarges his ability to perpetrate evil. It was
once believed that crime and misery would disappear from society with the general
diffusion of education. No one believes that now. Mere knowledge has no tendency
to make men good, (Milton’s Satan was not a fool.) It will help such as are good to
means and opportunities for doing good; but just as certainly it will aid the wicked


_ in their wickedness, and add to their power of causing misery. Then, in so far as


4


knowledge or education has a tendency to refine the nature, intensify the feelings,
quicken the susceptibilities, to that extent it augments the sum of human sorrow.

Learn: 1. Not to glorify ignorance or despise knowledge, but to seek first that
“ wisdom which cometh from above” (Jas. i. 5; iii. 17). 2. To seek other know=
ledges, not so much for their own sakes, as for the purpose of using them in God’s
service and for his glory.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver, 2.—* All ¢9 vanity.” If we regard this book as Solomon’s own record and
statement of his remarkable experience of human life, it must be deemed @7 us a
most valuable lesson as to the hollowness and emptiness of worldly greatness and
renown. If, on the other hand, we regard the book as the production of a later writer,
who lived during the troubled and depressed period of Jewish history which followed
the Captivity, it must be recognized as casting light upon the providentially appointed
consequences of national sin, apostasy, and rebellion, In the former case the moral aud
religious significance of Ecclesiastes is more personal, in the latter case more political.
In either case, the treatise, as inspired by Divine wisdom, demands to be received and
studied with reverential attention, Whether its lessons be congenial or unwelcome, they
deserve the consideration of those of every age, and of every station in society. Some
readers will resent the opening words of the treatise as gloomy and morbid; others will
hail them as the expression of reason and wisdom. But the truth they contain is
independent of human moods and temperaments, and is only to be fully appreciated
by those whose observation is extensive and whose reflection is prefeund. The wise
man makes a broad and unqualified statement, that all things earthly and human are
but vanity.

I. THIS MAY BE A STATEMENT OF A MERE MOOD OF FEELING OWING TO INDIVIDUAL
EXPERIENCE. ‘There are times when every man who lives is distressed and disappointed,
when his plans come to nought, when his hopes are blasted, when his friends fail him, .
when his prospects are clouded, when his heart sinks within him. It is the common
lot, from which none can expect to be exempt. In some instances the stormy sky clears
and brightens, whilst in other instances the gloom thickens and settles. But it may
be confidently asserted that, at some period and in some circumstances, every human
being, whose experience of life is large and varied, has felt as though he has been living
in a scene of illusion, the vanity of which has been perhaps suddenly made apparent to
him, and then the language of the writer of Ecclesiastes has risen to his lips, and he has
exclaimed in bitterness of soul, “ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity!”

II. THIS MAY BE A STATEMENT OF PAINFUL EXPERIENCE, DEPENDENT UPON THE
SPECIAL TIMES—POLITICAL AND ECCLESIASTIOAL—IN WHICH THE LOT Is CAST. Such is
the mutability of human affairs, that every nation, every Church, passes through epochs
of prosperity, confidence, energy, and hope; and again through epochs of adversity,
discouragement, depression, and paralysis, The Israelites had their times of conquest
and of progress, and they had also their times of defeat, of captivity, of subjection, ot
humiliation. So has it been with every people, every state. Nor have the Churches
into which Christian communities have been formed, escaped the operation of the same
law. Sofar as they have been human organizations, they have been affected by the
laws to which all things human are subject. In times when a nation is feeble at home
and despised abroad, when faction and ambition have reduced its power and crippled
its enterprise, there is proneness, on the part of the reflecting and sensitive among the


i


cu. 1. 1-18] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, | 15


——


citizens and subjects, to lament over the unprofitableness and vanity of civil life,
Similarly, when a Church experiences declension from the Divine standard of faith,
purity, and consecration, how natural is it that the enlightened and spiritual members
of that Church should, in their grief over the general deadness of the religious com-
munity, give way to feclings of discouragement and foreboding, which find a fittiny
expression in the ery, “ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity!”

Il. THis MAY BE A STATEMENT OF PHILOSOPHICAL REFLECTION UPON THE FACTS OF
NATURE AND OF HUMAN LIFE, It would be a mistake to suppose that the cry of
“Vanity!” is always the evidence of a merely transitory though powerful mood of
morbid feeling. On the contrary, there have been nations, ages, states of society, with
which it has been a settled conviction that hollowness and emptiness characterize all
human and earthly affairs. Pessimism may he a philosophical creed, as with the
ancient Buddhists and some of the modern Germans; it may be a conclusion reached
by reflection upon the facts of life. To some minds unreason is at the heart of the
universe, and in this case there is no ground for hope. To other minds, not speculative,
the survey of human affairs is suggestive of aimlessness in the world, and occasions
despondency in the observant and reflective mind. Thus even some who enjoy health
and prosperity, and in whose constitution and circumstances there is nothing to justify
discouragement and hopelessness, are nevertheless found, without any serious satisfac-
tion in existence, ready to sum up their conclusions, derived from a perhaps pro!onged
and extensive survey of human life, in the words of the writer of Ecclesiastes, ‘ All is
vanity!”

IV. THIS MAY BE A STATEMENT OF RELIGIOUS CONVICTION, BOTH SPRINGING FROM AND
LEADING TO THE KNOWLEDGE OF THE ETERNAL AND GLoRIoUus Gop. The student of
physical science looks at facts; it is his duty to observe and to classify facts; their
arrangement under certain relations, as of likeness and of sequence, is his business, in
the discharge of which he renders a great service to mankind, But thoucht is as
necessary as observation. A higher explanation than physical science can give is
imperatively required by human nature. We areconstraincd, not only to observe that a
thing is, but also to ask whyit is, Here metaphysics and theology come in to complete
the work which science has begin. Human life is composed not only of movements,
which can be scientifically accounted for, but of actions, of which the explanation is
hyperphysical, is spiritual. Similarly with the world at large, and with human life and
history. The facts are open to observation; knowledge accumulates from age to age;
as experience widens, grander classifications are made. Still there is a craving for
explanation. Why, we ask, are things as they are? It is the answer to this question
which distinguishes the pessimist from the theist. The wise, the enlightened, the
religious, seek a spiritual and moral significance in the universe—material and psychical.
In their view, if things, as they are and have been, be regarded ly themselves, apart
from a Divine reason working in and through them, they are emptiness and vanity,
On the other hand, if they be regarded in the light of that Divine reason, which is order,
righteousness, and love, they are suggestive of what is very different indeed from
vanity. To the thoughtful and reverent mind, apart from God, all is vanity ; seen in
the light of God, nothing is vanity. Both these seeming contradictions are true, and
they are reconciled in a higher affirmation and unity. Look at the world in the light
of sentience and the logical understanding, and it is vanity. Look at it in the light of
reason, and it is the expression of Divine wisdom and Divine goodness.

AppLicaTIoN. It is well to see and feel that all is vanity, if we are thus led to turn
from the phenomenal to the real, the abiding, the Divine. But it will be to our hurt
if we dwell upon the vanity of all things, so that pessimism be fostered, so that we fail
to recognize Infinite Reason at the heart of all things, so that we regard this as the
worst of all worlds, so that for us the future has no brightness.—T.


Vers. 3, 4.—The vanity of man’s life. At the very outset of his treatise, the wise
man gives his readers to understand that the vanity which is ascribed to all things
that are, is distinctive in an especial and obvious manner of human life. This is the
most interesting of all things to observe and study, as it is the most precious to possess.
And there is some danger lest, if the study of it lead to deapondency, the possession of
it should cease to be valued,


16 | EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. tr. 1—18,


err ED


J. Tee FACTS UPON WHICH THE CONVICTION OF THE VANITY OF LIFE I8 FOUNDED.
1. The unsatisfying character of human toil. Labour is the destiny of man, and is in
most cases the indispensable condition of not only life itself, but of those things for
the sake of which many men value life—wealth, comfort, pleasure, and fame, Yet in how
many cases does toil fail to secure the objects for the sake of which it is undertaken!
Men labour, but reap no harvest of their painful, wearying efforte. And when the
result is obtained, how commonly does it yield little or nothing of the satisfaction
desired! Men toil for years, and when they attain that upon which their hearts were
set, disappointment and dissatisfaction take possession of their nature. 2. The
brevity of human life, and the rapid succession of the generations, The reflection of the
wise man is a reflection which must have been current among men from the earliest
ages. No sooner has a laborious and successful man reached the summit of his ambi-
tion, grasped the object of his desire, than he is taken away from the enjoyment of
that for the sake of which he was content to “scorn delights, and live laborious days.”
The next generation renews the quest, only to repeat the experience of disappointment,
Changes and improvements take place in many details of our life; but life itself
remains throughout the ages, subject to the same limitations and the same calamities,
to the same uncertainties and the same close. 3. he contrast between the transitori-
ness of human life and the stability-of the unconscious earth. It appears strange and
inexplicable that man, with the great possibilities of his nature, should be so short-
lived, and that the earth should outlast generation after generation of mankind. The
writer of Ecclesiastes felt, as every reflecting observer must feel, the sadness of this
contrast between the perpetuity of the dwelling-place and the brief sojourn of its
successive inhabitants. 4. The impossibility of any generation reaping the harvest
for which it has sown. The toil, the genius, the enterprise of a generation may indeed
bear fruit, but it is the generation which follows that enjoys that fruit. All men
labour more for posterity than for themselves. ‘ This also is vanity.”

II. THE CHARACTER OF THE INFERENCE FROM THESE FACTS, VIZ THAT LIFE IS
PROFITLESS AND VAIN. 1. It is attributable to the reflecting and aspiring nature of
man. A being less endowed with susceptibilities and imagination, with moral capacities
and far-reaching aims and hopes, would be incapable of such emotions and such con-
clusions as this book expresses. The brute is content to eat and drink, to sleep, and
to follow its several instincts and impulses. But of man we may say that nothing that
he can be and do can give him perfect rest and satisfaction. It is owing to an innate
and noble dissatisfaction that he is ever aiming at something better and higher, and that
the narrow range and brief scope of human life cannot content him, cannot furnish him
with all the opportunity he desires in order to acquire and toachieve. 2. Itis attributable
to the very nature of earthly things, which, because they are finite, are incapable of
satisfying such a nature as that described. They may and do answer a high purpose
when their true import is discerned—when they are recognized as symbolical and
significant of what is greater than themselves. But no material good, no terrestrial
distinctions, can serve as “ profit” of labour. If so regarded, their vanity must sooner
or later be apparent. There is a divinely ordained disproportion between the spirit of
man and the scenes and occupations and emoluments of earth. ;

AppuicaTion. 1. There is in human life a continuity only discerned by the reflecting
and the pious. The obvious and striking fact is the disconnection of the generations,
But as evolution reveals a physical continuity, philosophy finds an intellectual and
moral continuity in our race. 2. The purpose of God is unfolded to successive genera-
tions of men. The modern study of the philosophy of history has brought this fact
prominently and; Yectively before the attention of the scholarly and thoughtful. We
see this continuity and progress in the order of revelation; but all history is, in a sacred
sense, & revelation of the Eternal and Unchanging. 8. It is well that what we do we
should do deliberately and seriously, not for our own good merely, but for mankind, and
in the truest sense for God. This will lend “ profit” to the unprofitable. 4. This state
is not all. Life explains school; summer explains spring; and so eternity shall explain
the disappointments, perplexitics, and anomalies of time,—T.


Vers. 5—7.— The cycles of nature. This is not to be taken as the language of one
who makes complaints of nature, wishing that the great forces of the world were


om, 1. 1—18.} ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 17


ordered otherwise than they actually are. It is the language of one who observes
nature, and is baffled by its mysteries; who asks what all means, and why everything
is as it is. Hven at that distant time it was recognized that the processes of nature
are cyclic. ‘Ihe stars accomplish their revolutions, and the seasons return in their
appcinted order. There is unity in diversity, and changes succeed one another with
remarkable regularity. These observations seem to have suggested to the writer of
Ecclesiastes the inquiry—Is man’s life and destiny in this respect similar to the order
of nature? Is our human experience as cyclic as are the processes of the material
universe? Is there no real advance for man? and is he destined to pass through changes
which in the end will only leave him where he was?

I. NATURE PRESENTS A SPECTACLE OF CONSTANT CHANGE AND RESTLESSNESS, The
three examples given in these passages are such as must strike every attentive observer
of this earth and the phenomena accessible to the view of its inhabitants. The sun
runs his daily course through the heavens, to return on the next morning to fulfil the
same circuit. The wind veers about from one quarter to another, and quits one
direction only in a few hours, or a few days, or at most a few weeks, to resume it,

_ The rivers flow on in an unceasing current, and find their way into the sea, which (as
is now known) yields in evaporation its tribute to the clouds, whence the water-springs
are in due time replenished. Modern science has vastly enlarged our view of similar
processes throughout all of the universe which is accessible to our observation,
“Nothing continueth in one stay.” There is in the world nothing immovable and
unchangeable. It is believed that not an atom is at rest.

II. NATURE SEEMS TO EFFECT NO PROGRESS BY ALL THE CHANGES EXHIBITED. Not
only is there a want, an absence, of stability, of rest; there is no apparent advance and
improvement. Things move from their places only to return to them; their motion is
rather in a circle than in a straight line. It was this cyclic tendency in natural
processes which arrested the attention and perplexed the inquiring mind of the wise
man. And modern science does not in this matter effect a radical change in our beliefs.
Evolutionists teach us that rhythm is the ultimate law of the universe. Evolution is
followed by involution, or dissipation. A planet or a system evolves until it reaches
its climax, and thenceforward its course ig reversed, until it is resolved into the elements
of which it was primevally composed. In the presence of such speculations the intellect
reels, dizzy and powerless.

III. REFLECTION MAY, HOWEVER, SUGGEST TO US THAT THERE IS UNITY IN DIVERSITY,
STABILITY IN OHANGE; THAT THERE Is A DIVINE PURPOSE IN NATURE. If there be
evidence of reason in the universe, if nature is the expression of mind, the vehicle by
which the Creator-Spirit communicates with the created spirits he has fashioned in his
own likeness, then there is at least the suggestion of what is deeper and more significant
than the cycles of phenomena. There is rest for the intelligence in such a conviction
as that of the theist, who rises above the utterances to the Being who utters forth his
mind and will in the world which he has made, and which le rules by laws that are
the expression of his own reason. He looks behind and above the mechanical cycles of
nature, and discovers the Divine mind, into whose purposes he can only very partially
penetrate, but in whose presence and control he finds repose.

1V. ANALOGY POINTS OUT THAT IN AND BENEATH THE MUTABILITY OF THE HUMAW
LOT AND LIFE THERE 18 DIVINE PURPOSE OF INSTRUCTION AND BLESSING. If, as it seems,
it occurred to the mind of the wise man that, as in nature, so in human existence, all
things are cyclic and unprogressive, such an inference was not unnatural. Yet it is
not a conclusion in which the reasonable mind can rest. The fuller revelation with
which we have been favoured enlightens us with respect to the intentions of Eternal
Wisdom and Love. Our Saviour has founded upon earth a kingdom which cannot be
moved. /nd the figures which he himself has employed: to set forth its progress are
an assura Je that it is not bounded by time or space; that it shall grow until its
dimensions and beneficence exceed all human expectations, and satisfy the heart ef the
Divine Redeemer himself. Each faithful Christian, however feeble and however lowly,
may work in his Master’s cause with the assurance that his service shall be not only
acceptable, but effective. Better shall be the end than the beginning. ‘The seed shall
give rise toa tree of whose fruit all nations shall taste, and beneath whose shadow
humanity itself shall find both shelter and revose.—T,

ROCLESLASTES. Pod


18 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. fou. r. 118.


—_


Ver. 8.— The insatiability of sense. Man is on one side akin to the brutes, whilst he
is on the other side akin to God. Sense he shares with the inferior animals; but the
intellect and conscience by which he may use his senses in the acquisition of knowledge,
and his physical powers in the fulfilment of a moral ideal, these are peculiar to himself.
On this account it is im) ossible for man to be satisfied with mere sensibility; if he
makes the attempt, he fails. ‘To say this is not to disparage sense—a great and won-
derful gift of God. It is simply to put the senses in their proper place, as the
auxiliaries and ministers of reason. Through the exercise of sense man may, by
Divine aid, rise to great spiritual possessions, achievements, and enjoyments.

I. AN INFINITE VARIETY OF OBJECTS APPEAL TO THE SENSES OF SIGHT AND HEARING.
These are chosen as the two noblest of the senses—those by whose means we learg
most of nature, and most of the thoughts and purposes of our fellow-men and of our
God. Around, beneath, and above us are objects to be seen, sounds and voices to be
heard, The variety is as marvellous as the multiplicity.

II, WonDERFUL IS THE ADAPTATION OF THE SENSES TO RECEIVE THE VARIED IMPRES-
BIONS PRODUCED BY NATURE. The susceptibility of the nerves of the eye to the undula-
tions of ether, of the ear to atmospheric vibrations, has only been fully explained in
recent times. There is no more marvellous instance of design than the mutual adapta-
tions of the voice, the atmosphere, and the-auditory nerve; of the molecular structure
of coloured body, the ether, and the retinal structure of the optic nerve. And these
are only some of the arrangements between nature and sense which meet us at every
turn and at every moment of our conscious existence.

III. Iv 1s IMPOSSIBLE THAT THE MERE EXERCISE OF SENSE SHOULD AFFORD A FULL
SATISFACTION TO THE NATURE OF MAN, It is not to be supposed that any reasonable
being should seek his gratification merely in the enjoyment of the impressions upon the
senses. But even curiosity fails to find satisfaction, and those who crave such satisfac-
tion make it manifest that their craving is in vain. The restlessness of the sight-seer
is proverbial. When the impressions of sense are used as the material for hich
intellectual and spiritual ends, the case is otherwise. But it remains true as in the
days of Koheleth, “The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with
hearing.”

IV. Ir WouULD BE AN ERROR TO REGARD THIS FACT AS A PROOF OF THE INHERENT
BADNESS OF THE SENSES. Such an inference has sometimes been drawn by enthusiastic
minds; and mystics have inculcated abstinence from the exercise of the senses as
essential in order to intellectual and spiritual illumination. The error here lies in
overlooking the distinction between making ourselves the slaves of our senses, and
using the senses as our helpers and servants,

V. Bur IT Is JUST TO REGARD THIS FACT AS AN INDICATION THAT MEN SHOULD SEEK
THEIR SATISFACTION IN WHAT IS HIGHER THAN SENSE. When the eyes are opened to
the works of God, when we look upon the form of the Son of God, when we hear the
Divine Word speaking in conscience and speaking in Christ, our senses then become,
directly or indirectly, the instrumentality by means of which our higher nature is called
into exercise and finds abundant scope. Our reason may thus find rest in truth; our
sympathies may thus respond to the revealed love of the Eternal Father known by his
blessed Son; our whole heart may rise into fellowship with him from whom all our
faculties and capacities are derived, and in whom alone his spiritual children can fing
@ perfect satisfaction and an unshaken repose.—T.


Vers. 9, 10.— Novelty. If, in the ancient days in which this book was written, men
were already experiencing the weariness which comes from their familiarity with the
scenes of earth and the incidents of life, how much more must this be the case at the
present time! It is, indeed, ever characteristic of the favourites of fortune, that they
“run through” the possibilities of excitement and of pleasure before their capacity for
enjoyment is exhausted, and cry for new forms of amuserent and distraction. It is
remarkable how soon such persons are reduced to the painfal conviction that there is
nothing new under the sun.

I. THE LOVE AND QUEST OF NOVELTY ARE NATURAL TO MAN. When we examine
human nature, we find there a deep-seated interest in change. What is called
“relativity,” the passage from one experience to another, is indeed an essential con-


ou. 1, 1—18.} EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 19


nr


dition of mental life, And transition from one mode of excitement to another is a
constituent of a pleasurable life, Thus, in the case of the intellectual man, the aim is
to know and to study ever new things; whilst in the case of the man of energy and
activity, the impulse is to view new scenes, to undertake new enterprises. It is this
principle in our nature which accounts for the efforts men put forth, and for the
sacrifices to which men willingly submit.

Il. THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF REAL NOVELTY IN THE NATURAL WORLD AND IN HUMAN
arrairs. A little reflection will convince us that continuous novelty is unattainable.
The laws of nature remain the same, and their sameness produces effects which with
familiarity produce the effect of monotony. ‘The conditions of human life do not
materially vary from year to year, from age to age. And human nature possesses
certain constant factors, in virtue of which men’s employments and pleasures, hopes,
sufferings, and fears remain substantially as they were in former times. The chief
exception to this rule arises from the fact that what is old to one generation is fora
while new to its successor. But it must not be forgotten that the individual, if favour-
ably circumstanced, soon exhausts the variety of human experience. The voluptuary
offers a reward to him who can invent a new pleasure. ‘The hero weeps for want of a
new world to conquer. The child of fortune experiences in the satisfaction of his wants,
and even his caprices, the ennui which is a proof that he has followed the round of
occupations and pleasures until all have been exhausted. Thus the most favoured are
in some cases the least happy, and the most ready to join in the complaint, “ Vanity of
vanities; all is vanity!”

Ill. Iv 18 THE SPIRITUAL REALM WHICH I8 ESPECIALLY CHARACTERIZED BY NEWNESS.
If it is impossible that the Book of Ecclesiastes should be written over again in the
Christian ages, the reason is that the fuller and sublime revelations made by the Son of
God incarnate have enriched human thought and life beyond all calculation. There ia
no comparison between the comparative poverty of knowledge and of life, even under
the Mosaic economy in ancient times, and “the unsearchable riches of Christ.” None
can exhaust the treasures of knowledge and wisdom, the possibilities of consecrated
service and spiritual progress, distinctive of the Christian dispensation. Christianity is
emphatically a religion of newness. It is itself the new covenant; its choicest gift to
man is the new heart; it summons the disciples of the Redeemer to newness of life;
it puts in their mouth a new song; whilst it opens up in the future the glorious
prospect of new heavens and a new earth. God comes in the Person of his Son to this
sin-stricken humanity, and his assurance and promise is this: “ Behold, I make all
things new.” And in fulfilment of this assurance, the Church of Christ rejoices in the
experience expressed in the declaration, “Old things have passed away; behold, all
things are become new.”—T.


Vers. 12—-18.—The vanity of human wisdom. Solomon was one of the great,
magnificent, and famous kings of the Hast, and was eminent both for possessions and
abilities. The splendour of his court and capital may have impressed the popular mind
more profoundly than anything else attaching to him. But his wisdom was his most
distinctive and honourable peculiarity. At the beginning of his reign he had sought
this from God as his supreme gift, and the gift had been bestowed upon him and
continued to him. Its evidences were striking and universally acknowledged. As a
king, a judge, an administrator, a writer, a religious teacher, Solomon was pre-emivently
wise. It must be admitted that he did not always make the best use of the marvellous
talents entrusted to him. But he was well able to speak from his own experience of
the gift of wiséom; and none was ever better able to speak of its vanity.

I. THE POSSESSION AND EXERCISE OF wisDoM. 1. This implies natural ability, asa
foundation; and, if this be absent, eminence is impossible. 2, It implies also good
opportunities, There are doubtless many endowed with native powers, to whom are
denied the means of calling forth and training those powers, which accordingly lie
dormant throughout the whole of life. 8. It implies the diligent cultivation of natural
powers, and the diligent use ‘of precious opportunities. 4. It implies prolonged
experience—* years that bring the philosophic mind.”

Il. THE LIMITATION OF HUMAN wispomM. ‘To the view of the uncultivated and
inexperienced, the knowledge of the accomplished student seems boundless, and the


20 EOOLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. (cu. 1 1—18.


wisdom of the sage almost Divine. But the wise man knows himself too well to be
thus deluded. The wisest man is aware that there are (1) problems he cannot solve;
(2) errors he cannot correct; (8) evils he cannot remedy. On every side he is reminded
how limited are his speculative and his practical powers, He is often all but helpless
in the presence of questions that baffle his ingenuity, of difficulties that defy his
endeavours and his patience. :

III. THE DISAPPOINTMENT AND DISTRESS OF wispoM. 1, One erroneous inference
from the considerations adduced must be carefully guarded against, viz. the inference
that folly is better than wisdom. The wise man may not always come to a just
conclusion as to belief and practice, but the fool will usually be misled by his folly.
2. The wise man is gradually disillusioned regarding himself. He may start in life
with the persuasion of his power and commanding superiority; but his confidence is
perhaps by slow degrees undermined, and he may end by forming a habit of self=
distrust. 3. At the same time, the wise man becomes painfully conscious that he
does not deserve the reputation which he enjoys among his fellow-men. 4. But, above
all, he feels that his wisdom is folly in the presence of the all-wise God, to whose
omniscience all things are clear, and from whose judgment there is no appeal.
5. Hence the wise man acquires the most valuable lesson of modesty and humility—
qualities which give a crowning grace to true wisdom. The wise man assuredly would
not exchange with the fool, but he would fain be wiser than he is; and he cherishes
the conviction that whatever light illumines him is but a ray from the central and
eternal Sun.—T.


Vers. 2, 3.— Human life and human labour. What is the worth of our human life ?
This is an old and ever-recurring question ; the answer to it depends far less on what
surrounds us than on what is within us, far less upon our circumstances than upon our
spirit. But it must be acknowledged—

I. THAT THE WORTH OF OUR LIFE DEPENDS LARGELY UPON ITS ACTIVITIES. We
have to ask—How are we related to our fellows? What is the number and what the
nature of the objects that minister to our comforts? What opportunities are there for
leisure, for repose, for recreation? But the largest of all questions is this: What ¢s
the character of our activities? Are these congenial or uninviting, burdensome or
moderate, tedious or interesting, fruitful or barren, passing or permanent in their
effects?  -

IJ. THAT HUMAN AOTIVITY HAS ITS DEPRESSING ASPECTS. So depressing were they
to “the Preacher,” that he pours forth his dejection of spirit in the strong exclamation
of the text. The valuelessness of all human labour made life itself seem to him to be
vain. Three things there are that dwarf it. 1. J¢ts slightness. A few men accomplish
that which is observable, remarkable, worthy of being chronicled and remembered,
making its mark on the page of history or of poetry; but how few they are! The
great majority of mankind spend all their strength in doing that which is of small
account, which produces no calculable effect upon their times, of which no man thinks
it worth while to speak or sing. 2. Its dependence on others. There are but very
few indeed whose labour can be said to be original, independent, or creative. Almost
every man is so working that if any of those who are co-operating with him were to
withdraw their labour, his would be of no avail; his work would be quite unprofitable
but for their countenance and support. 3. Zés insecurity. This is the main thought
of the text. What is the use of a man building up that which his neighbour may
come and pull down ; of gathering laboriously together that which the thief may take
away; of expending toilful days and exhausting energies on something which may be
taken from our grasp in the compass of an hour, at the bidding of one strong human
will; of making long and weary preparation for later life, when the tie that binds us
to the present sphere may be snapped in a moment? Insecurity, arising from one of
a number of sources—the elemental forces of nature, the malice and treachery of men,
despotism in government, the chances and changes of trade and commerce, failure of
health and strength, sudden death, etc.—marks all the products of human activity
with its own stamp, and brings down their value, who shall estimate how much ?
The Preacher says to nothing. But let it be remembered—

Til. THAT HUMAN ACTIVITY HAS ITS REDEEMING QUALITIZS. This is only one view


ou, 1, 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 21


of it. Another and a healthier view may ‘be taken of the subject. 1. All honest and
faithful labour is worthy in the sight of the wise man and of the Wise One (Prov. xiv.
23). 2. All couscientious labour provides a sphere for the active service of God; by
its honourable and faithful discharge, as in his sight, we can serve and please our
Lord. 3. All such labour has a happy reflex influence on ourselves, strengthening us
in body, in mind, in character. 4. All earnest work is really constructive of the
kingdom of Christ. Although we see not its issues and cannot estimate its worth, we
may be sure that “the day will declare it,” and that it will be found at last that every
true stroke we struck did tell and count for truth and righteousness, for the cause of
humanity and of Christ.—O.


Vers. 4—7.—The stability of nature. The Preacher was struck with the strong
contrast between the permanence of nature and the transiency of human life; and
the thought oppressed and pained him. We may take his view of the subject—and
our own. We look at the stability of nature—

I. AS1T APPEARS TO OUR BENSES. ‘To the outward eye things do continue as they
were—


“Changeless march the stars above,
Changeless morn succeeds to even,
And the everlasting hills,
Changeless, watch the changeless heaven.”


The hills, “rock-ribbed and ancient as the sun;” the “ unchanging, everlasting sea ;”
the rivers that flow down the centuries as well as through the lands; the plains that
stretch for long ages beneath the skies ;—these aspects of nature are impressive enough
to the simplest imagination; they make this earth which is our home to be charged
with deepest interest and clothed with truest grandeur. No man, who has an eye te
see and a heart to feel, can fail to be affected by them. —

II. As Ir APPEALS TO OUR REASON. The stability of all things about and above us:
1. Gives us time to study the nature and the causes of things, and enables one genera-
tion to hand down the results of its researches to another, so that we are constantly
accumulating knowledge. 2. Gives us proof of the unity of God. 3. Assures us of
the mighty power of the great Author of nature, who is seen to be strong to sustain
and preserve and renew. ;

Ili. As iT AFFECTS oUR LIFE. For what would happen if everything were incon-
stant and uncertain? What would be the effect on human labour and on human life
if there were no dependence to be placed on the continuance, as they are, of land and
sea, of earth and sky, of hill and plain? How does the security of all the great
objects and systems of the world add incentive to our industry! how does it multiply
our achievements! how does it enlarge and enrich our life! That we shall be able to
complete what we have begun, and that we have a good hope of handing down our
work to our successors,—is not this a large factor, a powerful inspiration, among us?

IV. As IT DWARFS OUR INDIVIDUAL CAREER. The Preacher seemed to feel this
acutely. What a small, slight, evanescent thing is a human life when compared with
the long ranges of time that the ancient earth and the more ancient heavens have
known! A generation comes and goes, while a river hardly changes its course by a
sinvle curve; many generations pass, while the face of the rocks is not visibly affected
by all the waves that beat upon its surface night and day; all the generations of men,
from the time that a human face was first turned up to heaven, have been looked down
upon by those silent stars! Why make so much of so transient’ a thing as a human
life? Ay, but look at it—

V. IN THE LIGHT OF THE SPIRITUAL AND THE ETERNAL. 1. The worth of spiritual
life is not determined by its duration. The life of a human spirit—if that be the life of
purity, holiness, reverence, love, generosity, asjiration—is of more account in the
estimate of Divine wisdom, even though it be extended over a mere decade of years,
than the existence which knows nothing of these nobilities, even though # should be
extended over many thousands of years. 2. Moreover, holy.human life on earth leads
on and up to the life which is eternal. So that we, whose course upon the earth is
so short, who are but of yesterday and with whom to-morrow may not be, do ye


223 ECCOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. oH. 1. 1—18


begin upon the earth a life which will abound in all that is beautiful and blessed,
in all that is great and noble, when the “everlasting hills” have crumbled into
dust.—C,


Vers. 7, 8.— Weariness and rest. We have here—

{. THE COMPLAINT OF THE UNSATISFIED, ‘ All things are full of weariness” (Revised
Version), 1. There are many obvious sources of satis/action. Life has many pleasures,
wnd many happy activities, and much coveted treasure. Human affection, congenial
entployment, the pursuit of knowledge, “the joys of contest,” the excitements of the
field of sport, the attainment of ambition, etc. 2. All of them together fail to
satisfy the heart. The eye is not satisfied with secing, nor tle ear wiih hearing, uor
the tongue with tasting, nor the hand with handling, nor the mind with inves'igating
and discovering. All the streams of temporal and worldly pleasure run into the sea
of the human soul, but they do not fill it. The heart, on whatsocver it feeds, is still
a-hunered, is still athirst. It may seem surprising that when so much that was craved
has been possessed and enjoyed, that when so many things have ministered to the
mind, there should still be heart-ache, unrest, spiritual disquietude, the painful question
—Who will show us any good? Is life worth having? ‘he profundity, the common-
ness ard femstancy of this complaint, is a very baffling and perplexing problem. We
surely aight to be satisfied, but we are not. The unillumined mind cannot explain it,
the uninspired tongue “cannot utter it.” What is the solution?

II. Ivs expLaNnation. Its solution is not far to seek; it is found in the truth so
finely uttered by Augustine, “O God, thon hast made us for thyself, and our leart
findeth no rest until it resteth in thee.” The human spirit, created in God’s image,
constituted to possess his own spiritual likeness, formed for truth and righteousness,
intended to spend its noble and ever-unfolding powers in the high service of the
Divine,—is it likely that such a one as this, that can be so much, that can know so
much, that can /ove the best and highest, that can aspire to the loftiest and purest
well-being, can be satisfied with the love that is human, with the knowledge that is
earthly, with the treasure that is material and transient? ‘The marvel is, and the
pity is, that man, with such powers within him and with such a destiny before him,
can sometimes sink so low as to be filled and satisfied with the husks of earth, unfilled
with the bread of heaven.

QI. Irs kemepy. ‘To us, to whom Jesus Christ has spoken, there is a plain and
open way of escape from this profound disquietude. We hear the Master say, “ Come
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my
yoke upon you . . . and ye shall find rest unto your souls.” (1) In the reconciliation
to God, our Divine Father, which we have in Jesus Christ; (2) in the happy love of
our souls to that Divine Friend and Saviour; (3) in the blessed service of our rightful,
faithful, considerate Lord; (4) in the not unavailing service we render to those whom
he loved and for whom he died; (5) in the glorious hope of immortal life beyond the
grave, we do “ find rest unto our souls.”—O,


Vers. 9, 10.—The changing and the abiding. We are not to take the Preacher's
words in too absolute a sense. There is that which has been but which is not now.
We are sometimes powerfully affected by—

I. THE cHANGING. Of those things which bear the marks of time, we may mention:
1. The face of nature. 2, The handiwork of man. We look on prostrate palaces, fallen
temples, buried cities, disused and decaving harbours, etc. 8. Historical characters,
We have been familiar with the faces and forms of men that have played a great part
in their country’s history or created an epoch in philosophy, or poetry, or science; but
where are they now? 4. Human science. Whether medica! or surgical, whether
geographical, geological, philosophical, theological, or of any other order, human science
is chanuing continually. The top-stone of yesterday is the stepping-stone of to-day.
5, The character of philanthropic work. This was once represented by almsgiving, but
to-day we feel that almsgiving is as much of an evil as a good, and that we want to
do that for men which will remove for ever all “charity” on the one side and all
dependence on the other. But look at—

ll, Tu aBipine. Many things remain and will remain; among these are: 1. The


oH. 1, 1—18,] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 23
neni ME


main features of human life. Labour, sorrow, care, struggle, death ; love, pleasure,
success, honour, 2. Typical human characters. We still have with us the false, the
licentious, the cruel, the servile, the ambitious, etc.; and we still have the meek, the
grateful, the generous, the pure-hearted, the devout, ete. 3. The spiritual element.
Men have not done, and they never wil! have done, with the myst.rious, the super-
natural, the Divine. They still ask—Whence came we? By whose power are we
sustained? To whom are we responsible? Whither do we go? How can we know
and serve and please God? 4. Vhe truth of Jesus Christ. Heaven and earth may
pass away, but his words “will not pass away.” They are with us still, and they
will remain, amid all wreckage, to enlighten our ignorance, to cheer our sorrow, to
accompany our loneliness, to conquer our sin, to light up our departure, to bless and
en oe us, ta hae with the blessings and the treasures that are not of earth but
of heaven.—C.


Ver. 11.— Oblivion and its consolaticns. We have here—

L A NATURAL HUMAN ASPIRATION. We do not like to think that the time is
coming when we shall be wholly forgotten; we should like to live on in the memory
of men, especially in the memory of the wise and good. We shrink from the idea of
being entirely forgotten; we do not care to think that the hour will come when the
mention of our name will not awaken the slightest interest in any human circle. There
is something exceedingly attractive in the thought of fame, and repelling in that of
oblivion. ‘There is that within us which responds to the fine line of Horace, in which
he tells us that he has built for himself a monument more enduring than brass; and to
the aspiration of our own Milton, that he might prove to have written something which
“the world would not willingly let die.” :

II. Ivs INEVITABLE DISAPPOINTMENT. 1. It is indeed true that “ the memory of
the just is blessed,” and that they who have lived well, loved faithfully, wrought
nobly, suffered meekly, striven bravely, will be remembered and honoured after death 3
they may be long, even very long, remembered and revered. 2. There are just a few
men whose names and histories will go down the long stream of time, of whom the very
last generation will speak and learn. 3. But the vast majority of men will soon be
forgotten. Their names may be inscribed on memorial-stones, but in a very few years
none will care to read them; the eye that lights upon them will glance from them with
indifference; there will be “no remembrance” of them. The world will take its way,
will do its work and find its pleasure, revardless altogether of the fact that these men
once trod its surface and now lie beneath it.

III. Our TRvE consoLaTIoN. This is certainly not found in the commonness of
our lot, It is no consolation to me that my neighbour is as ill off as myself; that
ought to be an aggravation of my trouble. It is, in fact, twofold. 1. We may be always
living in the deathiess influence our faithful lives exerted and handed down. For good
influences do never die; they are scattered and lost sight of, but they are not extin-
guished; they live on in human hearts and lives from generation to generation.
2. We shall be loved and honoured otherwhere. What if we be forgotten here upon
the earth? Are there not other parts of the kingdom of God? And is there not one
where God will have found for us a sphere, and in the minds and hearts of those who
will be our friends and fellow-labourers there we shall hold our place, honouring and
honoured, loving and beloved ?—O.


Ver. 18.—Knowledge and sorrow. This is one of those utterances which contain
much truth and leave much to be supplica. “ In much wisdom #s much grief,” but there
is much beside grief to be found in it. So we look at—

L Tue TRcrH wHIcH 1T ConTarns, Of the wisdom or the knowledge which brings
sadness to the heart we have to reckon the following. 1. Our deeper insight into our-
selves. As we go on we find ourselves capable of worse things than we once supposed
we were—selfish aims, evil thoughts, unhallowed passions, etc. Neither David nor
Peter supposed himself capable of doing the deed to which he fell. 2, Childhood’s
corrected estimate of the good. We legin by thinking all good men and women

rfect; then, as experience enlarges, we have reluctantly and sorrowfully to acknow-
toes to ourselves that there are flaws even in the life and character of the best. And


54 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. fou, 1. 1—18,


disillusion is a very painful process. 3. Maturity’s acquaintance with evil. We may
go some way into life before we know one-half of “the evil which is in the world.”
[ndeed, it is the wisdom and the duty of many—of even a large proportion of the race
—not to know much that might be revealed. But as a widening knowledge unveils
the magnitude and heinousness of moral evil, there is sorrow indeed to the pure and
sympatiietic soul. The more we know of the sins and the sorrows of our race—of its
cruelties on the one hand and its sufferings on the other, of its enormities and its
privations, of its toils and troubles, of its degradation end its death in life—the more
we are distressed in spirit; “in much wisdom is much grief.” :

Il. Ivs LARGE QUALIFICATIONS. There is much truth belonging to the subject
which lies outside this statement, qualifying though not contradicting it. 1. There is
much pleasure in the act of acquisition. The study of one of the sciences, the reading
of history, the careful observation of nature and mastery of its secrets, the investigation
of the nature of man, etc.,—there is a pure and invigorating delight in all this.
2. Knowledge is power; and it is power to acquire that which will surround us with
comfort, with freedom, with friendship, with intellectual enlargement. 3. The know-
ledge which is heavenly wisdom is, in itself, a source of elevation and of deep spiritual
thankfulness and happiness. 4, The knowledge of God, as he is known to us in Jesus
Christ, is the one unfailing source of unfading joy.—C. ;


Vers. 1—11.— The summary of a life’s experience. “‘Soiomon and Job,” says Pascal,
“had most perfect knowledge of human wretchedness, and have given us the most
complete description of it: the one was the most prosperous, the other the most
unfortunate, of men; the one knew by experience the vanity of pleasure, the other the
reality of sorrow.” In such diverse ways does God lead men to the same couciusion—
that in human life, apart from him, there is no true satisfaction or lasting happiness,
that the immortal spirit cannot find rest in things seen and temporal. The words,
“ Vanity of vanities, all is vanity : what profit hath man of all his labour wherein he
laboureth under the sun?” (Revised Version), are the key-note of the whole book—the
theme which the author maintains by arguments and illustrations drawn from a most
varied experience. If Solomon be not the speaker, if we have in Ecclesiastes the com-
position of a later writer, no more appropriate personage could have been found than the
ancient Jewish king to set forth the teaching which the book contains. For he had
tasted all the good things human life has to give. On him God had bestowed wisdom
and knowledge, riches, wealth, honour, and length of days. All these he had enjoyed
to the full, and therefore speaks, or is made to speak, as one from whom nothing had
been kept that his soul desired, and who found that nothing results from the mere
satisfaction of appetites and desires but satiety and loathing and disappointment.
We may contrast with this retrospect of life that given us by One whose aim it was to
fulfil the Law of God and secure the well-being of his fellow-men; and we may thus
discover the secyet of Solomon’s failure to win happiness or to reach any lasting result.
At the close of his life the Redeemer of mankind summed up the history of his career
in the words addressed to God, “I glorified thee on the earth, having accomplished the
work which thou hast given me to do” (John xvii. 4). It may seem to some a dreary
task to follow the course of Solomon’s morbid thoughts, but it cannot fail to be profitable
if we undertake the task in the earnest desire to discover the causes of his melancholy
and disappointment, and learn from the study how to guide our own lives more success-
fully, and to enter into the peace and contentment of spirit which, after all bis efforts
he failed to make his own. In the first eleven verses of this chapter we have revealed
to us the despair and weariness which fell upon the soul of him whose splendour and
wisdom raised him above all the men of his time, and made him the wonder of all
succeeding ages. Life seemed to him the emptiest and poorest thing possible—“ a
vapour that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.” He might have used
the words of the modern philosspher Amiel, “To appear and to vanish,—there is the
biography of all individuals, whatever may be the length of the cycle of existence
which they describe; and the drama of tue universe is nothing more. All life is the
shadow of a smoke-wreath, a gesture in the empty air, a hieroglyphic traced for an
instant in the sand and effaced a moment afterwards by a breath of wind, an air-bubble
expanding and vanishing on the surface of the great river of being—an appearance, @


om. 1. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 28
eee ee eS


vanity, a nothing. But this nothing is, however, the symbol of universal being, and
this passing bubble is the epitome of the history of the world.” It seemed to him that
life yielded no permanent results, that it was insufferubly mono/onous, and that it was
destined to end in utter oblivion. The futility of effort, the monotony of life, and the
oblivion that engulfs it at last are the topics of this opening passage of the book. Let
us take them up one after the other.

I. THAT LIFE YIELDS NO PERMANENT RESULTS. (Vers. 1—3.) We have before us, then,
the deliberate judgment of one who had full experience of all that men busy themselves
with—“ the labour wherein they labour under the sun”—the pursuit of riches, the enjoy-
ment of power, the satisfaction of appetites and desires, and so on, and his conclusion is
that there is no jrofit in it all. And his sentence is confirmed by the words of Christ,
“ What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul ?”
In the case of Solomon, therefore, we have a record of permanent significance and
value. We cannot deprive his sombre utterances of their weight by saying that he
spoke simply as a sated voluptuary, and that others might with more skill or discretion
extract from life what he failed to find in it. For, as we shall sce, he did not confine
himself to mere pursuit of pleasure, but sought satisfaction in intellectual employments
and in the accomplishment of great tasks, for which the power and wealth at his
disposal were drawn upon to the utmost. His melancholy is not a form of mental
disease, but the result of the exhaustion of his energies and powers in the attempt to
find satisfaction for the soul’s cravings. And in melancholy of this kind philosophers
have found a proof of the dignity of human nature. ‘ Man’s unhappiness,” says one of
them, “‘comes of his greatness: it is because there is an infinite in him, which, with
all his cunning, he cannot quite bury under the finite. . . . He requires, if you con-
sider it, for his permanent satisfaction and saturation, simply this allotment, no more
and no less: God’s infinite universe altogether to himself, therein to enjoy infinitely, and
fill every wish as fast as it rises. . . . Try him with half of a universe, of an omnipo-
tence, he sets to quarrelling with the proprietor of the other half, and declares himself
the most maltreated of men. Always there is a black spot in our sunshine; it is even
the shadow of ourselves” (Carlyle). The very consciousness of the unprofitableness of
life, of failure to attain to perfect satisfaction in the possession of earthly benefits,
painful as it is, should convince us of the value of the higher and better inheritance,
which may be ours, and in which alone we can find rest; and we should take it asa
Divine warning to seek after those things that are eternal and unchangeable. Our dis-
satisfaction and our sorrows are like those of the exile who pines for the pleasant land
from which by a hard fate he is for a time dissevered ; like the grief of a king who has
been deposed. And it is to those whose hunger and thirst cannot be satisfied by things
of earth, who find, like Solomon, that there is “ no profit in a man’s labour wherein he
laboureth under the sun,” that God issues tlie gracious invitation, ‘“‘ Ho, every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat;
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. Wherefore do ye
spend money for that which is not bread? and your labour for that which satisfieth
not? hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul
delight itself in fatuess.” The idea of the unprofitableness of human labour expressed
by Solomon is calculated, if carried too far, to put an end to all healthy and strenuous
effort to use the powers and gifts God has bestowed upon us, and to lead to indiffer-
ence and despair. If no adequate result can be secured, if all that remains after
prolonzed excrtion is only a sense of weariness and disappointment, why should we
labour at all? But such thoughts are dishonouring to God and degrading to ourselves.
He has not sent us into the world to spend our Jabour in vain, to be overcome with
the consciousness of our poverty and weakness. There are ways in which we can
glorify him and serve our gencration; and he has promised to bless our endeavours,
and supply that wherein we come short. Every sincere and unselfish effort we make
to help the weak, to relieve the suffering, to teach the ignorant, to diminish the miser
that meets us on every hand, and to advance the happiness of our fellows, is made
fruitful by his blessing. Something positive and of enduring value may be secured in
this way, even “ treasure laid up in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt,
and where thieves do not break through nor steal.” We may so use the goods, the
talents, now committed to our charge, as to create for ourselves friends, who will


26 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. om. 1. 1—18.
NT


receive us into everlasting habitations when the days of our stewardship are over, and
this visible, tangible world fades away from us.

II. The second reflection of the royal Preacher is that HUMAN LIFE IS INSUFFERABLY
MONOTONOUS ; that under all outward appearances of variety and change there is a
dreary sameness (vers, 4—10). Generation succeeds generation, but the stage is the
same on which they play their parts, and one performance is very like another. The
incessant motion of the sun, travelling from east to west; the shifting of the wind from
one point to another, and then back again; the spcedy current of the rivers to join the
ocean, which yet is not filled by them, but returns them in various ways to water the
earth, and to fecd the springs, “ whence the rivers come; ” the commonplace events of
human life, are all referred to as examples of endless and monotonous variation. The law
of mutability, without progress, seems to the speaker to prevail in heaven and in earth—
to rule in the material world, in human society, and in the life of the individual. The
lordship over creation, bestowed upon man, appeared to him a vain fancy. Man himself
was but a stranger, sojourning here for but a very short time, coming like a wandering
bird from the outer darkness into the light and warmth of a festive hall, and soon
flitting out back again into the darkness. And, to one in this sombre mood, it is not
wonderful that all natural phenomena should wear the aspect of instability and change.
To the pious mind of the psalmist the sun suggested thoughts of God’s glory and
power; the majesty of the creature gave hima more exalted idea of the greatness of the
Creator, and he expatiated upon the splendour of that light that rules the day. “The
heavens were his tabernacle; ” morning by morning he was as “a bridegroom coming
forth from his chamber, and rejoicing asa strong man toruna race.” Our Saviour saw
in the same phenomenon a proof of God’s impartial and bountiful love to the children
of men: “He maketh his sun to rise upon the evil and the good.” But to the
melancholy and brooding mind of our author nothing more was suggested by it than
monotonous reiteration, a dreary routine of rising and setting. “The sun also ariseth,
and the sun goeth down, and hastcth to his place where he arose.” ‘ He issues forth,
day after day, from the east, mounts up the vault of heaven until he has reached the
meridian, and then he descends at once towards the western horizon. He never stops in
his course at midday, as though he had attained the end for which he issued forth with the
dawn ; he never sinks beneath the horizon to enjoy repose. Even throughout the night
he is still hastening onward, that, at the appointed hour, he may again reach his eastern
starting-place. The wind, great though its changes may be, seems never to have accom-
ple the purpose for which it puts forth its power. It never subsides into a state of
asting quiescence; it never even finds a station which it can permanently occupy,
It ‘veereth about continually,’ yet it ever ‘bloweth again according to its circuits.’
The streams flow onward to the ocean; but the time never comes when the sea, filled
to overflowing, refuses to receive their waters. The thirst of the sea is never quenched;
the waters of the rivers are lost; and yet, with unavailing constancy, they still pour
their contributions into its bosom ” (Tyler). And so with regard to all the other things
on which the eye rests, or of which the ear hears—weariness clothes everything; an
unutterable monotony amid their changes and variations. Human life, too, all through,
is characterized by the same unrest and ceaseless, fruitless labour. Sometimes a new
discovery seems to be made; the monotony seems to be broken, and fresh and great
results are anticipate! by those who are ignorant of the world’s past history. But the
initiated, those whose experience has made them wise, or whose knowledge has made
them learned, recognize the new thing as something that was known in times long ago;
they can tell how barren it was of results then, how little, therefore, can be expected
from it now. There is scarcely anything more discourazing, especially to the young,
than this kind of moralizing. We feel, perhaps, that we can carry out some scheme
that will be of benefit to the society about us, and are met with lamentable accounts of
how similar schemes were once tried and failed disastrously. We feel moved to attack
the evils that we mect in the world, and are assured that they are too great and our
own strength too puny for us to accomplish anything worth while. And in the mean
time our fervour grows cold, our courage oozes away, and we really lose the power for
good we might have had. Now, this teaching of Solomon is not meant for the young
and hopeful. Indeed, those who collected together the books of the Old Testament
were rather doubtful about including Ecciesiastes among the others, and it ran a narrow


om. 1. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. 27


chance of being omitted from the sacred canon. But it has its place in the Word of
God; and those who have known anything of the doubts and speculations contained in
it will find it profitable to trace the course of thought that runs through it, until they
find the solid and positive teaching which the Preacher at lasts gives, The distressing
fact remains, and must be encountered, that to those who have had long experience of
the world, and whose horizon is bounded by it, who see only the things that are done
“under the sun,” in the midst of ever-recurring changes, there seems to be little or no
progress, and that which appears to be new is but a repetition of the old. But they
should remember that this world is meant as a place of probation for us—a school in
which we are to learn great lessons; and that all the changing circumstances of life serve,
and are meant to serve, to develop our nature and character. If it were to be our
abiding-place, many improvements in it might be suggested. It is not by any means
the best of possible worlds; but for purposes of education, discipline, and testing, it is
perfectly adapted. “ Rest yct remaincth for the people of God;” it is not here, but in
a world to come. This truth is admirably stated by the poet Spenser, who perhaps
unconsciously reproduces the melancholy thoughts of Solomon, and answers them,
He speaks of Mutability secking to be honoured above all the heavenly powers, as
being the chief ruler in the universe, and as indeed governing all things. Ina synod
of the gods, she is silenced by Nature, who combats her claims, and speaks of a time to
come when her present apparent power will come to an end—


“ But time shall come that all shall changed bee,
And from thenceforth none no more change shall see.”


And then the poet adds—


“When I bethinke me on that speech whyleare [formes]
Of Mutability, and well it way,
Me seemes, that though she all unworthy were
Of the Heav’ns Rule; yet, very sooth to say,
Tn all things else she bears the greatest sway :
Which makes me loath this state of life so tickle [unsuso},
And love of things so vain to cast away ;
Whose flow’ring pride, so fading and so fickle,
hort Time shall soon cut down with his consuming sickle


“Then gin I thinke on that which Nature sayd,
Of that same time when no more Change shall be,
But stedfast rest of all things, firmely stayd
Upon the pillours of Eternity,
That is contrayr to Mutability ;
For all that moveth doth iu Change delight:
But thence-forth all shall rest eternally
With him that is the God of Sabbaoth hight:
O! that great Sabbaoth God, grant me that Sabbaoth’s sight!”


Tll. Lirk DESTINED TO END IN UTTER oBLIVION. To all these considerations of
the resultlessness of life, of changefulness and monotony, is added that of the oblivion
that sooner or later overtakes man and all his works (ver. 11). “ There is no remem-
brace of the former generations; neither shall there be any remembrance of the
latter generations that are to come, among those that shall come after” (Revised
Version). One generation supersedes another; the new come up with fresh interests
and schemes of tleir own, and hustle the old off the stage, and are themselves in
their turn forced to give place to those who come up after them. Nations disappear
from the earth’s surface and are forgotten, The memorials of former civilizations
lie buried in the sand, or are defaced and destroyed to Imake room for something
else. On every page of creation we find the sentence written, that there is nothing
here that lasts. Almost no means can be devised to carry down to succeeding gencra-
tions even the names of the greatest conquerors, of men who in their time seemed to
have the strength of gods, and to have changed the history of the world. The earth
has wany secrets in her keeping, and is sometimes forced to yield up a few of them
“The ploughshare strikes against the foundations of buildings which once echoed to
human mirth; skeletons of men to whom life once was dear; urns and coins shat


28 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cu. x 1—18.


remind the antiquary of a magnificent empire now long passed away.” And so the
process goes on, Everything passes. A few years ago and we were not; a hundred
years hence, and there may be none who ever heard our names, And a day will come
when


‘The cloud-capp’d towers, the gorgeous palaces,

The solemn temples, the great globe itself,

Yea, all which it inherit, shall dissolve ;

And... leave nota rack behind. Weare such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life

Ig rounded with a sleep.”


Abundant material, then, had the Preacher, the son of David, for sombre meditation ;
abundant material for contemplation does he suggest to us. And if we cannot get
much further on in speculation than he did, if since his time very little new light has
been cast upon the problems which he discusses, we may still refuse to be depressed by
melancholy like his. Granted that all is vanity, that restlessness and monotony mark
everything in the world, and that its glories soon pass away and are forgotten ; still it
is not our home. It may dissolve and leave us no poorer. The tie that binds together
soul and body may be loosened, and the place that knows.us now may soon know us no
more. Our confidence is in him, who has promised to take us to himself, that where
he is we may be also. “God is our Refuge and Strength, .. . therefore will not we fear,
though the earth be removed.” In contrast with the Preacher’s desponding, despairing
words about the fruitlessness of life, its monotony and its brevity, we may set the
hopeful, triumphant utterance of Christ’s apostle: “The time of my departure is at
hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith:
henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also
that love his appearing.” —J. W.


Vers. 12—18.—Speculative study cf the world. Solomon has made serious allegations
concerning human life, and he now proceeds to substantiate them. He has declared
that it yields no permanent results, that it is tedious beyond expression, and that it is
soon overtaken by oblivion. ‘“ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity!” The monotony of
things in the natural world—the permanence of the earth in contrast with the changes
in human life, the mechanical routine of sunrise and sunset, the ceaseless agitation of
the atmosphere, the constant course of rivers to the sea, and so on—had not been the
sole ground for his conclusions. He had considered also “all the works that are done
under the sun,” the whole range of human action, and found in them evidence justifying
his allegations. Both in natural phenomena and in human efforts and attainments he
found that all was vanity and vexation of spirit. He had, he tells us (ver. 12), all the
resources of a great monarch at his command—riches, authority, capacity, and leisure ;
and he applied himself,—he gave his heart to discover, by the aid of wisdom, the nature
of earthly pursuits, and found that they were fruitless. He concentrated all his mental
enerzy upon the course of investigation, and continued in it until the conclusion was
forced upon him that “in much wisdom is much grief, and he that increaseth know-
ledge increaseth sorrow.” So different is the estimate of wisdom and knowledge formed
by the Jewish king from that held by other great philosophers and sages, “that it is
worth while to inquire into the cause of the difference. The explanation is to be found
in ver. 15, “ That which is crooked cannot be made straight : and that which is wanting
cannot be numbered.” It was a practical end that Solomon had in view—to remedy
evils and to supply deficiencies. He did not engage in the pursuit of wisdom and know-
ledge for the sake of the pleasure yielded by intellectual activity. In the case of
ordinary philosophers and scientists the aim is a different one. “A truth, once known
falls into comparative insignificance. It is now prized, less on its own account than
as opening up new ways to new activity, new suspense, new hopes, new discoveries
new self-gratulation. It is not knowledge, it is not truth, that the votary of science
principally seeks; he seeks the exercise of his faculties and feelings. Absolute certaint
and absolute completion would be the paralysis of any study; and the last aco
calamity that could befall man, as he is at present constituted, would be that full and


oH. L. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 29


final possession of speculative truth which he now vainly anticipates as the consum-
mation of his intellectual happiness. And what is true of science is true, indeed, of all
human activity. It is ever the contest that pleases us,and not the victory. Thus it is
in play; thus it is in hunting; thus it is in the search of truth; thus it isin life. The
past does not interest, the present does not satisfy ; the future alone is the object which
engages us. ‘It is not the goal, but the course, that makes us happy,’ says Richter ”
(Hamilton, ‘ Metaphysics’). But in the case before us we find that the pleasure afforded
by intellectual activity is not regarded by the Preacher as an end sufficient in itself to’
engage his energies, It is a practical end he has in view; and when he finds that
earthly pursuits cannot alter destinies, cannot change the conditions under which we
live, cannot set right that which is wrong, or supply that which is wanting for human
happiness, he loathes them altogether. he very wisdom and knowledge which he had
acquired in his investigations seem to him useless lumber. He wanted to find in life
an adequate aim and end, something in which man could find repose. He found it not.
“The light which the wisdom he had learned cast on human destiny only exhibited to
him the illusions of life, but did not show him one perfect object on which he might
rest as a final aim of existence. And therefore he says that ‘he that increaseth know-
ledge increaseth sorrow,’ since he only thus perceives more and more illusions, whilst
nothing is the result, and nihilism is only sorrow of heart” (vide Martensen, ‘ Christian
Ethics’). The Preacher then says about the pursuit of wisdom, that though it is
implanted by God in the heart of man (ver. 13), it is (1) @ severe and laborious task,
and (2) the results it yields are grief and sorrow.

I, In the first place, then, HE DESCRIBES THE PURSUIT OF WISDOM AS A SEVERE AND
LaBorious TASK. He looks back upon the course of inquiry he had followed, and
ceclares that it has been a rugged, thorny road. ‘“ This sore travail hath God given to
the sons of man to be exercised therewith.” And it is quite in harmony with the spirit
of the book that the name of God, which occurs here for the first time, should be
coupled with the thought of his laying heavy burdens upon men, since it was by hina
that this profitless search had been appointed. He remembers all the labours of the
way by which he had come—the weariness of brain, the laborious days, the sleepless
nights, the frustrated hopes, the disappointments he had experienced; and he counts
the pursuit of wisdom but another of the vanities of life. The common run of men,
who have no high aims, no desires after a wisdom more than that needed for procuring
a livelihood, who are undisturbed by the great problems of life, are spared this painful
discipline. It is those who rise above their fellows, that are called to spend their
strength and resources, to deny themselves pleasures, and to separate themselves from
much of that in which mankind delight and find solace, only to find keener sorrows
than those known to their fellows. ‘I'hey do indeed hear and obey the voice of God,
but it calls them to suffering and to self-sacrifice. In these days, when the sciences
open up before men vast fields for research, there must be many who can verify from
their own experience what Solomon says about the laboriousness of the methods used,
The infinite patience needed, the observation and cataloguing of multitudinous facts,
the inventing of fresh mechanical appliances for facilitating research, the varied experi-
ments, the careful examination of evidence, and the construction and testing of new
theories and hypotheses, are the “ sore travail” here spoken of.

II. In the second place, THE WISDOM AND KNOWLEDGE 80 LABORIOUSLY GAINED
ONLY MEAN INCREASE OF GRIEF AND sorrow. (Ver. 18.) ‘There is abundant evidence
of the truth of this statement in the experience of those who have made great attain-
ments in intellectual wisdom. For progress in knowledge only convinces man of the
little he knows, as compared with the vast universe of being that lies undiscovered,
He is convinced of the weakness of his powers, the shortness of the time at his
disposal, and the infinite extent of the field, which he desires, but can never hope to
take possession of. This thought is expressed in the well-known words of Sir Isaac
Newton : “I seem to have been only like a boy playing on the seashore, and diverting
myself now and then with a smoother pebble or a prettier shell than ordinary, while
the ocean of truth lay undiscovered before me.” With increase of intellectual know-
ledge, with enlarged acquaintance with the thoughts of men, and the various theories
of the universe that have been held, and the various solutions of difficulties that have
been given, there often comes, too, unwillingness or inability to rest content with any


80 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, [om. 1 1—18


em


theory or any solution. Doubts, which frequently settle down into definite agnosticism,
beset the man who is given to great intellectual activity. And then, too, the fact
remains that we cannot by sheer reasoning come to any definite conclusions as to any
of the great questions which most concern our hapjiness. No one can by searching
find out God—reach definite knowledge concerning him, his existence, nature, and
character; or be assured of the fact of there being an overruling Providence, of the
efficacy of prayer, of a life beyond the grave, or of the immortality of the soul.
Probable or plausible opinions may be formed, but certainty comes only by revelation
and faith. Hence it is that Milton describes some of the fallen angels as wandering
hopelessly through these labyrinths of thought and conjecture, and finding in so
doing intellectual occupation, but neither solace nor rest.


“ Others apart sat on a hill retired,
In thoughts more elevate, and reason’d high
Of providence, foreknowledge, will, and fate;
Fix’d fate, free-will, foreknowledge absolute,
And found no end, in wandering mazes lost.
Of good and evil much they argued then,
Of happiness and final misery,
Passion and-apathy, and glory and shame,
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy.”


And it has been said that one of the attractions which this Book of Ecclesiastes has for
the present age is in its sceptical questioning, and restless, fluctuating uncertainty.
The age can adopt as its own its sombre declarations. “Science boasts vaingloriously
of her progress, yet mocks us with her grand discovery of progress through pain, telling
of small advantages for the few purchased by enormous waste of life, by internecine
conflict and competition, and by a deadly struggle with Nature herself, ‘red in tooth
and claw with ravin,’ greedy to feed on the offspring of her own redundant fertility.
The revelations of ceology and astronomy deepen our depression. The littleness of our
lives and the insignificance of our concerns become more conspicuous in comparison with
the long and slow procession of the wons which have gone before, and with the vast
ocean of being around us, driven and tossed by enormous, complicated, and unresting
forces. A new significance is thus given to the words, ‘In much wisdom is much
grief: and he that increaseth knowledge increaseth sorrow’” (Tyler). In his celebrated
engraving of ‘M:lancolia,’ Albert’ Direr has with wonderful skill depicted this mood of
intellectual depression. He represents a winged figure, that of a woman seated by the
seashore and looking intently into the distance, with bent brows and proud, pensive
demeanour. Her thoughts are absorbed in sombre meditation, and her wings are
folded. A closed book isin her lap. Near her stands a dial-plate, and above it ‘a bell
that strikes the hours as they pass. The sun is rapidly nearing the horizon-line and
darkness will soon enshroud the earth. In her right hand she holds a compass and @
circle, emblematic of that infinity of time and space upon which she is meditating
Around her are scattered the various implements of art, and the numerous appliances of
science. They have served her purpose, and she now casts them aside, and listlessly
ponders on the vanity of all human calculations. Above her is an hour-glasa, in which
the sands are running low, emblematic of the shortness of the time yet left for fresh
schemes and efforts, In like manner the Preacher found that on the moral side increase
of knowledge meant increase of sorrow. Knowledge of the true ideal only made him the
more conscious of the distance we are from it, and of the hopelessness of our efforts to
reach it. The further the research is carried, the more abundant is the evidence dis-
coverable of our moral nature being in a condition of disorder. We find that conscience
too often reigns without governing, that natural appetites and desires refuse to subinit
to her rule, that often motives and feelings which she distinctly condemns, such as
pride, envy, selfishness, and cruelty, direct and animate our conduct. All schools of
philosophy have recognized the fact of moral disorder in our nature. It is, indeed, unfor-
tunately too evident to be denied or explained away. Aristotle says “We are more
naturally disposed towards those things which are wrong, and more easily carried away
to excess than to propriety of conduct.” “And Hume, “ We naturally desire what is for-
bidden, and often take a pleasure in performing actions merely because they are unlawful.


on, 1. 12—6.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 3.
cee cor oe al a a ll a


The notion of duty when opposite to the passions is not always able to overcome ther :
and when it fails of that effect, is apt rather to increase and irritate them, by producing
an opposition in our motives and principles.” But it is not necessary to mulitply
testimony to a fact so generally acknowledged. How this moral disorder originated in
human nature is a problem which philosophy is unable to solve, just as it is lacking in
ability to correct it. It can discern the symptoms and character of the disease, ani
desciibe the course it takes, but cannot cure it, And so the existence of disturbin
and lawless forces in our moral nature, the power of evil habit, the social inequalitics
and disorders which result from the perversity of the indiviluals of whom society is
made up, and the varying codes of morals which exist in the world, are all calculated
to distress and perplex him who seeks to make that straight which is crooked, and to
eeppement that which is defective, Increase of knowledge brings increase of sorrow


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER IL


Vers. 1—11.—Section 2. Vanity of striving
after pleasure and wealth.


Ver. 1.—Dissatisfied with the result of the
pursuit of wisdom, Koheleth embarks on a
course of sensual pleasure, if so be this may
yield some effect more substantial and per-
manent, I said in mine heart, Go to now,
I will prove thee with mirth. The heart is
addressed as tle seat of the emotions and
affections, The Vulgate misses the direct
address to the heart, which the words, rightly
interpreted, imply, translating, Vadam et
afiuam deliciis. The Septuagint correctly
gives, Acipo 5) mreipaow oe ev evppootyn. It
is like the rich fool’s language in Christ’s
parable, “I will say to my soul, Soul, thou
hast much goods laid up for many years;
take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry ” (Luke
xii, 10). Therefore enjoy pleasure; literally,
see good (ch. vi. 6). “To see” is often used
figuratively in the sense of “to experience,
or enjoy.” Wright compares the expres-
sions, “see death ” (Luke ii. 26), “see life”
(John iii. 86). We may find the like in Ps.
xxxiv. 13; Jer. xxix. 32; Obad. 13 (comp.
ch. ix. 9). The king now tries to find the
summum bonum in pleasure, in selfish en-
joyment without thought of others. Com-
mentators, as tlic y saw Stoicism in the first
chapter, so read Epicurcanism into this. We
shall have occasion to refer to this idea
further on (sce on ch. iii. 22). Of this new
experiment the result was the same as be-
fore. Behold, this also is vanity. This
experience is confirmed in the next verse.

Ver. 2.—I said of laughter, It is mad.
Lauvhter and mirth are personified, hence
treated as masculine. He uses the term
66 mad” in reference to the statement in ch.
i. 17, “I gave my heart to know madness
and folly.” Septuagint, “I said to laughter,
Error (repipopay);” Vulgate, Risum reputavt
errorem. Neither of these is as accurate as
the Authorized Version. Of mirth, What


doeth it? What does it effect towards real
happiness and contentment? How does it
help to fill the void, to give lasting satis-
faction? So we have in Prov. xiv. 13,
“Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful;
and the end of mirth is heaviness;” though
the context is different. The Vulgate
renders loosely, Quid frustra deciperis ?
Ver. 3.—I sought in mine heart; literally,
I spied out (as ch. i. 13) in my heart.
Having proved the fruitlessness of some sort
of sensual pleasure, he made another experi-
ment in a philosophical spirit. To give
myself unto wine; literally, to draw(mashak)
my flesh with wine; i.e. to use the attraction
of the pleasures of the table. Yet acquaint
ing my heart with wisdom. ‘This is a
parenthetical clause, which Wright trans-
lates, “ While my licart was acting [guiding]
with wisdom.” ‘That is, while, as it were,
experimenting with pleasure, he still re-
tained sufficient contro] over his passions as
not to be wholly given over to vice; he was
in the position of one who is being carried
down an impetuous stream, yet has the
power of stopping hia headlong course before
it becomes fatal to him. Such control was
given by wisdom. Deliberately to enter
upon a course of self-indulgence, even with
a possibly good intention, must be a most
perilous trial, and one which would leave
indelible marks upon the soul; and not one
person in a hundred would be able to stop
short of ruin. The historical Solomon, by
his experiment, suffered infinite loss, which
nothing could compensate. The Septuagint
renders not very successfully, “ I examined
whether my heart would draw (éAcdcer) my
flesh as wine; and my heart guided me in
wisdom.” The Vulgate gives a sense en-
tirely contrary to tlhe writer’s intention ; “I
thought in my heart to withdraw my flesh
from wine, that I might transfer my mind to
wisdom.” And to lay hold on folly. These
words are dependent upon “I sought in my
heart,” and refer to the sensual pleasures in
which he indulged for a certain object.


82 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(cz. m. 1—26,


ee


“Dulce est desipere in loco,” says Horace
(‘Carm.,’ iv. 12. 28); "Evy wey patvouévors
pdda patvouam (Theognis, 313). Till I
might see. His purpose was to discover if
there was in these things any real good
which might satisfy men’s cravings, and be
a worthy object for them to pursue all the
days of their life.

Ver. 4.—This commences a new experience
in the pursuit of his object. Leaving this
life of self-indulgence, he takes to art and
culture, the details being drawn from the
accounts of the historical Solomon. I made
me great works; literally, I made great
my works; Septuagint, ’EueydAvva molnud
pov; Vulgate, Magnificavi opera mea.
Among these works the temple, with all its
wonderful structural preparations, is not


specially mentioned, perhaps because no one .


could think of Solomon without connecting
his name with this magnificent building,
and it was superfluous to call attention to
it; or else because the religious aspect of liis
operations is not here in question, but only
his taste and pursuit of beauty. But the
omission tells strongly against the Solomonic
authorship of the book. I builded me
houses. Solomon liad a passion for erecting
magnificent buildings. We have various
accounts of his works of this nature in 1
Kings vii. and ix.; 2 Chron. viii. There
was the huge palace for himself, which occu-
pied thirteen years in building; there was
the “house of the forest of Lebanon,” a
splendid hall constructed with pillars of
cedar; the porch of pillars; the hall of
judgment; the harem for the daughter of
Pharaoh. Then there were fortresses, store-
cities, chariot-towns, national works of great
importance ; cities in distant lands which he
founded, such as Tadmor in the wilderness,
I planted me vineyards. David had vine-
yards and oliveyards (1 Chron. xxvii. 27, 28),
whic! passed into the possession of his son;
and we read in Cant. viii. 11 of a vineyard
that Solomon had in Baal-hamon, which
some identify with Belamon (Judith viii. 3),
a place near Shunem, in the Plain of
Esdraelon.

Ver. 5.—I made me gardens and orchards,
Solomon’s love of gardens appears through-
out the Canticles (vi. 2, etc.). He had a
king’s garden on the slope of the hills south
of the city (2 Kings xxv. 4); and Beth-
haccherem, “ the House of the Vine,” at Ain
Kurim, about six miles east of Jerusalem
(Jix. vi. 1); and at Baal-hamon another
ext nsive vineyard (Cant. viii. 11). The
word rendered “orchard” (parder) occurs
also in Cant. iv. 13 and Neh. ii. 8. It is a
Persian word, and passed into the Greek
form mapdSeicos (Xenoplion, ‘ Anab.,’ i. 2. 7),
Incaving “a park” planted with forest and
fruit trees, and containing herds of animals.


It is probably derived from the Zend
patridaeza, “ an enclosure.” (For the trees in
such parks, see Cant. iv. 13, 14; and for an
estimate of Solomon’s works, Josephus,
‘ Ant.,’ viii. 7. 3.)

Ver. 6.—Pools of water. Great care was
exercised by Solomon to provide his capital
with water, and vast operations were under-
taken for this purpose. “The king’s pool,”
mentioned in Neh. ii. 14, may have been
constructed by him (Josephus, ‘ Bell. Jud.,’
v.4.2); but the most celebrated work ascribed
to him is the water-supply at Etham, south-
west of Bethlehem, and the aqueduct leading
from thence to Jerusalem. Most modern
travellers have described these pools. They
are three in number, and, according to
Robinson’s measurement, are of immense
size. The first, to the east, is 582 feet long,
207 wide, and 50 deep; the second, 432 by
250, and 39 feet deep; the third, 380 by 236,
and 25 feet deep. They are all, however,
narrower at the upper end, and widen out
gradually, flowing one into the other. There
is @ copious spring led into the uppermost
pool from the north-east, but this supply is
augmented by other sources now choked and
ruined. The water from the pools was
conveyed round the ridge on which Bethle-
hem stands in earthen pipes to Jerusalem.
Dr. Thomson (‘The Land and the Book,’
p. 326) says, ‘ Near that city it was carried
along the west side of the Valley of Gihon to
the north-western end of the lower Pool of
Gihon, where it crossed to the east side, and,
winding round the southern declivity of
Zion below Neby Ddid, finally entered the
south-eastern corner of the temple area,
where the water was employed in the
various services of the sanctuary.” Etham
is, with good reason, identified with the
beautiful valley of Urtas, which lies south-
west of Bethlehem, in the immediate
neighbourhood of the pools of Solomen.
The fountain near the present village
watered the gardens and orchards which
were planted here, the terraced hills around
were covered with vines, figs, and olives,
and the prospect must have been delight-
ful and refreshing in that thirsty land. To
water thirewith the wood that bringeth
forth trees; Revised Version, to water
therefrom the forest where trees were reared;
literally, in order to irrigate a wood sprout-
ing forth trees; i.e. a nursery of saplings,
So we read how the Garden of Eden was
watered (Gen. ii. 10; xiii, 10)—a most
necessary feature in Eastern countries,
where streams and pools are not constructed
for picturesque reasons, but for material
uses.

Ver. 7.—I got me—I bought, procured—
servants and maidens. These are distinct
from those mentioned immediately after


on. 11. 1—26.]


wards, servants born in my house; Septua-


gint, oixoyeveis ; called in the Hebrew, “ sons.


of the house” (Gen. xv. 3). They were much
more esteemed by their masters, and showed
a much closer attachment to the family
than the bought slaves or the conquered
aboriginals, who were often reduced to
this state (1 Kings ix. 20, 21), The number
of Solomon’s attendants excited the wonder
of the Queen of Sheba (1 Kings iv. 26, ete. ;
x. 5), and with good reason, if Josephus’s
account is to be believed. This writer
asserts that the king had some thousand
or more chariots, and twenty thousand
horses. The drivers and riders were young
men of comely aspect, tall and well-made;
they had long flowing hair, and wore tunics
of Tyrian purple, and powdered their hair
with gold dust, which glittered in the rays
of the sun (‘ Ant.’ vili. 7.3). Attended
by a cavalcade thus arrayed, Solomon used
to betake himself to his “ paradise” at
Etham, to enjoy the refreshing coolness of
its trees and pools. Great and small cattle;
oxen and sheep The enormous amount of
Solomon’s herds and flocks is proved by the
extraordinary multitude of the sacrifices at
the consecration of the temple (1 Kings
vai 63), and the lavish provision made
daily for the wants of his table (1 Kings iv.
22, 23). The cattle of David were very
numerous, and required special overlookers
(i Chron. xxvii. 29—31). Job (i. 3) had,
before his troubles, seven thousand sheep,
three thousand camels, five hundred yoke of
oxen, and five hundred she-asses, and these
items were all doubled at the return of his

rosperity. Among Solomon’s possessions,

orses are not here mentioned, though they
formed no inconsiderable portion of his live
stock, and added greatly to his magnificence,
Koheleth, perhaps, avoided boasting of this
extravavance in consideration of the religious
sentiment which was strongly opposed to
such a feature. That were in Jerusalem
before me (so ver.9; see ch. i, 16). But
the reference here may not necessarily be
to kings, but to chieftains and rich men, who
were celebrated for the extent of their
possessions.

Ver. 8.—I gathered me also silver and gold.
Much is said of the wealth of the historical
Solomon, who had all his vessels of gold,
armed his body-guard with golden shields,
sat on an ivory throne overlaid with gold, re-
ceived tribute and presents of gold from all
quarters, sent his navics to distant lands to
import precious metals, and made silver as
common in Jerusalem as stones (see 1 Kings
ix. 28; x. 14—27; 2 Chron. i. 15 ; ix. 20—27).
The peculiar treasure of kings and of the
provinces. The word rendered “the pro-
vinces” (hammedinvth), in spite of the article,
seems to mean, not the twelve districts into


EOCLESIASTES,


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 33


—_——————————eee t="


which Solomon divided his kingdom for fiscal
and economical purposes (1 Kings iv. 7, etv.),
but countries generally exterior to Palestine,
with which he bad commercial or political
relations, and which sent to him the produc-
tions for which they were each most cele-
brated. So the districts of the Persian
empire were required to furnish the monarch
with a certain portion of their chief com-
modities. His friendship with Hiram of Tyre
brought him into connection with the Phoeni-
cians, the greatest commercial nation of anti-
quity, and through them he accumulated
riches and stores from distant and various
lands beyond the limits of the Mediterranean
Sea. The word 7379 (medinah) occurs again
in ch. v. 7 and in] Kings xx. 14, ete.; but
is found elsewhere ouly in exilian or post-
exilian books (e.g. Lam. i. 1; Esth. i. 1, etc.;
Dan. ii. 48, etc.). The “kings” may be the
tributary monarchs, such as those of Arabia
(1 Kings iv. 21, 24; x. 15); or the expression
in the text may imply simply such treasure
as only kings, and not private persons, could
possess. Men-singers and women-singers.
These, of course, are not the choir of the
temple, of which women formed no part, but
musicians introduced at banquets and social
festivals, toenliance the pleasures of the scene.
They are mentioue. in David’s days (2 Sam,
xix. 35) and later (see Isa. v. 12; Amos
vi. 5; Ecclus, xxxv. 5; xlix.1). The females
who took part in these performances were
generally of an abandoned class; hence the
warning of Ben-Sira, “Use not much the
company of a woman that is a singer, lest
thou be taken with her attempts” (Ecclus.
ix. 4). Such exhibitions were usually accom-
panied with dancing, the character of which
in Eastern countries is well known. The
Jews, ag time went on, learned to tolerate
many customs and practices, imported often
from other lands, which tended to lower
morality and self-respect. And the delights
of the sons of men; the sensual pleasures that
men enjoy. The expression is euphemistic
(comp, Cant. vii 6). Musical instruments,
and that of all sorts (siiddah veshiddoth).
The word (given here first in the singular
number and then in the plural emphatically
to express multitude) occurs nowhere else,
and has, therefore, been subjected to various
interpretations. The Septuagint gives,
oivoxdov Kal oivoxoas, “a male cupbearer and
female cupbearers;” and so the Syriac and
Vulgate, Scyphoset urceos in ministerio ad vina
fundenda—which introduces rather a bathos
into the description. After the clause im-
mediately preceding, one might expect men-
tion of Solomon’s numerous harem (1 Kings
xi. 83; Cant. vi. 8), and most modern sm-
mentators consider the word to mean “one
cubine,” the whole expression denoting
multiplicity, “wife and wives.” The
D


34 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


(cu. nm. 1—26.


Authorized Version is not very probable,
though somewhat supported by Kimchi,
Luther, ete., and the Greek Venetian, which
has, clornpa Ka) svorhpara, a musical term
signifying “combination of tones,” or har-
mony. Other interpretations are “ captives,”
“litters,” “coaches,” “baths,” “treasures,”
“chests,” “demons.” Ewald, followed by
Motais and others, suggests that the word
implies a strung or high degree of a
quality, so that, connecting the two clauses
together, we should render, “And in a
word, all the delizhts of the sons of men in
abundance.” This seems a more appro-
priate termination to the catalogue than any
specification of further sources of pleasure;
but there is no very strong etymological reason
to recommend it ; and we can hardly suppose
that, in the enumeration of Solomon’s prodi-
galities, his nultitudinous scraglio would be
omitted.
as the climax and completion of his pursuit
of earthly delight.

Ver. 9.—So I was great (see on ch. i. 16).
This refers to the magnificence and extent of
his possessions and luxury, as the former
passage to the surpassing excellence of his
wisdom. We may compare the mention of
Abraham (Gen. xxvi. 13), “'The man waxed
great, and grew more and more until he
became very great” (so Job i. 3). Also my
wisdom remained with me; perseverivit
mecum (Vulgate); éordén wor (Septuagint).
In accordance with the purpose mentioned
in ver. 3, he retained command of himself,
studying philosophically the effects and
nature of the pleasures of which he par-
took, and keeping ever in view the ‘object of
his pursuit. Voluptuousness was not the end
which he sought, but one of the means to
obtain the end; and what he calls his wisdom
is not pure Divine wisdom that comes from
above, but an earthly prudence and self-
restraint.

Ver. 10.—Whatsoever mine eyes desired,
The lust of ihe eyes (1 John ii. 16), all that
he sawand desired, he took measures to obtain,
He denied himself no gratification, however
foolish (ver. 3). For my heart rejoiced in all
my labour; te. found joy in what my labour
procured for it (comp. Prov. y. 18). This
was the reason why he withheld not his heart
from any joy; kept it, as it were, ready to
taste any pleasure which his exertions might
obtain. This was my portion of all my labour,
Such joy was that which he won from his
labour. He had his reward, such as it was
(Matt. vi. 2; Luke xvi. 25). This term
“ portion ” (cheleg) recurs often (e.g. ver. 21;
ch, iii. 22; v. 18, etc. ; so Wisd. ii. 9) in the
sense of the result obtained by labour or con-
duct. And what a meagre and unsatisfying
result it was which he gained! Contrast the
apostle’s teaching, “ All that is in the world,


Rather it comes in Lere nuturally-


the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes,
and the vain-glory of life, is not of the Father,
but is of the world. And the world passeth
away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth
the will of God abideth for ever” (1 John
ii. 16, 17).

Ver. 11.—Then I looked on—I turned to
contemplate —all the works which my hands
had wrought. He examined carefully the
effects of the conduct and proceedings men-
tioned in vers. 1—10, and he now gives hia
matured judgment concerning them. They
had contributed nothing to hisanxious inquiry
for man’s real good. His surrowful conclusion
again is that all was vanity, a hunting of
wind; in all the pursuits and labours that
men undertake there is no real profit (ch.i.3),
no lasting happiness, nothing to satisfy the
cravings of the spirit.


Vers. 12 — 26. — Section 3. Vanity of
wisdom, in view of the fate that awaits the wise
man equally with the fool, and the uncertainty
of the future of his labours, especially as man
is not master of his own fate.


Ver, 12.—And I turned myself to behold
wisdom, and madness, and folly (ch. i. 17),
He studied the three in their mutual con-
nection and relation, comparing them in
their results and cifects on man’s nature
und life, and deducing thence their real
value. On one side he set wisdom, on the
other the action, and habits which he
rightly terms “madness and folly,” and ex-
amined them calmly and critically. For
what can the man do that cometh after the
king? even that which hath been already
done. Both the Authorized Version and
Revised Version render the passage thus,
though the latter, in the margin, gives two
alternative renderings of the second clause,
viz. even him whom they made king long ago,
and, as in the Authorized Version margin, in
those things which have been already done,
The LXX., following a different reading,
gives, “For what man is there who will
follow after counsel in whatsoever things he
employed it?” Vulgate, “What is man,
said I, that he should be able to follow the
King, his Maker?” Wright, Delitzsch,
Nowacek, etc., “For what is the man that
is to come after the king whom they made
so long ago?” é.e. who can have greater
experience than Sulomon made king in old
time amid universal acclamation (1 Chron.
xxix. 22)? or, who can hope to equal his
fa.se ?—which does not secm quite suitable,
as it is the abnormal opportunitics of investi«
gation given by his unique position which
would be the point of the query. The
Authorized Version gives a fairly satie~
factory (and grammatically unobjectionable)
meaning—What can any one effect wlio tries


cu. 1. I-26.]


the same experiment as the -king did? He
could not do so under more favourable con-
ditions, and will only repeat the same pro-
cess and reach the game result. But the
pense is obscure, and every interpretation

as its own difficulty, Ifthe k¢ with which
the second purtion of the passage begins
(“for what,” etc.) assigns the reason or
motive of the first portion, shows what was
the design of Koheleth in contrasting wisdom
and folly, the rendering of the Authorized
Version is not inappropriate. Many crities
consider that Solomon is here speaking of
his succe:sor, asking what kind of man he
will be who comes after him—the man whom
some have already chosen? And certainly
there is some ground for this interpretation
in vers, 18,19, where the complaint is that
all the king’s greatness and glory will be
left to an unworthy successor. But this
view requires the Solomonic authorship of
the book, and makes him to refer to Re-
hoboam or some illegitimate usurper. The
wording of the text is too general to admit
of this explanation ; nor does it exactly suit
the immediate context, or duly connect the
two clauses of the verse. It seems best to
take the successor, not as one who comes to
the kingdom, but as one who pursues similar
investigations, repeats Koheleth’s experi-
ments,

Ver. 13.—Then (and) I saw that wisdom
excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth dark-
ness; or, (here is projit, advantuge (weplaoesa,
Septuagint, ch. i. 3) to wisdom over folly, as
the advantage of light over darkness. This
result, at any rate, was obtained—he learned
that wisdom had a certain value, that it
was as much superior to folly, in its effects on
men, as light is more beneficial than dark-
ness. It is a natural metaphor to represent
spiritual and intellectual development as
light, and mental and moral depravity as
darkness (comp. Eph. v. 8; 1 Thess. v. 5).

Ver. 14.—The wise man’s eyes are in his
head; but the fool walketh in darkness,
This clause is closely connected with the
preceding verse, showing how wisdom ex-
celleth folly. The wise man has the eyes
of his heart or understanding enlightened
(Eph. i. 18); he looks into the nature of
things, fixes his regard on what is most im-
portant, sees where to go; while the fool’s
eyes are in the ends of the earth (Prov. xvii.
24); he walks on still in darkness, stum-
blirg as he goes, knowing not whither his
road shall take him. And I myself also
(Leven I) perceived that one event happeneth
tothem all. “Event” (mikreh); cuveyrnua
(Septuagint); interitus( Vulgate); not chance,
but death, the final event. The word is trans-
lated “hap” in Ruth ii. 8, and “chance” In
1 Sam. vi. 9; but the connection here points
to a definite termination; nor would it be


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.
ee eee ee eters ln


' consistent with Koheleth’s religion to refer
this termination to fate or accident. With
all his experience, he could only conclude
that in one important aspect the observed
superiority of wisdom to folly was illusory
and vain. He saw with his own eyes, and
needed no instructor to teach, that both
wise and fool must succumb to death, the
universal leveller. Horace, in many pas-
sages, siugs of this: thus ‘Carn.,’ ii. 3. 21—


* Divesne prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest, an pauper et infima
De gente sub divo moreris,

Victima nil miserantis Orci.”


(Comp. ibid., i. 28. 15, etc.; ii. 14, 9, ete.)
Plato (‘Phado,’ lvii. p. 108, A) refers to
a passage in ‘Telephus,’ a lost play of
Aischylus, which is restored thus—


‘Amdjj yap olwos mdyras cis “AiSov pépes.
‘A single path leads all unto the grave.”


Ver. 15.—Then (and) said I in my heart
(ch. i. 16), As it happeneth to the fool, so it
happeneth even to me. WHe applies the
general statement of ver. 14 to his own
case. The end that overtakes the fool will
ere long overtake him; and he proceeds,
Why was I then more wise? “Then” (tx),
may be understood either logically, ¢.¢. in
this case, since such is the fate of wise and
foolish; or temporally, at the hour of death
regarded as past. He puts the question—
To what end, with what design, has he
been so excessively wise, or, as it may be,
wise oyermuch (ch. vii. 16)? His wisdom
has, as it were, recoiled upon himself—it
taught him much, but not content; it made
him keen-siyhted in seeing the emptiness of
human things, but it satisfied not his crav-
ings. Then I said in my heart, that this
also is vanity. This similarity of fate for
philosopher and fool makes life vain and
worthless ; or rather, the meaning may be,
if the superiority of wisdom over folly con-
duces to no other end than this, that superi-
ority is a vanity. The LXX. has glossed
the passage, followed herein by the Syriac,
“‘ Moreover, I spake in my heart that indeed
this is also vanity, because the fool speaks
out of his abundance ”—ver. 16 giving the
substance of the fool’s thoughts. Vulgate,
Locutusque cum mente mea, animadvertt
quod hoc quoque esset vanitas. Our Hebrew
text does not confirm this interpretation or
addition.

Ver. 16.—For there is no remembrance of
the wise more than of the fool for ever;
Revised Version, more empliatically, for
of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is
no remembrance for ever. ‘This, of course,
is not absolutely true. There are men
whose names are history, and will endura


%6 EOOLESIASI ES; OR, THE PREACHER.


as long as the world lasts; but speaking
generally, oblivion is the portion of all;
posterity soon forgets the wisdom of one and
the folly of another. Where the belief ip
the future life was not a strong and ani-
mating motive, posthumous fame exercised
a potent attraction for many minds, To be
the founder of a long line of descendants,
or to leave a record which should be fresh
in the minds of future generations, these
were objects of intense ambition, and valued
as worthy of highest aspirations and brst
efforts. The words of classical poets will
occur to our memory; e.g. Horace, ‘Carm.,’
iii. 30.


“Hxegi monumentum ere perennius .. .
Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei
Vitabit Libitinam.”


Ovid, ‘ Amor.,’ i. 15. 4—


“Ergo etiam, cum me supremus adederit
ignis,

Vivam, parsque mei multa superstes
erit.”


But Koheleth shows the vanity of all such
hopes; they are based on grounds which
experience proves to be unsubstantial.
Though Solomon’s own fame gives the lie to
the statement received without limitation
(comp. Wisd. viii. 13), yet his reflections
might well have taken this turn, and the
writer is quite justified in putting the
thought into his mouth, as the king could
not know how subsequent ages would re-
gard his wisdom and attainments. Seeing
that which now is in the days to come shall
all be forgotten. The clause has been vari-
ously translated. Septuagint, “ Forasmuch
as the coming days, even all the things, are
forgotten ;” Vulgate, “And future times
shall cover all things equally with oblivion.”
Modern editors give, “Since in the days
that are to come they are all forgotten;”
“As in time past, so in days to come, all
will be forgotten;” “In the days which
are coming [it will be said by-and-by],
‘The whole of them are long ago for-
gotten.’”’ This is a specimen of the un-
certainty of exact interpretation, where
the intended meaning is well ascertained.
“All” (S27) may refer either to wise
and foolish, or to the circumstances of
their lives. And how dieth the wise man? as
the fool. Better taken as one sentence, with
an exclaination, How doth the wise man die
with (even as) the fool! (For “with” (¢m),
equivalent to “as,” comp. ch. vii. 11; Job
ix. 26; Ps. evi. 6.) “How” (x) is sar-
castic, as Isa. xiv. 4, or sorrowful, as 2 Sam.
i. 19. The same complaint falls from a
psalmist’s lips, “He sceth that wise men
die; the fool and the brutish together


(on. mm. 1—26.


perish” (Ps. xlix. 10). So David laments
the death of tle murdered leader, “Should
Abner die as a fool dieth?” (2 Sam. iii. 33).
Plumptre considers that the author of the
Book of Wisdom expands this view with
the design of exposing its fallacy, and
introducing a better hope (ch. ii. 1—9).
But that writer would not have designated
Solomow’s sentiments as those of “the un-
godly” (ac¢ets), nor foisted these utter-
ances of sensualists and materialists upon so
honoured a source. At the same time, it is
only as being victims, nil mtserantis Ored, the
prey of the pitiless and indiscriminating
grave, that the wise and fo.lish are placed
in the same category. ‘ There is the widest
difference between the death-beds of the
two, as the experience of any one who has
watched them will testify, the one happy
with the consciousness of duty done ho-
nestly, however imperfectly, and bright with
the hope of immortality; the other darkened
by vain regrets and shrinking despair, or
listless in brutish insensibility.

Ver. 17.—Therefore I hated life; et td-
circo teduit me vite mex. Be a man wise
or foolish, his life leacls only to one end and
is soon forgotten; hence life itself is burden-
some and hateful. The hitter complaint of
Job (iii. 20, etc.; vi. 8,9) is here echoed,
though the words do not point to suicide as
the solution of the riddle. It is the ennué
and upprofitableness of all life and action in
view of the inevitable couclusion, which is
here lamented. Because the work that is
wrought under the sun is grievous unto me;
literally, for evil unto me (Estl:. iii. 9) ¢s the
work which ts done under the sun. The toil
and exertions of me pre-sed upon him like
a burden too heavy for him to bear. Syz-
machus, Kady por tpdvn Td epyov; Septua-
gint, Tloynpdy én’ éué 7d molnua, x.7.A. He
repeats the expression, “ under the sun,” as
if to show that he was regarding human
labour only in its earthly aspect, undertaken
and executed for temporal and selfish con-
siderations alone. The apostle teaches a
better lesson, and the worker who adopts his
rule is saved irom this crushing disappoint-
ment: “ Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as
to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing
that of the Lord ye shall receive the recom-
pense of the inheritance: ye serve the Lord
Christ” (Col. iii. 23, 24). For all is vanity.
He comes back to the same miserable refrain ;
it is all emptiness, striving after wind.

Ver. 18.—Such had been his general view
of men’s actions; he now brings the thought
home to his own case, which makes his dis.
tress rore poignant. Yea (and), I hated all
my labour which I had taken under the sun.
He is disgusted to reflect upon all the trouble
he has taken in life, when he thinks of what
will become of the productions of his geaius


ou. 1. 126,


and the treasures which he has amassed
Because I should leave it (my labour, i.e its
results) unto the man that shall be after me.
It is impossible that Solomon could thus
have spoken of Rehoboam; and to suppose
that he wrote thus after Jeroboam’s attempt
(1 Kings ii. 26, etc.), and in contemplation
of a possible usurper, is not warranted by any
historical statemest, the absolute security of
the succession be all along expected, and
the growing dissenter! beiuy perfectly un-
known to, or a suously disregarded by,
the king. The seutiment is general, and
recurs more than once; e.g. ch. iv. 8; v.14;
vi. 2, Thus Horace, ‘ Epist.,’ ii. 2. 175—


“Sic quia perpetuus nulli datur usus, et
heres
Heredem alterius velut unda supervenit
undam,
Quid vici prosunt aut horrea?”


Ver. 19.—Who knoweth whether he shall
be a wise man or a fool? The bitter feeling
that he has to leave the fruits of his life-
long labour to another is aggravated by the
thought that he knows not the character of
this successor, whether-he will be worthy or
not. As the psalmist says, “ He heapeth up
riches, and knuweth not who shall gather
them” (Ps. xxxix.6). Again inthe parable,
“The things which thou hast prepared,
whose shall they be?” (Luke xii. 20; comp.
Ecclus. xi. 18, 19). Yet shall he have rule,
etc. Whatever may be his character, he
will have free use and control of all that I
have gathered by my labour directed by

rudence and wisdom. Vulgate, Domina-
itur in laboribus meis quibus desudavi et
sollicitus fut.

Ver. 20.—Therefore I went about to cause
my heart to despair; "Erdéorpepa éye (Sep-
tuagint). “I turned” in order to examine
more closely. So in ver. 12 we had, “I
turned myself,” though the verbs are not the
same in the two passages, and in the former
the LXX. has éweBaepa. I turned from my
late course of action to give myself up to
despair. I lost all hope in labour; it had
no longer any charm or future for me. Sep-
tuagint, Tod arordtacbar thy Kapdiay pou éy
may udxPw pov, K.TA.

Ver. 21.—For there is a man whose labour
isin wisdom. “In,” 3,“ with,” directed and
performed with wisdom. The author speaks
of himself objectively, as St. Paul (2 Cor.
xii. 2) says, “I know a man in Christ,” etc.
His complaint now is, not that his successor
may misuse his inheritance (ver. 19), but
that this person shall have that on which he
has bestowed no skill or toil, shall enjoy
what modern phraseology terms “ unearned
increment.” ‘This, which was set forth as
ene of the blessings of the promised land


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 37


(Deut. vi. 10, 11), Koheleth cannot bear to
contemplate where it touches himself—not
from envy or grudging, but from the feeling
of dissatisfaction and want of energy which
it generates. In (with) knowledge and in
(with) equity. Kishron, translated “ equity ”
in the Authorized Version ; aydpeta, “ manli-
ness,” in the Septuagint; and sollicitudine
in the Vulgate, seems rather here to signify
“ skill” or “success.” It occurs also in ch.
iv. 4 and v. 10, and there only in the Old
Testament.

Ver. 22.—What hath man of all his
labour? 7.e. what is to be the result to
man? Tfverat év 7h dv0pdrw; (Septuagint);
Quid enim proderit homini? (Vulgate). There
is, indeed, the pleasure that accompanies the
pursuit of objects, and the successful accom-
plishment of enterprise; but this is poor and
unsubstantial and embittered. And of the
vexation of his heart; the striving, the effort
of his mind to direct his labour to great ends,
What does all this produce? The answer
intended is,“ Nothing.” ‘This striving, with
all its wisdom and knowledge and skill
(ver. 21), is for the labourer fruitless. .

Ver. 23.—All his days are sorrow, and his
travail grief (comp. ch. v. 16,17). These
are the real results of his lifelong efforts,
All his days are pains and sorrows, bring
trouble with them, and all his labour ends
in grief. “Sorrows” and“ grief” are pre-
dicated respectively of “days” and “travail.”
Abstract nouns are often so used. Thus ch,
x. 12, ‘*The words of a wise man’s mouth
are grace.” The free-thinkers in Wisd. ii.
1 complain that life is short and tedious
(Aurnpos). - Yea, his heart taketh not rest in
the night. He cannot sleep for thinking
over his plans and hopes and disappointe
ments. Not for him is the sweet sleep of
the labouring man, who does his day’s work,
earns his repose, and frets not about the
future. On the one hand care, on the other
saticty, murder sleep, and make the night a
torment.

Vers. 24—26.—From what has been said,
Koheleth concludes that man may indeed
enjoy the good things which he has provided,
and find a certain happiness therein, but only
according to God’s will and permission; and
to expect to win pleasure at one’s own caprice
is vain.

Ver. 24.—There is nothing better for a
man, than that he should eat and drink.
The Vulgate makes the sentence interro-
gative, which the Hebrew does not sanction,
Nonne melius est comedere et bibere? Sep-
tuagint, Ov« Zorw ayabdy avOpdry b payers
kal d nlera, “There is naught good to a man
to eat or drink;” St. Jerome and others
insert nisi, “except for a man to eat,” ete,


%


88 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(ox. m. 1—26.


pe ne ee ee ee ee


This and the Authorized Version, which are
more or less approved by most critics, make
the writer enunciate a kind of moiified
Epicureanism, quotations in confirmation of
which will be found set forth by Plumptre.
It is not pretended that the present Hebrew
text admits this exposition, und critics have
agreed to modify the original in order to
express the scuse wh.ch they give to the
passage, As it stands, the seutence runs,
“Tt is not good in(2) man that he should
eat,” ete. ‘This is supposed to clash with
later statemcuts; e.g. ch. iii. 12,13; viii. 15;
and to condemn all bodily pleasure even in
its simplest form. Hence commentators in-
sert D (“than”) before Saw, supposing
that the initial mem has dropped out after
the termival of the preceding word, adam
(comp. ch. iii. 22). This solution of a diffi-
culty might be allowed were the Hebrew
otherwise incapxble of explanation witheat
doing violence to the sentiments elsewhere
expressed. But this is not the case. As
Motais has secn, the great point lies in the
preposition 3, and what is stated is that it
does not depend on man, it is not in his
power, he is uot at liberty to eat and drink
and enjoy himself simply at his own will;
his power and ability proceed wholly from
God. A higher authority than his decides
the matter. The phrase, “ to eat and drink,”
is merely a periphrasis for living in comfort,
peace, and aftinence. St. Gregory, who holds
that here and in other places Koheleth seems
to contrad ct himself, makes a remark which
is of general application, * He who looks to
the text, and does not acquaiut himself with
the sense of the Holy Word, is not so mueh
furnishing himself with instruction as be-
wildering himself in uncertainty, in that the
literal words somctimes contradict them-
selves; but whilst by their oppositeness they
stand at variance with themselves, they direct
the reader to a truth that is to be under-
stood” (* Moral.” iv. 1). They who read
Epicureanism into the text fall into the error
here denounced. ‘I'hey take the expression,
“eat and driuk,” in the narrowest sense of
bodily pleasure, whereas it was by no means
so confined in the mind of a Hebrew. To
eat bread in the kingdom of God, to take a
place at the heavenly banquet, represents
the highest bliss of glorified man (Luke xiy.
15; Rey. xix. 9, eto.) In a lower degree it
signilies earthly prosperity, as in Jer. xxii.
15, “ Did not thy father eat and drink, and
do judgment and justice? then it was well
with him.” So in our passage we find only
the humiliating truth that man in himself
is powerless to make his life happy or his
labours successful, There is no Epicurean-
ism, even in a modified form, in the Hebrew
text as it has come down to us. With other


supposed traces of this philosophy we shall


have to deal subsequently (see on ch. ifi.
12; vi. 2). And that he should make his
soul enjoy good in his labour; #.e. taste the
enjoyment of his labour, get pleasure as the
reward of all his exertions, or find it in the
actual pursuit. This also I saw, that it was
from the hand of God. This is the point—
the power of enjoyment depends on the will
of God. The next verse substantiates this
assertion.

Ver, 25.—For who can eat, or who alse
can hasten hereunto, more thanI? This is
the translation of the received text. “Eat”
means enjoy one’s self, as in the preceding
verse; “hasten hereunto” implies eager
pursuit of pleasure; an Koheleth asks—
Who had better opportunity than he for
verifying the principle that al] depends
upon the gift of God? Vulgate, Ques ta
devorabit, et deliciis affluet ut ego? The
Septuagint had a different reading, which
obtains also in the Syriac and Arabic ver-
sions, and has been adopted by man
modern critics. Instead of 1399, they
3nd, “without him,” te. except from God.
* For who shall eat or who shall drink with-
out him (dpe aitod)?” This merely re-
peats the thought of the last verse, in agree-
ment with the saying of St. James (i. 17),
“Every good gift and every perfect boon is
from above, coming down from the Father
of lights.” But the received reading, if it
admits the rendering of the Authorized
Version (which is somewhat doubtful), stands
in close connection with the personal remark
just preceding, “This also I saw,” ete., and
is a more sensible confirmation thereof than
a tautological observation can be. The next
verse carries on the thought that subsiantial
enjoyment is entirely the gift of God, aud
granted by him as the moral Governor of
the world.

Ver. 26.—For God giveth to a man that
is good in his sight. Tie subject *God” is
not, in the Hebrew, an omission which is sup-
posed to justify its virtual insertion in ver. 25.
The Vulgate boldly supplies it here, Homing
bono tn conspectu suo dedit Deus. To the
man that finds favour in God’s sight (1 Sam.
xxix. 6; Neh. ii. 5), #6. who pleases him, he
gives blessings, while he withholds them or
takes them away from the man who dis-
pleases him. The blessings specified are
wisdom, and knowledge, and joy. ‘The only
true wisdom which is not grief, the onl
true knowledge which is not sorrow (ch. i.
18), and the only joy in life, are the gifts of
God to those whom he regards as good.
But to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather
and to heap up. ‘The sinner takes
pains, expends continuous labour, that he
may amass wealth, but it passes into other
(more worthy) hands. Horaoa, ‘Carm.,’ ii
14. 25—


on, 11. 1—26.]


“ Absumet heres Caeuba dignior
Servata centum clavibus.”


The moral government of God is here recog-
nized, as below, ch. iii. 15, 17, etc., and a
further thought is added on tle subject of
retribution: That he may give to him thut is
good before God. This idea is found in
Proy, xxvili. 8, “He that augmenteth his
substance by usury and inerease, gathercth
it for him that hath pity upon the poor;”
and ch, xiii. 22, “The wealth of the sinner
is laid up for the righteous” (comp. Job
xxvii. 16, 17). So in the parable of the
talents, the talent of the unprofitable servant
is given unto him who had made best use
of his money (Matt. xxv. 28). This also is
vanity. It is a question what is the refer-
euce here. VDelitzsch considers it to be the
striving after pleasure in and from labour


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 89


i


(ver. 24); Knobel, the arbitrary distribution
of the good things of this life; but, put thus
baldly, this could hardly be termed a “ feed-
ing on wind;” nor could that expression be
applied to the “gifts of God” to which
Bullock confines the reference, Wright,
Hengstenberg, Gratz, and others deem that
what is meant is the collecting and heaping
up of r-clies by the sinner, which has already
been decided to be vanity (vers. 11, 17, 18);
and this would limit the general conclusion
toa particular instance. Taking the view
contained in ver. 2t as the central idea of
the passage, we sce that Koheleth feels that
the restriction upon man’s enjoyment of
labour imposed by God’s moral government
makes that toil vain because its issue is not
in men’s hands, and it is a striving for or
a feeding on wind because the result is
unsatisfying and vanishes in the grasp.


HOMILETICS,


Vers, 1—11,— The vanity of pleasure—an experiment tn three stages. I, THE way
OF SENSUOUS ENJOYMENT. (Vers. 1, 2.) In this first stage Solomon, whether the real
or the personated king, may be viewed as the representative of mankind in general,
who, when they cast aside the teachings and restraints of religion, exclude from their
minds the thought of a Divine Being, erase from their bosoms all convictions of duty, and
refuse to look into the future, commonly addict themselves to pleasure, saying, G Enjoy-
ment, be thou my god ;” prescribing to themselves as the foremost task of their lives
to minister to their own gratification, and adopting as their creed the well-known
maxim, “ Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die” (1 Cor. xv. 32). 1. The investi~

ation was viyorously conducted. ‘The Preacher was in earnest, not merely thinking in
fe heart, but addressing it, rather like the rich farmer in the parable (Luke xii. 19)
than like the singer in the psalm (xvi, 2), and stirring it up as the brickmakers of
Babel did one another: “Go to now!” (Gen. xi. 3, 4). That the investigation was so
conducted by the real Solomon may he inferred from the preserved details of his history
(1 Kings x. 5; xi. 1, 3); that it has often been so conducted since, not merely in fiction,
as by Goethe’s ‘ Faust,’ but in actual life, as by ‘ Abelard and Heloise’ in the eleventh
century, admits of demonstration; that it is being at present so conducted by many
whose principal aim in life is not to obey the soul’s noblest impulses, but to hamper
the body’s lower appetite, is palpable without demonstration. 2. The result has
been clearly recorded. The Preacher found the way of pleasure as little fitted to
conduct to felicity as that of wisdom ; discovered, in fact, that langhter occasioned by
indulgence in sensual delights was only a species of insanity, a kind of delirious intoxi-
cation which stupeficd the reason and overthrew the judgment, if it did not lead to self-
destruction, and that no solid happiness ever came out of it, but only vani y and striving
after wind, So has every one who has sought his chief good in such enjoyment found.
They who live in pleasure are dead while they live (1 Tim. v. 6)—dead to all the soul’s
higher aspirations; are self-deceived (Titus iii. 3); and will in the end have a rude
awakening, when they find that their short-lived pleasures (Heb. xi, 25) have only
been nourishing them for slaughter (Jas. v. 5). ;

Il. THE WAY OF BANQUETING AND REVELRY. (Ver. 3.) In this second stage of the
experiment, neither Solomon nor the Preacher (if he was different) stood alone. The
path on which the ancient investigator now depicts himself as entering had been and
still is: 1. Much travelled. The number of those who abandon themselves to wine and
wassail, drunkenness and dissipation, chambering and wantonness, may not be so great
as that of those who join in the pursuit of pleasure, many of whom would disdain te
partake of the intoxicating cup; but still it is sufficiently large to justify the epithet
employed. 2. Appallingly fatal. Apart altogether from the rightness or the wrongness


40 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cu. m. 1—26.


of total abstinence, which the Preacher is not commending or even think‘ng of, this much
is evident, that no one need hope to secure true happiness by surrendering himself
without restraint to the appetite of intemperance. Nor is the issue different when the
experiment is conducted with moderation, te. without losing one’s self-control, or
abandoning the search for wisdom. Solomon and the Preacher found that the result
was, as before vanity, anda striving after wind. 3. Perfectly avoidable. One requires not
to tread in this way in order to perceive whither it leads. One has only to observe the
experiment, as others are unfortunately conducting it, to discern that its goal is not
felicity.

iL THE WAY OF CULTURE AND REFINEMENT. (Vers. 4—11.) In the third stage
of this experiment the picture is drawn from the experiences of Solomon—whether by
Solomon himself or by the Preacher is immaterial, so far as didactic purposes are con-
cerned. Solomon is introduced as telling his own story. 1. His magnificence had been
most resplendent. (1) His works were great. He had prepared for himself buildings
of architectural beauty, such as “ the house of the forest of Lebanon, the pillared hall
[porch | the hall of judgment, the palace intended for himself and the daughter of

haraoh ” (1 Kings vii. 1—12); he had strengthened his kingdom by the erection of
such towns as T'admor in the wilderness, the store-cities of Hamath and Baalath,
with the two fortresses of Beth-horon the Upper and Beth-horon the Nether (2 Chron.
viii, 3—6); he had planted «:meyards, of which Baal-hamon, with its choicest wine,
was one (Cant. viii. 11), and perhaps those of Engedi (Cant. i. 14) others; he had
caused to be constructed, 10 doubt in connection with his palaces, gardens and
orchards, with all kinds of fruit trees, and “ pools of water to water therefrom the forest
where trees were reared” (Cant. iv. 13; vi. 2). (2) His possessions were varied. In
addition to those above mentioned, he had slaves, male and female, purchased with
money (Gen. xxxvii. 28), and born in his house (Gen. xv. 3; xvii. 12), with great
possessions of flocks and herds. The number of the former was so large as to excite
the Queen of Sheba’s astonishment (1 Kings x. 5), while the abundance of the latter
was proved both by the daily provision for Sulomon’s household (1 Kings iv. 22, 23),
and by the hecatombs sacrificed at the consecration of the temple (1 Kings viii. 63).
(8) His wealth was enormous. Of silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of the
kings and of the provinces, he had amassed a heap. The ships of Hiram had fetched
him from Ophir four hundred and twenty talents of gold (1 Kings ix. 28); the Queen
of Sheba presented him with one hundred and twenty talents of gold (1 Kings x. 10);
the weight of gold which came to him in one year was six hundred and sixty-six
talents (1 Kings x. 14); while as for silver “the king made it to be in Jerusalem as
stones” (1 Kings x. 27). “The peculiar treasure of kings and of the provinces” may
either signify such rare and precious jewels as were prized by foreign sovereigns and
states and presented to him as tribute; or describe Solomon’s wealth as royal and
public, in contradistinction from that of private citizens. (4) His pleasures were
delicious. He had singing-men and singing-women to regale his jaded senses with
music at court banquets, after the manner of Oriental sovereigns; while over and
above he had “the delights of the sons of men,” or “concubines very many "—‘a love
and loves” (Wright), “‘ mistress and mistresses ” (Delitzsch). Clearly Solomon had
conducted the experiment of extracting happiness from worldly glory under the most
favourable circumstances; hence special interest attaches to the result he obtained.
What was it? 2. His misery was most pronounced, Although he had had every
gratification that eye could desire, heart wish, or hand procure, he had found to hig
chagrin that true happiness eluded him like a phantom; that all was vanity and »
striving after wind; that, in fact, there was no profit of a lasting kind < be derived
from pleasure in its highest any more than in its lowest forms.

Learn: 1. The way cf pleasure, however inviting, is not the way «f sa/aty or the
way of peace. 2. While it cannot impart happiness to any, it may lead everlasting
misery and shame. 3. The pursuit of pleasure is not only incompatible with religion,
but even at the best its sweets are not to be compared with religion’s joys.


Vers, 12—16.— Wisdom and folly. I. Fouuy as Goop as wispom. Three things
seemed to proclaim this. 1. The chances of life. These appeared to be as favourable
to the fool as to the wise man, The experiences of both were much alike; the lot of


oH. 1. 1—26.] ..CCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 4]


each little different. ‘TI perceived,” said he, “ that one event happeneth to them all”
(ver. 14). “As it happeneth to the fool, so will it happen even to me; and why was |
then more wise?” (ver. 15). This observation apparently had struck him with mech
force, as he refers to it more than once (ch. viii. 14; ix. 2). It was not an original
observation, as long before Job had remarked upon the seeming indifference with which
providential allotments were made to the righteous and the wicked (Job ix. 22; xxi. 7).
Nevertheless, it was and is a true observation that, so far as purely external circum-
stances are concerned, it may be doubtful if the wise man fares better than the fovl.
2. The onrush of oblivion. With pitiless maw this devours the wise and the fool
alike (ver. 16). If the human heart craves after ome thing more than another, it is an
assurance that name and memory shall not quite perish from the earth when one
himself is gone. Such as are indifferent to a personal immortality beyond the grave in
a realm of heavenly felicity, are often found to be supremely desirous of this lesser
immortality which men call posthumous fame. For this the Egyptian Pharaohs
erected pyramids, temples, mausoleums; for this men strive to set themselves on
pinnacles of power, fame, wealth, or wisdom before they die; yet the number of those
who are remembered many weeks beyond the circle of their immediate friends is small.
Even of the so-called great who have flourished upon the earth, how few are rescued
from oblivion!


“Their memory and their name are gone,
Alike unknowing and unknown.”


Who beyond 2 few scholars knows anything of the Pharaohs who built the pyramids,
or of Assurbanipal, the patron of learning in Assyria, of Homer, of Socrates, or of
Plato? If one thinks of it, the amount of remembrance accorded to almost all the
leaders of mankind consists in this—that their names will be found in dictionaries. 8.
The descent of death. The wise man might have derived consolation from the fact—
had it been a fact—that though after death his fate would be hardly distinguishable
from that of the fool, nevertheless before and at death, or in the manner of dying,
there would be a wide distinction. But even this poor scrap of comfort is denied him,
according to the Preacher. “How doth the wise man die? as the fool!” (ver. 16),
To appearance, at least, it is so, because in reality a difference wide asunder as the
poles separates the dying of “him who is driven away in his wickedness,” and “ him
who has hope in his death” (Prov. xiv. 32). But contemplating death from the out-
side, as a purely natural phenomenon, it is the same exactly in the experience of the
wise man as in that of the fool. In both the process culminates in the loosening of the
silver cord and the breaking of the golden bowl] (ch. xii. 6).

II. WisDoM SUPERIOR TO FoLLY. As light excelleth darkness, so wisdom excels
folly. Three grounds of superiority. 1. The path of wisdom a way of light ; that of
folly a way of darkness. hat the latter is essentially a way of darkness, and there-
fore of uncertainty, difficulty, and danger, had been declared by Solomon (Prov. ii. 18;
iv. 19). The Preacher adds an explanation by likening the foolish man to a person
walking backwards, or “ with his eyes behind;” so that. he knows neither whither he
is going, nor at what he is stumbling, nor the peril into which he is advancing. Had
the Preacher said nothing more than this, he would have been entitled to special thanks.
Thousands live in the delusion that the way of pleasure, frivolity, dissipation, extrava-
gance, prodigality, is the way of light, wisdom, safety, felicity—which it is not. The
traveller who would journey in comfort and security must walk with his eyes to the
front, considering the direction in which he moves, pondering the paths of his feet, and
turning neither to the right hand nor to the left (Prov. iv. 25—27). In other words,
the wise man’s eyes must be in his head, exercising at once forethought, cireum-
epection, and attention. 2. The source of wisdom from above; that of folly from
beneath. As the light descends from the pure regions of the upper air, so this wisdom
of which the Preacher speaks, like that to which Job (xxviii. 23), David (Ps. li. 6),
Solomon (Prov. ii. 6), Daniel (ii. 28), Paul (1 Cor. i. 30), and James (i. 5; iii, 15)
allude, comes from God (ver. 26). “As the darkness may be said to spring from the
earth, so folly has its birthplace in the heart. The individual that turns away from
the light of wisdom presented to him in the moral intuitions of the heart, the revela-
tions of Scripture, or the teachings of nature, by that act condemns his spirit to dwell


42 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. . (ox. 11. 1—26.


nr


in darkness. 3. The end of wisdom, safety ; that of folly, destruction, The light of
wisdom illuminates the path of duty for the individual; the darkness of folly covers it
with gloom. Specially true of heavenly wisdom as contrasted with wickedness and
sin. Even with regard to ordinary wisdom, its supeiiority over folly is not to be
denied. The wise man has at least the satisfaction of knowing whither he is going,
and of realizing the unsatisfactory character of the course he is pursuing. It may not
be a great advantage which the wise man has over the fool, that whereas the fool is a
madman and knows it not, the wise man cannot follow after wisdom (in itself and for
itself) without discovering that it is vanity; but still it isan advantage—an advantage
like that which a man has who walks straight before him, with his eyes in his head
and directed to the front, over him who either puts out his eyes, or blindfolds himself,
~ or turns his eyes backward before he begins to travel.

Lessons, 1. Get wisdom, especially the best. 2. Eschew folly, more particular]
that which is irreligious. 3. Learn to discriminate between the two; much evil wi
thereby be avoided.


Vers. 17—26.—The vanity of toil. I. THe sECRET OF HAPPINESS LIES NOT IN BUSI-
Ness. Granting that one applies himself to busincss, and succeeds through ability,

erseverance, and skill in building up a fortune, if he looks for felicity either in his

bour or in his riches, he will find himself inistaken. Three things are fatal to a
man’s chances of finding happiness in the riches that come from business success. 1. .
Borrow in the getting of them. Toiling and moiling, labouring and striving, drudging
and slaving, planning and plotting, scheming and contriving, rising up early and lying
down late, hurrying and worrying—by these means for the most part are fortunes built
up. How expressive is the Preacher’s language concerning the successful man of
business, that ‘all his days are sorrows, aud his travail is grief,” or “all his days are
pains, and trouble is his occupation,” “yea, even in the night his heart taketh no
rest” (ver. 23)! 2. Sorrow in the keeping of them. <A constant anxiety besets the
rich man, night and day, lest the riches he has aiuasscd should suddenly take wings
and flee away; by day looking out for safe investments, and by night wondering if his
ventures will prove good, if the money he has painfully collected may not some day
disappear and leave him in the lurch. And even should this not happen, bow often is
it seen that when a man has made his fortune, he finds there is nothing in it; that
success has been too long in coming, aud that now, when he has wealth, be wants the
power to enjoy it (ver. 22; cf. ch. vi. 2); as the duke says to Claudio in the prison—


“ And when thou art old and rich,
Thou hast neither heat, affection, limb, nor beauty,
To make thy riches pleasaut.”
(‘ Measure for Measure,’ act iii. ae. 1.)


8. Sorrow in the parting with them. The results of all his labour he must leave to
the man who shall be after him, without knowing whether that successor shall be a
wise rman or a fool (vers. 18, 19; cf. ch. v., 15); and though this does not greatly
trouble the Christian, who knows there is laid up for him a better and more enduring
substance in heaven, yet for the worldly or insincerely religious man it is an agitating
thought. Mazarin, the cardinal, and first minister of Lyuis X1V., was accustomed, as
he walked through the galleries of his palace, to whisper to himself, “1 mnst quit all
this;” and Frederick William IV. of Prussia on one occasion, as he stood upon the
Potsdam terrace, turned to Chevalier Bunsen beside him, and remarked, as they looked
out together on the garden, “This too [ must leave behind me” (sce Plumptre, én loco),

IJ, Business MAY MINISTER TO MAN’S ENJOYMENT. The Preacher dves not wish to
teach that happiness lies beyoud man’s reach, but rather that it is attainable, if sought
in the right way. He recognizes: 1, That there is nothing wrong in seeking after
happiness, or even earthly enjoyment. We admits there is nothing better, more per-
mi-sible or desirable, among men than that one “should eat and drink, and make his
soul enjoy good in his labour” (ver. 24). He even allows that this is from the hand
of God, which makes it plain that he ts not now alluding to sinful indulgence of the
bodily appetite, but speaking of that moderate enjoyment of the good things of life
God has so richly provided for man’s swyport and entertainment. It is not God’s


oH, 1. 1—26.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 43
SS


wish, he says, that man should be debarred or should debar himself from all enjoy-
ment, Rather it is his earnest desire that man should eat and drink and enjoy what
his been furnished for his entertainment, should not make of himself an ascetic,
under pretence of religion denying himself of lawful pleasures and gratifications, but
should so use them as to contribute to his highest welfare, 2. That no man can make
a good use of life's provisions unless in connection with the thought of God. ‘Who
can eat or have enjoyment, apart from him [t.e. God]?” (Revised Version, margiz)},
This corrective thought the Preacher lays before his readers, that while the world’s
good things cannot impart happiness by themselves and apart from God, they can if
enjoyed in conjunction with him, fe. if recognized as coming from him (1 Chron. xxix.
14; 1 Tim. vi. 17; Jas. i, 17), and used for his glory (1 Cor. x. 31). The last passages
show that this was the New Testament ideal of life (1 Tim. iv. 4). 8. That he who
seeks happiness in this way will succeed. “ For God giveth to a man that is good in
his sight [or, ‘that pleaseth him ’] wisdom, and knowledge, and joy ” (ver. 26). So far
from pronouncing felicity a dream, an unattainable gevg, a shadow without a substance,
the Preacher believes that if a man will take God and religion with him into the world,
and, remembering both the shortness of time and the certainty of a future life, will
enjoy the world’s good things in moderation and with thankfulness, he will derive
therefrom, if not absolute and unmixed happiness, as wear an approximation to it as
man can expect to reach on earth. God will graciously assist such a man to gather
the best fruits of wisdom and knowledge, both human and Divine, and will inspire him
with a joy the world can neither give nor take away (Job xxii, 21; Ps. xvi. 8, 9;
exii. 1, 7,8; John xvi. 22), This, if not happiness, is at least a lot immensely superior
to that God assigns to the sinner, fe, to the man who excludes God, religion, and
immortality from his life. The lot of such a man is often as the Preacher describes, to
toil away in making money, to heap it up till it becomes a pile, and then to dic aud
leave it to be scattered to the winds, enjoyed by he knows not whom, and not unfre-
quently by the good men he has despised (Job xxvii. 16, 17; Prov. xiii. 22; xxviii. 8),

Lessons. 1. Be diligent in business (Rom. xii.11). “ Whatsoever thy hand fiudeth
to do,” etc. (ch. ix. 10). 2. But be “fervent in spirit, serving the Lord” (Kom. xii,
11). 3. Seek happiness in God himself rather than in his gifts (Ps. iv. 7; ix. 2; xL
16; Luke i. 47; Phil. iii. 1).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1—11.— The vanity of wealth, pleasure, and greatness, There is certainly a
strange reversal here of the order of experience which is usual and expected. Men,
disappointed with earthly possessions and satiated with sensual pleasures, sometimes
turn to the pursuit of some engrossing study, to the cultivation of intellectual tastes,
But the case described in the text is different. Here we havea man, convinced by
experience of the futility and disappointing character of scientific and literary pursuits,
applying himself to the world, and seeking satisfaction in its pleasures and distractions,
Such experience as is here described is possible only to one in a station of eminence ;
and if Solomon is depicted as disappointed with the result of his experiment, there is
po great encouragement for others, less favourably situated, to hope for better results

imilar endeavours.
a Tun WORLDLY MAN'S AIM. This is to learn what the human heart and life can
derive from the gifts and enjoyments of this world. Man’s nature is impulsive,
acquisitive, yearning, aspiring. He is ever seeking satisfaction for his wauts and
desires. He turns now hither and now thither, seeking in every direction that which
he never finds in anything earthly, in anything termed “real.”

Il. THE WORLDLY MAN’s MEANS TO THIS END. How shall satisfaction be found?
The world presents itself in answer to this question, and invites its votary to acquisition
and appropriation of its gifts, ‘This passage in Keclesiastes offers a remarkable and
exhaustive catalogue of the emoluments and pleasures, the interests and occupations,
with which the world pretends to satisfy the yearning spirit of man. There are
enumerated: 1. Bodily pears especially the pleasure of abundance of choice wine.
@, Feminine society, 4% Riches, consisting of silver and gold, of flocks and herds,


44 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. m1. 1—26


4, Great works, as palaces, parks, etc. 5. Household magnificence. 6. Treasures
of art, and especially musical entertainments. 7%. Study and wisdom, associated with
all diversions and distractions of every kind. It seems scarcely credible that one man
could be the possessor of so many means of enjoyment, and it is not to be wondered at
that “Solomon in all his glory ” should be mentioned as the most amazing example of
this world’s greatness and delights, It needed a many-sided nature to appreciate so
vast a variety of possessiéns and occupations; the largeness of heart which is ascribed
to the Hebrew monarch must have found abundant scope in the palaces of Jerusalem.
It is instructive that Holy Writ, which presents so just a view of human nature,
should record a position so exalted and opulent and a career so splendid as those of
Solomon. ‘

III. THE WORLDLY MAN’S FAILURE TO SECURE THE END BY THE USE OF THE MEANS
DESCRIBED. 1. All such gratifications as are here enumerated are in themselves
insufficient to satisfy man’s spiritual nature. There is a disproportion between the
soul of man and the pleasures of sense and the gifts of fortune. Even could the wealth
and luxury, the delights and splendour, of an Oriental monarch be enjoyed, the result
would not be the satisfaction expected. There would still be “the aching void the
world can never fill.” 2. It must also be remembered that, by a law of our constitution,
even pleasure is not best obtained when consciously and deliberately sought. To seek
pleasure is to miss it, whilst it often comes unsought in the path of ordinary duty.
3. When regarded as the supreme good, worldly possessions and enjoyments may hide
God from the soul. They obscure the shining of the Divine countenance, as the clouds
conceal the sun that shines behind them. The works of God’s hand sometimes absorb
the interest and attention which are due to their Creator; the bounty and bencficence
of the Giver are sometimes lost sight of by those who partake of his gifts. 4, The
good things of earth may legitimately be accepted and enjoyed when received as
God’s gifts, and held submissively and gratefully ‘with a light hand.” 65, Earth’s
enjoyments may be a true blessing if, failing to satisfy the soul, they induce the soul
to turn from them to God, in whose favour is life—T.


Vers, 12—17.— The comparison between wisdom and folly. To the ordinary observer
the contrast between men’s condition and circumstances is more expressive than that
between their character. The senses are attracted, the imagination is excited, by the
spectacle of wealth side by side with squalid poverty, of grandeur and power side by
side with obscurity and helplessness. but to the reflecting and reasonable there is far
more interest and instruction in the distinction between the nature and life of the fool,
impelled by his passions or by the influence of his associations, and the nature and life
of the man who considers, deliberates, aud judges, ani, as becomes a rational being,
acts in accordance with vature and well-weighed convictions. Very noble are the
words which the poet puts into the lips of Philip van Artevelde—


“ All my life long
Have I beheld with most respect the man
Who knew himself, and knew the ways before him
And from amongst them chose deliberately,
And with clear foresight, not with blindfold courage;
And having chosen, with a steadfast mind
Pursued his purposes.”


I. THE NATURAL CONTRAST BETWEEN WISDOM AND FOLLY. 1, The distinction is one
founded in the very nature of things, and is similar to that which, in the physical
world, exists between light and darkness, This is as much as to say that God himself
is the All-wise, and that reasonable beings, in so far as they participate in his nature
and character, are distinguished by true wisdom; whilst, on the other hand departure
from God is the same thing as abandon nent to folly. 2. The distinction is brought
out by the just exercise or the culpable misuse of human faculty. “The wise man’s
eyes are in his head,” which is a proverbial and figurative way of saying that the wise
man uses the powers of observation and judgment with which he is endowed. The
position and the endowments of the organs of vision is a plain indication that the
were intended to guide the steps; the man who looks before him will not miss his “ae


on. 11. 1—26.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 45
re eS


or fall into danger. Similarly, the faculties of the understanding and reason which
are bestowed upon man are intended for the purpose of directing the voluntary actions,
which, becoming habitual, constitute man’s moral life. The wise man is he who not
only possesses such powers, but makes a right use of them, and orders his way aright.
The fool, on the contrary, “walketh in darkness; ” ¢.e. he is as one who, having eyes,
makes no use of them—shuts his eyes, or walks blindfold. The natural consequence is
that he wanders from the path, and probably falls into perils and into destruction.

THE APPARENT EQUALITY OF THE LOT OF THE WISE MAN AND THAT OF THE.
Foot, The writer of this Book of Ecclesiastes was impressed with the fact that in this
world men do not meet with their deserts; that, if there is retribution, it is of a very
incomplete character; that the fortune of men is not determined by their moral
character. This is a mystery which has oppressed the minds of observant and
reflecting men in every age, and has been to some the occasion of falling into
scepticism and even atheism. 1. The wise man and the fool in many cases meet with
the same fortune here upon earth: “One event happeneth to them all.” Wisdom does
not always meet with its reward in earthly prosperity, nor does folly always bring down
upon the fool the penalty of poverty, suffering, and shame. A man may be ignorant,
unthinking, and wicked; yet by the exercise of shrewdness and cunning he may
advance himself. A wise man may be indifferent to worldly ends, and may neglect
the means by which prosperity may be secured. Moral means secure moral ends; but
there may be spiritual prosperity which is not crowned by worldly greatness and
wealth. 2. The wise man and the fool are alike forgotten after death. “ All shall be
forgotten ;” “There is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for ever.”
All men have some sensitiveness to the reputation which shall survive them; the
writer of this book seems to have been particularly sensitive upon this point. He
was impressed by the fact that no sooner has a wise and good man departed this life
than straightway men proceed to forget him. A few years past, and the memory of
the dead itself dies, and good and bad alike are forgotten by a generation interested
only in its own affairs. A common oblivion overtakes us all. Such considerations
led the author of this book into distress and disheartenment. He was tempted to hate
life; it was grievous unto him, and all was vanity and vexation of spirit. A voice
within, plausible and seductive, urges—Why trouble as to the moral principles by
which you are guided? Whether you are wise or foolish, will it not soon be all the
same? Nay, is it not all the same even now?

III. THz REAL SUPERIORITY OF WISDOM OVER FOLLY. If we were to look at some
verses of this book only, we might infer that the author’s mind was quite unhinged by
the spectacle of human life; that he really doubted the superintendence of Divine
providence; that he did not care to make a fight for truth, righteousness, and goodness.
But although he had doubts and difficulties, though he passed through moods of a
pessimistic character, it appears plain that when he came to state his deliberate and
reasoned convictions, he showed himself to be a believer in God, and not in fate; in
resolute and sel{-denying virtue, and not in self-indulgence and cynicism. In this
passage are brought together facts which occasion most men perplexity, which bring
some men into scepticism. Yet the deliberate conclusion to which the author comes is
this: “I saw that wisdom excelleth folly.” He had, as we all should have, a better
and higher standard of judgment, and a better and higher law of conduct, than the
phenomena of this world can supply. It is not by temporal and earthly results that
we are to form our judgments upon morality and religion; we havea nobler and a truer
standard, even our own reason and conscience, the voice of Heaven to which to listen,
the candle of the Lord by which to guide our steps. Judged as God judges, judged by
the Law and the Word of God, “ wisdom excelleth folly.” Let the wise and good man
be afflicted in his body, let him be plunged into adversity, let him be deserted by his
friends, let him be calumniated or forgotten ; still he has chosen the better part, and
need not envy the good fortune of the fool. Even the ancient Stoics maintained this.
How much more the followers of Christ, who himself incurred the malice and derision
of men; who was despised and rejected and crucified, but who, nevertheless, was
approved and accepted of God the Ali-wise, and was exalted to everlasting dominion !
“Wisdom is justified of her children.” The wise man is not to be shaken either by
the storms of adversity or by the taunts of the foolish, His is the right path, and he


So


46 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cu. 1. 1—26,


will persevere in it; and he is not only sustained by the approbaticn of his conscience,
he is satisfied with the fellowship of his Master, Christ.—.


Vers. 18—23.— Concern for posterity. It is distinctive of man that he ie a being
that looks before and after; he cannot be satisfied to regard ony the present; he
investigates the former days, and the ancestry from which he has derived life and
circumstances; he speculates as to the days to come, and “all the wonder yet to be.”
It appeared to the “ Preacher” of Jerusalem that too great solicitude regarding our
posterity is an element in the “ vanity” which is characteristic of this life.

I. Ir 18 NATURAL THAT MEN SHOULD ANTICIPATE THEIR POSTERITY WITH INTEREST
AND SOLICITUDE. Family life is so natural to man that there is nothing strange in the
anxiety which most men feel with regard to their children, and even their children’s
children. Men do not like the prospect of their posterity sinking in the social scale,
Prosperous men find a pleasure and satisfaction in “ founding a family,” in perpetu-
ating their name, preserving their estates and possessions to their descendants, and in
the prospect of being remembered with gratitude and pride by generations yet unborn.
In the case of kings and nobles such sentiments cud anticipations are especially
powerful.

Il. Iv 18 A MATTER OF FACT THAT IN MANY INSTANCES MEN’S ANTICIPATIONS
REGARDING POSTERITY ARE DISAPPOINTED. The wide and accurate observations of the
author of Ecclesiastes convinced him that such is the case. 1. The rich man’s
descendants scatter the wealth which he has accumulated by means of labour and self-
denial. It need not be proved, for the fact is patent to all, that it is the same in this
respect in our own days as it was in the Hebrew state. In fact, we have an English
proverb, “One generation makes moncy; the second keeps it; the third spends it.”
2. The wise man’s descendant proves to be a fool. Notwithstanding what has been
maintained to be a law of “ hereditary genius,” the fact is unquestionable that there
are many instances in which the learned, the accomplished, the intellectually great, are
succeeded by those bearing their name, but by no means inheriting their ability. And
the contrast is one painful to witness, and humiliating to those to whose disadvantage
it isdrawn. 38. The descendants of the great in many instances fall into obscurity and
contempt. History affords us many examples of such descent; tells of the posterity of
the noble, titled, and powerful working with their hands for daily bread, etc.

III. Tue prospect OF AN UNFORTUNATE POSTERITY OFTEN DISTRESSES AND TROUBLES
MEN, ESPECIALLY THE GREAT. The “ wise man” knew what it was to brood over such
a prospect as opened up to his forseeing mind. He came to hate his labour, and to
cause his heart to despair; all his days were sorrow, and his travail grief; his heart
took not rest in the night ; and life seemed only vanity to him. Why should I tvil, and
take heed, and care, and deny myself? is the question which many a man puts to him-
self in the sessions of silent thought. My children or my children’s children may
squander my riches, alienate my estates, sully my reputation; my work may be
undone, and my fond hopes may be mocked. What is human life but hollowness,
vanity, wind ?

IV. THe TRUE CONSOLATION BENEATH THE PRESSURE OF SUCH FORESODINGS. It is
vain to attempt to comfort ourselves by denying facts or by cherishing unfounded and
unreasonable hopes. What we have to do is to place all our confidence in a wise and
gracious God, and to leave the future to his providential care; and at the same time
to do our own duty, not concerning ourselves overmuch as to the conduct of others, of
those who shall come after us, It is for us to “ rest in the Lord,” who has not promised
to order and overrule all things for our glory or happiness, but who will surely order
and overrule them for the advancement of his kingdom and the honour of his Name.—T.


_ Ver. 24.—All good is from ‘od. Revelation ever presents to man a standard of
conduct equally removed from selfish gratification and from proud asceticism, It con-
demns the habit, too common wit! the prosjerous and fortunate, of seeking all satis-
faction in the pleasures and luxuries of the world, in the enjoyments of sense ; and it at
the same time condemns the tendency to despise the body and the things of time and
sense, as if such independence of earth were of necessity the means to spiritual enrich-
ment and blessing, On the ene hand, we ate invited to partake freely and gladly of


on. 1. 1—26.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 47


the gifts of Divine providence; on the other hand, we are admonished to receive all
things as “ from the hand of God.”

I. Gop’s BOUNTY PROVIDES THE FAVOURS BY WHICH MAN’S EARTHLY LIFE IS ENRICHED,
Food and drink are mentioned here as examples of the good gifts of the Eternal Father,
who “open th his hand, and supplieth the wants of every living thing.” Manifold is
the provision of the Divine beneficence. The whole material world is an apparatus by
which the bounty of the Creator ministers to the wants of his creatures. And all God’s
gifts have a meaning and value beyond themselves; they reveal the Divine character,
they symbolize the Divine goodness. To despise them is to despise the Giver.

II. Gop’s KINDNESS BESTOWS FACULTIES ADAPTED TO THE ENJOYMENT OF HI8 GIFTS.
The adaptation is obvious and instructive between the bounties of God’s providence,
and the bodily constitution in virtue of which man is able to appropriate and enjoy what
God bestows. Food and drink presuppose the power to partake of them, and to use
them for the continued life, health, and vigour of the body. The correspondence may
be traced throughout the whole of our physical nature; between the eye and light,
between hearin and sound, between the lungs and the atmosphere—in fact, between the
organism and the environment,

III. Gop EXPECTS THAT WE SHOULD USE HIS GIFTS AS HE COMMANDS, AND FOR HIS
etory. All Divine bestowments are a kind of test and trial for man, who does not of
necessity follow appetite, but who can exercise his reason and his will in dealing with
the circumstances of his being, with the provisions of God’s bounty. All are susceptible
of use and of abuse. The Preacher gives us the key to a right use of providential
bounties, when he reminds us that all is “ from the hand of God.” The man who sees
the Giver in the gift, who partakes with gratitude of that which is bestowed, recogniz-
ing its spiritual significance, and using it as the means to spiritual improvement,—such
a man fulfils his probation aright, and does not live the earthly life in vain.

IV. Upon compLiaNcE WITH OR NEGLECT OF THE DIVINE REQUIREMENT DEPENDS THR
EFFECT OF Gop’s GIFTS UPON US, WHETHER THEY SHALL BE A BLESSING OR A CURSE. It
would be very easy toread amiss the teaching of this Book of Ecclesiastes, Let a man
read it when under the influence of a hedonistic and optimistic temper of mind, and he
may be encouraged to abandon himself to the pleasures of life, to the joys of sense, to
seek his welfare and satisfaction in what this world can give. Leta man read the book
when passing through bitter experience of the ills and woes and disappointments of
life, in a pessimistic mood, and he may be encouraged to dejection, despondency, and
cynicism. But the true lesson of the book is this: Life is a Divine discipline, and its
purpose should never be lost sight of; the gifts of Providence are intended for our
enjoyment, our grateful appropriation, but not for the satisfaction of the spiritual nature ;
Divine wisdom summons us to the reverential service of the Eternal himself; we should
then receive with joy what God bestows, and give up without undue mourning what
God takes away, for all of life is “from the hand of God.”—T.


Ver. 26.—etributses. Here at length the Preacher propounds the doctrine of God’s
moral government, wtich in the earlier part of the book has been kept in abeyance.
It is one thing to treat of human life, and another thing to treat of theology. The first
may, and does to the thoughtful mind, suggest the second; but there are many who
never ‘ake the step from the one to the other. The author of this book has recorded
his experience, with such generalizations and obvious lessons as such experience
naturally snggests; he has drawn such conclusions as an observant and reflecting
student could scarcely avoid. But hitherto he has refrained from the province of faith,
of insight, of revelation. Now, however, he boldly affirms the fact that the world isthe
scene of Divine retribution ; that behind all natural law there is a law which is super-
natural; that the Judge of all the earth doeth right. ;

I. Gop 18 INTERESTED IN I1UMAN CHARACTER AND LIFE, The ancient Epicurean
notions that the gods were above all care for the concerns of men is not extinct; for
many even now deem it derogatory to the Deity that he should be considered to
intcrest himself either in the experiences or in the character of men. This passage in
Ecclesiastes justly assumes that what men are and what they pass through are matters
of real concern to the Creator and Lord of all. ,

IL, Gow ALLOWS ‘S HUMAN LIFE sCOPK FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF MENS MOBAL


48 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. _ [ou. 11. 1—26,


i


cuaracter. He endows man with a constitution properly supernatural, with capacities
and faculties higher than those which are amenable to physical law. Interesting as is
the necessary development of the universe under the control of natural forces, far mora
interesting is the unfolding of the moral character of men. This, indeed, is for us the
most significant and momentous of all things that exist. Man is made not merely to
enjoy or to suffer, but to form character, to acquire habits of virtue and piety; to
become assimilated, in moral disposition and purpose, to the Divine Author of his
being. To this end all circumstances may conduce; for experience shows us that
there is no condition of human life, no range of human experience, which may not
minister to spiritual improvement and welfare.

III. Gop is THE RIGHTFUL RULER AND JuDGE oF MEN. All human relationships
fail adequately to set forth the character and offices of the Eternal; yet many such
relationships serve to afford us some glimpse into the excellences of him who is
judicially and morally the Supreme. There is no incompatibility between the repre-
sentation that God is a Father, and that which attributes to him the functions of a
Judge. The human relationships are based upon the Divine, and it is unjust to regard
the human as simply figures of the Divine. Having all power, God is able to apportion
the lot of the creature; being infinitely righteous, such apportionment on his part
must be beyond all criticism and censure. The life of man should be lived under a
constant sense of the Divine observation and judgment; for thus the probationer of
earth will secure the advantage of the loftiest standard of righteousness, and the
motive to rectitude and to progress which the Divine government is fitted to supply.
Distributive justice—to use the expression familiar in moral philosophy—is the function
of the Supreme.

IV. GoD HIMSELF DETERMINES THE MEASURE IN WHICH RETRIBUTION SHALL BE
CARRIED OUT IN THIS EARTHLY LIFE. The passage now under consideration lays stress
upon the earthly reward and penalty, though it does not represent these as exhaustive
and complete, “God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge,
and joy.” This is something very different from what is termed “ poetical justice; ”
these are gifts which are consistent with adversity and affliction. In fact, the lesson
seems to be conveyed that moral goodness meets with moral recompense, as distinct
from the doctrine of children’s story-books, which teach that “ virtue will be rewarded
with a coach-and-six”! And the sinner is warned that he will receive the reward of
his sin in travail, disappointment, and dissatisfaction. ‘“‘ Whatsoever a man soweth,
that shall he also reap.” A man must be blind who does not see in the constitution
of human nature and human society the traces of a righteous Lawgiver and Adminis-
trator; and at the same time, the man must be short-sighted who does not detect
indications of incompleteness in these judicial arrangements,

VY. GoD GIVES US IN THE PARTIAL RETRIBUTION OF THE PRESENT A SUGGESTION
OF A LIFE TO COME, IN WHICH HIS GOVERNMENT SHALL BE COMPLETED AND VINDICATED.
That the convictions and expectations of the ancient Hebrews with regard to a future
existence were as developed and decisive as those of Christians, none would contend.
But this and other books afford indications that the enlightened Jews had an
anticipation of judgment to come. If this world were all, vanity and vexation of
spirit would have been the only impression produced by the experience and contempla-
tion of human life, But it was seen, even if dimly, that this earthly state requires, in
order to its completeness, an immortality which is the scene of Divine judgment and
of human retribution.—T.


Vers. 1—11.—The trial of pleasure. We have to consider—

I, Tie CONSTANT QUESTION OF THE HUMAN HEART. In what shall we find the good
which will make our life precious to us? What is there that will meet the cravings
of the human heart, and cover our whole life with the sunshine of success and of
contentment ?

II, A VERY NATURAL RESORT. We have recourse to some kind of excitement. It
may be that which acts upon the senses (vers. 3, 8). Or it may be that which gratifies
the mind ; the sense of possession and of power (vers. 7—9). Or it may be found in
agrecable and inviting activities (vers. 4—6).

Ill. I7s TEMPORARY succEss. “ My heart rejoiced” (ver. 10). It would be simply


cn. m.1—26.]  ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 49
"=


false to contend that there is no delight, no satisfaction, in these sources of ood.
There is, for a while. -There is a space during which they fill the heart as the wine
fills the cup into which it is poured, The heart rejoices; it utters its joy in song; it
declares itself to be completely happy. It “sits in the sun;” it rolls the sweet morsel
between its teeth. It flatters itself that it has found its fortune, while the angels ot
God weep over its present folly and its coming doom.

IV. Irs ACTUAL AND UTTER INSUFFICIENCY. (Ver. 11.) Pleasure may be coarse
and condemnable; it may go down to fleshly gratifications (vers. 8, 8); ii may be
refined and chaste, may expend itself in designs and executions; it may be moderated
and regulated with the finest calculation, so as to have the largest measure spread over
the longest possible period; it may “guide itself with wisdom” (ver. 3). But it will
be a failure; it will break down; it will end in a dreary exclamation of “ Vanity!”
Three things condemn it as a solution of the great quest after human good. 1. Hxperi-
ence. ‘This proves, always and everywhere, that the deliberate and systematic pursuit
of pleasure fails to secure its end. Pleasure is not a harvest, to be sedulously sown and
reaped; it is a plant that grows, unsought and uncultivated, all along the path of duty
and of service. To seek it and to labour for it is to miss it. All human experience
shows that it soon palls upon the taste, that it fades fast in the hands of its devotee;
that there is no company of men so utterly weary and so wretched as the tired hunters
alter pleasurable excitement. 2. Philosophy. ‘lhis teaches us that a being made for
something so much higher than pleasure can never be satisfied with anything so low;
surely we cannot expect that the heart which is capable of worship, of service, of holy
love, of heroic consecration, of spiritual nobility, will be filled and satisfied with “the
delights of the sons of men.” 38. Religion. For this introduces the sovereign claims of
the Supreme One; it places man in the presence of God; it shows a life of frivolity to
be a life of culpable selfishness, of sin, of shame. It summons toa purer and » wiser
ssarch, to a worthier and a nobler course; it promises the peace which waits on
rectitude; it offers the joy which only God can give, and which no man can take
away.—C.


Vers. 12—14.— Sagacity and stupidity. The “wisdom” and the “ folly ” of the text
sre perhaps hest represented by the words “ sagacity ” and “stupidity.” The distinction
is one of the head rather than of the heart; of the understanding rather than of the
entire spirit. We are invited, therefore, to consider—

I. THE worTH oF saaactTy. 1. It stands much lower down than heavenly wisdom;

thot is the direct product of the Spirit of God, and makes men blessed with a good
which cannot be taken away. It places them above the reach of adversity, and makes
them invulnerable to the darts of death itself (see ver. 14). 2. It has its own distinct
advantages. ‘The wise man’s eyes are in his head;” he sees whither he is going; he
does not delude himself with the idea that he can viola‘e all the laws of his nature
with impunity. He knows that the wages of sin is death, that if he sows to the flesh
he will reap corruption; he understands that, if he would enjoy the esteem of men and
the favour of God, he must subdue his spirit, control his passions, regulate his life
according to the standards of truth and virtue. This sagacity of the wise will therefore
(1) save him from some of the most egregious and fatal blunders; (2) keep him
sufficiently near to the path of virtue to be saved from the darker excesses and more
crushing sorrows of life; (3) secure for himself and his family some measure of comfort
and respect, and place some of the purer pleasures within his reach; (4) keep him
within hearing of the truth of God, where he is more likely to find his way into the
kingdom of God.
_ If. Tus privircunyess or stupipiry. “The fool walketh blindly.” 1. He has no
eye to see the fair and the beautiful around him, no heart to appreciate the nobility
that might be within him or the glories that are above him. 2. He fails to discern
the real wretchedness of his present condition—his destitution, his condemnation, his
exile. 3. He does not shrink from the evil which impends. He is walking toward
the precipice, below which is utter ruin, eternal death. ‘Truly “the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom, and to depart from evil, that is understanding.”—C.


Vers. 18—24.— The complaint of the successful. ‘The man who labours and who fails
BOOLESIASTES gE


1) ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREADHER, —[on. mt, 1-28.


rT


to acquire may be pitied, and if he finds his life to have a large measure of vanity he
may be excused for complaining; but here is—

i. THE coMPLAINT OF THE sUCCESsFUL. The spenker (of the text) is made (or
makes himself) miserable because he has gained much by the expenditure of time and
strength, and lie hasto leave it behind him when he dies; he has to leave it to one who
“has not laboured ” (ver. 21), and possibly to a man who is not as wise as himself, but
is “a fool ” (ver. 19), and he may scatter or misuse it, And the thought of the insc-
curity of life, together with the certainty of leaving all behind to the man who comes
after, whoever or whatever he may be, makes day and night wretched (ver. 23).

II. WHEREIN IT 18 sotND. It is quite right that a man should ask himself what
will become of his acquisition. To be satisfied with present pleasure is ‘gnoble; to be
careless of what is coming after us—“ Aprés moi le deluge ”—is shamefu ly selfish. It
becomes every man to consider what the long results of his labour will be, whether
satisfactory or unfruitful.

III. WHEREIN IT Is UNSoUND. 1. There is nothing painful in the thought of part-
ing with our treasure. We inherited much from those who went before us, and we
may be well context to hand down all we have to those who come after us. We spent
no labour on that which we inherited: why should we be aggrieved because our heirs
will have spent none on what they take from us? 2. If we did not hoard our treasures,
but distributed them while we lived, putting them into the hands of the wise; or if
(again) we chose onr heirs according to their spiritual rather than their fleshly affinities,
we should be spared the misery of accumulating the substance which a foo! will scatter,
But let us look at a still better aspect of the subject.

IV. THE LEGACY AND THE HOPE OF THE WISE. 1, His best legacy. We may and
we should so spend our time and our strength that what we leave behind us is not
wealth that can be dissipated or stolen, but worth that cannot fail to bless—Divine
truth lodged in many minds, good principles planted in many hearts, a pure and noble
character built up in many souls, This is what no fool can divert or destroy; this is
that which will live on, and multiply and bless, when we are far from all mortal scenes,
Immeasurably better is the legacy of holy influence than that of “uucertain riches; ”
the former must be a lasting blessing, the latter may be an incalculable curse. 2. His
best and purest hope. What if the dying man feels that his grasp on earthly gain is
about to be finally relaxed ? is he not about to open his hand in a heavenly sphere, where
the Divine Father will enrich him with a heavenly heritage, which will make all
material treasures seem poor indeed ?—C,


Ver. 24.—(See homily on ch, iii. 12, 18, 22.)—O.


Ver. 26.—Piety and impiety; recompense and penalty. We ask and answer the
twofold question, viz. what is—

I. Our ExprcratTion. We should certainly expect two things, judging ante-
cedently. 1. That piety would be richly rewarded; for who would not expect that
the bountiful, just, and resourceful Father would give liberally, in many ways, to
those who sought his favour, and were “ good in his sight”? 2. That impiety would
bear plain marks of Divine disapproval; for who would suppose that men would
defy their Maker, break his laws, injure his children, spoil his holy and benignant
purpose, and not suffer marked and manifold evils as the just penalty of their presump-
tion and their guilt? We naturally look for much happiness and prosperity for the
former, much misery and defeat for the latter.

I]. Our Experrence. What do we find? 1. That God does reward his servants,
The Preacher mentions three good gifts of his hand; they are not exhaustive, though
they include or suggest much of the righteous man’s heritage. (1) Knowledye. Most
of all and best of all, the knowledge of God himself; and to know God is the very
essence and substance of true human life. Beside this, the knowledge of man. It is, in
truth, only the good man who understands human nature. Vice, iniquity, flatters
itself that it has this knowledce, But it is mistaken; its conception of mankind ia
distorted, erroneous, fatally mistaken. It does not know what it is in man to be and
to do and to become. “ Only the good discern the good,” and only they have a know-
ledge of our race which is profoundly true, (2) Wisdom, An enlightened conception


ou. 1. 1—26.] § ECCLESIASTES: OR, THE PREACHER. Bl
a


of human life, so that its beauty and its blessedness are appreciated and pursucd, so
that, on the other hand, its ugliness and its evil are recognized and shunned, The
wisdom of the wise includes also that practical good sense which keeps its disciples
from the mistakes and entanglements that lead to destitution, which also leads its
possessors to heizhts of honour and well-being. (3) Joy. In the worship of Christ,
in the service of man, in the culture of our own character, in walking along the path
of sacred duty and holy usefulness, is abounding and abiding joy. 2. That sin is
visited with penalty. Do we find that God giveth “to the sinner travail, to gather and
to heap up”? We do. (1) Sin necessitates the worst of all bad labours—that of
deliberately and persistently breaking down the walls of conscience, of breaking through
the fences which the God of righteousness and love has pnt up to guard his children
from moral evil. (2) Sin includes nuch hurtful and damaging struggle against the will
and against the laws of the wise and good, Bad men have to encounter and to contest
the opposition of the upright, (8) Sin frequently means low and degrading toil. The
“sinner” is brought down so low that he is fain to “ go into the fields to feed swine; ”
to do that from which he would once have indignantly recoiled. (4) Sin constantly
condemns the toiler to labour on in utter discontent, if not positive wretchedness of
soul. Life without the light of heavenly truth and the song of sacred service proves
an intolerable burden.—C,


Vers. 1—3.—An experiment: riotous mirth. Solomon had found that wisdom
and knowledge are not the means by which the search after happiness is brought to a
successful issue. He then resolved to try if indulgence in sensual delights would yield
any lasting satisfaction. This, as he saw, was a course on which many entered, who
like him desired happiness, and he would discover for himself whether or not they were
any nearer the goal than he was. And so he resolved to enjoy pleasure—‘ to give his
heart to wine,” and “ to lay hold of folly.” Like the rich man in the parable, who said
to his soul, “Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine ease, eat,
drink and be merry,” so did he address his heart, “Come, I will prove thee with
mirth.” He had tried wisdom, and found it fruitless for his pu: pose, and now would
try folly. He lays aside the character and pursuits of a student, and enters the
company of fools, to join in their revelry and mirth. The conviction that his learning
was useless, either to satisfy his own cravings or to remedy the evils that exist in the
world, made it easy for him to cast away, for a time at any rate, the intellectual
employments in which he had engaged, and to live as others do who give themselves
up to sensual pleasures. Wearied of the toil of thought, sickeneé of its illusions and
of its fruitlessness, he would find tranquillity and health of iwina m mvoious gaiety and
mirth. This was not an attempt to stifle his cravings after the mghest good, for he
deliberately determined to analyze his experience at every point, in order to discover
whether any permanent gain resulted from his search in this new quarter. “TI sought,”
he says, “in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine heart with
wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till 1 might see what was that good for the sons of
men, which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life.” For the sake
of others as well as for himself, he would try this pathway and see whither it would lead.
But the experiment failed. In a very short time he discovered that vanity was here
too. The laughter of fools was, as he says elsewhere (ch. vii, 6), like the crackling of
burning thorns; the blaze lasted but for a moment, and the gloom that followed was
but the deeper and more enduring. Where the fire of jovial revelry and boisterous
mirth had been, there remained but cold, grey ashes. The mood of reckless enjoyment
was followed by that of cynical satiety and bitter disappointment. He said of laughter,
“Tt is mad,” and of mirth, “ What doeth it?” In his moments of calm reflection, when
he communed with his own heart, he recognized the utter folly of his experiment, and
felt that from his own dear-bought experience he could emphatically warn all in time
to come against seeking satisfaction for the soul in sensual pleasures. Notin this way
can the hunger and thirst with which the spirit of man is consumed be allayed. At
most, a short period of oblivion can be secured, from which the awakening is all the
more terrible. The sense of personal responsibility, the feeling that we are called to
seek the highest good and are doomed to unrest and misery until we find it, the con-
viction that our failures only make ultimate success the more doubtful, is not to be


52 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. {cx. m1. 1—26,


rr


quenched by any such coarse anodyne. Various reasons may be found to explain
why this kind of experiment failed and must fail.

I. In the first place, it consisted in AN ABUSE OF NATURAL FACULTIES AND
APPETITES. Some measure of joy and pleasure is needed for health of mind and body.
Innocent gaiety, enjoyment of the gifts God has bestowed upon us, reasonable
satisfaction of the appetites implanted in us, have allarightful place inourlife. But
over-indulgence in any one of them violates the harmony of ournature. They were
never intended torule us, but to be under our control and to minister to our happiness,
and we cannot allow them to govern us without throwing our whole life into disorder,

II. In the second place THE PLEASURE EXCITED IS ONLY TRANSITORY. From the
very nature of things it cannot be kept up for any long time by mere effort of will;
the brain grows weary and the bodily powers become exhausted. A jest-book is
proverbially very tiresome reading. At first it may amuse, but the attention soon
begins to flag, and after a little the most brilliant specimen of wit can scarcely evoke
a smile. The drunkard and the glutton find that they can only carry the pleasures
of the tableup to a certain point; after that has been reached the bodily organism
refuses to be still further stimulated.

Ill. Inthethird place sucH PLEASURE CAN ONLY BE GRATIFIED BY SELF-DEGRADA-
Tron. It is inconsistent with the full exercise of the intellectual faculties which
distinguish man from the brute, and destructive cf those higher and more spiritual
faculties by which God is apprehended, served, and enjoyed. Self indulgence in
the gross pleasures of which we are speaking actually reduces man below the level
of the beasts that perish, for they are preserved from such folly by the natural
instincts with which they are endowed.

IV. Inthe fowrth place, THE INEVITABLE RESULT OF SUCH AN EXPERIMENT IS A
DEEPER AND MORE ENDURING GLOOM. Self-reproach, enfeeblement of mind and body,
saticty and disgust, come on when the mad fit is past, and, what is still worse, the
apprehension of evils yet to come—the knowledge that the passions excited and
indulged will refuse to die down; that they have a life and power of their own, and
will stimulate and almost compel their slave to enter again on the evil courses which
he first tried of his own free will and with a light heart. The prospect before him
is that of bondage to habits which he knows will yield him no lasting pleasure, and
very little of the fleeting kind, and must involve the enfeeblement and destruction
of all his powers. Mirth, and laughter and wine did not banish Solomon’s melan-
choly ; but after the feverish excitement they produced had passed away, they left
him in a deeper gloom than ever. ‘‘ Like phosphorus on a dead man’s face, he felt
that it was all a trick, a lie; and like the laugh of a hyena among the tombs, he
found that the worldling’s frolic can never reanimate the joys which guilt has slain
and buried.” ‘‘I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it?” The
well-known story of the melancholy patient being advised by a doctor to go
and see Grimaldi, and answering, ‘‘I am Grimaldi,” and that of George Fox being
recommended by a minister whom he consulted to dispel the anxieties which his
spiritual fears and doubts and aspirations had excited within him, by “drinking beer
and dancing with the girls” (Carlyle, ‘Sartor Resartus,’ iii. 1), may be used to
illustrate the teaching of our text. Some stanzas, too, of Byron’s last poem give a
pathetic expression to the feelings of satiety and disappointment which are the retribu-
tion. of sensuality—

“My days are in the yellow leaf;
The fiowers and fruits of love are gone;
The worm, the canker, and the grief
Are mine alone !


“The fire that on my bosom preys
Is lone as some volcanic isle ;
No torch is kindled at its blaze—
A funeral pile,


“«The hope, the fear, the jealous care,
The exalted portion of the pain
And power of love I cannot share,
But wear the chain.”


cu. m.1—26,]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, Ba
neways ee


Vers. 4—11.— Another experiment: refined voluptuousness. Riotous mirth having
failed miserably to give him the settled happiness after which he sought, our author
records another and more promising experiment which he made, the search for
happiness in a life of culture—“ the pursuit of beauty and magnificence in art.” More
promising it was, because it brought into play higher and purer emotions than those to
which ordinary sensuality appeals; it cultivated the side of the nature which adjoins,
and almost merges into, the spiritual. The Law of Moses, forbidding as it did the
making of images or representations of natural objects or of living creatures for
purposes of worship, had prevented much advance being made in sculpture and
painting; but there were still extensive fields of artistic development left for cultivation,
Architecture and gardening afforded abundant scope for the exhibition and gratification
of a refined taste. And so Solomon built splendid palaces, and planted vineyards, and
laid out parks and gardens, and filled them with the choicest fruit trees, and dug pools
for the irrigation of his plantations in the time of summer drought. Nothing was
omitted that could minister to his sense of the beautiful, or that could enhance his
splendour and dignity. A large household, great flocks of cattle, heaps of silver and
gold, precious treasures from distant lands, the pleasures of music and of the harem
are all enumerated as being procured by his wealth and power, and employed for his
gratification. All that the eye could rest on with delight, all that the heart could
desire, was brought within his reach. And all the time wisdom was with him, guiding
him in the pursuit of pleasure, and not abandoning him in the enjoyment of it.
Nothing occurred to prevent the experiment being carried through to the very end.
The delights he enumerates were in themselves lawful, and therefore were indulged in
without any uneasy sensation of transgressing against the Law of God or the dictates of
conscience. Nay, the very fact that he had a moral end in view when he began the
experiment seemed to give a high sanction to it. He was not interrupted by the
intrusion of other thoughts and cares. No foreign enemy disturbed his peace; sickness
did not incapacitate him; his wealth was not exhausted by the large demands made
upon it for the support of his magnificence and luxury. And so he went to the utmost
bounds of refined enjoyment, and found much that for a time amply rewarded him for
the efforts he put forth. ‘“ My heart,” he says, “rejoiced in all my labour” (ver. 10).
His busy mind was kept occupied; his senses were charmed by the beauty and richness
of the treasures he had gathered together, and of the great works which gave such
abundant evidence of his taste and wealth. His experiment was not quite fruitless,
therefore. Present gratification he found in the course of his labours; but when they
were completed, the pleasure they had yielded passed away. ‘The charm of novelty
was gone. Possession did not yield the joy and delight which acquisition had done.
When the palaces were finished, the gardens planted, the gems and rarities accumulated,
the luxurious household established, and nothing left to do but to rest in the happiness
that these things had been expected to secure, the sense of defeat and disappointment
again fell upon the king. “Then I looked on all the works that my hands had
wrought, and on the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and
vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.” He does not try to explain
the cause of his failure, but simply records the fact that he did fail. ‘He does not
moralize, still less preach; he just paints the picture of his soul’s sad wanderings, of
the baffled effort of a human heart, and passes on.” But we may find it highly profit-
able to inquire what were the causes why the life of culture—which, without harshness,
may be called a refined voluptuousness—‘ai s to give satisfaction to the human soul.

I. In the first place, IT 18 A LIFE OF sOLATION FROM Gop. As Solomon represents
the course he followed, we see that the thought of God was excluded from his mind.
The Divine gifts were enjoyed, the love of the beautiful which is implanted in the soul
of man was gratified, every exquisite sensation of which we are capable was indulged,
but the one thing needed to sanctify the happiness obtained and render it perfect was
omitted. ‘‘God,” says St. Augustine, “has made us for himself, and we cannot rest
until we rest in him.” Emotions of gratitude, adoration, humility, and sel{-consecra-
tion to His service cannot be suppressed without great .oss—the loss even of that
security and tranquillity of spirit which are essential to true happiness. All the
resources upon which Solomon drew may furnish helps to happiness, but none of them,
nor all of them together, could, apart {rom God, secure it. Compare with the failure


64 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, (on. m. 1—26,


of Solomon the success of those who have often, in circumstances of extreme discomfort
and suffering, enjoyed the peace of God that passeth all understanding. The sixty-
third psalm, written by David in the time of exile and hardship, illustrates the truth
that in communion with God the soul enjoys a happiness which cannot be found else-
where, “A man’s life docs not consist in the abundance of the things which he
possesseth.” Apart from the favour of God and the service of God, the richest pos-
sessions and the most skilful employment of them can secure no lasting satisfaction.
For we are so constituted as creatures that our life is not complete if we are dissevered
from our Creator. } ‘

II, In the second place, 1T Is A SELFISH LiFe. All that Solomon describes are hia
efforts to secure certain durable results for himself; to indulge his love for the beautiful
in nature and art, and to surround himself with luxury and splendour. He would have
been more successful in his search for happiness if he had eudeayoured to relieve the
wants of others—to clothe the naked, to feed the hungry, to comfort the afflicted, and
to instruct the ignorant. Self-denial and self-sacrifice for the sake of others would
have brought him nearer the goal of his desire. The penalty of his selfish pursuit fell
heavily upon him, He could not live at a height above mankind, in the enjoyment of
his own felicity, for long; “the riddle of the painful earth” filled him with thoughts
of self-loathing and despair, which shattered all his happiness. Do what he might,
old age, disease, and death were foes he could not conquer, and all about him in human
society he could discern moral evils and inequalities which he could not set right nor
even explain, Such selfish isolation as that into which for a time he had withdrawn
himself failed to secure the object he had in view, for he could not really dissever his
lot from that of his fellows, or escape the evils which afflicted them. The idea of a life
of luxurious ease, undisturbed by the sight or thought of the miseries and hardships
of life, was a vain dream, from which he soon awoke. In his poem, ‘The Palace of
Art,’ Tennyson has given a most luminous and suggestive commentary upon this
portion of the Book of Ecclesiastes. In it he represents the soul as seeking forgiveness
for the sin of selfish isolation by penitence, prayer, and sclf-renunciation, and as
anticipating a resumption of all the joys of culture and art in companionship with
others. In communion with God, in fellowship with others, all things that are noble
and pure and lovely are taken into holy keeping, and form a lasting source of joy and
happiness.—J. W.


Vers. 12—17.—The value and the futility of wisdom. Solomon had now made
many experiments to try and discover something that was good in itself, that was an
end for which one might labour, a goal for which one might make, a resting-place for
the soul. The acquisition of knowledge had first of all attracted him, but after a long
course of study, in which he traversed the whole field of learning and reached the limits
of human thought, the futility of his labours dawned upon him. Then he turned to
sensual enjoyments, and gave himself up to them for a time, with the deliberate
purpose of seeking to discover if there were in this quarter any permanent gain; if it
were possible so to prolong the pleasures of life as to silence, if not to satisfy, the
cravings of the soul. The experiineut was but a short one; he soon found out that
pleasure is short-lived, and that mirth and laughter are followed by weariness and
melancholy. His resources were not, however, yet exhausted. A new course
was open to him, and one which his richly endowed nature qualified him for trying,
and his kingly power and wealth laid open to him. This was the cultivation of
those arts by which human life is beautified; the gratification of those tastes that
distinguish man from the lower creatures, and that have something in thern that is noble
and pure, He built stately palaces, planted gardens and forests; he surrounded
himself with all the luxury and pageantry of an Oriental court; he accumulated
treasures such as kings only could afford to procure; music and song, and whatever
could delight a refined taste, and a love of the beautiful were sedulously cultivated.
But all in vain; astheticism proved as fruitless as the pursuit of knowledge, or the
indulgence of the coarser appetites, to give rést to the soul. And now in sober
meditation he reviewed all his experience; having come to the end of his resources, he
inquires into actual results attained, and pronounces upon them. First of all, he
is convinced that he has given a fair trial to all the various means by which men seek


oH. 11, 1—26,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 55


a


for the highest good. He had failed to find that satisfaction, but it was not because he
had been ill equipped for carrying on the search. No one that came after him (ver, 12)
could surpass him by a more complete and thorough investivation. God had given hui
“a wise and understanding heart,” and had endowed him with wealth and power; and
in both particulars he excelled all his fellows. Accordingly, he has no hesitation in
laying down great general principles drawn from careful observation of the phenomena
of human life.

I, Tu GREAT ADVANTAGE WHICH WISDOM HAS OVER FOLLY. The wise man walks
in light, and has the use of his eyes; the fool is blind, and walks in darkness. The
wisdom here praised is not that holy, spiritual faculty which springs from the fear of
God and obedience to his will (Job xxviii. 28; Deut iv. 6; Ps. cxi. 10), and which
is so strikingly personified, almost deified, in the Book of Proverbs and in that of Job
(Prov. viii., ix.; Job xxviii. 12—28); but is ordinary science, knowledge of the laws
of nature, and of the powers and limitations of human life. This wisdom can only be
acquired by long and painful labour, and though by it we cannot discover God or tind
out the way of winning and retaining his favour, or provide for the wants of the soul,
it has, in its sphere, high value. It gives some pleasure ; it affords some guidance and
direction to its poss:ssor, Tt enables him to acquire some good; it teaches him to
avoid some evils. Progress in civilization is only possible by the cultivation of this
wisdom, Wider acquaintance with the laws of health, for example, has enabled men
to stamp out certain furms of discase, or, at any rate, to prevent their frequent
recurrence, and to alleviate the sufferings caused by others. Consider the immense
benefit to the race the progress of medical science has secured. The inventions that
we owe to the cultivation of natural knowledge are beyond number, and by them
incalculable benefits have been brought within our reach—better cultivation of the
soil, less exhausting labour, discovery of the uses of the metals stored up in the bowels of
the earth, more rapid distribution of the productions of nature and of human industry,
swifter means of communication between one part of the world and another. “ ‘The
improvement of natural knowledge,” says a great authority, “ whatever direction it has
taken, and however low the aims of those who may have commenced it, has not only
conferred practical benefits on men, but in so doing has effected a revolution in their
conceptions of the universe and of themselves, and has profoundly altered their modes of
thinking and their views of right and wrong” (Huxley, ‘Lay Sermons’). Does not this
amply justify Solomon’s assertion that “ wisdom excels folly, as light darkness; that
the wise man hath the use of his eyes, the fool is blind ”?

II. Tue ruTiniry oF wispom. All the delight in the charms of wisdom is quenched
by the thonght of the levelling power of death, which overwhelms both the wise and
the foolish indiscriminately (vers. 146—17). For a brief space there is a distinction
between them—the one endowed with priceless gifts, the othvr ignorant and poor.
But what, after all, was the use of the short-lived superiority? Like an extinguished
torch, the wisdom of the sage is blown out by death, and the very memory of his
attainments and triumphs is buried in oblivion. For a time, perhaps, he is missed, but
the gap is soon filled up, the busy world goes on its way, and in s very short time it
forgets all about him. Thus even the posthumous fame, after which the purest and
noblest minds have longed, to secure which they have been content to endure poverty,
hardship, and neglect in their lifetime, is denied to the vast majority, even of those who
have richly deserved it. ‘here were wise men before Solomon (1 Kings iv, 31), but
no memorial survives of them but their names; no illustrations of their wisdom are
given to explain their reputation. And how faint is the impression which the wisdom
of Solomon himself makes upon the actual life of the present world! Enshrined though
it is in the sacred volume, it seems foreign to our modes of thought; its voice is not
heard in our schools of philosophy. The fact of death is a certainty both to the wise
and to the fool; the manner of it may be similar; the doubts and fears and anxicties
concerning the life to come may perplex both. What can we suggest to relieve the sad
picture, or to counteract the paralyzing effect which the spectacle of the futility of
wisdom and effort is calculated to produce? ‘he conviction that this life is nct all, that
there is a life beyond the grave, is the great corrective to the gloom in which other-
wise every thinking mind would be enwrapped. This present life is a state of infancy,
of probation, in which we receive education for eternity. And to ask in melancholy


56 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (ox. mm. 1—26.


Or


tones what is the use of acquiring wisdom if death is so soon to cut short our career
here, is as foolish as to ask what is the use of a sapling growing vigorously in a nursery
garden if it is to be afterwards transplanted. The place from which it was taken may
soon know it no more. But the loss is slight; the tree itself lives and flourishes still
under the eye and care of the almighty Husbandman. No fruitless regrets over the
brevity and uncertainty of human fame need interfere with present effort. We may
soon be forgotten on earth, but no attainments in wisdom or holiness we have made
will have been in vain; they will have qualified us for a — services and a truer
enjoyment of God than we could otherwise have known.—J. W.


Vers. 18—23.— Riches, thow~ obtained by much toil,are vanity. The thought ofdeath,
which sweeps away the wise | au as well as the fool, and of the eternal oblivion which
swallows up the memory of them both, was very depressing; but a new cause for deeper
ejection of spirit is found in the reflection that the man who has toiled in the
accumulation of wealth must leave it all to another, of whom he knows nothing, and
who will perhaps dissipate it in a very brief time.

I. ‘The first mortifying thought is—HE BUT GATHERS FOR A succssson. (Ver. 18.)
He himself, when the moment of death comes, must leave his possessions and depart
into the world of shadows as naked as he was when he entered upon life. The fact
that such a reflection should be bitter proves how deeply the soul is corroded by
covetuus and selfish aggraudizement. The heart is absorbed in the things of the

resent, and the anticipation of heavenly and spiritual joys grows faint and dies away.
iro be torn from the wealth and possessions acquired upon earth is regarded as losing
everything; to be forced to leave them to another, even to a son, is almost as bad as
being plundered of them by a thief. This feeling of bitter regret at having to give up
all they posscss at the call of death, has often been experienced by those who have
found tleir chief cocupation and happiness in life in the acquisition of earthly treasures.
“ Mazarin walks through the galleries of his palace and says to himself, ‘Il faut quitter
tout cela.” Frederick William IY. of Prussia turns to his friend Bunsen, as they stand
on the terrace at Potsdam, and says as they louk out on the garden, ‘ Das auch, das soll
ich lassen ’ (‘This too | must leave behind me*)” (Plumptre

IL, The second mortifying thought is—?rHAT IT IS QUITE UNCERTAIN WHAT CHARACTER
THE SUCCESSOR WILL BE OF, AND WHAT USE HE WILL MAKE OF HIS INHERITANCE.
(Ver. 19.) He may be a wise man, or he may be a fool; he may make a prudent use of
his inheritance, or he may in a very short time scatter it to the winds. ‘The very
change in his circumstances, the novelty of his new situation, may turn his head and
lead him into courses of folly which otherwise he might have avoided. Some have
thought that the character of the youthful Rehoboam was already so far developed as to
suggest this mortifying refiection to Solomon. But this is quite conjectural. The
early career of the headstrong, arrogant sovereign whose folly broke up the kingdom of
Israel is an illustration of the truth of this general statement, and may have been in the
thoughts of the writer, if he were not Solomon but some later sage. The special
reference to this one historical example of an inheritance dissipated by an unworthy son
need not be pressed. "or, unfortunately, in every generation there are only too many
instances ofa like kin So frequent are they, indeed, as to ¢ sgest very humiliating
reflections to every one who has spent his life in acquiring riches or collecting treasures
of art. As he sees fortunes squandered and collections of rarities broken up, the
thought must recur to his mind whose are to be the things which he has treasured up
so carefully (Ps, xxxix. 6; Luke xii. 20).

IL. The third mortifying thought is—THAT THE CHARACTER OF THE SUCCESSOR MAY
NOT BE A MATTER OF DOUBT; he may be a man of a positively foolish and vicious disposi-
tion (ver. 21). The case presents itself of a man who has laboured in wisdom and
knowledge and equity having to leave to another who is devoid of these virtues, who
has never sought to acquire them, all that his prudence and diligence have enabled him
to acquire. ‘here is thus a climax in the thoughts of the writer. First of all, there is
some matter for irritation, especially to a selfish mind, in the idea of giving up to another
what one has spent years of laborious toil in gathering together. Then there is the
torturing doubt as to the possible character of the new owner, and the use he will make


of what is left to him, But worst of all is the conviction that he is beth foolish aad


a


aa


“ws


ou, m. 1—26.] ECOLESIASTES; OB, THE PREACHER, o


vicious. This is enough to poison all present enjoyment, and to paralyze all farther
effort. Why should a mani spend laborious days ria rate nights, if this is to be the
end of it all? What has he left to show for all his exertions? What but weariness
and exhaustion, and the bitter reflection that all has been in vain? Yet a little time
after he has been forced by death to part with his possessions, and they will be made
to minister to the frivolity and vice of one who has never laboured for them, and
ultimately will be scattered like chaff before the wind. Thus a final discovery of
the vanity of all earthly employments is made, The pet ede of wisdom and
knowledge, the gratification of the pleasures of sense, the cultivation and indulgence
of artistic tastes, had all been tried as ible avenues to lasting happiness, and tried
in vain. To these must now be added the accumulation he and lawful
means, of great wealth. This, too, was discovered to be vanity. It could only be
accomplished by years of toil, and brought with it fresh cares; and in the end all
that had been gained must be given up to another. Mortifying though the experiments
had turned out to be, they had at least been of negative value. Though they had not
revealed. where happiness was to be found, they had revealed where it was not to be
found, The last disappointment, the discovery of the vanity of riches, taught the great
truth which might ome a clue to lead to the much-desired happiness, that “a
tnan’s life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possceacth *
(Luke xii. 16).—J. W.


Vers. 24—26.— The condition of pure enjoyment. Up to this point the thoughts of
our author have been gloomy and despairing. Wisdom is better, he declares, than
folly, but death sweeps away both the wise and the foolish. The learning of the sage,
the fortune accumulated by the successful worker, represent the labours of a lifetime ;


-but at the end, what are they worth? The results are twofold, partly internal an


partly external, The student or worker acquires skill in the use of his faculties, he
develops his strength, he becomes, as his life goes on, more proficient in his professiqn
or craft; but death quenches all these attainments. He leaves to those who are perha
unworthy of them all the external resulte of his labours, and perhaps in a very litt
time it will be difficult to find anything to remind one of him. We who have the
light of Christian truth may have much to console us and give us strength, even when
we are brought face to face with the dark and dreary facts upon which our author
dwells. We may think of this life as a preparation for a new and higher existence in
the world to come, and believe that every effort we make to use rightly the faculties
God has given us will tend to equip us better for service of him in anvther state of
being. But to our author's mind the thought of a future life is not vivid enough to be
the source of consolation and strength. What then? Does he find no escape from the
gloomy labyrinth of withering doubt, and decide that happiness is a boon for which one
may sigh in vain? No; strangely enough, at the very moment when the depression is
deepest, light breaks upon him fromm an unexpected quarter. Simple joys, moderate
hopes, contentment with one’s lot, thankful acceptance of the gifte of God, may yield a

and satisfaction unknown to those who are consumed by ambition, who make
riches, state, luxury, the object of their desires. The darkness of night will soon close
upon our lives, our tenure of our possessions is precarious in the extreme, but some
measure of joy is within the reach of us all In few but suggestive words the
Preacher describes— ;

L Tue satuez oy A HAPPY Lire. (Ver. 24.) “There is nothing better for a man
than that he should eat and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his
labour.” At first one might think the judgment here expressed somewhat poor and
gross, and unworthy of the reputation of the wise king to whom it is ascribed, not to
say of the Word of God in which we find it. But when we look more closely into it,
these impressions disappear. It is not an idle, useless life of self-enjuyment that is here
commended to us, but one in which useful labour is seasoned by healthy pleasures,
The man eats and drinks, and makes his soul enjoy good in his labour. The enjoyment
is not such as to waste and exhaust the energies of the soul, otherwise it would be very
short-lived. The riek of abusing the counsel in the first part of the sentence is avoided
by attending to the safeguard implied in the concluding words, It is not the decision
ef the sensuslist, “Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die” (1 Cor. xv. 32), but


6B EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [om. 1, 1-22
ee


the admonition of one who perceives that a thankful participation of the good things of
life is compatible with the sincerest piety. Eating and drinking mean satisfying the
natural appetites, and not ministering to artificial and self-created cravings ; and over-
indulgence in so doing is tacitly forbidden, The words snggest to us the simple healthy
life and habits of the industrious peasant or workman, who takes pleasure in his daily
employment, and finds in the innocent joys which sweeten his lot a happiness which
mere wealth cannot buy.


“The shepherd’s homely curds,
His cold thin drink out of his leather bottle,
His wonted sleep under a fresh tree’s shade,
All which secure and sweetly he enjoys,
Is far beyond a prince’s delicates,
His viands sparkling in a golden cup,
His body couched in a curious bed,
When care, mistrust, and treason wait on him.”

(‘Henry VL.,’ Part IIL., act ii. 90. 5.)


II. In the second place, our author tells us THE SOURCE OF THIS HAPPINESS—IT I8
THE Girt or Gop. (Ver. 24b.) “ This also I saw, that it.was from the hand of God,
For who can eat or who can have enjoyment apart from him?” (Revised Version
margin). These words are quite sufficient to convince us that a low Epicureanism is
far from the writer’s thoughts when he speaks of there being nothing better for a man
than “to eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labour.” One thing is
necessary for the accomplishment of this end, and that is the Divine blessing. Satis-
faction in work and in pleasure is a gift bestowed by him upon those who deserve it,
“What we get here is the recognition of what we have learnt to call the moral
government of God in the distribution of happiness, It is found to depend, not on
outward but inward condition, and the chief inward condition is the character that God
approves. The Preacher practically confesses that the life of the pleasure-seeker, or the
ambitious, or the philosopher, seeking wisdom as an end, was not good before God,
and therefore failed to bring contentment” (Plumptre). The source, then, of happiness
in life is in obedience to the Divine will, To the gifts of his providence God adds the
temper in which to enjoy them; from his hand both must be sought. Those who seek
to be independent of him find that all they may acquire is insufficient to satisfy them ;
those who place all their confidence in him are contented with even the hardest lot
(Phil. iv. 11—13). ‘“ Wisdom, knowledge, and joy ” are the portion of the good, whether
they be poor or rich in this world’s wealth ; but the sinner has only the fruitless labour
from which he can derive no satisfaction (ver. 26). And over again the Preacher writes
the dreary sentence, “This also is vanity and vexation of spirit,” upon the life in
which God is not.—J. W.


EXPOSITION.


of antithetical sentences. In Hebrew manu-
scripts and most printed texts vers, 2—8 are
arranged in two parallel columns, so that
one “time” always stands under another,


CHAPTER II.
Vers. 1—22.—Section 4. In confirmation of
the truth that man’s happiness depends upon


the will of God, Koheleth proceeds to show
how Providence arranges even the minutest
eonecerns ; that man can alter nothing, must
make the best of things as they are, bear with
anomalies, bounding his desires by this present
life.

Vers. 1—8.—The providence of God dis-
poses and arranges every detail of man’s life.
This proposition is stated first generally,


end then worked out in particular by means |


A similar arrangement is found in Josh.
xii. 9, etc., containing the catalogue of the
conquered Canaanite kings; and in Esth,
ix. 7, etc., giving the names of Haman’s ten
sons. In the present passage we have four-
teen pairs of contrasts, ranging from external
circumstances to the inner affections of man’s
being.

Ver. 1.—To every thing there is a season,
and a time to every purpose under heaven,


oH. m1. 1—22,]


“Season” and “time” are rendered by the j


LXX. xaipés and xpdvos. The word for
“season” (zeman), denotes a fixed, definite
portion of time; while eth, “time,” signifies
rather the beginning of a period, or is
used as a general appellation. The two
ideas are sometimes occurrent in the New
Testament; e.g. Acts i. 7; 1 Thess. v. 1
(comp. also Dan. ii. 21, where the Septua-
gint has xa:pods ral xpdvovs; and Dan. vii.
12, where we find the singular aipod nad
katpov in Theodotion, and ypédvov kad ratpod
in the Septuagint). So in Wisd. viii. 8, “She
[wisdum] foreseeth signs and wonders, and
the events of seasons and times (é«Bdcers
Kaipav kal xpdvwv).” Every thing refers
especially to men’s movements and actions,
and to what concerns them Purpose;
chephets, originally meaning “delight,”
“pleasure,” in the later Hebrew came to
signify “business,” “thing,” “mutter.” The
proposition is—In human affairs Providence
arranges the moment when everything shall
happen, the duration of its operation, and
the time appropriate thereto. The view of
the writer takes in the whole circumstances
of men’s life from its eommencement to its
close. But the thought is not. as some have
opined, that there is naught but uncertainty,
fluctuation, and imperfection in human
affuirs, nor, as Plumptre conceives, “It is
wisdom to do the right thing at the right
time, that inopportuneness is the bane of
life,” for many of the circumstances men-
tioned, e.g. birth and death, are entirely
beyond men’s will and controi, and the
maxim, Kaipdy yv@0:, cannot apply to min in
such cases. Koheleth is confirming his
assertion, made in the last chapter, that
wisdom, wealth, success, happiness, ete.,
are not in man’s hands, that his own efforts
can secure none of them—they are dis-
tributed at the will of God. He establishes
this dictum by entering into details, and
showing the ordering of Providence and the
supremacy of God in all men’s concerns, the
most trivial as well as the most important.
The Vulgate gives a paraphrase, and not a
very cxact one, Omnia tempus habent, et suis
spatits transeunt universa sub cwlo. Koheleth
jutimates, without attempting to reconcile,
the great cruz of man’s free-will and God’s
decree.

Ver. 2.—A time to be born, and a time to
die. Throughout the succeeding catalogue
marked contrasts are exhibited in pairs,
beginning with the entrance and close of
life, the rest of.the list being occupied with
events and circumstances which intervene
between those two extremities. The words
rendered, “a time to be born,” might more
naturally mean “atime to bear;” «aipds rod
rexeiv, Septuagint; as the verb is in the in-
finitive active, which, in this particular verb,


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 69


> et


is not elsewhere found used is, the passive
sense, though other verbs are so used some-
times, as in Jer. xxv. 84. In the first
case the catalogue commences with the
beginning of life; in the second, with the
season of full maturity : “Those who at one
time give life to others, at another have
themselves to yield to the law of death”
(Wright). The contrast points to the passive
rendering. There is no question of un-
timely birth or suicide; in the common
order of events birth and death have each
their appointed scason, which comes to pags
without man’s interference, being directed
by a higher Jaw. “It is appointed unto men
once to die” (Heb. ix. 27). Koheleth’s
teaching was perverted by sensualists, as we
read in Wisd. ii. 2, 3,5. A time to plant.
After speaking of human life it is natural to
turn to vegetable life, which runs in parallel
lines with man’s existence. Thus Job,
having intimate the shortness of life and
the certainty of death, proceeds to speak of
the tree, contrasting its revivifying powers
with the hopelessness of man’s decay (Job
xiv. 5, ete.). And...to pluck up that which
is planted. This last operation may refer te
the transplanting of trees and shrubs, or to
the gathering of the fruits of the earth in
order to make room for new agricultural
works. “But having regard to the opposition
in «ll the members of the series, we should
rather consider the “plucking up” as
equivulent to destroying. If we plant trees,
a time comes when we cut them down, and
this is their final cause. Some commertators
see in this clause an allusion to the settling
and uprooting of kingdims and nations, ag
Jer. i. 10; xviii 9, ete.: but this could not
have been the idea in Koheleth’s mind.

Ver. 3.—A time to kill, and a time to heal,
The time to kill might refer to war, only
that occurs in ver. 8. Some endeavour to
limit the notion to severe surgical operations
performed with a view of saving life; but
the verb harag does not admit of the mean-
ing “ to wound” or “cut.” It most probably
refers to the execution of criminals, or to
the defence of the oppressed; such emer-
gencies and necessities occur providentially
without man’s prescience. So sickness is
a visitation beyond man’s control, while it
calls into exercise the art of healing, which
is a gift of God (sce Ecclus, x. 10; xxxviii,
1, etc.). A time to break down, and a tima
to build up, ‘he removal of decaying o1
unsuitable buildings is meant, and the sub-
stitution of new aud improved structures,
A recollection of Solomon’s own extensive
architectural works is here introduced,

Ver. 4.—A time to weep, and a time to
laugh, grouped naturally with a time to
mourn, and a time to dance. The funeral
and the wedding, the hired mourners and


60 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


(ox. mi. 1—22%


ee


the guests at the marriage-feast, are set
against one another. The first clause inti-
mates the spontaneous manifestation of the
feelings of the heart; the second, their formal
expression in the performances at funerals
and weddings and on other solemn occasions.
The contrast is found in the Lord’s allusion
to the sulky children in the market-place,
who would not join their companions’ play :
“ We lave piped unto you, and ye have not
danced ; we have mourned unto you, and ye
have not lamented ” (Matt. xi. 17). Dancing
sometimes accompanied religious cere-
monies, as when David brought up the ark
(2 Sam. vi. 14, 16).

Ver. 5.—A time to cast away stones, and
atime to gather stones together. There is
no question about building or demolishing
houses, as that has been already mentioned
in ver. 3. Most commentators see an allusion
to the practice of marring an enemy’s ficlds
by casting stones upon them, as the Israelites
did when they invaded Moab (2 Kings iii.
19, 25). But this must have been a very
abnormal proceeding, and could scarcely be
cited as a usual occurrence. Nor is the
notion more happy that there is an allusion
to the custom of flinging stones or earth into
the grave at a burial—a Christian, but not
an ancient Jewish practice; this, too, leaves
the contrasted “ gathering” unexplained.
Equally inappropriate is the opinion that
the punishment of stoning is meant, or some
game played with pebbles. It seems most
simple to see herein intimated the operation
of clearing a vineyard of stones, as men-
tioned in Isa. v. 2; and of collecting
materials for making fences, wine-press,
tower, etc., and repairing roads. A time to
embrace. Those who explain tlie preceding
clause of the marring and clearing of fields
connect the following one with the other by
conceiving that “the loving action of em-
bracing stands beside the hostile, purposely
injurious, throwing of stones into a field”
(Delitzsch). It is plain that there are times
when one may give himself up to the
delights of love and friendship, and times
when such distractions would be incongruous
and unseasonable, as on solemn, penitential
occasions (Joel ii. 16; Exod. xix. 15; 1 Cor.
vii. 5); but the congruity of the two clauses of
the couplet is not obvious, unless tlie objec-
tionable position of stoues and their advan-
tageous employment are conipared with the
character of illicit (Prov. v. 20) and legiti-
mate love.

Ver. 6.—A time to get (seck), and a time
to lose. ‘\3e8 verb abad, in piel, is used in
the sense of “to destroy ” (ch. vii. 7), and it
is only in late Hebrew that it signifies, as
here, “to lose.” The reference is doubtless
to property, and has no connection with the
last clause of the preceding verse, as Delitzsch


would opine. There is a proper and lawful
pursuit of wealth, and there is a wise and
prudent submission to its inevitable loss,
The loss here is occasioned by events over
which the owner has no control, differing
from that in the next clause, which is volun-
tary. The wise man knows when to exert
his energy in improving his fortune, and
when to hold his hand and take failure
without useless struggle. Loss, too, is some-
times gain, as when Christ’s departure in
the flesh was the prelude and the occasion
of the sending of the Comforter (John xvi.
7); and there are many things of which we
know not the real value till they are beyond
our grasp. A time to keep, and a time to
cast away. Prudence will make fast what
it has won, and will endeavour to preserve
it unimpaired. But there are occasions
when it is wiser to deprive one’s self of some
things in order to secure more important
ends, as when sailors throw a cargo, etc.,
overboard in order to save their ship (comp.
Jonah i.5; Acts xxvii. 18, 19, 38). And
in higher matters, such as almsgiving, this
maxim holds good: “There is that scatter-
eth, and yet increaseth. ... The liberal soul
shall be made fat, and he that watereth
shall be watered also himself” (Prov. xi. 24,
25). Plumptre refers to Christ’s so-called
paradox, “ Whosoever would (és &y @éAn) save
his life shall lose it, and whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake shall find it’ (Matt.
xvi. 25).

Ver. 7.—A time to rend, and a time to
Sew (kaipbs Tod prt, kal Kapds rod pdwa).
This is usually understood of the rending of
garments in token of grief (Gen. xxxvii. 29,
34, etc.), and the repairing of the rent then
made when the season of mourning was
ended. The Talmudists laid down careful
rules concerning the extent of the ritual
tear, and how long it was to remain un:
mended, both being regulated by the near-
ness of the relationship of the deceased
person. In this interpretation there are
these two difficulties: first, it makes the
clause a virtual repetition of ver. 4; and
secondly, it is not known for certain that
the closing of the rent was a ceremonial
custom in the times of Koheleth. Hence
Plumptre inclines to take the expression
metaphorically of the division of a kingdom
by schism, and the restoration of unity,
comparing the Prophet Alijah’s communica-
tion to Jeroboam (1 Kings xi. 30, 31), But
surely this would be a most unlikely allusion
to put into Solomon’s mouth; nor can we
properly look for such a symbolical repre-
sentation amid the “ther realistic examples
given in the series. “What Koheleth says is
this—There are times when it is natural to
tear clothes to pieces, whether from grief, or
anger, or any other cause, eg. as being old


om, In, 1—22.]


and worthless, or infected; and there are
times when it jis equally natural to mend
them, and to make them serviceable b
timely repairs. Connected with the notion
of mourning contributed by this clause,
though by no means confined to that notion,
it is added, A time to keep silence, and a
time to speak. The silence of deep sorrow
may be intime22d, as when Job’s friends
sat by him in sympathizing silence (Job ii.
13), and the psalmist cried, “I was dumb
with silence, I held my peace, even from
good; and my sorrow was stirred” (Ps.
Xxxix. 2); and Elisha could not bear to
hear his master’s departure mentioned (2
Kings ii. 3, 5). There are also occasions
when the sorrow of the heart should find
utterance, as in David’s lament over Saul
and Jonathan (2 Sam. i. 17, etc.) and over
Abner (2 Sam. iii. 33, etc.). But the gnome
is of more general application. The young
should hold their peace in the presence of
their elders (Job xxxii. 4, etc.); silence is
often golden: “ Even a fvol, when he holdeth
his peace, is counted wise: when he shutteth
his lips, he is esteemed as prudent” (Prov.
xvii. 28). On the other hand, wise counsel
is of infinite value, and must not be with-
held at the right moment, and “a word in
due season, how good is it!” (Prov. xv. 23;
xxv. 11). “If thou hast understauding,
answer thy neighbour; if not, lay thy hand
upon thy mouth” (Kcclus. v. 12; see more,
Ecelus. xx. 5, etc.).

Ver. 8.—A time to love, and a time to
hate. This reminds one of the gloss to
which our Lord refers (Matt. v. 43), “Ye
have heard that it hath been said, Thou
shalt love thy neighbour, and hate thine
enemy,” the first member being found in
the old Law (Lev. xix. 18), the second
being a misconception of the spirit which
made Israel God’s executioner upon the
condemned nations. It was the maxim of
Bias, quoted by Aristotle, ‘ Rhet.,’ ii. 13,
that we should love as if about some “ay to
hate, and hate as if about to love. And
Philo imparts a still more selfish tone to the
gnome, when he pronounces (‘ De Carit.,’ 21,
p. 401, Mang.), “It was well said by them
of old, that we ought to deal out friendship
without absolutely renouncing enmity, and
practise enmity as possibly to turn to friend-
ship.” A time of war, and a time of peace.
In the previous couplets the infinitive mood
of the verb has been used; in this last
hemistich substantives are introduced, as
being more concise and better fitted to em-
phosize the close of the catalogue. The
first clause referred specially to the private
feelings which one is constrained to enter-
tain towards individuals, he second clause
has to do with national concerns, anu touclies
ou the statesmanship which discovers the


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 61
ee


—


necessity or the opportuneness of war and
peace, and acts accordingly. In this and in
all tle other examples adduced, the lesson
intended is this—that man is not indepen-
dent; that under all circumstances and
relations he is in the hand of a power
mightier than himself, which frames time
and seasons according to its own good _plea-
sure. God holds the threads of human life;
in some mysterious way directs and controls
events; success and failure are dependent
upon his will. There are certain laws which
regulate the issues of actions and events,
and man cannot alter these; his free-will can
put them in motion, but they become irre-
sistible when in operation. This is not
fatalism; it is the mere statement of a fact
in experience. Koheleth never denies man’s
liberty, though he is very earnest in assert-
ing God’s sovereignty. The reconciliation
of the two is a problem unsolved by him.

Ver. 9.—If thus man, in all his actions
and under all circumstances, depends upon
time and seasons which are beyond his con-
trol, we return to the same desponding
question already asked in ch. i. 3, What
profit hath he that worketh in that wherein
he laboureth? The preceding enumeration
leads up to this question, to which the
answer is “None.” Since time and tide
wait for no man, since man cannot know
for certain his opportunity, he cannot
reckon on reaping any advantage from his
labour.


Vers. 10—15.—There isa plan and system
in all the circumstances of man’s life; he
feels this instinctively, but he cannot com-
prehend it. His duty is to make the best
of the present, and to recognize the immu-
tability of the law that governs all things.


Ver. 10.—I have seen the travail which
God hath given to the sons of men to be
exercised in it; te. to busy themselves
therewith (ch. i. 13).- This travail, exercise,
or business is the work that has to be done
under the conditions prescribed of time and
season in face of the difficulty of man’s fre
action and God’s ordering. We take in-
finite pains, we entertain ample desires and
strive restlessly to carry them out, bat our
efforts are controlled by a higher 1 w, and
results occur in the way and at vhe time
arranged by Providence. Humen labour,
though it is appointed by God : nd is part
of man’s heritage imposed upon him by the
Fall (Gen. iii. 17, ete.), cannot bring con-
tentment or satisfy the spirit’s cravings.

Ver. 11.—He hath mado every thing
beautiful in his (ts) time ‘Hverything
(eth hacol) does not refer so much to the
original creation which God made very
good (Gen. i. 31), as to the travail and busi-


¢2 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


fou. rm. 1—24


rr ————————————————————————————


ness mentioned in ver. 10. All parts of
this have, in God’s design, a beauty and a
harmony, their own season for appeirance
and development, their work to do in carry-
ing on the majestic march of Providence.
Also he hath set the world in their heart.
“Tho world;” eth-haolum, placed (as hacol
above) before the verb, with eth, to emphasize
the relation, There is some uncertainty in
the translation of this word. The LXX.
has, Sturavra tov aidva; Vulgate, Mundum
tradidit disputationt eorum. The original
meaning is “the hidden,” and it is used
generally in the Old Testament of the remote
st, and somctimes of the future, as Dan.
iii, 83, so that the idea conveyed is of un-
known duration, whether the glance looks
backward or forward, which is equivalent
to our word “eternity.” Lt is only in later
Hebrew that the word obtuined the significa-
tion of “age” (aidv), or “ world” in its rela-
tion to time. Commentators who have
adopted the latter sense here explain the
expression as if it meant that man in him-
self is a microcosm, a little world, or that
the love of the world, the love of life, is
naturally implanted in him. But taking
the term in the signification found through-
out the Bible, we are justified in translat-
ing it “eternity.” The pronoun in “ their
heart” refers tu “the sons of men” in the
previous verse. God has put into men’s
minds a notion of infinity of duration; the
beginning and the end of things are alike
beyond his grasp; the time to be born and
the time to die are equally unknown and
uncontrollable. Koheleth is not thinking
of that hope of immortality which his words
unfold to us with our better knowledge; he
is speculating on tlie innate faculty of look-
ing backward and forward which man pos-
sesses, but whicii is insufficient to solve the
problems which present themselves every
day. This conception of eternity may be
the foundation of great hopes and expecta-
tions, but as an explanation of the ways of
Providence it fails. So that no man can
find out the work that God maketh from the
beginning to the end; or, without man being
able to penetrate; yet 8o that he cannot, ete.
Man sees only minute parts of the great
whole; he cannot comprehend all at one
view, cannot understand the law that regu-
Jates the time and svason of every cireum-
stance in the history of man and the world.
He feels that, as there has been an infinite
past, there will be an infinite future, which
may solve anomalies and demonstrate the
harmonious unity of God’s design, and he
must be content to wait and hope. Com-
sia of the past with the present may
elp to adumbrate the future, but is in-
adequate to unravel the complicated thread
of hs world’s history (comp. ch. viii, 16,


17, and ix. 1, where a similar thought is
expressed).

Ver. 12.—I know that there is no good
in them, but for a man to rejoice; rather,
T knew, perceived, that there was no yood for
them; i.e. for men. From the facts adduced,
Koheleth learned this practical re-ult—that
man had nothing in his own power (see on
ch. ii. 24) which would conduce to his hap-
piness, but to make the best of life such aa
he finds it. Vulgate, Cognovi quod non esset
melius nist leturi. To do good in his life;
Tod woety ayabdy (Septuagint); Facere bene
(Vulgate). This has been taken by many
in the sense of “doing one’s self good,
prospering, enjoying one’s self,” like the
Greek ¢ mparrew, and therefore nearly
equivalent to “rejoice” in the former part
of the verse. But the expression is best
taken here, as when it .occurs elsewhere
(e.g. ch. vii. 20), in a moral sense, and it
thus teaches the great truth that virtue
is essential to happiness, that to “trust
in the Lord... to depart from evil, and
to do good” (Ps. xxxvi. 3, 27), will bring
peace und content (see in the epilogue,
ch. xii. 143, 14). There is no kpicureanism
in this verse; the enjoyment spoken of is
aot licentiousness, but a lappy appreciation
cf the innocent pleasures which the love of
Ged offers to those who live in accordance
with the laws of their higher nature.

Ver. 13.—And also that every man should
eat and drink... it is the gift of God.
This enforces and intensifies the statement
in the preceding verse; not only the power
to “do good,” but even to enjoy what comes
in his way (see on ch. ii. 24), man must
receive from God. When we pray for our
daily bread, we also ask for ability to take,
assimilate, and profit by the supports and
comforts afforded to us. “It” is better
omitted, as “is the gift of God” forms the
predicate of the sentence. LEcclus, xi. 17,
“The gift of the Lord remaineth with the
godly, and his favour bringeth prosperity
for ever.”

Ver. 14.—I know that, whatsoever God
doeth, it shall be for ever. A second thing
(see ver. 12) that Koheleth knew, learned
from the truths adduced in vers. 1—9, is that
behind man’s free action and volition stands
tle will of God, which orders events with
a view to eternity, and that man can alter
nothing of this providential arrangement
(comp. Isa. xlvi. 10; Ps. xxxiii, 11).
Nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken
from it. We cannot hasten or retard God’s
designs; we cannot add to or curtail hia
plans, Septuagint, “It is impossible to add
(ovx €ort mpocbetvar) to it, and it is impos-
sible to take away from it.” Thus Ecclus.
xviii. 6, “As for the wondrous works of
the Lord, it is impossible to lessen or to


ou, mI. 1—22.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 63


add to them (ox forw @rartdca oddt
mpooGeivat), neither can the ground of them
be found out.” God doeth it, that men
should fear before him. There is a moral
esata in this disposal of events, Men
eel this uniformity and unchangeableness
in the working of Providence, and thence
learn to cherish a reverential awe for the
righteous government of which they are the
subjects. It was this feeling which led
ancient etymologists to derive @¢os and Deus
from 5déos, “fear” (comp. Rev. xv. 3, 4).
This is also a ground of hupe and confidence.
Amid the jarring and fluctuating circum-
stances of men God holds the threads, and
alters not his purpose. ‘‘I the Lord change
not; therefore ye, O sons of Jacob, are not
consumed” (Mal. iii. 6), The Vulgate is
not very successful: Non possumus ets quid-
quam aduere, nec auferre, que fecit Deus ut
timeatur, “ We cannot add anything unto,
or take anything away from, those things
which God hath made that he may be
feared.”

Ver. 15.—That which hath been is now;
so Septuagint; “That which hath been
nade, the same remaineth” (Vulgate);
better, that which hath been, long ago it is;
ie. was in existence long before. The
thought is much the same as in ch. i. 9,
only here it is adduced not to prove thie
vanity and endless sameness of circum-
stances, but the orderly and appointed suc-
cession of events under the controlling
providence of God. That which is to be
hath already been. The future will be a
reproduction of the past. The laws which
regulate things change not; the moral
government is exercised by him who ‘is,
and was, and is te come” (Rev. i. 8), and
therefore in effect history repeats itself;
the same causes produce the same pheno-
mena. God requireth that which is past;
literally, God seeketh after that which hath
been chased away; Septuagint, “God will
seek him who is pursued (rdv Siwxdpevor) ;”
Vulgate, ‘God reneweth that which is
passed (instaurat quod abiit).” The meaning
is—God brings back to view, recalls again into
being, that which was past and had vanished
out of sight and mind. The sentence is an
explanation of the preceding clauscs, and
hag nothing to do with the inquisition at
the day of judgment. Hengstenberg has
followed the Septuagint, Syriac, and Targum,
in translating, “ God seeks the persecuted,”
and seeing herein an allusion to the punish-
ment of the Egyptians for pursuing the
Israelites to the Red Sea, or a general state-
ment that God succours theoppressed. But
this idea is. quite alien to the inteution of
the passage, and injures the coherence.


Vers. 16—22.— Acknowledging the provi-


dential government of God, which controls
events and places man’s happiness out of
his own power, one is confrouted also by
the fact that there is much wickedness, much
injustice, in the world, which oppose all
plans fur peaceful enjoyment. Doubtless
there shall be a day of retribution for such
iniquities; and God allows them now in
order to try men and to teach them humi-
lity. Meantime man’s duty and happiness
consist, as before said, in aking the best
use of the present and improving the oppor-
tunities which God gives him.


Ver. 16.—And moreover I saw under the
sun the place of judgment. Koheleth records
his experience of the prevalence of iniquity
in high places. The place of judgment
(mishpat); where justice is administered.
The accentuation allows (cf. Gen. i. 1) this
to be regarded as the object of the verb.
The Revised Version, with Hitzig, Ginsburg,
and others, take oipp as an adverbial ex-
pression equivalent to “in the place.” The
former is the simpler construction. “ And
moreover,” at the commencement of the
verse, looks back to ver. 10, “ I have seen the
travail,” etc. That wickedness (resha) was
there. On the judicial seat iniquity sat
instead of justice. The place of righteous
ness (tsedek). “ Righteousness” is the pecus
liar characteristic of the judge himself, as
“ justice ” is of his decisions. ‘That iniquity
(resha) was there. The word ought to be
translated “ wickedness” or “iniquity ” in
both clauses. The Septuagint takes the
abstract for the concrete, and at the end
has apparently introduced a clerical error,
which has been perpetuated in the Arabic
and elsewhere, ‘And moreover I saw
under the sun the place of judgment, there
was the ungodly (dce8fs); and the place of
the righteous, there was tlie godly (evoeBis).”
‘The Complutensian Polyglot reads ac¢Bis
in both places. It is impossible to har-
monize these statements of oppression and
injustice here and elsewhere (e.g. ch. iv. 1;
v. 8; viii. 9, 10) with Solomon’s authorship
of the book. It is contrary to fact tl.at such
a corrupt state of things existed in his time,
and in writing thus he would be uttering a
libel against himself. If he was cognizant
of such evils in his kingdom, he had nothins
to do but to put them down with a high hand.
There is nothing to lead to the belief that he
is speaking of other countries and other
times; he is stating his own personal experi-
ence of what goes on around him. It is true
that in Solomon’s latter days disatfiction
secretly prevailed, and the people felt his
yoke grievous (1 Kings xii. 4); but there is
no evidence of the existence of corruption in


64 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


SS eee ee


judicial courts, or of the social and political
evils of which he speaks in this book. That
he had a prophetical foresight of the
disasters that would accompany the reign of
his successor, and endeavours herein to pro-
vide consolation for the future sufferers, is a
pfous opinion without historical basis, and
cannot be justly used to support the genuine-
ness of the work.

Ver. 17.—I said in mine heart, God shall
judge the righteous and the wicked. In
view of the injustice that prevails in earthly
tribunals, Koheleth takes comfort in the
thought that there is retribution in store
for every man, when God shall award sen-
tence according to deserts. God is a
righteous Judge strong and patient, and his
decisions are infallible. Future judgment
is here plainly stated, as it is at the final
conclusion (ch. xi. 14). They who refuse to
credit the writer with belief in this great
doctrine resort to the theory of interpolation
and alteration in order to account for the
language in this and analogous passages.
There can be no doubt that the present
text has hitherto always been regarded as
genuine, and that it does clearly assert
future retribution, though not so mucli as a
conclusion firmly established, but rather as
a belief which may explain anomalies and
afford comfoit under trying circumstances.
For there is a time there for every purpose
and for every work. The adverb rendered
“there” (OW, sham) is placed emphatically,
at the end of the sentence. Thus the Septua-
gint, “ There is a reason for every action, and
for every work there (éxe?).” Many take it
to mean “inthe other world,” and Plumptre
cites Eurip., ‘Med.,’ 1073—

*Evdaipovoirov, Gdn’ éxet 1a 3° evOdde
Tlarhp aetAer’.
“ All good be with you! but it must be there;

Here it is stolen from you by your sire.”


But it is unexampled to find the elliptical
“there,” when no place has been mentioned
in the context, and when we are precluded
from interpreting the dark word by asiguifi-
cant gesture, as Medea may have pointed
downwards in her histrionic despair. Where
the words, “that day,” are used in the New
Testament (e.g. Luke x. 12; 2 Tim.i. 18,
etc.), the context shows plainly to what
they refer. Some take the adverb here in
the sense of “then.” Thus the Vulgate,
Justum et impium judicabit Deus, et tempus
omnis rei tunc erit.” But really no time has
been mentioned, unless we conceive the
writer to have been guilty of a clumsy
tautology, expressing by “ then” the same
idea as “a time for every purpose,” ete.
Ewald would understand it of the past; but
this is quite arbitrary, and limits the signifi-
cation of the sentence unnecessarily. It is


[ox. m1. 1—22,


best, with many modern commentators, te
refer the adverb to God, who has just been
spoken of in the preceding clause. A similar
use is found in Gen. xlix. 24. With God,
apud Deum, in his counsels, there is a time
of judgment and rctribution for every act of
man, when anomalies which have obtained
on earth shall be rectified, injustice shall be
punished, virtue rewarded. There is no
need, with some commentators, to read oy,
“he appointed; ” the usual reading gives a
satisfactory se1se.

Ver. 18.—The comfort derived from the
thought of the future judgment is clouded
by the reflection that man is as powerless as
the beast to control his destiny. Concerning
the estate of the sons of men; rather, i
happens on account of the sons of men. God
allows events to take place, disorders to con-
tinue, ete., for the ultimate profit of men,
though the idea that follows is humiliate
ing and dispiriting. The LXX. has rept
Aaduas, “ concerning the speech of the sons
of men.” So the Syriac. The word dibrah
may indeed bear that meaning, as it is also
used for “ word ” or “ matter ;” but we can-
not conceive that the clause refers solely to
words, and the expression in the text signi-
fies merely “for tle sake, on account of,”
as in ch. viii. 2, That God might manifest
them; rather, that God might test them; Ut
probaret eos Deus (Vulgate). God allows
these things, endures them patiently, and
does not at once redress them, for two reac
sons. The first of these is that they may
serve for the probation of men, giving them
opportunity of making good or bad use of
them. We see the effect of this forbearance
on the wicked in ch. viii. 11; it hardens
them in impenitence; while it nourishes the
faith of the righteous, and helps them to
persevere (see Dan. xi. 35 and Rev. xxii.
11). And that they might see that they
themselves are beasts, The pronoun is
repeated emphatically, “that they them-
selves are [like] beasts, they in themselves,”
This is the second reason. Thus they learn
their own powerlessness, if they regard mere-
ly their own animal! life; apart from their
relation to God and hope of the future, they
arc no better than the lower ercatures. Se
tuagint. “And to show (rod Seta) that
they are beasts.” So the Vulgate and Syriac,
The Masoretic reading adopted in the Angli-
can Version seems best.


Vers. 19—21 are best regarded as a parene
thesis explanatory of vers. 16—18, eluci-
dating man’s impotence in the presence of
the anomalies of life. The conelusion in
ver. 22 is connected with vers. 16—18. We
must acknowledge that there are disorderg
in the world which we cannot remedy, and


om. 1. 122]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


65


——————————— shw— ee eSsSsSSses


which God allows in order to demonstrate
our powerlessness; therefore the wisest
course is to make the best of present cir-
cumstances,


Ver. 19.—For that which befalleth the
sons of men befalleth beasts; literally,
chance are the sons of men, and chance are
beasts (see on ch. ii. 14); Septuagint, “ Yea,
and to them cometh the event (cuvdytnua) of
the sons of men, am the event of the beast.”
Koheleth explains | 1 what respect man is on
a level with the brate creation. Neither are
able to rise superior to the law that controls
their natural life. So Solon says to Croesus
(Herod., i. 32), May ort tvOpwmos cvupoph,
“Man is naught but chance;” and Arta-
banus reminds Xerxes that clances rule
men, not men chances (ibid., vii. 49). Even
one thing befalleth them. A third time is
the ominous word repeated, “One chauce is
to both of them.” Free-thinkers perverted
this dictum into the materialistic language
quoted in the Book of Wisdom (ii. 2): ‘“‘ We
are born at haphazard, by chance (avtocxe-
Sfws),” etc. But Koheleth’s contention is, not
that there is no law or order in what happens
to man, but that neither man nor beast can
dispose events at their own will and plea-
sure; they are conditioned by a force superior
to them, which dominates their actions,
sufferings, and circumstances of life. As
the one dieth, so dieth the other. In tlhe
matter of succumbing to the law of death
man has no superiority over other creatures.
This is an inference drawn from common
observation of exterior facts, and touches
not any higher question (comp, ch. ii. 14,
15; ix. 2, 3). Something similar is found
in Ps, xlix. 20, “ Man that is in honour, and
understandeth not, is like the beasts that
perish.” Yea, they have all one breath
(ruach). This is the word used in ver. 23
for the vital principle, “the breath of life,”
as it is called in Gen. vi. 17, where the
same word is found. In the earlier record
(Gen. ii, 7) the term is nishma. Life in all
animals is regarded as the gift of God. Says
the psalmist, ‘‘Thou sendest forth thy
spirit (ruach), they are created” (Ps. civ.
30). This lower principle presents the
game phenomena in men and in brutes.
Man hath no pre-eminence above a beast;
é.e. in regard to suffering and death. This
is not bare materialism, or a gloomy deduc-
tion from Greek teaching, but must be ex-
plained from the writer’s standpoint, which
is to emphasize the impotence of man to
effect his own happiness. Taking only a
limited and phenomenal view of man’s cit
cumstauces and destiny, hé speaks a gencray
truth which all must acknowledge. Sep-
tuagint, “And what hath the man more
than the beast? Nothing.” For all is

ECCLESIASTES,


|


vanity. The distinction between man and
beast is annulled by death; the former’s
boasted superiority, his power of conceiving
and planning, his greatness, skill, strength,
cunning, all come under the category of
vanity, as they cannot ward off the inevi-
table blow.

Ver. 20.—All go unto one place. All,
men and brutes, are buried in the earth
(ch. xii. 7). The author is not thinking of
Sheol, the abode of departed spirits, but
merely regarding earth as the universal tomb
ofall creatures. Plumptre quotes Lucretius,
‘De Rer. Nat.,’ v. 260—


“Omniparens eadem rerum commune sepul-
chrum.”


“The mother and the sepulchre of all.”
Thus Bailey, ‘ Festus’— _


“The course of nature seems a course of
deuth ;
The prize of life’s brief race, to cease to
run ;
The sole substantial thing, death’s nothing-
ness.”


All are of the dust (Gen. iii. 19; Ps. civ.
29; exlvi. 4). So Keclus. xli. 10, “ All
things that are of earth shull turn to earth
again.’ This is true of the material part of
men and brutes alike; the question of the
destiny of ‘the immaterial part is touched in
the next verse.

Ver. 21.— Who knoweth the spirit of man
that goeth upward, and the spirit of the
beast that goeth downward to the earth?
The statement is here too categorically ren-
dered, though, for dogmatical purposes, the
Masorites seem to have punctuated the text
with a view to such interpretation. But, as
Wright and others point out, the analogy of
two other passages (cli. ii. 19 and vi. 12),
where “who knoweth” occurs, intimates
that the phrases which follow are intcrro-
gative. So the translation should be, ‘* Who
knoweth as regards the spirit (rwach) of the
sons of men whether it gocth upward, and
as regards the spirit (ruach) of the beast
whether it goeth downward under the
earth?” Vulgate, Quis novit si spiritus,
etc.? Septuagint, Tis cide mvedua viay tov
avOpemov ci avaBatver abTd avw; “ Who ever
saw the spirit of the sons of man, whether
it goeth upward?” The Authorized Ver-
sion, which gives the Masoretic reading, is
supposed to harmonize better with the asser-
tion at the end of the book (ch. xii. 7), that
the spirit returns to the God who gave it.
But there is no formal denial of the immor-
tality of the soul in the present passage as
we render it. The question, indeed, is not
touched. The author is confirming his


previous assertion that, in one point of view,
man is not superior to brute. Now he says,
F


66 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


[on. m1. 1—23


"a ———— — — ae


looking at the matter merely externally, and
taking not into consideration any higher
notion, no one knows the destiny of the
living powers, whether God deals differ-
ently with the spirit of man and of beast.
Phenomenally, the principle of life in both
is identical, and its cessation is identical ;
and what becomes of the spirit in either
case neither eye nor mind can discover.
The distinction which reason or religion
assumes, viz. that man’s spirit goes upward
and the brute’s downward, is incapable of
proof, is quite beyond experience. What is
meant by “upward” and “downward” may
be seen by reference to the gnome in Prov.
xv. 24, “To the wise the way of life goeth
upward, that he may depart from Sheol
beneath”’ The contrast shows that Sheol
is regarded as a place of punishment or
annihilation; this is further confirmed by


Ps. xlix. 14, 15, “They are appointed as a-


flock for Sheol: death shall be their shep-
herd ... their beauty shall be for Sheol
to consume. . . . But God will releem my
soul from the power of Sheol; for he shall
receive me.” Koheleth neither denies nor
affirms in this passage the immortality of
the soul; that he believed in it we learn
from other expressions; but he is not con-
cerned with parading it here. Oommen-
tators quote Lucretius’ sceptical thought
(‘De Rer. Nat.,’ i. 113—116)—


“Tgnoratur enim que sit natura animai,
Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur,
Et simul intereat nobiscum, morte di-

remta,
An tenebras Orci visat vastasque lacunas.”


“ We know not what the nature of the soul,
Born in the womb, or at the birth infused,
Whether it dies with us, or wings its way
Unto the gloomy pools of Orcus vast.”


But Koheleth’s inquiry suggests the possi-
bility of a different destiny for the spirits of
man and brute, though he does not at this
moment make any definite assertion on the
subject. Later on he explains the view
taken by the believer in Divine revelation
(ch. xii. 7).

Ver. 22.—After all, the writer arrives at
the conclusion intimated in ver. 12; only
here the result is gathered from the acknow-
ledgment of man’s impotence (vers. 16—18),
as there from the experience of life. Where-
fore I perceive that there is nothing better,
ete. ; rather, so, or wherefore I saw that there
was nothing, etc. As man is not master of
his own lot, cannot order events as he would


like, is powerless to control the forces of
nature and the providential arrangements
of the world, his duty and his happiness
consist in enjoying the present, in making
the best of life, and availing himself of the
bounties which the mercy of God places be-
fore him. Thus he will free himself from
anxieties and cares, perform present labours,
attend to present duties, content himself
with the daily round, and not vex his heart
with solicitude for the future. There is no
Epicureanism here, no recommendation of
sensual enjoyment; the author simply ad-
vises men to make a thankful use of the
blessings which God provides forthem. For
who shall bring him to see what shall be
after him? ‘I'lie Revised Version, by insert-
ing “back ”— Who shall bring him back to
see ?—aflixes a meaning to the clause which
it need not and. does not bear. It is, indeed,
commonly interpreted to signify that man
knows and can know nothing that happens
to him after death—whcther he will exist
or not, whether he will have cognizance of
what passes on earth, or be insensible to all
that befalls here. But Koheleth has com-
pleted that thought already; his argument
now turns to the future in this life. Use
the present, for you cannot be sure of the
future ;—this is hisexhortation. So he says
(ch. vi. 12), “ Who can tell aman what shall
be after him under the sun?” where the ex-
pression, “under the sun,” shows that earthly
life is meant, not existence after death.
Ignorance of the future is a very common
topic throughout the book, but it is the
terrestrial prospect that isin view. There
would be little force in urging the impotence
of men’s efforts towards their own happiness
by the consideration of their ignorance of
what may happen when they are no more;
but one may reasonably exhort men to cease
to torment themselves with hopes and fears,
with labours that may be useless and pre-
parations that may never be needed, by the
reflection that they cannot foresee the future,
and that, for all they know, the pains which
they take may be utterly wasted (of. ch. vii.
14; ix. 3). Thus in this section there is
neither scepticism nor Epicureanism. In
brief, the sentiment is this—There are in-
justices and anomalies in the life of men
and in the course of this wo:'d’s events
which man cannot control or alter; these
may be righted and compensated hereafter.
Meantime, man’s happiness is to make the
best of the present, and cheerfully to enjoy
what Providence offers, without anxious
care for the future.


on, m1. 1—22,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. |


SD SSS


= HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—9.— Times and seasons; or, Heaven’s order tn man’s affairs. I. THE EVENTS
AND PURPOSES OF LIFE. 1. Greut in their number. The Preacher’s catalogue exhausts
not, but only exemplifies, the “ occupations and interests,” occurrences and experiences,
that constitute the warp and woof of mortal existence, Between the cradle and the
grave, instances present themselves in which more things happen than are here
recorded, and more designs are attempted and fulfilled than are here contemplated.
There are also cases in which the sum total of experience is included in the two entries,
“born,” “died;” but the generality of mortals live long enongh to suffer and to do
many more things beneath the sun. 2. Manifold in their variety. In one sense and
at one time it may seem as if there were “no new thing under the sun” (ch. i, 9),
either in the history of the race or in the experience of the individual; but at another
time and in another sense an almost infinite variety appears in both. The monotony
of life, of which complaint is often heard (ch. i. 10), exists rather in the mind or heart
of the complainant than in the texture of life itself. What more diversified than the
events and purposes the Preacher has catalogued? Entering through the gateway of
birth upon the mysterious arena of existence, the human being passes through a
succession of constantly shifting experiences, till he makes his exit from the scene |
through the portals of the grave, planting and plucking up, etc.


“ All the world’s a stage,
And all the men and women merely players;
They have their exits and their entrances;
And one man in his time plays many parts,
His acts being seven ages.”
(‘As You Like It, act if. ae. 7.)


8. Antithetic im their relations. Human life, like man himself, may almost be
characterized as a mass of contradictions. The incidents and interests, purposes and
plans, events and enterprises, that compose it, are not only manifold and various, but
also, it would seem, diametric in their opposition. Being born is in due course
succecded by dying; planting by plucking up; and killing—it may be in war, or by
administration of justice, or throngh some perfectly defensible cause—if not by actual
raising from death, which lies confessedly beyond the power of man (1 Sam. ii. 6;
2 Kings v. 7), at least by healing every malady short of death. Breaking down,
whether of material structures (2 Chron. xxiii. 17) or of intellectual systems, whether
of national (Jer. i 10) or religious (Gal. ii. 18) institutions, is after an interval followed
by the building up of those very things which weredestroyed. Weeping endureth only
for a night, while joy cometh in the morning (Ps. xxx. 5). Dancing, on the other
hand. gives place to mourning. In short, wliatever experience man at any time has,
before he terminates his pilgrimage he may almost confidently count on having the
opposite; and whatever action he may at any season perform, another season will
almost certainly arrive when he will do the reverse. Of every one of the antinomies
cited by the Preacher, man’s experience on the earth furnishes examples. 4, Fixed in
their times. Though appearing to come about without any order or arrangement, the
events and purposes of mundane existence are by no means left to the guidance, or
rather no-guidance, of chance; but rather have their places in the vast world-plan
determined, and the times of their appearing fixed. As the hour of each man’s
entrance into life is decreed, so is that of his departure from the same (Heb, ix. 27;
2 Tim. iv. 6). ‘I'he date at which he shall step forth upon the active business of life,
represented in the Preacher’s catalogne by “planting and plucking up,” “ breaking
down and building up,” “casting away stones and gathering stones together,” “ getting
and losing;” the period at which he shall marry (ver. 4), with the times at which
weddings and funerals (ver. 4) shall occur in his family circle; the moment when he
shall be called upon to stand up valiantly for truth and right amongst his contem-
poraries (Prov. xv. 23), or to preserve a discreet and prudent silence when talk would
be folly (Prov. x. 8), or even hurtful to the cause he serves ; the times when he shall
either suffer his affections to flow forth in an uninterrupted stream towards the good,


68 ECCLESIASTES; OR, TE PREACHER. (cn. m. 1—22,


——s~


ane


or withhold them from unworthy objects; or, if he be a statesman, the occasions when
he shall go to war and return from it, are all predetermined by infinite wisdom.
5. Determined in their durations. How long each in 'ividual life shall continue (Ps.
xxxi. 15; Acts xvii. 26), how long each experience shall last, and kew long each action
shall take to perform, is equally a fixed and ascertained quantity, if not to man’s
knowledge, certainly to that of the supreme Disposer of events.

II. THE TIMES AND SEASONS OF LIFE. 1. Appointed by and known only to God. As
in the material and natural world the Creator hath appointed times and seasons, as,
e.g., to the heavenly bodies for their rising and setting (Ps. civ. 19), to plants for
their growing and decaying (Gen. viii. 22; Numb. xiii. 20; Judg. xv. 1; Jer. lL. 16;
Mark xi. 18), and to animals for their instinctive actions (Job xxxix. 1, 2; Jer. viii. 7),
so in the human and spiritual world has he ordained the same (Acts xvii. 26; Eph.
i. 10; Titus i.3); and these times and seasons, both in the natural and in the spiritual
world, hath God reserved to himself (Acts i. 7). 2. Unavoidable and unalterable by
man. As no man can predict the day of his death (Gen. xxvii. 2; Matt. xxv. 13), any ©
more than know beforehand that of his birth, so neither can he fathom beforehand the
incidents that shall happen, or the times when they shall fall out during the course of
his life (Prov. xxvii. 1). Nor by any precontriving can he change by so much as
a hair’s breadth the place into which each incident is fitted, or the moment when it
shall happen. ,

Learn: 1. The changefulness of human life, and the duty of preparing wisely to
meet it. 2. The Divine order that pervades human life, and the propriety of accepting
it with meeckness, 3. The difficulty (from a human point of view) of living well, since
no man can be quite certain that for anything he does he has found the right season.
4, The wisdom of seeking for one’s self the guidance of him in whose hands are times
and seasons (Acts i. 7).


Vers. 11—14.—All things beautiful; or, God, man, and the world. I. THe BEAU
TIFUL RELATION OF THE WORLD To Gop. Expressed by four words. 1. Dependence:
no such thing as independence, self-subsistence, self-origination, self-regulation, in
mundane affairs. The universe, out to its circumference and in to its centre, from its
mightiest structure down to its smallest detail, is the handiwork of God. Whatever
philosophers may say or think upon the subject, it is simple absurdity to tcach that
the universe made itself, or that the incidents composing the sum of human life and
experierce lave come to pass of themselves. It will be time enough to believe things
are their own makers when effects ‘can be discovered that have no causes. Persons ‘of
advanceil (?) intelligence and culture may regard the Scriptures as behind the age in
respect of philosophic insight and scientific attainment; it is to their credit that ‘their
writers never talk such unphilosophic and unscientific nonsense as-that mundane things
are their own creators. Their common sense—if not permissible to say their inspiration
—appears to have been stronz and clear enough to save them from being befooled by
such vagaries as have led astray many modern savants, and to have taught them that
the First Cause of all things is God (Gen.i.13 Exod. xx.11; Neh. ix. 6; Job xxxviii
4; Ps, xix. 1; Isa. xl. 28; Acts xiv. 15; xvii. 24; Rom. xi. 86; Eph. iii 9; Heb.
iii, 4; Rev. iv. 11). 2. Variety: no monotony in mundane affairs. Obvious Py
regards both the universe as a whole and its individual parts. The supreme Artificer
of the former had no idea of fashioning all things after one model, however excellent
bnt sought to introduce variety into the works of his hands; and just this is the
principle upon which he has proceeded in arranging the programme of man’s experiences
upon the earth, To this diversity in man’s experience the twenty-eight instances of
events and purposes given by the Preacher (vers. 2—8) allude; and this same diversity
is a mark at once of wisdom and of kindness on the part of the Supreme. As the
matcrial globe would be monotonous were it all mountain and no valley, so would
human lile be uninteresting were it an unchanging round of the same few incidents
But it is not. If there are funerals and deaths, there are as well marriages and births;
if nights of wecping, days of laughing; if times of war, periods of peace. 3. Order: no
chance or accident in mundane uffairs, To short-sighted and feeble man human life
is full of accidents or chances; but not so when viewed from the standpoint of God.
Not only does no event happen without his permission (Matt, x, 29; Luke xii, 6), bus


OH. m1. 1—22.] ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. to)
a ‘


each event occurs at the time and falls into the place appointed for it by infinite
wisdom. Nor is this true merely of such events as are wholly and exclusively in his
power, like births and deaths (ver. 2), but of such also as to some extent at least are
within man’s control, as eg. the planting of a field and the plucking up of that which
is planted (ver. 2), killing and healing, breaking down and building up (ver. 3), weep-
ing and laughing (ver. 4), etc. Men may flatter themselves that of these latter actions
they are the sole originators, have both the choosing of their times and the fixing of
their forms; but according to the Preacher, God’s supremacy is as little to be disputed
in them as in the matter of man’s coming into or going out from the world. We
express this thought by citing the well-known proverb, “ Man proposes, but God dis-
poses,” or the familiar words of Shakespeare—


“There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”
(‘ Hamlet,’ act v. so. 2.)


4. Beauty: no defect or deformity in mundane affairs. This cannot signify that in
such events and actions as “killing,” “hating,” “warring,” there is never anything
wrong; that God regards them only as good in the making, and generally that sin is
a necessary stage in the development of human nature. The Preacher is not pronouncing
judgment upon the moral qualities of the actions he enumerates, but merely calling
attention to their fitness for the times and seasons to which they have been assigned
by God. Going back in thought to the “ Very good!” of the Creator when he rested
from his labours at the close of the sixth day (Gen, i. 31), the Preacher cannot think
of saying less of the work God is still carrying on in evolving the plan and programme
of his purpose. ‘God hath made everything beautiful in its time” (cf. ver. 11):
beautiful in itself, so far as it is a work of his; but beautiful not less in its time, even
when the work, as not being entirely his, is not beautiful in itself, or in its inward
essence, Cf, Shakespeare’s—


“ How many things by season seasoned are
To their right praise and true perfection!”
(‘ Merchant of Venice,’ act v. se. 1.)


Beautiful in themselves and their times are the seasons of the year, the ages of man,
and the changing experiences through which he passes; beautiful, at least in their
times, are numerous human actions which God cannot be regarded as approving, but
which nevertheless he permits to occur because he sees the hour has struck for their
occurring. As it were, the glowing wheels of Divine providence never fail to keep time
with the great clock of eternity.

Il. THE BEAUTIFUL RELATION OF MAN TO THE WORLD. Also expressed in four words.
1. Weariness: no perfect rest in the midst of mundane affairs. Not only is man
tossed about continually by the multitudinous vicissitudes of which he is the subject,
but he derives almost no satisfaction from the thought that in all these changes there
is a beautiful because divinely appointed harmony, and a beneficent because Heaven-
ordained purpose. The order pervading the universe is something outside of and
beyond him. The fixing of the right times is a work in which he cannot, even in a
small degree, co-operate. Asa wise man, he may wish to have every action in which
he bears a part performed at the set time marked out for it on the clock of eternity ;
but the very attempt to find out for each action the right time only aggravates the
fatigue of his labour, and increases the sense of weariness under which he groans.
“ What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth?” Not, certainly,
“no profit,” but not enough to give him rest or even free him from weariness. And
this, when viewed from a moral and religious standpoint, is beautiful inasmuch as it
prevents (or ought to prevent) man from seeking happiness in mundane affairs.
2. Ignorance: no perfect knowledge of mundane affairs. “No man can find out the
work that God maketh from the beginning to the end.” One more proof of the vanity
of human life—that no man, however wise and far-seeing, patient and laborious, cam
discover the plan of God either in the universe as a whole or in his own life; and what
renders this a special sorrow is the fact that God hath set “ the world [or, ‘ eternity *) in


70 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. rm. 1—22,


ar


<6


his heart.” If the “ world ” be accepted as the true rendering (Jerome, Luther, Ewald),
then probably the meaning is that, though each individual carries about within his
bosom in his own personality an image of the world—is, in fact, a microcosmus in which
the macrocosmus or great world is mirrored—nevertheless the problem of the universe
eludes his grasp. If, however, the translation “eternity” be adopted (Delitzsch,
Wright, Plumptre), then the import of the clause will be that God hath planted in the
heart of man “a longing after immortality,” given him an idea of the infinite and
eternal which lies beyond the veil of outward things, and inspired him with a desire to
know that which is above and beyond him, yet he cannot find out the secret of the
universe in the sense of discovering its plan. With an infinite behind and before him,
he can grasp neither the beginning of the work of God in its purpose or plan, nor the
end of it in its issues and results, whether to the individual or to the whole. What
his eye looks upon is the middle portion passing before him here and now—in com-
parison with the whole but an infinitesimal speck—and so he remains with reference
to the whole like a person walking in the dark. 3. Submission: no ground for com-
pens as to mundane affairs, Rather in the view preseuted is much to comfort man.

ad the ordering of the universe, or even of his own lot, been left to man, man himself
would have been the first to regret it. As Laplace is credited with having said that,
if only the Almighty had called him into counsel at the making of the universe, he
could have given the Almighty some valuable hints, so are there equally foolish persons
who believe they could have drafted for themselves a better life-programme than has
been done for them by the supreme Disposcr of events. A wise man, however, will
always feel grateful that the Almighty has retained the ordering of events in his own
hand, and will meekly submit to the same, believing that God’s times are the best
times, and that his ways are ever “ mercy and truth unto such as keep his covenant
and his testimonies” (Ps. xxv.10). 4. Fear: no justification for impiety or trreverence
én mundane affairs, A proper study of the constitution and course of nature, a due
recognition of the order pervading all its parts, with a just consideration both of the
perfection and permanence (ver. 14) of the Divine working, ought to inspire men with
“fear ”’—of such sort as both to repress within them irreligion and impiety, and to
excite within them humility and awe.


Ver. 15.— Requiring that which is past. I. IN THE REALM OF NATURE. God seeks
after that which is past or has been driven away, in the sense that he recalls or
brings again phenomena that have vanished; as e.g. the reappearance of the sun with
its light and heat, the various seasons of the year with their respective characteristics,
the circling of the winds with other meteorological aspects of the firmament. The
thought here is the uniformity of sequence in the physical world (ch. i, 4—7),

I]. IN THE SPHERE OF INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCE. God seeks after that which has
been driven away in the sense that he reproduces in the life of one individual experi-
ences that have existed in another, or in himself at a former point in his career. The
thought is, that by Heaven’s decree a large amount of sameness exists in the phases of
thought and feeling through which different individuals pass, or the same individuals
at successive stages of their development.

Ill. IN THE poMAIN OF History. God seeks after that which has been driven away
in the sense that, on the broad theatre of action which men name “time,” or “ the
world,” he frequently, in the evolutions of his providence, seems to recall the past
by reproducing “situations,” “ incidents,” “ events,” ‘“ experiences,” similar to, if not
identical with, those which occurred before, The thought is that history frequently
repeats itself.

IV. In THE PROGRAMME OF THE UNIVERSE. God will eventually seek after that
which has been driven away, by calling up again out of the past for judgment every
individual that has lived upon the globe, with every word that has been spoken and
every act that has been done, with every secret thought and imagination, whether it
has been good or whether it has been bad. The thought is that the distant past and


the distant future will one day meet. The place will be before th i
throne ; the time will be the last day. P efore the great white


Vers, 16, 18.— Wickedness im the place of judgment; or, the mystery of providence,


on. nL 1—22 | ECCLESIASTES; OB, THE PREACHER. 7


I. THE proround Propiem. The moral disorder of the universe. “I saw under the sun
in the place of judgment that wickaduess was there, and in the place of righteousness
that wickedness was there” (ver. 16). 1. The strange spectacle. What fascinated the
Preacher’s gaze and perplexed the Preacher’s heart was not so much the existence as
the triumph of sin—the fact that sin existed where and as it did. Had he always
beheld sin in its naked deformity, essential loathsomeness, and abject baseness, receiving
the due reward of its misdeeds, trembling as a culprit before the bar of providential
judgment, and suffering the punishment its criminality merited, the mystery and
perplexity would most likely have been reduced by half. What, however, he did
witness was iniquity, not trembling but triumphing, not sorrowing but singing, not
suffering the due recompense of her own evil deeds but snatching off the rewards and
prizes that belonged to virtue. In short, what he perceived was the complete moral
disorder of the world—as it were society turned topsy-turvy ; the wicked up and the
righteous down; bad men exalted and good men despised; vice arrayed in silks and
bedizened with jewels, and virtue only half covered with tattered rags. 2. Two par-
ticular sights. (1) Iniquity usurping the place of judgment; thrusting itself into the
very council-chambers where right and justice should prevail; now as a judge who
deliberately holds the scales uneven because the one litigant is rich and the other poor,
anon as an advocate who employs all his ingenuity to defend a prisoner whom he knows
to be guilty, and again as a witness who has accepted a bribe and calmly swears to a
lie. (2) Iniquity preoccupying the place of righteousness; t.e. the tribunal, whether -
secular or ecclesiastical, whose efforts should be all directed to finding out and maintain-
ing the cause of righteousness.

If. TH PERPLEXING MysTERY. “J said in mine heart” (ver. 17). The Preacher
was troubled about it, as David (Ps. xxxvii. 1, 7), Job (xxi. 7), Asaph (Ps. Ixxiii. 3),
and Jeremiah (xii. 1) had been. To him, as to them, it was an enigma. But why
should it have been? 1. On one hypothesis it is no enigma. On the supposition
that God, duty, and immortality are non-existent, it is not a mystery at all that vice
should prevail and virtue have a poor time of it so long as it remains above ground,
for (on the hypothesis) fleeing to a better country beyond the skies is out of the ques-
tion, The mystery would be that it were otherwise. 2. On another hypothesis it is
an enigma. What creates the mystery is that these things occur while God is, duty
presses, and immortality awaits. Since God is, why does he suffer these things to
happen? Why does he not interpose to put matters right ? If right and wrong are not
empty phrases, how comes it that moral distinctions are so constantly submerged ?
With “ eternity in their hearts,” how is it to be explained that men are so regardless of
the future ?

Il]. THE PpRoposED soLuTion. This lay in three things. 1. The certainty of a
future judgment. “I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
wicked; for there is a time for every purpose and for every work” (ver. 17). Con-
vinced that God, duty, and immortality were no fictions but solemn realities, the
Preacher saw that these implied the certainty of a judgment in the future world when
all the entanglements of this world would be sorted out, its inequalities evened, and its
wrongs righted; and seeing this, he discerned in it a suflicient reason why God should
not be in a hurry to cast down vice from its undeserved eminence and exalt virtue to
its rightful renown. 2. The discrimination of human character. The Preacher saw
that God allowed wickedness to triumph and righteousness to suffer, in order that he
might thereby “ prove them,” @.e. sift and distinguish them from one another by the
free development of their characters. Were God by external restraints to place a
check on the ungodly or by outward helps to recompense the pious, it might come te
be doubtful who were the sinful and who the virtuous; but granting free scope to both,
each manifests its hidden character by its actions, according to the principle, “ Every
tree is known by its fruits ” (Matt. vii. 16-—20). 3. The revelation of human depravity.
Because a future judgment awaits, it is necessary that the wickedness of the wicked
should be revealed. Hence “nd abstains from interfering prematurely with the world’s
disorder that men may see to what thorough inherent depravity they have really come;
that, oppressing and destroying one another, they are little better than brute beasts who,
without consideration or remorse, prey on each other.

Lessons. 1. Patience ®% Confidence. 3. Hopefulness,


72 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ({ou. 1m. 1—22,


SS —


Vers. 19—22.—Are men no better than beasts? 1. BoTH ALIKE EMANATE FROM THE
sor, “All are of the dust” (ver. 20), This the first argument in support of the
monstrous proposition that man hath no pre-eminence above a beast. 1. The measure
of truth it contains. In so far as it asserts that man, considered as to his material part,
possesses a common origin with the beasts that perish, that both were at first formed
from the ground, and are so allied to the soil that, besides emerging from it, they are
every day supported by it_and will eventually return to it, being both resolved into
indistinguishable dust, it accords exactly with the teaching of Scripture (Gen. i. 24;
ii. 7), science, and experience. Compare the language of Arnobius, “ Wherein do we
differ from them? Our bones are of the same materials; our origin is not more noble
than theirs” (‘ Ad Gentes, ii. 16). 2. The amount of error tt conceals. It overlooks
the facts that, again according to Scripture (Gen. i. 27; ii. 7; ix. 6), man was created
in the Divine image, which is never said of the lower creatures; was endowed with
intelligence far surpassing that of the creatures (Job xxxii. 8); and so far from being
placed on a level with the lower animals, was expressly constituted their lord (Gen. 1
28). Read in this connection Shakespeare’s “‘ What a piece of work is man!” ete.

‘Hamlet,’ act ii. sc. 2). Moreover, it ignores what is patent on every paye of

ripture as well as testified by every chapter in human experience, viz. that God deals
with man as he does not deal with the beasts, subjecting him as not them to moral
discipline, and accepting of him what is never asked of them, the tribute of freely
rendered service, inviting him as they are never invited to enter into conscious fellow-
ship with himself, punishing him as never them for disobedience, and making of him
an object of love and grace to the extent of devising and completing on his behalf a
scheme of salvation, as is never done or proposed to be done for them. Unless, there-
fore, Scripture be set aside as worthless, it will be impossible to hold that in respect of
origin and nature man hath no pre-eminence over the beasts.

If. BorH ALIKE ARE THE SPORT OF CHANCE. “That which befalleth the sons of
‘men befalleth beasts; even one thing betalleth them;” or, “Chance are the sons of
smen, chance is the beast, and one chance is to them both” (ver. 19). 1. The asser-
‘tion under limitations may be admitted as correct. Certainly no ground exists for the
allegation that the course of providence, whether as it relates to man or as it bears
‘upon the lower animals, is a chance, a peradventure, a haphazard. Yet events, which
in the programme of the Supreme have their fixed places and appointed times, may
geem to man to be fortuitous, as lying altogether beyond his calculation and not within
his expectation; and what the present argument amounts to is that man is as helpless
before these events as the unthinking creatures of the field are—that they deal with
him precisely as with the beasts, sweeping down upon him with resistless force, falling
upon him at unexpected moments, and tossing him about with as much indifference
as they do them. 2. Vhe assertion, however, must be qualified. It follows not from
the above concessions that man is as helpless before unforeseen occurrences as the
beasts are. Not only can he to some extent by foresight anticipate their coming, which
the lower creatures cannot do, but, unlike them also, he can protect himself against
them when they have come. To man belongs a power not (consciously at least)
possessed by the animals, of not merely accommodating himself to circumstances—a
capability they to some extent share with him—but of rising above circumstances and
compelling them to bend to him. If to this be added that if time and chance happen
to man as to the beasts he knows it, which they do not, and can extract good from it,
which they cannot, it will once more appear that ground exists for disputing the
degrading proposition that man hath no pre-eminence over the beasts.

Il]. Boru ALIKE ARE THE PREY OF DEATH. “ As the one dieth, so dieth the other ;
yea, they have all one breath ” (ver. 19). 1. Seeming correspondences between the two
tn the matter of dying. (1) In both death means the extinction of physical life and
the dissolution of the material frame. (2) In both the mode of dying is frequently the
same. (3) The same grave receives both when the vital spark has departed. (4) The
only difference between the two is that man commonly gets a coffin and a funeral, a
mausoleum anc a monument, whereas the beast gets none of these luxuries. 2. Obvious
discrepancies between the two in respect of dying. (1) Man living knows that he must
die (ch. ix. 5), which the beast does not. (2) Man has the choice and power, if he
accepts the provisions of grace, of meeting death without a fear. (8) Even if he does


on. m1. 1—22.] ECCLESIASTES OR, THE PREACEER, 78


not, there is something nobler in the spectacle of a man going forth with eyes open to
the dread conflict with the king of terrors, than in that of a brute ex)iring in uncon-
scious stujidity. (4) If one thinks of him dying, as he often does die, like a Christian,
it ee seen more absurd than ever to assert that a man hath no pre-eminence over
a beast.

IV. Boru, DYING, PASS BEYOND THE SPHERE OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. “ Who knoweth
the spirit of man, whether it goeth upward? and the spirit of the beast, whether it
goeth downward to the earth?” (ver. 21). 1. Admitted so far as scientific knowledge
ts concerned. The agnostics of the Preacher’s day, like those of modern times, could
not say what became of a man’s spirit, if he had one (of which they were not sure),
after it had escaped from his body, any more than they could tell where a beast’s—
and the beast was as likely to have a spirit as the man—went to after its carcase sank
into the soil, Whether it was the man’s that went upward and the beast’s downward,
or vice versd, lay outside their ken. Their scientific apparatus did not enable them
to report, as the scientific apparatus of the nineteenth century does not enable it to
report, upon the post-mundane career of either beast or man; and so they assumed the
position from which the agnostics of to-day have not departed, that it is all one with
the man and the beast when the grave hides them, and that a man hath no pre-
eminence over a beast. 2. Denied so far as religious knowledge is concerned. Refusing —
to hold that the anatomist’s scalpel, or chemist’s retort, or astronomer’s telescope, or
analyst’s microscope are the ultimate tests of truth, and that nothing is to be credited
which cannot be detected by one or other of these instruments, we are not so hopelessly
in the dark about man’s spirit when it leaves its earthly tabernacle as are agnostics
whether ancient or modern. On the high testimony of this Preacher (ch. xii. 7), on
the higher witness of Paul (2 Cor. v. 1; Phil. i. 23), and on the highest evidence
attainable on the subject (2 ‘lim. i. 10), we know that when the spirit of a child of
God forsakes the body it does not disperse into thin air, but passes up into the Father's
hand (Luke xxiii. 46), and that when a good man disappears from earth he forthwith
appears in heaven (Luke xxiii, 43; Phil. i. 23), amid the spirits of the just made perfect
(Heb. xii. 23); so that another time we decline to endorse the sentiment that map
hath no pre-eminence over a beast.

V. Boru ALIKE, PASSING FROM THE EARTH, NEVER MORE RETURN. “ Who shall bring
him back to see that which shall be after him?” (ver. 29). Accepting this as the
correct rendering of the words (for other interpretations consult the Exposition): 1. B
may be granted that no human power can recall man from the grave any more than it
can reanimate the beast; that the realm beyond the tomb, so far as the senses are con-
cerned, is “an undiscovered country, from whose bourne no traveller returns.” 2. It és
contended that nevertheless there is a power which can and ultimately will despoil the
grave of its human victims, and that man will eventually come back to dwell, if not
upon the old soil and beneath the old sky, at least beneath a new heavens and upon o
new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness.

Lessons. 1. The dignity of man. 2. The solemnity of life, 8. The certainty of
death.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—8.—The manifold interests and occupations of life. There is nothing so
interesting to man as human life. The material creation enages the attention and
absorbs the inquiring activities of the student of physical science; but unless it is
regarded as the expression of the Divine ideas, the vehicle of thought and purpose, its
interest is limited and cold. But what men are and think and do is a matter of
concern to every observant and reflecting mind, The ordinary observer contemplates
human life with curiosity; the politician, with interested motives; the historian,
hoping to find the key to the actions of nations and kings and statesmen; the poet,
with the aim of finding material and inspiration for his verse; and the religious
thinker, that he may trace the operation of God’s providence, of Divine wisdom and
love. He who looks below the surface will not fail to find, in the events and incidents
ef human existence, the tokens of the appointments and dispositions of an all-wise


74 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fou. mr. 1—22.


Ruler of the world. The manifold interests of our life are not regulated by chance;
for “to everything there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven.”

I. Lirn’s PERIODS (ITS BEGINNING AND CLOSE) ARE APPOINTED BY Gop. The sacred-
ness of birth and death are brought before us, as we are assured that “there is a time
to be born, and a time to die.” The believer in God cannot doubt that the Divine
Omniscience observes, as the Divine Omnipotence virtually effects, the introduction
into this world, and the removal from it, of every human being. Men are born, to
show that God will use his own instruments for carrying on the manifold work of the
world; they die, to show that he is limited by no human agencies. They are born just
when they are wanted, and they die just when it is well that their places should be
taken by their successors. ‘Man is immortal till his work is done.”

TI. Lirn’s OCCUPATIONS ARE DIVINELY ORDERED. ‘The reader of this passage is
forcibly reminded of the substantial identity of man’s life in the differcnt ages of the
world Thousands of years have passed since these words were penned, yet to how
large an extent does this description apply to human existence in our own day!
Organic activities, industrial avocations, social services, are common to every age of
man’s history. If men withdraw themselves from practical work, and from the duties
of the family and the state, without sufficient justification, they are violating the
ordinances of the Creator. He has given to every man a place to fill, a work to do, a
service of helpfulness to render to his fellow-creatures,

III. THz EMOTIONS PROPER TO HUMAN LIFE ARE OF DIVINE APPOINTMENT. These
are natural to man. The mere feelings of pleasure and pain, the mere impulses of
desire and aversion, man shares with brutes. But those emotions which are man’s
glory and man’s shame are both special to him, and have a great share in giving
character to his moral life. Some, like envy, are altogether bad; some, like hatred,
are bad or good according as they are directed; some, like love, are always good. The
Preacher of Jerusalem refers to joy and sorrow, when he speaks of “a time to laugh,
and a time to weep;” to love and hate, for both of which he declares there is occasion
in our human existence. ‘There has been no change in these human experiences with
the lapse of time; they are permanent factors in our life. Used aright, they become
means of moral development, and aid in forming a noble and pious character.

TV. THE OPERATION OF DIVINE PROVIDENCE IS APPARENT IN THE VARIED FORTUNES
oF HUMANITY. ‘This passage tells of accumulation and consequent prosperity, of loss
and consequent adversity. The mutability of human affairs, the disparities of the
human lot, were as remarkable and as perplexing in the days of the Hebrew sage as in
our own, And they were regarded by him, as by rational and religious observers in
our own time, as instances of the working of physical and social laws imposed by the
Author of nature himself. In the exercise of divinely entrusted powers, men gather
together possessions and disperse them abroad. The rich and the poor exist side by
side; and the wealthy are every day impoverished, whilst the indigent are raised to
opulence. These are the lights and shades upon the landscape of life, the shifting
scenes in life’s unfolding drama, Variety and change are evidently parts of the Divine
intention, and are never absent from the world of our humanity.

V. THE MORAL AND SPIRITUAL ISSUES OF HUMAN LIFE BEAR MARKS oF DIVINE
WISDOM AND ORDER. It cannot be the case that all the phases and processes of our
human existence are to be apprehended simply in themselves, as if they contained
their own meaning, and had no ulterior significance. Life is not a kaleidoscope, but
a picture; not the promiscuous sounds heard when the instrumentalists are “tuning
up,” but an oratorio; not a chronicle, but a history. There isa unity and an aim in
Fife; but this is not merely artistic, it is moral. We do not work and rest, enjoy and
suffer, hope and fear, with no purpose to be achieved by the experiences through which
we pass. He who has appointed “a season, and a time for every purpose under the
heaven,” designs that we should, by toil and endurance, by fellowship and solitude by
gain and loss, make progress in the course of moral and spiritual discipline, should
grow in the favour and in the likeness of God himself.—T. :


Vers. 9—13.—The mystery and the meaning of life. The author of Ecclesi
too wise to take what we call a one-sided view of human life. No doahineonte
times and moods in which this human existence seems te us to be all made up of


ou, 11, 1—22. | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. f°)


a ey


either toil or endurance, delight or disappointment. But in the hour of sober reflection
we are constrained to admit that the pattern of the web of life is composed of many
and diverse colours. Our faculties and capacities are many, our experiences are varied,
for the appeals made to us by our environment change from day to day, from hour to
hour. “One man in his time plays many parts.”

I. IN LIFE THERE IS MYSTERY TO soLVE. The works and the ways of God are too
great for our feeble, finite nature to comprehend. We may learn much, and yet may
leave much unlearned and probably unlearnable, at all events in the conditions of this
present state of being. 1. There are speculative difficulties regarding the order and
constitution of things, which the thoughtful man cannot avoid inquiring into, which
yet often baffle and sometimes distress him. “Man cannot find out the work that God
hath done from the beginning even to the end.” 2. There are practical difficulties
which every man has to encounter in the conduct of life, fraught as it is with dis-
appointment and sorrow. “ What profit hath he that worketl in that wherein he
laboureth ?”

TI, IN LIFE THERE Is BEAUTY To ADMIRE. The mind that is not absorbed in pro-
viding for material wants can scarcely fail to be open to the adaptations and the
manifold charms of nature. The language of creation is as harmonious music, which
is soothing or inspiring to the ear of the soul. What a revelation is here of the very
nature and benevolent purposes of the Almighty Maker! “He hath made everything
beautiful in its time.” And beauty needs the asthctic faculty in order to its apprecia-
tion and enjoyment. The development of this faculty in advanced states of civilization
is familiar to every student of human nature. Standards of beauty vary; but the true
standard is that which is offered by the works of God, who “hath made everything
beautiful in its time.” here is a beauty special to every season of the year, to every
hour of the day, to every state of the atmosphere; there is a beauty in every several
kind of landscape, a beauty of the sea, a beauty of the heavens; there is a beauty of
childhood, another beauty of youth, of healthful manhood and radiant womanhood,
and even a certain beauty peculiar to age. The pious observer of the works of God,
who rids himself of conventional and traditional prejudices, will nvt fail to recognize
the justice of this remarkable assertion of the Hebrew sage.

III. IN LIFE THERE IS WORK TO Do. Labour and travail are very frequently
mentioned in this book, whose author was evidently deeply impressed by the
corresponding facts—first, that God is the almighty Worker in the universe; and,
secondly, that man is made by the Creator like unto himself, in that he is called upon
by his nature and his circumstances to effort and to toil. Forms of labour vary, aud
the progress of applied science in our own time seems to relieve the toiler of sume of
the severer, more exhausting kinds of bodily effort. But it must ever remain true that
the human frame was not intended for indolence; that work is a condition of welfare,
a means of moral discipline and development. It is a factor that cannot be left out of
human life; the Christian is bound, like his Master, to finish the work which the
Father has given him to do.

IV. In LIFE THERE Is Goop To PARTICIPATE. There is no asceticism in the teaching
of this Book of Ecclesiastes. The writer was one who had no doubt that man was
constituted to enjoy. He speaks of eating and drinking as not merely necessary in
order to maintain life, but as affording gratification. He dwells appreciatingly upon
the happiness of married life. He even commends mirth and festivity. In all these
he shows himself superior to the pettiness which carps at the pleasures connected with
this earthly existence, and which tries to pass for sanctity. O1 course, there are lawful
aud unlawful gratifications; there is a measure of indulgence which ought not to be
exceeded. But if Divine intention is traceable in the constitution and condition of
man, he was made to partake with graiitude of the bounties of God’s providence.

V. ALL THE PROVISIONS WHICH DIVINE WISDOM ATTACHES TO HUMAN LIFE ARE TO
BE ACCEPTED WITH GRATITUDE AND USED WITH FAITHFULNESS, AND WITH A CONSTANT
SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY. In receiving and enjoying every gift, the devout mind will
exclaim, “It is the gift of God.” In taking advantage of every opportunity, the
Christian will bear in mind that wisdom and gooduess arrange human life so that it
shall afford repeated occasion for fidelity and diligence, In his daily work he will
make it his aim to “serve the Lord Christ,”


¥6 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fom. mr. 1—22.


—————————————————————————— SS


Appiioation. 1. There is much in the provisions and conditions of our earthly life
which baffles our endeavours to understand it; and when perplexed by mystery, we
are summoned to submit with all humility and patience to the limitations of our
intellect, and to rest assured that God’s wisdom will, in the end, be made apparent to
all. 2. There is a practical life to be lived, even when speculative difficulties are
insurmountable; and it is in the conscientious fulfilment of daily duty, and the
moderate use of ordinary enjoyments, that as Christians we may adorn the doctrine
of God our Saviour.—T.


Ver. 14.—The purposes of Providence. Different minds, observing and considering
the same facts, are often very differently affected by them. The measure of previous
experience and culture, the natural disposition, the tone and temper with which men
address themselves to what is before them,—all affect the conclusion at which they
arrive. The conviction produced in the mind of the Preacher of Jerusalem is certainly
deserving of attention ; he saw the hand of God in nature and in life, where some see
only chance or fate. To see God’s hand, to admire his wisdom, to appreciate his
love, in our human life,—this is an evidence of sincere and intelligent piety.

I. Gop’s worK I8 PERFECT AND UNALTERABLE. ‘“ Nothing can be put to it, nor
anything taken from it.” This cannot be said to be the general conviction; on the
contrary, men are always finding fault with the constitution of things. If they had
been consulted in the creation of the universe, and in the management of human
affairs, all would have been far better than it is! Now, all depends upon the end in
view. The scientific man would make an optical instrument which should serve as
both microscope and telescope—a far more marvellous construction than the eye. The
pleasure-seeker would eliminate pain and sorrow from human life, and would make it
one prolonged rapture of enjoyment. But the Creator had no intention of making an
instrument which should supersede human inventions; his aim was the production
of a working, everyday, useful organ of vision. The Lord of all never aimed at
making life one long series of gratification; he designed life to be a moral discipline,
in which suffering, weakness, and distress fulfil their own service of ministering to
man’s highest welfare. For the purposes intended, God’s work needs no apology and
admits of no improvement.

TI. Gop’s worK 18 ETERNAL. All men’s works are both unstable and transitory.
Fresh ends are ever being approved and sought by fresh means. The laws of nature
know no change; the principles of moral government are the same from age to age.
When we learn to distrust our own fickleness, and to weary of human uncertainty and
mutability, then we fall back upon the unchanging counsels of him who is from
everlasting to everlasting.

III. Gop’s woRk HAS A PURPOSE WITH REFERENCE TO MAN. What God has done in
this world he has done for the benefit of his spiritual family. Everything that is
may be regarded as the vehicle of communication between the creating and the
created mind. The intention of God is “that men should fear before him,” ¢.e.
venerate and glorify him. Our human probation and education as moral and
sccountable beings is his aim. Hence the obligation on our part to observe, inquire,
end consider, to reverence, serve, and obey, and thus consciously and voluntarily secure
the ends for which the Creator designed and fashioned us.—T,


Vers. 16, 17.—Man’s unrighteousness contrasted with God’s righteousness, Every
observant, judicial, and sensitive mind shares this experience. Human society, civil
relations, cannot be contemplated without much of disapproval, disappointment, and
distress, And who, when so affected by the spectacle which this world presents, can
do other than raise his thoughts to that Being, to those relationships that are
characterized by a moral excellence which corresponds to our highest ideal, our purest
aspirations ?

I, THE PREVALENCE OF WICKEDNESS UPON EARTH AND AMONG MEN. The observation
of the wise man was naturally directed to the state of society in his own times and in hig
own and of the neighbouring countries. Local and temporal peculiarities do not, how-
ever, destroy the applicability of the principle to human life generally. Wickedness was
and is discernible wherever man is found. Unconscious nature obeys physical laws,


ou. mm. 1—22.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 7
—_—_——— SSSR


brute nature obeys automatic and instinctive impulse. But man is a member of a
rational and spiritual system, whose principles he often violates in the pursuit of lower
ends. In the earliest ages “the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and every
imagination of the thoughts of his heart. was only evil continually.” A remedial
system has checked and to some extent counteracted these evil tendencies; yet to how
large an extent is the same reflection just !

II, WICKEDNESS, IN THE FORM OF INJUSTICE, PREVAILS EVEN WHERE JUSTICE SHOULD
BE IMPARTIALLY ADMINISTERED. It is well known that in every age complaints have
been made of the venality of Eastern magistrates. In the Old Testament references
are frequent to the “ gifts,” the bribes, by which suitors sought to obtain decisions in
their favour. Corruption here is worse than elsewhere, for it is discouraging to
uprightness, and lowers the tone of public morals. We may be grateful that, in our
own land and in our own day, such corruption is unknown—that our judges are above
even temptation to bribery. But the fact has to be faced that injustice, whether
from motives of malice or from motives of avarice, has existed widely in human
communities.

II], THE UNIVERSAL JUDGMENT OF A RIGHTEOUS Gop. The atheist has no refuge
from such observations and reflections as those recorded in ver. 16. But the godly
man turns from earth to heaven, and rests in the conviction that there is a Divine and
righteous Judge, to whose tribunal all men must come, and by whose just decisions
every destiny must be decided. 1. All characters, the righteous and the wicked alike,
will be judged by the Lord of all. Has the unjust escaped the penalty due from a
human tribunal? He shall not escape the righteous judgment of God. Has the
innocent been unjustly sentenced by an earthly and perhaps corrupt judge? There
is for him a court of appeal, and his righteousness shall shine as the noonday. 2. All
kinds of works shall meet with retribution; not only the acts of private life, but alee
acts of a judicial and governmental kind. The unjust judge shall meet with his
recoropense, and the wronged and persecuted shall not be unavenged.—T.


Vers. 18—21.— The common destiny of death. The double nature of man has been
recognized by every student of human nature. The sensationalist and materialist lays
stress upon the physical side of our humanity, and endeavours to show that the
intellect and the moral sentiments are the outgrowth of the bodily life, the nervous
structure and its susceptibilities and its powers of movement. But such efforts fail to
convince alike the unsophisticated and the philosophic. It is generally admitted
that it would be more reasonable to resolve the physical into the psychical than the
psychical into the physical. ‘The author of Ecclesiastes was alive to the animal side of
man’s nature; and if some only of his expressions were considered, he might be claimed
as a supporter of the baser philosophy. But he himself supplies the counteractive.
The attentive reader of the book is convinced that the author traced the human spirit
to its Divine original, and looked forward to its immortality.

I. THE COMMUNITY OF MEN WITH BEASTS IN THE ANIMAL NATURE AND LIFE. If we
look upon one side of our humanity, it appears that we are to be reckoned among the
brutes that perish. The similarity is obvious in: 1. The corporcal, fleshly constitution
with which man and brute are alike endowed. 2. The brevity of the earthly life
appointed for both without distinction. 8. The resolution of the body into dust.

II. THE SUPERIORITY OF MEN OVER BEASTS IN THE POSSESSION OF A SPIRITUAL AND
IMPEBISHABLE NATURE AND LiFe. It is difficult for us to treat this subject without
bringing to bear upon it the knowledge which we have derived from the fuller and
more glorious revelation of the new covenant. “Christ has abolished death, and has
- brought. life and immortality to light by the gospel.” We cannot possibly think of
such themes without taking to their consideration the convictions and the hopes which
we have derived from the incarnate Son of God. Nor can we forget the sublime
speculations of philosophers of both ancient and modern times. 1. In his spiritual
nature man is akin to God. Physical life the Creator imparted to the animal
organisms with which the world was peopled. But a life of quite another order was
conferred upon man, who participates in the Divine reason, who is able to think the
thoughts of God himself, and who has intuitions of moral goodness of which the
brute creation is for ever incapable. Instead of man’s mind being a of


78 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. nm. 1—22,


organized matter, as a base sensationalism and empiricism is wont to affirm, the truth
is that it is only as an expression and vehicle of thought, of reason, that matter has
a dependent existence. 2. In his consequent immortality man is distinguished from
the inferior animals. The life possessed by these latter is a life of sensation and of
movement; the organism is resolved into its constituents, and there is no reason to
believe that the sensation and movement are perpetuated. But “the spirit of man
goeth upward;” it has used its instrument, the body, and the time comes—appointed
by God’s inscrutable providence—when the connection, local and temporary, which
the spirit has maintained with earth, is sundered. In what other scenes and pursuits
the conscious being is continued, we cannot tell. But there is not the slightest reason
for conceiving the spiritual life to be dependent upon the organism which it uses as its
instrument. ‘The spiritual life is the life of God; and the life of God is perishable.


“The sun is but a spark of fire,
A transient meteor in the sky;
The soul, immortal as its Sire,
never die.” T,


Ver. 22.—The earthly portion. When a man is, perhaps suddenly, awakened to a
sense of the transitoriness of life and the vanity of human pursuits, what more natural
than that, under the influence of novel conceptions and convictions, he should rush
from a career of self-indulgence into the opposite extreme? Life is brief: why concern
one’s self with its affairs? Sense-experiences are changeable and perishable: why not
neglect and despise them? Earth will soon vanish: why endeavour to accommodate
ourselves to its conditions? But subsequent reflection convinces us that such practical
inferences are unjust. Because this earth and this life are not everything, it does not
follow that they are nothing. Because they cannot satisfy us, it does not follow that
we should not use them.

I. If 18 POSSIBLE TO LIMIT OUR VIEW OF THIS EARTHLY LIFE UNTIL IT LOSES IT2
INTEREST FOR Us. 1. Man’s works, to the observant and reflecting mind, are
perishable and poor, 2. Man’s joys are often both superficial and transitory. 3. The
future of human existence and progress upon earth is utterly uncertain, and, if it could
be foreseen, would probably occasion bitter disappointment.

II. Ir 18 UNWISE AND UNSATISFACTORY 80 TO LIMIT OUR VIEW OF LIFE. There
is true wisdom in the wise man’s, declaration, “There is nothing better than that a
man should rejoice in his works; for that is his portion.” The epicurean is wrong who
makes pleasure his one aim. ‘The cynic is wrong who despises plcasure as something
beneath the dignity of his nature. Neither work nor enjoyment is the whole of life;
for life is not to be understood save in relation to spiritual and disciplinary purposes.
Man has for a season a bodily nature; let him use that nature with discretion, and it
may prove organic to his moral welfare. Man is for a season stationed upon earth;
let him fulfil earth’s duties, and taste earth’s delights. Earthly experience may be a
stage towards heavenly service and bliss.—T.


Vers. 1—10.— Opportunity ; opportuneness; ordination. This view of life
embraces—

I, OproRTUNITY, OR THE WISDOM OF WAITING, Everything comes in its turn; if
we weep to-day, we shall laugh to-morrow; if we have to be silent for the present ae
shall lave the opportunity of speech further on; if we must strive now, the time of peace
will return, Human life is neither unshadowed brightness nor unbroken cloom
‘Shadow and shine is life... flower and thorn.” Let no man be seriously dis-
couraged, much less hopelessly disheartened: what he is now suffering from will not
always remain; it will pass and give place to that which is better. Let us only
patiently wait our time, and our turn will come. ‘‘ Weeping may endure for a night
but joy cometh in the morning ”—at any rate, and at the furthest, in the morning of
eternity. Only let us wait in patience and in prayerful hope, doing all that we can de
in the paths of duty and of service, and the hour of opportunity will arrive,


*.. , with succeeding turns God tempers all,
That men may hope to rise, yet fear to fall.”


J


on. m1. 1—22.] ECCLESIAS7ES; OR, THE PREACHER. 79


II. Orrorruneness. The words of the text may suggest to us, though the
thought may not have been in the writer’s mind, that some things are good or otlicr-
wise according to their timeliness, There is a time to speak in the way of rehuking,
or of jesting, or of contending, and, when well-timed, such words may be right and
wise in a very high degree; but, if ill-timed, they would be wrong and fooli-h, and
much to be condemned. The same thought is applicable to the demonstration of
friendliness, or of any strong emotion (vers. 5, 7); to the exercise of severity or of
leniency (ver. 3); to the manifestation of sorrow or of joy (ver. 4); to the action of
economy or of gencrosity (ver. 6). Hard-and-fast rules will not cover the infinite
particulars of human life. Whether we shall act or be passive, whether we shall speak
or be silent, what shall be our demeanour and what the tone we shall take,—this mnst
depend upon particular circumstances and a number of new combinations; and every
man must judge for himself, and must remember that there is great virtue in
opportunencss,

III, Onpination. There is a season, an “ appointed time for every undertaking ”
(Ocx). © What profit hath he that worketh,” when all this “travail” with which “the
sons of men ” are exercised results in such fixed and inevitable changes? That is the
spirit of the moralist here. We reply: 1. That it is indeed true that much is already
appointed for us. We have no power, or but little, over the seasons and the elements
of nature, and not very much (individually) over the institutions and customs of the
land in which we live; we are compelled to conform our behaviour to forces which are
superior to our own. 2. But there is a very large remainder of freedom. Within the
lines that are laid down by the ordination of Heaven or the “ powers that be” on the
earth, there is ample scope for free, wise, life-giving choice of action. We are free to
choose our own conduct, to form our own character, to determine the complexion and
aspect of our life in the sight of God, to decide upon our destiny.—C,


Ver. 11.—“ This unintelligible world.” How sball we solve all those great problems
which continually confront us, which baffle and bewilder us, which sometimes drive
us to the very verge of distraction or even of unbelief? The solution is partly found in—

I, A WIDE VIEW OF THE WORTH OF PRESENT THINGS. If we look long and far, we
shall see that, though many things have an ugly aspect at first sight, God “‘has made
everything beautiful in its time.’ The light and warmth of summer are good to see
and feel; but is not the cold of winter invigorating ? and what is more beautiful to the
sight than the untrodden snow? The returning life of spring is welcome to all hearts ;
but are not the brilliant hues of autumn fascinating to every eye? Youth is full of
ardour, and manhood of strength ; but declining years possess much richness of gathered
wisdom, and there is a dignity, a calm, a reverence, in age which is all its own. There
is a joy in battle as well as a pleasantness in peace, Wealth has its treasures; but
poverty has little to lose, and therefore little cause for anxiety and trouble. Luxury
brings many comforts, but hardness gives health ani strength. Each climate upon the
earth, every condition in life, the various dispositions and temperaments of the human
soul,—these have their own particular advantage and compensation. Look on the other
side, and you will see something that will please, if it does not satisfy.

Tl. THE HELP WE GAIN FROM THE GREAT ELEMENT OF FUTURITY. “ Also he hath set
eternity ” (marginal reading, Revised Version) “in their heart.” We are made to look
far beyond the boundary of the visible and the present. The idea of ‘‘ the eternal
may help us in two ways. 1. That we are created for the unscen and the eternal
accounts for the fact that nothing which is earthly and sensible will satisfy our souls.
Nothing of that order owght to do so; and it would put the seal upon our degradation if
it did so. Our unsatisfiable spirit is the signature of our manhooc and the prophecy
of our immortality. 2. The inclusion of the future in our reasoning makes all the
difference to our thought. Admit only the passing time, this brief and uncertain life,
and much that happens is inexplicable and distressing indeed; but include the future,
add “eternity ” to the account, and the “crooked is made straight,” the perplexity is
gone. But, even with this aid, there is— ;

Ill. THe MYSTERY WHIOH REMAINS, AND WIii REMAIN. “ No man can find out,” ete,
We do well to remember that what we see is only a very small part indeed of the
whole—only a page of the great volume, only’a scene im the great drama, only a field


80 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER, [om. mm. 1—22,


re


of the large landscape—and we may well be silenced, ifnot convinced. But evea that does
not cover everything. We need to remember that we are human, and not Divine; that
we, who are God’s very little children, cannot hope to understand all that is in the
mind of our heavenly Father—cannot expect to fathom his holy purpose, to read his
unfathomable thoughts. We see enough of Divine wisdom, holiness, and love to
believe that, when our understanding is enlarged and our vision cleared, we shall find
that “all the paths of the Lord were mercy and truth”—even those which most
troubled and bewildered us when we dwelt upon the earth.—C.


Vers. 12, 18, 22 (with ch. ii. 24).—he conclusion of folly or the faith of the wise?
In what catalogue shall we place these words of the text? On whose lips are they to
be found? Are they—

J, THE REFUGE OF THE SCEPTIO? They may be such. The epicure who has lost his
faith in God says, “ Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die.” There is no sacred-
ness in the present, and no solid hope for the future. What is the use of aiming at a
high ideal? Why waste breath and strength on duty, on aspiration, on piety? Why
attempt to rise to the pursuit of the eternal and the Divine? Better lose ourselves in
that which is at hand, in that which we can grasp as a present certainty. The best
thing, the only certain good, is to eat and drink and to labour; is to minister to our
senses, and to work upon the material which is visible to our eye and responsive to our
touch. So speaks the sceptic; this is his miserable conclusion ; thus he owns himself
defeated and (we may say) dishonoured. For what is human life worth when the
element of sacredness is expunged, when piety and hope are left out of it? It is no
wonder that the ages of unbelief have been the times when men have had no regard
for other people’s dues, and very little for their own. Or shall we rather find here—

TI, AN ARTICLE OF A WISE MAN’S FAITH? It is not certain what was the mood in
which the Preacher wrote; but let us prefer to think that behind his words, actuating
and inspiring him, was a true spirit of faith in God and in Divine providence; let us
take him to mean—what we know to be true—that, in spite of all evidence to the
contrary, a wise and loyal-hearted man will hold that there is much that is worth
pursuing and possessing in the simple pleasures, in the daily duties, and in the ordinary
services which are open to us all. 1. Daily God invites us to eat and drink, to
partake of the bounties of his hand; let us appreciate his benefits with moderation
and gratitude. 2. Daily he bids us go forth to “our work and to our labour until
the evening; ” let us enter upon: it and carry it out in the spirit of conscientiousness
and fidelity toward both God and man (Col, iii. 23). 3. Daily God gives us the
means of getting good to ourselves and doing good to others; let us eagerly embrace
our opportunity, let us gladly avail ourselves of our privilege; so doing we shall make
our life peaceful, happy, worthy.

In the light that shines into our hearts from the truth of Christ we judge: 1. That
these lesser things—pleasure, activity, acquisition—are well in their way and in their
measure. ‘ Bodily exercise profiteth a little.” But: 2. That human life has possi-
bilities and obligations which immeasurably transcend these things; such, that to put
these into the front rank and to fill our life with them is a fatal error. Made subordinate
to that which is higher, they take their place and they render their service—a place
and a service not to be despised; but made primary and supreme, they are usurpers
that do untold injury, and that must be relentlessly dethroned.—O.


Vers. 14, 15.— Divine constancy and human piety. With the outer world of nature
and with our human nature and character before us, these words may somewhat sur-
prise us; it is necessary to take a preliminary view of—

I. Human action upon THe Diving. 1. There is a sense in which man has
modified the Divine action according to the Divine purpose. God has given us the
material, and he says to us, “ Work with it and upon it; mould, fashion, transform,
develop it as you will; make all possible use of it for bodily comfort, for mental
enlargement, for social enjoyment, for spiritual growth.” Man has made large use of
this his opportunity, and, with the advance of knowledge and of science, he will make
much more in the centuries to come. He cannot indeed “ put to” or “take from” the
substance with which God supplies him, but he can do much to change its form and


ou. mm. 1—22.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 81


to determine the service it shall render. 2. There is a sense in which man has tem-
porarily thwarted the Divine idea. For is not all sin, and are not all the dire conse-
quences of sin, a sad and serious departure from the purpose of the Holy One? Surely
infidelity, blasphemy, vice, cruelty, crime; surely poverty, misery, starvation, death ;—
all this is not what the heavenly Father meant for his human children when he
breathed into man’s nostrils the breath of life. But the leading idea of the text is—

Il. THe PERMANENCY oF THE Divine THouaHT. ‘This truth includes: 1. The fiwed-
ness of the Divine purpose. ‘‘ The counsel of the Lord standeth for ever, the thoughts
of his heart to all generations” (Ps. xxxiii. 11). We believe that from the beginning
God intended to work out the righteousness and the blessedness of the human race;
and whatever has come between him and the realization of his gracious end will be
cleared away. Man will one day be all that the Eternal One designed that he should
become. 2. The constancy of the Divine Law. The same great moral laws, and the
same physical laws also, which governed the action and the destiny of men in primeval
times still prevail, and will always abide. Sin has meant suffering and sorrow;
righteousness has worked out well-being and joy; diligence has been followed by
fruitfulness, and idleness by destitution ; generosity has been recompensed with love,
and selfishness with leanness of soul, etc. As it was at the beginning, so will it be
with the action of all Divine laws, even to the end. 3. The permanency of the Divine
attitude. (1) What God always felt toward sin he feels to-day; it is the thing which
he hates. In Jesus Christ, as fully and as emphatically as in the Law, his holy intoler-
ance of sin is revealed, his Divine determination to conquer and to destroy it. (2) What
God always felt toward the sinner he feels to-day—a Divine grief and an infinite
compassion ; a readiness to forgive and to restore the penitent.

Il{. Tae Divine besten. “God doeth it, that men should fear before him.” God’s
one unchanging desire is that his children should livea reverential, holy life before him.
All the manifestations of his character that he gives us are intended to lead up to and
issue in this. And surely the Divine constancy is calculated to promote this as nothing
else would. It is God’s desire and his design concerning us, because he knows (1) that
it is the only right relationship for us to sustain; and (2) that it is the one condition of
peace, purity, blessedness, life.—C.


Vers. 18—21.— Before and after Christ. ‘These words have a strange sound in our
ears; they evidently do not belong to New Testament times. They bring before us—

I. Man’s UNENLIGHTENED CONCEPTION OF HIMSELF. It is evidently possible that,
under certain conditions, men may judge themselves to be of nonobler nature than that
of “the beasts that perish.” It may be (1) bodily suffering or weakness; or (2)
untoward and disappointing circumstances; or (3) bewilderment of mind after vain
endeavours tosolve great spiritual problems; or (4) the distracted and unnatural state of
the society in which we are placed (see Cox’s ‘Quest of the Chief Good’); but, owing
to some one of many possible causes, men may be driven to take the lowest view of
human nature; so much so that they may lose all respect for themselves—may shut
the future life entirely out of view, and live in the narrow circle of the present; may
confine their ambition and aspiration to bodily enjoyment and the excitements of
present occupation; may practically own themselves to be defeated, and go blindly on,
“hoping nothing, believing nothing, and fearing nothing.” Such a melancholy con-
clusion (1) does us sad dishonour ; (2) has a demoralizing influence on character and
life; (3) yields a wretched harvest of despair and self-destruction. In most happy
contrast with this is—

Il. THE VIEW OF OUR NATURE WHIcH CHRIST HAS GIVEN US. He asks us to think
how “ much a man is better than a sheep,” and reminds us that we are “ of more value
than many sparrows.” He bids us realize that one human soul is worth more than
“the whole world,” and that there is nothing so costly that it will represent its value,
He reveals to us the supreme and most blessed fact that each human spiritis the object
of Divine solicitude, and may find a home in the Father’s heart of love at once, and in
his nearer presence soon. He assures us that there is a glorious future before every
man that becomes the subject of his kingdom, and serves faithfully to the end, Under
his teaching, instead of seeing that “they themselves are beasts,” his disciples find
themselves “children of their Father who is in heaven,” “ kings and priests unto God,”

EOCLESIASTRS, @


82 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fon. mm. 1—22,


“heirs of eternal life.” Coming after Christ, and learning of him, we see that we are
capable of a noble heritage now, and move toward a still nobler estate a little further


on.—C.


Vers. 1—8.—Opportuneness. Our author makes a fresh start. He drops the auto-
biographical style of the first two chapters, and casts his thoughts inte the form of
aphorisms, based not merely upon the reminiscences of his own life, but upon the experi-
ence of all men. He gives a long list of the events, actions, emotions, and feelings
which go to make up human life, and asserts of them that they are governed by fixed
laws above our knowledge, out of our control. The time of our entrance into the world,
the condition of life in which we are placed, are determined for us by a higher will than
our own, and the same sovereign power fixes the moment of our departure from life ; and
in like manner all that is done, enjoyed, and suffered between birth and death is governed
by forces which we cannot bend or mould, or even fully understand. That there isa fixed
order in the events of life is, to a certain extent, an instinctive belief which we all hold.
The thought of an untimely birth or of an untimely death shocks us as something con-
trary to our sense of that which is fit ani becoming, and those crimes by which either
is caused are generally recarded as specially repulsive. Yet there is an appointed season
for the other incidents of life, though less clearly manifest tous. Our wisdom lies, not
in mere acquiescence in the events of life, but in knowing our duty for the time. The
circumstances in which we are placed are so fluctuating, and the conditions in the midst
of which we find ourselves are so varying, that a large space is left for us to exercise our
discretion, to discern that which is opportune, and to do the right thing at the right
time. The first class of events alluded to, the time of birth and the time of death, is
that of those which are involuntary; they are events with which there can be no
interference without the guilt of gross and exceptional wickedness. ‘The actions and
emotions that follow are voluntary, they are within our power, though the circumstances
that cal! them forth at a precise time are not. The relations of life which are determined
for us by a higher power give us the opportunity for playing our part, and we either
succeed or fail according as we take advantage of the time or neglect it. The catalogue
given of the events, actions, and emotions which make up life seems to be drawn up with-
out any logical order; the various items are apparently taken capriciously as examples
of those things that occupy men’s time and thoughts, and at first sight the teaching
of our author does not seem to be of a distinctively spiritual character, Toasuperficial
reader it might appear as if we had not in it much more than the commonplace prudence
to be found in the maxims and proverbs current in every country: “Take time by the
forelock ;” “ He that will not when he may, when he would he shall have nay;” “Time
and tide wait for no man,” etc. But we are taught by Christ himself that knowing
how to act opportunely is a large part of that wisdom which is needed for onr salvation.
He himself came to earth in the “fulness of time” (Gal. iv. 4), when the Jewish people
and the nations of the world were prepared by Divine discipline for his teaching and work
(Acts xvii. 30, 81; Luke ii. 30,31). The purpose of the mission of John the Baptist, caleu-
lated as it was to lead men to godly sorrow for sin, was in harmony with the austerity of
his life and the sternuess of his exhortations. It was a time to mourn (Matt. xi. 18). The
purpose of Christ’s own mission was to reconcile the world to God and to manifest the
Father to men, so that joy was becoming in his disciples (Mark ii. 18—20). He taught
that there was a time to lose, when all possessions that would alienate the heart from
him should be parted with (Mark x. 21, 23); and that there would be a time of gain,
when in heaven the accumulated treasures would become an abiding possession (Matt.
vi. 19, 20). ‘That which the Preacher insists on is the thought that the circumstances
and events of life form part of a Divine order, are not things that come at random, and
that wisdom, and therefore such a measure of happiness as is attainable, lies in adapting
ourselves to the order, and accepting the guidance of events in great things and smail,
while shame and confusion come from resisting it.” But such teaching is applicable, as
we have seen, to the conduct of our spiritual as well as of our secular concerns. The
fact that there are great changes through which we must pass in order to be duly pre-
pared for the heavenly state, that we may have to forfeit the temporal to secure the
eternal, that the new life has new duties for the discernment and fulfilment of which all
our powers and faculties need to be called into full exercise—should make us earnestly


on, 111, 1—22.] EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 83


et


desire to be filled with this wisdom that prompts to opportune action. “If any of you
lack wisdom,” says St, James, ‘let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him” (i. 5).—J. W.


Vers. 9—11.—Desiderium eternitatis. The thought of there being a fixed order in
the events of life, of laws governing the world which man cannot fully understand or
control, brings with it no comfort to the mind of this Jewish philosopher. It rather, in
his view, increases the difficulty of playing one’s part successfully. Who can be sure
that he has hit upon the right course to follow, the opportune time at which to act?
Do not “the fixed phenomena” and “iron laws of life” render human effort fruitless
and disappointing? Another conclusion is drawn from the same facts by a higher
Teacher. We cannot by taking thought alter the conditions of our lives, and
should, therefore, Christ has taught us, place our trust in our heavenly Father,
who governs all things, and whose love for the creatures he has made is seen in his
feeding the birds and clothing with beauty the flowers of the field (Matt. vi. 25—34).
The anxiety which the thought of human weakness in the presence of the immutable
laws of nature excites is charmed away by the consolatory teaching of Jesus. But no
solution is given of the difficulties that occasioned it. These will always exist as
they spring from the limitations of our nature. We are finite creatures, and God is
infinite. We endure but for a few years; he is from everlasting to everlasting. Our
apprehension of these facts, of infinitude and eternity, prevents our being satisfied with
that which is finite and temporal. “‘God has set eternity” (vide Revised Version margin)
“in our hearts.” Though we are limited by time, we are related to eternity. “ That which
is transient yields us no support ; it carries us on like a rushing stream, and constrains
us to save ourselves by laying hold on eternity ” (Delitzsch). Wecannot rest satisfied
with fragmentary knowledge, but strive to pass on from it to the great worlds of truth
yet undiscovered and unknown; we would see the whole of God’s work from beginning
to end (ver. 1), and find ourselves precluded from accomplishing our desire, From
Solomon’s point of view, in which the possibility or certainty of a future life is not taken
into account, this desideriwm eternitatis is only another of the illusions by which the
soul of man is vexed. But we should contradict our better knowledge, and ungratefully
neglect the Divine aids to faith which have been given us in the fuller revelation of the
New Testament, if we were to cherish the same opinion. Dissatisfaction with the finite
and the temporal is not a morbid feeling in those who believe that they have an
immortal nature, and that they are yet to come into “ an inheritance incorruptible, and
undefiled, and that fadeth not away ” (1 Pet. i. 4).—J. W.


Vers. 12, 13.—Another condition of pure happiness. In these words we have a
repetition of the conclusion already announced (ch. ii. 24) as to the method by which
some measure of happiness can be secured by man, but there is a very important
addition made to the former declaration. Our author is referring to temporal things,
and tells the secret by which the happiness they may procure for us is to be won. It
consists of two particulars: (1) a cheerful enjoyment of the gifts of God, and (2) a
benevolent use of them. This latter is the addition to which I have referred. It is a
distinct advance upon the previous utterance, as it introduces the idea of an unselfish
use of the gifts which God has bestowed upon us—an employment of them for the benefit
of others less fortunately circumstanced than ourselves. ‘‘ Over and above the life of
honest labour and simple joys which had been recognized as good before, the seeker has
learnt that ‘doing good’ is in some sense the best way of getting good” (Plumptre).
It may be that beneficence is only a part of what is meant by “doing good,” but in the
connection in which the phrase is here employed it must be a large part, because it
evidently suggests something more as desirable than a selfish enjoyment of the good
things of life. This twofold duty of accepting with gratitude the gifts of God and of
applying them to good uses was prescribed by the Law of Moses (Deut. xxvi. 1—14);
and, to a truly pious mind, the one part of the duty will suggest the other. The thought
that God in his bounty has enriched us, who are unworthy of the least of all his mercies,
will lead us to be compassionate to those who are in want, and we shall find in relieving
their necessities the purest and most exquisite of all joys. We shall in this way
discover for ourselves the truth of that saying of our Lord’s, “It is more blessed to give


84 EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (om. mo. 1—22.


than to receive” (Acts xx. 35). While those who selfishly keep all they have for
themselves find that, however their goods increase, their satisfaction in them cannot be
increased—nay, rather that it rapidly diminishes. Hence it is that the apostle counsels
the rich “to do good, to be rich in gcod works, to be ready to distribute, willing to
communicate” (1 Tim. vi. 17—19). The general teaching of the Scriptures, therefore,
is in harmony with the results of our own experience, and leads to the same conclusion,
that “doing good” is a condition of pure happiness.—J. W.


Vers. 14—17.—An argument in suzport of the statement that a present use and
enjoyment of the gifts of God is advisable, is found in the fact of the unchangeable
character of the Divine purposes and government. He who has given may take away,
and none can stay his hand. While, therefore, we are in possession of benefits be
has bestowed on us, we should get the good of them, seeing that we know not how long
we shall have them. Exception has been taken to this teaching. “The lesson to
cheerfulness under such bidding seemsa hard one. Men have recited it over the wine-
cup in old times and new, in East and West. But the human heart, with such
shadows gathering in the background, has recognized its hollowness, and again and
again has put back the anodyne from its lips” (Bradley). But though the thought of
. the Divine unchangeableness may be regarded by some as a stimulus to a reckless
enjoyment of the present, it is calculated to have a wholesome influence upon our views
of life, and upon our conduct. Acquiescence in one’s lot, and reverential fear of God,
leading to an avoidance of sin, are naturally suggested by it. The conviction that the
will of God is righteous will prevent acquiescence in it becoming that apathetio
resignation which characterizes the spirit of those who believe that over all the events
of life an iron destiny rules, against which men strive in vain,

I. THE CHARACTER OF THE DIVINE GOVERNMENT. (Ver. 14.) It is eternal and
unalterable. In the phenomena of the natural world, we see it manifested in laws
which man cannot control or change; in the providential government of human affairs,
the same rule of a higher Power over all the events of life is discernible; and in the
revelations of the Divine will, recorded in the Scriptures, we see steady progress to an
end foreseen and foretold from the beginning. What God does stands fast; no created
power can nullify or change it (Ps. xxiii. 11; Isa. xlvi. 9, 10; Dan. iv. 35).

II. THE EFFECT WHICH THIS UNCHANGEABLENESS SHOULD PRODUCE. (Ver. 140.)
“That men should fear before him.” It should fill our heart with reverence. This is,
indeed, the purpose for which God has given this revelation of himself, and no other
view of the Divine character is calculated to produce the same effect. The thought of
God’s infinite power would not impress us in like manner if at the same time we
believed that his will was variable, that it could be propitiated and changed. But the
conviction that his will is righteous and immutable should lead us to “sanctify him in
our hearts, and make him our Fear and our Dread” (Isa. viii. 13), and give us hope and
coufidence in the midst of the vicissitudes of life (Mal. iii. 6). In the earlier part of his
work (ch, i. 9, 10) the Preacher had dwelt upon the uniformity of sequence in nature,
as if he were impressed with a sense of monotony, as he watched the course of events
happening and recurring in the same order. And now, as he looks upon human
history, he sees the same regularity in the order of things. “That which hath been is
now, and that which is to be hath already been.” But the former feeling of weariness
and oppression is modified by the thought of God’s perfection, and by the “fear” which
it excites. He recognizes the fact of a personal will governing the events of history,
It is no mechanical process of revolution that causes the repetition time after time of
similar events, the same causes producing the same effects; no wheel of destiny
alternately raising and depressing the fortunes of men. It is God who recalls, “ who
seeks again that which is passed away ” (ver. 156). “'The past is thought of as vanish-
ing, put to flight, receding into the dim distance. It might seem to be passing into the
abyss of oblivion; but God recalls it, brings back the same order, or an analogous order
of events, and so history repeats itself” (Plumptre). And out of this belief in God’s
wise providence a healthy spirit should gather strength to bear patiently and cheerfully
the difficulties and trials of life. ‘The belief that our life is governed by an unalterable
law is calculated, as I have said, to lead to a listless, hopeless state of mind, in which
one ceases to strive against the inevitable. But that state of mind is very different from


om. 1m. 1—22.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. Ba


SL


the resignation ot those who believe that the government of the world is regular and
unchangeable, because unerring wisdom guides him who is the Creator and Preserver
of all things. Their faith can sustain them in the greatest trials, when God’s ways
seem most inscrutable; they can hope against hope, and, in spite of all apparent contra-
dictions, believe that “all things work together for good to them that love God.”—J. W.


Vers. 18—22.— The darkness of the grave. In these words our author reaches the
very lowest depth of misery and despair. His observation of the facts of human lile
leads him to the humiliating conclusion that it is almost hopeless to assign to man a
higher nature and a more noble destiny than those which belong to the beasts that
The moral inequalities of the world, the injustice that goes unpunished, the
hopes by which men are deluded, the uncertainty of life, the doubtfuluess of
immortality, seem to justify the assertion “ that a man hath no pre-emineuce over a
beast.” ‘I'he special point of comparison on which he dwells is the common mortality
of both. Man and beast are possessed of bodies composed of the same elements,
nourished by the same food, liable to the same accidents, and destined to return to the
kindred dust from which they sprang. Both are ignorant of the period of life assigned
to them ; a moment before the stroke of death falls on them they may be unconscious
that evil is at hand, and when they realize the fact they are equally powerless to avert
it. What there isin common between them is manifest to all, while the evidence to be
adduced in favour of the superiority of man is, from its very nature, less convincing,
The spiritually minded will attach great weight to arguments against which the
natural reason may draw up plausible objections. Let us, then, see the case stated at
its very worst, and consider if there are any redeeming circumstances which are
calculated to relieve the gloom which a cursory reading of the words calls up.

I. The first statement is that MEN, LIKE BEASTS, ARE CREATURES OF ACCIDENT.
(Ver. 19a.) Not that they are both the results of blind chance; but that, “ being
conditioned by circumstances over which there can be no control, they are subject, in
respect to their whole being, actions, and sufferings, as far as mere human observation can
extend, to the law of chance, and are alike destined to undergo the same fate, ¢.e. death ”
(Wright). A parallel to the thought of this verse is to be found in the very striking
words of Solon to Creesus (Herodotus, i. 32), “Man is altogether a chance;” and in
Ps, xlix. 14, 20, “ Like sheep they are laid in the grave... . Man that is in honour,
and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.”

II. The second statement is that As Is THE DEATH OF THE ONE, 80 1S THE DEATH OF THE

‘ OTHER (ver. 195), for in both is the breath of life, and this departs from them in like
manner. So that any superiority on the part of man over the beast is incredible in the
face of this fact, that death annuls distinctions between them. One resting-place receives
them all at last—the earth from which they sprang (ver. 20). A belief in the immortality
of the soul of man would at once have relieved the gloom, and convinced the Preacher
that the humiliating comparison he institutes only reaches to a certain point, and is
based upon the external accidents of human life, and that the true dignity and value of
human nature remain unaffected by the mortality of the corporeal part of our being.
“ Put aside the belief in the prolongation of existence after death, that what has been
begun here may be completed, and what has gone wrong here may be set right, and man
is but a more highly organized animal, the ‘cunningest of nature’s clocks,’ and the
high words which men speak as to his greatness are found hollow. They too are
‘vanity. He differs from the brutes around him only, or chiefly, in having, what they
have not, the burden of unsatisfied desires, the longing after an eternity which after
all is denied him ” (Plumptre).

IlI. The third statement is the saddest of all—that of THE UNCERTAINTY OF
KNOWLEDGE AS TO WHETHER, AFTER ALL, THERE IS THIS HIGHER ELEMENT IN
HUMAN NATVRE—“a spirit that at death goeth upward”—or whether the living

rinciples of both man and beast perish when their bodies are laid in the dust (ver. 21).
t is quite fruitless to deny that it is a sceptical question that is asked—If the spirit of
the beast goeth downward to the earth, who knows that that of man goeth upward?
Attempts have been made to obliterate the scepticism of the passage, as may be seen
in the Massoretic punctuation followed in the Authorized Version of our English Bible,
but departed from in the Revised Version, “ Who knoweth the spirit of man that


& ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. mi. 1—22.


goeth upward,” etc.? as thouch an ascent of the spirit to a higher life were affirmed.
The rendcring of the four principal versions, and of all the best critics, convinces
us that it is indeed a sceptical question as to the immortality of the soul that is
here asked. A very similar passage is found in the great poem of Lucretius
G. 113—116)—
“ We know not what the nature of the soul,

Or born or entering into men at birth,

Or whether with our frame it perisheth,

Or treads the gloom and regions vast of death.”


It is to be noted, however, about both the question of the Preacher and the words of
the heathen poet, that they do not contain a denial of immortality, but a longing
after more knowledge resting on sufficient grounds, Sad and depressing as uncer-
tainty on such a point is to a sensitive mind, a denial of immortality would be
infinitely worse; it would mean the death of all hope. The very suggestion of a higher
life for man, after “this mortal coi] has been shufiled off,” than for the beast implies that,
far from denying the immortality of the soul, the writer seeks for adequate ground on
which to hold it. Arguments in favour of the doctrine of immortality were not wanting
to the Preacher. He has just spoken of the des/deriwm ceternitatis implanted in the
heart of man (ver. 11), which, like the instincts of the lower creation, is given-by the
Creator for our guidance, and not to tantalize and deceive us. The inequalities and
evils of the present life render a final judgment in a world beyond the grave a moral
necessity (ch. xii. 14), But still these are, after all, but indirect arguments, which have
not the weight of positive demonstration. It is only faith that can return any certain
reply to his doubting qnestion; its weight, thrown into the balance, inclines it to the
hopeful side. And this happy conclusion he reached at last, as he distinctly affirms in
ch, xii. 7, “ ‘Chen shall the du-t return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return
unto God who gave it.” ‘That the Preacher should ever have doubted this great truth,
and spoken as though no certainty concerning it were within the reach of man, need not
surprise us. In the revelation given to the Jewish people, the doctrine of rewards and
punishments in a future state was not set forth. ‘lhe rewards and punishments for
obedience to the Law, and for transgressions against it, were all temporal. Almost
nothing was communicated touching the existence of the soul alter death. In the
passage quoted by Christ in the Gospels, for the confutation of the Sadducees, who denied
the resurrection, the doctrine of immortality is implied rather than stated (Matt. xxii.
23—32). And in a matter so far beyond the power of the human intellect to search out, ~
the absence of a word of revelation rendered the darkness doubly obscure. It is, however
utterly monstrous for any of us now who believe in Christ to ask the question, “ Who
knoweth the spirit of man, whether it gueth upward?” The revelation given us by him
is full of light on this point. “ He hath brought life and immortality to light through
the gospel” (2 Tim. i. 10). His own resurrection from the dead, and ascension te
heaven is the proof of a life beyond the grave, and a pledge to all who believe in him
of a future and an everlasting life. It was not wonderful that the Preacher, in the then
stage of religiot” knowledge, should have spoken as he does here; but nothing could
justify us, to whom so much fresh light has been given, in using his words, as though
we were in the same condition with him. ;

IV. The fourth and concluding statement is, strangely enough, that since we know
not what will come after death, A CHEERFUL ENJOYMENT OF THE PRESENT is the best
course one can take. ‘his is the third time he has given this counsel (ch. ii, 245 iti
12,13). Acalm and happy life, healthy labour, and tranquil enjoyment, are to be valued
and taken alvantage of to the full. It is an epicureanisin of a spiritual cast that he
commends, and not the coarse and degraded animalism of those who say, “ Let us eat
and drink ; for to-morrow we die.” He recognizes the guod gifts of the present as a
“portion” given by God, and says— Rejoice in them, though tie future be all unknown
The very gloom out of which his words spring give a dignity to them. “ We feel that
we are in the presence of one who has the germ given him of some courage, equanimity,
and calmness, which may grow into other and better things, His spirit is torn by,
suffers with, all the pangs that beset. the inquiring human heart. — He feels for all the
woes of humanity ; cannot put them by, and fly to the wine-cup and crown himself with


ou. 1v.1—16.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 87


,_—


garlands. He has hated life, yet he will not lose his courage. ‘Be of good cheer,’ he
says, even in his dark hour; ‘work on, and enjoy the fruits of work; it is thy
portion, Do not curse God and die’” (Bradley). His words are not, as they might
seem at first, frivolous and heartless. It is a calm and peaceful happiness, a life of
honest endeavour and of single-hearted enjoyment of innocent pleasures, that he
commends; and, after all, it is only by genuine faith in God that such a life is


possible—a faith that enables one to rise above all that is dark and mysterious
and perplexing in the world about us.—J. W. ,


EXPOSITION,


CHAPTER IV.

Vers. 1—16.—Section 5. Koheleth pro-
ceeds to give further illustrations of man’s
tnability to be the architect of his own
happiness. There are many things which
interrupt or destroy it.

Vers. 1—3.—First of all, he adduces the
oppression of man by his fellow-man.


_ Ver. 1.—So I returned, and considered all
the oppressions that are done under the sun.
This is equivalent to, “again I saw,” ag
ver. 7, with a reference to the wickedness
in the place of judgment which he had
noticed in ch. iii. 16. Ashukim, “ oppres-
sions,” is found in Job xxxv. 9 and Amos
iii, 9, and, being properly a participle
passive, denotes oppressed persons or tliings,
and so abstractedly “oppressions ” Tas cuxo-
avtias (Septuagint); calumnias (Vulgate).

he verb is used of high-handed injustice,
of offensive selfishuess, of the hindrances to
his neighbour’s well-being caused by a man’s
careless disrvegara of aught but his own
interests (comp. 1 Sam. xii. 4; Hos. xii. 8,
etc.). Behold the tears of such as were op-
pressed; Tav cvKopaytoupever (Septuagint) ;
innocentium (Vulgate). He notes now not
merely the fact of wrong being done, but
its effect on the victim, and intimates his
own pity for the sorrow. And they had no
comforter. A sad refrain, echoed again at
the end of the verse with touching pathos.
Ovx gorw aitois mapaxoday (Septuagint);
they lad no earthly friends to visit them in
their affliction, and they as yet knew not
the soothing of the Holy Ghost, the Com-
forter (IlapdxAnros). There was no one to
wipe away their tears (Isa. xxv. 8) or to
redress their wrongs. The point is the
powerlessness of man in the face of these
disorders, his inability to right himself, the
incompetence of othcrs to aid him, On
the side of their oppressors there was
power (koach), in a bad sense, like tue
Greek Bla, equivalent to “violence.” Thus
the ungodly say, in the Book of Wisdom
ii. 11, “Let our strength be the law of
justice.” Vulgate, Neo posse resistere eorum


violentiz, cunctorum auzilio destitutoe. It
is difficult to suppose that the state of
things revealed by this verse existed in the
days of King Solomon, or that so powerful
a monarch, and one admired for “judgment
and justice” (1 Kings x. 9), would be con-
tent with complaining of such disorders
instead of checking them. There is no
token of remorse for past unprofitableness
or anguish of heart at the thought of failure
in duty. If we take the words as the utter-
ance of the real Solomon, we do violence to
history, and must correct the existing ehro-
nicles of his reign, The picture here pre-
scnted is one of later times, and it may be
of other countries. Persian rule, or the
tyranny of the Ptolemies, niight afford an
original from which it might be taken.

Ver. 2.—In view of these patent wrongs
Koheleth loses all enjoyment of life. Where-
fore (and) I praised the dead which are al-
ready dead; or, who died long ago, and thus
have escaped tlie miveries which they would
have had to endure. It must, indeed, have
been a bitter experience which elicited such
an avowal. ‘To die and be forgotten an
Oriental would look upon as the most cala-
mitous of destinies. More than the living
which are yet alive. For tliese have li xe
them the prospect of a long endurance of
oppression and suffering (comp. ch, vii, 13
Job iii. 13, ete.) The Greek gnome says—


Kpeicoov 7d wh Civ éotly, A Gv aoaAlws.
“ Better to die than lead a wretched life.”


The Septuagint version is scarcely a render-
ing of our present text: “ Above the living,
as many as are living until now.”

Ver. 3.—Yea, better is he than both they,
which hath not yet been. Thus we have
Job’s passionate appeal (iii. 11), “Why
died I not from the womb? why did I not
give up the ghost when I came forth,” etc. ?
And in the Greek poets the sentiment of
the text is re-echoed, Thus Theognia,
6 Paroon.,”’ 425—


Tidyrwy wey wh pivas émixOovlorow kporrep,
Mn eoideiv abvyas of¢os healou

btyra 5’, bros &xiota whras ’Alsao wepijga,
Kal keirOas moAAhy viv eraynoduever,


88 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


“Tis best for mortals never to be born,
Nor ever see the swift sun’s burning rays;
Next best, when born, to pass the gates of
death
Right speedily, and rest beneath the
earth.”


(Comp. Soph., ‘Cd. Col.,’ 1225—1228.)
Cicero, ‘Tusc. Disp.,’ i. 48, renders some
lines from a lost play of Euripides to the
same effect—


“Nam nos decebat, csetus cclebrantes,
domum
Lugere, ubi esset aliquis in lucem editus,
Humans vite varia reputantes mala;
At qui labores morte finisset graves,
Hunc omni amicos laude et letitia ex-
sequi.”


Herodotus (v. 4) relates how some of the
Thracians had a custom of bemoaning @
birth and rejoicing at a death. In our own
Burial Service we thank God for delivering
the departed “out of the miseries of this
sinful world.” Keble alludes to this bar-
barian custom in his poem on‘The Third
Sunday aftr Easter.” Speaking of a
Christian mother’s joy at a child’s birth, he
saya—


“ No need for her to weep
Like Thracian wives of yore,
Save when in rapture still and deep
Her thankful heart runs o’er.
They mourned to trust their treasure on
the main,
Sure of the storm, urknowing of their
guide:
Welcome to her the peril and the pain,
For well she knows the home where they
may safely hide.”


(See on ch. vii. 1; comp. Gray’s ode ‘Ona
Prospect of Eton College;’ and for the
classical notion concerning life and death,
see Plato, ‘Laches,” p. 195, D, sqq.;
‘Gorgias,’ p. 512, A.) The Buddhist reli-
gion does not recommend suicide as an escape
from tie evils of life. It indeed regards man
as master of his own life; but it considers
suicide foolish, as it merely transfers a man’s
position, the thread of life having to be
taken up again under less favourable cireum-
stances. See ‘A Buddhist Catechism,’ by
Subhadra Bhikshu (London: Redway, 1890).
Who hath not seen the evil work that is
done under the sun. He repeats the words,
“ under the sun,” from ver. }, in order to sliow
that he is speaking of facts that came under
his own regard—outward phenomena which
any thouzhtful observer might notice (so
again ver. 7).


Vers. 4—6.—Secondly, success meets with
envy, and produces no lasting good to the


fox. Iv. 1—16.


worker; yet, however unsatisfactory the re-
sult, man must continue to labour, as idle-
ness is ruin.


Ver. 4.—Again, I considered all travail,
and every right work. The word rendered
“right” is kishron (see on ch, ii. 21), and
means rather “ dexterity,” “ success.” Kohe-
leth says that he reflected upon the industry
that men exhibit, and the skill and dexterity
with which they ply their incessant toil.
There is no reference to moral rectitude in
the reflvction, and the allusion to the ostra-
cism of Aristides for being called “Just” over-
shoots the mark (see Wordsworth, in loc.).
Septuagint, cbuxacay avdplay rod movhuatos,
“ all manliness of his work.” That for this
a man is envied of his neighbour. Kinah
may mean either “object of envy ” or “ envi-
ous rivalry;” z.e. the clause may be translated
as above, or,as in the Revised Version margin,
‘it cometh of a man’s rivalry with his neigh-
bour.” The Septuagint is ambiguous, “OTs
avrd ChAos avdpds amd Tod Eralpou adrod, “That
this isa man’s envy from his comrade ;” Vul-
gate, Industrias animadverti patere invidia
proxims, “ Lay open to a neiglibour’s envy.”
In the first case the thought is that unusual
skill and success expose a man to envy and
ill will, which rob labour of all enjoyment.
In the second case the writer says that this
superiority and dexterity arise from a mean
motive, an envious desire to outstrip a neigh-
bour, and, based on such low ground, can lead
to nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit,
a striving after wind. The former explana-
tion seems more in accordance with Kohe-
leth’s gloomy view. Success itself is no
guarantee of happiness; the malice and ill
feeling which it invariably occasions are
neccgsarily a source of pain and distress.

Ver. 5.—The connection of this verse with
the preceding is this: activity, diligence,
and skill indeed bring success, but success
is accompanied by sad results. Should we,
then, sink into apathy, relinquish work, let
things slide? Nay, none but the fool (kesil),
the insensate, half-brutish man, doth this.
The fool foldeth his hands together. The
attitude expresses laziness and disinclination
for active labour, like that of the slugeard
in Proy, vi. 10. And eateth his own flesh.
Ginsburg, Plumptre, and others take these
words to mean “and yet eats his meat,” ¢.e.
gets that enjoyment from his sluggishness
which is denied to active diligence. They
refer, in proof of this interpretation, to Exod.
Xvi. 8; xxi. 28; Isa. xxii. 13; Ezek. xxxix.
17, in which passages, however, the phrase
is never equivalent to “eating his food.”
The expression is really equivalent to
“destroys himself,” “ brings ruin upon him-
self.” Thus we have in Ps. xxvii. 2, “ Evil-
doers came upon me to eat up my fiesh;”


c. 4 Iv. 1—16.]


and in Micah iii. 3, “ Who eat the flesh of
my people” (comp. Isa. xlix. 26), The
sluggard is guilty of moral suicide ; he takes
no trouble to provide for his necessities, and
suffers extremities in consequence. Some
see in this verse and the following an objeo-
tion and its answer. There is no occasion
for this view, and it is uot in keeping with
the context; but it contains an intimation of
the true exposition, which makes ver. 6 a
proverbial statement of the sluggard’s posi-
tion. The verbs in the text are participial in
form, so that the Vulgate rendering, which
supplies a verb, is quite admissible: Stultus
complicat manus suas, et comedit carnes suas,
dicens : Melior est, etc.

Ver. 6.—Better isa handful with quietness;
literally, better a hand full of rest. Than
both the hands full wit) travail and vexation
of spirit; literally, thun two hands full of
travail, etc. This verse, which has been
variously interpreted, is most simply regarded
as the fool’s defence of his indolcnce, either
expressed in his own words or fortified by a
proverbial saying. One open hand full of
quietnesy and rest is preferable to two closed
hands full of toil and vain effort. The verse
must not be taken as the writer’s warning
against sloth, which would be out of place
here, but as enunciating a maxim against
discontent and that restless activity which
is never satisfied with moderate returns.

Vers. 7—12.—Thirdly, avarice causes iso-
fation and a sense of insecurity, and brings
Ro satisfaction.

Ver. 7.—Then I returned. Another re-
flection serves to confirm the uselessness of
human efforts. The vanity under the sun
is now avarice, with the evils that accom-
pany it.

Ver. 8.—There is one alone, and there is
not asecond; or, without a second—a solitary
being, without partner, relation, or friend.
Here, he says, is another instance of man’s
inability to secure his own happiness. Wealth
indeed, is supposed to make friends, such as
they are; but miserliness and greed separate
a man from his fellows, make him su-picious
of every one, and drive him to live alone,
churlish and unhappy. Yea, he hath neither
child nor brother; noone to share his weaith,
or for whom to save and amass riches. ‘To
apply these words to Solomon himself, who
had brothers, and one son, if not more, is
manifestly inappropriate. They may pos-
sibly refer to some circumsiance in the
writer’s own life; but of that we know
nothing. Yet is there no end of all his
labour. In spite of this isolation lie plies lis
weary task, and ceases not tohoard. Neither
is his eye satisfied with riches; so that he is
content with what he has (comp. ch. ii. 10;
Prov. xxvii. 20). The insatiable thirst for


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 89
ee ee ee


gold, the dropsy of the mind, is a common-
place theme in classical writers. Thus
Horace, ‘ Carm.,’ iii, 16. 17—


“Crescentem sequitur cura pecuniam,
Majorumque fames.”


And Juvenal, ‘ Sat.,’ xiv. 138—


“TInterea pleno quum turget sacoulus ore,
Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia
crevit.”


Neither, saith he, For whom do I labour,
and bereave my soulof good? The orivinal
is more dramatic than the Authorized Version
or the Vulgate, Nee recogitat, dicens, Cui
laboro, ete.? The writer suddenly puts him-
self in the place of the friendless miser, and
exclaims, “ And for whom do I labour,” ete. ?
We see something similar in ver. 15 and
ch. ii. 15. Here we canuot find any definite
allusion to the writer’s own circumstances,
The clause is merely a lively personification
expressive of strong sympathy with the
situation described (comp. ch. ii. 18). Good
may mean cither riches, in which case the
denial to the soul refers to the enjoyment
which wealth miglit afford, or happiness and
comfort. The Septuagint has ayabwotrns,
“goodness,” “kindness ”—whicli gives quite
a different and not sosuitable an idea. Sore
travail; a sad business, a woeful employment.

Ver. 9.—Koheleth dwells upon the evils
of isolation, and contrasts with them the
comfort of companionship. Two are better
than one, Literally, the clause refers to the
two and the one mentioned in the pre
celing verse CAya@o) of Sto trip rév eva,
Septuagint); but the gnome is true in
general. “Two heads are better than one,”
says our proverb. Because (axher here con-
juuctive, not relative) they have a good
reward for their labour. ‘The joint labours
of two produce much more effect than the
efforts of a solitary worker. Companionship
is helpful and profitable. Ginsburg quotes
the rabbinical sayings, “ Hither friendship
or death; ” and “A man without friends is
like a left hand without the right.” Thus
the Greek gnome—


"Aviip yap &vipa, Kalmérus o@Cer wdruy.
“Man helps his fellow, city city saves.”
Xelp xcipa vimres SdutvAds re SdeTvAov.


“ Hand cleanseth hand, and finger cleanscth
finger.”


(Comp. Prov. xvii. 17; xxvii. 17; Ecclus. vi.
14.) So Christ sent out his apostles two and
two (Mark vi. 7).

Ver. 10.—Koheleth illustrates the benefit
of association by certain familiar examples.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his
fellow. If one or the other fall, the com-
panion will aid him. The idea is that two


$0 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(om. rv. i—16,'


en


travellers are making their way over a rough
road—an experience that every one must have
had in Palestine. Vulgate, St unus cecideritt.
Of course, if both fell at the same time, one
could not help the other. Commentators
quote Homer, ‘Iliad,’ x. 220—226, thus
rendered by Lord Derby— ~


“ Nestor, that heart is mine; I dare alone
Enter the hostile camp, so close at hand ;
Yet were one comrade giv’n me, I should go
With more of comfort, more of confidence.
Where two combine, one before other sees
The better course; and ev’n though one

alone
The realiest way discover, yet would be
His judgment slower, liis decision less.”


Woe to him that is alone. The same inter-
jection of sorrow, ‘x, occurs in ch. x. 16, but
elsewhere only in late Hebrew. The verse
may be applied to moral fulls as well as to
stumbling at natural obstacles. Brother
helps brother to resist temptation, while
many have failed when tried by isolation who
would have manfully withstood if they had
had the countenance and support of others.


“Clear before us through the darkness
Gleams and burns the guiding light;
Brother clasps the hand of brother,
Stepping fearless through the night.”


Ver. 11.—The first example of the advan-
tage of companionship spoke of the aid and
support that are thus given; the prescnt

_ verse tells of the comfort thus brought. If
two lie together, then they have heat.
The winter nights in Palestine are com-
paratively cold, and when, as inthe case of
the poorer inhabitants, the outer garment
worn by day was used as the only blanket
during sleep (Exod. xxii. 26, 27), it was a
comfort to have the additional warmth of
a friend lying under the same coverlet.
Solomon could have had no such experience.

Ver. 12.—The third instance shows the
value of the protection afforded Ly a com-
paulo presence when dangir tlireatens.

f one prevail against him, two shall with-
stand him; better, if a man overpower the
solitary one, the two (ver. 9) will withstand
him. The idea of the traveller is continued.
If he were attacked by robbers, he would
be easily overpowered when alone; but two
comrades might successfully resist the assault.
And a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
This is probably a proverbial saying, like
our “Union is strength.” Hereby the ad-
vantage of association is more strongly
enforced, If the companionship of two is
profitable, much more is this the case when
more combine, The cord of three strands
was the strongest made. The number three
is used as the symbol of completeness and
perfection. Funtculus triplex difficile rum-


pitur, the Vulgate rendering, has become &
trite saying; and the gnome has been con
stantly applied in a mystical or spiritual
sense, with which, originally and humanly
speaking, it has no concern. Herein is seen
an adumbration of the doctrine of the Holy
Trinity, the Eternal Three in One; of the
three Christian virtues, faith, hope, and
charity, wlich go to make the Christian life ;
of the Christian’s body, soul, and spirit, which
are consecrated as a temple of the Most High.


Vers, 18—16.—High place offers no as-
surance of security. A king’s popularity is
never permanent; he is supplanted by some
clever young aspirant for a time, whose in-
fluence in turn soon evapurates, and the sub-
ject-people reap no benefit from the change.


Ver. 13.—Better is a poor and wise child
than an old and foolish king. The word
translated “ child ” (yeled), is used sometimes
of one beyond childhoed (see Gen. xxx. 26;
xxxvii. 830; 1 Kings xii. 8), so here it may
be rendered “youth.”  Misken, revhs (Sep-
tuagint), pauper (Vulgate), “ poor,” is found
also at ch. ix. 15, 16, and nowhere else; but
the root, with an analogous signification,
occurs at Deut. viii. 9 and Isa. xl. 20. The
clause says that a youth who is clever and
adroit, though sprung from a sordid origin,
is better off than a king who has not learned
wisdom with his years, and who, it is after-
wards implied, is dethroned by this young
man. Who will no more be admonished;
better, as in the Revised Version, who
knoweth not how to receive admonition any
more. Age has only fossilized his self-will
and obstinacy; and thongh le was once
open to advice and hearkened to reproof, he
now bears no contradiction and takes no
counsel. Septuagint, “Os ob yyw tod mpoo-
éxew ér1, “Who kuows not how to take
heed any longer;” which is perliaps similar
to the Vulgate, Qui nescit previdere in
posterum, “ Who knows not how to look
forward to the future.” The words will
bear this translation, and it accords with
one view of the author’s meaning (see
below); but that given above is more
suitable to the interpretation of the para-
graph which approves itself to us. The
sentence is of general import, and may be
illustrated by a passage from the Book of
Wisdom (iv. 8, 9), ‘* Honourable age is not
that which standeth in length of time, nor
that is measured by length of years. But
wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and an
unspotted life is old age.” So Cicero, ‘De
benect.,’ xviii. 62, “Non cani nec rugea
repente auctoritatem arripere possunt, sed
honeste acta superior etas fructus capit
auctoritatis extremos.” Some have thought
that Solomon is here speaking of himself,


om, rv. 1—16.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


91


SS a a a a


avowing his folly and expressing his con-
trition, in view of. his knowledge of Jero-
boam’s delegation to the kingdom—the crafty
youth of poor estate (1 Kings xi. 26, etc.),
whom the Prophet Ahijah had warned of
approaching greatness. But there is nothing
in the recurded history of Solomon to make
probable such expression of self-abasement,
and our author could never have so com-
pletely misrepresented him. Here, too, is
antler proof that Ecclesiastes is not writtcn
by Solomon himself.

Wer. 14.—For out of prison he cometh to
reign; whereas alco he tliat is born in his
kingdom becometh poor, The ambiguity of
the pronouns has induced different inter-
pretations of this verse. It is plain that
the paragraph is inten/ed to corroborate the
statement of the previous verse, contrasting
the fate of the poor, clever youth with that
of the old, foolish king. The Authorized
Version makes the pronoun in the first
clause refer to the youth, and those in the
second to the king, with the signification
that rich and pvor change places—one is
abased as the other is exalted. Vulgate,
Quod de carcere catenisque interdum quis
egrediatur ad regnum; et alius natus in
regno inopia consummatur. The Septuagint
is somewhat ambiguous, “Or: é& ofcov Tay
Secuiwy eteAcvoeTa: Tov Bacidecidoal, bri Kal
ye év Bacirelg adtod eyerhOn mévns, “ For
from the house of prisoners he shall come
forth to reign, because in his kingdom he
{who?] was born [or, ‘became’] poor.” It
seems, however, most natural to make the
leading pronouns in both clauses refer to
the youth, and thus to render: “For out
of the house of prisoners goeth he forth
to reign, though even in his kingdom
he was born poor.” Beth hasurim is also
rendered “house of fugitives,” and [litzig
takes the expression as a description of
Egypt, whither Jeroboam fled to escape
the vengeance of Solomon. Others see here
an allusion to Joseph, who was raised from
prison, if not to be king, at Icast to an
exalted position which might thus be desig-
nated. In this case the old and foolish
king who could not look to the future is
Pharaoh, who could not understand the
dream which was sent for his admonition.
Commentators have wearied themselves with
endeavouring to find some other historical
basis fur the supposed allusion in the pas-
rage. But although many of these sug-
gestions (e.g. Saul and David, Joash and
Amaziah, Cyrus and Astyages, Herod and
Alexander) meet a part of the case, none
suit the whole passage (vers. 13—16). It
is possible, indeed, that some particular
allusion is intended to some circumstance or
event with which we are not acquainted.
At the same time, it seems to us that, without


much straining of language, the reference
to Joseph can be made good. If it is ob-
jected that it cannot be said that Joseph
was born in the kingdom of Egypt, we may
reply tliat the words may be taken to refer
to his cruel position in his own country,
when he was despoiled and sold, and may
be said metaphorically to have ‘“ become
poor;” or the word nolad may be considered
as equivalent to “came,” “appeared,” and
need not be restricted to the sense of “ born.”

Ver. 15.—I considered all the living which
walk under the sun; or, I have seen all the
population. The expression is hyperbolical,
as Eastern monarchs speak of their domi-
nions as if they comprised the whole world
(see Dan. iv. 1; vi. 25). With the second
child that shall stand up in his stead,
“With” (oy) means “in company with,”
“on the side of;” and the clause should be
rendcred, as in the Revised Version, That
they were with the youth, the second, that
stood up in his stead. The youth who is
ealled the second is the one spoken of in
the previous verses, who by general acclama-
tion is raised to the highcst place in the
realm, while the old monarch is dethroned
or depreciated. He is named second, as
being the successor of the other, either in
popular favour or on the throne. It is the
old story of worshipping the rising sun,
The verse may still be applied to Joseph,
who was made second to Piiuraoh, and was
virtually supreme in Egypt, standing in the
king’s place (Gen. xli, 40—44).

Ver. 16.—There is no end of all the
people, even of all that have been before
them. The paragraph plainly is carrying on
the description of the popular entliusiasm
for the new favourite. The Authorized
Version completely obscures this meaning.
It is better to translate, Numberless were the
people, all, at whose head he stood. Koheleth
places himself in the position of a spectator,
and marks how numerous are the adherents
who flock around the youthful aspirant.
“Nullus finis omni populo, omnibus, quibus
prefuit” (Gesenius, Rosenmiiller, Volek),
Yet his popularity was not lasting and his
influence was not permanent. They also
that come after shall not rejoice in him.
In spite of his cleverness, and notwith-
standing the favour with which he is now
regarded, those of a later generation shall
flout his pretensions and forget his benctits,
If we still continue the allusion to Joseph,
we may see here in this last clause a
reference to tle change that supervened
when another king arose who knew him not
(Exod, i. 8), and who, oblivious of the ser-
vices of this great benefactor, heavily
oppressed the Israelites. This experience
leads to the same result; it is all vanity
and wexation of spirit,


92 EOCLESIASTES; OR, 1HE PREACHER. [om. rv. 1—16.


ee


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—8.—Two pessimistic fallacies; or, the glory of being born, I. THE FIRST
FauLacy. That the dead are happier than the living. 1. Hven on the assumption of
no hereafter, this is not evident. The already dead are not praised because they enjoyed
better times on earth than the now living have. But (1) if they had better times when
living, they have these no more, having ceased to be; while (2) if their times on earth
were not superior to those of their successors, they have still only escaped these by
subsiding into cold annihilation, and it has yet to be proved that “a living dog” is not
“better than a dead lion” (ch. ix. 4). Besides, (3) it is not certain there is no hereafter,
which makes them pause and hesitate to jump the life to come, When they discuss
with themselves the question— —


“ Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them ?”—


they generally come to Hamlet’s conclusion, that it is better to


“ Bear the ills we have,
Than fly to others that we know not of.”


2. On the assumption that there is a hereafter, it is less certain that the dead are more
to be praised than the living. It depends on who the dead are, anu what the kind of
existence is into which they have departed. (1) If they have lived unrighteously on earth,
it will not be safe, even on grounds of natural reason, to conclude that their condition in
the unseen land into which they have vanished is better than that of the living who
are yet alive, even should these also be wicked; since for these there are still time and
place for repentance, which cannot be affirmed of the ungodly dead. (2) If their lives
on earth have been pious—e.g. if as Christians they have fallen asleep in Jesus—it
need hardly be doubted that their condition ig better even than that of the godly
living, who are still dwellers in this vale of tears, subject to imperfections, exposed to
temptations, and liable to sin.

Il. THE sEconD FALLACY. That better than both the living and the dead are the not
yet born. 1. On the assumption that this life is all, i¢ is not universally true that not
to have been born would have been a preferable lot to having been born and being
dead. No doubt it is sad that one born into this world is sure, while on his pilgrimage
to the tomb, to witness spectacles of oppression such as the Preacher describes; and
sadder that many before they die will be the victims of such oppressions; while of all
things, perhaps the saddest is that a man may even live to become the perpetrator of
such cruelties; yet no one can truly affirm that human life generally contains nothing
but oppression on the one side and tears upon the other, or that in any individual’s life
naught exists but wretchedness and woe, or that in the experiences of most the joys do
not nearly counterbalance, if not actually outweigh, the griefs, while in that of not a
few the pleasures far exceed the pains. 2. On the assumption of a hereafter, only one
case or class of cases can be pointed to in which it would have been decidedly better not
to have been born, viz. that in which one who has been born, on departing from this
world, passes into an undone eternity. Christ instanced one such case (Matt. xxvi. 24);
and if there be truth in the representations given by Christ and his apostles of the
ultimate doom of those who die in unbelief and sin (Matt. xi, 22; xiii. 41, 42; xxii. 13;
xxiv. 51; John v. 29; 2 Thess. i. 9; Rev. xxi. 8), it will not be difficult to see that in
their case also the words of the Preacher will be true. 3. In every other instance, but
chiefly in that of the good, who does not sce how immeasurably more blessed it is to have
been born? For consider what this means. It means to have been made in the Divine
image, endowed with an intellect and a heart capable of holding fellowship with and
serving God. And if it also signifies to have been born into a state of sin and misery
in consequence of our first parents’ fall, it should not be forgotten that it signifies, im


ou. Iv. 1~16.] ECCLESLASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 98
ae ee ae a a


addition, to have been born into a sphere and condition of existence in which God’s
grace has been before one, and is waiting to lift one up, completely and for ever, out of
that sin and misery if one will. No one accepting that grace will ever afterwards deem
it a misfortune that he was born, Thomas Halyburton, the Scottish theologian
(4.D. 1674—1712), did not so regard his introduction to this lower world, with all its
vicissitudes and woes. “Oh, blessed be God that I was born!” were his dying words,
“T have a father and a mother, and ten brothers and sisters, in heaven, and I shall be
the eleventh. Oh, blessed be the day that ever I was born!”

Learn: 1. The existence of sin and suffering no proof that life is an evil thing.
2. The wickedness of undervaluing existence under the sun. 3. The folly of over-
praising the dead and underrating the living. 4. A worse thing than seeing “ evil
work” beneath the sun is doing it.


Vers. 4—8.—Three sketches from life. I, THE INDUSTRIOUS WORKER. 1. Te success
that attends his toil. Every enterprise to which he puts his hand prospers, and in this
sense is a “right” work. Never an undertaking started by him fails, Whatever he
touches turns into gold. He is one of those children of fortune upon whom the sun
always shines—a man of large capacity and untiring energy, who keeps plodding on,
doing the right thing to pay, and doing it at the right time, and so building up for
himself a vast store of wealth. 2. The drawbacks that wait on his success. The
Preacher does not hint that his work has been wrong; only that success such as his
has its drawbacks. (1) It can only be attained by hard work. By Heaven’s decree it
is the fruit of toil; and sometimes he who finds it must sweat and labour for it, tugging
away at the oar of industry like a very galley-slave, depriving his soul of good, and
condemning his body to the meanest drudgery. (2) It often springs from unworthy
motives in the worker, as e.g. from ambition, or a desire to outstrip his competitors in
the race for wealth ; from covetousness, or a hungry longing for other people’s gold; or
from avarice, which means a sordid thirst for possession. (3) It commonly leads te
envy in beholders, especially in those to whom success has been denied. That it ought
not to do so may be conceded; that it will not do so in those who consider that success,
like every other thing, comes from God (Ps, lxxv. 6, 7), and that a man can receive
nothing except it be given him from above (John iii. 27) is certain; that it does so,
nevertheless, is apparent. In every department of life success incites some who witness
it to depreciation, censoriousness, and even to backbiting and slander. ‘“ Envy spies out
blemishes, that she may lower another by defeat,” and when she cannot find, seldom
wants the wit to invent them. Detraction is the shadow that waits upon the sun of
prosperity. (4) It is usually attended by anxiety. The man to whom success is given
is often one to whom success can be of small account, being “one that is alone and
hath not a second,” without wife or child, brother or friend, to whom to leave his
wealth, so that as this increases his perplexity augments as to what he shall do
with it.

Il. Taz HABITUAL IDLER. 1, The folly he exhibits. Not indisposed to partake o:
the successful man’s wealth, he is yet disinclined to the labour by which alone wealth
can be secured. He is one on whom the spirit of indoleice has seized. Averse to
exertion, like the sluggard, he is slumberous and slothful (Prov. vi. 10; xxiv. 33); and
when he does awake, finds that other men’s day is half through. If one must not
depreciate the value of sleep, which God gives to his beloved (Ps. cxxvii. 2), or
pronounce all fools who have evinced a capacity for the same, since according to
Thomson (‘ Castle of Indolence ’)—


“ Great men have ever loved repose,”


one may recognize the folly of expecting to succeed in life while devoting one’s day ww
indolence or slumber. 2. The wretchedness that springs from his folly. That the
habitual idler should “eat his own flesh”—not have a pleasant time of it, in spite of
his indolence, attain to the fruition of his desires without work (Ginsburg, Plumptre),
but reduce himself to poverty and starvation, and consume himself with envy and
vexation (Delitzsch, Hengstenberg, Wright)—is according to the fitness of things, as
well as the teachings of Scripture (Prov. xiii. 4; xxiii, 21; ch. x. 18 ; 2 Thess. iii.
10). “Idleness is the bane of body and mind, the nurse of naughtiness, the chief


04 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, [ou. rv. 1—16.


i


author of all misery, one of the seven deadly sins, the cushion upon which the devil
chiefly reposes, and a great cause not only of melancholy, but of many other diseases a
Burton).

‘ III. thon SAGACIOUS MORALIZER. 1. Lis character defined. Neither of the two
former, he is a happy mean between both. If he toils not like him who always
succeeds, he loafs not about like the fool who never works. If he amasses not wealth,
he equally escapes poverty. He works in moderation, and is contented with a com-
petence. 2. His wisdom extolled. If he attains not to riches, he avoids the sore
travail requisite to procure riches, and the vexation of spirit, or “ feeding upon wind,”
which riches bring. If he succeeds in gathering only one fistful of the youds of earth,
he has at least the priceless pearl of quietness, including ease of mind as well as comfort
of body.

Lessons, 1. Industry and contentment two Christian virtues (Rom. xii. 12, Eph. iv.
28; 1 ‘lim. vi. 8; Heb. xiii. 5), 2. Idleness and sloth two destructive sins (Prov, xii,
24; ch, x. 8).


Vers. 9—12.—Two better than one; or, companionship versus isolation. I. THE
DISADVANTAGES OF ISOLATION. 1, Jts causes, Either natural or moral, providentially
imposed or deliberately chosen, (1) Examples of the former: the individual who has
no wife or friend, son or brother, because these have been removed by death (Ps,
Ixxxviii. 18); the traveller who journeys alone through some uninhabited waste (Job
xxxvili, 26; Jer. ii. 6) or voiceless solitude; a stranger who lands on a foreiyn shore,
with whose inhabitants he can hold no converse, because of not understanding their
speech, and who lacks the assistance of a friendly interpreter. (2) Instances of the
latter: the younger son, who forsakes the parental roof, leaving behind him parents,
brothers, and sisters, as well as friends and companions, acquaintances and neizhbours,
and departs into a far country alone to see life and make a fortune; the elder brother,
who, when the old people have died, and the younger branches of the family have
removed, remains unmarried, because he chooses to live entirely for himself; the busy
merchant, self-contained and prosperous, who stands apart from his employees, and,
without either colleague or counsellor, partner or assistant, takes upon his own broad
shoulders the whole weight and responsibility of a large “concern;” the student, who
loves his books better than his fellows, and, eschewing intercourse with these, broods
in solitude over problems too deep for his unaided intellect, that might be solved in a
few hours’ talk with a friend; the selfish soul, who has heart to give to no thing or
person outside of self, and who fears lest his own stock of happiness should be
diminished were he in an inadvertent moment to augment that of others. 2. Its
miseries. Manifold and richly deserved—at least where the isolation springs from
causes moral and self-chosen. Amongst the lonely man’s woes may be enumerated
these: (1) the absence of those advantages and felicities that arise from companionship
—a theme treated of in the next main division of this homily; (2) the intellectual and
moral deterioration that inevitably ensues on the suppression of the soul’s gocial
instincts, and the attempt to educate one’s manhood apart from the family, the com-
munity, the race, of which it forms a part; (3) the inward wrcetchedness that by the
just decree of Heaven attends the crime (where the isolation spoken of assumes this
form) of living entirely for self; and, (4) aside from ideas of crime and guilt, the
insatiable greed of sell, which makes even larger demands upon one’s labour, and
deeper inroads upon one’s peace, than all the claims of others would were the soul to
honour these, and which, like an unpitying taskmaster, impels the soul to unceasin
toil, and fills it with unending care (ver. 8; ef. ch. ii, 28). :

I], THE BENEFITS OF COMPANIONSHIP. The “good reward” for their labour which
two receive in preference to one poiuts to the advantages that flow from union, These
are four. 1, Reciprocal assistance. The picture sketched by “the great orator” is
that of two wayfaring men upon a dark and dangerous road, who are helpful to each
other in turn as each stumbles in the path, rendered difficult to tread by gloom over-
head or uneven places underfoot. Whereas each one by himself might deem it
hazardous to pursue his journey, kuowing that if he fell when alone he might be quite
unable to rise, and might even lose his life through exposure to the inclemencies of the
night or the perils of the place, each accompanied by the other pushes on with quiet


on.1v.1—16.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 98


i


confidence, oe that, should a moment come when he has need of a second to help
him up, that second will be beside him in the person of his friend.


“ When two together go, each for the other
Is first to think what best will help his brother;
But one who walks alone, tho’ wise in mind,
Of purpose slow and counsel weak we find.”
(Homer, ‘ Iliad,’ x. 224236.)


The application of this principle of mutual helpfulness to almost every department of
life, to the home and to the city, to the state and to the Church, to the workshop and
to the playground, to the school and to the university, is obvious. 2. Mutual stimulus.
Illustrated from the case of two travellers, who on a cold night lie under one blanket
(Exod. xxiii. 6), and keep each other warm; whereas, should they sleep apart, they
would each shiver the whole night through in miserable discomfort. The counterpart
of this, again, may be found in every circle of life, but more especially in the home and
the Church, in both of which the inmates are enjoined and expected to be helpers and
comforters of each other, considering one another to provoke unto love and good works
(Heb. x. 24). 3. Efficient protection. The writer notes the peril of the pilcrim whom,
if alone, a robber may overpower, but whom, if accompanied by a comrade, the high-
wayman would not venture to attack. So multitudes of dangers assail the individual,
against which he cannot protect himself by his own unaided strength, but which the
friendly assistance of another may aid him to repel. As illustrations will at once
present themselves, cases of sickness, temptations to sin, assaults upon the youthful
believer’s faith. In ordinary life men know the value of co-operation as a means of
defence against invasions of what are deemed their natural rights; might the Christian
Church not derive from this a lesson as to how she can best meet and cope with the
assaults to which she is subjected by infidelity on the one hand, and immorality on the
other? 4. Increased strength. As surely as division and isolation mean loss of power,
with consequent weakness, so surely do union and co-operation signify augmented
might and multiplied efficiency. The Preacher expresses this by saying, “The three-
fold cord will not quickly be broken.” As the thickest rope may be snapped if first
untwisted and taken strand by strand, so may the most formidable army be defeated, if
only it can be dealt with in detached battalions, and the strongest Church may be laid
in ruins if its members can be overthrown one by one. But then the converse of this
is likewise true. As every strand twisted into a cable imparts to it additional strength,
s0 every grace added to the Christian character makes it stronger to repel evil, and
gives it larger ability for Christian service; while every additional believer incorporated
into the body of Christ renders it the more impregnable by sin, and the more capable
of furthering the progress of the truth.

Lessons. 1. The sinfulness of isolation, 2, The duty of union. 3. The value of a
good companion.


Vers. 13—16,— The vicissitudes of royalty; or, the experience of a king. I. Wrt-
COMED IN youTH. The picture sketched that of a political revolution. “An old and
foolish king, no longer understanding how to be warned,” who has fallen out of touch
with the times, and neither himself discerns the governmental changes demanded by
the exigencies of the hour, nor is wiliing to be guided by his state councillors, is
deposed in favour of a youthful hero who has caught the popular imagination,
perceived the necessities of the situation, learnt how to humour the fickle crowd,
contrived to install himself in their affections, and succeeded in promoting himsell to
be their ruler. 1. Climbing the ladder. Originally a poor man’s son, he had raised
himself to be a leader of his countrymen, perhaps as Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, did
in the days of Rehoboam (1 Kings xi, 26—28), interesting himself in the sucial and
political condition of his fellow-subjects, sympathizing with their grievances, probably
acting as their spokesman in laying these before the aged sovereign; and, when their
demands were unheeded, possibly fanning their discontent, and even helping them to
plot insurrection—for which, having been detected, he was cast into prison. Neverthe-
lesa, neither his humble birth nor his forcible incarceration had been sufficient tw
degrade him in the people’s eyes. 2. Standing on the swminit. Accordingly, when tho


96 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [ox tv. 1—16.


tide of discontent had risen so high that they could no longer tolerate their senile and
imbecile monarch, and their courage had waxed so valiant as to enable them success-
fully to carry through his deposition, they bethought themselves of the imprisoned hero
who had espoused and was then suffering for their cause, and having fetched him forth from
confinement, proceeded with him to the then deserted palace, where they placed upon
his head the crown, amid shouts of jubilant enthusiasm, crying, “God save the king!”
It is doubtless an ideal picture, which in its several details has often been realized; as,
e.g., when Joseph was fetched from the round house of Heliopolis, and seated on the
second throne of Egypt (Gen. xli. 14, 40); as when David was crowned at Hebron on
Saul’s death by the men of Judah (2 Sam. ii. 4), and Jeroboam at Shechem by the
tribes of Israel (1 Kings xii. 20); as when Athaliah was deposed, and the boy Joash
made king in her stead (2 Kings xi.12). 3. Surveying his fortune. So far as the new-
made king was concerned, the commencement of his reign was auspicious. It doubtless
never occurred to him that the sun of his royal person would ever know decline, or
that he would ever experience the fate of his predecessor. It was with him the dawn
of rosy-fingered morn; how the day would develop was not foreseen, least of all was it
discerned how the night should fall !

II, HonouRED IN MANHOOD. 1. Extending his renown. Seated on his throne, he
wields the sceptre of irresponsible authority for a long series of years. As the drama
of his life unfolds, he grows in the affections of his people. With every revolution of
the sun his popularity increases. The affairs of his kingdom prosper. The extent of
his dominions widens. All the kingdoms of the earth come to place themselves beneath
his rule. Like another Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Xerxes, Alexander, Cesar, he is a
world-governing autocrat. ‘“ All the living who walk under the sun” are on the side
of the man who had been born poor, and had once languished in a prison; neither is
there any end to all the people at whose head he is, 2. Enjoying his felicity. One
would say, as perhaps in the heyday of his prosperity he said to himself, the cup of
his soul’s happiness was full. He had obtained all the world could bestow of earthly
glory, power the most exalted, influence the most extended, riches the most abundant,
fame the most renowned, popularity the most secure! What could he wish else? The
sun of his royal highness was shining in meridian splendour, and prostrate nations were
adoring him as a god. No one surely would venture to suggest that the orb of his
niajestical divinity might one day suffer an eclipse. We shall see! Strange things
have happened on this much-agitated planet.

III. Despisep 1n ace. 1. The shadows gathering. The brightest earthly glory is
Viable to fade. One who has reached the topmost pinnacle of fame, and is the object
of admiration to millions of his fellows, may yet sink so low that men shall say of him,
as Mark Antony said of the fallen Casar—


‘“‘ Now lies he there,
And none so poor to do him reverence.”


The idol of one age may become an object of execration to the next. As in ancient

Egypt another king arose who knew not Joseph, so in the picture of the Preacher

Ber to manhood another generation which knew not the poor wise youth who had
his country’s deliverer. He of whom it had once been said—


“ All tongues speak of him, and the bleared sights
Are spectacled to see him . . and such a pother {made about him),
As if that whatsoever God who leads him
Were slily crept into his human powers,
And gave him graceful posture” —
(‘ Coriolanus,’ act fi. so. 1.)


lived to be an object of derision to his subjects. 2. The night descending. In the
frony of history, the same (or a similar) fate overtook him as had devoured his
redecessor. As the men and women of a past age had counted his predecessor an
imbecile and a fool, so were the men and women of the present age disposed to look on
him. If they did not depose him, they did not “rejoice in him,” as their fathers had
done when they hailed him as their country’s saviour; they simply suffered him to


cH. Iv. 1—16,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 97


drop into ignominious contempt, and perhaps well-merited oblivion. Such spectacles
of the vanity of kingly state had been witnessed before the Preacher’s day, and have
been not unknown since, So fared it with the boy-prince Joash (2 Kings xi. 12;
2 Chron. xxiv, 25), and with Richard II., whose subjects cried “ All hail!” to him in
the day of his popularity, but to whom, when he put off his regal dignity,


“No man cried, ‘God save him!’
No joyful tongue gave him his welcome home,
But dust was thrown upon his sacred head.”
(‘King Richard IL,’ act v. se. 2.)


Learn: 1. The vanity of earthly glory. 2. The fickleness of popular renown, & The
ingratitude of men.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Ver. 1.—The oppressed and the oppressor. Liberty has ever been the object of human
desire and aspiration. Yet how seldom and how partially has this boon been secured
during the long period of human history! Especially in the East freedom has been but
little known. Despotism has been and is very general, and there have seldom been states
of society in which there has been no room for reflections such as those recorded
in this verse.

I. THE TYRANNY OF THE OPPRESSOR, 1. This implies power, which may arise
from physical strength, from hereditary authority, from rank and wealth, or from civil
and political position and dignity. Power will always exist in human society; drive
it out at one door, and it will re-enter by another. It may be checked and restrained;
but it is inseparable from our nature and state. 2, It implies the misuse of power. It
may be good to have a giant’s strength, but “tyrannous to use it like a giant.” The
great and powerful use their strength and influence aright when they protect and care
for those who are beneath them. But our experience of human nature leads us to
believe that where there is power there is likely to be abuse. Delight in the exercise
of power is too generally found to lead to the contempt of the rights of others; hence
the prevalence of oppression. ;

Il. THE sORROWFUL LOT OF THE OPPRESSED. 1. The sense of oppression creates
grief and distress, depicted in the tears of those suffering from wrong. _ Pain is one
thing; wrong is another and a bitterer thing. A man will endure patiently the ills
which nature or his own conduct brings upon him, whilst he frets or even rages
under the evil wrought by his neighbour’s injustice. 2. The absence of consolation
adds to the trouble. ‘Twice it is said of the oppressed, “They had no comforter.”
The oppressors are indisposed, and fellow-sufferers are unable, to succour and relieve
them. 3. The consequence is the slow formation of the habit of dejection, which may

into despondency.
ae THE ee SUGGESTED BY SUCH SPECTACLES. 1. No right-minded
person can look upon instances of oppression without discerning the prevalence and
lamenting the pernicious effects of sin. To oppress a fellow-man is to do despite to the
image of God himself. 2. The mind is often perplexed when it looks, and looks in
vain, for the interposition of the just Governor of all, who defers to intervene for the
rectification of human wrongs. “ How long, O Lord!” is the exclamation of many 8
pious»believer in Divine providence, who looks upon the injustice of the haughty and
contemptuous, and upon the woes of the helpless who are smitten and afflicted. 8. Yet
there is reason patiently to wait for tle great deliverance. He who has effected a
glorious salvation on man’s behalf, who has “ visited and redeemed his people,” will in
due time humble the selfish tyrant, break the bonds of the captive, and let the oppressed


go free.—T.


Vers. 2, 3.—Pessimiem. It would be a mistake to regard this language as expressing
the deliberate and final conviction of the author of Ecclesiastes. It represents a mood
of his mind, and indeed of many a mind, oppressed by the sorrows, the wrongs, and the
perplexities of human life. Pessimism is at the root a philosophy; but its manifestation


TES, H


98 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fou. rv. 1—16.


ee ee


is in a habit or tendency of the mind, such as may be recognized in many who are
altogether strange to speculative thinking. The pessimism of the East anticipated that
of modern Europe. Though there is no reason for connecting the morbid state of mind
recorded in this Book of Ecclesiastes with the Buddhism of India, both alike bear witness
to the despondency which is naturally produced in the mental habit of not a few who
are perplexed and discouraged by the untoward circumstances of human life.

I. THE UNQUESTIONABLE FACTS UPON WHICH PESSIMISM IS BASED, 1. The unsatis-
fying nature of the pleasures of life. Men set their hearts upon the attainment of
enjoyments, wealth, greatness, etc. When they gain what they seek, the satisfaction
expected does not follow. ‘The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with
hearing. Disappointed and unhappy, the votary of pleasure is “soured” with life
itself, aud asks, ‘ Who will show us any good?” 2. The brevity, uncertainty, and
transitoriness of life. Men find that there is no time for the acquirements, the pursuits,
the aims, which seem to them essential to their earthly well-being. In many cases
life is cut short; but even when it is prolonged, it passes like the swift ships. It
excites visions and hopes which in the nature of things cannot be realized. 3. The
actual disappointment of plans and the failure of efforts. Men learn the limitations
of their powers; they find circumstances too strong for them; all that seemed desirable
proves to be beyond their reach. /

Il. THz HABIT OF MIND IN WHICH PESSIMISM CONSISTS. 1. It comes to be a steady
conviction that life is not worth living. Is life a boon at all? Why should it be
prolonged, when it is ever proving itself insufficient for human wants, unsatisfying
to human aspirations? ‘he young and hopeful may take a different view, but their
illusions will speedily be dispelled. There is nothing so unworthy of appreciation
and desire as life. 2. The dead are regarded as more fortunate than the living; and,
indeed, it is a misfortune to be born, to come into this earthly life at all. ‘ The sooner
it’s over, the sooner aslerp.” Consciousness is grief and misery; they only are blest
who are at rest in the painless Nirvana of eternity.

III. THE ERRORS INVOLVED IN THE PESSIMISTIO INFERENCE AND CONCLUSION. 1. It
is assumed that pliasure is the chief good. A great living philosopher deliberately
takes it for granted that the question—Is life worth living? is to be decided by the
oa a ae life yield a surplus of agreeable feeling ? This being so, it is natural

at the disappointed and unhappy should drift into pessimism. But, as a matter of
fact, the test is one altogether unjust, and can only be justified upon the supposition
that man is merely a creature that feels. It is the hedonist who is disappointed that
becomes the pessimist. 2. There is a higher end for man than pleasure, viz. spiritual
cultivation and progress. It is better to grow in the elements of a noble character
than to be filled with all manner of delights. Man was made in the likeness of God,
and his discipline on earth is to recover and to perfect that likeness. 8. This higher
end may in some cases be attained by the hard process of distress and disappointment.
This seems to have been lost sight of in the mood which found expression in the
language of these verses, Yet experience and reflection alike concur to assure us that
it may be good for us to be afilicted. It not infrequently happens that


« The soul
Gives up a part to take to it the whole.”


APPLICATION. As there are times and circumstances in all persons’ lives which are
naturally conducive to pessimistic habits, it behoves us to be, at such times and in such
circumstances, especially upon our guard lest we half consciously tall into habits so
destructive of real spiritual well-being and usefulness. The conviction that Infinite
Wisdom and Righteousness are at tiie heart of the universe, and not blind unconscious
fate and force, is the one preservative ; and to this it is the Christian’s privilege to add
an affectionate faith in God as the lather of the spirits of all flesh, and the benevolent
Author of life and immortal salvation to all who receive his gospel and confide in the
mediation of his blessed Son.—T.


Ver. 4.—mvy. There is no vice more vulgar and despicable, none which afforda
more painful evidence of the depravity of human nature, than envy. It is a vice which


om. rv. I—16.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 99


Christianity has done much to discourage and repress; but in unchristian communities
its power is mighty and disastrous.

I, ‘THE FACTS FROM WHICH ENVY SPRINGS. 1. Generally, the inequality of the human
lot is the occasion of envious feelings, which would not arise were all men possessed
of an equal and a satisfying portion of earthly good. 2. Particularly, the disposition,
on the part of one who is not possessed of some good, some desirable quality or property,
to grasp at what 7s possessed by another.

Il. ''HE FEELINGS AND DESIRES IN WHICH ENVY consists. We do not say that a
man is envious who, seeing another strong or healthy, prosperous or powerful, wishes
that he enjoyed the same advantages. Emulation is not envy. The envious man
desires to take another’s possessions from him—desires that the other may be
impoverished in order that he may be enriched, or depressed in order that he may be
exalted, or rendered miserable in order that he may be happy.

II. Tue MISCHIEF To WHICH ENVY LEADS. 1. It may lead to unjust and malevolent
action, in order that it may secure its gratification. 2. It produces unhappiness in the
breast of him who cherishes it; it gnaws and corrodes the heart. 3. It is destructive
of confidence and cordiality in society.

IV. THE TRUE CORRECTIVE TO ENVY. 1. It should be cunsidered that whatever
men acquire and enjoy is attributable to the Divine favour and loving-kindness, 2. And
that all men have blessings far beyond their deserts. 38. It becomes us to think less
of what we do not or do possess, and ore of what we do. 4. And to cultivate the
spirit of Christ—the spirit of self-sacrifice and benevolence.—T.


Ver. 6.— The handful with quietness. The lesson here imparted is proverbial. Every
language has its own way of conveying and emphasizing this practical truth. Yet
it is a belief more readily professed than actually made the basis of human conduct,

I, ABUNDANT MATERIAL WEALTH ATTRACTS ATTENTION AND EXCITES DESIRE,

II. ‘HE DISPOSITION AND HABIT OF MIND WITH WHICH OUR POSSESSIONS ARE ENJOYED
18 OF MORE IMPORTANCE THAN THEIR AMOUNT. 1. 'lhis appears from a consideration
of human nature. “A man’s life consisteth not.in the abundance of the things which
he possesses.” 2. And experience of human life enforces this lesson; for every observer
of his fellow-men has remarked the unhappiness and pitiable moral state of some
wealthy neighbours, and has known cases where narrow means have not hindered real
well-being and felicity.

III. Iv 1s HENCE INFERRED THAT A QUIET MIND WITH POVERTY IS TO BE PREFERRED
™0 WEALTH WITH VEXATION. So it seemed even to Solomon in all his glory, and
similar testimony has been borne by not a few of the great of this world. Nor, on the
other hand, is it uncommon to find the healthy, happy, and pious among the poor
rejoicing in their lot, and cherishing gratitude to God for the station to which they were
born, and for the work to which they are called.

ApputicaTion. 1. The comparison made by the wise man in this passage is a rebuke
to envy. Who can tell what, if his two hands were filled with earthly good, he might,
in consequence of his wealth, be called upon to endure of sorrow and of care? 2. On
the other hand, this comparison is an encouragement to contentment. A handful is
sufficient; and a quiet heart, grateful to God and at peace with men, can make what
others might deem poverty not only endurable but welcome. It is God’s blessing which
maketh rich; and with it he addeth no sorrow.—T.


Ver. 8.— The pain of loneliness. ‘The picture here drawn is one of pathetic interest.
It cannot have originated in personal experience, but must have been suggested by
incidents in the author’s wide and varied observation. A lonely man without a brother
to share his sorrows and joys, without a son to succeed to his name and possessions, is
represented as toiling on through the years of his life, and as accumulating a fortune,
and then as awaking to a sense of his solitary state, and asking himself for whom he
thus labours and endures? It is vanity, and a sore travail!

I, THE COMPANIONSHIP OF DOMESTIC AND SOCIAL LIFE IS THE ORDER OF NATURE
AND THE APPOINTMENT OF Gop’s PROVIDENCE. There are cases in which men are
called upon to deny themselves such companionship, and there are cases in which they
have been, by no action of their own, but by the decree of God, deprived of it, But the


100 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cx. rv. 1—16,
a ee re


constitution of the individual’s nature and of human society are evidence that the
declaration regarding our first father holds good of his posterity—that is, in normal
circumstances—“ It is not good for the man to be alone.”

Il. SucH COMPANIONSHIP SUPPLIES A MOTIVE AND A RECOMPENSE FOR TOIL. A man
can work better, more efficiently, perseveringly, and happily, when he wo1ks for others
than when he works only for himself. Many a man owes his habits of industry and
self-denial, his social advancement and his moral maturity, to the necessity of labouring
for his family. He may be called upon to maintain aged parents, to provide for the
comfort of a sickly wife, to secure the education of his sons, to save a brother from
destitution. And such a call may awaken a willing and cheerful response, and may,
under God, account for a good work in life.

III. THE ABSENCE OF SUCH COMPANIONSHIP MAY BE A SORE AFFLICTION, AND MAY
BE THE OCCASION OF UNWISE AND BLAMABLE DISSATISFACTION AND MURMURING.
Under the pressure of loneliness, a man may relax his cffurts, or he may fall into a dis-
contented, desponding, and cynical frame of mind. He may lose his interest in life
and in human affairs generally. He may even become misanthropic and sceptical.

IV. THE TRUE CORRECTIVE OF SUCH UNHAPPY TENDENCIES IS TO BE FOUND IN THE
OULTIVATION OF SPIRITUAL FELLOWSHIP WITH CHRIST, AND IN A WIDE CIRCLE OF
SYMPATHY AND BENEVOLENCE. No one need be lonely who can call his Saviour his
Friend ; and Christ’s friendship is open to every believer. And ali Christ’s disciples and
brethren are of the spiritual kindred of him who trusts and loves the Redeemer. Where
kindred “‘ according to the flesh” are wanting, there need be no lack of spiritual relatives
and associates. All around the lonely man are those who need succuur, kindly aid,
education, guardianship, and the heart purifies and refines as it takes in new objects of
pity, interest, and Christian affection. And the day shall come when the Divine Saviour
and Judge shall say to those who have responded to his appeal, “ Inasmuch as ye did
it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it unto me.”—T,


Vers. 9—12.— The advantages of fellowship. There is a sense in which we have no
choice but to be members of society. -We are born into a social life, trained in it, and
in it we must live. ‘‘ None of us liveth unto himself.” But there is a sense in which
it rests with us to cultivate fellowship with our kind. And such voluntary association,
we are taught in this passage, is productive of the highest benefits,

I, FELLOWSHIP MAKES LABOUR EFFECTIVE. “Two have a good reward for their
labour.” If this was so in the day of the writer of Ecclesiastes, how much more
strikingly and obviously is it so to-day! Division of labour and co-operation in labour
are the two great principles which account for the success of industrial enterprise
in our own time. ‘There is scope for such united efforts in the Church of Christ—for
unity and brotherly kindness, for mutual help, consideration, and endeavour.

I], FELLOWSHIP PROVIDES SUCCOUR IN CALAMITY. When two are together, he who
falls may be lifted up, when if alone he might be left to perish. This is a common-
place truth with reference to travellers in a strange land, with reference to comrades in
war, etc. Our Lord Jesus sent forth his apostles two and two, that one might supply
his neighbour’s deficiencies; that the healthy might uphold the sick ; and the brave
might cheer the timid. The history of Christ’s Church is a long record of mutual
succour and consolation. To raise the fallen, to cherish the weakly, to relieve the
needy, to assist the widow and fatherless,—this is true religion. Here is the sphere
for the manifestation of Christian fellowship.

III. FELLOWSHIP IS PROMOTIVE OF COMFORT, WELL-BEING, AND HAPPINESs. “ How
can one be warm alone?” asks the Preadher. Every household, every congrezation,
every Christian society, is a proof that there is a spirit of mutual dependence whe-ever
the will of the great Father and Saviour of mankind is honoured and obeyed. The
more there is of brotherly love within the Church, the more effective will be the Church’s
dey benevolence and missionary aggression upon the ignorance and sin of the
wor

IV. FELLowsHIP IMPARTS STRENGTH, STABILITY, AND POWER OF RESISTA
placing themselves shoulder to shoulder, can withstand an onset before ohichion’ ee
would fall. ‘‘ The threefold cord is not quickly broken.” It must’ be rememberea that
the work of religious men in this world is no child’s play; there are forces of evil to


om. 1rv.1—16.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 101


—_—_—_—_—— rc


resist, there is a warfare to be maintained. And in order to succeed, two things are
needful : first, dependence upon God; and secondly, brotherhood with our comrades and
fellow-soldiers in the holy war.—T.


Vers. 13, 14.—Folly a worse evil than poverty. This is no doubt a paradox. For
one man who seeks to become wise, there are a hundred who desire and strive for riches,
For one man who desires the friendship of the thoughtful and prudent, there are ten
who cultivate the intimacy of the prosperous and luxurious. Still, men’s judgment is
fallible and often erroneous; and it is so in this particular.

I, WIsDOM ENNOBLES YOUTH AND PoveRTy. Age does not always bring wisdom,
which is the gift of God, sometimes—as in the case of Solomon—conferred in early life.
True excellence and honour are not attached to age and station. Wisdom, modesty, and
trustworthiness may be found in lowly abodes and in youthful years, Character is the
supreme test of what is admirable and good. A young man may be wise in the
conduct of his own life, in the use of his own gifts and opportunities, in the choice of his
own friends; he may be wise in his counsel offered to others, in the influence he exerts
over others, And his wisdom may be shown in his contented acquiescence in the

verty of his condition and the obscurity of his station. He will not forget that the

rd of all, for our sakes, became poor, dwelt in a lowly home, wrought at a manual
occupation, enjoyed few advantages of human education or of companionship with the

reat,
: II. FoLuy DEGRADES AGE AND ROYALTY. In the natural order of things, knowledve
and prudence should accompany advancing age. It is “ years that bring the philosophio
mind.” In the natural order of things, high station should call out the exercise of
statesmanship, thoughtful wisdom, mature and weighty counsel. Where all these are
absent, there may be outward greatness, splendour, luxury, empire, but true kingship
there is not. There is no fool so conspicuously and pitiably foolish as the aged
monarch who can neither give counsel himself nor accept it from the experienced and
trustworthy. And the case is worse when his folly is apparent in the mismanayement
of his own life. It may be questioned whether Solomon, in his youth, receiving in
answer to prayer the gift of wisdom, and using it with serious sobriety, was not more
to be admired than when, as a splendid but disappointed voluptuary, he enjoyed the
revenues of provinces, dwelt in sumptuous palaces, and received the homage of
distant potentates, but yet was corrupted by his own weaknesses into connivance at
idolatry, and was unfaithful to the Lord to whose bounty he was indebted for ail he
ossessed.

: APPLICATION. This is a word of encouragement to thoughtful, pure-minded, and
religious youth. The judgment of inspiration commends those who, in the flower of
their age, by God’s grace rise above the temptations to which they are exposed, and
cherish that reverence toward the Lord which is the beginning of wisdom.—T.


Vers. 1—3.—Pessimism and Christian life. It is a very significant fact that this
pessimistic note (of the text) should be as much heard as it is in this land and in
this age;—in this land, where the hard and heavy oppressions of which the writer of
Ecclesiastes had to complain are comparatively unknown; in this age, when Christian
truth is familiar to the highest and the lowest, is taught in every sanctuary and may
be read ix every home. There are to be found (1) not only many who, without the
courage of the suicide, wish themselves in their grave; but (2) also many more who
believe that human life is worth nothing at all, even less than nothing; who would say
with the Preacher, “ better than both is he who hath not been;” who would respond
to the English poet of this century in his lament—


“ Count o’er the joys thy life has seen,
Count o’er thy days from sorrow free;
But know, whatever thou hast been,
Tis something better not to be.”


There is an unfailing remedy for this wretched pessimism, and that is found in an
earnest Christian life. No man who heartily and practically appropriates all that
Christian truth offers him, and who lives a sincere and genuine Christian life, could


102 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. rv. 1—16.
a a SS


cherish such a sentiment or employ such language as this. For the disciple of Jesus
Christ who really loves and follows his Divine Master has— f

I. ComrorT rN His sorrows. He never has reason to complain that there is “no
comforter.” Even if human friends and earthly consolations be lacking, there is One
who fulfils his word, “I will not leave you comfortless;” ‘I will come to you;” “ek
will send you another Cumforter, even the Spirit of truth.” Whether suffering from
oppression, or from loss, or bereavement, or bodily distress, there are the ‘‘consolations
which are in Jesus Christ ;” there is the “God of all comfort” always near.

II. Rest 1n wis wEART. That peace of mind, that rest of soul which is of simply
incalculable worth (Matt. xi. 28; Rom. v. 1); sacred, spiritual calm, which the world
“cannot take away.”

III. Resources WHICH ARE UNFAILING. In the fellowship he has with God, in the
elevated enjoyments of devotion, in the intercourse he has with holy and earnest souls
like-minded with himself, he has sources of sacre1 joy, “ springs that do not fail.” _

IV. 'lHE SECRET OF HAPPINESS IN ALL HIS HUMBLEST LABOUR. He does everything,
even though he be a servant or even a slave, as “unto Christ the Lord ;” and all
drudgery is gone; life is filled with interest, and toil is crowned with dignity and
nobleness.

V. Joy IN UNSELFISH SERVICE OF HIS KIND.

VI. Hors in pEatu.—C. :


Vers. 4—6.—Practical wisdom in the conduct of life. What shall we pursue—
distinction or happiness? Shall we aim to be markedly successful, or to be quietly
content? What shall be the goal we set before us?

I, THE FASCINATION OF success. A great many men resolve to atiain distinction in
their sphere. They put forth “labour, skilful labour,” inspired by feelings of rivalry ;
they are animated by the hope of surpassing their fellows, of rising above them in the
reputation they achieve, in the style in which they live, in the income they earn, ete.
There is very little that is profitable here. 1. It must necessarily be attended with a
large amount of failure: where many run, “but one receiveth the prize.” 2, The
satis(action of success is short-lived; it soon loses its keen relish, and becomes of small
account, 38. It is a satisfaction of a very low order.

II. THE TEMPTATION TO INDOLENCE. Many men are content to go through life
moving along a much lower level than their natural capacities, their educational
advantages, and their social introductions fit them and entitle them to maintain.
They crave quietude; they want to be free from the bustle, the worry, the burden of
the strife of life; they prefer to have a very small share of worldly wealth, and to fill
a very little space in the regard of their neighbours, if only they can be well left alone.
“The sluggard foldeth his hands; yea, he eateth his meat” (Cox). There is a measure
of sense in this; much is thereby avoided which it is desirable to shun. But, on the
other hand, such a choice is ignoble; it is to decline the opportunity; it is to retreat
from the battle; it is to leave the powers of our nature and the opportunities of our
life idle and unemployed,

III. Tue wispom or THE wisk. This is: 1. To be contented with our lot; not to be
dissatisfied because there are others above us in the trade or the profession in which we
are engaged; not to be envious of those more successful than ourselves; to recognize
the goodness of our Divine Father in making us what we are and giving us what we
have, 2. To let our labours be inspired by high and elevating motives; to work with
all our strength, because (1) God loves faithfulness; (2) we cannot respect ourselves
mor earn the esteem of the upright if we are indolent or faulty; (8) diligence and
devotedness conduct to an honourable success, and enable us to render greater service
both to Christ and to mankind.—C.


Vers, 9—12.—Mutual service. There is a measure of separateness, and even of
loneliness, which is inseparable from human life. There are times and occasions when
&® man must determine for himself what choice he will make, what course he will
pursue. Each human soul must “bear its own burden” in deciding what shall be its
fina] attitude toward revealed truth; what shall be its abiding relation to God;
whether it will accept or decline the crown of eternal life. Nevertheless, we thank


on, Iv. 1—16.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, TIE PREACHER. 108


God for human companionship; we rejoice greatly that he has so “fashioned our
hearts alike,” and so interwoven our human lives, that we can be much to one another,
and do much for one another, as we go on our way. “'I'wo are better than one.” The
union of hearts and lives means—

I, SHariea success. “They have a good reward for their labour.” If two men
work apart, and succeed in their labour, each has his own separate satisfaction. But
if they confide their hojcs, and tell their triumphs, and share their joys together, each
man has much more “ reward for his labour” than if he strove apart. It is one of the
blessings of earlier life that its victories are so much enhanced by their being shared
with others; it is one of the detractions from later life that its successes are confined
to so small a sphere.

If. Resroration, (Ver, 10.) The falling of the solitary traveller in the unfrequented
and dangerous path is a picture of the more serious and often fatal falling of the
pilgrim in the path of life. To fall into disgrace, or (what is worse) into sin and evil
habitude, and to have no true and loyal friend to stand by and to hold out the
uplifting hand, to cover the shame with the mantle of his unspotted reputation, to lead
back the erring soul with his strength and rectitude into the way of wisdom, into the
kingdom of God—to such a man, in such necessity, the “ woe” of the preacher may
well be uttered.

III. Animarion. (Ver.11.) “In Syria the nights are often keen and frosty, and
the heat of the day makes men more susceptible to the nightly cold, The sleeping-
chambers, moreover, have only unglazed lattices, which let in the frosty air... . And
therefore the natives huddle together for the sake of warmth, To lie alone was to lie
shivering in the chill night air.” Moreover, it may be said that to sleep in the cold
is, in certain temperatures, to be in danger of losing life, while the warmth given by
contact with life would preserve vitality. ‘To be “alone” is to live a cold, cheerless,
inanimate existence; to be warmed by human friendship, to be animated by contact
with living men, is to have a measure, a fulness, of life not otherwise enjoyed,

IV, Derence, (Ver. 12.) “Our two travellers (see above), lying snug and warm
on their common mat, buried in slumber, were very likely to be disturbed by thieves
who had dug a hole into the barn or crept under the tent.... If one was thus
aroused, he would call on his comrade for help” (Cox). It is not only the prowling
thief against whom a man may defend his companion. By timely warning, by wise
suggestion, by sound instruction, by faithful entreaty, by ; ractical sympathy, we may
so stand by one another, that we may save from the worst attacks of our most deadly
spiritual enemies; thus we may save one another from falling into error, into unbeliei,
into vice, into shame and sorrow, “into the pit,” We conclude, therefore; 1. That we
should prize human friendship most highly, as shat which furnishes us with the
opportunity of hishest service (see Isa, xxxii. 2). 2. That we should so choose our
companions that we shall have from them the help we need in the trying hour.
8. That we should gain for ourselves the stryngth and succour of the Divine
Friend.—C.


Ver. 12 (latter part).—.A threefold cord. Many bonds of many kinds bind us in
many ways, Of these some are hard and cruel, and these we have to break as best we
can; the worst of them may be snapped when we strive with the help that comes from
Heaven, But there are others which are neither hard nor cruel, but kind and beneficent,
and these we should not shun, but gladly welcome, Such is the threefold cord which
binds us to our God and to his service. It is composed of—

I. Dury. To know, to reverence, to love, to serve God, is our supreme obligation,
For we came forth from him; we are indebted to him for all that makes us what we
are, owing all our faculties of every kind to his creative power. We have been sus-
tained in being every moment by his Divine visitation; we have been enriched by him
with everything we possess, our hearts and our lives owing to his generous kindness all
their joys and all their blessings; it is in him that we live and move and have our
being; we sum up all obligations, we touch the height and depth of exalted duty,
when we say that “he is our God.” Moreover, all this natural obligation is enhanced
and multiplied manifold by all that he nas done ‘or us, and all that he has endured for
us in the salvation which is in Jesus Christ, his Son,


104 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. on, Iv. 1—16.


nnn EE dtEEE aS StS EES Osa


TI. Inverzest. To know, to love, to serve God,—this is our highest and truest
interest. 1. It means the possession of his Divine favour; and that surely is much, not
to say everything, to us. 2. It constitutes our real, because our spiritual, well-being; it
causes us thereby and therein to realize the ideal of our humanity; we are at our very
best imaginable when we are in fellowship with God and are possessing his likeness.
8. It secures to us a happy life below, filled with hallowed contentment, and charged
with sacred joy, while it conducts to a future which will be crowned with immortal

lory.
% Ti Arrrction. To live in the service of Jesus Christ is to act as our human
relationships demand that we should act. It is to give the deepest and purest satis-
faction to those from whom we have received the most self-denying love; it is also to
lead those for whom we have the strongest affection in the way of wisdom, in the paths
of honour, joy, eternal life.—C.


Vers. 13—16.—Circumstance and character. This very obscure passage is thus
sendered by Cox (‘The Quest of the Chief Good”): “ Happier is a poor and wise youth
han an old and foolish king, who even yet has not learned to be admonished. Fora
-wisoner may go from a prison to a throne, whilst a king may become a beggar in his
own kingdom. I see all the living who walk under the sun flocking to the sociable
youth who standeth up in his place; there is no end to the multitude of the people
over whom he ruleth. Nevertheless, those who live after him will not rejoice in him;
for even this is vanity and vexation of spirit.” Thus read, we have a very clear
myaning, and we are reminded of a very valuable lesson. We may learn—

i. THE VANITY OF TRUSTING IN CIRCUMSTANCE APART FROM CHARACTER. It is well
enough to bear a royal name, to have a royal retinue, to move among royal surroundings.
Old age may forget its infirmities in the midst of its rank, its honours, its luxuries.
But when royalty is dissevered from wisdom, when it has not learned by experience,
but has grown downwards rather than upwards, the outlook is poor enough. The
foolish king is likely enough to be dethroned, and tu “become a beggar in his own
kingdom.” An exalted position makes a man’s follies seem larger than they are; and
as they injuriously affect every one, they are likely to lead to universal condemnation
and to painful penalty. It is of little use to be enjoying an enviable position if we
have not character to maintain and ability to adorn it. The wheel of fortune will
soon take to the bottom the man who is now rejoicing on the top of it.

II. Tie NEEDLESSNESS OF DESPAIR IN THE DEPTH OF MISFORTUNE. Whilst the old
and foolish king may decline aud fall, the wise youth, who has been disregarded, will
move on und up to honour and to power, and even the condemned prisoner may mount
the throne. The history of men and of nations proves that nothing is impossible in
the way of recovery and elevation. Man may “hope to rise” from the bottom, as he
should ‘‘feir to fall” from the top of the scale. Let those who are honestly and
conscientiously striving, though it may be with small recognition or recompense, hope
to attain to the honour and the reward which are their due. Let those who have
suffered saddest disappointment and defeat remember that men may rise from the very
lowest estate even to the highest.

III. THE ONE UNFAILING SOURCE OF SATISFACTION. The old and foolish king may
deserve to be dethroned, but he may retain his position until he dies; the wise youth
may fail to reach the honours to which he is entitled; the innocent prisoner may
languish in his dungeon even until death opens the door and releases him. There is
no certainty in this world, where fortune is so fickle, and circumstance cannot be
counted upon even by the most sagacious. But there is one thing on which we may
reckon, and in which we may take refuge. To be upright in our heart, to be sound in
our character, to he true and faithful in life—this is to be what ts good; it is to enjoy
that which is best--the favour of God and our own self-respect; it is to move toward
that whtch ts blesse J—a heavenly future.—C.


Vers. 1—3.— Op,nression of man by hes fellows. Many different phases of human
misery are depicted in this book, many different moods of depression recorded; some
springing from the disquietude of the writer’s mind, others from the disorders he
witnessed in the world about him. Sensuous pleasure he had deelared (ch. iii. 12, 13,


on. tv. 1—16.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 105
ee I a


22) to be the only good for man, but now he finds that even that is not always to be
secured. There are evils and miseries that afflict his fellows, against which he cannot
shut his eyes. A vulgar sensualist might drown sorrow in the wine-cup, but he cannot
‘His merriment is spoiled by the thought of the misery of others, and he can find
nothing ‘ under the sun’ but violence and oppression. In utter despair, he pronounces
the dead happier than the living” (Cheyne). If he does not actually deny the immor-
tality of the soul, and is therefore without the consolation of believing that in a life to
come the evils of the present may be reversed and compensated for, he ignores it as
something of which we cannot be sure. We may see in this passage the germ of a
higher character than is to be formed by the most elaborate self-culture; the spontaneous
and deep compassion for the sufferings of others which the writer manifests tells us
that a nobler emotion than the desire of personal enjoyment fills his mind. He tells
us what he saw in his survey of society, and the feelings which were excited within
him by the sight.

I, THE WIDESPREAD MISERY CAUSED BY INJUSTICE AND CRUELTY, (Ver. 1.) His
description has been only too frequently verified in one generation after another of the
world’s history.

“ Man’s inhumanity to man
Makes countless thousands mourn.”


The barbarities of savage life, the wars and crusades carried on in the name of religion,
the cruelties perpetrated by despotic rulers to secure their thrones, the hardships of the
slave, the pariah, and the down-trodden, fill out the picture suggested by the words,
“T considered all the oppressions that are done under the sun.” They all spring from
the abuse of power (ver. 1), which might and should have been used for the protection
and comfort of men. The husband and father, the king, the priest, the magistrate, are
all invested with rights and authority of a greater or less extent over others, and the
abuse of this power leads to hardships and suffering on the part of those subject to them
which it is almost impossible to remedy. For many of the evils that may afflict a
community a revolution may seem the only way of deliverance; and yet that in the
vast majority of cases means, in the first instance, multiplying disorders and inflicting
fresh sufferings. Anarchy is a worse evil than bad government, and the fact that this
is so, is calculated to make the most ardent patriot hesitate before attempting to set
wrong right with a strong hand.

II. Tus FEELINGS EXCITED BY A CONTEMPLATION OF HUMAN MISERY. (Vers. 2, 3.)
One good point in the character of the speaker we have already noticed, and that is
that he cannot banish the thought of the distresses of others by attending to his own
ease and self-enjoyment. He is not like the rich man in the parable, who fared
sumptuously every day, and took no notice of the hungry, naked beggar covered with
sores that lay at his gate (Luke xvi. 19—21). On the contrary, a deep compassion
fills his heart at the thought of the oppressed who have no comforter, and the fact that
he cannot deliver them or ameliorate their lot does not lead him to consider it
unnecessary for him to distress himself about them; it rather tends to deepen the
despondency he feels, and to make him think those happy who have done with life,
and rest in the place where “the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary be at
rest” (Job iii. 17). Yea, better, he thinks, never to have been than to see the evil
work that is done under the sun (ver. 8). The distress which the sight of the suffer-
ings of the oppressed produces is unrelieved by any consolatory thought. The writer
does not, as I have said, anticipate a future life in which the righteous are happy, and
the wicked receive the due reward of their deeds; he does not invoke the Divine
interposition on behalf of the oppressed in the present life, or speak of the salutary
discipline of sufferings meekly borne. In short, we do not find here any light cast
upon the problem of evil in a world governed by a God of infinite power, wisdom, and
love, such as is given in o'her passages of Holy Scripture (Job, passim ; Ps. Ixxiii. ;
Heb. xii. 5—-11). But we may freely admit that the depth and intensity of feeling
with which our author speaks of human misery is infinitely preferable to a superficial
optimism founded, not upon Christian faith, but upon an imperfect appreciation of moral
and spiritual truth, aud generally accompanied by a selfish indifference to the welfare
of others. A striking parallel to the thought in this passage is to be found in the


106 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, [ou. rv. 1—16.


teaching of Buddhism. The spectacle of miseries of old age, discase, and death, drove
the Indian prince, Gakya Méwni, to find in Nirvana (annihilation, or unconscious
existence) a solution of the great problem. But both are superseded by the teaching of
Christ, who gives us to understand that “not to have been born” is not a blessing
which the more spiritually minded might covet, but a state better only than that
exceptional misery which is the doom of exceptional guilt (Matt. xxvi. 24).—J. W.


Vers. 4—6.— Ambition and indolence. The Preacher turns from the great, and to
him insoluble, problems connected with the misery and suffering in which so many of
the children of men are sunk. “His mood is still bitter; but it is no longer on the
oppressions and cruelty of life that he fixes his eye, but on its littleness, its mutual
jealousies, its greed, its strange reverses, its shams and hollowness. He puts on the
garb of the satirist, and lashes the pettiness and the follies and the vain hurry of
mankind” (Bradley). As it were, he turns from the evils which no foresight or effort
could ward off, to those which spring from preventible causes.

I. ResrLess AMBITION. (Ver. 4.) Revised Version, “Then I saw all labour and
every skilful work, that it cometh of a man’s rivalry with his neighbour” (margin),
The Preacher does not deny that labour and toil may be crowned with some measure
of success, but he notices that the inspiring motive is in most cases an envious desire
on the part of the worker to surpass his fellows. Hence he asserts that in general no
lasting good ig secured by the individual worker (Wright). The general community
may benefit largely by the results achieved, the progress of civilization may be
advanced by the competition of artist with artist, but without a moral gain being
attained by those who have put forth all their strength and exerted to the utmost all
their skill. They may still feel that their ideal is higher than their achievements;
they may see with jealous resentment that their bist work is surpassed by others.
The poet Hesiod, in his ‘Works and Days,’ distinguishes between two kinds of rivalry
—the one beneficent and provocative of honest enterprise, the other pernicious and
provocative of discord. The former is like that alluded to here by the Preacher, and is
the parent of healthy competition.


“ Beneficent this better envy burns—
Thus emulous his wheel the potter turns,
The smith his anvil beats, the beggar thron
Industrious ply, the bards conteud in song.


But our author, looking at the motive rather than the result of the work, brands as
injurious the selfish ambition from which it may have sprung.

IL. Inponence. (Ver. 5.) “The fool! foldeth his hands together, and eatcth his own
flesh.” While there are some who fret aud wear themselves out in endeavours to
surpass their neighbours, others rust out in ignoble sloth. The hands of the busy
artist are deftly used to shape and fashion the materials in which he works, and to
embody the ideas or fancies conceived in his mind; the indolent fold their handa
together, and make no attempt either to excel others or to provide a living for them-
selves. The one may, after all his toil, be doomed to failure and disappointment; the
other most certainly dooms himself to want and misery. “He feeds upon his own
flesh,” and destioys himself. The sinfulncss of indolence, and the punishment which
it brings down upon itself, are plainly indicated in many parts of Holy Scripture
(Prov. vi. 10, 11; xiii. 4; xx. 4; Matt. xxv. 26; 2 Thess, iii, 10). But the special
point of the reference to the vice here seems to be the contrast which it affords to that
of feverish ambition. ‘The two dispositions depicted are opposed to each other; both
are blameworthy. It is foolish to seek to escape the evils of the one by ineurring
those of the other. A middle way between them is the path of wisdom, This is
taught us in ver. 6: “Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full
with travail and vexation of spirit.” The rivalry that consumes the strength, and
leads almost inevitably to disappointment and vexation of spirit, is deprecated ; 80 also
by implication, is the inactivity of the indolent. The “quietness ” which refreshes the
soul, and gives it contentment with a moderate competence, is not idleness, or the rest
of sloth. It is rest after labour, which the ambitious will not allow themselves te
take, The indolent do not enjoy it, their strength wastes away from want of exercise ;


ge ee ee


—_~


on. tv, 1—16,] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 107


———


while those of moderate, chastened desires can both be diligent in business and mindful
of their higher interests; they can labour assiduously without losing that tranquillity
of spirit and peace of mind which are essential to happiness in life—J. W.


Vers. 7—12.— Friendship a gain in life. A new thought dawns upon our author,
In his observation of the different phases of human life, he notes much that is dis-
appointing and unsatisfactory, but he also perceives some alleviations of the evils by
which man is harassed and disturbed. Amidst all his depreciation of the conditions
under which we live, he admits positive blessings which it is our wisdom to discern
and make the most of. Amongst these latter he counts friendship. It is a positive
gain, by which the difficulties of life are diminished and its enjoyments increased,
In vers. 8—12 he describes an isolated life wasted in fruitless, selfish toil, and dilates
with sumething like enthusiasm upon the advantages of companionship. In order, I
suppose, to make the contrast between the two states more vivid, he chooses a very

ronounced case of solitariness—not that of a man merely isolated from his fellows, say
ting by himself on a desert island, but that of one utterly separate in spirit, a miser
intent only on his own interests. We may call the passage a description of the evils of
a solitary life and the value of friendship.

I, THE EVILS OF A SOLITARY LIFE. (Vers. 7,8.) The picture is drawn with a very
few touches, but it is remarkably distinct and vivid. It represents a “solitary, friend-
less money-maker—a Shylock without even a Jessica; an Isaac of York with no
faithful Rebecca.” He is alone, he has no companion, no relative or friend, he knows
not who will succeed him in the possession of his heaped-up treasures; and yet he toils
on with unremitting anxiety, from early in the morning till late at night, unwilling te
lose a moment from his work as long as he can add anything to his gains. “There is
no end of all his labour.” The assiduity with which he at first applicd himself to the
task of accumulating riches distinguishes him to the end of life. At first, perhaps, he
had to force himself to cultivate habits of industry and application, but now he cannot
tear himself away from business. His habits rule him, and take away from him both
the ability and the inclination to relax his labours and to enjoy the fruit of them,
Have we not often seen instances of this folly in our own experience? Those who
have lived a laborious life, and have been successful in their undertakings, toiling oa
to the very last, afflicted with an insatiable avarice, never satisfied with their riches,
and only enjoying the mere consciousness of possessing them? Have we not noticed
how such a man gets to be penurious and fretful and utterly unfeeling? He gathers
in eagerly, and often unscrupulously, and gives ont reluctantly and sparingly. Hw
starves himself in the midst of abundance, grudges the most necessary expenses, and
denies himself and those dependent upon him the commonest comforts. The misery
he inflicts upon himself does not open his eyes to the folly of his conduct ; he grows
gradually callous to discomforts, and finds in the sordid gains which his parsimony
secures an abundant compensation for all inconveniences, And not only does he doom
himself to material discomfort and to intellectual impoverishment by setting his desires
solely upon riches, but he degrades his moral and spiritual character. If he must keep
all he has to himself, he must often ignore the just claims of others upon him; he must
steel his heart against the appeals of the poor and needy, and he must look with scorn
and contempt upon all those who are generous and liberal in helping their fellows,
And so we find such men gradually growing harsher and more unsympathetic, until it
seems at last as if they regarded every one about them with suspicion, as seeking to
wrest from their hands their hard-earned gains. And what is the pleasure of such a
life? How is it such men do not say within themselves, “ For whom do I labour, and
bereave my soul of good?” The folly of their conduct springs from two causes.
1. They forget that unremitting, fruitless toil is a curse. As a means to an end toil
is good, as an end in itself it is evil. It was never contemplated, even when man was
innocent, that he should be idle. He was placed in the garden of Eden to dress and to


keep it. But it is either his fault or his misfortune if he is all his life a slavish
drudge. It may be that he is forced by the necessities of his position to labour
mcessaatly and to the very end, to make a livelihood for himeelf and for those


dent n him, but his condition is not an ideal one, If he could secure a litile
Br ication: it would be all the better for him im every sense of the word.


108 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (ox. rv. 1—16.


And therefore for the miser to toil like a mere slave, when he might save himself the
trouble, is an evidence of how blinded he is by the vice to which he is addicted. 2. A
second cause of the miser’s folly is his ignoring the fact that riches have only value
when made use of. The mere accumulation of them is not enough; they must be
employed if they are to bu of service. No real, healthy enjoyment of them is to be
obtained by merely contemplating them and reckoning them up. Used in that way
they only feed an unnatural and morbid appetite.

II. Over against the miseries of a selfish, solitary life, our author sets THE ADVANTAGE
OF COMPANIONSHIP. (Vers. 9—12.) Friendship affords considerable mitigation of the
evils by which life is beset, and a positive gain is secured by those who cultivate it.
Three very homely figures are used to describe these advantages. The thought which
connects them all tozether is that of life as a journey, or pilgrimage, like that which
Bunyan describes in his wonderful book. If a man is alone in the journey of life,
he is liable to accidents and discomforts and dangers which the presence of a friend
would have averted or mitigated. He may fall on the road, and none be by to help
him; he may at night lie shivering in the cold, if he has no companion to cherish him
with kindly warmth; he may meet with robbers, whom his unaided strength is
insufficient to beat off. All these figures illustrate the general principle that in union
there is mutual helpfulness, comfort, and strength, verification of which we find in all
departments of life—in the family, in the intercourse of friends, and in the Church.
The benefits of such fellowships are undeniable. “It affords to the parties mutual
counsel and direction, especially in seasons of perplexity and embarrassment; mutual
sympathy, consolation, and care in the hour’ of calamity and distress; mutual
encouragement in anxiety and depression; mutual aid by the joint application of
bodily or mental energy to difficult and laborious tasks; mutual relief amidst the
fluctuations of worldly circumstances, the abundance of the one reciprocally supplying
the deficiencies of the other; mutual defence and vindication when the character of
either is injuriously attacked and defamed; and mutual reproof and affectionate
expostulation when either has, through the power of temptation, fallen into sin. ‘ Woe
to him that is alone when he’ so ‘falleth, and hath not another to help him up!’
—no one to care for his soul, and restore him to the paths of righteousness” (Wardlaw).
So far as the application of the principle to the case of ordinary friendship is concerned,
the wisdom of our author is instinctively approved of by all. The writings of moralists
in all countries and times teem with maxims similar to his. Some have thought that
thie virtue of friendship is too secular in its character to receive much encouragement
in the teaching of Christianity; that it is somewhat overshadowed, if not relegated
to comparative insignificance, by the obligations which a’ highly spiritual religion
imposes. The fact that the salvation of his soul is the one great duty of the individual
might have been expected to lead to a new development of selfishness, and the fact
that devotion to the Saviour is to take precedence of all other forms of affection might
have been expected to diminish the intensity of love which is the source of friendship.
And not only have such ideas existed in a speculative form, but they have led, in
many cases, to actual attempts to realize them. The ancient hermits sought to
cultivate the highest form of Christian life by complete isolation from their fellows;
they fled from society, dissevered themselves from all the ties of blood and friendship,
and shunned all association with their kind as something contaminating. And in our
own time, among many to whom the monastical life is specially repulsive, the very
same delusion which lay at the root of it is still cherished. They think that love of
husband, wife, child, or friend conflicts with love of God and Christ; that if the
human love is too intense it becomes a form of sin. And along with this is generally
found a cruel and dishonouring conception of the Divine character. God is thought of
as jealous of those who take his place in the affections, and the loss of those loved is
spoken of as a removal by him of the “idcls” who had usurped his righ*s. That such
teaching is a perversion of Christianity is very evident. The New Testament takes
ali the forms of natural human love as types of the Divine. As the father loves his
children, so does God love us. As Christ loved the Church ought a husband to love
his wife, ought his followers to love one another. No bounds can be set to affection :
“he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God.” The one great check, that our love for
auvther should not be allowed to lead us to do wrong or condone wrong, is not upon


eu. 1v.1—16.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 109
SE seg


the intensity, but upon the perversion of affection, and leads toa purer, holier, and more
satisfying exercise of affection. That Christ, whose love was universal, did not discourage
friendship is evident from the fact that he chose twelve disciples, and admitted them
to a closer intimacy with himself than others enjoyed, and that even among them there
was one whom he specially loved. It was seen, too, in the affection which he manifested
to the family in Bethany—Martha and Mary and their brother Lazarus. In the time of
his agony in Gethsemane he chose three of the disciples to watch with him, seeking for
some solace and support in the fact of their presence and sympathy. The truth of
Solomon’s statement that “two are better than one” was confirmed by Christ’s sending
out his disciples “two and two together” (Luke x. 1), and by the Divine direction given
by the Holy Ghost when Barnabas and Saul were set apart to go together on their first
great missionary enterprise (Acts xiii.2). But over and above these instances of Christ’s
example in cultivating friendship, and of the advantages of mutual co-operation in
Christian work, the great principle remains that true religion cannot come to any
strength in an isolated life. We cannot worship God aright if we “forsake the
assembling of ourselves together;” we cannot cultivate the virtues of which holiness
consists—Justice, compassion, forbearance, purity, and love—if we isolate ourselves; for
all these virtues imply our conducting ourselves in certain ways in all our relations
with others. We lose the opportunity of helping the weak, of cheering the disheartened,
and of co-operating with those who are striving to overcome the evils by which the
world is burdened, if we withdraw into ourselves and ignore others. So far, then, from
the wisdom of Solomon in this matter being, in comparison with the fuller revelation
through Christ, of an inferior and almost pagan character, it is of permanent and
undiminished value. Our acquaintance with Christian teaching is calculated to lead
us to form quite as decided a judgment as Solomon did as to the evils of a solitary life,
and the advantages of friendship.—J. W.


Vers. 13—16.—Mortifications of royalty. Yet another set of instances of folly and
disappointment occurs to our author’s mind; they are drawn from the history of the
strange vicissitudes through which many of those who have sat upon thrones have

sed, His references are vague and general, and no success has attended the attempts
of those who have endeavoured to find historical examples answering exactly to the
circumstances he here describes. But the truthfulness of his generalizations can be
abundantly illustrated out of the records of history, both sacred and profane. The
reason why he adds these instances of failure and misfortune to his list is pretty
evident. He would have us understand that no condition of human life is exempt from
the common lot; that though kings are raised above their fellows, and are apparently
able to control circumstances rather than to be controlled by them, as a matter of fact
as surprising examples of mutability are to be found in their history as in that of the
humbler ranks of men. He sets before us—

I. The image of “ AN OLD AND FOOLISH KING, WHO WILL NO MORE BE ADMONISHED ;”
who, though “born in his kingdom, becometh poor.” He is debauched by long
tenure of power, and scorns good advice and warning. “ We see him driven from his
throne, stripped of his riches, and becoming in his old age a beggar.” His want of
wisdom undermines the stability of his position, Though he has in the regular course
inherited his kingdom, and has an indefeasible right to the crown he wears—though
for many years his people have patiently endured his misgovernment—his tenure of
office becomes more and more uncertain. A time comes when it is a question whether
the nation is to be ruined, or a wiser and more trustworthy ruler put in his place. He
is compelled to abdicate, or is forcibly deposed or driven from his kingdom by an
invader, whose power he is unable to resist. His noble birth, his legal rights as a
sovereign, his grey hairs, the amiability of his private character, do not avail to secure
for him the loyal support of a people whom his folly has alienated from him. The
same idea of folly vitiating the dignity of old age is found in Wisd. iv. 8, 9, “ Honour-
able age is not that which standeth in length of time, nor that is measured by number
of years. But wisdom is the grey hair unto men, and unspotted life is old age.” The
biographies of Charles I. and James II. of England, and of Napoleon HL, furnish
examples of kings who learned nothing from experience, and scorned all warnings, and
brought upon themselves misery like that hinted at by Solomon. ‘The first of them


Se


110 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, [ox. v. 1—20.


met his death at the hands of his exasperated subjects, and the oth .r two, after deep
humiliations, died in exile.

II. The second instance of strange vicissitude is that of ONE WHO STEPS FROM A
DUNGEON TO A THRONE. It is by his wisdom that he raises himself to the place of ruler
over the neglected community. From obscurity he attains in a ioment to the height
of popular favour; thousands fluck to do him homage (vers. 15, 16a, “I saw all the
living which walk under the sun, that they were with the youth, the second, that stood
up in his stead. There was no end of all the people, even of all them over whom he
was,” Revised Version). The scene depicted of the ignominy into which the worthless
old king falls, and the enthusiasm with which the new one is greeted, reminds one of
Carlyle’s vivid description of the death of Louis XV. and the accession of his grandson,
The courtiers wait with impatience for the passing away of the king whose life had
been so corrupt and vile; he dies unpitied upon his loathsome sick-bed. “In the
remote apartments, dauphin and daupliness stand rvad-ready; ... waiting for some
signal to escape the house of pestilence. And, hark! across the CHil-de-Boeuf, what
sound is that—sound ‘terrible and absolutely like thunder’? It is the rush of the
whole court, rushing as in wager, to salute the new sovereigns: ‘Huil to your
Majesties!” The body of the dead king is unceremoniously committed to the grave,
“Him they crush down and huddle underground; him and his era of sin and tyranny
and shame; for behold! a New Era is come; the future all the brighter that the past
was base” (‘French Revolution,’ vol. i. ch. iv.). The same kind of picture has been
drawn by Shakespeare, in ‘ Richard II.,’ act v. sc. 2, where he describes the popularity
of Bolingbroke, and the contempt into which the king he displaced had sunk. Yet,
according to the Preacher, the breeze of popular favour soon dies away, and the hero is
soon forgotten. ‘They also that come a'ter him shall not rejoice in him.” The dark
cloud of oblivion comes down and envclups in its shade both those who deserve to be
remembered, and those who have been unworthy of even the brief popularity they
enjoyed in their lifetime. ‘ Who knows,” says Sir Thos. Browne, “ whether the best
of men be known, or whether there be not more remarkable persous forgot than any
that stand remembered on the known account of time?” (‘ Urn-burial’).

The fickle and short-lived character of all earthly fame should convince us of the
futility of making the desire of the a;plause of men the ruling motive of our lives; it
should lead us to do that which is good because it is good, and not in order “to be seen
of men,” and because we are responsible to God, in whose book all our deeds are
written, whether they be good or whether they be evil. The sense of disappointment
at the vanity of human fame should dispose our hearts to find satisfaction in the favour
of God, by whom all our good deeds will be remembered and rewarded (Ps. xxxvii.
5, 6; Gal. vi. 9; Matt. xxv. 21).—J. W.


EXPOSITION.


verses is obvious. Keep thy foot wh
LEE 2 Vv. goest to the house of God. Robe nade
Vers. 1—7.—Section 6. Man’s outward and | instead of “foot,” but the singular and
secular life being unable to secure liappiness , Plural numbers are both found in this signi-
and satisfaction, can these be found in ets ares a ane vee Prov. i.
popular religion? Religious exercises need re Ba ae eee agen
the observation of strict rules, which are far ee ee ee


‘ you are about, whither { i

from meeting with general attention. Kohe- | ‘There is no allnsion to the macerdatal fie a

leth proceeds to give instruction, in the | washing the feet before entering the holy

form of maxims, concerning public worship, | Place (2xod. xxx. 18, 19), nor to the custom

prvyemiadiows. of caret ee eyes ae entering a con-
: . secrate uilding, whic ;

Ver t.—This verse, in the Hebrew, Greek, | reverential awe end ohodient sechies pele
and Latin Bibles, forms the conclusion of expres-ion is simply a term connected with
ch. iv., and is taken independently; but the | man’s ordinary life transferred to his moral
division in our version is more natural, and | and religious life. The house of God is th
the connection of this with the following temple, The tabernacle is called “ ‘he


ad


oH. v. 1— 20.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


ill


house of Jehovah” (1 Sam. i, 7; 2 Sam. xii.
20), and this name is commonly applied to
the temple; e.g. 1 Kings iii. 1; 2 Chron. viii.
16; Ezra iii. 11. But “house of God” is
applied also to the temple (2 Chiron. v. 14;
Hzra v. 8, 15, etc.), so that we need not,
with Bullock, suppuse that Koheleth avoids
the name of the Lord of the covenant as “a
natural sign of the writer's humiliation after
his fall into idulatry, and an acknowledg-
ment of his unworthiness of the privileges
of a son of the covenant.” It is probable
that the expression here is meant to include
synagogues as well as the great temple at
Jerusalem, since the following clause seems
to imply that exhortation would be heard
there, which formed no part of the temple
service. ‘The verse has furnished a text on
the subject of the reverence due to God’s
house and service from Clirysostom down-
wards. And be more ready to hear, than to
give the sacrifice of fools. Various are the
renderings of this clause. Wright, “ For to
draw near to hear is (better) than the fools
offering sacrifices.” (So virtually Knobel,
Ewald, etc.) Ginsburg, “ For it is nearer to
obey than to offer the sacrifice of the dis-
obedient ;” i.e. it is the straighter, truer way
to take when you obey Goud than when you
merely perform outwaid scrvice. The Vul-
gate takes the infinitive verb as equivalent
to the imperative, as the Authorized Version,
Appropingua ut audiaa; but it is best to
regurd it as pure infinitive, and to translate,
“To approacii in order to hear is better than
49 offer the sacritice of fools.”” The senti-
ment is the same as that in 1 Sam. xv. 22,
“Hath the Lord'as great delight in burnt
ofierings and sacrifices, as in obeying the
voice of the Lord? LBeliold, to obey is better
than sacrifice, aud to hearken than the fat
of rams.” The same thought occurs in
Proy. xxi. 3; Ps. 1. 7—15; and continually
in the prophets; e.g. Isa. i. 11; Jer. vii.
21—23; Hos. vi. 6, etc. It is the reaction
against the mere ceremonialism which
marked the popular rmligion, Koheleth
had seen and deplored this at Jerusalem
and elsewhere, and he cnunciates the great
truth that it is more acceptable to God
that one should go to his house to hear the
Law read and taught and expounded, than
to offer a formal sacrifice, which, as being
the offering of a godless man is called in
proverbial language “the sacrifice of fouls”
(Prov. xxi. 27). The verb used here, “ give”
(nathan), is not the usual expression for
offering sacrifice, and may possily refer to
the feast which accompanied such sacrifices,
and which often degenerated into excess
(Delitzsch). That the verb rendered “ to
hear” does not mean merely “to obey” is

lain from its reference to conduct in the

use of God. Thereading of the Law, and


probably of the prophcts, formed a feature
of the temple service in Koheleth’s day;
the expounding of the same in public was
confined to the synagogues, which seem to
have originated in the time of the exile,
though there were doubtless before that
time some regular occasions of assembling
together (see 2 Kings iv. 23). For they
consider not that they do evil; “Ors ovx
cioly ciddres Tod mojo Kaxdv (Septuagint) ;
Qui nesciunt quid faciunt mali (Vulgate);
“ They are without knowledge, so that they
do evil” (Delitzsch, Knobel, etc.); “ As they
(who obey) know not to do evil” (Gins-
burg). The words can scarcely mean, “They
know not that they do evil;” nor, as Hitzig
has, “They know not how to be sorrowful,”
There is much difficulty in understanding
the passage according to the received read-
ing, and Nowack, with others, deems the
text corrupt. If we accept what we now
find, it is best to translate, “‘ They know not,
so that they do evil;” ¢e. their ignorance
predisposes them to err in this matter. The
persons meant are the “fools” who offer
unacceptable sacrifices. ‘These know not
how to worship God heartily and properly,
and, thinking to please him with their
formal acts of devotion, fall into a grievous
sin.

Ver. 2.—Koheleth warns against thought-
less words or hasty professions in prayer,
which formed another feature of popular
religion Be not rash with thy mouth. The
warning is against hasty and thoughtless
words in prayer, words that go from the lips
with glib facility, but come not from the
heart. Thus our Lord bids those who pray
not to use vain repetitions (uy Barrovoyh-
onre), a8 the heathen, who think to be heard
for their much speaking (Matt. vi. 7). Jesus
himself used the same words in his prayer
in the garden, and he continually urges the
lesson of much and constant prayer—a lesson
enforced by apostolic admonitions (see Luke
xi. 5, ete.; Phil. iv.6; 1 Thess. v. 17); but
it is quite possible to use the same words,
and yet throw the whole heart into them
each time that they are repeated. Whether
the repetition is vain or not depends upon
the spirit of the person who prays. Let not
thine heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God. We should weigh well our
wishes, arrange them discreetly, ponder
whether they are such as we can riglitly
make subjects of petition, ere we lay them
in words before the Lord. “ Before God”
may mean in the temple, the house of God,
where he is specially present, as Solomon
himself testified (1 Kings vili. 27, 30, 43).
God is in heaven. The infinite distance
between God and man, illustrated by the
contrast of earth and the illimitable heaven,
is the ground of the admonition to reverence


112


and thoughtfulness (comp. Ps. cxv. 3, 16;
Isa. ly. 8, 9; Ixvi. 1). Therefore let thy
words be few, as becomes one who speaks
in the awful presence of God. Ben-Sira
seems to have had this passage in mind
when he writes (Ecclus. vil. 14), “ Prate not
in a multitude of elders, and repeat not (uh
devrepdons) the word in prayer.” We may
remember the conduct of the priests of Baal
C1 Kings xviii. 26). Ginsburg and Wright
‘quote the Talmudic precept (¢ Berachoth,’
68. a), “ Let the words of a man always be
few in the presence of God, according as it
is written,” and then follows the passage in
our text.

Ver. 3.—The first clause illustrates the
second, the mark of comparison being simply
the copula, mere juxtaposition being deemed
sufficient to denote the similitude, as in ch.
vii. 1; Prov. xvii. 3; xxvii. 21. For a dream
cometh through (in consequence of) the
multitude of business. The verse is meant
to confirm the injunction against vain
babbling in prayer. Carcs and anxieties in
business or other matters occasion disturbed
sleep, murder the dreamless repose of the
healthy labourer, and produce all kinds of
sick fancies and imaginations. Septuagint,
* A dream cometh in abundance of trial (ae
pucpnod);” Vulgate, Multas curas sequuntur
somnia. And a fool’s voice is known by
multitude of words. The verb should be
supplied from the first clause, and not a
new one introduced, as in the Authorized
Version, “ And the voice of a fool (cometh)
in consequence of many words.” As surely
as excess of business produces fevered dreams,
80 excess of words, especi:lly in addresses to
God, produces a fool’s voice, ¢.e. foolish
speech. St. Gregory points out the many
ways in which the mind is affected by
images from dreams. ‘ Sometimes,” he
says, “dreams are engendered of iulness or
euptincss of the belly, sometimes of illusion,
sometimes of illusion and thought combined,
sometimes of revelation, while sumetimes
they are engendered of imagination, thought,
and revelat.on together” (‘ Moral.,’ viii. 42).

Ver. 4.—Koheleth passes on to give a
warning concerning the making of vows,
which formed a great feature in Hebrew
religion, and was the occasion of much irre-
verence and profanity. When thou vowest
a vow unto God, defer not to pay it. There
is here plainly a reminiscence of Deut. xxiii.
z1—23. Vows are not regarded as absolute
duties which every one was obliged to
undertake, They are of a voluntary nature,
but when made are to be strictly performed.
They might consist of a promise to dedicate
certain things or persons to God (see Gen.
xxviii. 20; Judg. xi. 30), or to abstain from
doing certain things, as in the case of the
Nazarites. The rabbinical injunction quoted


ECCLESIASTES; OR, TH. PREACHER.
a ee


(ou. v. 1—-20.


by our Lord in the sermon on the mount
(Matt. v. 33), “Thou shalt not forswear thy-
self, but shalt perform unto the Lord thine
oaths,” was probably levelled against pro-
fane swearing, or invoking God’s Name
lightly, but it may include the duty of per-
forming vows made to or in the Name of
God. Our Lord does not condemn the
practice of corban, while noticing with
rebuke a perversion of the custom (Mark
vii. 11). For he hath no pleasure in fools,
The non-fulfilment of a vow would prove @
man to be impious, in proverbial language
“a fool,” and as such God must regard him
with displeasure. The clause in the Hebrew
is somewhat ambiguous, being literally,
There ts no pleasure (chephets) in fools; i.e.
no one, neither God nor man, would take
pleasure in fools who make promises and
never perform them. Or it may be, There
is no fixed will in fools; i.e. they waver and
are undecided in purpose. But this render-
ing of chephets appears to be very doubtful.
Septuagint, “Ore odx Zor: O€Anua ev &ppory
which reproduces the vagueness of the
Hebrew; Vulgate, Displicet enim ei (Deo)
tinfidelis et stulta promissio. The meaning is
well represented in the Authorized Version,
and we must complete the sense by supply-
ing in thought “on the part of God.” Pay
that which thou hast vowed. Ben-Sira
re-echoes the injunction (Ecclus. xviii. 22,
23), “Let nothing hinder thee to pay thy
vow (edx}v) in due time, and defer not until
death to be justified [i.e. to fulfil the vow].
Before making a vow (evtac@a:) prepare thy-
self; and be not as one that tempteth the
Lord.” The verse is cited in the Talmud;
and Dukes gives a parallel, “ Before thou
vowest anything, consider the object of thy
vow” (‘Rabb. Bhimenl.,’ p. 70). So in
Proy. xx. 25 we have, according to some
translations, “It is a snare to a man rashly
to say, It is holy, and after vows to make
inquiry.” Septuagint, “ Pay thou therefore
whatsoever thou shalt have vowed (Soa édy
evin).”

Ver. 5.—Better is it that thou shouldest
not vow. There is no harm in not vowing
(Deut. xxiii. 22); but a vow once made
becomes of the nature of an oath, and its
non-performance is a sin and savrilege, and
incurs the punishment of false swearing.
We gather from the Talmud that frivolous
excuses for the evasion of vows were very
common, and called for stern repression.
One sees this in our Lord’s references (Matt.
vy. 33—37; xxiii. 16—22), St. Paul severely
reprehends those women who break their
vow of widowhood, “having condemnation,
because they have rejected their first faith”
d ae v. 12).

er. 6.—Suffer not thy mouth to oa’
thy flesh to sin, “Thy flesh ” is availa


™*


on. v. 1—20.]


to “ thyself,” the whole personality, the idea
of the flesh, as a distinct part of the man,
sinning, being alien from Old Testament
ontology. The injunction means—Do not,
by uttering rash or inconsiderate vows, which
you afterwards evade or cannot fulfil, bring
sin upon yourself, or, as others render, bring
punishment upon yourself. Septuagint,
“Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin
(rod etauaptiioa thy cdpka cov);” Vulgate,
Ut peccare facias carnem tuam. Another
interpretation, but not so suitable, is this—
Do not let thy mouth (¢#.e. thy appetite) lead
thee to break the vow of abstinence, and
indulge in meat or drink from which (as,
e.g. a Nazarite) thou wast bound to abstain,
Neither say thou bsfore the angel, that it
was anerror. If we take “angel” (malak)
in the usual sense (and there seems no very
forcible reason why we should not), it must
mean the angel of God in whose special
charze you are placed, or the angel who
was supposed to preside over tlie a'tar
of wors!:ip, or that messenger of God whose
duty it is to watch man’s doings and
to act as the minister of punishment (2
Sam. xxiv. 16). The workings of God’s
providence are often attributed to angels;
and sometimes the names of God aad angel
are interchanged (seo Gen. xvi. 9, 13; xviii.
2, 3, etc.; Exod. iii. 2, 4; xxiii. 20, etc.).
Thus the Septuagint here renders, “Say
not before tlie face of God (apd mpoardrov
rot @<od).” If this interpretation be allowed,
we have an argument for the literal ex-
planation of the much-disputed passage in
1 Cor. xi. 10, 51a rots ayyéAous. ‘Thus, too,
in ‘ The Testaments of the XII. Patriarchs,’
we have, “I'he Lord is witness, and his
augels are witnesses, concerning the word of
your mouth” (‘ Levi,’ 19). But most com-
mentators consider that the word here m ans
“messenger” of Jehovah, in the sense of
pricst, the announcer of the Divine Law, as
in the unique passage Mal. ii. 7. Traces of
a similar use of &yyeAos may be found in
the New 'lestament (Rev. i. 20; ii. 1, etc.).
According to the first interpretation, the
man comes before God with his excuse;
according to the second, he comes to the
priest, and confusses that he was thoughtless
and overhasty in makivg his vow, and
desires to be released from it, or, at any
rate, by some means to evade its fulfilment.
His excuse may possibly look to the cases
mentioned in Numb. xv. 22, cte., and he
may wish to urge that the vow was made
in ignorance (Septuagint, “Ori &yvoid eory,
“Tt is an ignorance” ) and that therefore he
was not responsible for its incomplete execu-
tion. We do not know that a priest or any
otficer of the temple lad authority to release
from the obligation of a vow, so that the
excuse made “before” him would seem to be


ECOLESIASTES,


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PRP ACHER 113


objectless, while the evasion of » solemn
promise made in the Name of God might
well be said to be done in the presence of
the observing and recording angel, The
Vulgate rendering, Non est providentia,
makes the man account for his neglect by
assuming that God takes no heed of such
things; he deems the long-suffering of God
to be indifference and disregard (comp. ch.
vili. 11; ix. 2). The original does not bear
this interpretation. Wherefore should God
be angry at thy voice—the words in which
thy evasion and dishonesty are expressed—
and destroy the work of thine hands? i.e,
punish thee by calamity, want of success,
sickness, ete., God’s moral government being
vindicated by earthly visitations.

Ver. 7.—For in the multitude of dreams
and many words there are also divers
vanities. The Hebrew is literally, For in
multitude of dreams, and vanities, and many
words; i.e, a8 Wiight puts it, “In the
multitude of dreams are also vanities, and
(in) m:uny words (as well).” Koheleth sums
up the seuse of the preceding paragraph,
vers. 1_—6. The popular religion, which made
much of dreams and verbosity and vows, is
vanity, aud has in it nothing substantial or
comforting, The superstitious man who puts
his faith in dreams is unpractical and unreal;
the garrulous man who is rash in his vows,
and in prayer thinks to be heard for his much
speaking, displeases God and never secures
his object. Gi:sburg and Bullock render,
“ For it is (it happens) through the multitude
of idle thoughts and vanities and much
talking,” the reference being either to the
foolish speaking of ver. 2 or to the wrath of
God in ver. 6, The Septuagint rendering
is ellij tical, “Ore éy wAnGe évurvlwy Kah
paraoTitwy Kal Adywy woAAGY, OTL ob Thy
@cby pofod. To complete this, some supply,
“Many vows are made or excused ;” others,
“There is evil.” Vulgate, Ubi multa sunt
somnia, plurime sunt vanitates, et sermones
innumert.’ ‘The Authorized Version gives
the sense of the passage. But fear thou God.
In contrast with these spurious forms of
religion, which the Jews were inclined to
adupt, the writer recalls men to the fear of
the one true God, to whom all vows should
be performed, and who should be worshipped
from the heart.

Vers. 8—17.—Section 7. Perils to which
one is exposed in a despotic state, and the
unprofitableness of riches.

Vers. 8, 9.—In political life there is little
that is satisfactory; yet one must uot sur-
render one’s belief in a superintending
Providence.

Ver. 8.—If thou seest the oppression of
the poor. From errors in tle service of God,

1


114


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


(cx. v. 1—20.


it is natural to turn to fanlts in the ad-
ministration of the king (Prov. xxiv. 21).
Koheleth has already alluded to these
anomalies in ch. iii. 16 and iv. 1. Violent
perverting ; literally, robbery; so that judg-
ment is never riglitly given, and justice is
withheld from applicants. In a province
(medinah, ch. ii. 8); the district in which the
por addressed dwells. It may, perhaps,

implied that this is remote from the
central authority, and therefore more liable
to be injuriously dealt with by unscrupulous
rulers. Marvel not at the matter (chephcts,
ch. iii. 1). Be not surprised or dismayed
(Job xxvi. 11) at such evil doings, as though
they were unheard of, or inexperienced, or
disregarded. There is here nothing of the
Greek maxim, reproduced by Hurace in
his “ Nil admirari ” (‘ Epist.,’ i. 6.1). It is
like St. Johu’s “ Marvel not, my brethren, if
the world hate you” (1 John iii. 13); or St.


Peter’s “Think it not strange concerning the j


fiery trial among you” (1 Pet. iv. 12).
The stupid and unintelligent obscrvation of
such disorders m‘ght lead to arraignment of
Providence ani distrust in the moral govern-
ment of God. Against such mistakes the
writer guards. For he thut is higher than
the highest regardeth, Both the words are
in the singular number. Septuagint, ‘YwnAdbs
erdvw bWndov puddéa. One thinks of the
Persian satraps, who acted much as tle
Turkish pasl:as in later times, the petty
rulers oppressing the people, and being
themselves treated in the same fashion by
their superiors. The whole is a system of
wrong-doing, where the weaker always
suffers, and the only comfort is that the
oppressor himself is subject to higher super-
vision. The verb (shamar) translated “ re-
gardeth” means to observe in a hostile sense,
to watch for occasions of reprisal, as 1 Sam.
xix. 11; and the idea intended is that in the
province there were endless plottings and
counterplottings, mutual denunciations and
recriminations; that such things were only
to be expected, aud were no suflicient cause
for infidelity or despair. “The higher one”
is the monarch, the despotic king who holds
the supreme power over all these malad-
ministrators and perverters of justice. And
there be higher than they. ‘ Highcr” is
here plural (gebohim), the plural of majesty,
as it is called (comp. ch. xii. 1), like Elohim,
the word for “God,” the assonance be.ng
probably here suggestive. Over the highcst
of earthly rulers there are other powers,
angels, principalities, up to Goud himself,
who governs the course of this world, and to
whom we may leave the final adjustment.
Who are meant seems purposely to be left
undetermined; but the thought” of the
righteous Judge of all is intimated in
escordance with the view of ch. iii,17. This


is a far more satisfactory explanation of the
passage than that which regards as the
highest of all “the court favourites, king’s
friends, eunuchs, chamberlains,” etc. In this
view Koheleth is merely asserting the
general system of injustice and oppression,
and neither accounting for it nor offering
any comfort under the circum-tances. But
his object throughout is to show man’s in-
ab.lity to secure his own happiness, und the
need of submission to Divine providence.
To demonstrate the anomalies in the events
of the world, the circumstances of men’s lives
would be only one part of his task, which
would not be completed without turning
attention to the remedy against hasty and
unfair conclusions. ‘his remedy is the
thought of the supreme Disposer of events,
who holds all the strings in his hand, and
will in the end bring good out of evil.

Ver. 9.—It has been much debated whether
this verse should be connected with the
preceding or the following paragraph, The
Vulgate takes it with the preceding verse,
Et insuper universe terre rex imperat servt-
enti; so the Septuagint: and this seems most
natural, avarice, wealth, and its evils in
private life being treated of in vers. 10 and
many following. Moreover the profit of the
earth is for all: the king himself is served
by the field. The writer seems to be con-
trasting the misery of Oriental despotism,
above spoken of, with the happiness of a
country whose king was content to enrich
himself, not by war, rapine, and oppression,
but by the peaceful pursuits of agriculture,
by cherishing the natural productions of his
country, and encouraging his people in de-
veloping its resources. Such was Uzziah,
who “loved husbandry ” (2 Chron, xxvi. 10);
and in Solomon’s own time the arts of peice
greatly flourished. There is much difticulty
in interpreting the verse. The Vulgate
rendering, ‘“‘ And morcover the King of the
whole earth rules over his servant,” probably
means that God governs the king. But the
present Hebrew text does not support this
translation. The Septuagint has, Ka) weplo-
geia yis em) waytl éorl, Baoireds Tod aypod
eipyaouévov, which makes more difficulties,
“ Also the abundance of the earth is for every
one, or upon every thing; the king (is
dependent on) the cultivated land, or, there
is a king to the land when cultivated,” ¢.¢,
the throne itself depends on the due culti-
vation of the country. Or, removing the
comma, “The profit of the land in every-
thing is a king of the cultivated field.” The
Hebrew may safely be rendered, “ But the
profit of a land in all things is a king
devoted to tle field,” ¢.e. who loves and
fosters agriculture. It is difficult to suppose
that Solomon himself wrote this sentenes,


however we may imterpret it. According to


‘ox. v. 1—20,]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


115


the Authorized Version, the idea is that the
t of the soil extends to every rank of
life; even the king, who seems superior to
all, is dependent upon the industry of the
pepe. and the favourable produce of the
nd. He could not be unjust and oppres-
sive without injuring his revenues in the
end. Ben-Sira sings the praises of agricul-
ture: “Hate not laborious work, neither
husbandry, which the Most High hath
ordained” (Ecclus. vii. 15). Agriculture
held a very prominent position in the Mosaic
commonwealth. The enactments concérning
the firstfrnits, the sabbatical year, land-
marks, the non-alienation of inheritances,
ete., tended to give peculiar importance to
cultivation of the soil. Cicero’s praise of
agriculture is often quoted. Thus (‘ De
Senect.,’ xv. sqq.; ‘ De Off...’ i. 42): “ Omnium
rerum, ex quilus aliquid acquiritur, nihil
est agricultura mclius, nihil uberius, nihil
dulcins, nihil homine Jibero diznius,”

Vers. 10—17.--The thought of the acts of
injustice and oppression noticed above, all
of which spring from the craving for money,
leads the bard to dwell upon the evils that
accompany this pursuit and possession of
wealth, which is thus seen to give no real
satisfaction. Avarice has already been
noticed (ch. iv. 7—12); the covetous man now
reprobated is one who desires wealth only
for the enjoyment he can get from it, or the
display which it enables him to make, not,
like the miser, who gloats over its mere
possession. Various instances are given in
which riches are unprofitable and vain.


Ver. 10.—He that loveth silver shall not
be satisfied with silver. “Silver,” the generico
name for money, as Greek apytpiv and
French argent. The insatiableness of the
passion for movey is a common theme of
poets, moralists, and satirists, and is found
in the proverbs of all nations. Tlius Horace
(‘ Ep.,’ i. 2. 56): “ Semper avarus eget;” to
which St Jerome alludes (‘ Epist.,’ 53),
“Antiquum dictum est, Avaro tam deest,

nod habet, quam quod non habet.” Comp.
5 EY ‘Sat. xiy. 159—


“Interea pleno quum turget sacculus ore, —
Crescit «mor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia
crevit.”


* For as thy strutting bags with money riee,
The love of gain is of au equal size.”
(Dryden.)


There is much more of similar import in
Horace. See ‘Carm.,’ ii. 2. 13, sgq.; iii
16, 17, 28; ‘Ep. ii. 2, 147; and Ovid,
* Fast.” i. 211—


|


“Oreverunt et opes et opum furinsa cupido,
Et, quum possideant plura, plura volunt,”


“As wealth increases grows the frenzied
thirst
For wealth; the more they have, the more
they want.”


Nor he that loveth abundance with in-
crease. The Authorized Version scarcely
presents the sense of the passage, which is
not tantological, but rather that given by the
Vulgate, Ht qui amat divitias fructum non
capiet ex eis, “ He who loveth abundance of
wealth hath no fruit therefrom ;” he derives
no real profit or enjoyment from the luxury
which it euables him to procure; rather it
brings added trouble. And so the old con-
clusion is again reached, this is also vanity,
Hitzig takes the sentence as interrogative,
“Who hath pleasure in abunilance which
brings nothing in?” But such questions
are hardly in the style of Kohelcth, and the
notion of capital without interest is not a
thought which would have been then under-
stood. The Septuagint, however, reads the
clause interrogatively, Kal rls aryarnoev ev
mArANGe. ait@y (avrod, al.) yévynua; “ And
who has loved [or, has been content with]
gain in its fulness?” Buty is not neces-
sarily interrozative, but here indefinite,
equivalent to “ whosoever.”

Ver, 11.—Koheleth proceeds to notice
some of the inconvenieices which accom-
pany wealth, which go far to prove that
God is over all. When goods increase, they
are increased that eat them. The more
riches a man possesses, the greater are the
claims upon him. He increases his house-
hold, retainers, and dependents, and is really
none the better off for all his wealth. So
Job in his prosperous days is said to have
had “@ very great houseliold” (Job i. 3),
and the servants aud Jabourers employed by
Solomon must have taxed to the utmost even
bis abnormal resources (1 Kings vy. 18, ete.).
Commentators from Pineda downwards have
quoted the remarkable parallel in Xenoph.,
*Cyroped.,’ viii. 3, wherein the wealthy
Persian Pheraulas, who had risen from
poverty to high estate, disabuses a young
Sacian friend of the idea that his riches made
him happier or afforded supreme content.
“Do you not know,” said he, “ that I neither
eat, nor drink, nor sleep with any more
pleasure now than I did when I was poor?
By having this abundance I gain merely
this, that I have to guard more, to distribute
more among others, and to have the trouble
of taking eare of more. For now numerous
domestics demand of me food, drink, clothes;
some want the doctor; one comes and brings
me sheep that have been torn by wolves, or
oxen killed by falling down a precipice, or
tells of a murrain that has affected the


116


cattle; so that 1 seem to myself to have
more afflictions in my abundance than I had
when I was poor. . . . It is obligatory on
him who possesses much to expend much
both on the gods and on friends and on
strangers; and whosoever is greatly pleased
with the possession of riches will, you may
be assured, be greatly annoyed at the ex-
penditure of them.” What good is there to
the owners thereof, saving the beholding of
them with their eyes? What it is that the
owners behold is doubtful. Ginsburg con-
siders that the increased number of devourers
is meant; but surely this sight could hardly
be called kishron, “success,” “ profit.” So it
is better to take the sight to be the amassed
wealth. The contemplation of this is the


only enjoyment that the possessor realizes. :


So the Vulgate, Ht quid prodest possessori,
nisi quod cernit divitias oculis suis? Septu-
agint, Kal rl dvdpela to map’ avtjs; O71 apxy
Tov Spay opbarpots avrod, * And in what does
the excellence of the owner consist ? except
the power of seeing it with his eyes.”
Lapide quotes Horace’s portrait of the miser
(‘Sat.,’ i. 1. 66, sqgq.)—


“Populus me sibilat; ut mihi plaudo
Ipse domi, simul ac, nummos contemplor in
arca...
... congestis undique saccis
Indormis inhians et tanquam parcere sacris
Cogeris aut pictis tanquam gaudere tabellis.”


“He, when the people hissed, would turn
about,
And drily thus accost the rabble-rout :
‘ Hiss on; | heed you not, ye saucy wags,
oie self-applauses greet me o’er my
NY Gb e
O’er countless heaps in nicest order stored,
You pore agape, and gaze upon the hoard,
As relics to be laid with reverence by,
Or pictures only meant to please the eye.”
(Howes.)


Ver, 12.—Another inconvenience of great
wealth—it robs a man of his sleep. The
sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether
he eat little or much. The labourer is the
husbandman, the tiller of the ground (Gen.
iv. 2). The Septuagint, with a different
pointing, renders dovAov, “ slave,” which is
less appropriate, the fact being generally
true of free or bond man. Whether his fare
be plentiful or scanty, the honest labourer
earns and enjoys his night’s rest. But the
abundance of the rich will not suffer him to
sleep. The allusion is not to the overloading
of the stomach, which might occasion sleep-
lessness in the case of the poor equally with
the rich man, but to the cares and anxieties
which wealth brings. ‘‘ Not a soft couch,
nor a bedstead overlaid with silver, nor the
quietness that exists throughout the house,


r


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.
GM ee ee


nor any other circumstance of this nature,
are so generally wont to make sleep sweet
and pleasant, as that of labouring, and grow-
ing weary, and lying down with a disposition
to sleep, and very greatly needing it... .
Not so the rich. On the contrary, whilst
lying on their beds, they are frequently
without sleep through the whole night; and,
though they devise many schemes, they do
not obtain such pleasure” (St. Chrysostom,
‘Hom. on Stat.,’ 22). The contrast between
the grateful sleep of the tired worker and
the disturbed rest of the avaricious and
moneyed and luxurious has formed a fruitful
theme for poets. Thus Horace, ‘Carm.,’
iii. 1. 21—
“ Somnus agrestium
Lenis virorum non humiles domos
Fastidit umbrosamque ripam,
Non Zephyris agitata Tempe.”

* Yet sleep turns never from the lowly shed

Of humbler-minded men, nor from the

eaves
In Tempe’s graceful vale is banished,
Where only Zephyrs stir the murmuring


leaves.”
(Stanley.)
And the reverse, ‘Sat.,’ i. 1. 76, sqq.—


“An vigilare metu exanimem, noctesque
diesque
Formidare malos fures, incendia, servos,
Ne te compilent fugientes, hoc juvat?”


“ But what are your indulgencies? All day,
All night, to watch and shudder with dis-
may,
Lest ruffians fire your house, or slaves by
stealth
Rifle your coffers, and abstract your wealth?
If this be affluence—this her boasted fruit,
Of all such joys may I live destitute.”
; (Howes.)
Comp. Juvenal, ‘Sat.’ x. 12, sgg.; xiv.
304. Shakespeare, ‘ Henry IV.,’ Pt. IL, act
iii. so. 1—
“Why rather, sleep, liest thou in smoky
cribs,
Upon uneasy pallets stretching thee,
And hush’d with buzzing night-flies to thy
slumber,
Than in the perfumed chambers of the
great,
Under the canopies of costly state,
And lulled with sounds of sweetest
melody ?”


Vers. 13—17.—Another view of the evils
attendant upon riches is here presented;
the owner may lose them at a stroke, and
leave nothing for his children. This thought
is presented in different lighis.


Ver. 13.—There is also a sore evil which


‘on. ¥. 120.)


I have seen under the sun (so ver. 16).
The fact that follows is, of course, not uni-
versally true, but occasionally seen, and is a
very bitter evil The Septuagint calls it
appworta; the Vulgate, infirmitas. Riches
kept for the owners thereof to their hurt;
rather, preserved by the possessor, hoarded
and guarded, only to bring their lord added
grief when by some reverse of fortune he
loses them, as explained in what fullows.

Ver. 14.—Those riches perish by evil
travail; thing or circumstance. There is no
need to confine the cause of the loss to un-
successful business, as many commentatorsdo.
The rich man does not seem to be a trades-
man or 8 lator; he loses liis property,
iike Job, by visitations for which he is in no
way answerable—by storm or tempest, by
robbers, by fire, by exactions, or by lawsuits.
And he begetteth a son, and there is nothing
in his hand. ‘The verb rendered “ be-
getteth ” is in the past tense, and used as it
were, hypothetically, equivalent to “hath he
begotten a son,” supposing he hasason. His
misery is doubled by the reflection that he
has lost all hope of securing a fortune for his
children, or founding a family, or passing on
an inheritance to posterity. It is doubtful
to whom the pronoun “his” refers. Many
consider that the father is meant, and the
clanse says that when he has begotten a son,
he finds he has nothing to give him. But
the suffix seems most naturally to refer to
the son, who is thus left a pauper, Vulgate,
Generavit flium qui in summa egestate crit.
Having a thing in the hand means having
power over it, or possessing it.

Ver. 15.—The case of the rich man who
has lost his property is here generalized.
What is true of him is, in a measure, true
of every one, so far as he can carry nothing
away with him when he dies (Ps, xlix. 17).
As he came forth of his mother’s womb,
naked shall he return to go as he came.
There is a plain reference to Job i. 21,
“Naked came I out of my mother’s womb,
and naked shall I return thitler.” The
mother is the earth, human beings being
regarded as her offspring. So the psalmist
says, “My frame was curiously wrought in
the lowest parts of the earth” (Ps. exxxix.
15). And Ben-Sira, “Great trouble is
created for every man, and a heavy yoke is
upon the sons of Adam, from the day that
they go out of their mother’s womb till the
day that they return to the mother of all
things.” 1 Tim. vi. 7, “We brought |
nothing into the world, neither can we
carry anything out.” Thus Propertius,
‘Eleg.,’ ii 5. 13—


“Haud ullas portabis opes Acherontis ad |


undas, |
Nudus ab inferna, stulte, vehere rate.” |


EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


117


—_—_


“No wealth thou’lt take to Acheron’s dark


shore,
peng ad infernal bark will bear thee
er.


Shall take nothing of his labour; rather, for
his labour, the preposition being 2 of price,
He gets nothing by his long toil in amassing
wealth. Which he may carry away in his
hand, as his own possession. The ruined
Dives points a moral for all men.

Ver. 16.—This also is a sore evil. The
thought of ver. 15 is emphatically repeated.
Tn all points as he came; #.e. naked, help-
less. And what profit hath he that laboureth
for the wind? The answer is empliatically
“nothing.” We have had similar questions
in ch. i. 3; ii. 22; iii. 9. To labour for the
wind is to toil with no result, like the
“feeding on wind,” “pursuing of vanity,”
which is the key-note of tlie book. The
wind is the type of all that is empty,
delusive, unsubstantial. In Prov. xi. 29
we have the phrase, “to inherit the wind.”
Job calls futile arguments “ words of wind”
(Job xvi. 3; xv. 2). Thus the Greek
proverb, ’Avduous Onpar év 5ixrbos, “ to try to
catch the wind:” and the Latin, “ Ventos
pascere,” and “ Ventos colere” (see Erasmus,
‘ Adag.,’ s.v. “Inanis opera”). Septuagint,
Kal ris 4 weplocesa abrod f pwoxOel eis tveuor;
“ And what is his gain for which he labours
for the wind?”

Ver. 17.—The misery that accompanies
the rich man’s whole life is summed up
here, where one has to think chiefly of his
distress after his loss of fortune. All his
days also he eateth in darkness; f.e. passes
his life in gloom and cheerlessness. 2-52,
“all his days,” is the accusative of time, not
the object of the verb. To eat in darkness
is not a common metaphor for spending a
gloomy life, but it is a very natural one, and
has analogies in this book (eg. ch. ii. 24;
lii. 13, ete.), and in such phrases as to “sit
in darkness” (Micah vii, 8), and to “walk
in darkness” (Isa. 1. 10). The Septuagint,
reading differently, translates, Kal ye macat
al ijpépa avtoo ev oxdrer nal dy reve,
“Yea, and all his days are in darkness and
in mourning.” But the other versions reject
this alteration, and few modern commentators
adopt it. And he hath much sorrow and
wrath with his sickness; literally, and much
vexration, and sickness, and wrath; Revised
Version. he is sore vezed, and hath sickness
and wrath. Delitzsch takes the last words
as an exclamation, “ And oh for his sorrow
and hatred!” The man experiences all
kinds of vexation when his plans fail or


| involve him in trouble and privation; or he


is morbid and discased in mind and body;
or he is angry and envious when others suc-
ceed better than himself. The sentiment is


>»


118


exnressed by St. Paul (1 Tim vi. 9), “They
that desire (BovAduevor) to be rich fall into
a temptation and a snare, and many foolish
and hurtful lusts, such as drown men
(Bv@igovc. rovs &v@pdémrovs) in destruction
and perdition.” “For,” he proceeds, “ the
love of money is a rovt of ull kinds of evil,
which some reaching «fter have been led
astray from the faith, and have pierced
themselves through (éavrobs wepiémeipay)
with many sorrows.” The Septuagint con-
tinues its version, “And in much passion
(@vye) and in infirmity and wrath.” The
anger may be directed against himself, as
he thinks of his folly in taking all this
trouble for nothing.


Vers. 18—20.—Section 8. The incon-
veniences of wealth lead the writer back to
his old conclusion, that man should make the
best of life, and enjoy all the good that God
gives with moderation and contentment.


Ver. 18.—Behold that which I have seen:
it is good and comely, ete. The accentuation
is against this rendering, which, however,
has the support of the Syriac and the
Targum. The Septuagint gives, 150d, eiSov
éya ayabby, 6 €or: Kaddy, “ Behold, I shave
seen a good which is comely;” and it
is best to translate, with Dclitzsch and
others, “Behold, what I have seen as
good, what as beautiful, is this.” My
conclusion holds good. They who scek for
traces of Greek influence in Koheleth find
Epicureanism in the sentiment, and the
familiar combination, caddy kayaédy, in the
language. Both ideas are baseless. (For
suppvsed Epicureanism, see on ch. ii. 24 and
iii. 12.) And the juxtaposition of kaAés and
dya0ds is only a fortuitous rendering of the
Hebrew, upon which no argument for
Grecism can be founded. To eat and to
drink, etc.; te. to use the common blessings
which God bestows with thankfulness and
contentment. As St. Paul says, “ Having
food and covering, we shall be therewith
content” (1 Tim. vi, 8), Which God giveth
him. This is the »oint so often insisted
upon. These temporal blissings are God’s
gifts, and are not to be considered as the
natural and assured result of man’s own
exertions. Man, indeed, must labour, but
God giveth the increase. For it is his
portion (ch. iii. 22). This calm enjoyment
is allotted to man by God, and nothing
more must be expected. Ben-Sira gives
similar advice, “ Defraud not thyself of a
goo day, and Iet not the share in a right
pleasure pass by thee.... Give, and take,
and beguile thy soul; for there is no seck-
ing of dainties in Hades” (Keclus. xiv,
14, ete.),

Ver. 19,—Every man also. The sentence


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


fou. v. 120,


—


is anacoluthic, like ch. iii. 13, and may best
be rendered, Also for every man to whom...
this is a gift of God. Ginsburg connects
the verse closely with the preceding one,
supplying, “I have also seen that a man,”
etc, Whichever way we take the sentence,
it comes to the same thing, implying man’s
absolute dependence upon God’s bounty,
To whom God hath given riches and wealth,
Before he can enjoy lis possessions a man
must first receive them from God’s hands.
The two terms here used are not quite
synonymous. While the former word, osher,
is used for wealth of any kind whatever, the
latter, nekasim, means properly “wealth in
cattle,” like the Latin pecunia, and thence
used generally for riches (volek). Hath
given him power to eat thereof. Abundance
is useless without the power to enjoy it.
This is the gift of God, a great and special
bounty from a loving and gracious God,
Thus Horace, ‘ Epist.,’ i. 4. 7—


“Di tibi divitias dederunt artemque fruendi.”


“The gods have given you wealth, and
(what is more)

Have given you wisdom to enjoy your
store.”


(Howes.)


Ver. 20.—For he shall not much remember
the days of his life. The man who has
learned the lesson of calm enjoyment does
not. much concern himself with the short-
ness, uncertainty, or possible trouble of life.
He carries out the counsel of Christ, “Be
not anxious for the morrow, for the morrow
will be anxious for itself. Sufficient unto
the day is the evil thereof” (Matt, vi. 34),
Ginsburg gives an entirely opposite render-
ing to the clause, “ He should remember
that the days of his life are not many;”
fe. the thought of the shortness of life
should urge us to enjoy it while it lasts.
But the Authorized Version is supported
by the Septuagint and Vulgate and most
modern commentators, and seems most ap-
propriate to the context. The marginal
rendering, “ Though he give not much, yet
he remembereth,” etc., which Ginsburg calls
a literary curiosity, must have been derived
from the version of Junius, which gives,
“Quod si non multum (supple, est illud
quod dederit Deus, ex versu prec.),” eto.
Because God answereth him in the joy of
his heart. The man passes a calm and
contented life, because God shows that he
is pleased with him by the tranquil joy shed
over his heart. The verb m3yo (the hiph.
purticiple of yy) is variously rendered. The
Septuagint gives, ‘O @cds mepiomd adroy dy
evpportry Kapdias avrod, “God distracts him
in the mirth of his heart;” Vulgate, Eo
quod Deus occupet delictis cor ejus; Ging


OH. V. 1—20.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


119


ee  hw—


burg, “God causeth him to work for the
enjoyment of his heart,” ¢.e. God assigns
him work that he may thence derive enjoy-
ment; Késter, “ God makes him sing in the
joy of his heart;”’ Delitzsch, Wright, and
Plumptre, “God answers (corresponds with)
the joy of his heart,” which the latter ex-


own blessedness, the tranquillity of the wise
man mirroring the tranquillity of God.”
But this modified Epicureanism is alien
from tlie teaching of Koheleth. Rather the
idea is thit God answers him with, imparts
to him, joy of heart, makes him sensible of


his favourable regard by this inward feeling
t. ;


lains to mean “is felt to approve it as | of satisfaction and conten


armonizing, in its calm evenness, with his


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—7.— Vanities tn worship. I. Inpeverence. Specially exhibited in enter-
ing upon Divine service. Discommended and rebuked as: 1. Inconsistent with the
sanctity of the place of worship—the house of God. Wherever men convene to offer
homage to the Divine Being, in a magnificent cathedral or ina humble upper room,
upon hillsides and moors, or in dens and caves of the earth, there is a dwelling-place of
Jehovah.no less than in the temple (Solomonic or post-exilic) or in the synagogue, of
both which the Preacher probably thought. What lends sanctity to the spot in which
worshippers assemble is not its material surroundings, artificial or natural (architectural
elegance or cosmical beanty); it is not even the convening there of the worshippers
themselves, however exalted their rank or sacred the character of the acts in which they
engage. It is the unseen and spiritual, but real and supernatural, presence of God in the
midst of his assembled saints (Exod. xx. 24; Ps. xlvi. 4—7; Matt. xviii. 20; xxviii, 20);
and the simple consideration of this fact, much more the realization of that nearness of
God to which it points, should awaken in the breast of every one proceeding towards
and crossing the threshold of a Christian sanctuary the feeling of awe which inspired
Jacob on the heights of Bethel (Gen. xxviii. 17), Ethan the Ezrahite (Ps, Ixxxix. 7),
and Isaiah in the temple (vi. 1). The thought of God’s immediate neighbourhood and
of all that it implies, his observance of both the persons of his worshippers (Gen. xvi. 16),
and the secrets of their hearts (Ps. cxxxix. 1), should put a hush on every spirit (Hab.
ii. 20; Zech. ii. 13), and dispose each one to “keep his foot,” metaphorically, to
“ put off his shoe,” as Moses did at the bush (Exod, iii. 5), and Joshua in presence of the
Captain of Jehovah’s host (Josh. v. 15). 2. Opposed to the true charucter of Divine
worship. When congregations assemble in the house of God to do humage to him whose
preseuce fills the house, this end cannot be attained by offering the sacrifice of fools, te.
by rendering such service as proceeds from unbelieving, disobedient, and hypocritical
hearts (Prov. xxi. 27), but only by assuming the attitude of one willing to hear (1 Sam.
iii, 10; Ps. lxxxv. 8) and to obey not man but God (Ps. xl. 8). If unaccompanied by
a disposition to do God’s will, mere external performances are of no value whatever,
however imposing their magnificence or costly their productiou. What God desires in
his servants is not the outward offering of sacrifices or celebration of ceremonies, but the
inward devotion of the spirit (1 Sam. xv. 22; Ps, li. 16; 17; Jer. vii. 21—23 ; Hos. vi. 6)
The highest form of worship is not speaking of or giving to God, but hearing and receiv-
ing from God. 3. Proceeding from ignorance both of the sanctity of the place and of the
spirituality of its worship. However the final clause may be rendered (see Exposition),
its sense is that irreverence springs from ignorance—from failing properly to understand
the character either of that God they pretend to worship, or of that worship they affect
to render. Ignorance of God, of his nature as spiritual, of his character as holy, of his
presence as near, of his knowledye as all-observant, of his majesty as awe-inspiring, of
his power as irresistible, is the prime root of all wrong worship, as Christ said of the
Samaritans (John iv. 22), and as Paul told the Athenians (Acts xvii. 23).

Il. Formativy. Manifested when engaged in Divine service and more particularly
in prayer. Two phases of this evil commented on. 1. Rashness in prayer. (Ver. 2.)
Hasty utterance of whatever comes uppermost, as if any jangle of words might suffice
for devotion—a manner of prayer totally inconsistent with the thought that one is stand-
ing in the Divine presence. Ifa petitioner would hardly venture to lay his requests before
an earthly sovereign, how much less should a suppliant draw near to Heaven's throne


120 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. v. 1—20.


without calm forathoucht and deliberation? Moreover, it is incorsistent with the real
nature of prayer, which is a making known to God of the soul’s needs with thankful
acknowledgment of the Divine mercies; and how can one either state his own wants or
record God’s mercies who has never taken time to investigate the one or count up the
other? 2. Prolixity in prayer. Much speaking, endless and unmeaning repetitions—
a characteristic of Pharisaic devotions adverted to by Christ (Matt. vi. 7), and difficult
to harmonize either with a due regard to the majesty of God or with the possession of
that inward calm which is a necessary condition of all true prayer. As a dreamer’s
eloquence, usually turgid and magniloquent, proceeds from an unquiet state of the brain,
which during day has been unduly excited by a rush of business or by the ~vorries of
waking hours, so the multitude of words emitted by a “ fool’s” voice is occa_oned by
the inward disquiet of a mind and heart that have not attained to rest in God. At the
same time, “the admonition, ‘let thy words be few,’ is not meant to set limits to the
fire of devotion, being directed, not against the inwardly devout, but against the super-
ficially religious, who fancy that in the multitude of their words they have an equivalent
for the devotion they lack ” (Hengstenberg).

III. Instncerity. Displayed after leaving Divine service, more especially in the
non-fulfilment of vows voluntarily taken while engaged in worship. Against this
wickedness the preacher inveighs. 1. Because such conduct cannot be other than displeas-
ing to God. ‘‘ When thou vowest a vow, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure
in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed.” As the Almizhty himself is “the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever,” “ without variableness or shadow of turning,” and
®changcth not,” so he desires in all his worshippers the reflection at least of this perfec-
tion, and cannot regard with favour one who plays fast and loose with his promises to
men, and far less with his vows to God. 2. Because such conduct is in no sense
unavoidable, A worshipper is under no obligation to vow anything to Jehovah. What-
ever is done in this direction must proceed from'the clearest free-will. Hence, to escape
the sin of breaking one’s vows, one is at liberty not to vow (Deut. xxiii. 21—23),
‘Hence also should one cautiously guard against the utterance of rash and sinful vows

§ like those of Jephthah (Judg. xi. 30) and of Sani (1 Sam. xiv. 24), lest through fulfilling
(no less than through breaking) them one should incur sin. Similarly, “ we must not
vow that which through the frailty of the flesh we have reason to fear we shall not be


able to perform, as those that vow asingle life and yet know not how to keep their vow”


(Matthew Henry). The same remark applies to taking vows of total abstinence from meats
and drinks. 3. Because such conduct cannot escape the just judgment of God. The
rashly uttered vow, afterwards left unfulfilled, sets the speaker of it in the place of a sinner,
upon whom as guilty God will inflict punishment. Thus through his mouth, his
“flesh,” or his body, ¢.e. his whole personality, of which the flesh or body is the outer
covering, is caused tosuffer. Being just and holy, God can by no means clear the guilty
(Exod. xxxiv. 7), although he can justify the ungodly (Rom. iv. 5). Hence the vow-
breaker cannot hope.to elude the due reward of his infidelity. 4. Because such conduct
ds practically indefensible. To say before the angel or presiding minister in the temple or
synagogue in whose hearing the vow had been registered that the registration of it had
been an error, was, in the judgment of the Preacher, no excuse, but rather an aggravation
of the original offence, and a sure means of drawing down upon the offender the anger of
God, and of causing God to effectually thwart and utterly destroy the dvsigns his pretended
worshipper had, first in making his vows and afterwards in breaking them ; and so, when
one retreats from protestations and promises made to God, it is no justification of his
conduct in the eyes of others who may have listened to or become aware of his votive
engagements, to aver that he had made them in error. Nor is it sufficient to excu~s one-
in God’s sight to say that one was mistaken in having promised to do so-and-so. Hace,
if one vows before God with regard to matters left in his option, it is his duty to fulfil
these vows, even should it be to his hurt. But in all respects it is wiser and better not
to vow except in such things as are already enjoined upon one by God; and should it
be said that no possible need can arise for taking upon one’s self by voluntary obligation
what already lies upon one by Divine prescription, this will not be denied. Yet one
may vow to do what God has commanded in the sense of resolving to do it—always in
dependence on promised grace; and with re~~rd to this no better counes! can be offered


than that given Harvey—


on. v. 120.) ECCLESIASTES; OR, [HE PREACHER. 121


“all to thy God for grace to keep
‘Thy vows; and if thou break them, weep.
Weep for thy broken vows, and vow again:
Vows made with tears cannot be still in vain,”


Lessons. 1. The condescension of God in accepting human worship, 2. The dignity
of man thas he can render such worship as God can accept. 3. The spirituality of all
i eet of God. 4, The displeasure of God against all worship that is merely
external.


Vers. 8, 9.—The picture of an ideal state. I. THE soll WELL CULTIVATED. As the
land of a country is its principal source of wealth, where this is left untilled only desti-
tution to the people upon it can ensue. Access to the broad acres of earth, to extract
therefrom by means of labour the treasures therein deposited, constitutes an indispensable
prerequisite to the material prosperity of any province or empire. Hence the Preacher
depicts, or enables us to depict, a state or condition of things in which this is
realized—the common people spread abroad upon the soil and engaged in its cultiva-
tion; the upper classes or feudal lords deriving their support from the same soil in the
shape of rents, and even the king receiving from it in the form of taxes his imperial
revenues.

II. THE LAW EQUALLY ADMINISTERED. The opposite of this is the picture sketched
by the Preacher, who probably transferred to his pages a spectacle often witnessed in
Palestine during the years of Persian domination—* the oppression of the poor, and
violent perverting of judgment and justice in a province ;” the labouring classes despoiled
of their scanty savings, and even denied their lair share in the fruits of their own industry,
ground down and oppressed by the tyranny and avarice of their social and political
superiors, the satraps and other officers who ruled them, and these again preyed on by
fiercer harpies above them, and so on, up through each ascending rank of dignitaries,
till the last and highest was reached. Reverse the state of matters thus described, and
imagine all classes in the community dwelling together in harmony, and conspiring to
advance each other’s comfort and happiness—the toiling millions cheerfully, honestly,
and diligently cultivating the soil, and manufacturing its products into higher forms of
wealth and beauty, the upper classes jealously guarding the rights and furthering the
welfare of these industrious artisans, and each regarding the other with confidence and
esteem—the poet’s dream of Utopia, in which “all men’s good” should be “each man’s
rule,” would then be realized.

IIL. THE soVEREIGN BENEFICENTLY ENTERPRISING. Not in pushing forward his own
personal aggrandizement, which in ancient Oriental countries was often done at the
expense of his subjects, as by Pharaoh of Egypt (Exod. i. 11) and Solomon of Israel
and Judah (1 Kings xii, 4), but by devoting his energies to further the material (and
intellectual) advancement of his people. “ But the profit of a land every way is a
king that maketh himself servant to tle field,” or “is a king over the cultivated field ”
(Revised Version margin), or is a king devoted to agriculture (Rosenmiller, Delitzsch,
Wright), like Uzziah of Judah, who “loved husbandry ” (2 Chron. xxvi. 10). It is
only amplifying this thought to represent the ideal state as one in which the king or
emperor consecrates his life and powers to the honourable and laborious task of promot-
ing the material prosperity and temporal happiness of his subjects by removing the
yoke from agriculture, fostering trade and commerce, encouraging manufactures and
inventions, aiding science and art, diffusing education, and stimulating his people
upward in every possible way towards the ideal of all free peoples, viz. self-government.

IV. Tue Derry approvine. Here avain the Preacher’s picture must be changed.
What he beheld was wholesale oppression and robbery practised by the upper and
powerful classes against the under and powerless classes, or in modern phrase, “ the
masses,” and God over both looking on in calm silence (Ps. 1. 21), but by no means
imperturbed indifference (Zeph. i. 12), accurately noting all the wickedness going on
beneath the sun (Ps. xxxiii. 13—15), and quietly waiting his own time to call it to
account (ch. iii. 15, 17; xi. 9; xii. 14). What must be substituted is @ state of matters
in which over the well-organized, industrious, peaceful, co-operating community the
almighty Disposer of events, the King of nations and King of kings, presides, beaming


198 FOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, on. v.1—20


on them with his gracious smile (Numb. vi. 24—26) and establishing the work of their
hands upon them (Ps. xc. 17).

Learn: 1. The duty of the state to seek the welfare of all. 2. The duty of each
to promote the welfare of the state.


Vers. 8—17.—A sermon on the vanity of riches. I. FREQUENTLY ACQUIRED BY WRONG.
As, for instance, by oppression and robbery (ver. 8). That honest labour sometimes
leads to affluence cannot be denied (Prov. x. 4); more often, however, it is the ungodly
who increase in riches (Ps. ]xxiii. 12), and that, too, by means of their ungodliness
(Prov. i. 19; xxii. 16; xxviii. 20; Hab. ii. 6,9; 1 Tim. vi. 9, 10). Hence the question
arises whether, if riches cannot be obtained without plunging into all sorte of wicked-
ness, they are worth seeking to obtain at all; whether, if to secure them a man must
not only practise dishonesty, theft, oppression, and perhaps worse, but convert his soul
into a harbour of divers pernicious lusts, such as avarice, covetousness, and envy, it is
really a good bargain to secure them at such a cost. Christ’s question, “‘ What shall it
profit a man,” etc. ? (Matt. xvi. 26) has a bearing on this. (On the evils that have
come with the great accumulation of wealth, see ‘Socialism New and Old,’ p. xxxviii.:
International Scientific Series.)

II. ALWAYS INCAPABLE OF YIELDING SATISFACTION. ‘“‘ He that loveth silver shall
not be satisfied with silver; nor he that loveth abundance with increase” (ver. 10).
In addition to the well-known fact that material wealth has no power to impart solid
satisfaction to the better instincts of the soul (Luke xii, 15)—a fact eloquently com-
mented on by Burns (‘ Epistle to Davie’)—


‘ Tt’s no in titles nor in rank,
It’s no in wealth like Lon’on Bank,
To purchase peace and rest,’’ eto.


—the appetite for wealth grows by what it feeds on. The rich are ever craving for more.
“The avaricious man is always wanting,” said Horace (‘ Hyist.,’ i. 2. 26); while Ovid
(‘ Fasti,’ i. 211, 212) wrote of rich men, “ Both their wealth and a furious lust of wealth
inerease, and when they possess the most they seek for more.” Hence, to use another
rendering, “He whose love cleaveth to abundance hath nothing of it” (Delitzsch),
“He who hangs his heart on the continual tumult, noise, pomp, of more numerous and

ater possessions if possible, to all real profit—t.e. all pleasant, peaceful enjoyment—
is lost” (ibid.).

III. OrrEn MULTIPLY THEIR OWNER’S CARES. 1. Numerous dependents. Unless he
is a miser, “ who shuts up his money in chests and only feeds himself in looking at it
with closed doors” (Delitzsch), the rich man, like Job (i. 3) and Solomon (1 Kings
jv. 2, etc.), will maintain a large and expensive houseliold, which will eat up his sub-
stance, so that, notwithstanding all his wealth, he shall have little more for his portion
in the same than the satisfaction of seeing it pass through his hands (ver. 11). As
Pheraulas the Persian observed to a Sacian youth, who congratulated him on being rich
* Do you think, Sacian, that I live with more pleasure the more I possess? Do you
not know that I neither eat nor drink nor sleep with a particle more pleasure now than
when I was poor? But by having this abundance I gain merely this, that I have to
guard more, to distribute more to others, and to have the trouble of taking care of
more; for a great many domestics now demand of me their food, their drink, and their
clothes. . . . Whosoever, therefore, is greatly pleased with the possession of riches
will, be assured, feel annoyed at the expenditure of them” (Xenophon, ‘ Cyropaiia,’
viii. 3. 38944). 2. Increased anxieties, The rich man, through the abundance of his
riches, is worried with cares, which pursue him into the night, and will not suffer him
to sleep (ver. 12), for thinking of how he shall protect his wealth azainst the midnicht
pox, of how he shall increase it by successful trade and profitable investment, of

ow he shall employ it so as to extract from it the largest quantity of enjoyment;
whereas the labouring man, whether he eats little or much, drops into refreshing
slumber the moment he lays his head upon his pillow, untroubled by anxious thoughts
as to how he shall dispose of his wealth, which consists chiefly in the fewress of his
wants. So sang Horace long ago of “gentle sleep,” which “scorns not the humble
bodes of ploughmen ” (‘ Odes,’ iii. 1, 21—23), and Virgil of the tillers of the soil, who


on. v. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 128


“want not slumber sweet beneath the trees” (‘ Georg.,’ ii. 469); 80 wrote Shakespeare
of the “ honey-heavy dew of slumber” (‘ Julius Casar,’ act ii. sc. 1), describing it as


Sore labour’s bath,
Balm of hurt minds, great nature’s second course,
Chief nourisher in life’s feast ;”
(‘ Macbeth,’ act ii. so. 8.)


representing it as lying rather


“In smoky cribs
Than in the perfumed chambers of the great; ”
(‘ Henry [V.,’ Part IL, act iii. so, 1.)


and depicting the shepherd’s “ wonted sleep under a fresh tree’s shade” as “ far beyond
& prince’s delicates ” (‘ Henry VI.,’ act ii. sc. 5).

IV. Nor sELDOM DISAPPOINT THE HOPES THEY HAVE RAISED, 1, The hope of never-
Sailing happiness. The rich man hopes that in future years his wealth will be to him
a source of comfort (Luke xii. 19). As the years go by he discovers they have only
been kept to his hurt (ver. 13)—if not physically or mentally, at least morally and
spiritually (1 Tim. vi. 10, 17); and the fact is often so, whether he discovers it or
not. 2. The hope of never knowing want, The rich man expects that, having safely
locked them up in a prudent speculation, he will keep them at least during his lifetime;
but alas] the speculation turns out “an evil adventure,” and his much-prized riches
perish (ver. 14). 3. The hope of perpetuating his name. Once more the rich man

leases himself with the prospect of founding a family by leaving his son the fortune
ie has heaped up by toil, thrift, and profitable speculation. By the time he comes to
die he has nothing in his hand to bequeath, and so is forced to bid farewell to his
hopes and leave his son a pauper.

V. Must EVENTUALLY BE LEFT BY ALL. 1. Absolutely. However rich a man may
grow in his lifetime, of all he has amassed he must divest himself at the grave’s mouth,
as Claudio in the prison is reminded by the duke—


“Tf thou art rich, thou art poor;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,
Thou bear’st thy riches but a journey,
And death unloads thee.”
(‘Measure for Measure,’ act iii. se. 1.)


6 As he came forth of his mother’s womb, naked shall he return to go as he came, and
shall take nothing of his labour, which he may carry away in his hand” (ver. 15; cf.
Job i. 21); for as “ we brought nothing into this world,” so it is “certain we can carry
nothing out” (1 Tim, vi. 7). 2. Without compensation. ‘“ What profit,” then, the
Preacher asks, has the rich man who has laboured all his days to ainass wealth? The
answer is, “ Nothing! he has simply laboured for the wind.” Nor is this the worst.
To have had a pleasant time of it before being obliged to part with his wealth would
have been a compensation, however slight, to the rich man; but for the most part
even this is denied him. In order to amass his riches he has commonly been found to
play the part of a miser, “eating in the dark to save candle-light, or working all day
and waiting till nizhtfall before he sits down to a meal ” (Plumptre); or, if the words
eating in darkness” be taken metaphorically, while gathering gold he has passed his
existence in gloom and sadness, having no light in his heart (Hengstenberg), he has
fallen into sore vexation at the failure of many of his plans, become morbidly disposed,
“diseased in mind and body,” and even waxed wrathful at God, himself, and all the
world.

Lzssons. 1. The duty of moderating one’s pursuit of earthly riches. 2, The wisdom
of laying up for one’s self treasures in heaven. 8, The happiness enjoyed by the poor,


Vers. 18—20.— The picture of a “good and comely” life. 1. THE LABOUR OF THE
HANDS REWARDED. The toiler spends not his strength for nought and in vain (Isa.
xlix. 4), but with the sweat of his brow earns for himself bread to eat, water to drink,


124 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [cxu. v. 1—20,


a


1nd raiment to put on (Gen, xxviii. 20). Work and food the two first requisites of a

4 and comely life.

\1. THe GOOD THINGS OF LIFE ENJOYED. Not only has the toiler the pleasant satis-

-tion of being able to earn through his personal exertions something, yea, enough, to

: and drink and to clothe himself withal, but over and above he can eat and drink
ind wear that which he has earned, and generally rejoice in that which his hands have
won. Health and sheerfulness the next two requisites of a good and comely life.

Ill. THe ILs ( ? EXISTENCE FORGOTTEN, If not entirely exempt from ills, since
there is no man born of woman who is not heir to trouble (Job v. 7; xiv. 1), yet these
affect him so slightly and leave so small impression on his soul, that the even tenor
of his life flows on, and he hardly remembers the days as they pass. Equanimity and
hopefulness a third pair of requisites for a good and comely life.

V. THE aoopness oF HEAVEN RECOGNIZED. A “good and comely” life differs from
mere animal existence in this, that it acknowledges all it receives and enjoys as @
portion marked out for it by the sovereign appointment, and bestowed upon it by the
gracious bounty of God (Jas. i. 17). Gratitude and religion a fourth pair of requisites
for a good and comely life.

V. THE APPROBATION OF GoD EXPERIENCED. The joy of such a life, being more
than mere sensuous gratification, and springing up within the deep recesses of the soul,
being in fact pure heart-joy, is not displeasing to God, but, on the contrary, is by him
observed, answered, and confirmed. Peace and joy the last and highest pair of
requisites for a good and comely life.

Learn: 1. The propriety of striving after an ideal life. 2. The necessity of aiming
at improved surroundings of existence. 3. The impossibility of reaching Utopia either
for the state or the individual without religion.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver. 1.—The temple and the worshippers. It is evident that the services of the pious
Israelites were by no means merely sacrificial and ceremonial. There is a reflective and
intellectual character attributed to the approach of the Hebrew worshippers to their
God. The practical admonitions of this passage have reference, not to a formal, but to
an intellizent and thoughtful worship.

I, THE HousE oF Gop. By this is to be understood no doubt a place, a building,
probably the temple at Jerusalem. But clearly it follows from this language that in
the view of the writer of Ecclesiastes the idea of the locality, the edifice, is almost lost
sight of in the idea of the spiritual presence of Jehovah, and in-the society and fellow-
ship of sincere and devout worshippers. God, it was well understood, dwelleth not ia
temples made with hands, but abideth in his people’s hearts.

Il. THe SackiFice OF FoLLy. In every large gathering of professed worshippers
there is reason to fear there are those with whom worship is nothing but a form, a
custom. The sacrifice of such is outward only; their postures, their words, may be
unexceptionable, but the heart is absent from the service. Inattention, want of true
interest, unspirituality, take the place of those penitential acknowledgments—that
heavenward aspiration—which are acceptable to him who searcheth the hearts and
trieth the reins of the children of men. The sacrifice of such formal and irreverent
worshippers is justly designated a sacrifice of fools. They consider not their own nature
their own needs; they consider not the attributes of him whom they profess to approach
with the language of adoration, of gratitude, of petition. They are, therefore, rot only
peizious; they are foolish, and they seem to say to every sensible observer that they
are fools.

If]. ‘Tae worsHip or THE WIsE. In contrast with the careless and undevout we have
here depicted the spirit and the demeanour of true worshippers. They are characterized
by: 1. Self-restraint. The modest repression of all that savours of self-assertion seems
to be intended by the admonition, “ Keep thy foot,” which is as much as tosay, “Take
heed to thy steps, observe with care thy way, wander not from the path of sincerity
beware of indifference and of obtrusiveness.” 2. Reverence. Such as becomes the creature
in approaching the Creator in whose hand his breath is, and whose are all his WAYS ;


ou. v. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ! 123


such as becomes the sinner in addressing a holy God, whose Law has been broken, whose
favour has to be implored. 3. A spirit of attentive and submissive hearing. “ Speak,
Lord; for thy servant heareth,” is language becoming to the lowly and reverent
worshipper a he shall be made acquainted with God’s Law, and he shall rejoice in God’s
promises,—T,


Ver. 2.—Reverence, reticence, and brevity in devotion. What a contrast is there
between this sound and sober counsel, and the precepts and customs prevalent among
the heathen! These latter have corrupted the very practice of devotion; whilst those
who acknowledge the authority of the Scriptures condemn themselves if their worship
is superficial, pretentious, formal, and insincere.

1, THE RULES OF DEVOTION. 1. Avoid profane rashness and precipitancy. When
rashness and haste are forbidden, it is not intended to condemn ejaculatory or extempore
prayer. There are occasions when such prayer is the natural and appropriate expression
of the deep feelines of the heart; when one cannot pause to weigh one’s words, when
one cannot fall back upon liturgy or litany, however scriptural and rich. What is
censured is ill-considered prayer, which is not properly prayer at all, but the outpouring
of ill temper and petulance. Such utterances may be profane, and are certainly unsuit-
able, unbecoming. 2. Avoid verbiage. When praise and prayer take shape in many
words, there is danger of: using “‘ vain repetitions,” against which our Lord Christ has
so urgently warned his disciples. Long and diffuse devotions are probably addressed
rather to men than to God. They are unnecessary and unprofitable, for God does
not need them; they are irreverential, for they betoken a mind more occupied
about self than about the Supreme. But this precept does not preclude urgency
and even repetition when such are dictated by profound feeling and by special
circumstances.

II. THE REASON OF THESE RULES. 1. The nature, the character of God himself.
‘“« He is in heaven.” By heaven we are to understand the eternal sphere apart from and
above time, earth, and sense. We are not to rank God with earthly potentates, but
are to bear in mind his distinctness and superiority. As our Creator, he knows both
our emotions and our wants; as our Lord and Judge, he knows our sins and frailties ;
as our Saviour, he knows our penitence and faith. Such considerations may well
preclude familiarity, rashness, verbosity, irreverence. ‘l'o think rightly of God, to feel
aright with regard to him, is to be preserved from such faults and errors as are here
mentioned with censure. 2. The position of men. Being upon earth, men partake in
the feebleness and finiteness of the created. They are suppliants; and as such they
should ever approach the throne of grace with reverence and humiliation. They are
sinners ; and should imitate the spirit of him who, when he came up into the temple

~ to pray, cried, “God be merciful to mea sinner!” This was a short prayer; but he
who offered it was accepted and justified. —T.


Vers, 4, 5.—The law of the vow. There are those who would disapprove of the
violation of a promise given to a fellow-man, who think lightly of evadinga “promise.
~solemnly volunteered to the Creator, It may be said that a fellow-man might suffer
Be frcn suck neglect or dereliction, but. that God can suffer no loss or harm if a vow be
not fulfilled. Such an extenuatiou or excuse for violating vows arises from the too
common notion that the moral character of an action depends upon the consequences
that follow it, aud not upon the principles that direct it. A man’s conduct may be
wrong even if no one is injured by it; for he may violate both his own nature and the
moral law itself. .

I. THz NATURE OF THE vow. When some signal favour has been experienced,
some forbearance exercised on a man’s behalf, he desires to evince his gratitude, to do
something which in ordinary circumstances he would probably not have done, and he
makes a vow unto God, sacredly promising to offer some gift, to perform some service,
Or even more commonly, the vow is made in hope of some benefit desired, and its
fulfilment is conditiunal upon a petition being favourably answered, a desire being
gratified. ; ie :

Il, THe VOLUNTARINESS OF THE vow. It is presumed that no constraint is exercised,
that the promise made to Heaven is the free and spontaneous expression of religious


16 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. _[os. v. 1—20,


feeling. The language of Peter to Ananias expresses this aspect of the proceeding:
“ Whiles it remained, did it not remain thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in
thy power?”

IIL Tue oBLiGATION oF THE vow. It is questionable whether vows are in all cases
expedient. A vow to act sinfully is certainly not binding. And there are some vows
which it is unwise in some circumstances, if not in all circumstances, to make; this
is the case especially with vows which seem to make too great a demand upon human
nature, which are indeed against nature; e.g. vowsof celibacy, and of obedi to fellow=
creatures as fallible as are rie pie Dine shemales y., But if a vow be made

“Knowingly and voluntarily, and@f its fulfilment be not wrong,)th en the text assures us
it is obligatory, and should be paid.

IV. Tue FOLLY OF DEFERRING TO PAY THE vow. There are disagreeable duties,
which weak persons admit to be duties, and intend to discharge, but the discharge of
which they postpone. Such duties do not become easier or more agreeable because
deferred. Generally speaking, when conscience tells us that a certain thing ought to °
be done, the sooner we do it the better. So with the vow. ‘‘ Defer not to pay it; for
God hath no pleasure in fools.”

V. THE SIN OF NEGLECTING AND REPUDIATING THE vow. The vow is an evidence,
it may be presumed, that there existed at the time, in the mind of him who made it,
strong feelings and earnest purposes, Now, for one who has passed through such
experiences so far to forget or abjure them_as to act as if the vow had never been made,
is a proof of religious declension and of inconsistency. How common is such “ back-
sliding”! It is said, “ Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
vow and not pay.” He who vows not contracts no special obligation, whilst he who
vows and withholds payment repudiates a solemn obligation which he has undertaken,
A warning is thus given to which it is important for those especially to give heed who
are liable to religious excitement and enthusiasm. If such characters yield as readily
to evil influences as to good, their impressions may be a curse rather than a blessing,
or at least may be the occasion of moral deterioration. None can feel and resolve and _

ray,and then.afterwards act in opposition to.their purest feelings, their-highest resolves,
3 ther fervent. prayers, without suffering serious harm,.without weakening. théir..moral-
SpONsh aithout incurring the just displeasure of the righteous Governor. and Lord of


oy e


Ver. 8.— The oppressor’s accountability. We are not taught in this verse to disre-
gard the wrongs o! our fellow-creatures, to shut our eyes to deeds of iniquity, to close
our ears against the cry of the suffering, to steel our heart against the anguish of the
oppressed. But we are cautioned against drawing hasty and ill-considered conclusions
from the prevalence of injustice; we are encouraged to cherish faith in the overruling
and retributive providence of God.

I. Tue Fact or oppression, Such cases as are here referred to exist in every state;
but in the Hast they have always existed in great numbers. Despotic governments are
more favourable to oppression than those states where frec institutions are established
and where popular rights are respected. Reference is made: 1. To the maltreatment
of the poor, who are powerless to defend themselves, and who bave no helper. 2, To
the withholding and perversion of justice.

II. THE DiIsTRESS AND PERPLEXITY NATURALLY OCOASIONED BY THE EXISYENCE OF
OPPRESSION. 1, 'l'o the sufferers themselves; who are in some cases deprived of liberty,
in some cases robbed of their property, in other cases injured in their person. 2, The
spectators of such wrongs are aroused to sympathy, pity, and indignation. No rightly
constituted mind can witness injustice without resentment. Even those who them-
selves exercise rights and enjoy privileges lose much of the pleasure and advantage of
their own position by reason of the wrongs which their neighbours endure at the hand
of power and cruelty. 3. Society is in danger of corruption when the laws are overs
ridden by selfishness, avarice, and lust; when righteousness is scoffed at, and when
men’s best instincts and convictions are outraged.

é TH. THE REDRESS FOR WRONG IN THE UNIVERSAL GOVERNMENT OF Gop. 1.0 pres
sion is not unnoticed. Whether the oppressor hopes to escape, or fears to be called to
account, it is for the spectator of his evil deeds to remember that “ One higher than the


ou, Vv. 1—20.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 127


high regardeth.” 2. Oppression is not unrecorded. The iniquities of the unjust judge,
of the arbitrary sovereign, of the villainous workman who violently hinders his fellow-
workman from earning an honest livelihood,—all are written in the book of God. Even
when deeds of oppression are wrought in the sacred name of religion by the persecutor
and the inquisitor, such deeds are remembered, and will in due time be brought to
light. 8. Oppression will not be unavenged. Either now in this world, or hereafter
in the state of retribution, the oppressor, like every other sinver, shall be brought to
the bar of Divine justice, God shall bring every man into judgment. As @ man
soweth, so shall he also reap. The wicked shall not go unpunished.—T,


Ver. 9.—The earth and man. Whatever obscurity may attach to the interpretation
of this verse, in any case it represents the dependence of the inhabitants of earth upon
the produce of the soil.

I. THE FACT OF THE BOUNTEOUSNESS OF THE FRUITFUL EARTH. 1. Man’s body is
fashioned out of its dust. Whatever may have been the process by which the animal
nature of man was prepared as the lodging and the vehicle of the immortal spirit, there
is no question as to the fact that the human body is a part of nature, that it is com-
posed of elements of a nature similar to those existing around, that it is subject to
physical law. All this seems implied in the statement that.the human frame was
formed of the dust of the ground. 2. Man’s body is supported by its produce. Directly
or indirectly, man’s corporeal nature is nourished by the material substances which
exist in various forms upon the surface of the earth. The vegetable and animal creation
minister to man’s needs and growth. 3. Man’s body is resolved into its substance,
“ Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return.” ‘The earth provides man with his
food, his raiment, his dwelling, and his grave.

II. THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE BOUNTEOUSNESS OF THE EARTH. 1. The least is
not overlooked, the poorest is cared for, fed, and sheltered. 2. The greatest is not
independent. All men share the same nature, and sit at the same table: “The king
himself is served by the field.”

Lessons. 1. We have to learn our dependence upon what is lower than our-
selves. Whilst we are in this earth, whilst we share this corporeal nature, the material
ministers to bodily needs, and must not be disdained or despised. 2. We should rise
to an apprehension of our real dependence upon Divine providence. “The earth is the
Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” It is ordered by God’s wisdom that the earth should
be the instrument of good to all his creatures, even to the highest. And the enlightened
and thoughtful will not fail to ascend from the instrument to him that fashioned it,
from the abode to him that built it, from the means of well-being to him who appointed
and provided them all, and who intended the earth and all that is in it to teach his
intelligent creatures something of his glorious character and gracious purposes,—T,


Vers. 10—17.— The unsatisfying nature of riches. ‘To love wealth for its own sake
is ridiculous. To desire it for the sake of the advantages it may secure is natural, and
Varga limits) is not blamable. To set the heart upon it for such purposes, to long
or it above higher good, to be absorbed in its quest, is sinful, The wise man points
out the insufficiency of material possessions to satisfy the natureof man. The reflections
here recorded are the result of wide observation and of personal experience.

I, RICHES CANNOT AFFORD SATISFACTION TO THOSE WHO SET THEIR AFFECTION UPON
THEM. A man who uses his property for lawful ends, and regards it in the true light
as @ provision made by God’s wisdom and bounty for his wants, need know nothing of
the experience recorded in ver. 10. But he who Joves—i.e. desires with ardent desire,
and as the chief good of life—silver and abundance, shall not be satisfied with wealth
when it is attained. It is not in the nature of earthly good to quench the deep desires
of man’s immortal spirit. :

IL. Riches AR& CONSUMED BY THOSE WHO ARE DEPENDENT UPON THEM. A large
family, a circle of dependents, needy relatives, are the cause of the disappearance even
of large revenues. ‘his is no trouble to a man who judges justly; but to a foolish man
whose one desire is to accumulate, it is a distress to witness the necessary expenditure
involved in family and social claims.

IIL. Ricues ARE A SOURCE OF ANXIETY TO THE PossEssoR, ‘The labouring man,


128 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cH. v. 1—20


ee =r


who earns and eats his daily bread, and depends for to-morrow’s supply upon to-morrow’s
toil, sleeps sweetly; whilst the capitalist and investor are wakeful by reason of many
anxieties, A ship richly freighted may be wrecked, and the cargo lost; a company in
which large sums have been invested may fail; a mine of precious metal upon which
money has been spent, and from which much is hoped, nay cease to be productive,
An estate may no longer be profitable; thieves may break through and steal jewels and
bullion. As surely as a man owns more than is needed for the supply of his daily wants,
so surely is he liable to solicitude and care,

IV. RicHEs MAY EVEN PROVE INJURIOUS TO THEIR OWNER. Jn some states of society
the possession of wealth is likely to bring down upon the rich the envy and cupidity of
a despotic ruler, who ill treats the wealthy in order to secure his riches for himself,
And in all states of society there is danger lest wealth should be the occasion of moral
injury, by enkindling evil passions, envy on the part of the poor, and in return
hatred and suspicion on the part of the wealthy; or by leading to flattery, which in
turn produces vanity and contem)tuousness,

V. RicHiS ARE OF NO AVAIL BEYOND THIs LIFE. ‘They thus add, in the case of the
avaricious, another sting to death; for clutch and grasp them as he may, they must be
left behind. A man spends his whole life, and exhausts all his energies, in gathering
together a “fortune; ” no sooner. has he succeeded than he is summoned to return
naked to the earth, carrying nothing in his hand, poor as he came into the scene of his
toils, his success, his disappointments. The king of terrors cannot be bribed. A mine
of wealth cannot buy a day of life.

VI. RicHEs MAY BE WASTED BY THE RICH MAN’s HEIRS. This was a misfortune of
which the writer of Ecclesiastes seems to have been well aware from his prolonged
observation of human life. One may gather; but who shall scatter? He to whom
wealth is everything has no security that his property shall not, after his death, come
into the hands of those who shall squander it in dissipation, or waste it in reckless
speculations. ‘his also is vanity.

AppLicaTion. These things being so, the moral is obvious. The poor man may
rest contented with his lot, for he knows not whether increase of possessions would
bring him increase of happiness. The prosperous man may well give heed to the
admonition, “ If riches increase, set not your heart upon them.”—T.


Vers. 18—20.—The good things appointed for man by God. Some detect in these
verses the ring of Epicurean morals. But the difference is vast between desiring and
rejoicing in the things of this world as mere means of pleasure, and accepting them
with gratitude and using them with moderation and prudence, as the gifts of a Father’s
bounty and the expression of a Father’s love.

J. THE GOOD THINGS OF THIS WORLD coME FRoM Gop. It is God’s earth which
provides our sustenance; it is God’s creative wisdom that provides our companionships ;
rb God who gives us power to acquire, to use, and to enjoy his gifts, All is from

od,

II, THE ENJOYMENT OF THINGS IN THEMSELVES GOOD IS INTENDED, AND APPOINTED
BY DIVINE WISDOM AND GoopNEss. They were not given to tempt or to curse man
but to gladden his heart and to enrich his life. Benevolence is the impulse of the
Divine nature. God is “ good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.”

III. THE ENJOYMENT OF THESE GOOD THINGS MAY BE RENDERED THE OCOASION OF
FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD AND THANKSGIVING To Gop. ‘Thus even the common things
of earth may be glorified and made beautiful by their devotion to the highest of all
purposes. Through them the Giver of all may be praised, and the heart of the grateful
recipient may be raised to fellowship with “the Father of the spirits of all flesh.”

IV. THE ABUSE OF GoD's GOOD GIFTS IS OWING TO HUMAN ERROR AND SIN. They
are so often abused that it is not to be wondered at that men come to think them evil
in themselves. But in such cases, the blame lies not with the Giver, but with the
recipient, who turns the very honey into gall.—T.


Vers, 1, 2.—Acceptable service. Although the precise meaning of the Preacher is
open to some doubt, we shall not go wrong in letting these words speak to us of-—
L THe FULILITY OF FoRMAL worship. Reference is made to (1) the offering of


OR, V. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 129


rr


sacrifice (ver. 1), and (2) the repetition of devotional phrases. We may find a Christian
parallel in the reception of sacraments, and in the “prayers” and psalmody of the
Church. We know that the purest spirituality may breathe in these, and may be
nourished by these, but we know also (1) that they may fail to express any real and
pure devotion; (2) that in this case they also fail in winning the favour of God; and
(8) that they leave the soul rather the worse than the better, for in such futile worship
ore a dangerous delusiveness which is apt to lead toa false and even fatal sense of
security. :

II. AccerTaBLE servicer. This is threefold. 1. Reverence, This is strongly
implied, especially in the second verse. Let the worshipper realize that he is in “the
house of God,” none other and no less than that (see Gen. xxviii. 17). Let him realize
that “God is in heaven,” etc.; that he is bowing before the Infinite One himself; that
he is addressing him who, in his Divine nature and in his unapproachable rank, is
immeasurably removed above himself; that he is speaking to One who sees the actions
of every life, and knows the secrets of all hearts, and who needs not, therefore, to be
informed of what we do or what we feel. Let language be spared, let sacred thought
and solemn feeling flow; let a sense of human littleness and of the Divine majesty
silence all insincerity, and fill the soul with reverential awe. 2. Docility. ‘Be more
ready [‘ draw nigh,’ Revised Version] to hear,” etc. There is much virtue in docility.
Our Lord strongly commended the child-spirit as the condition of entrance into the
kingdom; and was not this principally because the spirit of childhood is that of
docility—eagerness to know, readiness to receive? We should draw nigh to God in
his house, not that we may hear our favourite dogmas once more exalted or enforced,
but that we may hear the mind and know the will of Christ better than we have done
before; that we may “be filled with the knowledge of his will;” that it may become
increasingly true that “we have the mind of Christ.” To desire to part with our errors,
our ignorance, our prejudices, our half-views, our misconceptions, and to have a closer
vision of our Lord and of his Divine truth,—this is acceptable worship. 3. Obedience.
“ Keep thy foot;” “go to the house of God ‘with a-straicht foot,’ a foot trained to
walk in the path of holy obedience.” Go to the house of God as one that ‘‘ has clean
hands and a pure heart;” as one that “lifts up holy hands” unto God. To go up to
“offer sacrifice,” or ‘make long prayers,” with the determination in the heart to
continue a life of impurity, or intemperance, or dishonesty, or injustice, or harshness
toward the weak and the dependent,—this is to mock our Maker; it is to grieve the
Father of spirits, the Lord of holiness and love. But, on the other hand, to go up to
his sanctuary with a pure desire and real resolve to turn from our evil way, and to
strive, against all outward hostility and all inward impulses, to walk in our integrity,—
this is acceptable with God. “'‘l'o obey is better than sacrifice;” and it is the spirit
of obedience rather than the overt act of correctness for which the righteous Lord
is looking.—C.


Vers. 4—6.—Vowing and paying. We may regard the subject of vows in two
aspects.

t Turtr cHARACTER. They may be of: 1. An entirely obligatory character. We
may solemnly promise to God that which we may not withhold without sin. But
this may be shortly summed up in one word—ourselves. We owe to him ourselves,
all that we are and have, our powers and our possessions, And the first thing that
becomes us all is to present ourselves before God in a most solemn act of surrender,
in which we deliberately resolve and undertake to yield to him our heart and life
thenceforth and for ever. In this great crisis of our spiritual history we make the one
supreme vow with which all others are incompe™sble. It should be made in the
exercise of all the powers of our nature; not under any kind of compulsion, but as
freely as fully, as intelligently as heartily. It is one that is, of course, to be reuewed,
and this both regzJarly, and also on all special occasions. It is a vow to be confirmed
every time we bow in the sanctuary, and every time we gather at the table of the
Lord. 2. Optional. And of these vows which may be described as optional, there
are (1) those that are conditional; as when a man promises that if God give him
wealth he will devote a large proportion of it to his direct service (see Gen. xxviii. 22);
or #hat if God restore his health he will consecrate all his time and all his possessions 3

WOLESIASTER, K


180 ECOLES7ASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [cx v. 1—20,


to the proclamation of his truth. (2)Those that are wncondition xl; as when (a) a
man determines that thenceforth he will give a certain fixed proportion of his income
to the cause of Christ; or (6) when he pledges himself to abstain from some particular
indulgence which is hurtful to himself or is a temptation to others.

Il. THE SPIRIT IN WHICH THEY SHOULD BE MADE AND FULFILLED. 1. With devout
deliberation. It is aserious mistake for a man to undertake that which he fails to
carry out. (1) It is offensive to God (ver. 4). (2) It is injurious to the man himself; he
is in a distinctly worse spiritual position after failure than he would have been if he had
not entered into an engagement (ver.5). We should not promise anything in ignorance
of ourselves, and then lose our self-respect by a humiliating withdrawal. 2. In a spirit
of prompt and cheerful obedience. Whiat we vow to do we should do (1) without
delay, “deferring not.” There is always danger in delay. To-morrow we shall be
further in time from the hour of solemn resolution, and its force will be lessened by
the distance. Also (2) cheerfully; for we may be sure that God loveth a cheerful
promise-keeper—one that does what he undertook to do, although it proves to be of
greater dimensions or to be attended with severer effort than he at first imagined it
would, 38. With patient persistency; not allowing anything to come between himself
and his honourable fulfilment. (1) Are we fully redeeming our vows of Christian
consecration in the daily life that we are living? (2) Are we paying the vows we
made in some dark hour of need (see Ps. Ixvi. 13, 14) ?—C.


Vers, 8—16.—Com/fort in confusion. In the time and the country to which the
text belongs there was a very large amount of injustice, rapacity, insecurity. Men
could not count on enjoying the fruils of their labour; they were in serious danger of
being wronged, or even “done to death;” there were not the constitutional guards and
fences with which we are familiar now and here. The political and social conditions
of the age and of the land added much to the seriousness of-tle great problems of the
ee eet But though he was perplexed, he was not without light and comfort. There
was that—

I, AFFoRDED BY REASON AND EXPERIENCE. What if it were true that oppression
was often to be witnessed, and, with oppression, the suffering of the weak, yet it was
to be remembered that; 1. There was often an appeal to a higher authority, and the
unrighteous sentence was reversed (ver. 8), 2. There was always reason to hope that
injustice and tyranny would be short-lived (ver. 9). The king was served by the field ;
he was by no means independent of those who lived by manual labour; he was as
much their subject in fact and truth as they were his in form and in law; he could
not afford to live in their disregard and disapproval. 3. Successful oppression was far
from being satisfactory to those who practised it. (1) No avaricious man was ever
satisfied with the money he made; he was always coveting more; the thirst for gold
lived on, and grew by what it gained (ver.10). (2) The wealthy man found that he
could not enjoy more than a fraction of what he acquired; he was compelled to see
others partaking of that which his own toil had earned (ver. 11). The successful man
was worried and burdened with his own wealth; the fear of losing balanced, if it did
not more than counterbalance, the enjoyment of acquisition (ver. *2). (4) No rich
man could be sure of the disposition of his hardly won and carefuli, stored treasure ;
his son might scatter it in sin and folly (vers. 18, 14), (5) No man can take a solitary
fraction of his goods beyond the boundary of life (vers. 15, 16). 4. Obscurity is not
without its own advantage. (1) It sleeps the sweet sleep of security; it has nothing
to lose; it holds out no bait to the despoiler (ver. 12), (2) It enjoys the fruit of its
labour, untroubled by the ambitions, unwearied with the excessive toils, unworried
by the frequent vexations of those who aim at higher posts and move in larger
spheres,

II. AFFORDED BY REVELATION. The godly man, and more especially he to whom
Jesus Christ has spoken, contents himself—so far as it is right and well to be contented
in the midst of confusion and perversion—with the peace-bringing considerations:
1. That Infinite Wisdom is overruling, and will direct all things to a right issue.
2, That it is not our circumstances, but our character, that should chiefly concern us,
To be pure, true, loyal, helpful, Christ-like, is immeasurably more than to have and to
hold any quantity of treasure, any place or rank whatsoever. 8. That we who travel


om. v.1—20.] | ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 18x


A I NR YS


to a heavenly home, who look forward to a “crown of life,” can afford to wait for our
heritage.—O, 3 ee


Vers, 15, 16.— The difference at death. Even when we have been long looking for
the departure of one whose powers as well as his days are spent, his death, when it
does come, makes a great difference to us, Between life at its lowest and death
there is @ great and felt interval. How much more must this be the case to the
departed himself! What a difference to him between this life and that to which
goes! Perhaps less than we imagine, yet doubtless very great. The text suggests

oO us—

I. WHAT WE MUST LEAVE BEHIND US AT DEATH. 1, Our worldly goods. This is an
obvious fact, which painfully impressed the Preacher (text), and which comforted the
psalmist (Ps. xlix. 16,17). It is a fact that should make the wise less careful to
acquire and to save. 2. Our reputation. The reputation for wisdom or folly, for
integrity or dishonesty, for kindness or severity, which our life has been building up,
death cannot destroy, through whatever experiences we may then pass. We must
content to leave that behind to be associated with our name in the memories of men,
for their benediction or for their reproach, 38. The influence for good or evil we have
exerted on human souls. These we cannot remove, nor can we stay to deepen or
to counteract them; they are our most important legacies.

II, WHAT WE MAY LEAVE BEHIND Us. 1..A wise disposition of our property. A
sagacious statesman once said that he never quite made up his mind about his
neighbour’s character until he had seen his will. What disposition we make of that
we leave behind is a very serious act of our life; there are very few single acts so
serious, (1) It is usually a good thing for a man to dispose of a large proportion of
all that he has earned during his life when he is here to superintend it, (2) It is
criminally careless to cause additional sorrow at death by negligence in the matter of
disposition of means. (3) The kindest thing we can do for our relatives is not to
provide absolutely for their wants, but to facilitate their own self-support. 2. Wise
counsels to those who will heed them. ‘There are usually those who will pay great
regard to the wishes of the dying, apart from any “legal instructions.” We may leave
with those we love euch recommendations as shall save them from grave mistakes, and
guide them to good and happy courses. 3. A valued testimony to the power and
preciousness of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

II. WHat WE MAY TAKE wiTH us. 1. Our faith in Jesus Christ; that settled
attitude of the soul toward him which is one of trustfulness and love, which determines
our place in the kingdom of God (John iii. 15, 16, 18, 36), 2. Our Christian life—its
record in the heavenly chronicles; that Christian service which, in its faithfulness or
its imperfection, will gain for us the larger or the smaller measure of our Lord’s
approval (Luke xix. 16—19). 3. Qualification, gained by steadfastness, patience, zeal,
for the sphere which “the righteous Judge” will award us and will have ready for
us.—C.


Ver. 1.—Vanity in religion: 1. Thoughtlessness. From secular life the Preacher turns
to religious. He has sought in many quarters for peace and satisfaction, but has found
none. Royal palaces, huts where poor men lie, cells of philosophers, banqueting-halls,
are all alike, if not all equally, infested by vanities which poison pleasure and add to
the burden of care. But surely in the house of God, whcre men seek to disengage their
thoughts from things that are seen and temporal, and to fix them upon things that are
unseen and eternal, where they endeavour to establish and maintain communion with
their Creator, one may count upon finding a haven of refuge for the soul from vanity
and care. But here, too, he perceives that, by thoughtlessness, formalism, and
insincerity, the purpose for which worship was instituted, and the blessings it may
secure, are in danger of being defeated and nullified. But a change is manifest in the
tone in which he reproves these faults. He lays down the whip of the satirist, he
suppresses the fierce indignation which the sight of these new follies might have
excited within him, and with sober earnestness exhorts his hearers to forsake the faults
which separate between them and God, and hinder the ascent of their prayers to him
and the descent of his blessings upon them. His feelings of reverence, and his


132 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. von. v. 1—20,


re


conviction that in obedience tc God and in communion with him peace and satisfaction
may be found, forbid his sayirg of genuine reliyion that it is “ vanity and vexation of
spirit.” So far as the spirit of his exhortation is concerned, it is applicable to all forms
of worship, but we find some difficulty in ascertaining the kind of scene which was in
his mind’s eye when he spoke of “the house of God.” If we are convinced that it is
Solomon speaking iz his own person, we know that he must refer to the stately
building which he erected for the service of God in Jerusalem; and we understand
from his words that he is not depreciating the offering of sacrifices, but is giving the
admonition so olten on the lips of the prophets, that the external act without accom-
panying devotion and love of righteousness, is in vain (1 Sam. xv. 22; Ps. lL. 8, 9;
Prov. xxi. 8; Isa. i. 11—17; Jer. vii. 22, 23; Mark xii. 33). But if we have here the
utterance of a later writer, may there not be a-reference to the synagogue service, in
which the reading of the Word of God and exposition of its meaning were the principal
religious exercises employed? May not the writer be understood as affirming “that a
diligent listening to the teaching imparted in the synagogue is of more reai value than
the ‘sacrifices’ offered up in the temple by ‘ fools’”? The answer we give is determined
by the opinion we form as to the date of the book, But even if we are unable to decide
this point, the exhortation before us will lose none of its significance and weight. The
underlying truth is the same, whether the primary reference be to the gorgeous ritual
of the temple, or to the simple, unadorned services of the synagogue, which in later
times furnished the pattern for Christian worship. The first fault against which the
Preacher would have his hearers be on their guard is that of thoughtlessness—entering
the house of Gud inconsiderately (ver. 1), The form in which the admonition is
expressed is probably intended to remind his readers of the Divine command to Moses
in the desert when he drew near to the bush that burned with fire: “ Put off thy shoes
from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground” (Exod. iii. 5;
of. also Josh. v. 15).

I, Our first duty in entering the house of God is, therefore, To BE REVERENT BOTH
IN MANNER AND 1N spiriT. The outward expression of this feeling, whatever form
according to the custom of our time, or country, or Church, it may take, is to be ar
indication of the frame of mind in which we enter upon the service of God. It is true
that there may be a reverent manner without devoutness of spirit, but it is equally
true that there cannot be devoutness of spirit without reverence of manner. The true
frame of mind is that which springs from a due sense of the solemnity attaching to the
house of God, and of the purpose for which we assemble in it. It is not superstition,
but genuine religious sentiment, that would lead us to be mindful of the fact that it is
no common ground which is enclosed by the sacred walls; that it is here that we meet
with him whom “the heaven of heavens cannot contain.” Though we are at all times
in his presence, his house is the place in which we entreat him to manifest himself to
his congregated people. Yet, though we know that the place and the purpose of our
frequenting it are of the most holy and solemn nature, it is only by a strong effort
that we can maintain the frame of mind we should be in when we wait upon God in
his house. It is only by resolutely determining so to do that we can control our
wandering thoughts, suppress frivolous and sinful imavinations, and divest ourselves of
the secular cares and anxieties which occupy only too much of our attention in the
world outside the sanctuary.

II. Our second great duty is THAT OF OBEDIENCE TO THE Divine Law; “ for to draw
near to hearken is better than to give the sacrifice of fools, for they know not that they
do evil” (Revised Version), Not only should there be reverence of manner and spirit
in the presence of God, but a cesire to know what he requires from us, and a disp: sition
to render it. Love of holiness, and endeavours to exemplify it, are essential to all true
service of God. By hearkenirg is evidently meant an attitude of mind which leads
directly to obedience to the words spoken, to repentance and amendment when faults
are reproved, and to a love ané practice of the virtues commended. In the Epistle of
James (i. 19—25) we have an inspired commentary upon this precept in the Book of
Ecclesiastes. The Christian teacher enforces the same lesson, and depicts the contrast
between the “forgetful hearer” and the “doer of the Word.” The one is like a man
looking for & moment into a mirror, and going on his way, and speedily forgetting what
he looked like; the other is like’a man who uses the revelation the mirror gives him


ea. v. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 183


of himself, to correct what in him is faulty. The latter returns again and again te
examine himself in the faithful glass, for the purpose of removing those stains which
it may show are upon him. This reverence of manner and spirit and this love of
righteousness alone give value to worship; omission of them through thoughtlessness
is a positive offence against God.—J. W.


Vers. 2, 3.— Vanity in religion: 2. Rash prayers. From an admonition as to the
spirit in which we should enter the house of God, our author proceeds to counsel us as
to the religious exercises we engage in there. Our utterances in prayer are to be calm
and deliberate. A multitude of wishes may fill our hearts, and, unless we take care, find
expression in a volume of ill-considered words, But we are to remember that only some
of our wishes can be lawfully turned into prayers, and that an appropriate expression of
the requests we feel we can offer, is due from us. The counsel here given is twofold:
(1) it relates to our words, which often outrun our thoughts, and (2) to our hearts or
minds, which are often the homes of vain imaginations and desires. Over both we
must exercise control if we are to offer acceptable prayers. One great safeguard
against offending in this matter is brevity in our addresses to heaven’s King. In
moultitude of words even the wisest are in danger of giving indications of folly.
Definite petitions, duly weighed, and expressed in simple, earnest language, become
us who stand at such a distance from the throne of God. Our Lord reiterates the
admonition in the sermon on the mount (Matt. vi. 7, 8): “ When ye pray, use not
vain repetitious, as the heathen do: for they think that they shall be heard for their
much speaking. Be not ye therefore like unto them: for your Father knoweth what
things ye have need of, before ye ask him.” And in the parable of the Pharisee and
the publican (Luke xviii. 9—14) he contrasts the voluble utterance of the self-
righteous and complacent worshipper with the brief, sincere confession and supplication
of the true penitent. The greatest of all safeguards against the evil here condemned
consists in our having before our minds a true idea of what prayer is. It is our offering
petitions to God as creatures who are dependent upon his goodness, as children whom
he loves. If we take as our example that offered by our Saviour in the garden of
Gethsemane (Matt. xxvi. 39), we learn that the aim of prayer is not to determine the
will of God. Some one thing we may ask for, but we leave it to Gud to grant or to
deny, and seek above all that our will may be changed into his will (see Robertson of
Brighton, vol. iv. serm. 3, “ Prayer ”).—J. W.


Vers. 4—7.— Vanity in religion: 3. Broken vows. A vow is a promise to dedicate
something to God, on certain conditions, such as his granting deliverance from death
or danger, success in one’s undertakings, or the like, and is one of the most ancient
and widespread of religious customs. The earliest we read of is that of Jacob at

~ Bethel (Gen. xxviii. 18—22; xxxi. 13). The Mosaic Law regulated the practice, and
the passage before us is an almost exact reprduction of the section in Deuteronomy,

(xxiii. 21—23) in which general directions are given about the discharge of such
obligations. The vow consisted in the dedication of persons or possessions to sacred

uses. The worshipper’s s2lf, or child, or slave, or property, might be devoted to God,

Vows were entirely voluntary, but, once made, were. regarded as compulsory, and
evasion of performance of them was held to be highly irreligious (Numb, xxx, 2;

Deut. xxiii. 21—23; ch. vy. 4). The kind of sin referred to here is that of making

a vow inconsiderately, and drawing back when the time of performance comes. No

_—__ obligation to vow rested upon any may (Deut. xxiii. 22), but when the vow had once
been made, no one could without dishonourtéfuse to fulfil it. Of course, it was to be

taken for granted that the vow was such as could be fulfilled without violating any

law or ordinance of God. And, accordingly, provision was made in the Mosaic Law for

the cancelling of any such obligation undertaken inadvertently, and found on maturer
consideration to be immoral. It could be set aside, ara the offence of having made it

be atoned for as a sin of ignorance (Lev. v. 4—6). But when no such obstacle stood in

the way of performance, nothing but a prompt and cheerful fulfilment of the vow

could be accepted as satisfactory. A twofold fault is described in the passage before

us: (1) an unseemly delay in fulfilling the vow (ver. 4) leading, perhaps, to an omission

to it at all; and (2) a deliberate evasion of it, the insincere worshipper going te


184 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, _—[am. v. 1—20.


the angel (priest), aid saying that the vow had been made in ignorance, and should
not therefore be kept literally (ver. 6). And in eorrespondence with tho respective
degrees of guilt incurred by such conduct, the Divine indignation takes a less or more
intense form: ver. 4, “ile hath no pleasure in fovls;” ver. 6, “ Wherefore sould God
be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?” ‘The idea of the former
of the two statements of the Divine displeasure is far from being trivial or from being
a tame anticipation of the latter. “The Lord first ceases to delight in a man, and
then, after long forbearance, gives him over to destruction” (Wright). The one great
source of these three forms of evil which so often vitiate religious life—thoughtlessness,
rash prayers, and broken vows—is irreverence, and against it the Preacher lifts up his
voice (ver. 7): “For in the multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers
vanities: but fear thou God.” Just as occasional dreams may be coherent, so few
well-considered utterances may be characterized by wisdom. But a crowd of dreams,
and hasty, babbling speech, are sure to contain confused images and offensive folly.
The fear of God, therefore, if it habitually influence the mind, will preserve a man
from being “rash with his mouth ;” it will hinder his making inconsiderate vows, and
alterwards seeking excuses for not fulfilling them.—J. W.


Ver, 8.—A misgoverned state. From the follies only too prevalent in the religious
world, the Preacher turns to the disorders of the political; and although he admonishes
his readers in a later section of the book (ch. viii. 2) to be mindful of the duties
to which they are pledged by their oath of allegiance, it is very evident that he
felt keenly the misery and oppression caused by misgovernment. For these evils he
could suggest no cure; a hopeless submission to the inevitable is his only counsel.
Like Hamlet, his heart is wrung by the thought of evils against which it was almost
useless to strive—


“The oppressor’s wrong, the proud man’s contumely
... the law’s delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes.”


The subordinate magistrates tyrannized over the people, those who were higher in
office watched their opportunity for oppressing them. From the lowest up to the very
highest rank of officials the same system of violence and jealous espionage prevailed.
Those that were in the royal household and had the ear of the king, his most intimate
counsellors, who were in a sense higher than any of the satraps or governors he
employed, were able to urge him to use his power for the destruction of any whose
ill-gotten riches made him an object of envy (comp. ch. x. 4, 7, 16, etc.). The whole
system of government was rotten to the core, the same distrust-and jealousy pervaded
every part of it. ‘Marvel not,” says the Preacher, “ at oppression and injustice in the
lower departments of official life, for those who are the superiors of the tyraunical judge
or governor, and should be a check on him, are as bad as he.” Such seems to be the
sense of the words. At first sight, indeed, the impression left on one’s mind is that
the Preacher counsels his readers not to be perplexed or unduly dismayed at the wrong
they are forced to witness, on the ground that over and above the highest of earthly
tyrants is the power of God, and that it will in due time be manifested in the punish-
ment of the evil-doer. As though he had said, God who is “higher than the highest
regardeth,” beholds the wrong-doing; and when he comes to judgment, the proudest
will have to submit to his power (comp. ch, iii. 17). But this interpretation, though
very ancient, is not in harmony with the general character of the utterance, The
thought of God’s power and justice is indeed calculated to give some consolation to the
oppressed, but not to explain why they are oppressed. The latter part of the verse is
assigned as a reason for not marveiling at the prevalence of evil. If, therefore, reference
be made to the power of Goi, by which the evil might be restrained or abolished, the
marvel of its prevalence would only be increased. We are, therefore, to understand his
words as meaning, “Do not be surprised at the corruption and baseness of the lower
officials, in so much as the same corruption prevails among those in far higher
positions.” He is not here seeking to cheer up the sufferer by bidding him look
higher; he is describing the evil state of affairs everywhere existing in the empire in


om. v.1—20.]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 138


his own day (Wright). There is nothing very heroic or inspiring in the counsel. It
is simply an admonition, based on prudence, to escape personal danger by stolid]

submitting to evils which one’s own power can do nothing to abolish or alleviate. T
those who under an Oriental despotism had become hopeless and dispirited, the words
might seern worthy of a wise counsellor; but surely there is a servile ring about them
which ill harmonizes with the love of freedom and intolerance of tyranny which are
native to a European mind. There is but one relieving circumstance in connection
with them, and that is that submission to oppression is not commanded in them or
asserted to be a duty; and therefore those in whose hearts the love of country and of
justice burns brightly, and who find that a pure and devoted patriotism moves them
to make many sacrifices for the good of their fellows, violate no canon of Scripture
when they rise superior to the prudential considerations dwelt upon here. Granted
that submission to the inevitable is the price at which material safety and happiness
may be bought, it is still a question at many times whether the patriot should not
hazard material safety and happiness in the attempt to win for his country and fos
himself a higher boon.—J, W.


Ver. 9.—A well-ordered state. In contrast with the evils produced by an adminis-
tration in which all the officials, from the lowest to the highest, seek to enrich
themselves, our author now sets the picture of a well-governed community, in which
the efficient cultivation of the land is a matter of the first consideration, and all classes
of the population, up to the king himself, share in the consequent prosperity. (The
verse has been differently rendered, but the translation of both our Revised and
Authorized Versions is probably the best reproduction of the original words.) From
the kings who wasted the resources of the lands over which they ruled in carrying on
bloody wars, and in the indulgence of their capricious tastes, he turns to those who,
like Uzziah, encouraged agriculture, and under whose beneficent rule Judah enjoyed
the blessings of peace and prosperity (2 Chron. xxvi. 10). “The profit of the earth is
for all.” All are dependent upon the labours of the husbandman for the supply of the
necessaries of life. By the judicious cultivation of the soil wealth is accumulated, by
which comforts and luxuries are to be procured, so that even “the king himself ig
served by the field.” The king, indeed, is more dependent upon the husbandman than
the husbandman upon the king; without his labours there would be no bread for the
royal palace, and no luxuries could make up for the absence of this necessary of life,
We have, surely, in this consideration a strong pet of the dignity and value of the
humblest labour, and in the fact of the mutual dependence of all classes upon each
other an argument for the necessity of mutual forbearance and co-operation. A very
striking illustration of the teaching here given is afforded in an incident which took
place at Heidelberg in the reign of Frederic I. (1152—1190). “This prince invited to
a banquet all the factious barons whom he had vanquished at Seckingen, and who
had previously ravaged and laid waste great part of the palatinate. Among them
were the Bishop of Mentz and the Margrave of Baden, ‘The repast was plentiful
and luxurious, but there was no bread. The warrior-guests looked round with sur-
prise and inquiry. ‘Do you ask for bread?’ said Frederic, sternly; ‘you who have
wasted the fruits of the earth, and destroyed those whose industry cultivates it?
There is no bread. Eat, and be satisfied; and learn henceforth mercy to those
who put the bread into your mouths’” (quoted in ‘Sketches of Germany,’ by Mrs,
Jameson).—J. W.


Vers. 10—20.— The drawbacks upon wealth. The series of aphorisms which begins
in ver. 10 is not unconnected with what precedes it. It is for wealth generally that the
unjust judge and oppressive ruler barters his peace of mind, sells his very soul. As the
means for procuring sensual gratification, for surrounding one’s self with ostentatious
luxury, and for carrying out ambitious schemes, riches have great fascination, The
Preacher, however, records at length the drawbacks connected with them, which are
calculated to diminish the envy with which the poor very often regard those who
possess them. Probably the bulk of mankind would say that they are willing to put
up with the drawbacks if only they could possess the riches. But surely those who
read the Word of God reverently and with a docile spirit are disposed te profit by the


186 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHAR. (ou. v. 1—20,


wise counsels and warning it contains. The gross and presumptuous frame of mind,
which would lead any to laugh at the drawbacks upon wealth as imaginary, when
compared with the happiness they think it must secure, deserves severe censure. Both
rich and poor may draw appropriate lessons from the Preacher’s words: the rich may
learn humility; the poor, contentment.

I. INSATIABLENESS OF avarice, (Ver. 10.) Those who begin to amass money
cultivate an appetite which can never be satisfied, which only grows in fierceness as
it is supplied with food. Those who love silver will never count themselves rich
enough; they will always hunger for more, and the amount tl at would once have
seemed abundance to them will be spurned as paltry, as their ideas and desires are
enlarged. Dissatisfaction with what they have, and greed to acquire more, poison their
pleasure in all that they have accumulated. Happy are those who have learned to be
content with little, whose wants are few and moderate, who, having fvod and raiment,
desire no more—they are really rich.

Il, Another thought calculated to diminish envy of the rich is that, As WEALTH
INCREASES, THOSE THAT CONSUME IT INCREASE ALSO. (Ver. 11.) Along with the more
abundant possessions, there is generally a larger retinue of servants and dependants.
So that, with more to provide for, the wealthy man may be poorer than he was in
earlier days when his means were smaller. Fresh demands are made upon him; the
outward display he is forced to make becomes a daily increasing burden; he has to
labour for the supply of others rather than for himself. A striking passage in
Xenophon—quoted by Plumptre—expresses the same thought. “Do you think that
I live with more pleasure the more I possess? . . . By having this abundance I gain
mercly this, that I have to guard more, to distribute more to others, and to have the
trouble of taking care of more; for a great many domestics now demand of me their
food, their drink, and their clothes. . . . Whosoever, therefore, is greatly pleased with
the possession of riches will, be assured, feel much aunoyed at the expenditure of
them ” (‘Cyrop.,’ viii. 3). The only compensation that the rich man may have is that
of being able to look on his treasures and say, “These are mine.” Is it, after all, a
sufficient reward for his toils and cares?

III. Another boon which the poor may always enjoy, but which the rich may often
sigh for in vain, is SWEET SLEEP, (Ver. 12.) The labourer enjoys refreshing sleep,
whether his food be abundant or not; the toils of the day ensure sound slumber at
night. While the very abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep; all kinds
of cares, projects, and anxieties rise within his mind, and will not suffer him to be at
rest. The dread of losing his riches may make him wakeful, feverish excitement may
result from his luxurious mode of living, and rob him of the power to compose himself
to slumber, and, like the ambitious king, he may envy the ship-boy rocked and lulled
by the tossing of “the rude, imperious surge” (Shakespeare, ‘Henry IV.,’ Part IL,
act ili, sc. 1).

IV. Riches MAY INJURE ITs PossEssoR. (Ver. 13.) It may mark him out as a
suitable victim for spoliation by a lawless tyrant or a revolutionary mob, Or it may
furnish him with the means of indulging vicious appetites, and increase greatly the
risks and temptations that make it difficult to live a sober, righteous, and godly life
and ruin him body and soul. As says the apostle, “They that desire to be rich fall
into a temptation and a snare, and many foolish and hurtful lusts, such as drown men
in destruction and perdition” (1 Tim. vi. 9, 10).

V. Another evil attendant on wealth is THE DANGER OF SUDDEN AND IRRETRIEVABLE
toss. (Ver. 14,) “Not only do riches fail to give any satisfying joy, but the man
who reckoned on founding a family, and leaving his heaped-up treasures to his son, gains
nothing but anxieties and cares, he may lose his wealth by some unfortunate chance
and leave his son a pauper.” ‘T'he case of Job would seem to be in the writer’s mind
as an example of this sudden cownfall from prosperity and wealth. In any case, death
robs the rich man of all his possessions; in the twinkling of an eye he is stripped of
his wealth, as a traveller who has fallen in with a troop of banditti, and is forced to
depart from life as poor in goods as when he entered it (vers. 15, 16).

VI. Lastly, come THE INFIRMITY AND PEEVISHNESS WHICH ARE OFTEN THE coM-
PANIONS OF WEALTH. (Ver. 17.) Riches cannot cure disease, or ward off the day of
death, or compensate for the sorrows and disappointments of life, and may only tend te


oH. VL. 1—12.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 187


aggravate them ; a deeper dissatisfaction with self, and with the providential govern-
ment of the world, a more intense feeling of misanthropy and embitterment are likely
to be the portion of the godless rich than of those who have had all through life to
labour for their bread, and have never risen much above the position in which they
first found themselves.

As a practical conclusion, the Preacher reiterates for the fourth time his old advice
(vers. 18—20): “If you have little, be content with it. If you have much, enjoy it
without excess, and without seeking more. God gives life and earthly blessings, and
the power to enjoy them.” And in words that are less clear than we could wish, he
seems to intimate that in this pious disposition of mind and heart will be found the
secret of a serene and happy life, which no changes or disappointments will be able
wholly to overcast. “For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because
God answereth him in the joy of his heart”—words which seem to imply, “The man
who has learned the secret of enjoyment is not anxious about the days of his life; does
not brood even over its transitoriness, but takes each day tranquilly as it comes, as
God’s gift to him; and God himself corresponds to his joy, is felt to approve it, as
harmonizing, in its calm evenness, with his own blessedness, The tranquillity of the
wise man mirrors the tranquillity of God” (Plumptre).—J. W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER VL


Vers, 1—6.—Section 9. Koheleth proceeds
to illustrate the fact which he stated at the
end of the last chapter, viz. that the posses-
sion and enjoyment of wealth are alike the
free gift of God. We may see men possessed
of all the gifts of fortune, yet denied the
faculty of enjoying them. Hence we again
conclude that wealth cannot secure happiness.


Ver. 1.—There is an evil which I have
geen under the sun. The writer presents his
personal experience, that which has fallen
under his own observation (comp. ch. y. 13;
x. 5). And it iscommon among men. fu),
translated “ common,” like woAis in Greek,
is used of number and of degree; hence
there is some doubt about its meaning here,
The Septuagint has moAaf, the Vulgute
frequens. ‘Taking into account the fact
that the circumstance stated is not one of
general experience, we must receive the
adjective in ite tropical signification, and
render, And it is great [lies heavily] upon
men. Comp. ch. viii 6, where the same
word is used, and the preposition by is rather
“upon” than “ among” (Isa. xxiv. 20).

Ver. 2._A man to whom God hath given
riches, wealth, and honour. This is the
evil to wnich reference is made. Two of the
words here given, “riches” und “ honour,”
are those used by God in blessing Sulomon
in the vision _§ Gibeon (1 Kings iti. 13);
but all three are employed in the parallel
passaye (2 Chron. i11). Sothat he wanteth
nothing for his soul of all that he desireth.
“Hig soul” is the man himself, his perzon-
ality, as Ps. xlix. 19, So in the parable


(Luke xii. 19) the rich fool says to his soul,
“Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for
many years.” In the supposed case the man
is able to procure for himself everything
which he wants; has no occasion to deny
himself the gratification of any rising desire.
All this comes from God’s bounty; but
something more is wanted to bring happi-
nese, Yet God giveth him not power to eat
thereof. “To eat” is used in @ metaphorical
sense for “ to enjoy,” take advantage of, make
due use of (see on ch. ii. 24). The ability to
enjoy all these good things is wanting, either
from discontent, or moroseness, or sickness,
or as &® punishment for secret sin. But a
stranger eatethit. The “stranger” (nokrt)
is not the legal heir, but an alien to the
possessor’s blood, neither relation nor even
necessarily a fricnd. Fora childless Ori: ntal
to adupt an heir is a common custom at
the present day. The wisi to continue a
family, to leave a name and inheritance to
children’s children, was very strong among
the Hebrews—all the stronger as the life
beyond the grave was dimly apprehended.
Abraham expressed this feeling when he
sadly cried, “I go chi.dless, and he that
shall be possessor of my house is Vammesek
Eliezer” (Gen, xv. 2). The evils are two—
that this great fortune brings no happiness
to its possessor, aud that it passes to one
who is nothing to him. An evil disease;
appworla rovnpa, Septuigint, an evil as bad
as the diseases spoken of in Deut. xxviil.
27, 28.

Ver. 3.—If a man beget an hundred chil-
dren, Another case is supposed, differing
from the preceding one, where the rich man
dies childless, Septuagint, Edy yeyrvicn avnp
éxaréy. “Sons,” or “children,” must be


138


supplied (comp. 1 Sam. ii. 5; Jer. xv. 9).
To have a large family was regarded as a
preat blessing, The “hundred” is a round
number, though we read of some fathers who
had nearly this number of children; thus
Ahab had seventy sons (2 Kings x, 1),
Rehoboam eighty-eight children (2 Chron.
xi. 21). Plumptre follows some commen-
tators in seeing here an allusion to Arta-
xorxes Mnemon, who is said to have had
a hundred and fifteen children, and died of
griefat the age of ninety-four at the suicide
of one son and the murder of another.
Wordsworth opines that Solomon, in the pre-
vious verse, was thinking of Jeroboam, who,
it was revealed unto him, should, stranger
as he was, seize and enjoy his inheritance,
But these historical references are the
merest guesswork, and rest upon no substan-
tial basis. Plainly the author’s statement is
general, and there is no need to ransack
history to find its parallel And live many
years, so that the days of his years be many;
Et vixerit multos annos, et plures dies xtatis
habuerit (Vulgate). ‘These versions seem to
be simply tautological. The second clause
is climacteric, as Ginsburg renders, ‘ Yea,
numerous as may be the days of his years.”
The whole extent of years is summed up in
daya. So Ps. xo. 10, “The days of our years
are three score years and ten,” etc. Long
life, again, was deemed a special blessing, as
we see in the commandment with promise
(Exod. xx. 12). And (yet tf) his soul be not
filled with good; ¢.e. he does not satisfy
himself with the enjoyment of all the good
things which he possesses. Septuagint, Kal
Wuxh adrod ob mAngbjoerat amd Tis dyabw-
covns, ** And-his soul shall not be satistied
with his good.’”’ And also that he have no
burial. This is the climax of the evil that
befalls him. Some critics, not entering into
Koheleth's view of the severity of this
calamity, translate, “and even if the grave
did not wait for him,” ¢.e. “if he were never
to die,” if he were immortal. But there is
no paralle] to show that the clause can have
this meaning ; and we know, without having
recourse to Greek precedents, that the want
of burial was reckoned a grievous loss and
dishonour, Hence comes the common allu-
sion to dead carcases being left. to be de-
voured by beasts and birds, instead of mect-
ing with honourable burial in the ancestral
graves (1 Kings xiii, 22; Isa. xiv. 18—20v),
Thus David says to his giant foe, “1 will
give the carcases of the host of the Philis-
tines this day unto the fowls of the air, and
to the wild beasts of the earth” (1 Sam.
xvii, 46); and about Jehoiakim it was de-
nounced that he should not be lamented
when he died: “ He shall be buried with the
burial of an asa, drawn and cast forth beyond
the gates of Jerusalem” (Jer. xxii. 18, 19).


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


ee EEUU IRRRER ER


The lot of the rich man in question {a pro-
claimed with ever-increasing misery. He
cannot enjoy his possessions; he has none
to whom to leave them; his memory perishes;
he has no honoured burial. I say, that an
untimely birth is better than he (comp. oh.
iv. 8). The abortion or still-born child is
preferable to one whose destiny is so miser-
able (see Job iii, 16; Ps. lviii. 8). It is
preferable because, although it has missed
all the pleasures of life, it has at least
escaped all suffering. The next two verses
illustrate this position.

Ver. 4.—For he cometh in with vanity;
rather, for tt came into nothingness, The
reference is to the foatus, or still-born child,
not to the rich man, as is implied by the
Authorized Version. This, when it appeared,
had no independent life or being, was a mere
nothing. And departeth in darkness; and
goeth into the darkness. It is taken away
and put out of sight. And his (és) name
shall be covered with darkness. It is a
nameless thing, unrecorded, unremembered.

Ver. 5.—It has seen nothing of the world,
known nothing of life, its joys and its suffer-
ings, and is speedily forgotten. To see the
sun” is a metaphor for to “live,” as ch. vii.
11; xi. 7; Jobiii, 16, and implies activity and
work, the contrary of rest. This hath more
rest than the other; literally, there és rest to
this more than to that. The rest that belongs
to the abortion is better than that which
belongs to the rich man. Others take the
clause to say simply, “It is better with this
than the other.” So the Revised Version
margin and Delitzsch, the idea of “ rest”
being thus generalized, and taken to signify
& preferable choice, Septuagint, Kal od«
éyvw dvamatoes TotTe twtp rovTov, “And
hath not known rest for this more than
that ””—which reproduces the difficulty of
the Hebrew; Vulgute, Neque coguvvit dis-
tantiam bont et mali, which is a paraphrase
unsupported by the present accentuation of
the text, Rest, in the concep.ion of au
Oriental, is the most desirable of all things;
compared with the busy, careworn life of the
rich man, whose very moments of leisure
and sleep are troubled and disturbed, the
dreamless nothingness of the still-born child
is happiness. This may be a rhetorical
exaggeration, but we have its parallel in
Job’s lamentable cry in ch, iii. when he
“ oursed his day.”

Ver. 6.—Yea, though he live a thousand
years twice told, yet hath he seen no good.
What has been said would still be true even
if the man lived two thousand years. The
s.cond clause is not the apodosis (as the
Authorized Version makes it), but the con-
tinuation of the protasis: if he lived the
longest life, “and saw not good;” the cons
clusion is given in the form of a question.


A


“oH. VL 1—12.]


The “ good” is the enjoyment of life spoken
of in ver. 8 (seeonch. ii.1). The specified
time seems to refer to the age of the
appa none of whom, from Adam to

oah, reached half the limit assigned. De
not all go to one place? viz. to Sheol, the
grave (ch. iii. 20). If long life were spent
in calm enjoyment, it might be preferabie to
a short one; but when it is pussed amid
care and annoyance aud discontent, it is no
better than that which begins and en'ls in
nothingness, The grave receives bth, and
there is nothing to choose between them, at
least in this point of view. Of life as in
itself a blessing, a discipline, a echoul, Kohe-
leth says nothing here; he puts himself in
the place of the discontented rich man, and
appraises life with his eyes. On the com-
mon destiny that awaits peer and peasant,
rich and poor, happy and sorrow-laden, we
ean all remember utterances old aud new.
Thus Horace, ‘Carm.,’ ii. 3. 20—


“Divesne prisco natus ab Inacho,
Nil interest, an pauper et infima
De gente gub divo moreris,
Victima nil miserantis Orcd.
“Omnes eodem cogimur.”
Ovid, ‘ Met.’ x. 83--


* Omnia debeutur vobis, paulluamque morati
Serius aut citius sedeum properamus ad
unam.
Tendimus huc omnes, hec est domus
ultima.”


* Pate is the lord of all things; soon or late
To one abode we epecd, thither we all
Pursne our way, this is our final home.”


Vers. 7—9.—Section 10. Desire is insati-
able; men are always striving after enjoyment,
but they never cain their wish completely—
whicl. fortifies the old conclusion that man’s
happiness is not in lis own power.


Ver. 7—All the iabour of man is for his
mouth; ie. for eclf preservation and enjoy-
ment, eating and driuking being taken as
a type of the proper use of earti:ly blessings
(comp. ch ii. 24 ; iii. 13, cte.; Pa. exxviii 2).
The sentiment is general, and does not rcfer
specially to the particular person described
above, though it carries on the idea of the un-
satisfactory result of wealth. Luther trans-
lates strangely and erroneously, “To every
man is work allotted according to his
measure.” Such an idea is entirely forrign
to the context. And yet the appetite is not
filled. The word rendered “appetite” is
nephesh, “soul,” and Zéckler coutends that
“‘tnouth ’ and ‘soul’ stand in contrast to each
other as representatives of the purely sensual
and therefore transitory enjoyment (comp.
Job xii. 11; Prov. xvi. 26) a2 compared with


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


189


the deeper, more spiritual, snd therefore
more lasting kind of joy.” But no such
contrast is intended; the writer would never
have uttered such a truism as that deep,
spiritual joy is not to be obtained by sensual
pleasure; and, a: Delitzsch points out, in
some passages (e.g. Prov. xvi, 26; Isa. v. 14;
xxix. 8) “imoutii” in one sentence corre.
sponds to “soul” in another. The soul is
considered as the seat of the appetitive
faculty—emotious, desires, ete. ‘This is
never satisfied (ch. i. 8) with what it has,
but is always craving for more. So Horce
affirms that a man rightly obtains the appel-
lation of king, “avidum domando spiritum,”
by subduing his spirit’s cravings (‘ Carm.,’
ii, 2. 9),

Ver. 8.—For what hath the wise more
than the fool? te. What advantage hath
the wise man over the fool? This verse
coifirms the previous one by an interrogative
argument. The same labour for support,
the same unsatisfied desires, belong to all,
wize or foolish ; in this respect intellectual
gifts have no superiority. (For a similar
interrogution implying an emphatic denial,
see ch. i. 3.) What hath the poor, that
knoweth to walk before the living? The
Septuagint gives the verse thus: “Or: rls
wepicceia (A, O, 87) rH cob@ itp rév Eppovay
Bors 6 révns olde mopevOjva natévayrt THs
(wns, For what advantage hath the wise
man over tlie foul? siuce the poor man knows
how to walk before life?” Vulgate, Quid
habet amplius sapiens a stulto? ea quid pau-
per, nisi ut pergut illue, ubi est vita? “ And
wiat hath the poor man except that he go
thither where is life?” Both these versions
regard Ovnn as used in the sense of “life,” and
that the life beyond the grave; but this idea
is forcign to the context; and the expres-
sion must be rendered, as in the Authorized
Version, “the living.” The interpretation
of the clanse has much exercised critics,
Piumptre adheres to that of Berustein and
others, “ What advantage hath the poor
oyer him who knows how to walk before the
Lying?” (ie. the man of high birth or station,
who lives in public, with the eyes of men
upon bim). ‘The poor has his cares and
unsati fied desires as much as the man of
enlture and position. Poverty offers no
protection against such assaults, But the
expression, to know how to walk before the
living, means to understund «nd to follow the
correct path of life; to know how to behave
properly and uprightly in the intercourse
with one’s fellow-men; to have what the
French call savoir vivre. (80 Voick.) The
question must be completed thos: “ What
aJvantage has the discreet and properly con-
ducted poor mau over the fool?” None, at
least in this respect. The poor man, even
though he be well verged in the rule of life,


140


has insatiable desires which he has to check
or conceal, and so is no better off than the fool,
who equally is unable to gratify them. The
two extremities of the social scale are taken
—the rich wise man, and the prudent poor
man—and both are shown to fail in enjoying
life ; and what is true of these must be also
true of all that come between these two
limits, “ the appetite is not filled” (ver. 7).

Ver. 9.— Better is the sight of the eyes
than the wandering of the desire (nephesh,
“the goul,” ver. 7). This is a further con-
firmation of the misery and unrest that
accompany immoderate desires. ‘“ The sight
of the eyes” means the enjoyment of the
present, that which lies before one, in con-
trast to the restless craving for what is dis-
tant, uncertain, and out of reach. The lesson
taught is to make the best of existing cir-
cumstances, to enjoy the present, to control
the roaming of fancy, and to narrow the vast
field of appetency. We have a striking ex-
pression in Wisd. iv. 12, peuBacpds émdv-
plas, by which is denoted the giddiness, the
reeling intoxication, caused by unrestrained
passion. The Roman satirist lashed the sin
of unscrupulous greed—


“ Sed que reverentia legum,
Quis metus aut pudor est unquam prope-
rantis avari?”
(Juven., ‘ Sat.,’ xiv. 177.)
Nor law, nor checks of conscience will he


ear
When in hot scent of gain and full career.”
(Dryden.)

Zockler quotes Horace, ‘ Epist.,’ i. 18, 96,

ogqg.—

© Inter cuncta leges et percontabere doctos,
Qua ratione queas traducere leniter evum ;
Num te semper inops agitet vexetque

cupido,
Num pavor et rerum mediocriter utilium
spes.”

“To sum up all—Consult and con the wise
In what the art of true contentment lies:
ne and hope, that rack the human

will,
Are but vain dreams of things nor good
nor ill.”
(Howes.)


Mare, Aurel., ‘Meditat.,’ iv. 26, “Has any
advantage happened to you? It is the
bounty of fate. It was all preordained you
by the universal cause. Upon the whole,
life is but short, therefore be just and pru-
dent, and make your most of it; and when
you divert yourself, be always on your
guard” (J. Collier). Well is it added ‘that
this insatiability of the soul, which never
leads to contentment, is vanity and vexation
of spirit, a feeding on wind, empty, unsatis-


EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(on. vi. 1—12,


fying. Commentators refer in illustration
to the fable of the dog and the shadow, and
the proverb, “ A bird in the hand is worth
two in the bush.”


Vers. 10—12.—Section 11. All things are
foreknown and foreordained by God; tt ts
useless to murmur against or to discuss this
great fact; and as the future is beyond our
knowledge and control, it is wise to make
the best of the present.


Ver. 10.—That which hath been is named
already; better, whatsoever hath been, long
ago hath its name been given. The word
rendered “already,” kebar (ch. i. 10; ii. 12,
iii. 15; iv. 2), “long ago,” though used else-
where in this book of events in human
history, may appropriately be applied to the
Divine decrees which predetermine the cir-
cumstances of man’s life. This is its signi-
ficance in the present passage, which asserts
that everything which happens has been
known and fixed beforehand, and therefore
that man cannot shape his own life. No
attempt is here made to reconcile this
doctrine with man’s free-will and consequent
responsibility. The idea has already been
presented in ch. iii. 1, eto. It comes forth
in Isa. xlv. 9, “Shall the clay say to him
that fashioneth it, What makest thou? or
thy work, He hath no hands?” (comp. Rom.
ix. 20); Acts xv. 18 (according to the Textus
Receptus), ‘Known unto God are all his
works from the beginning of the world.”
The same idea is brought out more fully
in the following clauses. Septuagint, “If
anything ever was, already hath its name
been called,” which gives the correct sense
of the passage. The Vulgate is not so
happy, Qué futurus est, jam vocatum est
nomen ejus, being rather opposed to the
grammar. And it is known that it is man,
What is meant by the Authorized Version
is doubtful. If the first clause had been
translated, as in the margin of the Revised
Version, “ Whatsoever he be, his name was
given him long ago,” the conclusion would
come naturally, “and it is known that he
is man” (Adam), and we should see an
allusion to man’s name and to the ground
(adamah) from which he was taken (Gen.
ii. 7), as if his very name betokened his
weakness. But the present version is very
obscure. Cox gives, ‘It is very certain
that even the greatest is but a man, and
cannot contend with him,” ete. But the
Hebrew will not admit this rendering,
The clause really amplifies the previous
statement of man’s predetermined destiny,
and it should be rendered, “And it is
known what a man shall be.” Every in-
dividual comes under God’s prescient super-
intendence. Septuagint, ’Eyvdety 3 doris


om. vi 1—12.]


= ee “Tt is known what man is;”
Vulgate, Ht scitur quod homo sit. But it is
not the nature of man that is in question,
but his conditioned state. Neither may he
contend with him that is mightier than he.
The mightier One is God, in accordance
with the passages quoted above from Isaiah,
Acts, and Romans. Some consider that
death is intended, and that the author
is referring to the shortness of man’s life.
They say that the word tagqiph, “ mighty”
(which occurs only in Ezra and Daniel), is
never used of God. But is it used of death?
And is it not used of God in Dan. iv. 3
(iii. 33, Hebrew), where Nebuchadnezzar
says, “How mighty are his wonders!”?
To bring death into consideration is to in-
troduce a new thought having no connection
with the context, which is not speaking of
the termination of man’s life, but of its
course, the circumstances of which are ar-
ranged by a higher Power. Septuagint,
Kal ov duvjcera: KpiOijvai werd rob iaxvpotépov
imtp aitév. With this we may compare
1 Cor. x. 22, “Do we provoke the Lord to
jealousy? are we stronger than he? (uy
ioxupdrepat adtod éopuer;).”

Ver. 11.—Seeing there be many things that
increase vanity. ‘Thenoun rendered “things”
(dabar) may equally mean “ words;” and it
is a question which signification is most
appropriate here. The Septuagint has Adyo
woAAot, “many words.” So the Vulgate,
verba sunt plurima. If we take the render-
ing of the Authorized Version, we must
understand the passage to mean that the
distractions of business, the cares of life, the
constant disappointments, make men feel
the hollowness and unsatisfactory nature
of labour and wealth and earthly goods,
and their absolute dependence upon Provi-
dence. But in view of the previous con-
text, and especially of ver. 10, which

of contending (din) with God,
it is most suitable to translate debarim
“words,” and to understand them of the
expressions of impatience, doubt, and un-
belief to which men give utterance when
arraigning the acts or endeavouring to ex-
plain the decrees of God. Such profitless
. words only increase the perplexity in which
men are involved. It is very possible that
reference is here made to the discussions on
the chief good, free-will, predestination, and
the like subjects, which, as we know from
Josephus, had begun to be mooted in Jewish
schools, as they had long been rife in those


of Greece. In these disputes Pharisees and |


Sadducees took opposite sides. The former
maintained that some things, but not all,


were the subject of fate (ris cipapuévns), |


and that certain things were in our own
power to do or not to do; that is, while they
attribute all that happens to fate, or God’s


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,
fT A a


141


decree, they hold that men has the power
of assent, supposing that God tempers all
in such sort, that by his ordinance and
man’s will all things are performed, good or
evil, The Sadducees eliminated fate alto.
gether from human actions, and asserted
that men are in all things governed, not by
any external force, but by their own. will
alone; that their success and happiness de-
pended upon themselves, and that ill for-
tune was the consequence of their own folly
or stupidity. A third school, the Essenes,
held that fate was supreme, and that nothing
could happen to mankind beyond or in con-
travention of its decree (‘ Joseph. Ant.,’ xiii
5. 9; xviii. 1. 8, 4; ‘Bell. Jud.,’ ii, 8. 14).
Such speculative discussions may have been
in Koheleth’s mind when he wrote this sen-
tence. Whatever may be the difficulties
of the position, we Christians know and
feel that in matters of religion and morality
we are absolutely free, have an unfettered
choice, and that from this fact arises our
responsibility. What is man the better?
What profit has man from such speculations
or words of scepticism ?

Ver. 12.—This verse in the Greek and
Latin versions, as in some copies of the
Hebrew, is divorced from its natural place,
as the conclusion of the paragraph, vers. 10,
11, and is arranged as the commencement
of ch. vii. Plainly, the Divine prescience
of vers. 10, 11 is closely connected with the
question of man’s ultimate good and his
ignorance of the future, enunciated in this
verse, For who knoweth what is good for
man in this life? Such discussions are
profitless, for man knows not what is his real
good—whether pleasure, apathy, or virtue,
as philosophers would put it. To decide
such questions he must be able to foresee
results, which is denied him. The inter-
rogative “ Who knows?” is equivalent to an
emphatic negative, as ch. iii. 21, and is a
common rhetorical form which surely need
not be attributed to Pyrrhonism (Plumptre).
All the days of his vain life which he
spendeth asa shadow. These words amplify
and explain the term “in life” of the pre-
ceding clause. Tliey may be rendered lite-
rally, During the number of the days of the
life (ch. v. 18) of his vanity, and he passeth
them as a shadow. A life of vanity is one
tliat yields no good result, full of empty
aims, unsatisfied wishes, unfulfilled purposes.
It is the man who is here compared to the
shadow, not his life. So Job xiv. 2, “He
fleeth as a shadow, and continueth not.”
He soon passes away, and leaves no trace
behind him. The thought iscommon. ‘ Ye
[Revised Version] are @ vapour,” says St.
James (iv. 14), “that appeareth for a little
time, and then vanisheth away.” Plumptre
well quotes Soph., ‘ Ajax,’ 125—


142


‘Op yap has ob3ty Brras BAAO eA}
E1dwA’, 8courep Caner,  obpny onidy.


“Tn thia I see that we, all we that live,
Are but vain shadows, unsubstantias
dreams,”


To which we may add Pind., ‘Pyth.,’ viii.
95— :


"Exduepos' vl 8é risy oi 8 of visy oxids Bvap
“AvOpwres.


“ Ye creatures of a day |
What is the great man, what the poor?
Naught but a shadowy dream.”


The comparison of man’s life to a shadow
or vapour is equally general (comp. ch. viii.
18; 1 Chron. xxix. 15; Ps. cii.11; oxliv. 4;
Wisd. ii. 5; Jas. iv. 14). The verb used for
“ spendeth ” is asah, “to do or make,” which


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


a


(om. v1. 1—12,


Greek influence in the employment of the
expression here. For who can tell a man
what shall be after him under the sunt
This does not refer to the life beyond the
grave, but to the future in the present world,
as the words, “ under the sun,” imply (comp.
ch, iii. 22; vii. 14). To know what is best
for him, to arrange his present life according
to his own wishes and plans, to be able to
depend upon his own counsel for all the
actions and designs which he undertakes,
man should know what is to be after hi
what result his labours will have, who an
what kind of heir will inherit his property,
whether he will leave children to carry om
his name, and other facts of the like nature;
but as this is ull hidden from him, his duty
and his happiness is to acquiesce in the
Divine government, to enjoy with moderation


the goods of life, and to be content with the
moditied satisfaction which is accorded to
him by Divine beneficenca,


recalls the Greek phrase, xpévov roieiy (Acts
xv.33,ete.; Demosth., ‘De Fals. Leg.,’ p. 392,
17), and the Latin, dies facere (Cic., ‘ Ad
Attic..” v, 20. 1); but we need not trace


HOMILETICS.


Vers, 1—6.—Sore evils beneath the sun; or, the misfortunes of @ rich man. I. A
RIOH MAN WITHOUT THE CAPACITY OF ENJOYMENT. 1. A frequent occurrence. The
oe that of one who has attained to great wealth, power, and honour, who has

m conscious of large ambitions and has realized them, who has been filled with
insatiable desires and possessed the means of gratifying them, and yet has been unable
to extract from all his possessions, pleasures, and pursuits any grain of real and solid
happiness. 2. A sorrowful experience. The Preacher characterizes it as an evil which
lies heavy upon men. Upon the individua] himself, whose hopes are disappointed and
plans frustrated, whose riches, wealth, and honours thus become mocking decorations
tather than real ornaments, and whose pleasures and gratitications turn into apples of
Sodom rather than prove, as he expected they would do, grapes of Eshcol. 38. An
instructive lesson. The valuable truth that the soul’s happiness is not, and cannot be,
found in any creatures, however excellent, but only in God (Ps, xxxvii. 4), is thus
forcibly pressed home upon the hearts and consciences of rich men themselves, and of
such as observe the experiences through which they pass.

II, A RICH MAN WITHOUT AN HEIR TO HIs WEALTH. A great diminution to the rich
man’s happiness, who, in having no son or child, lacks: 1. That which is dearer to the
heart of man than wealth, power, or fame. Unless the instincts of human nature have
been utterly perverted by avarice, covetousness, and ambition, the hearts of rich no
less than of poor men cling to their offspring, and, rather than lose these by death
would willingly surrender all their wealth (2 Sam. xviii. 83). 2. That without which
wealth and hunour lose the greater part of their attractions, Abraham felt it a
considerable detraction from the sweetness of Jehovah’s promise that he had no heir
and that all his possessions would ultimately pass into the hands of his steward,
Eliezer of Damascus (Gen. xv. 1—3). 3. That which gives to wealth-gathering and
power-seeking their best justification. It is not certain that anything will justify these
when inordinate; if anything will excuse a man for heaping up wealth in an honest
and legitimate way, and for endeavouring to acquire power and influence amongst his
fellows, it is the fact of his doiug so with a view to promote the happiness of those
God has made dependent on him, and bound to him by the ties of natural affection,

I[l. A RICH MAN WITHOUT A TOMB FOR HI8 CORPSE. (For a different rendering of
this clause, “And moreover he have no burial,” see the Exposition.) 1. The case
supposed. That of a rich man surrounded by many (an hundred) children, who lives


~~


/


on, ¥.1—12.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHEH, 143


long, but has no true enjoyment of his good fortune, and when he dies is denied the
glory of a funeral such“as Dives doubtless had (Luke xvi, 22), and the shelter of a
grave such as was not withheld even from Lazarus. How he should come at last to

ave no burial, though not explained, may be supposed to happen either through the
meanness of his relatives or their hatred of him, or through his perishing in such a
way (¢g. in war, at sea, through accident, by violence) as to render burial by his
children impossible, Commentators cite as an illustration of the case supposed the
murder by Bagoas of Artaxerxes Ochus (8.0, 362 —339), whose body was thrown to
the cats. Another may be that of Jehoiakim, of whom it was predicted (Jer. xxii, 19),
“He shall be buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth beyond the
gates of Jerusalem.” 2. The judgment pronounced. That such a case is not to be
compared in respect of felicity with that of “an untimely birth,” which “cometh in
vanity, and departeth in darkness, and the name thereof is covered with darkness;”
#.e. which enters on a lifeless existence when born, and “is carried away in all quietness,
without noise or ceremony,” having received no name, and becoming forgotten as if it
had never been (Delitzsch). The grounds on which the Preacher rests his judgment
are three: (1) that an untimely birth never sees the sun, and so escapes all sight of
and contact with the sufferings and miseries of earth; (2) that it never wakes to the
exercise of intelligence, and so is never conscious of either the wickedness or the woe
that is surging around it; and (8) that it rests better in the grave to which it goes than
does the corpse of the joyless rich man. 3. The correction needed. This pessimistic
view of life may be thus admirably qualified. The allegation here made “contains a
thought to which it is not easy to reconcile one’s self. For supposing that life were
not in itself, as over against non-existence, a good, there is yet scarcely any life that is
absolutely joyless; and a man who has become the father of a hundred children has,
as it appears, sought the enjoyment of life principally in sexual love, and then also has
found it richly. But also, if we consider his life less as relating to sense, his children,
though not all, yet partly, will have been a joy to him; and has a family life so
lengthened and rich in blessings only thorns, and no roses at all? And, moreover,
how can anything be said of the rest of an untimely birth, which has been without
motion and without life, as of a rest excelling the termination of the life of him who
has lived long, since rest without a subjective reflection, a rest not felt, certainly does
not fall under the point of view of more or less good or evil? ‘The saying of the
author on no side bears the probe of exact thinking” (Delitzsch).

IV. A RICH MAN WITHOUT A BETTER LOT THAN HIs NEIGHBOURS, “ Do not all go to
one place?” In the grave rich and poor differ not. ‘he dusts of the patrician and of
the piebeian, freely intermingled, no human chemistry can distinguish, A tremendous
humiliation, no doubt, to human pride, that Solomon and the harlot’s child, Cesar ana
his slave, Dives and Lazarus, must ultimately lie together in the same narrow house—
that rich and poor, wise and unwise, powerful and powerless, honoured and abject.
kings and subjects, princes and peasants, masters and servants, must ultimately sleep
side by side on the same couch; but so itis. And this, also, in the eyes of worldlings,
but not of good men, is 4 vanity, and a sore evil beneath the sun.

Lessons. 1. Riches are not the chief good. 2. Temporal evils may be sources of


spiritual good.


Vv —9,— The insatiableness of desire. I. It CONSUMES THE LABOUR OF ALI,
C Al the labour of man is for his tee and yet the appetite is not filled” (ver. 7).
The appetite, as an imperious master, urges on the soul to labour with all its powers
and energies to furnish food for its delectation; and yet the utmost man can provide
is insufficient to fill its capacious maw. However varied man’s works may be, they
have all this end in common, to appease the hunger of the sensuous nature; and all
alike fail in reaching it. The appetite grows by what it feeds on, and hence never cries,
“Enough!” ;

Il. Iv AFFECTS THE CHARACTERS OF ALL, “ What advantage hath the wise more
than the fool? or what [advantage] hath the pror man, who knows to walk before the
living, over the fool?” (ver. 8). 1. Intellectual gifts do not argue the absence of desire,
The philosopher, no less than the peasant, is vader its dominion. The former may
attempt to control, and may even to some extent succeed in controlling, his bodily


laa ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (oH. VE. 1—12,


appety’es; but the appetite is there, impelling him to labour equally with the fool.
2, Maverial poverty does not guarantee the absence of desire, The poor man who knows
how io walk before the living, i.e. who understands the art of living, is no more exempt
from its sway than is the rich man, though a fool. The poor man may have learned
how (o put restraints upon himself, because of inability to gratify his desire, but the
appetite is as much felt by him as by his rich neighbour.

IIL. Iv DISAPPOINTS THE HOPES OF ALL. “ Better is the sight of the eyes than the
wandering of the desire” (ver. 9). Just because desire is never satisfied, it wanders
on in pursuit of other objects which are often visionary, and almost always illusory ;
as a consequence, like the dog which snapped at his shadow and lost the meat he
carried in his mouth, desire frequently misses such enjoyments as are within its
reach through striving after those that are beyond its power.

Lessons. 1. The danger of self-indulgence. 2. The difficulty of keeping the lower
nature in subjection. 3. The propriety of preferring present and possible to future
and perhaps impossible enjoyments.


Vers. 10—12.— four aspects of human life. I, MAN a8 A CREATURE OF DESTINY.
6‘ Whatsoever hath been, the name thereof was given long ago, and it is known that it
is man” (ver. 10); or, “‘ Whatsoever he be, his name was given him long ago, and it is
known that he is man” (Revised Version margin); or, “That which hath been, its
nar.e hath long ago been named; and it is determined what a man shall be”
(Delitzsch, Wright). - These different readings suggest three thoughts. 1. That man’s
appearance upon the earth had been long ago foreseen. The sentiment holds good of
man collectively or individually, ¢.e. of the race, or of the unit in the race, Neither
did “man” originally spring into being by a happy accident, without the direct or
indirect cognizance of God, nor does the “individual” so arrive upon the scene of
time; but both the hour and the manner of man’s arrival upon the globe, and of each
individual’s birth, were prearranged from eternity by him who ‘made the earth, and
created man upon it” (Isa. xlv. 12), and who “giveth to all life and breath and all
things” (Acts xvii. 25). 2. That man’s character as a creature hud been long ago
foreknown. In this respect, indeed, he had in no way differed from other creatures,
Known unto God had been all his works from the beginning of the world (Acts xv. 18).
Human cliaracter is not in any instance an accidental product of blind forces, but is
determined by fixed laws, moral and spiritual, which have been prearranged and
instituted by the supreme moral Governor, Hence, within limits, it is possible for
man to predict what himself or another shall become. “ He that doeth righteousness”
not only “is righteous” in the sense of already possessing the fundamental and
essential principle of righteousness, viz. faith in, love of, and submission to God, but
his righteousness shall eventually become within him the all-pervading and permanent
quality of his being; and similarly “he that doeth unrighteousness” not only is
potentially, but shall become permanently, unrighteous. Moral character in all men
tends to fixity, whether of good or evil. Hence the greater possibility, amounting to
certainty, that the Divine Mind, whose creation the laws are under which these results
are wrought out, can, ab initio, foresee the issue to which, in every separate instance,
they lead. 3. That man’s destiny as an individual had been long ago determined.
The doctrine of Divine predestination, however hard to harmonize with that of human
ireedom, is clearly revealed in Scripture (Exod. ix. 16; 2 Chron, vi. 6; Ps. cxxxv. 4;
Isa. xliv. 1—7; Jer. i. 5; Matt. xi. 25, 26; John vi. 37; Rom. viii. 29; ix. 11), and
is supported by the plain testimony of experience, which shows that

“ There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough-hew them how we will.”


¢ Hamlet.’)
Or, in the words of Cesar, that nothing
“Can be avoided
Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods.”
(‘Julius Ossur.”)


TI, Maw As THE POSSESSOR OF FREE-WILL. ‘Neither may [or, ‘can’] he contend
with him that is mightier than he” (ver. 10); in which rep e the Gineing


@x, v1.1—12.} SCCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 145


—_—_—_————————OOO OO


thoughts: 1. That mighty as man is (in virtue of his free-will), there és a mightier
than he. That mightier is not death (Plumptre), but God (Delitzsch), who also is
a Being possessed of free-will, which must still less be interfered with by man’s choices
and intentions, than man’s free-will must be impaired by God’s purposes and plans,
This thought frequently forgotten, that if man, in virtue of his free-will, must be able
to carry out his volitions, much more must God be able to carry out the free decisions
of his infinite mind. In this concession the whole doctrine of predestination, or
election, is involved. 2. That if in any instunce man’s purposes and God’s come into
collision, those of man must give way. One has only to put the question, whether
it is of greater moment that God’s purposes with regard to the universe and the
individual should be carried out, or that man’s with regard to himself should, to
perceive the absurdity of limiting the Divine sovereignty in order to avoid the
appearance of restricting human freedom, rather than seeming to impair human
freedom in order to preserve intact the absolute and entire supremacy of God. 3. That
Gods determinations, when accomplished, will met be impeachable by man. The veil of
mystery now shrouding the Divine procedure will in the end be in great measure,
perhaps wholly, upli/ted, and man himself constrained to acknowledge that the supreme
Ruler hath done all things well (Mark vii. 37).

TI. May as 4 VICTIM oF IGNORANCE. “Seeing there be many things (or, ‘ words ]
that increase vanity, what is man the better? For who knoweth,” etc.? and “ who
can tell?” (vers. 11, 12). 1. The fact of his ignorance. Elsewhere in Scripture
explicitly asserted (Deut. xxxii. 28; Ps. xiv. 4; Proy. xix. 3; John i. 5; Eph, iv. 18),
and abundantly confirmed by experience. 2. The extent of his ignorance. Restricting
attention to the Preacher’s words, two subjects may be noted concerning which man—
apart, #.¢., from God and religion—is comparatively unenlightened: (1) the supreme
good (Ps. iv. 6), which he places now in pleasure, now in possessions, now in philosophy,
now in power, never in God; and (2) the future, which is to him so much a sealed book
that he cannot tell what a day may bring forth (Prov. xxvii. 1), and far less “ what
shall be after him under the sun.” 3, The strangeness of his tgnerance. Considering
that man is a being possessed of high natural endowments, and is often much and
earnestly engaged in searching after knowledge. That with all his lofty capacity, and
devotion to intellectual pursuits, he should, if left to himself, be unable to tell either
what is good for man in this life (all his discussions upon this subject having been
little else than words, words, words), or how the course of events shall shape itself
when he has passed from this earthly scene, is a surprising phenomenon which calls for
examination. 4, The explanation of his ignorance lies in two things: (1) in the
natural limitation of his faculties, which are finite, and not infinite; and (2) in the
moral depravation of his faculties, which are now those not of an unfallen, but of a
fallen, being.

IV. Man As A DENIZEN OF EARTH. 1, His continuance #3 not permanent. He and
his generation shall pass on, that those coming after may enter in and take possession
(ch. i. 4). 2. His duys are not many. His life he spendeth like a shadow, which has
no substance, and abides not in one stay. “Man that is born of a woman is of few
days,” etc. (Job xiv. 1, 2). 3. His life is not good. Apart from God and religion it
is “ vain,” t.e. empty of real happiness, and destitute of solid worth.

Lzssons. 1. The sovereignty of God. 2. ‘he weakness of man. 8. The duty of
submission to the Supreme. 4. The inability ot earthly things to make man better.
6. The chief good for man on earth is God.


Ver. 12.—“ Who can tell?” a@ sermon on human tgnorance, I. THInes THAT LIE
BEYOND THE SCOPE OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 1. The nature of the Deity. “Canst thou
by searching find out God,” etc. ? (Job xi.7). To define God as Spirit (John iv. 24), to
characterize him as Love (1 John iv. 8, 16) or as Light (1 John i. 5), to ascribe to
him attributes of omnipotence, omnipresence, ‘nniscience, etc., is not so much to
explain his essence as to declare it to be something that lies beyond the bounds of our
finite unégstanding (Ps. cxxxix. 6), 2. The mystery of the Incarnation. “Great is
the myste: 7 of godliz 3s: God was manifest in the flesh” (1 ‘lim. iii. 16). To show
that Jesus Christ must have been “Emmanuel, God with us” (Matt. i. 23), may not
surpass the powers of man; to give an adequate exhibition of the way in which im

BOOLESLASTEA, &


146 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (ow. vr. 1—12.
i


Christ the human and Divine natures were and are united does. The best proof of this
lies in the nuinber of the theories of the Incarnation. 8. The contents of the atonement.
That Christ, as a matter of fact, bore the sins of men so as to expiate their guilt and
destroy their power, one can tell from the general tenor of Scripture declarations on the
subject (Matt. xxvi. 28; Rom. iii, 24; 2 Cor. v. 21; 1 Tim. ii. 6; 1 Pet. ii, 24;
1 Jobn ii. 2); but what it was in Christ’s “obedience unto death” that constituted the
propitiation is one of those “secret things” that belong to Gud. 4. The movements of
the Spirit. “hou canst not tell whence it [the wind] cometh, or whither it goeth;
20 is every one that is born of the Spirit” (John iii. 8). That the Holy Spirit is the
Author of regeneration and of inspiration is perfectly patent to the understanding of
the Christian. The theory that shall adequately explain how the Spirit renews or
inspires the soul has not yet been elaborated. 6. The events of the future. ‘“ Who can
tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?” or even what shall be on the
morrow (Prov. xxvii. 1)?

Il. THINGS THAT LIE WITHIN THE SCOPE OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. 1. The character
of God. The Ninevites could not tell whether Jehovah would be gracious to them
(Jonah iii, 9); we can tell from the revelation of Scripture, and especially from the
teaching of Christ, that God is Love, and willeth not the death of any. 2. The
Divinity of Christ. Human reason is perfectly competent to decide upon the question
whether Jesus of Nazareth belonged to the category of common men, or whether he
was a new order of man broken in upon the ordinary line of the race. The evidence
for such a decision has been provided, and any one who seriously wishes can arrive at
a just conclusion. 8. The work of the Saviour, This also has been fully discovered
in the Scripture. Christ came to reveal the Father (John xiv. 9), to atone for sin
(Matt. xx. 28), to exemplify holiness (1 Pet. ii. 21), and to establish the kingdom of
heaven upon earth (Rev. i. 6). 4. The fruits of the Spirit. If a man cannot always
judge whether the Spirit is in his own or another’s heart, he should be at no loss
to tell whether the Spirit’s fruits, which are love, joy, peace, etc. (Gal. v. 22), are
discernible in his or his neighbour's life. 5. The goals of the future. If the separate
incidents that shall hereafter occur in any individual’s life be concealed from view, the
two termini, towards one or other of which every individual is moving—heaven or hell
—have been clearly revealed.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,


Vers. 1,2.—The unsatisfactoriness and transitoriness of earthly good. Men are
prone to be guided, in the conclusions they form regarding human life, by their own
personal experience, and by the observations they make in their own immediate circle
of acquaintance. So judging, they are prone to be one-sided in their estimate, and to
take a view either too gloomy or too roseate. The author of Kcclesiastes was a man
who had very large and varied opportunities of studying mankind, and who was in the
habit of forming impartial conclusions. This accounts for what may perhaps seem to
some readers opposed and inconsistent representations of the nature of man’s life on
as In fact, a more detinite and decisive representation would have been less correct
and fair.

I, MEN LOOKING UPON THEIR FELLOW-MEN ARE PRONE TO GIVE TOO LARGE &
MEASURE OF ATTENTION TO THEIR OUTWARD CIRCUMSTANCES. The first question that
occurs to many minds, upon forming a new acquaintance, is—What has he? t.e. what
property ? or— What is he? ¢.e. what is his rank in society? A man to whom God has
given riches, wealth, and honour, who lacks nothing for his soul of all that he desireth,
ie counted fortunate. He is held in esteem ; his /riendship and favour are cultivated.

IJ. REFLECTING OBSERVERS BEAR IN MIND THAT THERE ARE OTHER ELEMENTS IN
HUMAN WELFARE. For instance, it cannot be questioned that health of body and a
sound and vigorovs mind are of far more importance than wealth. And there may be
family trouble, which mars the happiness of the most prosperous. The wise man had
observed cases in which there was no power to enjoy the gilts of Providence; and other
cases in which there were no children to succeed to the possession of accumulated
wealth, so that it came into the hands of strangers, Bodily affliction and domestie


om. v1.1—12.]  ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 147


nS


disappointment may cast a shadow over the lot which seems tne fairest and most
desirable, “This is vanity, and it is an evi! disease.”

ITI, THESE IMPERFECTIONS IN THE HUMAN LOT OFTEN GIVE RISE TO MELANCHOLY
REFLEOTIONS AND DISTRESSING DOUBTS. Those who not only remark what happens
around them, but reflect upon what they witness, draw inferences which have a certain
semblance of validity. If we judge only by the facts which come under our cognizance,
we may be led to conclusions inconsistent with true religion. Men come to doubt the
rule of a benevolent Governor of the universe, simply because they cannot reconcile
certain facts with such convictions as Christianity encourages. Scepticism and
pessimism often follow upon bitter experiences and upon frequent contact with the
calamities of this mundane state.

IV. WisDoM sUGCESTS A REMEDY FOR SUCH DIFFICULTIES AND DousTs. 1. It should
be remembered that what any individual observes is but an infinitesimal part of the
varied and protracied drama of human life and history. 2. It should not be lost
sight of that there are moral and spiritual purposes in our earthly existence. It is a
discipline, a proving, an education. Its end is not—as men too often suppose that
it should be—enjoyment and pleasure; but character—conformity to the Divine
character, and submission to the Divine will. The highest benevolence aims at the
highest ends and to secure these it seems in many cases necessary that lower ends
should be sacrificed. If temporal prosperity be marred by what seems misfortune, this
may be in order that spiritual prosperity may be promoted. It may not be well for
the individual that he should be encouraged to seek perfect satisfaction in the things
of this world. It may not be well for socicty that great and powerful families should
be built up, to gratify human pride and ambition. God’s ways are not as our ways,
but they are wiser and better than ours.—T.


Vers. 3—6.— The gloom of disappointment. The case supposed in these verses is far
more painful than that dealt with in the preceding passage. It is now presumed that a
man not only lives to an advanced age—“ a thousand years twice told””—but that he
begets “a hundred children.” Yet he is unsatisfied with the experience of life, and
dies without being regretted and honourably buried. And in such a case it is affirmed
that the issue of life is vanity, and that it would have been better for such a one not to
have been born. It must be borne in mind, when considering this melancholy con-
clusion, that it is based entirely upon what is earthly, visible, and sensible.

I. HERE I8 AN EXAGGERATION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF OUTWARD PROSPERITY AND OF
WORLDLY PLEASURE. The standard of tlie world may be a real one, but it is far from
being the highest, Wealth, long life, important family connections, are good things;
but they are not the best. Much of human unhappiness arises from first over-
estimating external advantages, and then, as a natural consequence, when these are
lost, attaching undue importance fo the privation. If men did not exaggerate the
value of earthly good, they would not be so bitterly disappointed, so grievously
depressed, upon losing it.

. HERE IS AN UNWARRANTABLE EXPECTATION OF SATISFACTION WITH WHAT EARTH
CAN Give. Of the person imagined it is assumed “that his soul be not filled with
good.” ‘The fact is that men seek satisfaction where it is not to be found, and in
so doing prove their own folly and short-sightedness. God has given to man a nature
which is not to be satisfied with the enjoyments of sense, with the provision made for
bodily appetite, with the splendour, luxury, and renown, upon which men are so prone
to set the desires of their hearts. If what this world can give be accepted with
gratitude, whilst no more is expected from it than reason and Scripture justify us in
asking, then disappointment will not ensue. But the divinely fashioned and immortal
spirit of man cannot rest in what is simply intended to still the cravings of the body,
and to render life tranquil and enjoyable.

III, HERE 18 MOROSE DISSATISFACTION RESULTING FROM FAILURE TO SOLVE AN
INSOLUBLE PROBLEM. Apply the hedonistic test, and then it may be disputed whether
the sum of pain and disappointment is not in excess of the sum of pleasure and satis-
faction ; if it is, then the “untimely birth” is better than the prosperous voluptuary
who fails to fill his soul with good, who feels the utter failure of the endeavour upon
which he has staked his all. But the test is a wrong one, however hard it may be to


148 ROOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. _[on. vi. 1—12,


convince men that this is so. The question—Is life worth living? does not depend upon
the question—Does life yield a surplus of agreeable feeling? Life may be filled with
delights, and the lot of the prosperous may excite envy. Yet it may be nothing but
vanity, and a striving after wind. On the other hand,a man may be doomed to
adversity ; poverty and neglect and contempt may be his portion; whilst he may fulfil
the purpose of his being—may form a eharacter and may live a life which shall be
acceptable and approved above.—T.


Vers. 7—9.—Satisfaction better than desire. It has sometimes been represented
that the quest of good is better than its attainment. The truth and justice of this
represeutation lies in the unquestionable fact that it would not be for our good to
possess without effort, without perseverance, without self-denial. Yet the end is
superior to the means, however excellently adapted those means may be to the
discipline of the character, to the calling out of the best moral qualities.

I, Man’s NATURE IS CHARACTERIZED BY STRIVING, DESIRE, APPETITE, ASPIRATION,
Man’s is a yearning, impulsive, acquisitive constitution. His natural instincts urge
him to courses of action which secure the continuance of his own being and of that of
the race. His restless, eager desires account for the activity and energy which distin-
guish his movements. His intellectual impulses urge him to the pursuit of knowledge,
to scientific and literary achievemeut. His moral aspirations are the explanation of
heroism in the individual, and of true progress in social life.

II. OF HUMAN DESIRES, NONE CAN EVER BE FULLY SATISFIED, MANY CANNOT BB
SATISFIED AT ALL. The testimony of those who have gone before us is uniform upom
this point.

© We look before and after,
We pine for what is nots
Our sincerest laughter
With some pain is fraught :
Our sweetest songs are those that tell of saddest thought.”


Thus it becomes proverbial that man is made to desire rather than to enjoy. Of our

aspirations some can never be gratified on earth. The lower animals have desires for

which satisfaction is provided ; but whilst their life is thus thoroughly adapted to their

constitution, this cannot be said of man, who has capacities which cannot be filled,

aspirations which cannot be satisfied, faculties for which no sufficient ecope is attaine
here on earth. His, as the poet tells us, is


“The desire of the moth for the star,
Of the night for the morrow;
The longing for something afar
From the sphere of our sorrow.”


IIL. Even wIspoM DOES BUT ENLARGE THE RANGE OF MAN’S INSATIABLE’ DESIRES,
It is not only upon the lower grade of life that we observe a discordance between what
is sought and what is attained. For the philosopher, as for the uncultured child of
nature, there is an ideal as well as an actual. Prudence may enjoin the limitation and
repression of our requirements. But thought ever looks out from the windows of the
high towers, and gazes upon the distant stars.


“Who that has gazed upon them shining
Can turn to earth without repining,
Nor wish for wings to flee away,

And mix with their eternal day?”


IV. THESE CONSIDERATIONS TEND TO INCREASE THE UNHAPPINESS OF THE WORLDLY,
WHILST THEY OPEN UP TO THE SPIRITUAL AND PIOUS MIND A GLORIOUS AND IMMORTAL
ProsPEcT. They to whom the bodily life and the material universe are everything
er even anything regarded by themselves, may well give way to dissatisfaction and
despondency when they learn by experience “the vanity of human wishes.” On the
other hand, such reflections may well prompt the spiritual to gratitude, for they cannot
believe the universe to have been fashioned in vain; they cannot but see in the illusions


on, vi. 1—12.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 149


of earth suggestions of the heavenly realities. The storms of life are not to be hated it
they toss the navigator of earth’s sea into the haven of God’s breast. The wandering
of the desire may end in the sight of the eyes, when the pure in heart shall see God.
Tn his rpeconce is fulness of joy, and at his right hand are pleasures for ever-
more.”—T,


Ver. 10.—Contending against power. The limitation which is characteristic of the
human life and lot is observable, not only in man’s inability to attain the happiness he
conceives and desires, but also in his inability to execute the purposes he forms. Con-.
scious of powers which are yet undeveloped, inspired by an ambition that knows no
bounds, he puts forth effort in many directions, at first with strong confidence and
high hope. Experience alone convinces him of the truth expressed by the wise man
in the assertion, “ Neither can he contend with him that is mightier than he.”

I. Tue way oF RESISTANCE. The will may be strong, and naturally prone to self-
assertion, to energetic volition, and to contention with any resisting force. 1. God is,
as the providential Ruler of the world, the Lord and Controller of all circumstances,
mightier than man. Men fret against the conditions and limitations of their lot ; they
would fain possess greater strength and health, a longer life, enjoyments more varied
and unmixed, etc. ‘They resent the imposition of laws in the determination of which
they had no voice. They are even disposed to believe that the world has been ordered,
not by a benevolent Intelligence, but by a hard and cruel fate. 2.God is, as the
moral Administrator and Jude, mightier than man. In their selfishness and prejudice,
men may aud do question the sway of reason in the universe; they assign all things
to chance; they deny any laws superior to such as are physical and political; they
deem man the measure of all things; they ridicule responsibility. All this they may
do; but it is of no avail. God is mivhtier than they. They may violate his laws, but
they cannot escape from their action; they may spurn his authority, but that authority
is all the same maintained and exercised. The time comes when the insurgent and the
rebel are constrained to admit that they are powerless, and that the Almighty is, and
that he works and rules, and effects his rizhteous purposes,

Il. THe way OF suBMission. It is the province of religion to point out to men that
there is a Power in the universe which is above all, and to summon men to yield to
this Power a cheerful subjection. 1. Submission is a just requirement on the part of
God, and an honourable attitude on the part of man. He is no tyrant, capricious and
unjust, who claims our loyalty and service; but the Being who is himself infinitely
righteous. To do him homage is to bow, not before irresistible power merely, but
before moral perfection. Resistance here is slavery; subjection is freedom. 2. Sub-
mission is the one only condition of efficient work and solid happiness. Whilst we
resist God, we can do nothing satisfactory and good; when we accept his will and
receive our commands from him, we become fellow-workers with God. Just as the
secret of the mechanician’s success is in obeying the laws of nature, ¢.e. the laws of
God in the physical realm, so the secret of the success of the thinker and the philan-
thropist lies in the apprehension and acknowledgment of Divine law in the intellectual
and moral kingdoms. Man may do great things when he labours under God and with
God. And in such a course of life there is true peace as well as true success. “If
God be for us, who can be against us ?”—T.


Vers. 11, 12.— What is man’s good? The author of this book constantly reverts to
this inquiry, from which tendency we cannot fail to see how deep an impression the
inquiry made upon his mind. In this he is not peculiar; the theme is one that grows
not old with the lapse of centuries.

I. A NATURAL QUESTION, AND ONE BOTH LEGITIMATE AND NECESSARY. “There be
many that say, Who will show us any good?” Sometimes the inquiry arises upon the
suggestion of daily occupation; sometimes as the result of prolonged philosophical
reflection. The good of man is certainly not obvious, or there would not be so many
and varying replies to the question presented. A lower nature, not being self-conscious,
could not consider such a question as the swmmum bonum ; being what he is, a ration’
and moral creation, man cannot avoid it.

IL A @OXSTION TO WHICH NO SATISFACTORY REPLY GAN BE GIVEN UPON THE BASIS


150 ECOLESIASTES ;; OR, THE PREACHER. for. vr. 1—12,


er EXrentEnce. 1. The occupations and enfoyments of the present are proved to be
productive of vanity. “Many things increase vanity.” Man “‘spendeth his vain life
as a shadow.” he several objects of human pursuit agree only in their failure to afford
the satisfaction that is desired and sought. Yet the path which one has ahandoned
another follows, only to be misled like those who have gone before, only to be put
further than ever from the destination desired. The objects which excite hnman ambi-
tion or cupidity remain the same from age to age; and they have no more power to
give satisfaction than in former periods of human history. 2. The future is felt to be
clouded by uncertainty. “Who can tell a man what shall be after him under the
sun?” This element of uncertainty occasioned perplexity and distress in tormer times,
as now. What shall be a man’s reputation after his decease? Who shal! inherit his
estates? and what use shall be made of possessions accun ulated with toil and diffienliy ?
These and similar inquiries, made but not satisfactorily answered, disheartened even
the energetic and the prosperous, and took the interest and joy ont of their daily life.
The present is unsatisfactory, and the future uncertain; where, then, shall we look for
the true, the real good ?

III, A QUESTION WHICH IS SOLVED ONLY BY FAITH. As long as we confine our
attention to what can be apprehended by the senses, we cannot determine what is the
real good in life. For that, in the case of rational and immortal natures, lies outside of
the province in which supreme govd must be sought. Good for man is not bodily or
temporal good; it is something which appeals to his higher nature. The enjoyment
of God’s favour and the fulfilment of God's service—this is the good of man. his
renders men independent of the prosperity upon which multitudes set their hearts.
“Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us;” such is the desire and
prayer of those who are emancipated from the bondage to time and sense, who ace all
things as in the light of Heaven, and whose thoughts and affections are not called away
from the Giver of life and happiness by the gifts of his bounty, by the shadow of the
substance that endures for ever. “Thy loving-kindness is better than life.”.—T,


Vers. 1—6.— The insufficiency of circumstance. The Preacher recurs to the same
strain as that in which he spoke before (see ch. ii. _—11). We have to face the same
thoughts again. i

T. AN IMAGINARY ENRICHMENT. Let # man have, by supposition: 1, All the money
that hecan spend. 2. All the honour that waits on wealth. 8. All the luxuries that
wealth can buy of every kind, material and mental (ver. 2). 4. Let him have an
unusual measure of domestic enrichment and affection; let him be the recipient of all
possible filial affection and obedience (ver. 3). 5. Let his life be indefinitely prolonged
(ver. 6), so that it extends over many ordinary human lives, Give to a man not only
what God does give to many, but give him that which, as things are, is not granted to
the most favoured of our race; and what then? What is—

IJ. THE PROBABLE RESULT. It will very likely end in simple and utter dissatisfaction.
“God giveth him not the power to eat thereof;” “His soul is not filled with good; ”
he gets so little enjoyment out of all that he has at command, that “an untimely birth
is better than he;” he feels that it would have been positively better for him if he
had never been born. Subtract the evil from the good in his life, and you have
nothing left but “a negative quantity.” This is quite in accord with human
experience, As much of profound discontent is found within the walls of the palace
as under the cottage roof. The suicide is quite as likely to be found to be a “ well-
dressed man,” belonging to “ good society,” as to be a man clad in rags and penniless,

IU, Irs expnanation. The explanation of it is found in the fact that God has
made us for himself, that he has “set eternity in our hearts” (ch. iii. 11), and that we
are not capable of being satisfied with the sensible and the transient. Only the love
and service of God can fill the heart that is made for the eternal and the Divine (see
homily on ch. i. 7, 8).

IV, Irs Curistian correction. There need never live a man who has known
Jesus Ohrist of whom so sad a statement as this has to be made. For a Christian life:
1, Even when spent in poverty and obscurity, is filled with a holy contentment; it
includes high and sacred joys; it is relieved by very precious consolations. 2. Contains
and transmits a valuable influence on others. 8. Constitutes an excellency which God


on, vi. 1—12.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 161


LLL ND


approves, and the angels of God admire. 4. M i
my Sarpy ha > oves on toa glorious future. It does


Ver. 10.—Heroism; infatuation; wisdom. ‘Translating the latter part v
passage thus, “ And it is very certain that even the eetalsat is but era pile
contend with him who is mightier than he” (Cox), we have our attention directed
to vee things.

. Reau HERosM. This is found in opposing ourselves to the strong on beh
the weak, even though the odds avainst us are fick great, and apparently Peel gict
Wonderful triumphs have been achieved, even though the agents have “ been but
men,” when they have courageously and devoutly addressed themselves to the work
before them. They have triumphed over (1) powerful “ interests;” (2) imperious
passions; (3) deep-rooted prejudices; (4) mighty numbers, in the cause of (a) their
country, (0) truth, (c) Jesus Christ,

II, Pirirvn inraTuaTion. This is seen in those who are foolish enough to measure
their poor strength (or their weakness) with the power of God, with “him who is
mightier than they.” And this they do when they: 1, Act as if he did not regard
them; when they say, “ How doth God know? and is there knowledge in the Most
High ?” (Ps. Ixxiii. 11). 2. Imagine they can outwit him; when they think they will
sin and be forgiven; will corrupt their lives and waste their powers, and yet find
entrance at the last hour into his kingdom. But “God is not mocked; whatsoever a
man sows, that does he reap.” Sin always carries its penalty at one time and in some
form, a not in ee 3. ae in simple defiance of his rule; go on in conscious
wrong-doing, in the vague and senseless hope that somehow they will “
judgment of God.” ‘ % rates

IIL Tave wispom. This is realized in: 1, Submitting to his will; in acknowledging
his supreme claims, as Father and Saviour of our spirit, upon our worship and trust,
our love, our service, and in yielding ourselves unreservedly to him. 2. Enlisting his
Divine strength on our side. For if we are reconciled to him, and become his true and
trusted children—“ his disciples indeed ”—then is God on our side; there is no need to
speak of “contending” with him that is mightier than we; there is no further contest
or variance. Surely “ God is with us,” bestowing upon us his fatherly favour, admitting
us to his intimate friendship, accepting us as his fellow-labourers (1 Cor. iii. 9), over-
ruling all adverse (or apparently adverse) forces and making them work our true and
lasting good (Rom. viii. 28), guarding us from every evil thing, leading us on to a
peaceful end and out to a glorious future.—C,


Vers, 1—6.—Life without enjoyment valueless. The problem which occupies the
Preacher (vers. 1, 2) is virtually the same as that in ch. iv. 7, 8. It is not that which
is discussed in the Book of Job, and the thirty-seventh and seventy-third psalms, viz.
why the wicked often prosper, and the righteous often suffer adversity. It is that of
men blessed with riches, with children, and with long life, and debarred all enjoyment
of these blessings. In the Law of Moses these had been the rewards promised for
obedience to God (Deut. xxviii. 1—14), but the Preacher sees that something more is
needed for happiness than the mere possession of them. There is another “gift of
God” needed in order that one may enjoy the good of any one of them.

L The first picture (vers, 1, 2) is that of a RICH MAN, able to gratify every desire,
but incapable of making his wealth yield him any pleasure or satisfaction, He may
be a miser, afraid to make use of his riches; he may be in ill health, and find that his
wealth cannot procure for him any alleviation of his pains; his domestic circumstances
may be so unhappy as to cast a cloud over his prosperity. From various causes, such
as these, the evil upon which our author remarks is common enough in human society
—great wealth failing to procure fur its possessor any enjoyment he can relish, and
perhaps passing at last, on his death, into the hands of a stranger, for want of an heir
to whom he might have had some satisfaction in leaving it.

II. A second case of a different kind is suggested in vers, 3—6. The rich man {s
KOT CHILDLESS, but has a numerous family, and lives out all his days; but he, too,
often has no happiness in his life, and perhaps even fails to find honourable burial
when he dies, His fate is worse than that of the stillborn child that has never tasted


162 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. {om. wt. 1—12.


of life. “The abortion has the advantage in not having known anything; for it is
beter to know nothing at all than to know nothing but trouble. It is laid in the
-rave without having tasted the miseries of human life; in the grave, where, amid the
silence and solitude of death, the cares and disappointments, the disquietudes and
mortifications and distresses of this world are neither felt nor dreamed of” (Wardlaw).
However gloomy these reflections of our author’s may seem at first sight, when we
examine them a little more closely we find that they are not so sombre in their
character as many of the utterances of pessimistic philosophy. He does not contrast
being with not-being, and declare that the latter is preferable, but he declares a joyless
lie to be inferior to that which has been “cut off from the womb.” His teaching that
the value of existence is to be measured by the amount of good that has been enjoyed
in it, is so far from being the utterance of a despairing pessimism that most sober-minded
persons would accept it as reasonable and true. Specimens of utterances which, to a
superficial reader, might appear to be closely akin to his, but which really are the
expression of a very much darker mood than his, might easily be given, Thus we
have in Theognis (425—428)—


“ Best lot for man is never to be born,
Nor ever see the bright rays of the morn;
Next best, when born, to haste with quickest tread
Where Hades’ gates are open for the dead,
And rest with much earth gathered for our bed,”


And in Sophocles (‘ Ed. Ool.,’ 1225)—


« Never to be at all
Excels all fame;
Quickly, next best, to pass
From whence we came,”


And according to the teaching of Schopenhauer, the non-existence of the world is to be
preferred to its existence. ‘I'he world is cursed with four great evils—birth, disease,
old age, and death. “Existence is only a punishment,” and the feeling of misery
which often accompanies it is “repentance” for the great crime of having come into the
world by yielding to the “ will to live” (Wright, ‘ Ecclesiastes,’ p. 158). Such despairing
utterances, when found in the writings of those who have not known God, move us to
compassion, but we can scarcely avoid the feeling of indignation when we find them
on the lips of those who have known God, but have not “retained him in their
knowledge.” And we must beware of concluding, after a hasty and superficial reading
of the Book of Ecclesiastes, that its author, even in his darkest mood, sank to the
depth of atheism and despair which they reveal.—J. W.


Vers. 7—9.—The insatiability of desire. In these words the Preacher lays stress
upon the little advantage which one man has over another in regard to the attainment
of happiness and satisfaction in life, All are tormented by desires and longings which
can never be adequately satisfied. His reference is principally, if not entirely, to the
cravings of natural appetites to which all are subject, and which cannot by any
gratification or exercise of will be wholly silenced. ‘lhe instinct of self-preservation,
the necessity of sustaining the body with food, inspire labour, and yet no amount of
labour is sufficient to put an end, once and for all, to the gnawings of desire. The
sensuous element in man’s nature is insatiable, and the appetites of which it consists
grow in strength as they are indulged. Though the pressure of appetite differs in
different cases, none are free from it. ‘The wise as well as the foolish, the man of
simple tastes and chastened temper, as well as he who gives free rein to all his
impulses, feel it. Gifts of intellect, acquirements in culture, make no difference in
this matter, Some little obscurity seems at first to hang over ver. 8b, but a little
examination of the words disperses it, The whole verse runs (Revised Version), “ For
what advantage hath the wise man more than the fool? or what [advantage] hath the
poor man [more than the fool], that knoweth to walk before the living?” “To know
to walk before the living” is, as is nsw generally acknowledgid, to understand the
tight rule of life, to possess the savoir vivre, to be experienced in the right art of living


ou, vi. 1—12.)] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 158


(Delitzsch). The question accordingly is—What advantage has the wise over the fool ?
and what the poor, who, although poor, knows how to maintain his social position?
The matter treated of is the insatiable nature of sensual desire. The wise sceks to
control his desire; he who is spoken of as poor knows how to conceal it, for he lays
restraints upon himself, that he may make a good appearance and maintain his
reputation. But desire is present in both, and they have in this nothing above the
fool, who follows the bent of his desire, and lives for the passing hour. In other
words, “‘The idea of the passage seems to be, the desire of man is insatiable, he is
never really satisfied; the wise man, however, seeks to keep his desires within bounds,
and to keep them to himself, but the foo! utters all his mind (Prov. xxix. 11). Even
the poor man, who knows how to conduct himself in life, and understands the right
art of living, though he keeps his secret to himself, feels within himself the stirrings
of that longing which is destined never to be satisfied on earth” (Wright), The
reference here to the poor man may possibly be made because the Preacher has already
praised the lot of the labouring man (ch. v. 12) in comparison with that of the rich,
whose abundance will not suffer him to sleep. If so, he virtually says here, half-
humorously, “ Don’t imagine that poverty is the secret of contentment and happiness.
Poverty covers cares and anxieties as well as riches. Both rich and poor are pretty
much o@ the same level.” A very simple and practical conclusion is drawn from the
fact of the insatiability of desire, and that is the advisability of enjoying the present

that is within our reach (ver. 9). That which the eyes see and recognize as
good and beautiful should not be forfeited because the thoughts are wandering after
something which may be for ever unattainable by us. So far the teaching ie not above
that of the fable of the dog who lost the piece of flesh he had in his mouth, because he
snapped at the reflection of it he saw on the surface of the water. And if this be
thought but a poor, cold scrap of morality to offer to men for their guidance in life,
the answer may be given that multitudes spend their life in fruitless endeavours after
what is far above their reach, and bereave their souls of present good, from an insatiable
greed which this fable rebukes. Constituted as we are, placed as we are amid many
temptations, we need not despise any small scraps of moral teaching which may be
even in threadbare fables, and homely, familiar proverbs. To say that the words,
“ Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire,” is about equivalent
to the proverb, “ A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush,” may seem irreverent to
some, who would fain read into the text more than it contains. But instead of
imagining that the Word of God is degraded by the comparison, let them recognize
the good sense and prudent advice which lie in the proverb which corresponds so
closely to the sense of the Preacher’s words.—J. W.


Vers. 10—12.—Jnexorable destiny.- Before considering these words of the Preacher,
we need te obtain a clear and precise idea of the statements he makes. A considerable
measure of obscurity hangs over the passage, and renders it all the more difficult to
catch the writer’s meaning, This is apparent from the alternative renderings of several
clauses in it which we have in the margin of the Revised Version. The general idea
of the passage seems to be—Man’s powerlessness and short-sightedness with respect to
destiny. ‘“ Whatsoever hath been, the uame thereof was given long ago, and it is
known that it is man: neither can he contend with him that is mightier than he”
(ver. 10). The difficult phrase is that thus translated—“ it is known that it is man.”
But if we take the Hebrew phrase, as several eminent critics (Delitzsch, Wright) do,
to be equal to scitur id quod homo sit—“it is known that which a man is”—an
intelligible and appropriate meaning of the passage is obtained. It seems to point to
the fact that man has been placed in certain unalterable conditions by the will of God,
and to urge the advisability of submitting to the inevitable. Both as to time and
place, the conditions have been fixed from of old, and no human effort can change
them. The same thouvht occurs in St. Paul’s address to the Athenians : “He made of
one every nation of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, having determined
their appointed seasons, and the bounds of their habitation” (Acts xvii, 26, Revised
Version). It is to be found also in Isaiah’s saying, “ Woe unto him that striveth with
his Maker! a potsherd among the potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay, say to him
that fashioncth it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no bands?” And


164 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ‘for. vz. 1—12.)


— : = ———


passage in Ecclesiastes seems to have been in the mind of the Apostle Paul quite as
certainly as that just quoted from Isaiah, when he wrote the famous paragraph in the
Epistle to the Romans on the potter aud the clay (ix. 20, e¢ seq.). ‘That God has
predetermined the conditions of our lives, and that it is useless to strive against his
power, seems, therefore, the teaching of ver. 10, The obscurity in ver. 11 is caused by
the translation, both in our Authorized Version and Revised Version, of the Hebrew
m7 as “things” instead of “words,” In the Revised Version “words” is given in
the margin, but assuredly should be in the text, as in the ancient versions (LXX.,
Vulgate, Syriac): “Seeing there be many words that increase vanity, what 1s man
the better?” (ver. 11). Most probably the reference is to discussions concerning man’s
freedom and God’s decrees, that were coming into vogue among the Jews. The nascent
school of the Pharisees maintained fatalistic views concerning human conduct, that of
the Sadducees denied the existence of fate (Josephus, ‘ Ant.,’ xiii. 5. 9; xviii. 1. 3, 4;
‘Bell. Jud.,’ ii, 8. 14). The uselessness of all such discussions is also asserted later in
ch. xii. 12, and is pathetically reiterated in the famous passage of Milton’s ‘ Paradise
Lost,’ in which some of the fallen angels are described as discussing


* Fixed fate, free-will, foreknowledge absolute;
Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy.”


The twelfth verse is clear enough. After all discussion as to the true course of life, who
can give a decided answer? Life is a shadow; the future is unknown to us, “ For who
knoweth what is good for man in this life, all the days of his vain life, which he
spendeth as a shadow? for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?”
No one can read the words without being struck with the dark, despairing Pyrrhonism
of their tone. ‘A cloud of irrepressible, inexpressible melancholy hangs around the
writer, a leaden weight is on the spring of his spirit.” And it is only when we consider
that the spiritual education of the world by God has been gradual, that we can tolerate
the words as expressing the thoughts of a mind not yet privileged to see truth in its
fulness, If we believe that the light of truth is, like the light of the sun, increasing
from the first faint rays that begin to dispel the darkness of midnight to the splendour
of noonday, we shall not be surprised at the words of the Preacher, They would be
highly inappropriate in one to whom the revelation of God in Christ had been given;
as used by him, they would necessarily imply a gross unbelief, which would excite
our indignation rather than our sympathy. Christianity puts the facts which the
Preacher regarded as so sombre in a@ fresh light, and strips them of all their terror,
Let us take them in order.

I. THAT WHICH HE CALLED FATE WE CALL PROVIDENCE. “Since fate bears sway,
and everything must be as it is, why dost thou strive against it?” said the Stoic,
Marcus Aurelius (xii. 13), and his words seem exactly similar to those before us. The
idea of a fixed order in human life, a Divine will governing all things, does not
neccssarily fill us with the same gloomy thoughts, or summon us to a proud and
ecorniul resignation to that which we cannot change or modify. In the teaching of
Christ we have the fact of a preordination of things by God frequently alluded to, in
such sentences as “Mine hour is not yet come;” “The hairs of your head are all
numbered ;” “‘ Many be called, but few chosen ;” “ No man can come to me except the
Father draw him;” “ For the elect’s sake whom he hath chosen God hath shortened
the days.” This is not a dark, inexorable fate governing all things, but the wise and
gracious will of a Father, in which his children may trust with confidence and joy.
The thought, I say, of all things being predetermined by the Divine will is prominent
in the teaching of Christ, but it is set in such a light as to be a source of inspiration
and strength, It prompts such comfortable assurances as, “ Fear not, little flock; it
is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom.” ;

II, Tot PREACHER WAS HUMILIATED AT THE THOUGHT OF HUMAN WEAKNESS,
* Neither a4 he contend with one that is mightier than he” But we know more
clearly than he did of the Divine compassion for the poor and feeble and helpless—a
compassion that prompted God to send forth his Son for our redemption. We know
that the Son of God took on him our nature, submitted to the toils, trials, privations
and temptations of a mortal lot, and overcame the worst foes by whom we are assailed
e-ain and death, If, as some think, “the mightier” one here referred to is death, we


ox. vil. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 165


ns


believe that Christ took away his power, and that in his triumphant resurrection we
have the pledge of everlasting life. And the one great lesson taught by the Church’s
history is that God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the strong.

III. ANOTHER CAUSE OF GRIEF WAS THE FLEETING CHARACTER OF LIFE. “ Vain life
which man spendeth as a shadow.” But this does not afflict us, who know that the
grave is not the end of all things, but the door of a better life. The present existence
acquires new value and solemnity when we consider it as the prelude to eternity, the
time and place given us in which to prepare ourselves for the world to come. We have
his words, “I am the Resurrection and the Life: . . . whosoever liveth and believeth
in me shall never die.” The sorrows and trials of the present dwindle into iusigniicance
as compared with the reward we anticipate as in store for us if we are faithful to God.
“Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding
and eternal weight of giory; while we look not at the things which are seen, but at
the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the
things which are not seen are eternal” (2 Cor. iv. 17, 18).

IV. A FINAL CAUSE OF GRIEF WAS THAT THE FUTURE WAS DARK AND UNKNOWN.
“Who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?” This is still true in
many departments of life. The mightiest potentate cannot tell how long the dynasty
he has founded, or of which he may be the brightest ornament, will last. The
conqueror may be distressed by the thought that the power, to obtain which he has
squandered myriads of lives and countless treasures, may soon fade away, and in a
short time after his death vanish “like the baseless fabric of a vision.” The poet does
not know that even the most brilliant of his works will be kept alive in the memories
of men, and treasured among the things they will not willingly let die, within a
generation or two after he has passed away. The successful merchant, who has built
up a colossal fortune by the labours of a lifetime, cannot guard against its being
dissipated in a very short time by those to whom he leaves it. But the Ohristian is
in no such uncertainty. The cause of his Master he knows will prosper and grow to
far vaster proportions in the time to come, The good work he has done will aid in
the advancement of the kingdom of God, and no blight of failure will fall upon his
efforts; the plans of God in which during his earthly life he co-operated will not be
frustrated, and his own personal happiuess is for ever secured. All the various causes
of despondency by which the Preacher’s mind was harassed and perplexed vanish
before the brighter revelation of God’s will given us in the mission and work of Christ,
And it is only because we keep in mind that the truth vouchsafed to us was withheld
from him, that we can read his words without being depressed by the burden by which
his spirit was borne down and saddened. It would only be by our deliberately sinning
against the light we enjoy that we could ever adopt his words as expressing our views
of life—J. W.


EXPOSITION.
ecious ointment. The paronomasia here


CHAPTER VIL


Ver. 1—ch. xii. 8.—Division I. Depvoe-
TIONS FROM THE ABOVE-MENTIONED EixPERI-
ENogs IN THE Way OF WARNINGS AND RULES
or Lire.

Vers, 1—7.—Section 1. Though no man
knows for certain what is best, yet there are
some practical rules for the conduct of life
shich wisdom gives. Some of these Koheleth
gets forward in the proverbial form, recom-
mending a serious, earnest life in preference
to one of gaiety and frivolity.


Ver. 1—A good name is better thas


to be remarked, tob shem mishemen tob.
There is a similar assonance in Cant. i. 3,
which the German translator reproduces by
the sentence, “ Besser gut Geriicht als Wohl-
geruch,” or, “ gute Geriiche,” and which may
perhaps be rendered in English, “ Better is
good favour than good flavour.” It is a
proverbial saying, running literally, Better
és a name than good oil: Shem, “name,” is
sometimes used unqualified to signify a cele-
brated name, good name, reputation (comp.
Gen. xi. 4; Prov. xxii. 1). Septuagint,
"Ayabby Svona batp Edaoy dyaddy. Vulgate,
Melius est nomen bonum quam unguenta pre
tiosa. Odorous unguents were Very precious
in the mind of an Oriental, and formed ong


186


ROCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.


(om. viz. 1—28


eT


of the luxuries lavished at feasts and costly
entertainments, or social visits (see ch. ix. 8 ;
Ruth iii. 3; Ps. xlv. 8; Amos vi. 6; Wisd.
ii. 7; Luke vii. 37, 46). It was a man’s
most cherished ambition to leave a good
reputation, and to hand down an honourable
remembrance to distant posterity, and this
all the more as the hope of the life beyond
the grave was dim and vague (see on ch.
ii. 16, and comp. ch. ix. 5). The complaint of
the sensualists in Wisd. ii. 4 is embittered by
the thought, “ Our name shall be forgotten in
time, and no man shall have our works in
remembrance.” We employ a metaphor like
that in the clause when we speak of a man’s
reputation having a good or ill odour; and
the Hebrews said of ill fame that it stank
in the nostrils (Gen. xxxiv. 30; Exod. v.21;
see, on the opposite side, Ecclus. xxiv. 15;
2 Cor. ii. 15), And the day of death than
the day of one’s birth. The thought in this
clause ig closely connected with. the pre-
ceding. Ifaman’s lifeis such that he leaves
a good name behind him, then the day of
his departure is better than that of his birth,
because in the latter he had nothing before
him but labour, and trouble, and fear, and
uncertainty ; and in the former all these
anxieties are past, the storms are success-
fully battled with, the haven is won (see on
ch. iv. 3). According to Solon’s well-known
maxim, no one can be called happy till he
has crowned a prosperous life by a peaceful
death (Herod., i, 32; Soph., ‘ Trachin.,’
1—3 ; ‘Cid. Tyr.,’ 1528 sqq.) ; as the Greek
gnome runs—


Mite péyay clays xply TeAcuThcav7’ ty.


“Call no man great till thou hast seen him
dead,”


So Ben-Sira, “Judge none blessed (ud ma-
kdpiCe wndéva) before his death; for a man
shall be known in his children” (Heclus.
xi. 28).

Ver. 2.—It is better to go to the house of
mourning, than to go to the house of feasting.
The thought in the last verse leads to the
recollection of the circumstances which ac-
company the two events therein mentioned
—birth and death, feasting and joy, in the
first case; sorrow and mourning in the
second. In recommending the sober, earnest
life, Koheleth teaches that wiser, more en-
during lessons are to be learned where grief
reigns than in the empty and momentary
excitement of mirth and joyousness. The
house in question is mourning for a death;
and what a long and harrowing business this
was is well known (see Deut. xxiv. 8; Ecclus.
xxii. 10; Jer. xxii. 18; Matt. ix. 23, etc.).
Visits of condolence and periodical pilgrim-
ages to graves of departed relatives were
considered duties (John xi. 19, 31), and con-
dneed to the growth in the mind of sympathy,


seriousness, and the need f preparation for
death. The opposite side, the house of
carousal, where all that is serious is put
away, leading to such scenes as Isaiah
denounces (v. 11), offers no wise teaching,
and produces only selfishness, heartlessness,
thoughtlessness. What is said here is no
contradiction to what was said in ch. ii. 24,
that there was nothing better for a man than
that le should eat and drink and enjoy him-
self. For Koheleth was not speaking of un-
restrained sensualism—the surrender of tlie
mind to the pleasures of the body—but of
the moderate enjoyment of the good things
of life conditioned by the fear of God and
love of one’s neighbour. This statement is
quite compatible with the view that sees a
higher purpose and training in the sympathy
with sorrow than in participation in reckless
frivolity. For that is the end of all men
viz. that they will some day be mourned,
that their house will be turned into a house
of mourning. Vulgate, In lla (domo) enim
jinis cunctorum admonetur hominum, which
is not the sense of the Hebrew. The living
will lay it to his heart. He who has wit-
nessed this scene will consider it seriously
(ch, ix. 1), and draw from it profitable con-
clusions concerning the brevity of life and
the proper use to make thereof. We recall
the words of Christ, “‘ Blessed are they that
mourn: for they shall be comforted;” and
“ Woe unto you that laugh now! for ye shall
mourn and wecp” (Matt. v. 4; Luke vi. 25).
Schultens gives an Arab proverb which says,
“ Hearest thou lamentation for the dead,
hasten to the spot; art thou called to a
banquet, cross not the threshold.” The
Septuagint thus translates the last clause,
Kol 6 (av ddce dyaddy eis napdlay abrod,
“The living will put good into his heart ;”
the Vulgate paraphrases fairly, Ht vivens
cogitat quid futurum sit, “ The living thinks
what is to come.” ‘So teach us to number
our days,” prays the psalmist, “that we may
apply our hearts unto wisdom” (Ps. xe. 12).
Ver. 3.—Sorrow is better than laughter.
This is a further expansion of the previous
maxim. bp (kaas), as contrasted with ping


is rightly rendered “ sorrow,” “ melancholy,”
or, a8 Ginsburg contends, “thoughtful sad-
ness.” The Septuagint has duuds, the Vul-
gate fra; but anger is not the feeling
produced by a visit to the house of mourning.
Such a scene produces saddening reflection,
which is in itself a moral training, and is
more wholesome and elevating than thought-
less mirth. For by the sadness of the coun-
tenance the heart is made better. The
feeling which shows itself by the look of
sadness (comp, Gen. xl. 7; Neh. ii. 2) has
& purifying effect on the heart, gives a moral
tone to the character. Professor Tayler
Lewis renders the clause, “For in the sad«


OH, wi, 1—29.]}


ness of the face the heart becometh fair;”
#.e. sorrow beautifies the soul, producing, as
it were, comeliness, spiritual beauty, and, in
the end, serener happiness. The Vulgate
translates the passaze thus: Melior est ira
risu; quia per tristitiam vultus corrigitur
animus deliquentis, “ Better is anger than
laughter, because through sadness of coun-
tenance the mind of the offender is cor-
rected.” The anger is that either of God or
of good men which reproves sin; the laughter
is that of sinners who thus show their con-
nivance at or approval of evil. There can
be no doubt that this is not the sense of the
passage. For the general sentiment con-
cerning the moral influence of grief and
suffering, we may compare the Greek sayings,
TA xadqpara pwalhuara, and Tl paddy; cl
wale ; which are almost equivalent in means
ing (comp. Aischyl., ‘Agam.,’ 170; Herod.,
i. 207). The Latins would say, “Qua
nocent, docent,” and we, “ Pain is gain.”

Ver. 4.—The heart of the wise is in the
house of mourning. This is the natural
conclusion from what was said in vers. 2, 3.
The man who recognizes the serious side of
life, and knows where to learn lessons of high
moral meaning, will be found conversant
with scenes of sorrow and suffering, and
reflecting upon them. But the heart of fools
is in the house of mirth. The fool, who
thinks of nothing but present enjoyment,
and how to make life pass pleasantly, turns
away from mournful scenes, and goes only
there where he may drown care and be
thoughtless and merry.

Ver. 5.—It is better to hear the rebuke of
the wise. Gearah, “rebuke,” is the word
used in Proverbs for the grave admonition
which heals and strengthens while it wounds
(see Prov. xiii. 1; xvii. 10). The silent
lessons which a man learns from the con-
templation of others’ sorrow are rightly sup-
plemented by the salutary correction of the
wise man’s tongue. Than for a man to hear
the song of fools. Shir, “song,” is a general
term used of sacred or profane song; the
connection here with the second clause of
ver. 4, etc., leads one to think of the boister-
ous, reckless, often immodest, singing heard
in the house of revelry, such as Amos (vi.
5) calls “idle songs to the sound of the
viol.’ Koheleth might have heard these in
his own country, without drawing his ex-
perience from the licence of Greek practice
or the impurity of Greek lyrics. The Vul-
gate renders the clause, Quam stultorum
adulatione decipi, “Than to be deceived by
the flattery of fools.” This is a paraphrase;
the correctness is negatived by the explana-
tion given in the following verse.

Ver. 6.—For as the crackling of thorns
under a pot. There is a play of words in
the Hebrew, “The orackling of sisém under


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


Se a ae


157


8 sir,” which Wright expresses by trans-
lating, “ Like the noise of the nettles under
the kettles.” In the East, and where wood
is scarce, thorns, hay, and stubble are used
for fuel (Ps. lviii. 9; cxx. 4; Mait. vi. 30),
Such materials are quickly kindled, blaze
up for a time with much noise, and soon die
away (Ps. cxviii. 12). So is the laughter of
the fool, The point of comparison is the
loud crackling and the short duration of the
fire with small results, So the fool’s mirth
is Kaper and noisy, but comes to a
speedy end, and is spent to no good purpose.
So in Job (xx. 5) we have, “ The siuniching
of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
godless but fora moment.” All this profit-
less mirth is again nothing but vanity.

Ver. 7.—The verse begins with ki, which
usually introduces a reason for what has
preceded; but the difficulty in finding the
connection has led to various explanations
and evasions. ‘The Authorized Version
boldly separates the verse from what has
gone before, and makes @ new paragraph
beginning with “ surely: ” Surely oppression
maketh a wise man mad. Delitzsch supposes
that something has been lost between vers,
6 and 7, and he supplies the gap by a clause
borrowed from Prov. xvi. 8, “Better is a
little with righteousness than great revenues
without right ;” and then the sentence pro-
ceeds naturally, “ For oppression,” etc. But
this is scarcely satisfactory, as it is mere
conjecture wholly unsupported by external
evidence. The Vulgate leaves ks untrans-
lated; the Septuagint has ér:. Looking at
the various paragraphs, all beginning with
tob, rendered “ better,” viz. vers. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,
we must regard the present verse as con-
nected with what precedes, a new subject
being introduced at ver. 8. Putting ver. 6
in a parenthesis as mesely presenting an
illustration of the talk ef fools, we may see
in ver. 7 a confirmation of the first part of
ver. 5. The rebuke of the wise is useful
ever in the case of rulers who are tempted
to excess and injustice. The “ oppression”
in the text is the exercise of irresponsible
power, that which a man inflicts, not what
he suffers; this makes him “mad,” even
though he be in other respects and under
other circumstances wise; he ceases to be
directed by reason and principle, and needs
the correction of faithful rebuke. The Sep-
tuagint and Vulgate, rendering respectively
suxopaytla and calumnia, imply that the
evil which distracts the wise man is false
accusation. And a gift destroyeth the heart.
The admission of bribery is likewise an evil
that calls for wise rebuke. So Prov. xv. 27,
“He that is greedy of gain troubleth his own
house; but he that hateth gifts shall live.”
The phrase, “destroys the heart,” means
corrupts the understanding, deprives a man


158


of wisdom, makes him no better than a fool
(comp. Hos. iv. 11, where the same effect is
attributed to whoredom and drunkenness).
The Septuagint has, drdAAvor thy kapdlay
evyevelas avrod, “destroys the heart of his
nobility;” the Vulgate, perdet robur cordis
illiua, “will destroy the strength of his
heart.” The interpretation given above
seetns to be the most reasonable way of
dealing with the existing text; but Nowack
and Volzk adopt Delitzsch’s emendation.


Vers. 8—14.—Section 2. Here follow some
recommendations to patience and resignation
under the ordering of God’s providence.
Such conduct is shown to be true wisdom.


Ver. 8.—Better is the end of a thing than
the beginning thereof. This is not a repe-
tition of the assertion in ver. 1 concerning
the day of death and the day of birth, but
states a truth in a certain sense generally
true. The end is better because we then can
form a right judgment about a matter; we
see what wasits purpose; we know whether
it has been advantageous and prosperous or
not. Christ’s maxim, often repeated (see
Matt. x. 22; xxiv. 13; Rom. ii. 7; Heb.
iii. 6, etc.), is, “ He that shall endure unto
the 6nd shall be saved.” No one living can
be said’ tobe 80 absolutely safe as that he
can look to the great day without trembling.
Death puta the seal to the good life, and
obviates the danger of falling away. Of
course, if a thing is in itself evil, the gnome
is not true (comp. Prov. v. 3, 4; xvi. 25,
etc.); but applied to things indifferent at
the outset, it is as correct as generalizations
can be. The lesson of patience is here
taught. A man should not be precipitate
in his judgments, but wait for the issue.
From the ambiguity in the expression
dabar (see on ch. vi. 11), many render it
“word ” in this passage. Thus the Vulgate,
Melior est finis orationts, quam princtpium ;
and the Septuagint, "Ayah éoxdrn Adywy
bartp apxhy avtod, where pwr, or some such
word, must be supplied. If this interpre-
tation be preferred, we must either take the
maxim as stating generally that few words
are better than many, and that the sooner
one concludes a speech, so much the better
for speaker and hearer; or we must con+
sider that the word intended is a well-
merited rebuke, which, however severe
end at first dislike, proves in the end
wholesome and profitable. And the patient
in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
“Patient” is literally “long of spirit,” as
the phrase, “short of spirit,” is used in
Prov. xiv. 29 and Job xxi. 4 to denote one
who loses his temper and is impatient. Fo
wait calmly for the result of an acticu, not
to be hasty in arraigning Providence, is the
part of a pationt man; while the proud,


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


{ou. vi. 1—29.


inflated, conceited man, who thinks all must
be arranged according to hie notions, is never
resigned or content, but rebe's against the
ordained course of events. “ In your patieuce
ye shall win your souls,” said Christ (Luke
xxi. 19); and a Sootch proverb declares
wisely, “ He that weel bides, weel betides.”

Ver. 9.—Be not hasty in thy spirit to be
angry. A further warning against the
arrogance which murmurs at Providence
and revolts against the checks of tle Divine
arrangement. The injunction in ch. v. 2
might be taken in this sense. It is not
a general admonition against unrighteous
anger, but is levelled at the hauglity indig-
nation which a proud man feels when things
do not go as he wishes, and he deems that
he could have managed matters more satis-
factorily. For anger resteth in the bosom of
fools, Such unreasonable displeasure is the
murk of a foolish or sceptical mind, and if
it rests (Prov. xiv. 33), is fostered and
cherished there, may develop into misan-
thropy and atheism. If we adopt the
rendering “word” in ver. 8, we may see in
this injunction a warning against being
quick to take offence at a rebuke, as it is
only the fool who will not look to the
object of tle censure and see that it ought
to be patiently submitted to. On the
subject of anger St. Gregory writes, “As
often as we restrain the turbulent motions
of the mind under the virtue of mildness,
we are essaying to return to the likeness of
our Oreator. For when the peace of mind
is lashed with anger, torn and rent, ae it
were, it is thrown into confusion, so that it
is not in harmony with itself, and loses the
force of the inward likeness, By anger
wisdom is parted with, so that we are left
wholly in ignorance what to do; as it is
written, ‘Anger resteth in the bosom of a
fool,’ in this way, that it withdraws the light
of understanding, while by agitating it
troubles the mind ” (‘ Moral.,’ v. 78).

Ver. 10.—The same impatience leads a
man to disparage the present in comparison
with a past age. What is the cause that the
former days were better than these? He
does not know from any adequite infor-
mation that preceding times were in any
tespect superior to present, but in his moody
discontent he looks on what is around him
with a jaundiced eye, and sees the past
through a rose-tinted atmosphere, as an age
of heroism, faith, and righteousness, Horace
finds such a character in the morose old


eee whom he describes in ‘De Arte Poet.,


“ Difficilis, querulus, laudator temporis acti
Se puero, castigator censorque minorum.”


“Moroae and querulous, praising former
afi f 0}


OH. Vil. 1—29.]


When he was
youth”


And ‘ Epist.,’ fi. 1. 22—
“, .. et nisi que terris semota suisque
Temporibus defuncta videt, fastidit et odit.”


« All that is not most distant and removed
From his own time and place, he loathes
and scorns.”


For thou dost not inquire wisely concerning
this, In asking such a question you show
that you have not reflected wisely on the
matter. Every age has its light and dark
side; the past was not wholly light, the
present is not wholly dark, And it may
well be questioned whether much of the
glamour shed over antiquity is not false and
unreal. The days of “Good Queen Bess”
were anytuing but halcyon; the “ merrie
England” of old time was full of disorder,
distress, discomfort. In yearning again for
the flesh-pots of Egypt, the Iaraclites forgot
the bondage and misery which were the
accompaniments of those sensual pleasures.

Ver. 11.—Suoli hasty judgment is incom-
patible with true wisdom and sagacity.
Wisdom is good with an inheritance;
Septuagint, *Aya8) copia peta KAnpovouias.
Vulgate, Utilior est sapientia cum divitiis.
The sentence tlius rendered seems to mean
that wealth lends a prestige to wisdom,
that the man is lappy who possesses both.
The inheritance spoken of is an hereditary
one; the man who is “rich with ancestral
wealth” is enabled to employ his wisdom
to good purpose, lis position adding weight
to his words and actions, and relieving him
from the low pursuit of money-making. To
this effect Wright quotes Menander—


Maxdpios do71s ovclar Kad vooy Exes
Xpirat yap ovros cis & bet rabry Kars.


“ Blest is the man who wealth and wisdom
hath,
For he can use his riches aa he ought.”


(Comp. Prov. xiy. 24.) Many commentators,
thinking such a sentiment alien from the
context, render the particle oy not “ with,”
but “as:” Wisdom is [as] good as an in-
heritance ” (see on ch. ii. 16). ‘Uhis is putting
wisdom on rather a low platform, and one
would have expected to read some such
aphorism as “ Wisdom is better than rubies”
(Prov. viii. 11), if Koheleth lad intended to
make any such comparison. It appears then
most expedient to take im in the sense of
“ moreover,” “as well as,” “and” (comp.
1 Sam. xvii. 42, “ ruddy, and (im) of a fair
countenance”). “ Wisdum is good, and an
inheritance is good;” both are good, but the
advantages of the former, as ver. 12 intimates,
far outweigh those of the latter. And by it
there is profit to them that see the sun;


boy, now ever blaming


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


159


rather, and an advantage for those that see
the sun. However useful wealth may be,
wisdom is that which is really beneficial
to all who live and rejoice in the light of
day. In Homer the phrase, épav ddos HeAloo,
“to see the light of the sun” (‘Iliad,’
Xviii. 61), signifies merely “to live;”
Plumptre considers it to be used here and
in ch. xix. 7 in order to convey the thought
that, after all, life has its bright side. Cox
would take it to mean to live much in the
sun, #.¢. to lead an active life—which is an
imported modern notion.

Ver. 12.—For wisdom is a defence, and
money is a defence; literally, tn the shade is
wisdom, in the shade is money ; Septuagint,
“Ori 1 cHiG adtis ) godla ds ond dpyuplou,
“For in its shadow wisdom is as the shadow
of money.” Symmachus has, Sxéret copla
@s oxére td apytpiov, “* Wisdom shelters
as money shelters.” The Vulgate explains
the obscure text by paraphrasing, Sicut enim

otegit saptentia, sic protegit Nide
eulw, in Oriental eres is eaatvalent to
protection (see Numb. xiv. 9; Ps. xvii. 8;
Lam. iv. 20). Wisdom as well as money
is a shield and defence to men. As it is said
in one passage (Prov. xiii. 8) that riches
are the ransom of a man’s life, so in another
(ch. ix. 15) we are told how wisdom
delivered a city from destruction. The
literal’ translation given above implies that
he who has wisdom aud he who has money
rest under a safe protection, are secure
from material evil. In this respect they
are alike, and have analogous claims to
man’s regard. But the excellency—profit, or
advantage—of knowledge is, that wisdom
giveth life to them that have it. “ Know-
ledge” (daath) and “wisdom” (chokmah)
are practically here identical, the terms
being varied for the sake of poetio paral-
lelism. The Revised Version, following
Delitzsch and others, renders, Wisdom
preserveth the life of him that hath tt; i.e.
secures him from passions aud excesscs
which tend to shorten life. This seems to
be scarcely an adequate ground for the
noteworthy advantage which wisdom is said
to possess. The Septuagint gives, Ka) re-
ploceia yvdoews THs coplas (woronoe rdy
map’ avrijs, “ And the excellence of the know-
ledge of wisdom will quicken him that hath
it.” Something more than the mere animal
life is signified, a climax to the “ defence”
mentioned in the preceding clause—the
higher, spiritual life which man has from
God. Wisdom in the highest sense, that is,
practical piety and religion, is “a tree of
life to them that lay hold of her, and happ
is every one that retaineth her” (Prov. iii.
18), where it is implied that wisdom restores
to man the gift which he lost at the Fall
(comp. also Prov. viii. 85). Tho Septuagint


160


expression (wororhoe recalls the words of
Christ, “As the Father raiseth the dead
and quickeneth ((woro:e?) them, even so the
Son also quickeneth whom he will; ” “It is
the Spirit that quickeneth (rd (womo:odv)”
(John vy. 21; vi. 63). Koheleth attributes
that power to wisdom which the more
definite teaching of Christianity assigns to
the influence of the Holy Spirit. Some
would explain, “fortifies or vivifies the
heart,” «e. imparts new life and strength
to meet every fortune. The Vulgate
rendering is far astray from the text, and
does not accurately convey the sense of
the passage, running thus; Hoc autem plus
habet eruditio et sapientia: quod vitam
tribuunt possessori suo, “But this more
have learning and wisdom, that they give
life to the possessor of them.”

Ver. 13.—Consider the work of God.
Here is another reason against murmuring
and hasty julgment.
shown by submission to the inevitable. In
all that happens one ought to recognize
God’s work and God’s ordering, and man’s
impotence. For who canmake that straight,
which he hath made crooked? The things
which God hath made crooked are the
anomalies, the crosses, the difficulties, which
meet us in life. Some would include bodily
deformities, which seems to be a piece of
unnecessary literalisin. Thus the Septua-
gint, Tis duvhoetas nooujoa by by 6 Ocds
diactpéyy aitév; “Who will be able to
straighten him whom God has distorted?”
and the Vulgate, Nemo possit corrigere quem
tlle despexerit, “No one can amend him
whom he hath despised.” The thought
goes back to what was said in ch. i. 15,
“That which is crooked cannot be made
straight;” and in ch. vi 10, man “cannot
contend with him that is mightier than he.”
“ As for the wondrous works of the Lord,”
says Ben-Sira, “ there may be nothing taken
from them, neither may anything be put
unto them, neither can the ground of them
be found out ” (Ecclus. xviii. 6). We cannot
arrange events according to our wishes or
expectations; therefore not only is placid
acquiescence a necessary duty, but the wise
man will endeavour to accommodate him-
self to existing circumstances.

Ver. 14.—In the day of prosperity be joy-
ful; literally, in the day of good be tn good®
i.e. when things go well with you, be cheer-
ful (ch. ix. 7; Esth. viii. 17); accept the
situation and enjoy it. The advice is the
same as that which runs through the book,
viz. to make the best of the present. So
Ben-Sira says, “Defraud not thyself of the
good day, and let not a share in a good
desire pass thee by” (Hcclus. xiv. 14).
Septuagint, *Ey jucpa ayadwotyvns (HO ev
ayad¢, “In @ day of good live in (an


True wisdom is_


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREAJHER.


|


(


(on. viz, 1—20


atmosphere of) good ;” Vuigate, In die bone
fruere bonis, “Ina good day enjoy your good
things.” But in the day of adversity consider ;
in the evil day look well. The writer could
not conclude this clause so as to make it
parallel with the other, or he would have
had to say, “In the ill day take it ill,”
which would be far from his meaning; so
he introduces a thought which may help to
make one resigned to adversity. The re-
flection follows. Septuagint, Kal te ep
huépg kaxtas: (5c, x.7.A.; Vulgate, Et malam
diem precave, “‘ Beware of the evil day.”
But, doubtless, the object of the verb is the
following clause. God also hath set the one
over against the other; or, God hath made
the one corresponding to the other; i.e. he
hath made the day of evil as well as the
day of good. The light and shade in man’s
life are equally under God’s ordering and
permission, “What?” cries Job (ii. 10),
“shall we receive good at the hand of
God, and shall we not receive evil?” Corn,
& Lapide quotes a saying of Plutarch to this
effect: the harp gives forth sounds acute
aud grave, and both combine to form the
melody; so in man’s life the mingling of pros-
perity and adversity yields a well-adjusted
harmony. God strikes all the strings of our
life’s harp, and we ought, not only patiently,
but cheerfully, to listen to the chords pro-
duced by this Divine Performer. To the end
that man should find nothing after him.
This clause gives Koheleth’s view of God’s
object in the admixture of good and evil;
but the reason has been variously inter-
preted, the explanation depending on the
sense assigned to the term “after him”
(Ypnx). The Septuagint gives éxlow abrod,
which is vague; the Vulgate, contra eum,
meaning that man may have no occasion to
complain against God. Cheyne (‘Job and
Solomon’) considers that Koheleth here
implies that death closes the scene, and
that there is then nothing more to fear,
rendering the clause, “On the ground that
man is to experience nothing at all hereafter.”
They who believe that the writer held the
doctrine of a future life cannot acquiesce in
this view. The interpretation of Delitzsch
is this—God lets man pass through the
whole discipline of good and evil, that when
he dies there may be nothing which he has
not experienced. Hitzig and Nowack ex-
plain the text to mean that, as God designs
that man after his death shall have done
with all things, he sends upon him evil
as well as good, that he may not have to
punish him hereafter—a doctrine opposed
to the teaching of s future judgment.
Wright deems the idea to be that man
may be kept in ignorance of what shall
happen to him beyond the grave, that the
present life may afford no clue to the future.


om #7. 1- ~29.]


One does not see why this should be a com-
fort, nor how it is compatible with God’s
known counsel of making the condition of
the future life dependent upon the conduct
of this. Other explanations being more or
less unsatisfactory, many modern commenta-
tors see in the passage an assertion thit God
intermingles good and evil in men’s lives
according to laws with which they are un-
acquainted, in order that they may not dis-
quiet themselves by forecasting the future,
whether in this life or after tlicir death, but
may be wholly dependent upon God, casting
all their care upon bim, knowing that he
careth for them (1 Pet. v. 7). We may
safely adopt this explanation (comp. ch.
iii. 22; vi. 12). The paragraph then con-
tains the same teaching as Horace’s oft-
quoted ode—


“ Prudens faturi temporis exitum,” ete.
(‘Carm.,’ iii. 29. 29.)
Theognis, 1075—
Mphyparos § amphxrov
TeheuTHY
Tva@vat, dws péAdAet ToUTO @eds TEAEcEt’
Opovn yep térata’ mpd St Tov péAdovTos
Ever Ou
Od Evverd Ovnrois relpar’ dunxavins.


«The issue of an action incomplete,
"Tis hard to forecast how God may dispose
it;
For it is veiled in darkest night, and man
In present hour can never comprehend
His helpless efforts.”


Plumptre quotes the lines in Cleanthes’s
hymn to Zeus, vers. 18—21 (‘ Poet. Gnom.,’
p- 114)—

*AAAG od Kal Td wWepiocd, K.T.A,


“Thou alone knowest how to change the
odd
To even, and to make the crooked straight ;
And things discordant find accord in thee.
Thus in one whole thou blendest ill with
ood.
So that one law works on for evermore.”


xarerétaréy ters


Ben-Sira has evidently borrowed the idea
in Ecclus. xxxiii. (xxxvi.) 13--15 from our
passage; after speaking of man ‘eing like
clay under the potter’s hand, be ¢grocceds,
“ Good is set over against evil, and life over
against death; so is the godly against the
sinner, and the sinner against the godly. So
look upon all the works of the Most High:
there are two and two, one against the other.”


Vers. 15—22.—Section 3. Warnings
against excesses, and praise of the golden
mean, which is practical wisdom and the
art of living liappily.

Vers. 15.--All things have I seen in the

ECCLESIASTES.


ECOLESIASTFE: OR, TER PRY ACHER.


161


days of my vanity. Kokeleth gives his
own experience of an anomalous condition
which often obtains in human affairs,
“All,” being here defined by the article,
must refer to the cases which he has men-
tioned or proceeds to mention. “The days
of vanity” mean merely “fleeting, vain
days” (comp. ch. vi. 12). The expression
denotes the writer’s view of the emptiness
and transitoriness of life (ch. i. 2), and it
may also have special reference to his own
vain efforts to solve the problems of exist.
ence. There is a just (righteous) man that
perisheth in his righteousness. Here is a
difficulty about the dispensation of good
and evil, which has always perplexed the
thoughtful. It finds expression in Ps. lxxiii.,
though the singer propounds a solution
(ver. 17) which Koheleth misses. The
meaning of the preposition (3) before
“righteousness” is disputed. Delitzsch,
Wright, and others take it as equivalent to
“in spite of,” as in Deut. i. 32, where “in
this thing” means “notwithstanding,”
“for all this thing.” Righteousness has
the promise of long life and prosperity; it is
an anomaly that it should meet with disaster
and early death. We cannot argue from
this that the author did not believe in
temporal rewards and punishments; he
states merely certain of his own experi-
ences, which may be abnormal and capable
of explanation. For his special purpose
this was sufficient. Others take the pre-
position to mean “through,” “in conse-
quence of.” Good men have always been
persecuted for righteousness’ sake (Matt.
y. 10, 11; John xvii. 14; 2 Tim. iii. 12),
and so far the interpretation is quite ad-
missible, and is perhaps supported by ver.
16, which makes a certain sort of righteous
ness the cause of disaster. But looking to
the second clause of the present verse, where
we can hardly suppose that the wicked man
is said to attain to long life in consequence
of his wickedness, we are safe in adopting
the rendering, ‘in spite of.” There is a
wicked man that prolongeth his life in (in
spite of) his wickedness. The verb arak,
“to make long,” “to prolong,” is used both
with and without the accusative “days”
(see ch. viii, 12, 13; Deut. v. 33; Prov.
xxviii. 2). Septuagint, Eorly aocBjs pevwv
éy xaxlg avrov, “There is an ungodly man
remaining in his wickedness,’ which does
not convey the sense of the original. Ao-
cording to the moral government of God
experienced by the Hebrews in their his-
tory, the sinner was to suffer calamity and
to be cut off prematurely. ‘This is the con-
tention of Job’s friends, against which he
argues so warmly, The writer of the Book
of Wisdom has learned to look for the cor
rection of such anomalies in another lifa
M


162


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


{ou vir. 1—29,


Se


He sees that length of days is not always a
blessing, and that retribution awaits the
evil beyond the grave (Wisd. i. 9; iil.
4,10; iv. 8, 19, ete.). Abel perished in
early youth; Cain had his days prolonged.
‘This apparent inversion of moral order leads
to another refiection concerning the danger
of exaggerations. .

Ver. 16.—Be not righteous over much,
The exhortation has been variously inter-
preted to warn against too scrupulous obser-
vance of ritual and ceremonial religion, or
the mistaken piety which neglects all mun-
dane affairs, or the Pharisaical spirit which
is bitter in condemning others who fall short
of one’s own standard. Cox will have it
that the advice signifies that a prudent man
will not be very righteous, since he will

ain nothing by it, nor very wicked, as
fe will certainly shorten his life by such


conduct. But really Koheleth is condemn-


ing the tendency to immoderate asceti-_


cism which had begun to show itself in his
day—a rigorous, prejudiced, indiscreet
manner of life and conduct which made
piety offensive, and afforded no real aid to
the cause of religion. This arrogant system
virtually dictated the laws by which Provi-
dence should be governed, and found fault
with divinely ordered circumstances if they
did not coincide with its professors’ precon-
ceived opinions. Such religionism might
well be calied being “ righteous over much.”
Neither make thyself over wise; Septuagint,
Mn5é codi(ov wepiocd; Vulgate, Neque plus
sapias quam necesse est; better, show not
thyself too wise ; i.e, do not indulge in specu-
lations about Gord’s dealings, estimating
them according to your own predilections,
questioning the wisdom of his moral govern-
ment. Against such perverse speculation St.
Paul argues (Rom. ix. 19, ete.), “Thou wilt
say unto me, Why doth he still find fault?
For who withstandeth his will? Nay but,
O man, who art tlou that replicst against
God? Shall the thing formed say to him
that formed it, Why didst thou make me
thus?” <A good principle carried to excess
may bring evil results. Summum jus, summa
tnjuria, The maxim, Mydcy ayay, Ne quid
nimis, “ Moderation in all things,” is taught
here; and Aristotle’s theory of virtue being
the mean between the two extremes of ex-
cess and defect is adumbrated {‘ Ethic,
Nicom..,’ ii. 6. 15, 16); though we do not see
that the writer is “reproducing current
Greek thought” (Plumptre), or that inde-

endent reflection and observation could not

ave landed him at the implied conclusion
without plagiarism. Why shouldest thou
destroy thyself? Septuagint, Mf more
éxrdayns, “ Lest perchance thou he con-
founded ;” Vulgate, Ne obstupescas, “ Lest
thou be stupefied.”” This is the primary


meaning of the special form of the verb here
used (hithp. of opz), and Plumptre sup-
poses that the author intends thereby to
express the spiritual pride which accom-
panies fancied excellence in knowledge and
conduct, and by which the possessor is puffed
up (1 Tim. iii. 6), But plainly it is not a
mental, internal effect that is contemplated,
but something that affects comfort, position,
or life, like the corresponding clause in the
following verse. Hitzig and Ginsburg ex-
plain the word, “Make thyself forsaken,”
“Tsolate thyself,” which can scarcely be the
meaning. The Authorized Version is cor-
rect. A man who professes to be wiser than
others, and, indeed, wiser than Providence,
incurs the envy and animosity of his fellow-
men, and will certainly be punished by God
for his arrogance and presumption.

Ver. 17.—Be not over much wicked, neither
be thou foolish.. These two injunctions are
parallel and correlative to those in ver. 16
concerning over-righteousness and over-
wisdom. But the present verse cannot be
meant, as at first sight it seems to do, to
sanction a certain amount of wickedness
provided it does not exceed due measure. To
surmount this difficulty some have endea-
voured to modify the term “* wicked ” (rasha),
taking it to mean “engaged in worldly
matters,” or “ not subject to rule,” “lax,” or
again “restless,” as some translate the word
in Job iii. 17. But the word seems not to be
used in any such senses, and bears uniformly
the uncompromisiig signification assigned
to it, “to be wicked, unrighteous, guilty.”
The difficulty is not overcome by Plumptre’s
suggestion of the introduction of a little
“playful irony learned from Greek teachers,”
as if Koheleth meant, “ I have warned you,
my friends, against over-rigliteousness, but
do not jump at the conclusion that licence
is allowable. That was very far from my
meaning.” The connection of thought is
this: in the previous verse Koheleth had
denounced the Pharisaical spirit which
virtually condemned tlie Divine ordering of
circumstances, because vice was not at once
and visibly punislied, and virtue at once re-
warded ; and now he proceeds to warn against
the deliberate and abominable wickedness
which infers from God's long-suffering his
absolute neglect and non-interference in
mortal matters, and on this view plunges
audaciously into viceand immorality, saying
to itself, “@cod hath forgotten: he hidcth
his face; he will never see it” (Ps. x. 11).
Such conduct may well be called “ foolish;
it is that of “the fool who saya in his heart,
There is no God” (Ps. xiv. 1). The actual
wording of the injunction sounds to us some-
what strange; but its form is determined by
the requirements of parallelism, and the
aphorism must not be pressed beyond its


*) aye
Oa ari ot as


ou. vi. 1—29.]


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 168


general intention, “ Be not righteous nor wise
to excess; be not wicked nor foolish to ex-
cess.” Septuagint, “ Be not very wicked, and
be not stubborn (cxAnpés).” Why shouldest
thou die before thy time ? literally, not in thy
time ; prematurely, tempting God to punish
thee by retributive judyment, or shortening
thy days by viciousexcesses. (For the former,
see Job xxii. 16; Ps. lv. 23; Prov. x. 27; and
comp. 1 Sam. ii. 31, 33; and for the latter,
Prov. v. 23; vii. 23—27; x.21.) The Syriae
contains a clause not given in any other
version, “that thou mayest not be hated.”
As is often the case, both in this book and
in Proverbs, a general statementin one place
is reduced by o contrariant er modified
opinion in another. Thus the prolongation
of the life of the wicked, noticed in ver. 15,
is here shown to be abnormal, impiety in the
usual course of events having a tendency to
shorten life. In this way hasty generaliza-
tion is corrected, and the Divine arrange-
ment is vindicated.

Ver. 18.—It is good that thou shouldest
take hold of this; yea, also from this with-
draw not thine hand. The pronouns refer
to the two warnings in vers. 16 and 17
against over-righteousness and over-wicked-
ness. Koheleth does not advise a man to
make trial of opposite lines of conduct, to
taste the fruit of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, that from a wide cxperience
he may, like a man of the world, pursue a
safe course; this would be pocr morality,
and unmeet for the stage at which his argu-
ment has arrived. Rather he advises him
to lay to heart the cautions above given, and
learn from them to avoid all extremes. As
Horace says (‘ Hpist.,’ i. 18. 9}—


“Virtus est medium vitiorum et utrinque
reductum.”


“Folly, as usual, in extremes is seen,
While virtue nicely hits the happy mean.”
(Howes)


The Vulgate has interpolated a word, and
taken the pronoun as m:sculine, to the sacri-
fice of the sense and connection: Bonwm est
te sustentare justum, sed et ub illo ne subtrahas
manum tuam, “ It is good that thou shouldst
support the just man, nay, from him with-
draw not thy hand.” For he that feareth
God shall come forth of them all; shall escape
both extremes together with their evil re-
sults. The fear of God will keep a man
from all exoesses. The intransitive verb
yatsa, “to go forth,” is here used with an
accusstive (comp. Gen. xliv. 4, which, how-
ever, is not quite analogous), as in Latin
ingreds urbem (Livy, i. 29). Vulgate, Qué
timet Deum nihil negligit. So Hitzig and
Ginsburg, “ Goes, makes his way with both,”
knows how te avail himself of picty and


wickedness, which, as we have seen, is not
the meaning. St, Gregory, indeed, who uses
the Latin Version, notes that to fear God is
never to pass over any good thing that ought
to be done (‘Moral.,’ i. 3); but he is not
professing to comment on the whole passage.
Wright, after Delitzsch, takes the term
“come out of” as equivalent to “ fulfil,” so
that the meaning would be, “ He who fears
God performs all the duties mentioned above,
and avoids extremes,” as Matt. xxiii, 23,
“These ought ye to have done, and not to
have left the other undone.” But this is
confessedly a Talmudic use of the verb;
and the Authorized Version may be safely
adopted. The Septuagint gives, “ For to
them that fear God ali things shall come
forth well.”

Ver. 19.—Wisdom strengtheneth the wise.
The moderation enjoined is the only true
wisdom, which, indeed, is the most powerful
incentive and support. ‘“ Wisdom proves it-
self stronger” (as the verb is put intransi-
tively) “to the wise man.” Septuagint,
BonOjoes, “ will help;” Vulgate, confortavit,
“hath strengthened.” The spiritual and
moral force of the wisdom grounded upon
the fear of God is here signified, and is all
the more insisted upon to counteract any
erroneous impression conveyed by the caution
against over-wisdom in ver. 16 (see note on
ver. 17, at the end), More than ten mighty
men which are in the city. The number
ten indicates completeness, containing in it-
self the whole arithmetical system, and used
representatively for an indefinite multitude.
Thus Job (xix. 3) complains that his
friends have reproached him ten times, and
Elkanah asks his murmuring wife, “Am I
not better to thee than ten sons?” (1 Sam.
i. 8). Delitzsch thinks that some definite
political arrangement is referred to, e.g. the
dynasties placed by Persian kings over con-
quered countries; and Tyler notes that in
the Mishna a city is defined to be a place
containing ten men of leisure; and we know
that ten men were required for the establish-
ment of a synagogue in any locality. The
same idea was present in the Anglo-Saxon
arrangement of tything and hundred. The
number, however, is probably used indefi-
nitely here as seven in the parallel passage
of Ecclesiasticus (xxxvii. 14), “A man’s mind
is sometime wont to tell him more than seven
watchmen that sit above in a high tower.”
The sentence may be compared with Prov.
x. 15; xxi. 22; xxiv. 5. he word rendered
“mighty men ” (shallitim) is not necessarily
8 military designation; it is translated
“ruler” in eh. x. 5, and “governor” in
Gen. xlii. 6. The Septuagint here has
*Elovotd(ovras trols bvtas év Ti wéAet; the
Vulgate, principes civitatis. The persons
intended are not primarily men of valour in


164


war, like David’s heroes, but rulers of
sagacity, prudent statesmen, whose moral
force is far greater and more efficacious than
any merely physical excellence (comp. ch.
ix. 16).

vo 20.—The wisdom above signified is,
indeed, absolutely necessary, if one would
escape the consequences of that frailty of
nature which leads to transgression. Wisdom
shows the sinner a way out of the evil course
in which he is walking, and puts him back
in that fear of God which is his only safety.
For there is not a just man upon earth.
The verse confirms ver. 19. Even the just
man sinneth, and therefore needs wisdom.
That doeth good, and sinneth not. This
reminds us of the words in Solomon’s prayer
(1 Kings viii. 46; Prov. xx. 9). So St.
James (iii. 2) says, “‘ In many things we all
offend ;” and St. John, “If we say that we
have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us” (1 Johni. 8). A Greek
gnome runs—


‘Apaprdves Tt eal copod coparepos.
“Erreth at times the very wisest man.”


Ver. 21.—Also take no heed unto all words
that are spoken; literally, give not thy heart,
as ch. i. 13, etc. Here is another matter in
which wisdom will lead to right conduct.
You will not pay serious attention to evil
reports either about yourself or otliers, nor
regulate your views and actions according to
such distortions of the truth. To be always
hankering to know what people say of us
is to set up a false standard, which will
assuredly lead us astray; and, at the same
time, we shall expose: ourselves to the keen-
est mortification when we find, as we pro-
bably shall find, that they do not take us
at our own valuation, but have thoroughly
marked our weaknesses, and are ready
enough to censure them. We have an in-
stance of patience under unmerited reproof
in the case of David when cursed by Shimei
(2 Sam. xvi. 11), as he, or one like minded,
says (Ps. xxxviii. 13), “I, as a deaf man,
hear not; and I am as a dumb man that
openeth not his mouth. Yea, I am as a
man that heareth not, and in whose mouth
are no reproofs.” Corn. & Lapide comments
in words to which no translation would do
justice, “Verba enim non sunt verbera;
aerem feriunt non hominem, nisi qui iis
attendit mordetur, sauciatur.” Lest thou
hear thy servant curse thee. The servant
is introduced as an example of a gossip or
calumniator, because he, if any one, would
be acquainted with his master’s faults, and
be most likely to disseminate his knowledge,
and blame from such a quarter would be
most intolerable. Commentators appositely
quote Bacon’s remarks on this passage in


EOCCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(on. vit. 1—29.


his ‘Advancement of Learning,’ viii. 2,
where he notes the prudence of Pompey,
who burned all the papers of Sertorius un-
read, containing, as they did, information
which would fatally have compromised many
leading men in Rome.

Ver. 22.—Oftentimes also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast
cursed others. The appeal to a man’s own
conscience follows. The fact that we often
speak ill of others should make us less open
to take offence at what is said of ourselves,
and prepared to expect unfavourable com-
ments. The Lord has said, “Judge not,
that ye be not judged; for with what judg-
ment ye judge, ye shall be judged; and
with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured unto you” (Matt. vii. 1,2). This
is a universal law. “ Who is he,” asks Ben-
Sira, “that hath not offended with his
tongue?” (Ecclus. xix. 16). Septuagint,
“Or: tAELoTdKLs wovnpedoeTal oe, Ka) KaOddous
ToAAads Kakdoe Kapdlay cov, rt ws Kalye od
Katnpdow érépous, “For many times he [thy
servant] shall act ill to thee, and in many
ways shall afflict thine heart, for even thou
also hast cursed others.” This seems to be
a combination of two renderings of the pas-
sage. “It is the praise of perfect greatness
to meet hostile treatment, without bravely
and within mercifully. . . . Some things
are more quickly dismissed from our hearts
if we know our own misdemeanours against
our neighbours, For whilst we reflect what
we have been towards others, we are the
less concerned that others should have
proved such persons towards ourselves, be-
cause the injustice of another avenges in us
what our conscience justly accuses in itself”
(St. Gregory, ‘ Moral.,’ xxii. 26).

Vers. 23—29.—Section 4. Further in-
sight into essential wisdom was not obtain-
able; but Koheleth learned some other
practical lessons, viz. that wichkedness was
folly and madness; that woman was the most
evil thing tn the world; that man had per-
verted his nature, which was made originally
good.

Ver. 23.—All this have I proved by
wisdom; ¢e. wisdom was the means by
which he arrived at the practical conclusions
given above (vers. 1—22). Would wisdom
solve deeper questions? And ifso, could he
ever hope to attain it? I said, I will be
wise. ‘This was his strong resolve. He
desired to grow in wisdom, to use it in order
to unfold mysteries and explain anomalies.
Hitherto he had been content to watch the
course of men’s lives, and find by experience
what was good and what was evil for them;
now he craves for an insight into the secret
lawe that regulate those external civcum:-


oa, vit. 1—29.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


165


3tances : he wants a philosophy or theosophy.
His desire is expressed by his imitator in the
Book of Wisdom (ix.), “ O God of iny fathers,

- - give me Wisdom, that sitteth by thy
throne.... Osend her outof thy holy heavens,
and from the throne of thy glory, that being
present she may labour with me.” But it
was far from me. It remained in the far
distance, out .of reach. Job’s experience
(xxviii.) was his. Practical rules of life he
might gain, and had mastered, but essential,
absolute wisdom was beyond mortal grasp.
Man’s knowledge and capacity are limited.

Ver. 24.—That which is far off, and ex-
ceeding deep, who can find it out? The
broken, interjectional style of the original
in this passage, as Professor Taylor Lewis
terms it, is better brought out by translat-
ing, “Far off is that which is, and deep,
deep: who can find it out?” Professor
Lewis renders, “Far off! the past, what is
it? Deep—a deep—oh, who can find ?” and
explains “the past” to mean, not merely
the earthly past historically unknown, but
the great past before the creation of the
universe, the kingdom of all eternitics with
ita ages of ages, its worlds of worlds, its
mighty evolutions, its infinite variety. We
prefer to retain the rendering, “that which
is,” and to refer the expression to the phe-
nomenal world. It is not the essence of
wisdom that is spoken of, but the facts of
man’s life and the circumstances in which
he finds himself, the course of the world,
the phenomena of nature, eto. These things
—their causes, connection, interdependence
—we cannot explain satisfactorily (comp.
ch. iii. 11; viii. 17). In the Book of Wisdom
(vii. 17—21) Solomon is supposed to have
arrived at this abstruse knowledge, “for,”
he says, “God hath given me certain know-
ledge of the things that are (ray dvtwy
yvraow a&yevd9),” and he proceeds to enume-
rate the various departments which this
“universitas literarum” has opened to him.
The Septuagint (and virtually the Vulgate)
connects this verse with the preceding, thus:
“T gaid, I will be wise, and it (arn) was far
from me, far beyond what was (uaxpay brtp
® jv), and deep depth: who shall find it
out?” (For the epithet “deep” applied to
what is recondite or what is beyond human
comprehension, comp. Prov. zx. 5; Job
xi. 8. ;

vo 25.—I applied mine heart to know;
more literally, I turned myself, and my
heart was [set] to know. We have the ex-
pression, “turned myself,” referring to a
new investigation in ch. ii. 20 and elsewhere;
but the distinguishing the heart or soul
from the man himself is not common in
Scripture (see on ch. xi. 9), though the soul
is sometimes apostrophized, as in Luke xii.
19 (comp. Pa, ciii. 1; cxlvi. 1). The writer


here implies that he gave up himsclf with
all earnestness to the investigation. Un-
satisfactory as his quest had been hitherto,
he did not relinquish the pursuit, but rather
turned it in another direction, where he
could hope to meet with useful results, The
Septuagint has, “I and my heart travelled
round (éxveAwoa) to know;” the Vulgate,
Lustravi universa animo meo ut setrem. And
to search, and to seek out wisdom. The
accumulation of synonymous verbs is meant
to emphasize the author’s devotion to his
self-imposed task and his return from profit-
less theoretical investigation to practical
inquiry. And the reason of things. Cheshbon
(ver. 27; ch. ix. 10) is rather “account,”
“reckoning,” than “reason” —the summing-
up of all the facts and circumstances rather
than the elucidation of thcir causes. Vulgate,
rationem; Septuagint, Wijdov. The next
clause ought to be rendeed, And to know
wickedness as (or, to be) folly, and foolishness
as (tobe) madness. His investigation led lim
to this conclusion, that all infringement of
God’s laws is a misjudging aberration—a
wilful desertion of the requirements of right
reason—and that mental and moral obtusee
ness is @ physical malady which may be
mt) madness (comp. ch. i. 17; ii. 12;
x. 13).

Ver. 26.—One practical result of his quest
Koheleth cannot avoid mentioning, though
it comes with a suddenness which is some
what startling, And I find more bitter than
death the woman. Tracing men’s folly and
madness to their source, he finds that they
arise generally from the seductions of the
female sex. Beginning with Adam, woman
has continued to work mischief in the world.
“ Ofthe woman came the beginuing of sin,”
says Siracides, “and through her we all die”
(Ecclus. xxv. 24); it was owing to her that
the punishment of death was infl.ctecd on
the human race. If Solomon himself were
speaking, he had indeed a bitter experience
of the sin and misery into which women
lead their victims (see 1 Kings xi. 1, 4, 11).
It may be thought that Koheleth refers here
especially to “ the strange woman” of Prov.
ii. 16, etc.; v. 3, etc.; but in ver. 28 he
speaks of the whole sex without qualifi-
cation; so that we must conclude that he
had a very low opinion of them. It is no
ideal personage whom he is introducing; it
is not a personification of vice or folly; but
woman in her totality, such as he knew her
to be in Oriental courts and homes, denied
her proper position, degraded, uneducated,
all natural affectionscrushed or undeveloped,
the plaything of her lord, to be flung aside
at any moment. It is not surprising that
Koheleth’s impression of the female sex
should be unfavourable. He is not singular
in such an opinion. One might fill a large


166


page with groverbs and gnomes uttered |
in disparagement of woman by men of
all ages and countries. Men, having the
making of such apothegms, have used their
licence unmercifully; if the maligned sex
had equal liberty, the tables might have
been reversed. But, really, in this as in
other cases the mean is the safest; and
practically those who have given the darkest
picture of women have not been slow to
recognize the brighter side. If, for instance,
the Book of Proverbs paints the adulteress
and tle harlot in the sombrest, most appal-
ting colours, the same book affords us such a
sketch of the virtuous matron as is unequal-
led for vigour, truth, and high appreciation.
And if, as in our present chapter, Koheleth
shows a bitter feeling against the evil side
of woman’s nature, he knows how to value
the comfort of married life (ch. iv. 8), and
to look upon a good wife as one who makes
a man’s home happy (ch. ix. 9). Since the 4
incarnation of our blessed Lord Jesus
Christ, “ the Seed of the woman,” we have
learned to regard woman in her true light,
and to assign her that position to which she
is entitled, giving honour unto her as the
weaker vessel, and, at the same time, heir
with us of the glorious hope and destiny of
our renewed ature (1 Pet. iii. 7). Whose
heart is snares and nets; more accurately,
who is snares, and nets in her heart;
Septuagint, “The woman who is a snare,
and her heart nets;” Vulgate, Qua laqueus
venatorum est, et sagena cor ejus. The
imagery is obvious (comp, Prov. v. 4, 22;
vii. 22; xxii.14; Hab. i. 15); the thoughts of
the evil woman’s heart are nets, occupied in
meditating how she may entrap and retain
victims; and her outward look and words
are snares that captivate the foolish. M?
trdvra yuvourd éraipiComevy, says the Son of
Sirach, “ Lest thou fall into her snares”
(Ecclus, ix. 8). Plautus, ‘ Asin.,’ i. 3, 67—


“ Auceps sum ego;
Esca est meretrix; lectus illex est; amatores
aves.”
“The fowler I;
My bait the courtesan ; her bed the lure;
The birds the lovers.”


So ancient critics, stronger m morals than
in etymology, derive Venus from venari, ‘‘to
hunt,” and aulier trom mollire, “to soften,”
or malleus, “a hammer,” because the devil
uses women to mould and fashion men to his
will. And her hands as bands. Asurim,
“bands ” or “fetters,” is found in Judg. xv.
14, where it is used of the chains with
which the men of Judah bound Samson;
it refers here to the wicked woman’s volup-
tuous embraces. "Whoso pleaseth God (more
literally, he who ts good before God) shall
escape from her. He whom God regards as


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


(on. vir. 1—29.


a —


good (ch. ii. 26, where see note) shall have
grace to avoid these seductions. But the
sinner shall be taken by her; ma, “in her,”
in the snare which is herself. In some
manuscripts of [cclesiasticus (xxvi. 23)
are these words; ‘* A wicked woman is given
as a portion to a wicked man; but a godly
woman is given to him that feareth the
Lord.”

Ver. 27.—Behold, this have I found. The
result of his search, thus forcibly introduced,
follows in ver. 28. He has carefully ex-
amined the character and conduct of both
sexes, and he is constrained to make the
unsatisfactory remark which he there puts
forth. Saith the preacher. Koheleth is here
treated as a feminine noun, being joined
with the feminine form of the verb, though
elsewhere it is grammatically regarded as
masculine (see on ch. i. 1). Many have
thought that, after speaking so disparagingly
of woman, it would be singularly inappro-
priate to introduce tle official preacher as a
female; they have therefore adopted a slight
alteration in the text, vig. nonpn 7D8 instead
of ndnp nz, which is simply the transfer-
ence of he from the end of one word to the
beginning of the next, thus adding the
article, as in ch. xii. 8, and making the term
accord with the Syriac and Arabic, and the
Septuagiut, efwey 6 ’ExxAnoiacrhs. The
writer lere introduces his own designation
in order to call special attention to what is
coming. Counting one by one. The phrase
is elliptical, and signifies, adding one thing
to another, or weighing one thing after
another, putting together various facts or
marks. To find out the account; to arrive
at the reckoning, the desired result,

Ver. 28.—Which yet my soul seeketh, but
I find not; or, which my soul hath still sought,
but I have not found. ‘The conclusion at
which he did arrive was something utterly
different from what he had hoped to achieve.
The soul and the ego are separately regarded
(comp. ver. 25); the whole intellectual
faculties were absorbed in the search, and
the composite individual gives his conse-
quent experience, One man (Adam) among
a thousand have I found. He found only
one nan among a thousand that reached his
standard of excellence—the ideal that he had
formed for himself, who could be rightly
called by the noble name of man. The
phrase, “one of a thousand,” oceurs in Job
ix. 3; xxxiii. 23; Ecclus. vi. 6 (els awd
XAiwy, ws in the Septuagint here). Adam,
the generic term, is used here instead of dsh,
the individual, to emphasize the antithetical
ishah, “ woman,” in the following clause, or
to lead the thought to the original perfection
of man’s nature, So in Greek &@pwmos ig
sometimes used for dvjp, though generally


OH. vil. 1—29.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


167


————————


the distinction between the two is sufficiently
marked, as we find in Herodotus, vii. 210,
“Ort woddol pty kvOpwma elev, bAlyor BE
&vépes. But a woman among all those have
I not found; ¢.e. not one woman in a thousand
who was what a woman ought to be. Says
the Son of Sirach, “Ail wickedness is but
little to the wickedness of a woman; let the
portion of a sinner fall upon her” (Hcelus.
xxv. 19). So the Greek guome—


OdAagoa, kal wip, xa) yuvh, cand Tpla.


*Three evils are there—sea, fire, and
woman.”


Solomon had a thousand wives and concu-
bines, and his experience might well have
been that mentioned in this passage.

Ver. 29.—Lo, this only (or, only see! this)
havelIfound. Universal corruption was that
which met his wide investigations, but of
one thing he was sure, which he proceeds to
specify —he has learned to trace the degrada-
tion to its source, not in God’s agency, but
in man’s perverse v@ll. That God hath made
man upright Kvuheleth believes that man’s
original constitution was yashar, “straight,”
“rigut,” “morally good,” and possessed of
ability to cloose and follow what was just
and 1ight (Gen. i. 26, etc.). Thus in the Book
of Wisdom (ii. 23) we read, “God created
man to be immortal, and made him an image
of his own nature (ididryjT0s). Nevertheless,
through envy of the devil, came death into
the world, ani they that are his portion
tempt it.” But they (men) have sought out
many inventions (chishshebonoth); 2 Chron,
xxvi. 15, where the term implies works of
invention, and is translated “ engines,” #.e.
devices, ways of going astray and deviating
from original righteousness. Man has thus
abased his free-will, and employed the
inventive faculty with which he was en-
dowed in excogitating evil (Gen. vi. 5).
How this state of things came about, how


—< —


the originally good man became (hua
wicked, the writer does not tell. He
knows from revelation that God made him
upright; he knows from experience that he
is now evil; and he leaves the matter there,
Plumptre quotes, as illustrating our text,
& passage from the ‘ Antigone’ of Sophocles,
vers, 332, 365, 366, which he renders—


“ Many the things that strange and wondrous
are,
None stranger and more wonderful than
man....
And lo, with all this skill,
Wise and inventive still,
Beyond liope’s dream,
He now to good inclines,
And now to ill.”


We may add Aschylus, ‘Choeph..” vera,
585, etc.—


TIoAAG pév ya tpépes
dewd Semdrwv uxn. +
GAN bwéproApoy ay-
Spds ppdvnua tls Acyoug


“ Many fcarful plagues
Earth nourishes .. .
But man’s audacious spirit
Who can tell?”


Horace, ‘Carm.,’ i. 3. 25—


“ Audax omnia perpeti
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.”


“ The race of man, bold all things to endure,
Hurries undaunted to forbidden crime.”


Vulgate, Ht ipse se infinitis miscuertt ques-
tionibus, “And he entangled himself in
multitudinous questions.” This refers to
unhallowed curiosity and speculation; but,
as we have seen, the passage is concerned
with man’s moral declension, declaring
how his “devices” lead him away from
“ uprightness.”


HOMILETICS,


Ver. 1.—A good name better than precious ointment. I. More vIrFicuLT oF
acquisition. Money will buy the “good nard,” but the cost of a “good name” is
beyond rubies, This which cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed
for the price thereof, can be secured only by laborious persvunal exercise in goodness,
always smiled on by Heaven’s favour and assisted by Heaven’s grace. It is the flower,
fruit, and fragrance of a soul long practised in well-l'ving and good-doing. Tf, there-
fore, things are valuable in proportion to the cost of obtaining them, the above
proverbial utterance bears the stamp of truth. ; ma

Il. More HONOURABLE IN possession. It is: 1. An article of greater value in ttself.
Precious ointment is, after all, only a production of the earth; whereas a good pame is
@ spiritual aroma proceeding from the soul. 2. An index of truer wealth, Precious
ointment at the best is material riches; a good name proclaims one possessed of richea
which are spiritual. 8, 4 mark of higher dignity. Costly unguent a sign of social


168 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cx. vi. 1—29.


a


rank among the children of men ; a good name attests that one has qualities of soul, of
mind, heart, and disposition, proclaiming him a son of God and a peer of heaven.

II]. Mor® savisFYING IN ENJOYMENT. Perfumed oil may yield a pleasant fragrance
which gratifies the sense of smell and revives the body’s vigour; the spiritual aroma
of a good name not only diffuses happiness amongst those who come to hear of it, but
imparts a sweet joy, holy and refreshing, to him who bears it.

IV. More DIFFUSIVE IN INFLUENCE. The odour of precious ointment extends to
those in its immediate vicinity; the savour of a good name goes far and wide, often
pervades the community in which the owner of it lives; sometimes, as in the instance
of Mary of Bethany (Mark xiv. 9), spreads itself abroad through the whole worlu.

V. More ENDURING IN conTINUANCE. The fragrance of the unguent ultimately
ceases. Becoming feebler the longer it is exposed to the air and the wider it diffuses
itself, it ultimately dies away. The savour of a good name never perishes (Ps. cxii. 6).
It passes on from age to age, being handed down by affectionate tradition to succeed-
ing, frequently to latest, generations. Witness the names of Noah, the preacher of
righteousness; Abraham, the father of the faithful; Moses, the law-giver of Israel ;
David, the sweet singer of the Hebrew Church ; John, the beloved disciple; Peter, the
man of rock; Paul, the Apostle of the Gentiles; with names like those of Polycarp,
Cyprian, Origen, Athanasius, Augustine, Chrysostom, Luther, Calvin, Knox, ete.

VI. More BLESSED IN ITs IssuB. Precious ointment can only secure for one
entrance into earthly circles of rank and fashion; a good name will procure for him
who bears it admission into the society of Heaven’s peerage.

Lessons. 1. Seek this good nane. 2. Cherish it above all earthly distinctions.
3. Guard it from getting tarnished. 4. Walk worthy of it.


Ver. 1.—The day of death and the day of birth. I. The latter begins a life at the
longest brief (Ps. xc. 10); the former a life which shall never end (Luke xx. 386).

II. The latter ushers into a field of toil (Ps. civ. 23); the former into a home of rest
(Rev. xiv. 13).

III. The latter admits into a scene of suffering (Job v. 7; xiv. 1); the former into
a realm of felicity (Rev. vii. 16).

IV. The latter introduces a life of sin (Gen. viii. 21; Job xiv. 4; Ps. li. 5; lviii. 3;
Rom. v. 12); the former an existence of holiness (Jude 24; Rev. xxi. 27).

V. The latter opens a state of condemnation (Rom. v. 18); the former a state of
glory (2 Cor. iv. 17).

Lessons. 1. The secret of living well—keeping an eye on the day of one’s death
(Deut. xxxii. 29; Ps, xc. 12). 2. The secret of dying happily—living in the fear of
God (Acts xiii. 836; Phil. i. 21),


Vers. 2—6.— The house of mourning and the house of feasting. I. THe HOUSE OF
MOURNING A DIVINE INSTITUTION; THE HOUSE OF FEASTING AN ERECTION OF MAN. 1,
The house of mourning a Divine institution. Though not true that “man was made
to mourn” (Burns) in the sense that the Creator originally intended human experience
on the earth to be one prolonged wail of sorrow, it is nevertheless certain that days of
mourning, equally with days of death—and, indeed, just because of these—come to all
by Heaven’s decree. As no one of woman born can elude bereavement in some shape
or form, so must every one in turn make acquaintance with the house of mourning.
Hence mourning for departed relatives (Gen. xxiii. 2; xxvii. 41; 1.4; Numb. xx. 29;
Deut. xxxiv. 8; 2 Sam, xi. 27) has not only been a universal custom among mankind,
but has commended itself to men’s judgments as in perfect accordance with the divinely
implanted instincts of human nature. To mourn for the dead in becoming manner is
something more than to array one’s self in “customary suits of solemn black,” to affect
the “windy suspiration of forced breath,” with “the fruitful river in the eye,” or to
put on “the dejected *haviour of the visage, together with all forms, modes, shapes of
grief,” which are at best only the outward “ trappings and suits of woe” (Shakespeare,
‘Hamlet,’ act i. sc. 2); it is more even chan to utter selfish lamentations over one’s
own loss in being deprived of the society of the departed, sighing like the psalmist,
“ Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness ”
Ps, Ixxxviii. 18); it is to bewail their abstraction from the light of heaven and the


OH. viL. 1—29.]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 169


love of friends, saying, “ Alas, my brother!” (1 Kings xiii. 30; the grief of Constance
for her son: cf. ‘King John,’ act iii. sc. 4), though sorrow on this account is greatly
tempered by the consolations of the gospel in respect of Christians (2 Thess. iv. 18);
it is to express the heart’s affection for those who have been removed from its embrace,
like Rachel weeping for her children, and refusing to be comforted because they were
not (Matt. ii. 18); it is even to pay a tribute of gratitude to God for the temporary
loan of the precious gift he has withdrawn, as Job did when he lamented his dead sons
and daughters (i. 21)—to record appreciation of its worth, and seek, if not its immediate
return, its safe keeping till a future day, when they who have been severed here shall
be reunited in immortal love. Hence it is easy to perceive how the house of mourning
may be fitly spoken o! as a house of Divine appointment. 2. The house of feasting a
purely human institution. Not that feasting and dancing, considered in themselves,
are sinful, or that there are not times and seasons when both may be indulged in
without sin. Many such occasions may be found in actual life, as eg. in connection
with birthdays (Gen. xl. 20), marriages (Gen. xxix. 22; John ii. 1), and funerals
(Deut. xxvi. 14; Job xlii. 11; Jer. xvi. 7; Ezek. xxiv. 17; Hos. ix. 4), with family
rejoicings of other sorts and for other reasons. But the “house of feasting,” contrasted
with the abode of sorrow, is the tent of carousal, in which wine and wassail, song and
dance, mirth and revelry, prevail without moderation, and with no other end in view
than the gratification of sinful appetite. Such-like gatherings, having no sanction
from Heaven, may be spoken of as instituted by man rather than as appointed by God.

II. ‘THE HOUSE OF MOURNING FREQUENTED BY THE WISE; THE HOUSE OF FEASTING
ATTENDED BY FOOLS. 1. The heart of the wise in the house of mourning. The wise
are the good, serious, devout, religious, as distinguished from the wicked, frivolous,
profane, and irreligious, The hearts of the wise are in the house of mourning, “ even
when their bodies are absent;” “ they are constantly or very frequently meditating
upon sad and serious things” (Poole); “they are much conversant with mournful
subjects” (Henry); and as often as occasion offers and duty calls, they repair to the
scene of sorrow and chamber of bereavement to sympathize with and comfort its
inmates, as Job’s friends did with him (Job ii. 11), and Mary’s with her (John xi. 19),
recognizing it to be their duty to “weep with them that weep,” as well as to “ rejoice
with them that do rejoice” (Rom. xii. 15); and even on their own accounts to learn
the wisdom which such a scene is fitted toimpart. 2. The heart of fools in the house
of mirth. To this they are attracted on the principle that “like draws to like "—the
same principle that constrains the wise to repair to the house of mourning, and by the
gratification there found for their folly, in the langhter which there provokes their
mirth, and the revelry which there slakes their longing for self-indulgence.

Il. THE HOUSE OF MOURNING A SCHOOL OF WISDOM; THE HOUSE OF FEASTING A
BCHOOL OF FOLLY. 1. The lessons taught by the house of mourning. (1) The certainty
of death for the wise man himself and for all others. What he sees in the chamber
of bereavement is “the end of all men,” the end to which all the bravery and glory
of all men must eventually come (2 Sam, xiv. 14; Ps. Ixxxix. 48; Isa. xl. 7; Heb,
ix. 27), the final scene also in his own swiftly fleeting life (Ps. xxxix. 4); and so
while he lives he lays it to heart, considers his end, numbers his days, and applies his
soul unto wisdom (Deut. xxxii. 29; Ps. xc.12), (2) The vanity of all earthly things,
and especially of pleasure and frivolity. The “song of fools,” whether the bacchanalian
carol, the obscene ballad, the comic ditty, or the amorous sonnet, grates with harshness
and pain upon his ear, while the laughter it evokes is like the crackling of thorns
under a pot, or of nettles under kettles, noisy, short-lived, evanescent, and profitless,
leaving nothing behind but ashes (Isa. xliv. 20), a bad taste in the mouth, a pain in
the ear, a taint upon the conscience, a wound in the heart. (3) The duty and sweet-
ness of sympathy—duty for him and sweetness for the bereaved. Weeping with them
that weep (Rom. xii. 15), he learns how to bear another’s burdens (Gal. vi. 2),
appreciates the inward satisfaction which flows from the exercise of sympathy (Prov.
xi. 17), sees the sustaining strength it yields to the weak and disconsolate (Prov. Xvii.
17), and thus has his own soul confirmed and enlarged in goodness, “ Sorrow, says
Delitszch, “penetrates the heart, draws the thought upward, purifies, transforms; ’
and thus, as the Preacher observes, “by the sorrow of the countenance the heart is
made better.” (4) The value of serious talk. The discourse that prevails in the


'


170 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on, vi. 1—29%


a


house of mourning is fitted to improve the serious listener. Should it sometimes lay
rebukes upon one’s spirit, these are felt to be better from a moral and spiritual point
of view than the low and grovelling, frequently prurient and obscene, sougs that in
the Preacher’s day were heard, as in our day they are not unknown, in a pothouse.
2. The proficiency acquired in the house of feasting. By no means in wisdom, either
human or Divine. One will hardly assert that a person will become shrewder in
business or brighter in intelligence by indulging in chambering and wantonness; it is
certain he will not grow either holier or more spiritually minded. Whatever apologies
may be offered for frequenting carousals—innocent feasting requires none—this cannot
be urged, that it tends to make one purer in heart or devouter in spirit, incites one to |
holy living, or prepares one for happy dying. Rather, the instruction received in such


-haunts of dissipation is for the most part instruction in vice, or at the best in frivolity—


@ poor accomplishment for a man with a soul.


Vers. 7—10.—Counsels for evil times. 1, THE WRONG WAY OF BEHAVIOUR UNDER
OPPRESSION. 1. Allowing it to unsettle one's judgment. “Surely oppression,” or extor-
tion, “ maketh a wise man mad,” or foolish; ie. driveth him to foolish actions through
indignation and vexation, through the misery he endures, the hardship he suffers, the
sense of injustice he feels, the rising doubts of which he is couscious. A soul thus
driven to the wall and set at bay through the woes inflicted by imperious and pitiless
tyranny, is prone to be unsettled in its judgments, fierce and even reckless in its
actions. Of course, no amount of oppression or extortion should have this effect on
any; but it sometimes has. 2. Attempting to remove it by bribery. “And a gift
destroyeth the understanding.” Equally of him that gives and him that receives a
bribe is the saying true, that it perverts the judgment, disturbs the soul’s perceptions
of right and wrong, and leaves a blot upon the conscience. To seek tle removal of
oppression by currying favour with the oppressor throuh presentation of gifts, is to
seek a right thing in a wrong way, and is to that extent to be condemned. 3,
Indulging in anger on account of it. “Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry.”
Whether this anger be directed against the oppressor or asaiust the oppression, or
against God’s providence, who has suffered both to come together aud co-operate against
the wise man, to give way to it is to part with one’s wisdom, since “anger resteth in
the bosom of fools,” if it is not also (in the last case it is) to sin against God. It is
always difficult to be angry and sin not (Ps. iv. 4, margin; Eph. iv. 26); hence
Christians are exhorted not to be soon angry (Titus i. 7), indeed, to put off (Col. iii, 8)
and put away (Eph. iv. 31) anger, as one of the works of the flesh (Gal. v. 20). 4.
Giving way to despair because of it. Saying in one’s heart that “the former days were
better than these,” and that all things are goiny to the bad. The Preacher pretty
plainly hints that such a sentiment is an error, and yet it is one widely entertained by
the ignorant and prone to be adopted by the unfortunate,

II. THE BIGHT WAY OF BEHAVING UNDER OPPRESSION. 1, Permitting the evil to avenge
ttself on tts perpetrator. This it will do, if the propositions be correct that oppression
practised even by a wise man will make him mad, and tliat a bribe accepted by a good
man will corrupt his heart and destroy his understanding. “The oppressive exercise of
power is so demoralizing that even the wise man, skilled in statecraft, loses his wisdom.
There comes upon him, as the history of crime so olten shows, something like a menia
of tyrannous cruelty. And the same effect follows on the practice of corruption”
(Plumptre). 2, Reflecting that the evil will not continue for ever. It will run its
course, have its day, and come to an end as other evil things have done before it; and
“better will its end be than its beginning.” In the course of history this has often
been observed, that seasons of oppression and periods of persecution have not been
suffered to continue for ever, and have often been terminated (by some sudden turn in
providence, by the death of the oppressor, or by a change of purpose in the persecutor)
sooner than the victims expected. 3. Hwercising putience while the evil day continues.
“ Better is the patient in spirit than the proua in spirit,” better in respect of moral
character and religious profiting, Philosophy and religion both teach that the way to
rise superior to injustice and oppression, to extract the largest amount of profiting from
it, and to bring it most speedily to an end, is to meckly endure it. Patience disarma
the oppressor of his strongest weapon, and imparts to his victim double advantage over


a = —-


ox, wa. 1—29.] ECOLESIASTES; 9R, THE PREACHER. 171


his foe. Without patience tribulation cannot work out the soul’s good (Rom. v. 3;
Jas.i.4), 4. Cherishing a hopeful spirit in the darkest times. Not despairing of the
future either for one’s self or for the world, but believing that all things work together
for good to them that love God, and that through evil times as well as good times the
world is slowly but surely moving on towards a better day.

Lessons. 1. Neyer oppress, 2, Cultivate meckness. 3, Be hopeful.

VA Stipe CG Geto fe

Ver. 8.—The end better than the beginning, I. THE IMPORT OF THE PROVERB
STATED. Not always true that the end of a thing is better than the beginning,
Whether it is so depends largely on what the thing is, upon the character of its
beginning and the nature of its end. 1. Cases in which the maxim will not apply.
C) Evil projects which reach their consummation ; as eg. the temptation of Eve by

atan (Gen. iii. 1, etc.), the wrath of Cain against Abel (Gen. iv. 8), the design of
David against Uriah and Bathsheba (2 Sam. xi. 2—24), the murder of Naboth by
Jezebel (1 Kings xxi. 14), the seduction of a youth by the strange woman (Prov.Av. 3,
4). (2) Undertakings which, though good, nevertheless fail to succeed; as eg. the
journey of Jacob and his sons to Egypt, which commenced in gladness and ended in
bondage and oppression (Gen. xlvi. 5,6; Exod. i. 18); the voyage of the corn-ship of
Alexandria which carried Paul, and which, though it left the Fair Havens with a soft
south wind, was not long after caught by a tempestuous Euroclydon and wrecked on
the island of Malta (Acts xxvii. 13, 14). (3) Works and lives which appear promising
at the outset, but terminate in disappointment and disaster; as eg. the kingship of
Saul (1 Sam. x. 24; xxxi. 6), the apostleship of Judas (Matt. x. 4; xxvi. 14—16),
the adventure of the prodigal (Luke xv. 11—16), the ministry of Demas (2 Tim. iv. 1


2. Cases in which the maxim will apply. (1) Evil_projects-when they are defeated; _


as ¢.g. that of Satan to ruin man, which was cOtnter-worked by Christ’s mission to
effect man’s salvation (Heb. ii. 14,15); or that of the same adversary to overthrow
Job’s faith and allegiance, which was overcome by Job’s constancy and trust (Job xiii.
12); that of Haman to exterminate the Jews, which the skilfulness of Mordecai and
Esther (Esth. viii. 7, 8) thwarted ; and that of the Jews to assassinate Paul, which the tact
of his sister’s son (Acts xxiii. 16—31) enabled him toescape; that of the Spanish Armada
to overthrow the Protestantism of England, and that of St. Bartholomew’s Day to crush
the Huguenots in France. (2) Quod undertakings when successfully completed; as
e.g. the building of Noah’s ark to save himself and family from the Flood (Gen. vi. 22);
and of Solomon’s temple for the worship of Jehovah (1 Kings vi. 37, 88); the emanci-
pation of Israel from Egypt under the leadership of Moses (Exod. xii. 51; xiv.81); and
afterwards from Babylon under that of Zerubbabel (Ezra i. 11); the work of human
redemption which Christ completed on the cross (John xix. 30), and the life of a good
man who dies in the faith (2 ‘lim. iv. 6—8).

II. THe TRUTH OF THE PROVERB JUSTIFIED. Of things to which the maxim will
apply. 1. The beginnings are attended with anvieties and fears as to ultimate success ;
while from all such the endings are delivered As no man can foretell what a day may
bring forth, or provide against all possible contingencies, no one can calculate with
absolute certainty that any scheme of his contriving will attain to success. Man pro-
poses, but God disposes. When, however, success has been attained there is manifestly
no further groun or room for apprehension. 2. The beginnings have periods of labour
before them; while the endings have all such periods behind them. Not that labour is a
bad thing, but that labour accomplished is better to contemplate than labour not yet
attempted. Inthe former case failure is impossible; in the latter case it is still possible.
In the latter, energy, thought, care, have still to be expended; in the former these are
no more demanded. Instead of toil, there is repose; instead of peril, safety; instead of
anxiety, peace. 3. The beginnings are times of preparation, of effort, and of laying
out, while the endings are seasons of fulfilment, of reward, and of gathering in,
Examples will be found in the reaping of a harvest in autumn as contrasted with its
sowing in spring, the completion of a house as distinguished from its foundation-laying,
the collection of ‘profits from a fortunate speculation or investment in business,
the gaining of distinction in learning after a long course of diligent study, the
attainment of the “ exceeding, even an eternal, weight of glory” at the close of a life
of faith.


172 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [cx. vir. 1—29,


—_————————————————————————— ee 00


Lessons. 1. A stimulus to diligence, 2, An argument for patience. 8, A caution
against rashness.


Ver. 10.—“* The good old times”—a popular delusion, I. THE DELUSION STATED.
“That the former days were better than these.” The proposition may be understood
as applying: 1. To individual experience, in which case it will signify tuat the former
days of the speaker’s life were better than those in which he then was. Or: 2. To
mundane history, in which case the sense will be that the earlier periods of the world’s
history were better than the later, or that the times which preceded the speaker’s day
were better than those in which he was living.

Il. THE DELUSION EXEMPLIFIED. 1. From sacred history. (1) As to individual
experience. Job was neither the first nor the last who cried, “Oh that I were as in
months past!” (Job xxix. 2). Probably Jacob was in a similar mood of mind when he
heard of Simeon’s detention in Egypt, and of Judah’s proposal to take Benjamin (Gen.
xlii. 86; xliii. 14), The old men who wept at the foundation of the second temple
certainly believed that the days when as yet the first temple stood were incomparably
more resplendent than those in which they then lived (Ezra iii. 12). (2) As tu world-
epochs. To many of the Sethites, no doubt, in the antediluvian era, “ the days of old,”
when man lived in innocence in Eden, were regarded as better than those in which
their lot had fallen when all flesh had corrupted its way (Gen. vi. 12). ‘lo not a few
in the days of the judges and of the kings it seemed as if “ the years of ancient times,”
and “of the right hand of the Most High,” when he brought forth the bondmen of
Pharaoh from Egypt, were the glorious days of Israel as a nation (Ps. lxxvii. 5, 10).
To the exiles who had returned from Babylon, the golden age of their country was
behind them in the days of David and Solomon, -not before them in the era of Persian
domination. 2. From profane history. “Illustrations crowd upon one’s memory.
Greeks looking back to the age of those who fought at Marathon; Romans under the
empire recalling the vanished greatness of the republic; Freichmen mourning over the
ancien réyime; or Englishmen over the good old days of the ‘l'udors, are all examples
of this unwisdom” (Plumptre). Old men regretting the vanished days of their boyhood,
or once rich but now poor men lamenting the disappearance of wealth which was
theirs, or fallen great men sighing for the times when they were called “ My lord!” are
individual instances of this same delusion.

III. THE DELUSION EXPLAINED. Two things account for this widespread delusion
as to the relative values of the past and present. 1. An instinctive idealization of the
past. (1) The good things of the past, which one has either never known at all or
counted only moderately good when he did know them, he now esteems as supremely
excellent, on the principle that “distance lends enchantment. to the view.” (2) The
bad things of the past, which he complained of when he endured them, he has now
through lapse of time largely forgotten; while if the bad things of the past were such
as he never himself experienced but has only heard or read of, these are not likely to
press him down so heavily as the lesser present evils under which he groans. 2. An
equally instinctive depreciation of the present. (1) Its good things are never so sweet
as some other good things which we have not, or which other people had. As the
possession of pleasure is seldom so intoxicating as its pursuit, so is that which one has
never 80 valuable as that which one once had or may yet have. (2) Its evil things
being present always appear woree, é.e. heavier, than they really are. ‘They are felt
more acutely and oppress more severely than either the ills of other people one has
never felt, or one’s own ills in the past which have been forgotten.

IV. THE DELUSION DISPROVED. The false judgment rests upon two foundations,
1. A mistaken standard. If “better” only means in the case of the individual “ more
free from anxiety, pain, or difficulty,” or in the case of communities or nations
“more free from wars, troubles, revolutions, or social disturbances, the proposition
complained of may be easily established ; but if “ better” signify more advantageous
in the highest sense, z.e. more helpful to and beneficial for moral and spiritual good
it will frequently be found that the proposition is false, and that for individuals
for instance, times of present trouble and seasons of present affliction may be better
than past times of quiet and seasons of prosperity, and for communities and nations

periods of social upheaval and foreign war better than antecedent days of stagnation


og. vi. 1—29.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 178
See ee


and civil death. 2. An incomplete comparison. It is commonly forgotten that each
age has a dark as well as bright side, and that in estimating the worth of two different
periods in the experience of an individual or the history of a nation, it will not do to
contrast the dark side of the present with the bright side of the past, but the dark and
bright sides of both must be brought into view.

Lessons. 1, The duty of man in evil times, submission rather than complaining,
2. The wisdom of trying to make the best of the present instead of dreaming about
the past. 3. The certainty that the most careful calculations concerning the relative
values of past and present are tainted with error.


Vers. 11, 12.— Wisdom and wealth. I. Tae GREAT POWER OF WEALTH. 1, Wha?
tt cannot do. (1) Purchase salvation for the soul (Ps, xlix. 6,7). (2) Impart happi-
ness to the mind (Luke xii. 15). (8) Secure health for the body (2 Kings v.1; Luke
xvi. 22). 2. What it can do. (1) Defend the body against want and disease, at least
partially. (2) Protect the mind against ignorance and error, also again to a limited
extent. (3) Shield the heart, once more in a measure, from such anxieties as spring
from material causes.

I. THE GREATER POWER OF wisdom. 1. Jt can do things that wealth can. Nay,
without it wealth can effect little. (1) It can often do much without wealth to avert
want and disease from the body. (2) It can effectually dispel from the mind the
clouds of ignorance and error. (3) It can help to keep anxiety altogether from the
heart, to sustain the heart in bearing it when it does come, and to direct the heart
how most speedily and effectually to get rid of it, 2. It can do things that wealth
cannot. It—in its highest form, the fear of the Lord (ch. xii. 13; Ps. cxi. 10; Job
xxviii. 28), the wisdom of God (1 Cor. ii. 7), the wisdom which is from above (Jas.
iii. 17), the wisdom which consists in believing on Christ, loving God, living in the
Spirit, walking in love, and following holiness—can “ preserve the life of him that
hath it:” (1) the soul’s life, by imparting to it the gift of God, which is eternal life;
(2) the mind’s life, by flooding it with the light of truth; and (8) the body’s life, by
communicating to it here on earth length of days (the first rule of health being to
fear God and keep his commandments), and by restoring it at the resurrection to a
condition of immortality.

Lessons. 1. The superiority of wisdom. 2. The duty of preferring it to wealth.


Vers. 18, 14.—Crooked things and straight. I. ComMposE THE TEXTURE OF HUMAN
LIFE. 1. Crooked things. Such experiences, events, and dispensations as run counter
or lie cross to the inclinations, as e.g. afflictions, disappointments, and trials of all
sorts. Few lives, if any, are exempt from crosses; few estates are so good as to have
no drawbacks. Examples: Abraham (Gen. xv. 2, 3), Naaman (2 Kings v. 1), Haman
(Esth. v. 18), Paul (2 Cor. xii. 7). 2. Straight things. Such experiences as har-
monize with the soul’s wishes, as e.g. seasons of prosperity, dispensations of good, and
enjoyments of every kind; and, as nobody’s lot on earth is entirely straight, so on the
other hand no one’s lot is wholly crooked—“ there are always some straight and even
parts in it.” ‘“ Indeed, when men’s passions, having got up, have cast a mist over their
minds, they are ready to say all is wrong with them and nothing right; yet is that
never true in this world, since (always) it ts of the Lord’s mercies that we are not
consumed (Lam. iii. 22)” (Boston).

Il. ProckeD FROM THE HAND oF Gop. Neither come by accident or from second
causes, but from him “of whom, to whom, and through whom are all things” (Rom.
xi, 836; 2 Cor. v.18; Heb. ii. 10). 1. True of straight things. “ Every good gift and
every perfect is from above” (Jas. i. 17). Saint and sinner alike depend on the
providential bounty of God (Ps. exxxvi. 25), who appointeth to all men the bounds of
their habitation (Acts xvii. 26) and measureth out their lots (Isa, xxxiv. 17; Jer.
xiii. 25). So elementary is this truth that it needs no demonstration; yet is it so
familiar as to be frequently forgotten. 2. No less correct of crooked things. These
also are from God (2 Kings vi. 33; Amos iii. 6; Micah i, 12). It is he who lays
affliction on the loins of men (Ps. Ixvi. 11), distributes sorrows in his anger (Job
xxi. 17), shows great and sore troubles ce Ixxi. 20), lifts up and casts down (Ps.
cii. 10), wounds and heals, kills and makes alive (Deut. xxxii. 39). The Preacher


174 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [ou. vm. 1—29,


recognizes God’s hand in introducing crooked things into men’s lots; in this all should
follow his example.

11], DemanD DIVERSE TREATMENT FROM THE INDIVIDUAL. 1. Straight things eall
for cheerfulness, ‘In the day of prosperity be joyful,” “ be in good spirits,” be thank-
fully happy and happily thankful. (1) Gratitude, an element in that treatment God’s
goodness calls for (Ps. ciii. 1, 2). Every creature of God is good if it be received with
thanksgiving (1 Tim. iv. 4); (2) Use, another ingredient in a proper return for God’s
gifts. ‘These are not to bedespised and shunned, but valued and enjoyed. Asceticism,
or voluntary abstinence from meats and drinks, as if these were sinful, harmonizes
not with the spirit of either the Old (ch. ix. 7) or the New Testament (Col. ii. 20—23)
religion. If permissible under the latter as a means of spiritual discipline (1 Cor.
ix, 27), or as an expedient for preventing sin in others (Rom. xiv. 21), it should not
be forgotten that God “giveth us all things richly to enjoy” (1 Tim. vi.17), 2. Crooked
things demand consideration. “In the day of adversity consider:” (1) Whence
adversity comes, viz. from God (Lam. iii. 32; Job ii. 10). Hence should it be accepted
with submission (1 Sam. iii. 18; Job ii. 10; Ps, xxxix. 9), (2) How adversity comes,
Not as a strange thing, t.e. allotted in an exceptional way to the individual (1 Pet.
iv. 12), but rather as an experience common among men (1 Cor, x. 13; 1 Pet, v. 9).
Not as an isolated thing, unmixed with good or untempered with mercy (Ps. ci. 1).
Not as a constant thing, as if life were a-perpetual calamity (Job xxii. 18). Not as
an arbitrary thing, as if the sovereign Disposer of events acted without reason in
sending troubles upon men (Lam. iii, 838; Heb. xii, 10). Certainly not as a malignant
thing, as if the Almighty took pleasure in the sufferings and miseries of his creatures
(Lam. iii, 33; Heb. xii. 10), (3) Why adversity comes; because of man’s sinfulness,
though not always in each instance connected with some particular offence. (4)
Wherefore adversity comes; to fulfil the Divine purpose concerning man, which is
not one, but manifold (Job xxxiii. 29).

IV. ComBINE To SERVE A LOFTY PURPOSE, ‘“ God hath even made the one side by
side with the other, to the end that man shonld not find out anything that shall be
after him.” The Almighty’s design variously explained. 1. Unlikely interpretations.
(1) That God, willing man to be rid of all things at death instead of punishing him
hereafter, puts evil into his existence here, and allows it to alternate with good
(Hitzig). This does not harmonize with the Preacher’s doctrine of a future ‘adgment
(ch, ix. 9; xii. 14), and is ruled out of court by the general scope of the New ‘Testa-
ment, (2) ‘That man might find nothing which he, dying, might take with him intn
the unseen world (Ewald). But this end is secured by death (ch. v. 15), and if more
were needed would have been more effectually attained by making man’s Jot on earth
all adversity and no prosperity, rather than a commineling of the two; while if the
proposed interpretation explains the presence of evil alongside of good, it leaves
unaccounted for the existence of good alongside of evil in man’s lot. (8) That man
might pass through the whole school of life, so that on departing from this scene
nothing might remain outstaudiny (in arrears) which he had not experienced
(Delitzsch). This seems equivalent to saying that God commingles joy and sorrow in
man’s experience that man might have a taste of both—which sounds like a truism—
or that his discipline might be complete by being subjected to both, so that aothing
more should be possible to or required by him in a future state to render him
responsible—which, though true, indicates a clearness and fulness of theological
conception manifestly beyond the Preacher. (4) That no one coming atter God by
way of review should be able to find anything of blame to cast on his procedure (Mer-
cator, Poole, Fausset); which, though undeniable, is not warranted by a just transla-
tion of the Hebrew, 2. Likely interpretations, (1) That the alternation of prosperous
and adverse dispensations was designed to prevent man from fin ling out the course of
future events; in other words, that man should never be able certainly to predict his
own future, or even what should be on the morrow (Zickler, Hengstenberg), and
therefore should be disposed to trust in God and calmly wait the development of
events; with which teaching may be compared Christ’s about taking no thought for
the morrow (Matt, vi. 34), and that of Horace (‘ Odes,’ iii, 29. 29—38).

“God in his wisdom hides from sight,
Veiled in impenetrable night,
The future chance and change;


os A ag


ox, vit. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 176
ET


And smiles when mortals’ anxious fears,
~~ Forecasting ills of coming years,
Beyond their limit range.”
(Plumptre, én loco.)

The continuity of human experience is not so unbroken that mortal sagacity, at its
highest, can forecast the incidents of even the nearest day. (2) That no man should
be ab'e to tell precisely what might come to pass on earth after he had left it
(Plumptre), a thought already expressed (ch. vi. 12), of which the practical outcome
is the same as that just stated, viz. that as the Divine Being desired to keep the times
and seasons in his own hand, he mingled crooked things and straight in man’s experi-
ence, that nan should not be able to guess with certainty at what was coming, and
might accordingly be impelled to lead a life of sobriety and watchfulness (Prov. iv. 23,
25, 26; Matt. xxv. 13; Luke xii. 15, 35—40). (3) That man might not be able by
all his cogitations on the present scene to find out the lot either of himself or of
mankind generally in a future state (Wright); and unquestionably this is true that
without the gospel the whole subject of a future state for man would be, if not an
insoluble enigma, at least a darkly veiled mystery. A consideration of man’s experi-
ences on earth would so little guide to accurate knowledge of what his experiences
beyond the grave should be, that to thoughtful minds they might rather seem to
have been constructed for the very purpose of bafiling curiosity on that alluring
theme.

Learn: 1. That crooked things may sometimes be better than straight. 2. That
men should not always ask the crooked things in their lot to be straightened. 3, That
straight things alone might often prove hurtful.


Vers. 15—18.— Nothing in excess; or,a cation against extremes. I. IN INTERPRET-
ING THE WAYs OF PRroviDENCE. 1. As fo the perishing of a fust man tn his righteous-
ness. Because, though it may sometimes happen that a just or good man loses his
life in his righteousness, it does not follow (1) that all just or good men must necessarily
lose their lives—which, considering the natural infirmity of the human heart, would
certainly prove a check to the progress of righteousness. Or (2) that though good
men perish in their righteousness, they also perish because of their righteousness—which
would be asserting that God loved iniquity and hated righteousness, the exact reverse
of the truth (Deut. xxxii. 4; Job xxxiv. 10; Ps. xi. 7). Or (3) that therefore being
just is not a wise, or doing righteousness a good, thing—which would be constituting
temporal success or material prosperity the stan’ard of moral right, and adversity the
test of moral wrong. Or (4) that just men should not persevere in their righteousness,
even though they should perish temporally, since he that loseth his life for righteous-
ness’ sake shall find it unto life eternal (Matt. xvi. 25). Or (5) that the just man may
not sometimes be to blame for his own perishing by proceeding to excess in the
performance of things in themselves righteous (see below). 2. As to the prolonging of
a wicked man’s life in (or in spite of) his evil doing. From this it must not be inferred
either (1) that under the moral government of God wickedness has a greater
tendency to prolong life than virtue, because the opposite of this is the case (Ps, xxxiv.
12—14; lv. 23). Or (2) that wickedness is not therefore an evil because it occasionally,
or even freqnently, appears to be rewarded with long life; because no amount or
degree of pro-perity can ever render sin the same as holiness, or make it less the
abominable thing which God hates. Or (3) that wicked men have the best of life
because they do not perish prematurely, but rather often live long and become old
and mighty in power (Job xxi. 7); because through their wickedness they are
separated even here from him who is the Source of all true felicity (Isa. lix. 2), Or
(4) that wicked men will not one day be recompensed for their wickedness, although
God may permit them through a long life to sin with impunity ; because it is written
that “destruction shall be to the workers of iniquity” (Prov. x. 29). In either of
these directions it is possible for one, by not observing the limits of just judgment, to
go astray in interpreting the ways of God. .

Il. In REGULATING THE conpDUCT oF LIFE. 1. In respect of righteousness. ‘Be not
righteous overmuch; neither make thyself overwise” (ver. 16). (1) The Preacher
cannot be supposed to teach that one may be too holy or too ardent in pursuit of


176 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PIEACHER.  [cn. em, 1—29.


righteousness. That seems inadmissible in the case of one whose standpoint was that
of the Old Testament—that religion signified the worship of a holy God (Lev. xix. 2),
and righteousness a keeping of that holy God’s commandments. Hence if this
righteousness could always receive from man a pure expression, it would be simply
inconceivable that it should ever be too much in the estimation of Heaven—though it
might be too much for the safety of the indivilual performing or expressing it, and
through exciting the world’s hostility might lead to his destruction. But man’s
expression of righteousness is never absolutely perfect, but always tainted with defect,
and often one-sided, if not insincere and formal. Hence (2) the Preacher may have
meant it was possible to push to excess the doing of purely external righteousness
simply as an opus operatum, and, in doing so under the impression that such was the
way to happiness and salvation, to exercise wisdom beyond measure; because no
amount of such righteousness and wisdom could (in his estimation) conduct a soul to
peace and felicity; but ratler the more a soul pushed these to excess, the more inwardly
torpid, lifeless, benumbed, and disordered would it become, till eventually it should
land the soul in spiritual, if not the body also in temporal, ruin. 2. In respect of
wickedness. “Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish” (ver. 17). Here,
again, it cannot be supposed the Preacher teaches the permissibility of a moderate
indulgence in sin, but merely that if excessive righteousness is no sign of superior
wisdom or perfect guarantee of attaining to felicity, but rather an evidence of mistaken
judgment and a precursor of inward moral and spiritual deterioration, much more is
excessive wickedness a proof of absolute and unredeemed folly, and a sure as well as
short road to ruin (1 Tim. vi. 9; 2 Pet. ii. 12).

Lessons. 1. Fear God instead of murmuring at his dark providences, 2. Serve
God with intelligent reason and prudence instead of rushing into extravagances
either on one side or on another. 3. Perish in righteousness rather than prosper in
wickedness.


Vers. 19—22.—The dangers and defences of a city. I. A crry’s DANGERS. 1. Hither
external or internal. Hither attacking it from without or assailing it from within.
2. Hither personal or impersonal. Arising from individuals, as eg. from embattled
hosts marching against the city, or from designing traitors proving unfaithful to the
city ; or proceeding from material causes, as e.g. from such physical conditions and
surroundings as endanger the city’s safety or the health of its inhabitants. 3. Hither
temporal or spiritual. Such as threaten its prosperity in trade and commerce, or such
as menace its civil order, social well-being, and political stability. 4. Hither few or
many. Wither one or two of the above-named perils happening at one time, or all of
them together confronting the city.

II. A orry’s pereNnces. 1. The prowess of its soldiers. The ten mighty men or
rulers may be regarded as chiefs or generals (sallith being probably equivalent to the
Assyrian sdlat, which signifies a stadtholder or commander; Schrader, ‘Die Keilin-
schriften nd das Alte Testament,’ p. 588), or viewed as civil governors like the
Roman decemvirs (see Adam’s ‘ Roman Antiquities,’ p. 130), or perhaps taken simply
as persons of wealth and influence, like the ten men of leisure whom the Mishna
(‘ Megillah, i. 3) declares to have been necessary to constitute a great city with a
synagogue. Hither way, they may represent the first or outer line of defence to which
a city usually resorts in times of danger, viz. that of physical force, expressed for the
most part in armies and garrisons. he Preacher says not that such wall of defence
is worthless, but merely that there are defences better and more efficient than it. And
though battalions and bullets, regiments and fleets, constitute not the highest instru-
ments of safety to which a city or a nation can trust, yet they have their uses in
averting, as well as their dangers in inviting, war (Luke xi. 21). 2. The wisdom of
its rulers. These the wise men are now supposed to be; and the meaning is that a
city’s satety depends more upon the mental sagacity of those who guide its affairs
than upon the extent and depth of its material resources; that “ wise statesmen,” for
instance, “‘ may do more” for it “ than able generals ” (Plumptre), and skilful inventors
than herculean labourers (cf. ch. ix. 16, 18); and if more upon the mental sagacity of
its governors, much more upon their moral earnestness. The wisdom to which the
Preacher alludes is unquestionably that which fears God, keeps his commandments,


on. vit. 1—29.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER 177
So re a A I a


and gives life to all that have it. Hence even move indispensable for a city’s safety is
it that her dignitaries should be good than that they should be great. 3. The piety of
tts people. This a legitimate deduction from the statement that “ there is not a just
man upon the earth, that doeth good, and sinneth not” (ver. 20). In introducing this
sentiment, suggested probably by the utterance of Solomon (2 Kings viii. 46), the
Preacher may have wished to call up the thought that once upon a time ten righteous
men, could they only have been found (which they were not), would have saved a city
(Gen. xviii. 82), and to point to the fact that no such expectation as that of saving a
city by means of its righteous men need be cherished now as a reason for resorting to
the next best defence—that of moral wisdom instead of brute force. Yet the truth
remains that righteousness, holiness, piety, could it only be attained, would be a far
more endurable and impregnable wall of protection to a people than either mighty
armies or wise statesmen.

Lessons. 1. Righteousness or wisdom the highest civil good. 2. The permanence
of a state determined by the number of its good men. 8. The power of moral
goodness in buth individuals and empires. 4. The universal corruption of mankind,


Vers, 23—29.—A great quest, and its sorrowful result. I. THE GREAT QUEST
1. The person of the seeker. ‘lhe Preacher (see on ch. i.1). The frequency with which
he draws attention to himself shows that he regarded himself as one possessed of
ample and perhaps well-known qualifications for the search upon which he had
engaged. 2. The object of his search. ‘Io be wise—to know and to search out and to
seek wisdom and the reason of things; and in particular to know the wickedness of
folly, and that foolishness is midness. In other words, he desired to reach that wisdo.n
in its fulness which would enable him to solve the problem of the universe, 8. The
spirit in which he entered on his quest. (1) Calm resolution. He said to himself, “ I
will be wise.” (2) Genuine humility. He understood that wisdom in its ideal vast-
ness and elevation was beyond his reach. (3) Harnest applxasion. He applied his
heart, or turned himself and his heart, to the business he had undertaken. (4) Patient
perseverance, His soul kept on seeking, laying one thing to another to find out the
account. These qualities should distinzuish all seekers after wisdom.

I{. Tire SORROWFUL FINDING. 1. Concerning the strange woman. Not “ heathenish
folly’ (Hengstenberg), but the flesh-and-blood harlot of Proverbs (ii. 16—19; v.
8—18). With respect to her the Preacher calls attention—speaking, no doubt, from
personal experience, and recording the results of his own observation—to: (1) Her
seductive arts. ‘ Her heart is snares and nets,” luring with her false beauty, bewitch-
ing voice, and voluptuous peison, numerous unthinking and inexperienced persons,
chiefly young men devoid ot understanding (Prov. vi. 7), into her embrace. (2} Her
deceptive gifts. While promising her lovers liberty, she only leads them into slavery—
“ Her hands are as bands; ” «nd while flattering them with promises of hidden sweets,
what she gives them is an experience “ more bitter than death,” ae an inward
wretcheduess more intolerable to the soul than even darkness and the grave. “ Her
house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers of death” (Prov. vii, 27).
(3) Her powerless charms—in sume cases. Fascinating to the natural heart, and
especially to sensual dispvsitions, her attractions have no influence upon pure minds
aud religious souls. ‘*Whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her;” either never be
captivated by her spells, or be recovered from them before it is too late. (4) Her
miseravle victims. ‘Ihose she leads off as prey are “sinners,” in whose hearts sin
rules as a domiuating principle; who are carnally minded, and delight to make
provision fur the flesh, to fultl the lusts thereof (Rom. viii. 1; xiii, 14); lovers of
pleasure more than lovers of Gud (2 Tim, iii, 4); foolish and disobedient souls, who
serve divers lusts and pleasures (Titus iii, 3). 2. Concerning womankind, (1) The
Preacher’s finding was incorrect if desigued as a universal negative, in the sense that,
while in a thousand men taken at random one might be found good, in a thousand
women similarly taken not one could be found entitled to be so characterized, The
best refutation of such woman-hating utterances is to point to “ the numerous examples
of noble women mentioned in Old Testament Writ, and of the devoted heroines of New
Testament days, ‘‘ whose names stand furth conspicuously, side by side with those of
men, in the muster-roll of the ‘noble army of martyrs’” (Wright), (2) The

BOOLESIASTES. a


178 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vm. 1—29.
NN eee


Preacher’s finding may have been correct if accepted only as the record of his own
individual experience. In this case, either his lot must have fallen in very evil times
in respect of moral corruption, rivalling the days that were before tle Flood (Gen.
vi. 11; vii. 1), or he himself must have mixed with extremely questionable characters
and limited his investigations to the lowest strata of society. It is doubtful if in any
age, at least since the Flood, the condition of mankind has been so deplorably
degenerate as the Preacher’s language implies. (3) The Preacher’s finding may be
endorsed if it only means (as is probably the case) that woman less frequently attains
to her ideal than man does to his—which, however, need not argue deeper depravity in
woman than in man, but may point either to the loftier character of woman’s ideal
than of man’s, or to the greater difficulties that stand in the way of woman realizing
her ideal than hinder man from reaching his. 3. Concerning the human race.
(1) Their original condition had been one of uprightness. This one of two conclusions
to which the Preacher had been conducted, viz. that whatever of evil was now
perceptible in man’s nature had not proceeded from the hand of God. (2) Their
present condition was one of “inventive refined degeneracy” (Delitzsch). A second
result to which the Preacher had been led. Man had lapsed from his primitive
condition of moral simplicity and had become an ingenious inventor; not always of
things indifferent, but frequently of things immoral in themselves, and leading to
immorality and sin as their results.

Lessons. 1. The value of wisdom as a human pursuit. 2, The worth of experience
asa teacher. 3. The danger of sensuality. 4. The excellence of piety as a protection
against impurity. 5. The inestimable worth of a good woman. 6, The rarity of
noble men. 7%, The certainty that man is not what God made him.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver. 1.—Reputation. The connection between the two clauses of this verse is not at
first sight apparent. But it may well be intended to draw attention to the fact that it
is in the case of the man who has justly gained a good name that the day of death is
better than that of birth.

I. THERE IS A SENSE IN WHICH REPUTATION AMONG MEN IS WORTHLESS, AND IN
WHICH SOLICITUDE FOR REPUTATION Is FOLLY. If the reality of fact points one way,
and the world’s opinion points in an opposite direction, that opinion is valueless. It is
better to be good than to seem and to be deemed good; and it is worse to be bad than
unjustly to be reputed bad. Many influences affect the estimation in which a man is
held among his fellows, Through the world’s injustice and prejudice, a good man may
be evil spoken of. On the other hand, a bad man may be reputed better than he is,
when he humours the world’s caprices, and falls in with the world’s tastes and fashions,
He who aims at conforming to the popular standard, at winning the world’s applause,
will scarcely make a straight course through life.

Il. YET THERE IS A RIGHTEOUS REPUTATION WHICH OUGHT NOT TO BE DESPISED,
Such good qualities and habits as justice, integrity, and truthfulness, as bravery, sym-
pathy, and liberality, must needs, in the course of a lifetime, make some favourable
impression upon neighbours, and perhaps upon the public; and in many cases a man
distinguished by such virtues will have the credit of being what he is. A good name
when deserved, and when obtained by no mean artifices, is a thing to be desired, though
not in the highest degree. It may console amidst trials and difficulties, it is gratifying
to friends, and it may serve to rouse the young to emulation. A man who is in good
repute possesses and exercises in virtue of that very fact an extended influence for good,

III. Iv 1s ONLY WHEN LIFE 18 COMPLETED THAT A REPUTATION IS FULLY AND
FINALLY MADE uP. “Call no man happy befire his death” is an ancient adage, not
without its justification. There are those who have only become famous in advanced
life, and there are those who have enjoyed a temporary celebrity which they have long
outlived, and who have died in unnoticed obscurity. ‘It is after a man’s career has come
to an end that his character and his work are fairly estimated; the career is considered
as a whole, and then the judgment is formed accordingly.

IV. THe APPROVAL or THE Diving Jup@e AND AWARDER IS OF SUPREME CONSE-


ou. vi. 1—29,]  ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 179
eee eee


quence. A good name amongst one’s fellow-creatures, as fallible as one’s self, is of
small account. Who-does not admire the noble assertion of the Apostle Paul, “It is
a small thing for me to be judged by man’s judgment”? They who are calumniated
for their fidelity to truth, who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, who are execrated
by the unbelieving and the worldly whose vices and sins they have opposed, shall be
recognized and rewarded by him whose judgment is jnst, and who suffers none of his
faithful servants to be for ever unappreciated. But they may wait for appreciation
until “the day of death.” The clouds of misrepresentation and of malice shall then be
rolled away, and they shall shine like stars in the firmament, “Then shall every man
have praise of God.” —T.


Vers, 2—4.—A Divine paradow. ‘l'o many readers these statements appear startling
and incredible. The young are scarcely likely to receive them with favour, and to the
pleasure-seeking and the frivolous they are naturally repugnant. Yet they are the
embodiment of true wisdom; and are in harmony with the experience of the thoughtful
and benevolent.

I. FEasTING, LAUGHTER, AND MIRTH ABE 100 GENERALLY REGARDED BY THE
FOOLISH AS THE BEST PORTION AND THE ONLY JOY OF HUMAN LIFE. 1, It is not
denied that there is a side of human nature to which merriment and festivity are
congenial, or that there are occasions when they may be lawfully, innocently, and
suitably indulged in. 2, But these experiences are not to be regarded by reasonable and
immortal beings as the choicest and most desirable experiences of life. 3. If they are
unduly prized and sought, they will certainly bring disappointment, and involve regret
and distress of mind, 4, Constant indulgence of the kind described will tend to the
deterioration of the character, and to unfitness for the serious and weighty business of
human existence.

II. INTERCOURSE WITH THE SORROWFUL AND THE BEREAVED YIELDS MORE TRUE
PROFIT THAN SELFISH AND FRIVOLOUS INDULGENCE. 1. Such familiarity with the
house of mourning reminds of the common lot. of men, which is also our own, Ina
career of amusement and dissipation there is much which is altogether artificial. The
gay and dissolute endeavour, and often for a time with success, to lose sight of some of
the greatest and most solemn realities of this earthly existence. Pain, weakness, and
sorrow come, sooner or later, to every member of the human race, and it is inexcusable
folly to ignore that with which every reflective mind must be familiar, 2. The house
of mourning is peculiarly fitted to furnish themes of most profitable meditation. The
uncertainty of prosperity, the brevity of life, the rapid approach of death, the urgency
of sacred duties, the responsibility of enjoying advantages and opportunities ouly to be
uged aright during health and activity,—such are some of the lessons which are too
often unheeded by the frivolous, Yet not to have learned these lessons is to have lived
in vain. 3. The house of mourning is fitted to bring home to the mind the precious-
ness of true religion. Whilst Christianity is concerned with all the scenes and circum-
stances of our existence, and is as able to hallow our joys as to relieve our sorrows, it is
evident that, inasmuch as it deals with us as immortal beings, it has a special service
to render to those who realize that this earthly life is but a portion of our existence,
and that it is a discipline and preparation for the life to come. Many have been
indebted, under God, to impressions received in times of bereavement for the impulse
which has animated them to seek a heavenly portion and inheritance. 4. Familiarity
with scenes of sorrow, and with the sources of consolation which religion opens up to
the afflicted, tends to promote serenity and purity of disposition. The restlessness and
superficiality which are distinctive of the worldly and pleasure-seeking may, through
the influences here described, be exchanged for the calm confidence, the acquiescence
in the Divine will, the cheerful hope, which are the precious possession of the true
children of God, who know whom they have believed, and are persuaded that he is able
to keep that which they have committed to him against that day.—T.


Ver. 7.—The mischief of oppression and bribery 'ihere is some uncertainty as to
the interpretation of this verse: the reference may be to the effect of injustice upon
him who inflicts it; it may be to its effect upon him who suffers it, It is usual to
fegard the observation as descriptive of the result of oppression and bribery in the feel-


180 ECCLESIASTES; OR,; THE PREACHER. {cx. vit. 1—29.


ings of irritation and despondency they produce upon the minds of those who are
wronged, and upon society generally.

I, JUSTICE IS THE ONLY SOLID FOUNDATION FOR socieTY. There is moral law, upon
which alone civil law can be wisely and securely based. When those who are in power
are guided in their administration of political affairs by a reverent regard for righteous-
ness, tranquillity, and contentment, order and harmony may be expected to prevail.

II. OPPRESSION, EXTORTION, AND VENALITY ON THE PART OF RULERS ARE INCOM-
PATIBLE WITH JUSTICE AND WITH THE PUBLIC @ooD. Unjust rulers sometimes use
the power which they have acquired, or with which they have been entrusted, for
selfish ends, and in the pursuit of such ends are unscrupulous as to the meane they
employ. Such wrong-doing is peculiar to no form of civil government. It is to some
extent checked by the prevalence of liberty and of publicity, and yet more by an
elevated standard of morality, and by the influence of pure religion. But in the East
corruption and bribery have been too general on the part of those in power.

III. THE sPECIAL RESULT OF CORRUPTION AND OPPRESSION I8 THE FURTHERANOE
AND PREVALENCE OF FOLLY AND UNREASON. To the writer of Ecclesiastes, who
regarded wisdom as “the principal thing,” it was natural to discern in mischievous
principles of government the cause of general unwisdom and foolishness. 1. The
governor himself, although he may be credited with craft and cunning, is morally
injured and degraded, sinks to a lower level, loses self-respect, and forfcvits the esteem of
his subjects. 2. The governed are goaded to madness by the impossibility of obtaining
their rights, by the curtailment of their liberties, and by the loss of their property.
Hence arise murmurings, discontent, and resentment, which may, and often do, lead to
conspiracy, insurrection, and revolution.

IV. THE DUTY OF ALL UPRIGHT MEN TO SET THEIR FACES AGAINST SUCH EVIL
PRACTICES. A good man must not ask—Can I profit by the prevalence of injustice ?
Will my party or my friends be strengthened by it? He must, on the contrary, turn
away from the question of consequences; he must witness against venality and oppres-
sion ; he must use all lawful means to expose and to put an end to such practices. And
this he is bound to do from the highest motives. Government is of Divine authority,
and is to be upon Divine principles. Of God we know that “righteousness and judg-
ment are the habitation of his throne.” They are unworthy to rule who employ their
power for base and selfish ends.—T.


Ver. 8.—The end better than the beginning. There are many persons, especially
among the young and ardent, who adopt and act upon a principle diametrically opposed
to this. Every beginning has for them the charm of novelty; when this charm fades,
the work, the enterprise, the relationship, have no longer any interest, and they turn
away with disgust from the end as from something “ weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable.”
But the language of this verse embodies the conviction of the wise and reflecting
observer of human affairs.

I, THE REASON OF THIS PRINCIPLE. The beginning is undertaken with a view to
the end, and apart from that it would not be. The end is the completion and justi-
fication of the beginning. The time-order of events is the expression of their rational
order; thus we speak of means and end. Aristotle commences his great work on
‘Ethics’ by showing that the end is naturally superior to the means, and that the highest
end must be that which is not a means to anything beyond itself.

IJ. THE APPLICATION OF THIS PRINCIPLE. 1. ‘l’o human works. It is well that the
foundation of a house should be laid, but it is better that the top-stone should be placed
with rejoicing. So with seed-time and harvest; with a journey and its destination;
with a road and its completion, etc. 2. To human life. The beginning may, in the
view of men, be neutral; but, in the view of the religious man, the birth of a child is
an occasion for gratitude. Yet, if that progress be made which corresponds with the
Divine ideal of humanity, if character be matured, and a good life-work be wrought,—
then the day of death, the end, is better than the day of birth, in which +this earthly
existence commenced. 3. To the Christian calling. ‘lhe history of the individual
Christian is a progressive history ; knowledge, virtue, piety, usefulness, are all developed
by degrees, and are brought to perfection by the discipline and culture of the Holy
Spirit. The end must therefore be better than the beginning, as the fruit excels the


r


ou. vir. 1—29} SOO_TSIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 181


blossoms of the spring. 4. To the Church of Christ. As recorded in the Book of the
Acts of the Apostles, the beginning of the Church was beautiful, marked by power and
pros. But the kingdom of God, the dispensation of the Spirit, has a purpose—

igb, holy, and glorious. When ignorance, error, and superstition, vice, crime, and sin,
are vanquished by the Divine energy accompanying the Church of the living God—
when the end cometh, and the kingdom shall be delivered unto the Father—it will be
seen that the end is better than the beginning, that the Church was not born in vain,
was not launched in vain upon the stormy waters of time. :

Ill. THE Lessons OF THIS PRINCIPLE. 1. When at the beginning of a good work,
look on to the end, that hope may animate and inspire endeavour. 2. During the
tourse of a good work look behind and before; for it is not possible to judge aright
without taking a comprehensive and consistent view of things. We may trace the
hand of God, and find reason alike for thanksgiving and for trust. 3, Seek that a
Divine unity may characterize your work on earth and your life itself. If the end
Labial as the begirning, then it were better that the beginning had never been
made.—T.


Vers, 8, 9.—The folly of pride, hastiness, and anger. The Scriptures are more pro-
nounced and decisixe with regard to these dispositions than for the most part are
heathen moralists, Yet the student of human character and life is at no loss to adduce
facts in abundance to justify the condemnation of habits which philosophy and religion
slike condern.

I. THESE DISPOSITIONS AND HABITS HAVE THEIR SOURCE IN THE CONSTITUTION OF
HUMAN NATURE.

II. CixcuMsTANCES IN HUMAN LIFE OCCASION THEIR EXERCISE AND GROWTH,

III. To YIELD TO SUCH PASSIONS AND TO ALLOW THEM TO RULE THE LIFE I8 THB
PART OF FOLLY.

IV. THE sPIRIT AND CONDUCT OF THE DIVINE SAVIOUR EXEMPLIFY THE BEAUTY
dF HUMILITY, PATIENCE, AND MEEKNESS.

VY. THE SUBJUGATION OF PASSION AND THE IMITATION OF CHRIST CONTRIBUK. TO
YHE WELFARE OF THE INDIVIDUAL AND OF SOCIETY.

VI. THERE ARE MEANS BY THE CONSTANT AND PRAYERFUL USE OF WHICH EVIL
@ABITS MAY BE CONQUERED, AND SELF-CONTROL MAY BE ATTAINED.—T.


Ver. 10.—Laudator temporis acti. It appears from this passage that a tendency of
wind with which we are familiar—a tendency to paint the past in glowing colours—is
of ancient date, and indeed it is probably a consequence of human nature itself.

I THE QUESTIONABLE ASSERTION, We often hear it affirmed, as the author of this
book ‘had heard it affirmed, that the former days were better than these. There are
politicians in whose opinion the country was formerly more happy and prosperous than
now; farmers who fancy that crops were larger, and merchants who believe that trade
was more profitable, in former days; students who prefer ancient literature to modern;
Christian men who place the age of faith and piety in some bygone period of history.
It has ever been so, and is likely to be so in the future. Others who will come after us
will regard our age as we regard the ages that have passed away.

II. THE GROUND UPON WHICH THE QUESTIONABLE ASSERTION 18 MADE, 1. Dissatis-
faction with the present. It is in times of pain, loss, adversity, disappointment, that
men are most given to extol the past, and to forget its disadvantages as well as the
privileges and immunities of the present. 2. The illusiveness of the imagination. The
aged are not only conscious of their feebleness and their pains; they recall the days of
their youth, and paint the scenes and experiences of bygone titnes in colours supplied
by a fond, deceptive fancy. The imaginative represent to themselves a state of the
world, a condition of society, a phase of the Church, which never had real existence.
By feigning all prosperity and happiness to have belonged to a past age, they remove
their fancies from the range of contratiction. All things to their vision become
lustrous and fair with “ the light that pever was on Jand or sea.”

III. THE UNWISDOM OF INQUIRING FOR AN EXPLANATION OF A BELIEF WHICH IB
@ROBABLY UNFOUNDED. Experience teaches us that, before asking for the cause, it is
well to assure ourselves of the fact. Way a thing is presumes that the thing is, Now,


182 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [os. vm. 1—29.
EEE UEnEestneneneementiie


in the case before us, the fact is so questionable, and certainty with regard to it is so
difficult, if not unattainable, that it would be a waste of time to enter upon the inquiry
here supposed. : :

APPLICATION. Vain regrets as to the past are as unprofitable as are complaints as to
the present. What concerns us is the ri-ht use of circumstances appointed for us by &
wise Providence. Whether or not the former times were better than these, the times
upon which we have fallen are good enough for us to use to our own moral and spiritual
improvement, and at the same time they are bad enough to call for all our consecrated
powers to do what in us lies—little as that may be—to mend them.—T.


Vers. 13 —15.—The perplexities of life. The Book of Ecclesiastes raises questions
which it very inadequately answers, and problems which it scarcely attempts to solve.
Some of the difficulties observable in this world, in human society, and in individual
experience appear to be insoluble by reason, though to some extent they may be over-
come by faith. And certainly the fuller revelation which we enjoy as Christians is
capable of assisting us in our endeavour not to be overborne by the forces of doubt and
perplexity of which every thoughtful man is in sume measure conscious.

I. A SPECULATIVE DIFFICULTY: THE COEXISTENCE OF OROOKED THINGS WITH
sTRAIcHT. The philosophical student encounters this difficulty in a more definite form
than ordinary thinkers, and is best acquainted with the apparent anomalies of existence.
It may suftice to reier to the coexistence of sense and spirit, nature and reason, law and
freedom, good and evil, death and immortality.

IL A PRACTICAL DIFFICULTY: THE JUXTAPOSITION AND INTEROHANGE OF PROS-
PERITY AND ADVERSITY. ‘“ God hath even made the one side by side with the other.”
The inequality of the human lot has, from the time of Job, been the occasion of much
questioning, dissatisfaction, and scepticism. Opinions differ as to the effect upon this
inequality of the advance of civilization. Riches and poverty, splendour and squalor,
refinement and brutishness, exist side by side, And the observation of every one has
remarked the startling transitions in the condition and fortunes alike of the wealthy
and the poor; these are exalted, and those depressed. At first sight all this seems
inconsistent with the sway of a just and benignant Providence.

II. A MoRaL DIFFICULTY : THE EVIDENT ABSENCE OF A JUST AND PERFEO? BETRI-
BUTION IN THIS LIFE. The righteous perish, and the wicked live on in their evai-doing,
unchecked and unpunished. There are those who would acquiesce in inequality of
condition, were such inequality proportioned to disparities of moral character, but who
are dismayed by the spectacle of prosperous crime and triumphant vice, side by side
with integrity and benevolence doomed to want and suffering.

IV. THE DUTY OF CONSIDERATION AND PATIENCE IN THE PRESENCE OF SUCH PER-
PLEXING ANOMALIES. The first and most obvious attitude of the wise man, when
encountering difficulties such as those described in this passage, is to avoid hasty con-
clusions and immature, unconsidered, and partial judgments. It is plain that we are
confronted with what we cannot comprehend. Our observation is limited; our pene-
tration is at fault; our reason is baffled. We are not, therefore, to shut our eyes to the
facts of life, or to deny what our intelligence forces upon us. But we must think, and
we must wait.

V. THE PURPOSE OF SUCH DIFFICULTIES, AS FAR AS WE ARE CONCERNED, IS TO
TEST AND TO ELICIT FAITH <N Gop. There is sufficient reason for every thoughtful
man to believe in the wisdom and rigiiteousncss of the eternal Ruler. And the Christian
has special grounds for his assurance that all things are ordained by his Father and
Redeemer, and that the Judge of all the earth will do richt.—T,


Vers. 16, 17.—Moderation. This langnage must be interpreted in accordance with
the rules of rhetoric; it is intended to convey a certain impression, to produce a certain
effect; and this it does. The Preacher aims at inculcating moderation, at cautioning
the reader against what a modern poet has termed.“the falsehood of extremes.” In
interpreting this very effective language we must not analyze it as a scientific state-
ment, but receive the impression which it was designed to convey.

I. HUMAN NATURE IS PRONE TO EXTREMES. In how many instances may it be
observed that a person is no sooner convinced that a certain object is desirable, a certain


cH. vil. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 188


—_ee——————————————


course is to be approved, than he will hear and think of nothing else! Is liberty good ?
Then away with all restraints! Is self-denial good? ‘hen away with all pleasures]
Is the Bible the best of books? Then let no other volume be opened! Is our own
country to be preferred to all beside? Then let no credit be allowed to foreigners for
anything they may do!

Il. THIS TENDENCY TO EXTREMES IS OWING TO THE DOMINANOE OF FEELING, Calm
reason would check such a tendency ; but the voice of reason is silenced by passion or
prejudice. Impulsive natures are hurried into unreasoning and extravagant opinions
and habits of conduct. The momentum of a powerful emotion is very great; it may
urge men onwards to an extent inexpected and dangerous, Whilst under the guidance
of sober reason, feeling may be the motive power to virtue and usefulness; but when
uncontrolled it may hurry into folly and disaster.

TIL. Yrerpixe@ To THIS TENDENCY OCCASIONS THE LOSS OF SELF-RESPECT AND OF
BOCLAL INFLUENCE. ‘The man of extremes must, in his cooler moments of reflection,
admit to himself that he has acted the part of an irrational being. And he certainly
gains among his acquaintances the reputation of a fanatic; and even when he has
sound and sober counsel to give, little heed is taken of his judgment.

TV. MopEerRATION IS USUALLY THE WISEST AND JUSTEST PRINCIPLE OF HUMAN
conDuctT. A great moralist taught the ancient Greeks that the ethical virtues lie
between extremes, and adduced many very striking instances of his law. Bravery lies
between fvolhardiness and cowardice; liberality between profusion and niggardliness,
etc. ‘That a very insufficient theory of morals was provided by this doctrine of “ the
mean” would universally be admitted. Yet no account of virtue can be satisfactory
which does not point out the importance of guarding against those extremes of conduct
into which men are liable to be hurried by the gusts of passion that sweep over their
nature. Who has not learned by experience that broad, unqualified assertions are
usually false, and that violent, one-sided courses of action are in most cases harmful and
regrettable? There is wisdom in the old adage which boys learn in their Latin
grammar, In medio tutissimus tbis.—T.


Vers. 20, 29.—Perfection is not on earth. It would be a mistake to attribute these
statements to anything peculiar in the experience and circumstances of the author of
this book. The most attentive and candid observers of human nature will attest the
truth of these very decided judgments. Christians are sometimes accused of exaggerating
human sinfulness, in order to prepare for the reception of the special doctrines of
Christianity ; but they are not so accused by observers whose opportunities have been
wide and varied, and who have the sagacity to interpret human conduct.

I, Tue NATURE or sin. It is deflection from a Divine standard, departure from the
Divine way, abuse of Divine provision, renunciation of Divine purpose.

II. THE UNIVERSALITY oF sIN. ‘This is both the teaching of Scripture and the
lesson of all experience in every land and in every age.

Ill. Tug exceprion To stn. The Divine Man, Jesus Christ, alone among the sons
of men, was faultless and perfect.

IV. THE SPIRITUAL LESSONS TAUGHT BY THE PREVALENCE OF SIN. Il. The duty
of humility, contrition, and repentance. 2, The value of the redemption and salvation
which in the gospel Divine wisdom and compassion have provided as the one universal
remedy for the one universal evil that afflicts mankind.—T.


Vers. 25—28.—Bad women a curse to society. It is generally considered that in this
language we have the conclusion reached by Solomon, and that his polygamy was
largely the explanation of the very unfavourable opinion which he formed of the other
sex, A monarch who takes to himself hundreds of wives and concubines is scarcely
likely to see much of the best side of woman’s nature and life. And if marriage is
divinely intended to draw out the unselfish, affectionate, and devoted qualities of
feminine nature, such a purpose could not be more effectually frustrated than by an
arrangement which assigns to a so-called wife an infinitesimal portion of a husband’s
time, attention, interest, and love. For this reason it is not fair to take the sweeping
statement of this passage as expressing a universal and unquestionable truth. What is
gaid of the bitterness of the wicked woman, and of the mischief she does in society,


184 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vi. 1—29.


remains for ever true; but there are states of society in which good women are as
numerous as are good men, and in which their influence is equally beneficial.

J. ‘HE INJURIOUSNESS OF BAD WOMEN EXEMPLIFIES THE PRINCIPLE THAT THE
ABUSE AND CORRUPTION OF GOOD THINGS IS OFTEN THE CAUSE OF THE WORST OF ILLS,

II. THE WICKEDNESS OF BAD WOMEN DISPLAYS ITSELF IN THEIR HABIT OF ENSNARING
THE FOOLISH; FOR THEY WILL NOT AND CANNOT SIN ALONE.

Ill. THE PRESENCE OF BAD WOMEN IN SOCIETY IS THE GREAT TEMPTATION TO
WHICH MEN ARE LIABLE, AND THE GREAT TEST BY WHICH THEY ARE TRIED.

IV. THE BITTERNESS OF BAD WOMEN MAY BY CONTRAST SUGGEST THE EXCELLENCE
OF THE VIRTUOUS AND THE PIOUS, AND MAY PROMPT TO A GRATEFUL RECOGNITION
OF THE INDEBTEDNESS OF SOCIETY TO HOLY AND KINDLY FEMININE INFLUENCES.—T.


Ver. 1.—Reputation. There is much both of exalted enjoyment and of valuable
influence in a man’s reputation. It is said of the great explorer and philanthropist,
David Livingstone, that he used to live in a village in Africa until his “good name”
for benevolence had been established and had gone on before him: following his
reputation, he was perfectly safe. A good reputation is—

I. 'HE AROMA WHICH OUR LIFE SHEDS AROUND Us. We are always judging one
another; every act of every kind is appraised, though often quite unconsciously, and
we stand better or worse in the estimation of our neighbours for all we do and are,
Our professions, our principles, our deeds, our words, even our manners and methods,—
all these leave impressions on the mind concerning ourselves, What men think of us
is the sum-total of these impressions, and constitutes our “name,” our reputation.
The character of a good man is constantly creating an atmosphere about him in which
he will be able to walk freely and happily. It is indeed true that some good men
seriously injure their reputation by some follies, or e~en foibles, which might easily
be corrected and which ought to be avoided; but, asa rule, the life of the pure and holy,
of the just and kind, is surrounded by a radiance of good estimation, as advantageous
to himself as it is valuable to his neighbours.

II. THe BEST LEGACY WE LEAVE BEHIND Us. At “the day of one’s birth” there is
rejoicing, because “a man is born into the world.” And what may he not become?
what may he not achieve? what may he not enjoy? But that ts a question indeed.
That infant may become a reprobate, an outcast; he may do incalculable, deplorable
mischief in the world; he may grow up to suffer the worst things in body or in mind.
None but the Omniscient can tell that. But when a good man dies, having lived an
honourable and useful life, and having built up a noble and steadfast character, he has
won his victory, he has gained his crown; and he leaves behind him memories, pure
and sweet, that will live in many hearts and hallow them, that will shine on many
lives and brichten them. At birth there is a possibility of good, at death there is a
certainty of blessedness and blessing.

1, Reputation is not the very best thing of all. Character-stands first. It is of vital
consequence that we be right in the sight of God, and tried by Divine wisdom. The
first and best thing is not to seem but to be right and wise. But then: 2, Reputation
is of very great value. (1) It is worth much to ourselves; for it is an elevated and
ennobling joy to be glad in the well-earned estecm of the wise. (2) It is of great value
to our kindred and our friends. How dear to us is the good name of our parents, of our
children, of our intimate friends! (8) It is a source of much influence for good with
our neighbours. How much weightier are the words of the man who has been growing
in honour all his days, than are those of either the inexperienced and unknown man
or the man whose reputation has been tarnished !—Q(, ;


Vers. 2—6.—The evil, the unprofitable, and the blessed thing. I. THE POSITIVELY
EvIL THING. “ The laughter of lvvls,” or ‘ the song of fvols,” may be pleasant enough
at the moment, but it is evil; for (i) it proceeds from folly, and (2) it tends to folly.
Of th. nany things which are here implicitly condemned, there may be mentioned :
]. The irreverent or the impure jest or song. 2. The immoderate feast—particularly
indulgence in the tempting cup. 38. The society of the ungodly, sought in the way of
frieudship and enjoyment, as distinguished from the way of duty or of benevolence,
4, The voice c* “attery,


on. vil. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 185


II, THe COMPARATIVELY UNPROFITABLE THING. Two things are mentioned in Scrip
ture as being lawful, but as being of comparatively slight value—bodily indulgence and
bodily exercise (see 1 Cor. vi. 13; 1 Tim. iv. 8). ‘The house of feasting” (ver. 2) is
a right place to be found in, as is also the gymnasium, or the recreation-ground, or the
place of entertainment. But it is very easy to think of some place that is worthier
As those that desire to attain to heavenly wisdom, to a Christ-like character, to th:
approval of God, let us see that we only indulge in the comparatively unprofitable
within the limits that become us. To go beyond the bound of moderation is to err, and
even to sin. Fun may grow into folly, pleasure pass into dissipation, the training of
the body become an extravagant athleticism, in the midst of which the culture of the
spirit is neglected, and the service of Christ forsaken. It behoves us to “ keep under”
that which is secondary, to forbid it the first place or the front rank, whether in our
esteem or in our practice.

III. THE DIs@UIsED BLESSING. It is not difficult to reach the heart of these para-
doxes (vers, 2—5). There is pain of heart in visiting the house where death has come
to the door, as there is in receiving the rebuke of a true friend; but what are the issues
of it? What is to be gained thereby? What hidden blessing does it not contain?
How true it is that it is


“Better to have a quiet grief
Than a tumultuous joy”!


that the hollow laughter of folly is a very poor and sorry thing indeed compared with
the wisdom-laden sorrow, when all things are weighed in the balances. To have a
chastened spirit, to have the heart which has been taught of God great spiritual
realities, to have had an enlarging and elevating vision of the things which are unseen
and eternal, to have been impressed with the transiency of earthly good and with the
excellency of “ the consolations which are in Christ Jesus,” to be lifted up, if but one
degree, toward the spirit and character of the self-sacrificing Lord we serve, to have
had some fellowship with the sufferings of Christ,-—surely this is incomparably preferable
to the most delicious feast or the most hilarious laughter. To go down to the home
that is darkened by bereavement or saddened by some crushing disappointment, and
to pour upon the troubled hearts there the oil of true and genuine sympathy, to bring
such spirits up from the depths of utter hopelessness or overwhelming grief into the
light of Divine truth and heavenly promise,—thus “ to do good and to communicate ”
is not only to offer acceptable sacrifice unto God, but it is also to be truly enriched in
our own soul.—C,


Ver. 8.—Patience and pride. Patience is to be distinguished from a dull indis-
criminateness and from insensibility, to which one treatment is much the same as
another; it is the calm endurance, the quiet, hopeful waiting on the part of the
intelligent and sensitive spirit. Pride is to be distinguished from self-respect; it is an
overweening estimate indulged by a man respecting himself—of his power, or of his
position, or of his character. ‘hus understood, these two qualities stand in striking
contrast to one another.

I, PATIENCE IS A DIVINELY COMMENDED AND PRIDE A FORBIDDEN THING. Patience
(Luke xxi. 19; 2 Thess. i. 4; Heb, x. 86; 2 Pet. i. 6; Jas. v. 7, 8,11; Rev. ii, 2).
Pride (Ps. ci. 5; cxix. 21; cxxxviii. 6; Prov. vi. 17; Isa. ii, 12; Mark vii. 22; Rom.
xii. 3; Jas. iv. 6).

Il. PATIENCE IS THE SEAT OF SAFETY, PRIDE THE PLACE OF PERIL. The man
that is willing to wait in patience for the good which God will grant him, accepting
what he gives him with quiet contentment, is likely to walk in wisdom, and to abide in
the fear and favour of the Lord; but the man who over-estimates his strength is stand-
ing in a very “slippery place”—he is almost sure to fall. No words of the wise man
are more frequently fulfilled than those concerning pride and a haughty spirit (Prov.
xvi. 18). The proud heart is the mark for many adversaries.

IIL. Partenck 18 A BECOMING GRACE, PRIDE AN UGLY EVIL. Few things are more
spiritually beautiful than patience. When under long-continued bodily pain or weak-
ness, or under grievous ill-treatment, or through long years of deferred hope and
disappointment, the chastened spirit lives on in cheerful resignation, the Christian


186 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PRE.CHER, on, vit. 1-28


workman toils on in unwavering faith, there is a spectacle which we can well believe
that the angels of God look upon with delight. Certainly it is the object of our admir-
ing regard. On the other hand, pride is an offensive thing in the eyes cf man, as we
know it is in the sight of God (Prov. viii. 13). Whether a man shows himself elated
about his personal appearance, or his riches, or his learning, or his strength (of any kind),
we begin by being amused and end by being annoyed and repelled; we turn away as
frum an ugly picture or from an offensive odour.

IV. PATIENCE CONDUCTS INTO, PRIDE EXCLUDES FROM, THE KINGDOM or Gop. L.
Patient inquiry will bring a man into the sunshine of full discipleship to Jesus
Chr‘st, but pride will keep him away, and leave him to be lighted by the poor sparks of
his own wisdom. 2. Patient steadfastness in the faith will conduct to the gates of the
celestial city. 3. Patient continuance in well-doing will end in the commendation of
Christ and in his bountiful reward.—C.


Ver. 10.—Foolish comparison and complaint. This querulous comparison, preferring
former days to present ones, is unwise, inasmuch as it is—

I. BASED UPON IGNORANCE. We know but little of the actual conditions of things in
past times. Chroniclers usually tell little more than what was upon the surface. We
probably exaggerate and overlook toa very large extent. ‘Tbe good that is gone from
us was probably attended with evils of which we have no idea; while the evils that
remain we magnify because we experience them in our own person and suffer from them,

Il. Markep BY FORGETFULNEss, Often, though not always so. Often the change
for the worse is not in a man’s surroundings, but in himself. Leaving his youth and
his prime behind him, he has left his vigour, his buoyancy, his power of mastery and
of enjoyment. The “times” are well enough, but he himself is failing, and he sees
everything through eyes that are dim with years.

IlI, INDICATIVE OF A SPIRIT OF DISCONTENT. It is the querulous spirit that thinks
ill of his companions and his circumstances. He would come to the same conclusion if
these were much better than they are. A sense of our own unworthiness and a con-
sciousness of God’s patience with us and goodness toward us, filling our souls with
nny and gratitude, would dissipate these clouds and put another song into our
mouth.

IV. WANTING IN MANLY BESOLUTENESS. If we are possessed of a right spirit, instead
of sitting down and lamenting the inferiority of present things we shall gird ourselves
to do what has to be done, to improve that which is capable of reform, to abolish that
which should disappear, to plant that which should be thriving.

V. LacKING IN TRUSTFULNESS AND HOPEFULNEss. What if things are not all they
should be with us; what if we ourselves are going down the hill and shall soon be at the
bottom ;—is there not a God above us? and is there not a future before us? Let us look
up and let us look on. Above us is a Power that can regenerate and transform; before
us is a period, an age, Day, an eternity, wherein all lost joys and honours will be
“swallowed up of life.” —O.


Vers, 13, 14.—The trremediable. Before we apply the main principle of the text, we
may gather two lessons by the way.

I. THE wisDoM OF aPPROPRIATIN@—of appropriating to ourselves and enjoying what
God gives us without hesitation. In the day of our prosperity let us be joyful. We
need not be draping our path with gloomy thoughts; we need not send the skeleton
round at the feast ; we should, indeed, partake moderately of everything, and in every-
thing give thanks, showing gratitu//e to the Divine Giver; and we should also have the
open heart which does not fail to show liberality to those in need. If our success be
hallowed by these three virtues, it will be well with us.

Il. THe RIGHTNESs OF RECTIFYING—of making straight all the crooked things which
can be straightened. We are not to give up great moral problems as insoluble until we
are absolutely convinced that they are beyond our reach, Poverty, ignorance, intem-
perance, irreligion,—these are very ‘crooked” things; but God did not make them
what they are. Man has done that. His sin is the great and sad perverting force in the
world, bending all things out of their course and turning them in wrong directions,
And though they may seem to be too rigid and fixed to be amenable to our treatment,


oH. vit. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 187


yet, hoping in God and seeking his aid, we must address ourselves courageously and
intelligently to these crooked things until they are made straight. There is nothing
that so strongly appeals to, and that will so richly reward, our aspiration, our ‘ngenuity,
our energy, our patience.

Ill. Tue pury or susmirtine. There are some things in regard to which we have
to acknowledge that the evil thing is a “work of God,” something he has “made
crooked.” This is to be accepted as the ordering of his holy will, as something that ia
balanced and overbalanced by the good things which are on the other side. It may
be slenderness of means, lowliness of position, feebleness of intelligence, exclusion from
society in which we should like to mingle, incapacity to visit scenes we long to look
upon, the inaccessibility of a sphere for which we think ourselves peculiarly fitted, the
advance of fatal disease, the reduction of resources or the decliue of power, the break-
ing up of the old home and the scattering of near relatives, the loosening of old ties
with the formation of new ones, etc. Such things as these are to be calmly and con-
tentedly accepted. 1. To strive against the inevitable or irremedialle is (1) to strive
-against God and be guilty; (2) to court failure and be miserable; (3) to waste energy
that might be happily and fruitfully spent in other ways, 2. To submit to the will of
God, after considering his work, is (1) to please him; (2) to have the heart filled with

ure and elevating contentment ; (3) to be free to do a good if not a great work “ while
it is day."—0O,


Vers. 15—22.— The lower and the higher standard. The Preacher is not now in his
noblest mood ; he offers us a morality to which he himself at other times rises superior,
and which cannot be pronounced worthy by those who have heard the great Teacher
and learnt of him. We will look at—

I. THE LOWER STANDARD HERE HELD UP. L, His view of sin. And here we find three
things with which we are dissatisfied. (1) Sin is not represented to us as tn its:/f an
intolerable thing (ver. 17). We are allowed to think of it as something that would be
allowable if indulged within certain limits, and if it did no serious injury to our life or
to our health. But we know that, apart from its fatal consequences, all wickedness is
“an abominable thing which God hates,” an essentially evil thing. (2) The invariable
penalty of sin is overlooked. We are not reminded that wickedness always makes us
suffer, in spirit if not in health, in soul if not in circumstance. (38) We are likened to
one another rather than with the Holy One (vers. 20—22). The strain is this: we
need not be much troubled by the presence of some sin in our hearts and lives; all
men are guilty, and we are ouly like our fellows; if there be those who are reproaching
us, we are censuring them in return; we are standing on the same level, though it may
be a common condemnation, 2. His view of rightevusness. ‘The Preacher sees two
unsatisfactory features in righteousness. (1) It does not always prolong life and secure
sucvess (ver. 15). (2) It leads the best men into a painful loneliness. “ Why shouldest
thou be desolate ?” (ver. 16, marginal reading); #.e. why be so honest and so pure and
so true that thou canst not associate with the unscrupulous, whose standard is lower
than thine own? Be content with that measure of righteousness which comes up to
the common standard. Such is the Prcacher’s counsel in this mood of his. But we
who have learnt of a Greater and Wiser than he, of him who was not only the wisest of
men but “the Wisdom of God,” cannot be satisfied with this; we aspire to something
loitier and worthier ; we must rise to—

Il. ‘I's HigHeR sTANDARD. Tauvht of Jesus Christ, we: 1. Have a truer view of
sin. We regard it as a thing which is only and utterly evil, offensive to God, con-
stantly and profoundly injurious to ourselves, to be hated and shunned in every sphere,
to be cleansed from heart and life. 2, //ave a truer conception of righteousness. We
look upon it as (1) that which is in itself precious beyond all price; (2) that which
allies us to God in nature and character ; (3) that which is to be clierished and pursued
at all costs whatever; (4) that which makes our present life beautilul and noble, and
leads on to far greater excellence and far deeper joy hereafter.—C.


Vers. 23—28.—Deyradation and elevation. The words of the Preacher painfully
remind us of the familiar story of Diogenes and his lantern, Whether we are to
aecribe this pitiful conclusion respecting woman to his own infirmity or to the actual


188 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, (cu. vu. 1—29,


condition of Oriental society, we do not know. But there was, no doubt, so much of
realism about the picture that we may learn a very practical lesson therefrom. It is
twofold.

I. THE AWFUL POSSIBILITIES OF DEGRADATION. That woman, created by God to be
a helpmeet for man, aid so admirably fitted, as she is at her best, to comfort his heart
and to evrich and bless his life—that woman should be spoken of in such terms as
these, is sad and strange indeed. It would be unaccountable but for one thing. The
explanation is that man, in his physical strength and in his spiritual weakness, has
systematically degraded woman; has made a mere tool and instrument of her whom he
should have treated as his trusted compauion and truest friend. And if you once
degrade any being (or any animal) from his or her true and right position, you send that
being down an incline, you open the gates to a long and sad descent. You take away
self-respect, and in so doing you undermine the foundation of all virtue, of all moral
worth, Dishonourany one, man or woman, lad or child, in his (her) own eyes, and you
inflict a deadly injury. A very vile woman is probably worse than a very bad man,
more inherently foul and more lamentably mischievous; it is the miserable consequence
of man’s folly in wishing to displace her from the position God meant her to hold, and
in making her take a far lower position than she has the faculty to fill. To degrade is
to ruin, and to ruin utterly. ;

II. ‘THE NOBLE POSSIBILITIES OF ELEVATION. How excellent is the impossibility of
seriously writing such a seuteuce as that contained in the twenty-eighth verse, in this
age and in this land of ours! Now and here it certainly is not more difficult to find a
woman worthy of our admiration than to find such a man. In the Churches of Jesus
Christ, in the homes of our country, are women, young and old and in the prime of
their powers, whose character is sound to the centre, whose spirit is gracious, whose
lives are lovely, whose influence is wholly beneficent, who are the sweetness and strength
of the present generation, as they are the hope and promise of the next. And this
elevation of woman all comes of treating her as that which God meant her to be—giving
to her her rightful position, inviting and enabling her to fill her sphere, to cultivate her
powers, to do her work, to take her heritage. 1. It is easy as it is foolish and sinful to
degrade; assume the absence of what God has given and deny the opportunity which
should be offered, and the work is speedily done. 2. It is quite possible as it is most
blessed to elevate; treat men and women, wherever found and at whatever stage in
worth or unworthiness they may be taken, as those God meant to be his children, and
they will rise to the dignity and partake the inheritance of “the sons and daughters of
the living God.”—C.


Ver. 1—The charm of goodness, When our author wrote these words he had,
for a time at any rate, passed into a purer atmosphere ; some gleams of lizht, if not the
full dawn of day, had begun to shine upon him. Up to this he has been analyzing
the evil conditions of human life, and has depicted all the moods of depression and
sorrow and indignation they excited in him. Now he tells us of some things which
he had found good, and which had cheered and strengthened him in his long agony.
They were not, indeed, efficient to remove all his distress or to outweigh all the evils he
had encountered in his protracted examination of the phenomena of human life; but
to a certain extent they had great value and power. The first of these compensations
of human misery is the beauty and attractiveness and lasting worth of a good
character. The name won by one of honourable and unblemished character, who has
striven against vice and followed after virtue, who has been pure and unselfish and
sealous in the service of God and man, “is better than precious ointment.” It is not
anwarrantable thus to exjand the sentence; for though the epithet “ good” is not in
the original, but supplied by our translators (Revised Version), it is undoubtedly under-
stood, and also it is taken for granted that the renown so highly praised is fully
deserved by its possessor. “Dear,” he says, “to the human senses ”—speaking,
remember, toan Eastern world—“ is the odour of costly unguents, of sweet frankincense
and fragrant spikenard ; but dearer still, more precious still, an honoured name, whose
odour attracts the love, and penetrates and fills for a while the whole heart and
memory of our friends” (Bradley). There is in the original a play upon words (shem.
® name; shemen, ointment) which harmonizes with the brightness of the thought, and


oa. vir. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER 189


gives a touch of gaiety to the sentence so strangely concluijed with the reflection that
for the owner of the good name the day of his death is better than the day of his
birth, An exquisite illustration of the justness of our author’s admiration for a good
name is to be found in that incident in the Gospels of the deed of devotion to Christ,
on the part of the woman who poured upon his head the precious ointment. Her
name, Mary of Bethany (John xii. 8), is now known throughout the whole world, and
is associated with the ideas of pure affection and generous self-sacrifice. The second
part of the verse, which at first sounds so out of harmony with what precedes it, is
yet closely connected with it. The good name is thought of as not finally secured
until death has removed the possibility of failure and shame. So many begin well
and attain high fame in their earlier life which is sadly belied by their conduct and
fate in the close. The words recall those of Solon to Croesus, if indeed they are not a
reminiscence of them, “Call no man happy until he has closed his life happily ”
(Herod., i. 82); and are to the same effect as those in ver. 8, “ Better is the end of a
thing than the beginning thereof.” It is not to be denied that there is, however, more
in the words than a prudential warning against prematurely counting upon having
secured the “good name” which is better than ointment. They betray an almost
heathenish distaste for life, which is utterly out of harmony with the revelation both
of the Old Testament and of the New; and are more appropriate in the mouth of one
of that Thracian tribe mentioned by Herodotus, who actually celebrated their birth-
days as days of sadness, and the day of death as a day of rejoicing, than of one who
had any faith in God. The only parallel to them in Scripture is what is said of
Judas by our Lord, “ It had been good for that man if he had not been born” (Matt.
xxvi. 24). Ingenuity may devise explanations of the seatiment which bring it into
harmony with reliyious sentiments. ‘hus it may be said, at death the box of precious
ointment is broken and its odours spread abroad; prejudices that assailed the man of
noble character during his lifetime are mitigated, envy and jealousy and detraction
are subdued, and his title to fair fame acknowledged on all hands. It may be said
life is a state of probation, death the beginning of a higher and happier existence.
Life is a struggle, a contest, a voyage, a pilgrimage; and when victory has been won,
the goal reached, the reward of labour is attained. We may borrow the words and
infuse a brighter significance into them; but no trace of any such inspiring, cheering
thoughts are in the page before us. “The angel of death is there; no angel of
resurrection sits within the sepulchre.”—J. W.


Vers, 2—6.—Compensations of misery. Although in the Book of Ecclesiastes there
is much that seems to be contradictory of our ordinary judgments of life, much that
is at first apparently calculated to prevent our taking an interest in its business and
pleasures—which are all asserted to be vanity and vexation of spirit—there are yet to
be found in it sober and well-grounded exhortations, which we can only neglect at our
peril. Out of his large experience the writer brings some lessons of great value. It
is sometimes the case, indeed, that he speaks in such a way that we feel it is reasonable
in us to discount his judgment pretty heavily. When he speaks as a sated voluptuary,
as one who had tried every kind of sensuous pleasure, who had gratified to the utmost
every desire, who had enjoyed all the luxuries which his great wealth could procure,
and found all his efforts to secure happiness vain—I say, when he speaks in this
way, and asks us to believe that none of these things are worth the pains, we
are not inelined to believe him implicitly. We are inclined rather to resent being
lectured ig such a way by sucha man. ‘The satiety, the weariness, the ennuz, which
result from over-indulgence, do not qualify a man for setting up as a moral and
spiritual guide; they rather disqualify him for exercising such an office. In answer
to the austere and sweeping condemnation which he is inclined to pass upon thie
sources from which we think may be drawn a reasonable amount of pleasure, we nay
say, “Oh yes! it is all very well for you to speak in that way. You have worn out
your strength and blunted your taste by over-indulgence; and it comes with a bad
grace from you to recommend an abstemious and severe mood of life which you have
never tried yourself. The exhortations which befit the lips of a John the Baptist,
nurtured from early life in the desert, lose their power when spoken by a jade
epicure.” The answer would be perfectly just. And if Solomon’s reflections were a!)


190 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. _[on. vu, 1-29.


of the type described, we should be justified in placing less value upon them than he
did. It is true that more than once he speaks with a bitterness and disgust of all the
occupations and pleasures of life, which we cannot, with our experience, fairly endorse.
But, as a rule, his moralizing is not of the ascetic type. He recommends, on the whole,
a cheerful and grateful enjoyment of all the innocent pleasures of life, with a constant
remembrance that the judgment draws ever nearer and nearer. While he has no
hesitation in declaring that no earthly employments or pleasures can completely satisfy
the soul and give it a resting-place, he does not, like the ancient hermits, approve of
dressing in sackcloth, of feeding on bread and water only, and of retiring altogether
from the society of our fellows. His teaching, indeed, contains a great deal more of
true Christianity than has often been found in the writings and sermons of professedly
Christian moralists and preachers. All the more weight, therefore, is to be attached
to his words from this very fact, that he does not pose as an ascetic. We could not
listen to him if he did; and accordingly we must be all the more careful not to lessen
the value and weight of the words he speaks to which we should attend, by depreciating
him as an authority. It is only of some of his judgments that we can say they are
such as a healthy mind could scarcely endorse. This, in the passage betore us, is
certainly not one of them. It certainly runs counter to our ordinary sentiments and
practices, like many of the sayings of Christ, but is not on that account to be hastily
rejected ; we are not justified either in seeking to diminish its weight or explain it
away. It is not, indeed, a matter of surprise that the thoughts and feelings of beings
under the influence of sinful habits, which enslave both mind and heart, should require
to undergo a change before their teaching coincides with the mind of the Holy Spirit.
In this section of the book we have teaching very much in the spirit of the New
Testament. Compare with the second verse the sentences spoken by Christ: “ Woe
unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger; woe unto you that laugh now! for ye
shall mourn and weep” (Luke vi. 25). And notice that the visits paid to the afflicted
to console them, from which the Preacner declares he had gained mora! and spiritual
benefits, are recommended to us by the apostle as Christian duties (Jas. i. 27). From
even the saddest experiences, therefore, a thoughtful mind will derive some gain; some
compensations there are to the deepest miseries, The house of mourning is that in
which there is sorrow on account of death. According to Jewish customs, the expres-
sion of grief for the dead was very much more demonstrative and elaborate than with
us. The time of mourning was for seven days (Ecclus. xxii. 10), sometimes in special
cases for thirty days (Numb, xx. 29; Deut. xxiv. 8). The presence of sympathizing
friends (John xi. 19), of hired mourners and minstrels (Matt. ix. 23; Mark v. 38), the
solemn meals of the bread and wine of affliction (Jer. xvi, 7; Hos, ix. 4), made the
scene very impressive, Over against the picture he suggests of lamentation and woe, he
sets that of a house of feasting, filled with joyous guests, and he asserts that it is better
to go to the former than to the latter. He contradicts the more natural and obvious
inclination which we all have to joy rather than to sorrow. But a moment’s consider-
ation will convince us that he is in the right, whether we choose the better part or not.
Joy at the best is harmless—it relieves an overstrain on the mind or spirit; but when
it has passed away it leaves no positive gain behind. Sorrow rightly borne is able to
draw the thoughts upward, to purify and transform the soul. Its office is like that
attributed to tragedy by Aristotle: “to cleanse the mind from evil passions by pity
and terror—pity at the sight of another’s misfortune, and terror at the resemblance
between the sufferer and ourselves” (‘ Poetics’). Contradictory of ordinary feelings and
opinions though this teaching of Solomon’s is, there are three ways in which a visit to
the house of mourning is better than to the house of feasting.

I, Iv AFFORDS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR SHOWING SYMPATHY WITH THE AFFLICTEN,
Among our best-spent hours are those in which we have sought to lighten and share
the burden of the bereaved and distressed. We may not have been able to open
sources of consolation which otherwise would have remained hidden and sealed; but
the mere expression of our commiseration may be helpful and soothing. Sometimes
we may be able to suggest consolatory thoughts, to impart serviceable advice, or to
give needful relief. But in all cases we feel that we have received more than we have
given—that in seeking to comfort the sorrowful we come into closer communion with
that Saviour who came from heaven to earth to bear the burden of sin and suffering,


og. vi. 1—29.) ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 191


who was & welcome Guest on occasions of innocent festivity (John ii. 2; Luke vii. 36),
but whose presence was still more eagerly desired in the homes of the afflicted (John
xi. 3; Mark v. 23).

Il, Ir ENABLES US TO FORM TRUER ESTIMATES OF LIFE. It gives us a more trust-
worthy standard of judging the relative importance of those things that engage our
attention and employ our faculties. It checks unworthy ambitions, flattering hopes,
and sinful desires. We learn to realize that only some of the aims we have cherished
have been worthy of us, only some of the pursuits in which we have been engaged are
calculated to yield us lasting satisfaction when we come in the light of eternity to
review the past of our lives. The sight of blighted hopes admonishes us not to run undue
risk of disappointment by neglecting to take into account the transitory and changeful
conditions in which we live. The spectacle of great sorrows patiently borne rebukes
the fretfulness and impatience which we often manifest under the minor discomforts
and troubles which we may be called to endure.

III, Ir REMINDS US OF THE POSSIBLE NEARNESS OF OUR OWN END. (Ver. 2.) “It
is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the house of feasting: for that
ts the end of all men ; and the living will lay it to his heart.” Though the brevity of
life is a fact with which we are all acquainted from the very first moment when we are
able to see and know what is going on about us, it is a fact which it is very difficult

- for us to realize in our own case. “ We think all are mortal but ourselves.” No feel-
ings of astonishment are excited in us by the sight of the aged and weakly sinking
down into the grave, but we can scarcely belicve that we are to follow them, The
very aged still lay their plans as though death were far off; the dying can hardly be
convinced till perhaps the very last moment that their great change is at hand. But
a visit to the house of mourning gives us hard, palpable evidence, which must, though
but for an instant, convince us that mortality is a universal law; that in a short time
our end will come. The effect of such a thought need not be depressing; it need not
poison all our enjoyments and paralyze all our efforts. It should lead us to resolve (1
to make good use of every moment, since life is so brief; and (2) to live as they shoul
do who know that they have to give account of themselves to God. A practical benefit
is thus to be drawn from even the saddest experiences, for by them “the heart is made

~ better” (ver. 3). The foolish will seek out something which he calls enjoyment, in
order to deliver his mind from gloomy thoughts; but the short-lived distraction of
attention which he secures is not to be compared with the calm wisdom which piety
can extract even from sorrow (ver. 4). Painful though some of the lessons taught us
may be, they wound but to impart a permanent cure; while the mirth which drowns
reflection soon passes away, and is succeeded by a deeper gloom (vers. 5,6). One
circumstance renders the teaching of this passage all the more impressible, and that is
the absence from it of the ascetic spirit. ‘his perhaps is, you will think, a paradoxical
statement, when the whole tone of the utterance is of a sombre, not to say gloomy,
character. But you will notice that the author does not lay a ban upon all pleasure;
he does not denounce all innocent enjoyments as wicked. He does not say it is sinful
to go to the house of feasting, to indulge in laughter, to sing secular songs, There
have been and are those who make these sweeping statements. But he says that a
wise, serious-minded man will not find these things satisfying all his desires; that he
will, on the contrary, often find it greatly for his advantage to familiarize kimself with
very different scenes and employments. In other words, there are two sides ‘0 life—the
temporal and the eternal. ‘Ihe soul, like the head of Janus, looks both on vie present,
with all its varied and transitory events, and on the future, in which there are so many
new ani solemn experiences in store for us. The epicurean, the worldling, looks to
the present alone; the ascetic looks to the future alone, ‘The wise have true appre-
ciation of them both; know what conduct duty prescribes as appropriate in revard to
them both. The examples of Christ and his apostles show us that we may partake
both in the business and innocent pleasures of life without being untrue to our higher
calling. He, though “holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners,” wrought
with his own hands, and thus sanctified all honest labour; he graced a marriage-feast
with his presence, and supplied by a miracle the meaus of convivial cheerfuluess, The
sights and sounds of city and country life, the mirth of happy homes, the splendour of
palaces, the pageantry of courts, the sports of children, were not frowned upon by hir


.92 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER _[ou. vu. 1—29,


» in themselves unworthy of attracting the attention of immortal ratures; they were
ployed by him to illustrate eternal truths. And all through the writings and
:xhortations of his apostles the same spirit is manifest; the same counsel is virtually
siven to use the present world without abusing it—to receive with thankfulness every
good creature of God. And at the same time, no one can deny that great stress is laid
by them also upon the things that are spiritual and eternal; greater even than on the
others. For we are in greater risk of forgetting the eternal than of neglecting the
temporal, Far too often is it true in the poet’s words—


“The world is too much with us; late and goon,
Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers.”


Therefore it is all the more necessary for startling admonitions like these of Solomon’s to
be given, which recall us with a jerk to attend to things that concern our higher welfare,
The fact that there are dangers against which we must guard, dangers springing not
merely from our own sinful perversity, but from the conditions of our lives, the danger
especially of being too much taken up with the present, is calculated to arouse us to
serious thought and effort. Very much easier would it have been for us if a code of rules
for external conduct had been given us, so that at any time we might have made sure
about being on the right way; but very much poorer and more barren would the life
thus developed have been. We are called, as in this passage before us, to weigh matters
carefully ; to make our choice of worthy employments; to decide for ourselves when
to enjoy that which is earthly and temporal, and when to sacrifice it for the sake of
that which is spiritual and eternal, And we may be sure that that goodness which
springs from an habitually wise choice is infinitely preferable to the narrow, rigid
formalism which results from conformity with a Puritanic rule. It is not a sour, kill-
joy spirit that should drive us to prefer the house of mourning to the house of feasting ;
but the sober, intelligent conviction that at times we may find there help to order our
lives aright, and have an opportunity of lightening by our sympathy the heavy burden
of sorrow which God may see fit to lay upon our brethren.—J. W.


Vers. 7—10.—Patience under provocation. In these words our author seems to
commend the virtues of patience and contentment in trying circumstances, by pointing
out that certain evils against which we may chafe bring their own punishment, and
so in a measure work their own cure, that others spring from or are largely aggravated
by faults in our own temperament, aud that others exist to a very great extent in
our own imagination rather than in actual fact. And accordingly the sequence of
thought in the chapter is perfectly clear. We have here, too, some “compensations of
misery,” as in vers. 2—6. The enumeration of the various kinds of evil that provoke
our dissatisfaction supplies us with a convenient division of the passage.

I, EVILS THAT BRING THEIR OWN PUNISHMENT AND WORK THEIR OWN cuRE, “ Surely
oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the heart. Better is the
end of a thing than the beginning thereof” (vers. 7, 8a). It is the oppressor and not
the oppressed who is driven mad, The unjust use of power demoralizes its possessor,
deprives him of his wisdom, and drives him into actions of the grossest folly. The
receiver of bribes, ae. the judge who allows vifts to warp his judgments, loses the
power of moral discernment, and becomes utterly disqualified for discharging his sacred
functions. And this view of the meaning of the words makes them an echo of those
jassages in the Law of Moses which prescribe the duties of magistrates and rulera,
“Thou shalt not wrest judgment; thou shalt not respect persons, neither shalt thou
take a gift: for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
righteous” (Deut. xvi. 19; cf. Exod. xxiii, 8). The firm conviction which any
extended experience of life is sure to confirm abundantly, that such moral perverseness
as is implied in the exercise of tyranny, in extortion and bribery, brings with it its
own punishment, is calculated to inspire patience under the endurance of even very
gross wrongs, ‘The tyrant may excite an indignation and detestation that will lead to
his own destruction; the clamour against an unjust judge may become so great as to
accessitate his removal from office, even if the government that employs him be
ordinarily very indifferent to moral considerations. In any case, “the man who can
quietly endure oppression is sure to come off best in the end ” (cf, Matt. v. 388—41),


vn. vit. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 193


II. Evins THAT SPRING LARGELY FROM OUR OWN TEMPERAMENT. “The patient in
spirit is better than the proud in spirit. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for
anger resteth in the bosom of fools” (vers. 83, 9). ‘That the disposition here reprobated
is a very general and fruitful source of misery cannot be doubted. The proud spirit
that refuses to submit to wrongs, either real or fancied, that is on the outlook for
offence, that strives to redress on the instant the injury received, is rarely long without
cause of irritation. If unprovoked by real and serious evils, it will find abundant
material for disquietude in the minor crosses and irritations of daily life. While. the
patient spirit, that schools itself to submission, and yet waits in hope that in the
providence of God the cause of pain and provocation will be removed, enjoys peace
even in very trying circumstances. It is not that our author commends insensibility
of feeling, and deprecates the sensitiveness of a generous nature, which is swift to
resent cruelty and injustice. It is rather the ill-advised and morbid state of mind in
which there is an unhealthy sensitiveness to affronts and a fruitless chafing against them
that he reproves. ‘That anger is in some circumstances a lawful passion no reasonable
person can deny; but the Preacher points out two forms of it that are in themselves
evil. The first is when anger is “hasty,” not calm and deliberate, as the lawful
expression of moral indignation, but the outcome of wounded self-love; and the second
when it is detained too long, when it “rests” in the bosom. As a momentary, instinc-
tive feeling excited by the sight of wickeduess, it is lawful; but when it has a home in
the heart it changes its character, and becomes mali-nant hatred or settled scoriful-
ness. ‘“ Be ye angry,and sin not,” says St. Paul; “ let not the sun go down upon \our
wrath ” (Eph. iv. 26, 27). ‘“ Wherefore, my beloved brethren,” says St. James, “ let
every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath: for the wrath of man
worketh not the righteousness of God” (i. 19, 20).

III. EviLs THAT ARE LARGELY IMAGINARY. “Say not thou, What is the cause
that the former days were better than these? for thou dost not inquire wisely con-
cerning this” (ver. 10). Discontentment with the present time and conditions is
reproved in these words. It is often a weakness of age, as Horace has described it—


© Difficiiis, querulus, laudator temporis acti
Se puero, censor castigatorque minorum.”
(‘ Ars Poet.,’ 173, 174.)


But it is not by any means confined to the old. There are many who cast longing
glances back upon the past, and think with admiration of the age of heroes or of the
age of faith, in comparison with which the present is ignoble and worthless. It would
be a somewhat harmless folly if it did not lead, as it generally does, to apathetic
discontent with the present and despondency concerning the future, ‘Every age has
its peculiar difficulties, and a man inclined to take a dark view of things will always
be able to compare unfavourably the present with the past. But a readiness to make
comparisons of that kind is no sign of real wisdom. There is light as well as darkness
in every age. The young inen that shouted for joy at the rebuilding of the temple
acted more wisely than the old men who wept with a loud voice” (Ezra iii. 12, 13).
And the question may still be asked—Were the old times really better than the
present? Is it not a delusion to imagine they were? Are not we the heirs of the
ages, to whom the experience of the past and all its attainments in knowledge and all
its bright examples of virtue have descended as an endowment and an inspiration ?
The disposition, therefore, that makes the best of things as they are, instead of
grumbling that they are not better, that bears patiently even with very great annoy-
ances, and that is characterized by self-control, is sure to escape a great deal of the
misery which falls to the lot of a passionate, irritable, and discontented man
(ci. Ps. xxxvii.).—J. W.


Vers. 11, 12.— Wisdom and riches. The precise meaning of ver. 11 is rather diff-
cult .o catch. The Hebrew words can be translated either as, ‘“‘ Wisdom is good
with an inheritance ” (Authorized Version), or, “ Wisdom is good as an inheritance”
(Rer*sed Version); and it is instructive to notice that the earlier Kuglish version has
in ths margin the translation which the Revisers have put in the text, and that the
Revisers have put in the margin the earlier rendering, as possibly correct. Both

¢*SCLESIASTES. 0


194 ECCLESTASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vir. 1—29.


ee


companies of translators are equally in doubt in the matter. It isa case, therefore, in
which one must use one’s individual judgment, and decide as to which rendering is to
be preferred from the general sense of the whole passage, Our author, then, is speaking
of two things which are profitable in life—* for them that see the sun” (ver. 11}—wisdom
and riches; and as he gives the preference to the former in ver. 12—‘ the excellency of
knowledge is that wisdom preserveth the life of him that hath it”—we are inclined to
think that that is his view all through. And, therefore, thongh in themselves the
translations given of the first clause in the passage are about cqually balanced, < dis
consideration is in our opinion weighty enough to turn the scale in favour of that in
the Revised Version. Two things, therefore, there are which in Cifferent ways provide
means of security against some of the ills of life, which afford some “ compensation for
the misery” of our condition—wisdom and riches. By wisdom a man may to some
extent forecast the future, anticipate the coming storm, and take measures for shield-
ing himself against some or all of the evils it brings in its train. Like the unjust
steward who acted “wisely,” he can win friends who will receive him in the hour of
need. By riches, too, he can stave off many of the hardships which the poor man is
compelled to endure ; he can secure many benefits which will alleviate the sufferings he
cannot avert. But of the two wisdom is the more excellent; “it giveth life” (or
“bestoweth life,’ Revised Version) “to them that haveit.” “It can quicken a life within;
it can give salt and savour to that which wealth may only deaden and make insipid”
(Bradley). And surely by “ wisdom” here we are not to understand mere prudence, but
rather that Heaven-born faculty, that control of man’s spirit by a higher power, which
leads him to make the fear of God the guide of his conduct. And in order to under-
stand wherein it consists, and what are the benefits it secures, we may identify the
quality here praised with “that wisdom that cometh from above,” which all through
the Word of God is described as the source of all excellence, the fountain of all happi-
ness (Prov. iii, 13—18; iv. 13; viii 22<—24- Fabs ™* 4%: moe. Bs 2 Cor. iii, 6),


Vers. 18, 14.—Resignation to Providence. Already in the tenth verse the Preacher
has counselled his readers not to chafe against the conditions in which they find them-
selves. “Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better than
these?” It is part of the true wisdom which he has praised “to consider the work of
God,” to accept the outward events of life, and believe that, whether they be pleasant
or the contrary, they are determined by a will or power which we cannot control or
change. Itis wise to submit. ‘The crooked we cannot make straight (ch. i, 16); the
cross which is laid upon us we cannot shake off, and had best bear without repining
(cf. Job viii. 8; xxxiv. 12; Ps. cxlvi. 9). A mingled draught is in the cup of life—
prosperity and adversity, the sweet and the bitter. Remember that it is commended
to your lips by a higher hand, which it is folly to resist; accept the portion which may
be assigned to you. In the time of prosperity be in good spirits (ver. 14), let not
_ forebodings of future evil damp the present enjoyment; in the time of adversity consider

that it is God who has appointed the evil day as well as the good. The thought is the
same as that in the Book of Job, “ What ? shall we receive good at the hands of God, and
shall we not receive evil?” (ii. 10). The reason why both good and evil are appointed
us is given by the Preacher, though his words are somewhat obscure: “ God also hath
even made the one side by side with the other, to the end that man should not find out
anything that shall be after him” (ver. 142, Revised Version). The obscurity is in
the thought rather than in the phrases used. The commonest explanation of the
words is that they simply assert that to know the future is forbidden us. But the
phrase, “ after him,” is always used to mean that which follows upon the present world
(ch, iii, 22 ; vi. 12; Job xxi. 21), Hitzig explains the words as implying, “that because
God wills it that man shall be rid of all things after his death, he puts evil into the
par of his life, and lets it alternate with good, instead of visiting him therewith after

is death.” This explanation would make the passage equivalent to, Jdcirco ué non
tnveniat homo post se quidquam, scil. quod non expertus est, But probably the best expla-
nation of these words is that given by Delitzsch, who accepts this of Hitzig’s with some
modification : “ What is meant is much rather this, that God causes man to experience
good and evil, that he may pass through the whole school of life, and when he departs


cu. v1. 1--29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 195


ae


hence that nothing may be outstanding which he has not experienced.” This interpre-
tation of the various cvents of life, joyous and sombre, as forming a complete disciplinary
course, through which it is an advantage for us to pass, is the most worthy of the
explanations of the words that they have received. And if we accept it as truly repre-
senting the author’s thoughts, we may say that our author’s researches were not so
fruitless as he himself seems sometimes to assert. This recognition of a Divine purpose
running through all the events of life is calculated to sanctify our enjoyment of
the blessings we receive, and to comfort and sustain us in the day of sorrow and
adversity.—J. Ww.


Vers, 15—18.— Righteousness and wickedness. This section is one of the most diffi-
eult in the whole Book of Ecclesiastes, though there are no various readings in it to
perplex us, and no difficulty in translating it. Neither the Authorized Version nor the
Revised Version has alternative renderings of any part of it in the margin. The difficulty
lies in the uncertainty in which we are as to the writer’s standpoint in making out what
form of religious life or what phase of thought or conduct he refers to when he says,
‘Be not righteous overmuch.” It is equally humiliating to attempt to explain his
words away —to read into them a higher meaning than they evidently bear, or to confess
regretfully that we have here a cynical and low-toned depreciation of that which is in
itself holy and good. Both courses have been followed by commentators, and both de
dishonour to the sacred text.

I. In the first place, the Preacher states in plain terms THE GREAT AND PERPLEXING
PROBLEM WHICH 80 OFTEN TROUBLED THE HEBREW MinD—that of the adversity of
the righteous and the prosperity of the wicked. In his experience of life, in
the days of his vanity, in the course of his troubled pilgrimage, he had seen this
sizht: “There is a just man that perisheth in his righteousness”—in spite of his
righteousness; “and there is a wicked man that prolongeth his life in his wickedness ”
—in spite of his wickedness (ver. 15), It is the same problem of which varving
solutions are attempted in the Book of Job and in the thirty-seventh and seventy-
third psalms. The old theory, that the good find their reward and the wicked their
punishment in this life, was not borne out by his experience. He had scen it
violated so often that he could not hold it as even an approximate statement of the
facts of the case. What, then, is his inference from his own experience? Does
he say, “Cleave to righteousness in spite of the misfortunes which often attend it?”
or, “ Believe that somehow and somewhere the apparent inequalities of the present will
ultimately be redressed, and both righteousness and wickedness will meet with the
rewards and punishments they merit”? No; whether he might acquiesce in one or
other of these inferences or not, we cannot tell. Other thoughts are in his mind. A third
inference he draws, which would not naturally have occurred to us, but which is as
legitimate as ours.

ll. From HIS EXPERIENCE HE DEDUCES THE LESSON: “ Be not righteous overmuch ;
neither make thyself overwise: why shouldest thou destroy thyself? Be not over-
much wicked, neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time?”
Neither the righteous nor the wicked being able to count upon reward for goodness or
punishment for evil in this life as certain, both are exposed to certain risks—the one is
tempted to adopt an exaggerated and feverish form of religious life, the other to enter
on a course of unbridled wickedness, That there is a tendency to exaggeration in
matters of religion is abundantly proved by the history of asceticism, which has made
its appearance in every religion, true or spurious. ‘The ascetic is the man who is
“righteous overmuch.” He denies himself all pleasures through the fear of sin; he
separates himself, not merely from vicious indulgences, but from occupations and amuse-
ments which he admits are innocent enough and lawful enough for those who have not
the end in view he has set before himself. He is not content with the good works
commanded by the Law of God; he must have his works of supererogation. The Pharisee
in the parable (Luke xviii. 9—14) is a typical person of this class. He claimed merit
for going beyond the requirements of the Law. Moses appointed but one fast-day in the
year, the great Day of Atonement; he b ested that he fasted twice in the week. The Law
commanded only to tithe the fruits of the field and increase of the cattle; but he no
doubt tithed mint and cummin, all that came into his possession, down to the veriest


196 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cn. vir. 1—29,


——


trifle. And the aim is in all cases the same—the accumulation of a store of merit
which will compel a reward if God is not to show himself unjust ; an attempt to fores
from his hand a benediction which others cannot claim who have not adopted the same
course. The folly and impiety of such conduct must be apparent to any well-balanced
mind. The blessing of Heaven is not to be extorted by any attempt we may make; it
may, so far at any rate as outward appearances go, be bestowed capriciously : “The just
man nay perish in his righteousness, the wicked man may prolong his life in his wicked-
ness.” On the other hand, the fact that punishment for sin is not inevitably and inva-
riably visited immediately upon the evil-doer is undoubtedly the source of danger te
those who are inclined to vice. The fact that justice is slow and lame tempts the sinner
to an unbridled course of evil ; it removes one great restraint upon his conduct. He trusts
to the lightness of his heels to escape from punishment until he runs into the arms of
death. Nome have been as shocked at the counsel, “Be not overmuch wicked,” as at
that “Be not righteous overmuch,” as though the writer allowed that a certain moderate
degree of wickedness were permissible. ‘They should, if they are lovical, be equally
horrified at the admonition of St. James, “ Wherefore lay apart all filthiness and super-
fluity of naughtiness” (i. 21). It is in both cases a prohibition of a headlong pursuit
of sin, without regard to the fearful consequences it entails. The Preacher las in view
the consequences in the present life of being “righteous vvermuch.” The result in both
instances is pretty much the same. To the one he says, “ Why shouldest thou destroy
thyself? ”—to the other, “ Why shouldest thou die before thy time?” Both classes
lose the pleasure of living, the bright, innocent joys which spring from a grateful accept-
ance and temperate use of the blessings which God bestows upon men. ‘Tlie ascetic who
makes it his aim to torture himself to the very limit of human endurance, and the
debauchee who gives himself up to self-indulgence without restraint, each receive, though
in diff-rent ways, the penalty due for violating the conditions of life in which God has
set us. Another warning is given in the same passage against intellectual errors.
“Neither make thyself overwise; neither be thou foolish.” Wisdom, too, has limits
within which it should be confined. There is a region of the unknowable into which ‘t
is presumptuous for it to attempt tointrude. ‘ Fools rush in where anvels fear to tread.”

III. The Preacher, in conclusion, points out that A MIDDLE COURSE IS THAT OF DUTY
AND OF SAFETY. ‘lhere are dangers on the right hand and on the left, of over-rigorous
austerity and of undue laxity. But the God-fearing are able to walk in the narrow
path, and emerge at last unscathed from all the temptations with which life is surrounded.
“It is good that thou shoildest take hold of this; yea, also from that withdraw not thine
hand, for he that feareth God shall come forth of them all.” The words “this” and
“that” refer to the two different precepts he has given. ‘“ Lay thine hand it is good
to do so,” he says, “on the one precept, ‘ Be not righteous overmuch;’ but do not lose
sight of the other, ‘Be not overmuch wicked.’ It is he that feareth God that shall
steer his way between both.”

Without, therefore, distorting the words of the Preacher to give them a more spiritual
meaning or higher tone than they actually possess, we find in them teaching which is
worthy of him and of the Word of God. It is remarkable indeed, how, even in his most
desponding moods, the fear of God bulks largely in his thoughts as incumbent on men,
and as opening up the path of duty, however much else remains dark and unknown.
“In his coldest, grayest hour this sense of the fear of God still smoulders, as it were,
within his soul ; not, indeed, the quickening love of God, but something that inspires
reverence; something that saves him from utter shipwreck amidst the crossing and
eddying currents of the sunless sea of hopeless pessimism ” (Bradley).—J. W.. ss


Vers, 19—22.— Wisdom a protection. The connection between these words and those
that precede them seems somewhat loose. But the Preacher has just been speaking of
“the fear of God,” and some one of those passages of Scripture, which assert that
in it is true wisdom (Prov. i. 7; Ps. cxi. 10; Job xxviii. 28), may have been in his
mind. He now speaks of the protection and strength which wisdom gives, and of
the sort of conduct becoming those who possess it (ver. 19). “ Wisdom strengtheneth
tbe wise man more than ten mighty men which are in the city.” Why ten mighty
men are spoken of is a question difficult to answer. It may be that “ten” is meant to
suggest “a full number” (cf. Gen, xxx: 7; Job xix. 3), or perhaps we have here an


on. vil. 1—29.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 197


allusion to some political or other arrangements of the time now unknown to us. But
the evident meaning of the verse is that the wisdom that fears God is better than
material force, that in it there is a ground of confidence better than weapons of war
(cf. Prov. xxiv. 5a, “A wise man is strong”). In the words that follow we have man’s
fallibility strongly insisted on in words quoted from the prayer of Solomon at the dedi-
cation of the temple (1 Kings viii. 46), “For there is not a just man upon earth that
doeth good and sinneth not,” and the inference seems to be that “the wisest at times
commit mistakes, but their wisdom enables them to get the better of their mistakes, and
joe. them against the evil consequences which happen in such cases to the unwise.”

his thought leads on to the teaching of vers. 21, 22. The wise man who remembers
his own mistakes and offences will judge leniently of others, and not punish them as
offenders for their occasional hasty words. Indifference to idle praise or idle blame
becomes the possessor of true wisdom. For him, to use St. Paul’s words, “ It is a very
small thing to be judged of man’s judgment” (1 Cor. iv. 8). An idle curiosity to know
what others think of us or say of us is the source of constant mortification. We expect
praise, and forget that others are as frivolous and hasty in their criticism of us as we
have been in our criticism of them. ‘The servant who waits on us, and from whom we
expect special reverence, would probably, if we could hear him without his knowledge,
say much about us that would surprise and mortify us, Let us therefore not be too
eager to hear our character analyzed and discussed.


“ Where ignorance is bliss,
*Tis folly to be wise.”


Some excuse may be found for the motto of the old Scottish family which expresses this
indifference to the opinion of others in the most pointed form: “ They say. What say
they? Let them say.”—J. W.


Vers, 23—29.—Woman. The limitations of human knowledge are nowhere more
plainly indicated than in the opening verse of the present section. The Preacher points
out that after his utmost endeavours to obtain wisdom with the view of solving the
perplexing questions connected with mankind, their actions and their relation to
God, he found all such knowledge to be far beyond mortal ken (Wright). ‘For
that which is,” that which exists, the world of things in its essence and with its causes,
“ig far off,” far removed from the sight of man, “and it is deep, deep ; who can discover
it?” (vers. 23, 24). Essential wisdom appeared to him as to Job (xxviii.), quite out of
reach. But all his efforts after it had not been in vain. In the course of his researches
he had discovered some truth of great value. Though the problems of the universe
proved to be insoluble, some lessons had been learned of practical value in the conduct
of life. Some rules for present guidance he had discovered, though much remained
hidden from him. So is it in every age. The sagest philosophers, the profoundest
thinkers, are baffled in their endeavours to explain the mysteries of life, but are able to
lay down rules for present conduct which approve themselves to the consciences of all.
And happy is it for us that it should be so; that while clouds hang over many regions
into which the intellect of man would fain penetrate, the way of duty is plain for all.
One great truth he learned, that wickedness was folly, that foolishness was madness,
that men who lived in the pursuit of folly were beside themselves and were mad (ver.
25). This thought is very closely akin to the teaching of the Stoics, that the wicked-
ness of men is a kind of mental aberration, and that knowledge is but another name
for righteousness. One great source of wickedness he introduces in ver. 26—the fatal
fascination of so many by scheming and voluptuous women. The picture he draws is
like those in Prov. ii. and vii., and, but for the more sweeping condemnation in the
verses that follow, might be thought to express reprobation of a certain degraded class
rather than a cynical estimate of the whole of womankind. One man, he says, he had
found among a thousand, oue only what aman ought to be; but not one woman among
the same number who corresponded to the ideal of womanhood, who reminded him of
the innocence and goodness of Eve as God created her (ver. 29). The race, both men
and women, had been created upright, but had become almost utterly corrupt by the
devices they had invented by which to gratify their inclinations toward evil. What
are we to make of his words? Is the case really as bad as he represents it? The


198 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vit. 1—17


answer to the question is not far to seek. The Preacher is recording his own experi-
ence, and if we take his words as a truthful report, we can only say that he was specially
unfortunate in his experience. There is no doubt that in some countries and in some
ages of the world, corruption is very widespread and deep, and in the land and time in
which our author lived matters may have been as bad as he represents them. But the
experience of a single life does not afford sufficient ground for broad generalizations
concerning human nature. The words may be an expression of that terrible feeling of
satiety and loathing which is the curse fullow ng upon gross sensuality such as that of
the historical Solomon, with his three hundred wives and seven hundred concubines.
No sensible person would take the moralizings of the satiated debauchee without very
considerable deductions. Those of a chaste, temperate, God-fearing man are much more
likely to hit the truth. We may grant that search had been made, and not one woman
among the thousand whose dispositions and characters had been passed in review
approved herself worthy of praise as like what a true woman should be, and still doubt
whether the thousand were fair representatives of their sex. Did he search in the right
quarter ? or were the women the population of his seraglio? If they were, we cannot
wonder that, in an institution which is itself an outraze upon human nature, all its
inhabitants were found corrupt. Fora very different estimate of the female character
as exemplified in some of its representatives, we have only to read the praises of the
Shulamite in the Song of Songs, and of the virtuous women described in Prov. v. 18, 19;
xxxi. 10—31, And Scripture itself is rich in the histories of good women. There are
those of patriarchal times whose tender grace gives such an idyllic charm to so many
incidents of that early age. The names of Sarah, Rebekah, and Rachel call up ideas of
purity, innocence, piety, and steadfast love, as a rich inheritance they have left to the
race. Miriam, Hannah, Ruth, and Esther, too, suggest a world of goodness and holi-
ness which was quite unknown to the ex=wrience of the writer of these dark and sombre
words in Ecclesiastes. ‘hen in the Wew Testament we have the luminous figures of
the Virgin-mother, the Prophetess Anna, the devout women who ministered to Christ
and stood by his cross, and were early in the morning at his sepulchre, and were the
first to believe in him as their risen Lord. There are those in the long list recorded in
the Epistles of St. Paul, who were zealous fellow-labourers with him in all good works,
who, by their deeds of hospitality, their kindly ministrations to the poor and sick and
bereaved, reproved the wickedness of the world in which they lived, and gave promise
of the rich harvest of goodness which would spring from the holy teaching and example
of the Redeemer, And in no Christian country have abundant examples been wantin:

of the pure and devoted love by which mothers and wives and sisters have enriched a
blessed the lives of those connected with them, and redeemed their sex from the stigma
cast upon it by gross-minded and corrupt men. No persecutions have ever wasted any
section of the Christian Church without finding among women as true and steadfast
witnesses for the cause of Christ as among men.


“ A noble army— men and boys,
The matron and the maid,
Around the Saviour’s throne rejoice,
In robes of light array’d.
They climb’d the steep uacent of heaven
Through peril, toil, and pain;
O God, to us may grace be given


To follow in their train |
J. W.
EXPOSITION.
5 CHAPTER VIIL oppressive a tyrant may prove sure retribue


tion awaits him.
Vers. 1—9.—Secti : i i :
ee Soton Skee ee Ver. 1.—Who is as the wise man? i.e,


wepining or rebelling; true wisdom counsels Who is like, equal to, the wise man? The
obedience to the powers that be, and submission | somewhat sudden question occurs naturally
to the dispensations of Providence, However | after the results of the search for wisdom


on. vir. 1—17.}


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


199


mentioned at the end of the last chapter. ; is like the wise man?” I, who am now


The thought is not, as in Hos. xiv. 9 and
Jer. ix. 12, “ Who is wise?” but—No one can
be compared with a wise man; he has no
compeer. And who [like him] knoweth the
interpretation of a thing? Who, so well as
the wise man, understands the proper rela-
tion of circumstances, sees into human
affairs and God’s dispensations in the case
of nations and individuals? Such a one
takes the right view of life. The word
pesher, “interpretation,” occurs (peshar)
continually in Daniel, and nowhere else,
and is Chaldaic. The Vulgate, which con-
nects these two cl.uses with ch, vii., renders,
Quis cognovit solutionem verbi? So the
Septuagint. The“ word” or “saying ” may
be the question proposed above concerning
the happy life, or the proverb that imme-
diately follows. But dabar is better ren-
dered “thing,” as ch. i. 8; vii. 8. A man’s
wisdom maketh his face to shine; Septua-
gint, dwtie?, “will enlighten, illuminate.”
The serene light within makes itself visible
in the outward expression; the man is con-
tented and cheerful, and shows this in his
look and bearing. This is an additional
praise of wisdom. Thus Kvclus. xiii. 25,
26, “The heart of man changeth his coun-
tenance, whether it be for good or evil. A
cheerful countenance is a token of a heart
that is in prosperity.” Cicero, ‘ De Orat.,’
iii. 57, “Omnes enim motus animi suum
quemdam a natura habet vultum et sonum
et gestum; corpusque totum hominis et vjus
omuis vultus omnesque voces, ut nervi in
fidibus, ita sonant, ut motu animi quoque
sunt pulse.” And the boldness of his face
shall be changed. ‘The word translated
“boldness” is iy, which means properly
“strength,” and is best taken of tle course-
ness and impudence engendered by ignor-
ance and want of culture. Wisdom, when it
fills the heart, changes tle: countenance to
an open genial look, which wins confidence
and love. Delitzsch refers to the well-
worn lines of Ovid, ‘ Epist.,’ ii. 9. 47—


“ Adde, quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter
artes
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros.”


The Septuagint, “And a man shameless in
countenance will be hated,” shows an altera-
tion in the text, and does not agree with tlie
context. Vulgate, Ht potentissimus factem
tllius commutabit, ret the Almighty will
change his face,” where again the text is
not accurately followed.

Ver. 2.—I counsel thee to keep the king’s
commandment. ‘The pronoun J stands in
the Hebrew without a verb (the Vulgate,
Ego os regis observo, is not warranted by the
grammar of the clause), and some take it as
the answer to the question in ver. 1, “ Who


teaching you. But it is better to regard
the pronoun as emphasizing the following
rule, supplying some verb (which may pos-
sibly have dropped out of the text), as, “ Say,
advise—I, for my pait, whatever others
muy do or advise, I counsel thee;” the
injunction being given in the imperative
mood. The Septuagint and Syriac oniit the
pronoun altogether. The warning implies
that the writer was living under kingly, and
indeed despotic, government, and it was the
part of a wise man to exhibit cheerful
obedience. Ben-Sira observes that wise met
teach us how to serve great men (Hcclus.
viii 8). Such conduct is not only prudent,
but really a religious duty, even as the
prophets counse! submission to Assyrian and
Chaldean rulers (see Jer. xxvii. 12; xxix. 7;
Wzek. xvii. 15). The liege lord, being God’s
viccg: rent, must be reverenced and obeyed.
St. Panl, though he does not quote Eccle-
siastes, may have had this passage in mind
when he wrote (Rom. xiii. 1), “ Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers. Vor
there is no power but of God: the powers
that be are ordained of God,” ete.; and
(ver. 5), “Ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience’
sake.” The “king” in the text is under-
stoud by some to mean God, but the follow-
ing clause renders this improbable, and it is
wisdom in its political aspect that is here
revarded, And that in regard of the oath
of God. The vav is explicative; “in regard
of,” or “ because of,” as ch. iii, 18. ‘The
oath of God” is the oath of allegiance to the
king, taken in the name of God, under his
invocation (comp. Exod. xxii. 11; 1 Kings
ii. 43). So we read (2 Kings xi. 17) of a
covenant between king and people, and
people and king, in the time of Jehoiuda;
Nebuchadnezzar made Zedekiah swear by
God to be his vassal (2 Chron. xxxvi. 13);
and Josephus (‘ Ant.,’ xii. 1; xi. 8 3) re-
lates that Ptolemy Soter, son of Lagus
(following herein the example of Darius),
exacted-an oath from the Jews in Egypt to
be true to him and his successors, We
know that both Babylonian and Persian
monarchs exacted au oath of fealty from
conquered nations, making them swear by
the gods whom they worshipped, the selec-
tion of deities being left to them.

Ver. 3.—Further advice concerning poli-
tical behaviour. Be not hasty to go out of
his (the king’s) sight. Do not, from some
hasty impulse, or induced by harsh treat-
ment, cast off your allegiance to your liege
lord. We have the phrase, “go away,” in
the sense of quitting of service or desertion
of a duty, in Gen. iv. 16; Hos. xi. 2. So St.
Peter urges servants to be subject unto theix
masters, “not only to the good and gentle,


200


but also to the froward” (1 Pet. ii. 18).
Solomon might have given this advice to
the Israelites who were ready to follow
Jeroboam’s lead; though they could have
remained loyal to Rehoboam only from high
religious motives. But it is better to bear
even a heavy yoke than to rebel. The
Septuagint has, “ Be not hasty ; thou shalt
go from his presence”—which seems to
mean, “Be not impatient, and all will be
well.” But the authorized rendering is cor-
rect (comp. ch. x. 4). We may quote Men-
delssohn’s comment cited by Cliance on Job
xxxiv. 16, “This is a great rule in politics,
that the people must have no power to pro-
nounce judgment upon the conduct of a
king, whether it be good or bad; for the
king judges the people, and not the reverse ;
and if it were not for this rule, the country
would never be quiet, and without rebels
against the king and hislaw.” Stand not in
an evil thing; Vulgate, Neque permaneas in
opere malo, “ Persist not in an evil affair.”
But the verb here implies rather the en-
gaging in a matter than continuing an
undertaking already begun. The “affair”
is conspiracy, insurrection; and Koheleth
warns against entering upon and taking
pee in any such attempt. This seems to
the correct explanation of the clause;
but it is, perhaps intentionally, ambiguous,
and is capable of other interpretations.
Thus Ginsburg, “Do not stand up (in a
passion) because of an evil word.” Others,
“Obey not a sinful command,” or “ Hesi-
tate not at an evil thing,” ze. if the king
orders it. Wordsworth, referring to Ps. i. 1.
renders, “Stand not in the way of sinners,”
which seems to be unsuitable to the context.
The Septuagint gives, “Stand not in an
evil word ” (Ady, perhaps “ matter”), The
reason for the injunction follows. For he
doeth whatsoever pleaseth him. The irre-
sponsible power of a despotic monarch is | ere
signified, though the terms are applicatle
(as some, indeed, take tlem as alone apper-
taining) to God himself (but see Prov. xx.
2). The Septuagint combines with ti.is
clause the commencement of the following
verse, ‘* For he will do whatsover he pleases,
even as a king using authority (éfovcid(wy).”
Some manuscripts add AaAci, “he speaks.”
Ver. 4.—Where the word of a king is,
there is power. A further confirmation of
the last thought. More accurately, “ Inas-
much as the word of a king is powerful”
(shilton, ver. 8). This last word is used in
Daniel (iii. 2) for “a lord,” or “ruler.” The
king does as he thinks fit because his man-
date is all-powerful, and must be obeyed.
Aud who may say unto him, What doesy


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(on viii, 1—17


spoken of in the same ‘terms as the irre-
sistible power of Almighty God.


Elkay 88 BacAdhp éorw Zupuxos Oeov.
“@od’s living image is an earthly king.”


Ver. 5.—Whoso keepeth the command-
ment shall feel no evil thing. This is an
encouragement to obedience to royal autho-
rity (comp. Prov. xxiv. 21, 22; Rom. xiii.
3). The context plainly shows that it is not
God’s commandment that is spoken of
(though, of course, the maxim would be very
true in this case). but the king’s. Nor is it
necessarily a servile and unreasoning obedi-
ence that is enjoined. Koheleth is dealing
with generals. Such cases as that of
Daniel and the three children, where obedi-
ence would have been sinful, are not here
taken into consideration. “Shall feel,”
literally, “shall know,” t.e. experience no
physical evil. Quiet submission to the
powers that be guarantecs a peaceful and
happy life. Ginsburg and others translate,
“knoweth not an evil word,” ¢.e. is saved
from abuse and reproach, which seems
somewhat meagre, though the Septuagint
gives, Ob yvdoera: fijua wovnpov. The Vul-
gate is better, Non experietur quidquam mali.
And a wise man’s heart discerneth (knoweth)
both time and judgment. The verb is the
same in both clauses, and ought to have
been so translated. The “heart” includes
the moral as well as the intellectual facul-
ties; and the maxim says that the wise
man bears oppression and remains unex-
cited even in evil days, because he is con-
vinced that there is a time of judgment
coming when all will be righted (ch. xii.
14). ‘The certainty of retributive justice is
so strong in his mind tliat le does not
resort to rebellion in order to rectify matters,
but possesses his soul in patience, leaving
the correction of abuses in God’s hands.
Septuagint, “The wise man’s heart knoweth
the time of judgment,” making a hendiadys
of the two terms. The Vulgate has tempus
et responsionem, “ time and answer.”

Ver. 6.—Because. This and the three
following clauses all begin with kd, “ since,”
“for,” and the conjunction ought to have been
siinilarly rendered in all the places. Thus
here, For to every purpose there is time and
judgment. Here commences a chain of
argument to prove tle wisdom of keeping
quiet under oppression or evil rulers. Every-
thing has its appointed time of duration,
and in due course will be brought to judg-
ment (see ch. iii. 1, 17; ‘xii. 14). There-
fore (for) the misery of man is great upon
him. This is a further reason, but its exact


thou? The same expression is found applied | signification is disputed. Literally, the eval
to God (Job ix. 12; Isa. xlv.9; Wisd. xii. | of the man is heavy wpon him (comp. ch. vi. 1).
12). The absolute authority of a despot is | This may mean, asin the Authorized Version,


on, vit, 1—17.]


that the affliction which subjects suffer at
the hand of a tyrant becomes insupportable,
and calls for and receives God’s interposi-
tion. Or “the evil” may be the wickedness
of the despot, which presses heavily upon
him, and under retributive justice will ere
long bring him to the ground, and so the
oppression will come to anend, This seems
to be the most natural interpretation of the
passage. The Septuagint, reading differ-
ently, has, “ For the knowledge of a man is
great upon him.” Though what this means
it is difficult to say.

Ver. 7.—For he knoweth not that which
shall be. The subject may be man in general,
or more probably the evil tyrant. The clause
contains a third reason for patience. The
despot cannot foresee the future, and goes on
blindly filling up the measure of his iniquity,
being unable to take any precautions against
his inevitable fate (Prov. xxiv. 22). Quem
Deus vult perdere prius dementat. For who
can tell him when it shall be? rather, how it
shail be. The fourth portion of the argument.
The infatuated man knows not the time when
the blow will fall, nor, as here, the manner
in whicl: the retribution will come, the form
which it will take. Septuagint, ‘ For how it
shall be, who will tell him?” The Vulgate
paraphrases inaccurately, Quia ignorat pra-
terita, et futura nullo scire potest nuntio,
“ Because he knoweth not the past, and the
future he can ascertain by no messenger.”

Ver. 8.—This verse gives the conclusion
of the line of argument which confirms the
last clause of ver. 5. ‘There is no man that
hath power over the spirit to retain the
spirit. If we take “spirit” in the sense of
“the breath of life,” explaining the clause
to mean that the mightiest despot has no
power to retain life when his call comes,
we have the same thought repeated virtually
in the next clause. It is therefore better to
take ruach in the sense of “wind” (Gen.
viii. 1). No one can control the course of the
wind or know its way (comp. ch. xi. 5, where
the same ambiguity exists; Prov, xxx. 4).
Koheleth gives here four impossibilities
which: point to the conclusion already given.
The first is man’s inability to check the
viewless wind or to know whence it comes or
whither it goes (John iii. 8). Equally im-
potent is the tyrant to influence the drift of
events that is bearing him on to his end.
God’s judgments are often likened to a wind
(sce Isa. xli. 16; Wisd.iv. 4; v. 23). Neither
hath he power in the day of death; rather,
over the day of death. ‘The second impossi-
bility concernsthe averting the hour of death.
Whether it comes by sickness, or accident, or
design, the despot must succumb; he can
neither foresee nor ward it off (1 Sam. xxvi.
10, “The Lord shall smite him; or his day
shall come to die; or he shall go down into


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,
ee a ea


eee


battle, and perish;” Ecclus. xiv. 12, “Re-
member that death will not be long in coming,
and that the covenant of the graye is not
showed unto thee”). And there is no dis-
charge in that war. The word rendered
* discharge” (mishlachath) is found elsewhere
only in Ps. lxxviii. 49, where it is translated
“sending,” mission,” or “band.” The
Septuagint here has axocroaf ; the Vulgate
Nec sinitur quiescere ingruente bello. The
Authorized Version is doubtless correct,
though there is no need to insert the pronoun
“that.” The severity of the law of military
service is considered analogously with the
inexorable law of death, The Hebrew
enactment (Deut. xx. 5—8) allowed exemp-
tion in certain cases; but the Persian rule
was inflexibly rigid, permitting no furlough
or evasion during an expedition. Thus we
read that when Giobazus, the father of three
sons, petitioned Darius to leave him one at
home, the tyrant replied that he would leave
him all three, and had them put to death,
Again, Pythius, a Lydian, asking Xerxes to
exempt his eldest son from accompanying
the army to Greece, was revile| by the
monarch in unmeasured terms, and was
punished for his presumption by seeing his
son slain before his eyes, the body diviied
into two pieces, and placed on either side of
the road by which the army passed, that all
might be warned of the fate awaiting any
attempt to evade military service (Herod., iv.
84; vii. 38). The passage in the text hasa
bearing on the authorship and date of our
book, if, as seems most probable, the reference
is to the cruel discipline of Persia. This is
the third impossibility; the fourth follows.
Neither shall wickedness deliver those that
are given toit; its lord and master. Septua-
gint, roy wap’ abris, “its votuary.” Ginsburg
translates resha “cunning;” but this seems
foreign to the sentiment, which is concerned
with the despot’s impiety, injustice, and
general wickedness, not with the means by
which he endeavours to esciupe the reward of
his deeds. The fact is, no evil despot, hows
ever reckless and imperious, can go long un-
punished. He may say in his heart, “‘ ‘There
is no God,” or, “God hideth his face, and
sees him not,’’ but certain retribution awaits
him, and may not be avoided. Says the
gnome—


“Aye Td Ociov Tovs Kakovs mpds Thy Blenv.


“ Heaven drives the evil always unto judg-
ment.”


Ver. 9.—All this have I seen (ch. v. 18;
vii. 23); 7.e. all that has been mentioned in
the preceding eight verses, especially the
conviction of retributive justice. He gained
this experience by giving his mind to the
considexation of men’s actions. There is @


202


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [om. vitt. 1—11.


ee


time wherein one man ruleth over another to
his own hurt. This version is certainly
incorrect. A new sentence is not commenced
here, but the clause is closely connected with
what precedes; and “his own hurt” should
he “his [equivocally] hurt.” Thus Wright
and Volek: “ All this have I seen, even by
applying my heart to all the work that is
done under tle sun, at a time when man
ruleth over man to his hurt.” Most modern
commentators consider that the hurt is that
of the oppressed subject; but it is possible
that the sense is intentionally ambiguous,
and the injury may be that which the despot
inflicts, and that which he has to suffer.
Both these have been signified above. There
is no valid reason for making, as Cox does,
this lust clause commence ver. 10, and
rendering, “ But there is a time when a
man ruleth over men to their hurt.”


Vers. 10—15.—Section 6. Koheleth is
troubled by apparent anomalies in God’s
moral government. He notes the prosperity
of the godless and the misery of the righteous,
God’s abstention and the seeming impunity
of sinners make men incredulous of Provi-
dence; but God is just in reward and
punishment, as the end will prove. Mean-
time, returning to his old maxim, he advises
men patiently to ucquiesce in things as they
are, and to make the best of life.

Ver. 10.—And s0 (j23:); then, in like
manner, under the same circumstances
(Esth. iv. 16). The writer notes sume ap-
parent exceptions to the law of retribution
of which he has just been speaking, the
double particle at the beginning of the verse
implying the connection with the preceding
statement. I saw the wicked buried. “The
wicked” are especially the despots (ver. 9).
These are carried to their graves with every
outward honour and respect, like the rich
man in the parable, who “died, and was
buried” (Luke xvi. 22). Such men, if
they had received their due reward, far from
having a pompous and magnificent funeral
(which would befit only a good and honoured
life), would have been buried with the
burial of an ass (comp. Isa. xiv. 19; Jer.
xxli. 19). So far the Authorized Version is
undeniably correct. What follows is as cer-
tainly inaccurate as it is uni tclligible,
Who had come and gone from .te place of
the holy; literally, and they came, and
from the place of the holy they went. The
first verb seems to mean, “ they came to their
rest,” they died a natural death. The words,
in themselves ambiguous, are explained by
the connection in which they stand (comp.
Isa, lvii. 2). Wright renders, “they came
into being,” and explains it with the


following clause, “ they went away from the
holy place,” as one generation coming and
another going, in constant succession. But
if, as we suppose, the paragraph applies to
the despot, such an interpretation is unsuit-
able. Cox’s idea, that oppressive despots
“come again” in the persons of their wicked
children, is wholly unsupported by the
text. The verse admits and has received @
dozen explanations differing more or less
from one another. A good deal depends
upon the manuer in which the succeeding
clause is translated, And they were forgotten
in the city where they had so done. As the
particle rendered “so” (ken) may also mean
“well,” “rightly,” we get the reidering,
“ even such as acted justly,” and thus intro-
duce a contrast between the fate of the
wicked man who is honoured with a sump-
tuous funeral, and that of the righteous
whose naine is cast out as pollution and soun
forgotten. So Cheyne (‘Job and Solomon’)
gives, “And in accordance with this I have
seen ungodly men honoured, and that too in
the holy place (the temple, Isa. xviii. 7), but
those who had acted rightly i.ad to depart,
and were forgotten in the city.” Against
this interpretation, which has been adopted
by many, it may reasunably be urged that
in the same verse ken would hardly be
used in two different senses, and that there
is nothing in the text to indicate a change
of subject, It seems to me that the whole
verse applies to the wicked man. He diesin
peace, he leaves the holy place; the evil that
he has done is forgotten in the very city
where he had so done, #.e. done wickedly.
“ The place of the boly ” is Jerusalem (Isa,
xlviii, 2; Matt. xxvii. 53) or the temple
(Matt. xxiv. 15). He is removed by death
from that spot, the very name of which ought
to have cried shame on his crimes and ime
piety. The expression seems to picture a
great procession: of priests and Levites
accompanying the corpse of the deccased
tyrant to the place of burial, while the final
clause implies that no long lamentation was
made over him, no monument erected to his
memory (see the opposite of this in the treate
ment of Josiah, 2 Chron. xxxv. 24, 25).
They who consider “the righteous” to be
the subject of the last clauses see in the
words, “ from the holy place they departed,”
an intimation that these were excommuni-
cated from the synagogue or temple, or
banished from the promised land, on account
of their opinions, I would translate the
passage thus: In like manner have I seen
the wicked buried, and they came to their
rest, and they went from the holy place, and
were forgotten in the city where they had so
(wickedly) acted. The versious have followed
variousreadings. Thusthe Septuagint: “And
then I saw the impious brought unto graves,


oy. voz 1—17,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


203


and from the holy place; and they departed
and were praised in the city, because tliey
had so done;” Vulgate, “I have seen the
impious buried, who also, while they still
lived, were in the holy place, and were praised
in the city as if men of just doings,” Com-
menting on this version, St. Gregory writes,
“The very tranquillity of the peace of the
Church conceals navy under the Christian
name who are beset with the plague of tueir
own wickedness. But if a light breath of
persecution strikes them, it sweeps them
away at once as chaff from the threshing-
floor. But some persons wish to bear the
mark of Christian calling, because, since the
niume of Christ has been exalted on high,
nearly all persons now look to appear faithful,
and from seeing others called thus, they are
ashamed not to seem faithful themselves;
but they neglect to be that which they boast
of being called. for they assume the reality
of inward excellence, to adorn their outward
appearance; and they who stand befure the
heavenly Judge, naked from the unbelief of
their heart, are clothed, in the sight of men,
with a holy profession, at least in words”
(‘ Moral.,’ xxv. 26). Thisisalso vanity. The
old refrain recurs to the writer as he thinks
on the prosperity of the wicked, and the
conclusions which infidels draw therefrom.
Here is anvther example of the vanity that
prevails in all earthly circumstances.

Ver. 11.—The verse states one of the
results of God’s forbearance in punishing
the evil. Because sentence against an evil
work is not executed speedily. The verse
begins with asher, “because,” as in ch. iv.
8; vi. 12, which connects the sentence with
the allegation of vanity just preceding, as
well as with what follows. Pithgam, “ sen-
tence,” “ edict,” is a foreign word of Per-ian
origin, found in Esth. i. 20 and in Chaldee
portions of Ezra (iv. 17) and Daniel (iv. 14,
etc.). God seems to us to delay in punishing
the guilty because we beliold only one little

xtion of the course of his providence;
cuuld we take a more comprehensive view,
anomalies would disappear, and we should
see the end of these men (Ps. Ixxiii. 17).
But a contracted, sceptical view leads to
two evils—first, a weakening of faith in
God’s moral government; and second, a
miserable fatalism which denies man’s re-
sponsibility and saps his energy. Of the
former of these results Koheleth here treats
Therefore the heart of the sons of men.
The heart is named as the seat of thought
and the prime mover of action (comp. ch ix,
8; Esth. vii. 5; Matt. xv. 18,19). Is fully
set in them to do evil; literally, és full in
them; i.e. their heart becomes filled with
thoughts which are directed to cvil, or full
of courage, hence “emboldened” (Revised
Version margin) to do evil. Vulyate,


absque timore ullo filit hominum perpetrunt
mala; Septuagint, “Because there is no
contradiction (av7lg5no1s) made on the part
of (amd) those who do evil speedily. therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully per-
suaded (éAnpopophOn) in them to do evil.”
The long-suffering of God, instead of leading
such men to repentance, hardens them in
their infidelity (Ps. Ixxiii. 11). Primarily,
the reference is still to tyrannical despots,
who, in their seeming impunity, are om-
boldene to pursue their evil course. But
the statement is true gencrally. As Ci-ero
says, “Quis ignorat maximam ill-cebrain
esse peccandi impunitatis spem?” (‘ Pro
Milone,’ xvi.).

Ver. 12.—Though a sinner do evil a hun-
dred times. ‘Ihe sentence begins again, as
ver. 11, with asher, followed by a participle;
and the conjunction ought to be rendered
“because,” the statement made in the former
verse being resumed and strengthened. The
Vulgate has attamen, which our version
follows. The Septuagint goes astray, trans-
lating, ds fjuaprev, ‘ He that has sinned has
done evil from that time.’ The sinner is
here supposed to have transgressed con-
tiiually without check or punishment. The
expression, “a hundred times,” is used in-
detinitely, as Prov. xvii. 10; Isa. Ixv. 20.
And his days be prolonged; better, prolongeth
his days for tt; ie. in the practice of evil,
with a kind of contentment and satisfaction,
tie pronoun lo being the ethic dative. Con-
trary to the usual course of temporal retri-
bution, the sinner often lives to old age.
The Vulgate has, Ht per patientiam susten-
tatur, which signifies that he is kept in lite
by God’s long-suffering. Ginsburg gives,
“and is perpetuated,’ i.e. in his progeny—
which is a possible, but not a probable,
rendering. Yet surely I know; rather,
though I for my part know. He has seen
sinners prosper; this experience has been
forced upon him; yet he holds an inward
conviction that God’s moral government
will vindicate itself at some time and in
some signal manner. It shall be well with
them that fear God, which fear before him.
This is not really tautologic \- it is com-
pared to St. Paul’s expression {; Tim. v. 3),
“ widows that are widows indeed ” (dvrws),
implying that they are, in fact and life, what
they profess to be. Delitzsch and Plumptre
suggest that in Koheleth’s time ‘“God-
fearers” had become the nume of & religious
class, as the Chasidim, or “ Assideans,” in
1 Mace. ii. 42; vii. 13, ete. Certain’y a
trace of this su-named party is seen in Ps.
exvili. 4; Mal. iii. 16. When this adjust-
ment of anomalies shail take place, wiether
mi this life or in another, the writer suys not
here. in spite of ull contrary appearances,
be holds firm to his faith that it will be well


204


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PRZACHER.


[ou. vir. 1—17.


Heeeeee eee eeeeee eee TE EEEEEESESnnEn SRI aaa


with the righteous in the long run. The
comfort and peace of a conscience at rest,
and the inward feeling that his life was
ordered after God’s will, would compensate
s good man for much outward trouble; and
if to this was added the assured hope of
another life, it might indeed be said that it
was well with him. The Septuagint has,
“that they may fear before him,’ which
implies that the mercy and loving-kindness
of God, manifested in his care of the
righteous, lead to piety and true religion.
Cheyne (‘Job and Solomon’), combining
this verse with the next, produces a sense
which is certainly not in the present Hebrew
text, “For I know that it ever happens
that a sinner does evil for a long time, and
yet lives long, whilst he who fears before
God is short-lived as a shadow.”

Ver. 13.—But it shall not be well with
the wicked. If experience seemed often to
militate against this assertion, Koheleth’s
faith prevailed against apparent contradic-
tions. Neither shall he prolong his days,
which are as a shadow. Above we read of
a wicked man enjoying a long, untroubled
life; here the contrary is stated. Such con-
tradictions are seen every day. There are
inscrutable reasons for the delay of judg-
ment; but on the whole moral government
is vindicated, and even the long life of a
sinner is no blessing. The author of the
Book of Wisdom writes (iv. 8), “Honour
able age is not that which standeth in length
of time, nor that is measured by number
of years;” and Isaiah (ixv. 20), “The
sinner being an hundred years old shall be
accursed.” Man’s life is compared to a
shadow because it passes away with the
setting sun (see on ch. vi. 12). The Vul-
gate, in order to obviate the apparent dis-
crepancy between this and the preceding
verses, renders the verb in a precatory form:
Non sit bonum impio, etc., “Let it not be
well with the wicked, and let his days not
be prolonged ; but let them pass away as a
shadow who fear not the Lord.” This is
quite unnecessary; and the words, “as a
shadow,” according to the accents, belong to
what precedes, as in the Authorized Version.
Hitzig and others have adopted the Vulgate
division, and render, “ Like a shadow is he
who fears not God.” But there is no suffi-
cient reason for disregarding the existing
accentuation. Septuagint, ‘“ He shall not
prolong his days in a shadow (éy oxia).”
Because ho feareth not before God. This is
the reason, looking to temporal retribution,
why the wicked shall not live out half their
days (ch. vii. 17; Prov. x. 27; Ps. lv. 23).
Koheleth cleaves to the doctrine received
from old time, although facts seem often to
eontradict it.

Ver. 14.—There is a vanity which is done


upon the earth. The vanity is named in
what follows, viz. the seeming injustice in
the distribution of good and evil. There be
just men, unto whom it happeneth accord-
ing to the work of the wicked (comp. ver. 10;
ch. iii. 16). The melancholy fact is noted
that the righteous often experience that fate
with which the wicked are threatened, which
their conduct might be expected to bring
upon them. The verb translated “ happen-
eth” (naga), with el, “to come to,” “strike
against,” is thus used only in later Hebrew,
e.g. sth. ix. 26. According to the work
of the righteous. The wicked meet with
that outward prosperity and success which
were thought to be the special reward of
those who served God. The Vulgate is ex-
planatory, “There are just men whom evils
befall, as if they did the works of the wicked ;
and there are wicked men who are as free
from care as if they had the deeds of the
just.” Commenting on Job xxxiv. 10, 11,
St. Gregory writes, “It is by no means
always the case in this life that God renders
to each man according to his work and ac-
cording to his own ways. For both many
who commit unlawful and wicked deeds he
prevents of his free grace, and converts to
works of holiness; and some who are devoted
to good deeds he reproves by means of the
scourge, and so afilicts those who please
him, as though they were displeasing to
him. ... God doubtless so ordains it of
his inestimable mercy, that both scourges
should torture the just, lest their doings
should elate them, and that the unjust
should pass this life at least without punish-
ment, because by their evil doings they are
hastening onwards to those torments which
are without end. For that the just are
sometimes scourged in no way according to
their deserts is shown by this history of Job.
Elihu, therefore, would speak more truly if
he had said that there is not unmercifulness
and iniquity in God, even when he seems
not to render to men according to their ways.
For even that which we do not understand
is brought forth from the righteous balance
of secret judgment” (‘ Moral.,’ xxiv. 44).
Koheleth ends by repeating his melancholy
refrain, I said that this also (¢ndeed) is
vanity. This conclusion, however, does not
lead to despa‘> or infidelity.

Ver. 15.—Then (and) I commended mirth.
In face of the anomalies which meet us in
our view of life, Koheleth recommends the
calm enjoyment of such blessings and com-
forts as we possess, in exact accordance with
what has already been said (ch. ii. 24; fii
12, 22; v. 18), though the road by which he
arrives at the conclusion is not identical in
both cases. In the earlier chapters the in«
Junction is based on man’s inability to be the
master of his own fate; in the present pas-


ou, vil. 1—17.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


sage the inscrutable nature of the Jaw that
directa God’s moral government leads to the
advice to make the best of circumstances.
In neither instance need we trace veiled
Epicureanism. The result obtained is reached
by acute observation supplemented by faith
in God. Underthesun. The phrase occurs
twice in this verse and again in ver. 17, and
implies that the view taken was limited to
man’s earthly existence, To eat, and to drink,
etc. Thisis not a commendation of a grecdy,
voluptuous life, but an injunction thankfully
to enjoy the good provided by God without
disquieting one’s self with the mysteries of
Providence. So it was said of Israel in its
pany days (1 Kings iy. 20), “Judah and

srael were many, as the sand which is by
the sea in multitude, eating and drinking,
and making merry.” For that shall abide
with him of his labour; rather, and that
this should accompany him in his labour.
The Greek Version regards the verb as indi-
catiye, not subjunctive, nor, as others, as
jussive: “This shall attend (evyrpocecrat)
him in his work.” But it seems better to
consider Koheleth as saying that the happiest
thing for a man is to make the best of what
he has, and to take with him in all his work
a cheerful and contented heart.


Ver. 16 — ch. ix. 10.—Section 7 (the
division in the theme caused by the introduc-
tion of anew chapter is misleading). Man’s
wisdom és incapable of explaining the course
of God’s providential government; death
awaits all without any exception, whatever be
their condition or actions. These two con-
siderations conduce to the old conclusion,
that man had best enjoy life, only being
careful to use it energetically and well.


Vers. 16, 17.— No mortal wisdom, com-
bined with the closest observation and
thought, can fathom the mysteries of God’s
moral government.


Ver. 16.— When I applied mine heart
(ch. i. 13). The answering member of the
sentence is in ver. 17, the last clause of the
present verse being parenthetical. Toknow
wisdom. ‘This was his first study (see on
ch. i. 16). He endeavoured to acquire wisdom
which might enable him to investigate God’s
doings. His second study was to see the
business that is done upon the earth; i.e. not
only to learn what men do in their several
stations and eallings, but likewise to under-
stand what all this means, what it tends to,
its objectand result. (For “business,” inyan,
see on ch. i. 13.) The Vulgate here renders
it distentionem, “ distraction,” which is like
the Septuagint repiswacudy. For aiso there
is that neither day nor night seeth sleep with


205


his eyes. This is a parenthetical clause ex-
pressing either the restless, unrelieved labour
that goes on in the world, or the sleepless
meditation of one who tries to solve the pro-
blem of the order and disorder in men’s lives.
In the latter case, Koheleth may be giving
his own experience. To “see sleep” is to
enjoy sleep. The phrase is not found else-
where in the Old Testament, but commen-
tators quote parallels from classical sources,
Thus Terence, ‘ Heautontim..,’ iii. 1. 82—


“Somnum hercle ego hac noote oculis non
vidi meis.”

“No sleep mine eyes have seen this livelong
night.”


Cicero, ‘Ad Famil., viii. 30, “Fuit miri-
fica vigilantia, qui toto suo consulatu som-
num non vidit.” Of course, the expression
is hyperbolical. The same idea is found
without metaphor in such passages as Ps,
exxxii. 4; Prov. vi. 4.

Ver. 17.—Then I beheld all the work of
God. This is the apodosis to the first clause
of ver. 16. “God’s work” is the same as the
work that is done under the sun, and means
men’s actions and the providential ordering
thereof. This a man, with his finite under-
standing, cannot find out, cannot thoroughly
comprehend or explain (comp. ch. iii. 11;
vii. 23, 24). Because though a man labour
to seek it out. ‘The Septuagint has, “Oca dy
poxohon, “ Whatsoever things a man shall
labour to seek;” Vulzate, Quanto plus labor-
averit ud querendum, tanto minus inveniat.
The interpreters waver between “ how much
so ever,” and “ wherefore a man labours.”
The latter seems to be best. Though a wise
man think to know it, yet shall he not be able
to find it. It is the part of wisdom to deter-
mine to know all that can be known; but the
resolution is baffled here (comp. ch. vii. 23).
The two verses, with their repetitions and
tautologous expressions, seem to denote per-
turbation of mind in the author and his sense
of the gravity of his assertions. He is over-
whelmed with the thought of the inscruta-
bility of God’s judgments, while he is forced
to face the facts. An exquisite commentary
on this passage is found in Hooker, ‘ Eccl.
Pol.,’ i. 2. § 2, quoted by Plumptre; and in
Bishop Butlers sermon ‘On the Ignorance
of Man,’ where we read, “ From it [the know-
ledge of our ignorance] we may learn with
what temper of minda man ought to inquire
into the subject of religion, namely, with
what expectation of finding difficulties, and
with a disposition to take up and rest satis-
fied with any evidence whatever which is
real. A man should beforehand expect things
mysterious, and such as he will not be able
thoroughly to comprehendor goto the bottom
of. . . . Our ignorance is the proper answer
to many thinga which are called objections


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


fon. vir. 1—17.


rr


against religion, particularly to those which
arise from the appearance of evil and irregu-
larity in tho constitution of nature and the
government of the world. . . . Since the con-
stitution of nature and the methods and
designs of Providence in the government of
the world are above our comprehension, we
should acquiesce in and rest satisfied with
our ignorance, turn our thoughts from that
which is above and beyond us, and apply
ourselves to that which is level to our capa-
cities, and which is our real business and
concern. .. . Lastly, let us adore that in-
finite wisdom and power and goodness which


The conclusion is that in all lowliness of
mind we set lightly by ourselves; that we
form our temper to an implicit submission to
the Divine Majesty, beget within ourselves
an absolute resignation to all the methods
of his providence in his dealings with the
children of men; that in the deepest hum.lity
of our souls we prostrate oursel ves before him,
and join in that celestial song, ‘Great and
marvellous are thy works, Lord God
Almighty; just and true are thy ways, thou
King of saints. Who shall not fear thee,
O Lord, and glorify thy Name?’ (Rev. xv.
8, 4)” (comp. Rom. xi. 33).


is above our comprehension (Ecclus. i. 6).


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 1.—A wise man’s supertority—in what does tt consist? 1. IN PENETRATION
oF INTELLECT. He knoweth not merely things, but the interpretation thereof. Among
the Chaldeans the interpretation of dreams was a special branch of wisdom professed by
magicians and astrologers (Dan. ii. 4—13). A wise man—using the term in its widest
sense—has clearer insight than ordinary mortals into the essences of things. To him
pertains the faculty of searching into and discovering the causes of events (cf. “ Naturam
cognoscere rerum,” Lucretius, iii, 1072). In particular he has insight into: 1. The
secrets of nature. He is qualified to understand and explain phenomena which to
ordinary minds are mysterious and inscrutable, 2. The events of history. He is able fre-
quently to trace the under-currents moving society, and bringing about occurrences which
to common minds are inexplicable. 3, The wonders of revelation, He can discover in
sacred Scripture truths veiled to unenlightened eyes. 4. The mysteries of grace. Pos-
sessed of an unction from the Holy One, he can understand all things (1 John ii. 20, 27).

Tl, In ELEVATION oF CHARACTER, “A man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine.”
“Tt scarcely needs a proof that the countenance or front of the head is regarded in
Scripture as the mirror of Divine influences upon the man—of all affections, and of the
entire life of soul and spirit.” ‘In the physiognomy is reflected the moral condition
of the man” (Delitzsch’s ‘ Bib. Paych.,’ p. 301; Clark). “ Many a poet, and seer, and
martyr, and reformer, and woman of the finest fibre has at times had a face that has
looked like porcelain with a light behind it ” (Joseph Cook, ‘ Boston Noonday Lectures,’
2nd series, p. 148). The wise man’s face shines because of three things: 1. The light
of truth tn his understanding. The wise man is essentially a child of light. A
luminous intellect makes a radiant countenance. 2. The light of purity in his heart.
There are faces which glow and beam with a soft silver sheen, as if they had shed off
all that was gross and material, animal and brutish, and were spiritualized into a fine
ethereal essence ; because they reflect upon their surface the pure, sweet, chaste, and
holy emotions that stir the clear depths of their bosoms within. 3. Zhe light of life in
his consctence, In the wise man the moral faculty is not dead, torpid, dull, and besotted ;
but alive, bright, sensitive, and vigorous; and what Cook calls the solar look in a face
“arises from the activity of the higher nature when conscience is supreme” (* Boston
Noonday Lectures,’ 2nd series, p. 149).

III. IN REFINEMENT OF MANNERS. “The hardness,” or strength, “of a wise man’s
face is changed.” “The coarse ferocity of ignorance” is in him “transformed by
culture” (Plumptre). What Ovid says of human learning—it


“ Makes manners gentle, rescues men from strife ””—


is true of heavenly wisdom, which is “first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and e

entreated,” etc. (Jas. iii. 17). ‘* Wisdom gives to a faa bright ba a antler pase
nance, @ noble expression; it refines and dignifies h. -xternal appearance and his
demeanour; the hitherto rude external, and the rude regardless, selfish, and bold
deportment, are changed into their contraries” (Delitzsch). The change may be: 1.


Gradeat, as all moral transformations are slow, “ from stage to stage,” “ first the blade


ry,


on. vit. 1—17.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 207
ee ee
and then the ear, and after that the full corn in the ear;” but it must be: 2. Actual,
otherwise there is no reason to suppose the individual has become possessed of wisdom ;
and it will eventually be: 3. Vis¢ble to all, so that all beholding him shall reccgnize in
him the gentleness of one who has studied in wisdom’s school. Christ, in whom are
hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge (Col. ii. 3), was the highest impersonation
the world ever witnessed of true gentleness and refinement. ‘


Vers. 2—6.—“ Honour the king.” I. THE subsECT’s DUTY TOWARDS THR KING.
1, To keep the king’s command. Unless conscience interposes with a clear and distinct
veto, as in the cases of Moses’ parents (Heb. xi. 23), Daniel and his companions in
Babylon (ch. i. 8; iii, 16—18; vi. 10), and the apostles before the Sanhedrin (Acts
iv. 19, 20), it is the duty of all to render obedience to the civil power, kingly or
magisterial, even though the doing of this should entail suffering and hardship (Rom.
xiii. 1—7; Titus iii. 1; 1 Pet. ii, 13—15). 2. To abide in the king’s service. The
subject should not be hasty “to go out of the king’s presence,” in the sense of cither
renouncing allegiance to the king’s throne, or deserting the post of duty he has received
from the king. The obligation to preserve one’s loyalty, however, is not absolute.
Times may come when insurrection is a duty, as in the revolution which overthrew
Athaliah (2 Chron. xxiii. 15; 2 Kings xi. 16). Nor can it be maintained that states-
men should never desert their sovereigns. When these embark on projects the con-
sciences of their ministers cannot approve, it is incumbent on these ministers to leave
them. Only nations should not resort to revolutionary practices without due con-
sideration, and statesmen should not resign their portfolios in a fit of haste. 3. To
preserve the king’s favour. This the subject will usually do, if he “ persist not in an
evil thing,” t.e. if he take no part in conspiracies against the king’s power or person;
as he certainly will lose the king’s favour by acting otherwise.

If. THE GROUNDS ON WHICH THE SUBJECT’S DUTY RESTS. 1. The sanctions of religion.
These as much bind the subject as if the subject had individually sworn an oath in
God’s presence. The relationship existing between king and people being of Divine
appointment, the subject is practically bound as by a solemn covenant in God’s sight
to render obedience and loyalty to his sovereign (cf. 2 Chron. xxiii. 16; xxxvi. 13).
Nor does religion exempt the subject from such obligation even when the king is
unworthy and his rule oppressive (Jer. xxix. 7; Matt. xxii. 21). 2. The power of the
king. This also a reason why the subject should not raise the standard of rebellion
without just cause, or offer unreasonable resistance to the carrying out of royal com-
mands, that the king, as representative of the supreme power of the state, is usually able
to enforce obedience and loyalty at least of an external kind, “The king doeth what-
soever pleaseth him,” etc. (vers. 3, 4). The language applies to Oriental despots more
than to constitutional monarchs, 3. The safety of the subject. Under arbitrary rule
such as the Preacher alluded to, the way of submission was the way of safety. It
might not, indeed, promise much good to the individual quietly to suk ait to a power he
could not resist; but at least it would largely protect him against evil. Ideal rulers
should be a fountain of blessing to their loyal as well as a force of repression to their
disloyal subjects (Rom. xiii. 3). 4. The dictates of wisdom. ‘The subject who might
feel impelled to rebellion and disobedience perceives that, as “ to every purpose there is
a time and judgment” (¢.e. a boundary beyond which it cannot pass, and a judicial
decision upon its character which it cannot evade), since otherwise man’s misery beneath
the whips and scorns of time would become intolerable, so the oppression under which
he groans will one day exhaust itself, come to an end, and be called up for judgment at
the bar of the Supreme, if not in time and on earth, at least at the world’s close, and
in the unseen; and, perceiving this, the wise subject deems it better to keep the king’s
commandment, and maintain allegiance to the king’s throne, than to enter on the
dubious paths of insurrection and revolt.

Learn: 1. The superior honour due from man to him who is the King of kings.
2. The loftier grounds on which the Christian soul’s allegiance to God and Jesus Christ
is claimed. 3. The blessedness of those who are faithful subjects of the heavenly
King. 4. The folly of attempting to elude God’s presence, and the danger of persisting
in an evil thing. 5. The high argument for patience supplied by the certain prospect


of a future judgment,


208 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vi. 1—17,


Vers. 7—9.— The sorrowful tale of man’s misery upon the earth. I. No KNOWLEDGE
oF THE FUTURE. Neither himself can foresee, nor can any one inform him, either what
shall be or how it shall be. Man’s acquaintance with the future amounts at best to a
“ perhaps.”

AL No EXEMPTION FROM DEATH. This great truth stated in a threefold form.
1. No man can retain his spirit, or hold it back, when the hour strikes for it to be
breathed forth, any more than he can hold back the winds of heaven when the moment
has arrived for them to blow. 2. No man has power over the day of his death, to defer
it, to remove it to a dim and distant future, or to hasten it to bring it near, any more
than he has power over the day of his birth. His times both of coming into and of
going out from the world are in God’s hand. 3. No man can procure a discharge
from the war with the king of terrors, either for himself or another, any more than a
conscript could escape the battle when drawn for service by an Oriental despot. All
without exception must go forth to the final conflict (Heb. ix. 27).

III. No EscAPE FROM RETRIBUTION. The wicked may hope that in some way or
other it may be possible for them to evade the due reward of their transgressions; but
such hope is taken from them by the fact that God will one day bring every secret
thing into judgment, whether it has been good, or whether it has been evil (ch. xii. 14).

TV. No munity From oppression. Though it cannot be affirmed that all are
oppressed—else where were the oppressors ?—yet it cannot be guaranteed beforehand
that any one will not be oppressed, since “ there is a time wherein one man hath power
over another to his hurt” (ver. 9).

Lessons. 1. Leave the future with God, and live in the present. 2. Prepare for
that day which will come on all like a thief in the night. 3. So live that the recom-
pense of the future will be that which belongs to righteousness, 4, Avoid being an
oppressor, and rather be oppressed.


Ver. 10.—Before, at, and after death; or, the wicked and the good—a contrast.
I, BerorE DEATH. In the character of their lives. Each lives and acts in accordance
with his character of soul. 1. The wicked acts wickedly. Spends his days (1) without
religion, having no fear of God before his eyes (Ps. xxxvi.1; Rom. iii. 18); (2) without
morality, taking pleasure in disobedience to God’s Law (Eph. ii. 2; v. 6); (8) and
without hope (Eph. ii. 12), having no happy outlook beyond the grave. 2. The
righteous acts rightly. (1) Worshipping in the temple of the holy; (2) learning in the
school of the holy ; (3) walking in the ways of the holy ; and (4) cherishing the hopes
of the holy. These different characteristics belong to the wicked and the rightecus in
all ranks and classes of society.

II. Ar pEatH. In the style of their funerals. Both come to the grave, the house
appointed for all the living (Job xxx. 23), like Dives and Lazarus (Luke xvi. 22);
perhaps after having lived respectively as these did—the wicked clothing themselves
in fine linen and faring sumptuously every day ; the good lying in rags and sores at the
rich man’s gate, and feeding on the crumbs from the rich man’s table. But from this
point their paths and experiences diverge. 1. The wicked have a burial. They are
borne to the place of sepulture with pomp and pageantry, and in presence of assembled
crowds are committed to the dust. Wealth and honour wait upon them to their last
resting-places, and do the utmost to provide quiet and peaceful couches for their lifeless
corpses. Oftentimes, if not always, is this the fortune of the ungodly who have defied
the Almighty, despised religion, insulted morality, and yet increased in riches and
grown great in power. 2, The good simply go away. They vanish from the scene of
their sufferings and labours, no one knows when or how. Whether they have a funeral
no one cares, Certainly their departure is not marked by long trains of mourners
going about the streets. Their obsequies, conducted by angels, are not observed by the
passing crowds of busy men on earth. ‘This also is a frequent lot of good men at death,
though it must not be assumed that good men are never carried to their graves amid
lamentations and tears (2 Chron, xxiv. 16; Acts viii. 2).

Ill. Arrer peatu. In the treatment of their memories. Both pass into the unseen
and have no more knowledge of what transpires on this side the veil. But their lots upon
the other side are frequently as different from each other as before. 1. The wicked are
remembered. Forgotten, it may be, and forsaken by God, but not by men who admired


om, vi. 1—17.]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 209


their splendour, and perhaps envied or feared their greatness when living. 2. Tha
good are forgotten. ~Remembered indeed by God, but not by mer, who suffer their
names to pass into oblivion ; as saith the poet—


“The evil that men do lives after them;
The good is oft interréd with their bones.”
(‘Julius Caesar,’ act iii. sc. 3.)


Lessons. 1. Study to live well by acting well. 2. Seek a lodging for thy soul when
it must leave thy body. 3. Commit the care of thy memory to God and good men.
4, Envy neither the present nor the future lot of the wicked.


Vers. 11—13.—Solemn thoughts for serious moments. I. A @REAT DISTINCTION IN
THE CHARACTERS OF MEN. Between the righteous and the wicked (Mal. iii. 18), the
sinner and the saint, the man that fears God and the soul that fears him not. This
distinction eclipses all oth.rs. Other distinctions affect the externals, this the essentials
of.man’s being. The fear of God the root of all goodness in the soul (Ps. exi. 10).

II. A GREAT FACT IN THE DIVINE ADMINISTRATION. That sentence is already pro-
nounced (Hzek. xviii. 4), and will eventually be executed (unless intercepted by grace)
on every evil work (Ps. xi. 6; xxxiv. 21; Rom. i. 18; v.12; vi. 21, 23; Jas, i. 15).
A sermon on the certainty of future judgment. The principle of the Divine govern-
ment is one of moral retribution. ‘To each man according as his work shall be—evil to
the evil, good to the good.

III. A @REaT DisPLAY OF DrivINE CLEMENCY. Though pronounced, yet is sentence
not executed against every evil work. Sometimes in God’s providence retribution
follows swiftly upon the heels of crime. For the most part, however, the infliction of
the sentence is deferred—to give the sinner space to repent, to reveal to him the great-
ness of his guilt, and to melt him by a personal experience of undeserved kindness,
“ Account the long-suffering of our God salvation” (2 Pet. iii. 15).

IV. A GREAT INSTANCE OF HUMAN IMPIETY. “ Because sentence against an evil work
is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to
do evil.” The abuse of clemency a sadder sign of depravity than the violation of com-
mandment; to trample on God’s mercy a greater wickedness than to break his Law.

VY. A GREAT DIVERGENCE IN INDIVIDUAL EXPERIENCE. Between that of the long-
lived and deeply-dyed sinner who defies the Divine Law and despises the Divine mercy,
and that of the good man and humble who fears God and walks in his commandments
and ordinances. The former, in spite of all bis shameless audacity and boundless impiety,
attains net to real happiness—“ it shall not be well with the wicked,” either here or
hereafter (Isa. iii. 11), The former, notwithstanding his depressed condition, and
perhaps brief life, is possessed of the secret of inward felicity—‘ it shall be well with
them that fear God,” both in this world and the next (Isa. iii. 10; 1 Tim. iv. 8).


Vers. 14, 15.—A misunderstood providence and a mistaken judgment. I. Tue
MISUNDERSTOOD PROVIDENCE. 1. The providence is undeniable. ‘‘'There be righteous
men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked;” and “ there be
wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work of the righteous,” Of the
former, Joseph, David, Job, Asaph, and Jeremiah were examples; as also the apostles
and early Christians, the martyrs and confessors of the New Testament Church. Of
the latter, Noah’s sons, who, though not themselves righteous, were saved in the ark;
Pharaoh’s butler, who, though guilty of having conspired against the king’s life, was
nevertheless spared; Haman, who for a time at least flourished, though he was essentially
a bad mat ~—besides others—may be cited as examples. 2. The providence ts inevitable.
The constieution of the world being what it is, and the human family interlaced and
interdependent as it is, it is impossible but that calamities should sometimes fall upon
the righteous, and blessings descend upon the heads of the wicked, and that ovcasionally
even wicked men should be deliberately treated as if they were righteous, and righteous
men rewarded as if they were wicked. Good men often suffer the consequences of other
people’s evil deeds, and vice versé bad men reap the benefits of other people’s good works,
3. The providence ts mysterious. hat such things should occur in a world presided
ever by an all-wise and all-powerful as well as holy and just God, who loves righteous-

BOOLESLASTRS, P


210 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fon. wm. 1—17.


ness and hates iniquity, is undoubtedly “hard to be understood,” and for the full
solution of the enigma it is more than likely the clearer light of the future must be
awaited. 4. The providence is symbolic. At least it has its counterpart in the spiritual
world—in the experience of Christ the Rigkteous One, who was numbered with trans-
gressors (Mark xv. 28), and made sin for us, though he knew no sin (2 Cor. v. 21); and
in that of believers, who, though personally sinful and unrighteous, are yet accepted as
righteous in God’s sight, and treated as such on account of the rig 1teousness of Christ
(Rom, iii, 25, 26; 1 Cor. i. 830; 2 Cor. v.21; Eph. i. 6). May this not in part explain
the occurrence of such phenomena in actual life? Nevertheless, it often happens that:
5. The providence is misunderstood. Men because of it rush to conclusions that cannot
be sustained—as e.g. that there is no such thing as a providential government of the
world, that the Supreme Being is indifferent to moral distinctions, that there is no profit
in piety, and that no disadvantage follows on the practice of wickedness, and the
like.

Il. THE MISTAKEN JUDGMENT. 1. The judgment ts wrong. It may not be wrong
to affirm that a man, more especially if good and wise, should eat, drink, and be merry
(ch. ix. 7), though such as do so are not always either good or wise (Luke xii.19); but
it certainly is not right to say that a man has nothing better to do under the sun than
to eat, drink, and be merry. He who thinks so must have a low conception of both the
nature and the destiny of man. 2. The reason is doubtful. That mirth will abide with
a man in his labour all the days of his life. One fears this cannot be sustained as in
perfect accord with experience. Inward happiness or joy in God may abide with a sonl
through every varying phase of external circumstances; it is not clear that so outward
a thing as mirth, hilarity, satisfaction in creature-comforts, will abide with any to the
close cf life.

Learn: 1. To trust God even in the darkest and most mysterious providences,
2. To rejoice in God rather than in any of his creatures.


Vers. 16, 17.—‘* The business that ts done upon the earth.” I. Iw rts RELATION TO
Gop. It is his work. 1. As to tts plan, “ He doeth according to his will in the army of
heaven, and among the inhabitaits of the earth” (Dan. iv. 35). ‘He worketh all
things after the counsel of his will” (Eph.i.11). 2. As to tts execution. Not directly,
but indirectly—it being in him that men live and move and have their being (Acts xvii.
28). Not so that heis the Author of sin, or that in any way the freedom and efficiency
of second causes are taken away; but so that while man freely acts and carries out hig
purposes, God also as freely acts in and throngh man and carries out his. 38. As to its
characteristics, It is unsearchable and past finding out. As God’s thoughts are deep,
his works are vast and his ways inscrutable (Ps, Ixxvii. 19; Rom. xi. 33).

II. In rvs RELATION To MAN, It is man’s work also, he being the immediate agent
engaged in its performance; and as such it is: 1. Jncessant. It goes on day and
night—work, work, work. 2. Laborious. So much so that multitudes are able to see
sleep with their eyes neither day nor night. 8, Disappointing. Man labours on, and
not only often makes little of his toil, but never comes to a clear perception of what
the garment is he and others are weaving upon the loom of time.

Lessons, 1. The duty of each man performing his appointed task with fidelity.
leaving the ultimate issue in the hands of God. 2, The wisdom of recognizing that the
business done upon the earth is after all only a means toward an end. 3. The greater
propriety of labouring for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life. 4. The
limited extent of man’s knowledge as to God’s plan in the government of the world,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver. 1.—The tokens of wisdom. This book, and those which have affinity with it,
both canonical and apocryphal, are in nothing more remarkable than in the stress they
lay upon wisdom, ‘This is the quality of the spirit which in its highest manifestation
is godliness and piety, which in its ordinary manifestations distinguishes the ruler from
the subject, the sage from the fool, The reader of Ecclesiastes cannot fail to admire the


ct


on. vit. 1—17.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 211
ee


Independence of the author of common human standards of well-being, such as wealth,
prosperity, and pleasure; wisdom is with him “the principal thing.” The signs of true
wisdom are graphically portrayed in this verse.

I, WIspoM IMPARTS INSIGHT. Ordinary men are not even, as a rule, observant; but
there are men who are observant of what strikes the senses, of the phenomena of nature,
of external life, but who go no further. Now, it is characteristic of the wise that they
are not satisfied to know what lies upon the surface. The first stage of wisdom is
science ; the scientific man notes resemblances and differences, antecedents and sequences;
he arranges phenomena into classes and species and genera upon the one principle, and
into physical caux.~ and effects upon the other. He recognizes similarities and uni.
formities in nature, snd terms these arrangements laws. The second stage of wisdom
is philosophy, whose province it is not only to proceed to higher generalizations, but to
discover in all the processes of nature and in all the activities of mind the presence and
operation of reason. The third stage of wisdom is theology, or religion, ¢.e. the discern-
ment of the ubiquitous presence in the universe of the Eternal Spirit, from whom all
individual minds proceed, and whose language, by which he holds communion with
those minds, is nature. The scientist, the philosopher, the theologian, are all men who
possess wisdom, who are dissatisfied with superficial knowledge, who “ know the inter-
pretation of a thing.” Their wisdom is limited indeed if they disparage one another’s
work and service, for the world has need of them all. And there is no occasion why,
in a measure, one man should not partake all three characters,

II. WispoM IMPARTS BRIGHTNESS. The stupid and brutal betray themselves by an
expression of stolidity. The cunning and crafty often display their characteristic quality
by a keen, designing, “ underhand,” and sinister glance. But the wise are bright;
clearness of perception, width of judgment, decisiveness of purpose, seem written upon
the brow, seem to gleam from the steady eye of the wise man. The entrance of a wise
man into the council-chamber is like the rising of the sun upon a landscape,—when
the mists are cleared away and the dark places are illumined.

TII. WispoM IMPARTS STRENGTH, BOLDNESS, CONFIDENCE, The wise man is prepared
for difficulties and dangers, and because he is prepared he is not alarmed. He measures
circumstances, and sees how they may be bent to his will, how their threats may be
turned into favour. He measures his fellow-men, discerns the strength of the strong,
the depth of the thoughtful, the trustworthiness of the firm, the incompetency of the
pretender, and the worthlessness of the shifty. He measures himself, and neither
exaggerates or underestimates his abilities and his resources, Hence the boldness, the
hardness of his face, when he turns to survey his task, to encounter his adversary, to
endure oe test. His heart is not dismayed, for his trust is ever in his God and
Saviour.—T. -


Vers, 2—5.— The ruler and the subject. It is possible that some persons, living under
a form of government very different from that presumed in the admo i‘ions of this
passage—under a limited monarchy or a republic instead of under an absoliite monarchy
of a special theocratic kind—may fancy that these verses have no special significance
for them, no applicability to the practical conduct of their actual life. But reflection
may show us that this is not so, that there are valuable principles of interest and import
for the civil life of all men.

I. CrviL AUTHORITY Is IN ITSELF OF DIVINE ORIGIN, AND POSSESSES DIVINE SANCTIONS.
The king, the king’s word, commandment, and pleasure, are all significant of order in
society, of that great reality and power in human affairs—the state. “ Order is Heaven’s
first law.” Right does not, indeed, grow out of civil authority, but it is its Divine basis.
That kingship has often become tyranny, and democracy moberule, that every form of
government may be abused, is known to every student of history, to every reader of the
newspapers. But law in itself is good, and its maintenance is the only security for
public liberty. One of the first duties of a religious teacher is to impress upon the
people the sacredness of civil authority, to inculcate reverence for law, to encourage to
good citizenship. He is not called upon to flatter the great and powerful, to repress
discussion, to enjoin servility. But that freedom which is the condition of the true
development of national life, and which can only be preserved by reverence for rightful
suthority, for constitutional government, should be dear to every Christian, and should


212 EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. vim. 1—17.


Daeee eee e a RT


be held in honour by every Christian teacher and preacher. “The powers that be are
ordained of God.”

II. Wisk PATRIOTISM LEADS TO CHEERFUL OBEDIENCE AND SUBMISSION TO AUTHORITY.
Law for the most part is designed to repress crime, to maintain peace and tranquillity,
to afford protection to the honest, industrious, and law-abiding. Therefore to commit
wrong of any kind, whether theft, or slander, or violence, is both evil in itself and is
transgression of the law. A man who simply contents himself with breaking no civil
law may indeed be a villain, for civil law is not all; there is a Divine Law which the
civil ruler is not bound to enforce. But the bad citizen cannot be a good Christian; to
break the laws of the state is not likely to lead to obedience to the commandments of
the King of kings. It is, indeed, not to be expected that a man should approve of every
command of the king, of every law which is enforced in hiscountry. But if every man
were to refuse to obey every statute of which he disapproved, how could government
be carried on? The wonderful word of Christ is decisive, “‘ Render unto Cesar the
things that are Cexsar’s.” Where no Divine ordinance is violated by conforraing to
civil law, the duty of the subject, the citizen, is plain; he shouldobey. He is, «/ course,
at liberty under a constitutional government to use means of an honourabls Find to
secure a change of law. It is a grand word of the Preacher, “ Whoso ke .peth the
commandment shall know no evil thing.”

III, LoyanTy To EARTHLY, HUMAN AUTHORITY IS SUGGESTIVE OF LOYALT( To Gop.
When submission is enjoined, it is supported by a religious motive— and tha’ in regard
of the oath of God.” It is evident that the authority of a parent or a ruler, ihe subjec-
tion of achild ora citizen, are intended to symbolize the even higher facts of thie spiritual
kingdom—the empire of the “ King, eternal, immortal, and invisible,” and ‘he loyalty
of those who by the new birth have entered “ the kingdom of heaven.”—T.


Ver. 11.—A hasty and foolish tnference. In the case of some this conclusion may
be reached deliberately, but in that of others the process may be unconscious, or at all
events without attentive consideration and reasoned purpose.

I, THE pata. There is delay in retribution. When we perceive immedis.te punish-
ment follow upon flagrant sin, we are surprised and startled. We often remark that
the course of the wrong-doer who avoids collision with the civil government is a course
of uninterrupted prosperity. We see families advanced to honour and wealth who are
lacking in moral character. We read of nations persevering for years, and even for
centuries, in paths of injustice, rapacity, and violence, and yet growing in power and
acquiring renown. And we cannot doubt that many evil deeds wrought in secret
remain unpunished. The acts must be admitted. But they are explicable, and may
be reconciled with a firm belief in the righteous retribution, the perfect moral govern-
ment, of God. Stress is to be laid upon the word “speedily.” It must be remembered
Se bieg God “‘one day is as a thousand years, and a thousand years are as one

ye


“Though the mills of God grind slowly, yet they grind exceeding small;
Though with patience he stands waiting, he exactly judgeth all.”


Judgment deferred is not judgment abandoned. From the time of Job
referred to have been a perplexity to the observer of human society. means 7
IL, THE ERRONEOUS INFERENCE. “The heart of the sons of men is fully set in them [is
emboldened] to do evil.” ‘I'he supposition is that sin may be committed with impunit
and the conclusion is that those sins which yield pleasure should be committed mae
they will entail upon the sinner no evil consequences. Of course, an upright. conscien-
tious, and godly man does not reason thus. He does what is right from a conviction of
the nobility and beauty of goodness, ard from a desire to act in conformity with the
will of God, and to enjoy the approval of God; he abstains from evil because his con-
science condemns it, because it is contrary to the universal order, because it is a grief
to his Saviour’s heart. But the self-secking, pleasure-loving, base mind /ooks only te
the consequences of actions, and does what affords pleasure, and evades painful dut
It is such @ man who is referred to in this passage, whose heart is emboldened to sin re
the foolish persuasion that no penalty will follow. ”


on, vit. 1—17.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 213
a a


IIL. Tae Practioan Lessons. 1. The sinner should reflect upon the facts of the
Divine government, and upon the express statements of the revealed Word of God. He
may thence learn the certainty of retribution. “The wicked shall not go unpunished; ”
“‘The way of transgressors is hard;” ‘“ The wages of sin is death.” The sentence may
not be executed speedily; but it is passed, and it will in God’s time be carried out.
2, The godly man should rest assured that, however he may be perplexed by the mys-
teries of Divine providence, however he may be unable to reconcile what he sees in
society with his religious convictions, nevertheless the Lord reigneth, and it shall be
well with those who fear, obey, and love him. And he may well think less of the
consequences of conduct, and more of those principles by which conduct is governed,
of those motives by which action is inspired. Loyalty and gratitude, devotion and
sympathetic admiration, may well lead to such a life as shall be its own reward. How-
ever it may fare with a man in this life, he chooses the good part who hates that which
is evil and loves that which is good, whose convictions are just, and whose life is in
harmony with his convictions. For such a man all things work together for


good.—T.


Vers. 12—14.— The certainty of retribution. Again and again the writer of thia
remarkable book reverts to the same mysterious and perplexing facts of human society.
As soon as men began to observe carefully and to think seriously, they were distressed
by the inequality of the human lot, and by the apparent absence of a just arrangement
of human affairs. If a family is wisely and righteously ordered, the obedient children
are rewarded; whilst the selfish, wilful, rebellious children are chastised. In a well-
administered government the law-abiding citizens are regarded and treated with favour,
whilst the strong arm of the law is brought down heavily upon the idle and the
criminal. Now, if God be the Father and the King of humanity, how is it that the
affairs of the world are not so administered that the good are recompensed, and
the wicked duly, swiftly, and effectively punished? Can there be a just Ruler who is
also omniscient to observe and almighty to carry out his purposes of righteous govern-
ment? Such are the thoughts which have passed through the minds of reflecting men
in every age, and which passed through the mind of the writer of this Book of Hccle-
siastes, and which are expressed in this passage.

I, THE PERPLEXING FACTS OF OBSERVATION. These are recorded in the fourteenth
verse, and are described as “a vanity which is done upon the earth.” 1. he just
suffer the inflictions which seem appropriate to the wicked. 2. The wicked reap the
prosperity which might be expected to recompense the righteous. These are facts of
human life which belong to no age, to no state of society more than to another. ‘Taken
by themselves, they do not satisfy the intellect, the conscience, of the inquirer.

II. THE ASSURED CONVICTION OF FAITH. The Preacher, regarding the admitted facts
with the eye of faith, comes to a conclusion which is not supported by mere reasoning
upon observed facts. For him, and indeed for every truly religious man, there is a test
of character which determines the destiny of spiritual beings; the discrimination is
made between those who fear God and those who fear him not. Time and earth may
not witness the award; but it is the award of the Almighty Judge and Lord. 1, It
shall not be well with the wicked, even though he may be permitted to continue and
to repeat his offences, 2. On the other hand, it shall be well with them that fear God.
Such convictions are implanted by God himself; the righteous Lord has implanted
them in the mind of his righteous people, and nothing can shake them, deep-seated as
they are in the moral nature, which is the most abiding work of the Creator-Spirit.

If]. THE arTrrupE oF GODLY wispoM. Those who, in the face of the facts described,
nevertheless cherish the convictions approved, may reasonably apply such convictions
to the practical control of the moral life. 1. Patience should be cultivated in the
presence of perplexing and often distressing anomalies. We must wait in order that
we may see the end, which is not yet. 2. Quiet confidence is ever the strength of God’s
people. They do not lean upon circumstances; they lean upon God, who never changes,
and who will not fail those who place their trust in him. 3. Expectation of deliverance
and acceptance. God may tarry ; but he will surely appear, and will vindicate and save
his own. Our salvation is nearer than when we first believed. Much has happened to
test our faith, our endurance; but when the trial has been sufficiently prolonged and


214 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. vir. 1—17,


aevere to answer the purpose of our all-wise Father, it will be brought to an end.
“Unto the upright light ariseth out of darknéss;” “The Lord is mindful of his
own.”-—T,


Ver. 16.—Mun’s busy life. The Preacher was observant, not only of the phenomena
and processes of nature, but also of the incidents and transactions of human life. In
fact, man was his chief interest and his chief study. He observed the diligence of the
laborious; the incessant activity of the scheming, the restless, the acquisitive. How
he would have been affected by the spectacle of modern commercial life—say in London
or Paris, New York or Vienna—we can only imagine; but as things were then, he was
impressed by the marvellous activity and untiring energy which were displayed by lis
fellow-men { » the various avocations of life.

I. MAn’s OWN NATURE AND CONSTITUTION 18 acTIVE, It would be an absurd mis-
representation of man’s being to consider him as capable only of feeling and of know-
ledge. Intellectual and emotional he is; but, possessed of will, he is enterprising,
inquiring, and active. Nature does indeed act upon him; but he reacts upon nature,
aubdues it to his purposes, and impresses upon it his thoughts.

II. Man’s CIRCUMSTANCES ARE SUCH AS TO CALL FORTH HIS ACTIVITY. Human
nature ig endowed with wants, which prove, as a matter of fact, to be the means to bis
most valuable possessions and his chief enjoyments. His bodily necessities urge him
to toil; and their supply and satisf:ction, in many cases, absorb almost all disp sable
energy. His intellectual aspirations constrain to much endeavour; curiosity and
inquiry prompt to efforts considerable in themselves, and lasting all through life. The
family and social relations are the motive to many labours. Could one enter a market,
an exchange, a port, and could one not merely witness the movements of body and of
features which strike every eye, but penetrate the motives and purposes, the hopes and
fears, which dwell in secret in the breasts of the busy throng, something might be dia-
cerned which would furnish a key to the busy activity of life.

III. Business ACTIVITY I8 ACCOMPANIED WITH MANY PERILS. The labourer, the
craftsman, the merchant, the lawyer, all have their various employments and interests,
which are in danger of becoming engrossing. Perhaps the main temptation of the very
busy is towards worldliness. ‘lhe active and toiling are prone to lose sight of every-
thing which does not contribute to their prosperity, and especially of the higher rela-
tions of their being and their immortal prospects. Young men entering upon
professional and commercial) life need especially to be warned against worldliness, to be
reminded that it is possible to gain the whole world, and yet to lose the soul, the higher
and worthier life. A man may become covetous, or at least avaricious; he may lose
his sensibilities to what is noblest, purest, and best; he may adopt a lower standard of
value, may move upon a lower plane of life.

1V. Y&T THE LIFE OF CONSTANT ACTIVITY I8 DESIGNED BY DIVINE WISDOM TO BE THE
MEANS OF SPIRITUAL PROFIT. Like all the appointments of providence, this is dis-
ciplinary, Business is not only a temptation, it may be an occasion of progress, 8 means
to moral improvement. A busy man may learn to consecrate his powers to his Creator’s
service and glory; in the discharge of active duties he may grow in wisdom, in patience,
even in self-denial. He may do with his might that which his hand findeth to do, he
may redeem the time, he may prepare for the account to be rendered at last of the deeds
lone in the body.—T.


Ver. 17.—The impenetrable, inscrutable mystery. Plain people often think that a
wise man is aman who knows, if not all things, yet all things to which he has directed
lis attention, It does not enter into their mind that wisdom lies largely in the eon-
sciousness of the limitation of the human powers. A great thinker has justly a |
beautifully said that the larger the circle of knowledge, the larger the external circum-
ference which reveals itself to the apprehension. The writer of Ecclesiastes was a wise
man, but he confesses himsclf to have been baffled in his endeavour to find out and
master all the work of man, and much more the work of God. In this confession he
was not singular, The man who knows a little may be vain of his knowledge; but
the man who knows much knows full well how much there is which to him is unknown,
aud hpw much more is by him unknowable.


ox, vi. 1—17.]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 216:


I, Tae FACT THAT THE THOUGHTFUL MAN IS BAFFLED IN HIS ENDEAVOUR TO COM-
PREHEND Gop’s WAYS, AND TO COMPREHEND HUMAN LIFE AND DESTINY.

II. THis 1s JUST WHAT I8 TO BE EXPECTED FROM A CONSIDERATION OF (1) man’s finite
nature, and (2) God’s infinite wisdom.

III. THE PROFITABLENESS OF THIS ARRANGEMENT. 1, It tends to raise our thought
of God to a juster elevation, 2. It calls forth (1) humility, (2) submission, and (3)
faith. 38, It makes the future infinitely interesting and attractive. What we know
“ here we shall know hereafter. Now we know as in a mirror, dimly; then, face to
ace,

“ Here it is given only to survey
Dawnings of bliss and glimmerings of day;
Heaven’s fuller affluence mocks our dazzled sight—
Too swift its radiance and too clear its light.”
T


Ver. 8.—Death—our power and our powerlessness. The Preacher brings before us
the familiar fact of—

I. OUR POWERLESSNESS IN THE PRESENCE OF DEATH. There are evils from which
jarge resources, or high rank, or exceptional abilities may secure us; but in these death
is not included. No man may escape it. Some men have lived so long that “death
has seemed to have forgotten them; ” but their hour has come at last. Death is acam-
paign in which there is “no furlough” given. Therefore: 1. Let every man be in readi-
ness for it; let us live “‘as those who to-day indeed are on the earth, but who to-morrow
may be in heaven.” Let not death surprise us with some urgent duty undone, the
neglect of which will leave our nearest relatives or dearest friends in difficulty or
distress. 2, Let us all measure the limit of our life; and let us feel that since so much
is to be done by us if we can, for narrower and for wider circles, and since there is but
a brief period in which to do it, let us address ourselves seriously, energetically,
peuently devoutly, to the work which the Divine Husbandman has given us to do.

ut the statement of the Preacher, reminding us of this familiar truth, may suggest to
us, by contrast—

II. OuR PROVINCE AND OUR POWER IN THE PROSPECT OF DEATH. Although it is
utterly hopeless that we can avert the stroke of the “ last enemy,” we may do much in
regard to it. 1. We can often defer its coming by the wise regulation of our life; we
cannot “ retain our spirit” when our hour is come, but we may put that hour much
further on by prudence and virtue. Folly will ante-date, but wisdom will post-date
it. We cannot, indeed, measure Divine favour by the number of our years—there is a
Christian reading of the heathen adage, ‘“‘ Whom the gods love die young ”—but it is
very often true that “ with long life” God will “ satisfy” the man who “ sets his love
upon him” (Pa, xci. 14—16). 2. We can gain a spiritual victory over it; we can


« ,.. 80 live, that we may dread
The grave as little as our bed.”


We may s0 abide in Jesus Christ, and so live in the light of his holy truth, that the
idea of death, instead of being a terror or even a dark shadow at its close, will be
positively welcome to our spirit. 3, We may find a friend in it when it comes; the
friend whose kind hand opens for us the door of immortality, and ushers into the life
which is free and full and endless,—O.


Vers. 9, 10.—Sin im power. Amid the obscurities and uncertainties in which the
precise meaning of this verse is lost, we may allow it to speak to us of the truth that
when sin is in power it isin all respects an unsatisfactory thing. It is—

I. Insugious To THE PEOPLE. “A man ruleth over men to their hurt” (Cox). The
evils of misrule are obvious, for they have been only too often illustrated; they are
these: the infliction of grave injustice; the encouragement of iniquity and discourage-
ment of righteousness; disturbance and unsettlement, and consequent reduction in
various spheres of useful industry ; decline of activity, morality, worship.

IL Hurrru, To THE HOLDER HIMSELF. “One man hath power over another to his
own hurt” (Revised Version marginal reading). It is certainly and most profoundly


216 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACAER. (on. vit. 1—17.


ee EEUU EEE UIE RSE ERE


true, whether here stated or not, that the holding of power by a bad man is hurtful te
himself. It elevates him in his own eyes when he needs to be humbled therein; it gives
him the opportunity of indulgence, and indulgence is certain to feed an evil inclination,
or to foster an unholy habit ; it makes injurious flattery the probable, and a beneficial
remonstrance the unlikely, thing in his experience.

III. Or BRizF DURATION. If we only wait awhile we shall “ see the wicked buried.”
It is probable enough that sin in power will be guilty of serious excesses, and will
therefore bring down upon itself those human resentments or those Divine judgments
which end in death. But, apart from this, an evil course must end at death. God
has put a limit to our human lives which, though it sometimes takes from the field a
brave and powerful champion, on the other hand relieves society of the impure and the
unj ist. Sin in power is bound fast by the tether which it is quite unable to snap
(see Ps, xxxvii. 35, 36).

IV. Conrractine euitt. They “had come and gone from the place of the holy.”
They had either (1) been professing to administer justice, and had done injustice; or
(2) attended the place of privilege, and had despised their opportunity. Hither way,
they had been “‘ laying up for themselves wrath against the day of wrath.”

V. Gone DOWN INTO OBLIVION. The sense may be that this happens too often to the
righteous; but it iscertainly appropriate to the wicked. And is it not more applicabie
to them? For no man tries to remember them. No one proposes to erect monuments
or institute memorials of them. There is a tacit understanding, if nothing more, that °
their name shall be dropped, that their memory shall perish. The only kind thing that
can be done concerning them is to leave their name unspoken.

1. Be content with the exercise of a holy and benignant influence, 1% is well to be
powerful if God wills it. But most men have to live without it, anda human life may
be destitute of it, and yet be truly happy, and be of real service to a great many souls.
2. Resolve to leave a holy influence and a fragrant memory behind. We may have to
content ourselves with a very simple memorial stone, but if we leave kindly memories
and good influences in many hearts, so that in our case “the memory of the just is
blessed,” we shall not have lived in vain.—C.


Vers, 11—13.—The perversion of Gods patience. No obscurity hangs over this
passage; the evil to which the Preacher refers is clear enough and common enough,
while his condemnation of it is distinct and decisive,

I. A PALPABLE FACT IN THE GOVERNMENT OF Gop. The fact is that God often iets
sin go unpunished, or, as we should rather say, partly unpunished. The tyrant is not
dethroned; the fraudulent dealer is not convicted and sentenced; the murderer is not
apprehended; the drunkard and the debauchee are not driven from the society which they
disgrace; the hypocrite is not exposed and expelled ; the men who fill their purses or
satisfy their cravings at the expense of the property or even the character of their
neighbours are sometimes allowed to remain in positions of comfort and of honour.
And it may be that even their health and their spirits appear untouched by their sins,
and even by their vices.

II. ITs MISINTERPRETATION BY MANY. What does it mean that God allows this to
happen? The guilty are not slow to convince themselves that it means safety to them-
selves. It is, they think, that God does not concern himself with the small particulars
of human life, and will not therefore visit them with his penalties; orit is that God is too
“good,” too kind, to punish his children for following the bent of their own nature ; or
it is that the world is not under the government of any righteous Ruler at all, but only
subject to certain laws of which they may prudently make use for their ultimate
immunity. It is that they may safely go on in their evil course without fear of
consequences.

II]. THEIR COMPLETE MIsTAKE. They argue that because we always make penalty
follow crime as soon as we can, and because our non-infliction of it argues our intention
to condone it altogether, it is the same with God, and that his forbearance to punish is
proof that he does not intend to do so, ‘hus they think that “God is altogether such
one as ourselves.” But they are wrong; he “ will reprove us and set {our sins} in
order before our eyes” (see Ps. 1. 21). We aiways make penalty pursue wrong-doing
without any interval, because (1) we are sfraid the criminal will escape us, or (2) we


om, vin. 1—17.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER 217
ce i a


fear that we ourselves may be taken from the scene. But God is not hurried by such
considerations as these. The guilty can never get beyond his reach, and he is ever
present. Time does not enter into the account of him who is “ from everlasting to
everlasting.”. God’s long forbearance is, therefore, no proof of Divine indifference or
of the absence of a ruling hand from the affairs of men. ;

IV. Irs TRUE sigNiIFicaNce. What the Divine long-suffering really means is that
God is patient with us in the hope that we shall repent and live (see Ezek. xxxiii. 11;
Rom. ii. 4; 1 Tim, ii. 4; and especially 2 Pet. iii. 9). The truth is tha’ (1) while
men do often seem to escape the retribution that is due to them, and while they do in
fact enjoy a large measure. of Divine forbearance; (2) sin is always suffering, and is on
its way to doom. (a) If outward and visible evils are not attending it, inward and
spiritual evils are. (6) Sin always fends toward misery and shame, and is working it
out, as the event will show. Even if it should escape the hundredth time, there is a
number that will prove fatal. (3) The righteous man has a distinct and immeasurable
advantage. It is “well with them that fear God.” (a) Piety and virtue have the
promise of the life that now is. Sobriety, chastity, uprightness, diligence, prudence,
courtesy, kindness,—these are all making for health and for prosperity, and for the best
friendship which earth can offer. (b) They lead up to the gates of the heavenly
city.—0O.


Ver. 1.—“ Sweetness and light.” The wisdom which is here spoken of as conferring
upon its possessor an incomparable superiority is not mere wealth of intellectual
knowledge, or a wide and accurate acquaintance with any department of science or
philosophy. It is rather a moral condition, a state of heart and mind with an outward
life consonant with it,a temperament and disposition attained by long and careful
endeavour. In our modern use of the word, wisdom is equivalent to knowledge, and
generally indicates mental endowments and equipment which may or may not enable
its possessor to act sensibly in the ordinary affairs of life. We are familiar enough with
the phenomena of men of science who in practical matters are as helpless as children,
who betray # gross and astounding ignorance of things which lie «tside the depart-
ment of kus pledge which they have cultivated, or who make it m..¢ifest to all that
their knowiedge has not had a refining influence upon them, and delivered them from
the evil of being biassed by the disturbing influence of prejudices and passions. Such
wisdom which we admire and respect, in spite of its unpractical character, is not of the
same order with that which the Preacher eulogizes. The wisdom which is so often
spoken of in the Hebrew Scriptures, especially in the Proverbs, in this Book of
Ecclesiastes, and in Job, is a Divine faculty by which a man is enabled to live a well-
ordered life. Its source isin God, but it is not confined to the one nation which he
chose, or synonymous with the exceptional revelations made to it. Thus the wisdom
of Solomon is declared to have been higher in degree than that attained by any in the
neighbouring peoples, but not different in kind (1 Kings iv. 29—31), Then, too, its
range is very wide. Nothing is too high, nothing is too low, for wisdom “ fitly ” to
“order.” Law and government (Prov. viii. 15, 16), and even the precepts of husbandry
(Isa. xxviii. 2329), are equally her productions with those moral observations which
constitute in the main the three books of Scripture to which I have referred. She is
the source of skill of every kind, the mistress of the arts, the guardian of the vast and
inexhaustible stores garnere! by experience, from which men may equip thernselves for
meeting every emergency of life, ‘The wise man is God-fearing, free from superstition
and fanaticism, prudent, shrewd, a good counsellor, a safe guide (vide Cheyne, ‘ Job and
Solomon,’ pp. 117, et seg.). The enthusiastic manner in which the influence of wisdom
upon a character is described reminds us of the somewhat similar sentiment expressed


by Ovid—


“ Adde quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter artes,
Emollit mores nec sinit esse feros.”
(‘ Epp. ex Ponto,’ ii. 9, 47.)


“A man’s wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be
changed.” The words depict very vividly and beautifully the almost transfiguring
effect of serene wisdom upon the countenance—how it lights up the face, and gives to


218 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [ox. wit 1—17'


a


even homely features an exquisite charm. The coarse, sullen, vacant stare of ignorance
is transformed by the “ sweetness and light” with which the soul is suffused. There is
a reference probably to the literal shining of Moses’ countenance when he came down
from the mount on which he had seen God face to face (Exod, xxxiv. 29). We must
all of us have known cases in which true piety and wisdom, such as is learned from
Christ, have had this refining and transforming influence; persons of little ordinary
education or culture, to whom religion has given really new intellectual power, and
whose tranquillity and peace of spirit has given an air of heavenly serenity to their
whole bearing and manner. And, indeed, in every case a holy disposition of mind has a
refining effect upon those who cherish it. The face is an index to the character, and if
the emotions that are expressed upon it are pure and worthy, they cannot fail in time
to transform it in some measure—to tone down what may have been its natural harsh-
ness, and to banish from it all traces of coarse and sensual passions. An example of
religion giving intellectual power, or rather of drawing out the faculties which but for
it would have remained unexercised, we may see in the life of John Bunyan, The
genius which is so marvellously displayed in his works, and which gives him a high
place in the literature of his country, would never have shown itsclf but for the
wonderful change in his life, when, from being a profane, careless, godless fe'low, he
becarne a true-hearted servant of Christ.

he abruptness with which this chapter opens may, it has been supposed, have been
intended to call the attention of the reader to the hidden significance of the worda that
are about to be spoken, as our Lord often emphasized his utterances by the saving,
“He that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” Something there is in what he is about
to add to be read between the lines. And the probable explanation of the suggestive
question, and the allusion to a wise man’s understanding “the interpretation of a
thing,” is in the fact thot the writer veils a protest against despotism in the garb of
the maxims of servility (Plumptre).—J. W.


Vers, 2—5.— Allegiance of subjects. It is scarcely to be denied that the wisdom
which the Preacher exhorts his readers to exemplify in their relations as subjects witk
their kings, has something very like a servile tone about it, “There is not a traca
of the enthusiastic loyalty of a Hebrew to a native sovereign, ‘whose power loveth
righteousness, who judzeth God’s people with righteousness; in whose days the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the oon endureth’ (Ps, xxii.
7). Wor do we find the freeman’s boldness, with which an Elijah could confront ar
apostate or a tyrant king. That fire is spent! The counsels here, as where he recura
to the same subject in the last five verses of ch. x., are those of submission, forbearance,
self-control, prudence in dealing with a power irresistible, overbearing, often oppressive,
yet which carries within itself the seeds of decay. Such advice may well have been
nee cd by a generation of Jews, proud, intractable, detesting foreign rule, and groaning
auder the tyranny of an alien monarch” (Bradley). Loyal obedience to a duly cons
stituted authority is declared to be (1) a matter of conscience (ver. 2); (2) a prudent
course (vers. 3, 4, 5a); because by it we escape the punishment incurred by rebellion,
and enjoy some tranquillity even under the worst rule. And as a consolation to those
who are indignant at a tyrannous use of power, the reminder is given (5b) that punish-
ment for evil deeds will be meted out in due time by a higher hand than ours.

I, OBEDIENCE A MATTER OF CONSCIENCE. (Ver. 2.) “I counsel thee to keep the
king’s commandment, and that in regard of the oath of God.” Though the words
** counsel thee” are not in the Hebrew text, no better have been suggested to fill up
the gap. But the emphasis which is laid upon the J by the omission of the verb may
be interpreted to mean that the writer is giving a personal opinion, and not speak-
ing authoritatively on a matter concerning which different men might form very
diverse judgments. And we may compare with it St. Paul’s manner of speaking,
“ But to the rest say J, not the Lord” (1 Cor. vil. 12, Revised Version), as contrasted
with “IT command, yet not J, but the Lord” (1 Cor. vii.10). If we interpret the
words in this way, a considerable measure of what I have called the servility of their
tone is taken away. The writer is giving us prudential counsels, but of course the
question still remains open whether there are not in certain emergencies higher con-
siderations than those of prudence, He tells how tranquillity may be preserved even


om, vin, 1—17.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 219


under the rule of a tyrant; but it is for us to decide whether higher blessings than
that of tranquillity are-not to be striven for. The great cautiousness with which he
speaks ig not unreasonable when we remember how ready men are to make use of
passages of Scripture to justify even questionable conduct, and how many errors have
sprung from an ignorant aud self-willed misinterpretation of isolated texts. The
advice, then, given is “ to keep the king’s commandment” out of regard to the oath of
allegiance taken to him or imposed by him. No hasty or ill-advised breach of such an
oath is justifiable. It would seem that this passage was in St. Paul’s mind, though he
does not directly quote from it, when he says, “‘ Wherefore ye must needs be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience’ sake” (Rom. xiii. 6). As is well known,
both the words of the Preacher, and the teaching of St. Paul in the thirteenth chapter
of Romans, have been taken as laying down the rule of passive olcedience for all
subjects in all circumstances. However cruel the despot, the duty of subjects to obey
him implicitly, and to make no attempt to deprive him of his power, has been held by
many to be clearly laid down by the Word of God. And great stress has been laid
upon the fact that the ruler of the civilized world, when St. Paul wrote the Epistle to
the Romans, was Nero, one of the most infamous and cruel tyrants who ever wore the
purple. In our own country during the seventeenth century, when the question of the
prerogative of the sovereign and the rights and duties of subjects engaged the attention
of all, these portions of Scripture were often interpreted to teach that the king’s will was
by right, and by the authority of God’s Word, above all charters and statutes and acts of
parliament, and that no misuse of his power could justify rebellion against him. But
those who took up this ground forgot or ignored the tact that kings have duties towards
their subjects, that coronation oaths bind them to keep the laws; and that St. Paul, in
the very same place in which he commands subjects to obey, describes the kind of rule
which has an absolute claim upon their allegiance. “ Forrulers are not a terror to good
works, but to evil,... Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the same:
for he is the minister of God to thee for good .. . a revenger to execute wrath upon
him that doeth evil.” It must surely be evident to all whose minds have not been
blinded by a grotesque and monstrous theory, that a ruler who isa terror to good works,
who rewards vice and punishes virtue, and uses the sword of justice to enforce his own
selfish and cruel purposes, cannot claim from subjects the obedience which the apostle
commands them to render to one of the very opposite character. But though passive
obedience to tyrannical government cannot be commended on any higher ground than
that of prudence, there can be no doubt that in ordinary circumstances the faithfulness
of subjects to their rulers is a religious duty, And so we find in many passages of
Scripture blame attached to those who thought that rebellion against the authority
even of heatheu kings, to whom the chosen people might be in subjection, was justifiable
(Isa. xxviii, 15; xxx.1; Ezek. xvii. 15; Jer. xxvii. 12; cf. Matt. xxii, 21).

Il. A PRUDENT couRSE. (Vers. 3, 4, 5a.) In these verses the Preacher “seeks to
dissuade his readers from casting off their allegiance to the king, or taking part with
the enemies of the monarch under any hasty impulse whatever.” “ Do not lightly
forsake the post of duty, join in no conspiracy against the king’s throne or life,” the
words might be paraphrased. His power is absulute; he is above courts of law, and
therefore any action against him must be attended with great risk. Of course, as I
have said, the course recommended is a prudential one, and there are circumstances in
which many will think that the oppressiveneas of a tyrannical government lias reached
a pitch justifying rebellion against it. But those who seek tranquillity will bear a
great deal, and not be eager to euter on any such undertaking. In ordinary circun-
stances, those who obey the king’s commandment will experience no evil thing (5a),
cases being left out of view in which the king requires obedience to decrees contrary to
the Divine laws (Dan. iii., vi.); while the risk of failure in attempts to overthrow his
power, and the anarchy and crime that gencrally attend insu: rection against constituted
authority, are calculated to make the wise man pause before he resolves to become a
rebel. The advice given by the Preacher is so carefully stated, and based on such
reasonable grounds, that perhaps one should not term it servile, And this impression
is strengthened by a consideration of what is implied rather than expressed in the
latter part of ver. 5. There is hope of @ beneficial change even for those who submit
in silence to the worst evils of despotism, Itis to be found in the conviction of there


220 EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. om. vim. 1— 7.


being a power higher than that of earthly sovereigns, which will in its own time mete
out punishment to all transgressors. The wise man’s heart “ discerneth both time and
judgment;” he will wait patiently for the “time and season of judgment which God

ath put in his own power ” (Lam. iii. 26; ch. iii, 1, 11,17). Evil-doing cannot escapa
punishment; however exalted in station the offender may be, the time will come round
when his deeds will be weighed in an unerring balance, and receive the chastisement
they deserve. His high-handed disregard of equity and mercy may prevail up to a
certain point, but retribution will come when the measure of his iniquity has been
filled up. And the knowledge that this is so will help to console and strengthen the
wise in the dark and evil day.—J. W.


Vers. 6—8.—The doom of tyrants. In words which are purposely dark the writer
speaks of the fall of unrighteous tyrants. It is with bated breath that he whispers to
those who are writhing helplessly under the oppressive rule of crue) despots, that the
evil under which they suffer works its own cure in time, and that those who have their
own way at present will sooner or later have to succumb to a power greater than their
own. It is with considerable difficulty that the drift of the passage is to be made out,
but with this clue in our hands it becomes intelligible. In the sixth and seventh verses
there are four statements, each introduced by the same conjunction, 3, “for,” or
‘‘ because,” and by retaining it in each case, instead of varying it as is done in our
English versions, the sequence of thought becomes clearer. The sense of the verses is
as follows: “The heart of the wise man will know the time and judgment, and will
keep quiet; for (1) there is a time and a judgment appointed by God in which the
wicked ruler will be duly punished (cf. ch. iii. 17); (2) the wickedness of man is
heavy upon him, and will entail its own punishment,—the misery caused by a tyrant
is a weight which will bring him down at last; (3) no man knows the future, or that
which will take place, and therefore no despot is able absolutely to guard himself
against the stroke of vengeance; for (4) who can tell him how the vengeance will be
brought about? He may look in this direction and in that for the longed-for informa-
tion, but in vain (cf. Isa. xlvii. 13, etc.), One thing, however, is certain, that whilst the
wicked “are drowned in their carousing, they shall be consumed like stubble fully
dry” (Nah. i. 10). The inexorable nature of the doom which will fall upon the cruel
despot is described in highly vivid language. There are four things which are impos-
sible for him to do. 1. “There is no man that hath power over the spirit to retain the
spirit.” Life can be shortened or cut off at any moment, but can by no art be prolonged
beyond the fixed term. The despot cannot by his power escape the doom of death, any
more than can the meanest of his subjects. Or understanding by mo not “ the spirit of
man,” but “the wind,” to which Divine judgments are often likened (Isa. xli. 16; lvii.
18; Jer. iv. 11—13; xxii. 22), it is as fruitless to try to keep back the Divine judg-
ments as to prevent the wind from bursting forth. 2. There is no one who has power
over the day of death, or is able to avert the arrival of that “ king of terrors” (Job xviii.
14); the pestilence walketh forth in darkness, and the sickness wasteth at noonday
(Ps. xci. 6). 3. There was no discharge granted from the ranks in the time of war
under the vigorous law of Persia, and the Divine law of requital cuts off with equal
certainty all hope of escape from the guilty transgressor; and lastly: 4. Wickedness
will not deliver its master. When the hour of Divine vengeance strikes, the sinner
shall receive the meet reward of his actions. “The wages of sin is death” (Rom. vi.
23) (Wright). By no lavish bribes, by no use of power, by no arts or endeavours, can
the evil-doer, however high his rank may be, avert the day of judgment, which may
precede, but which, if it does not precede, will certainly coincide with the day of death.
And in that time, when he will have to stand before the tribunal of the King of kings
none of his deeds of cruelty and oppression will be passed over. Such is the teaching
half concealed beneath the words of the Preacher; but not so veiled as to be hidden
from the discernment of a reader made sensitive by the righteous indignation which
oppression excites in a healthy mind. His words pass from an apparent servility of tone
into a generous anger, and there is a triumphant ring in his voice as he speaks of the
immutability of the law or of the will, upon which the moral government of the world
is based. But though horror of injustice and hardness of heart is manifest in his words
they are not instinct with any less worthy feeling. He does not justify revenge, or


On, viii 1—17.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 221


hint at the advisability of subjects taking the law into their own hands when their
patience has been long tried. But he raises the matter to a higher level, and makes
faith in God the source of consolation; and in his very words of counsel to subjects
adduces considerations which are calculated to weigh with their rulers, and make


those of them who are still amenable to reason, pause in a course of oppression and
cruelty.—J. W.


Vers. 9, 10.— Unequal lots. The enunciation in the preceding verses of a firm con-
viction in the moral government of the world by God might have been expected to
have silenced for ever doubts excited by the inequalities and irregularities so often
apparent in human society. The possession of a master-key might have been expected
to deliver the wanderer from the mazes of the labyrinth. But so great is the power of
the actual, so varying is the strength of faith, that at times belief in a God of infinite
wisdom and power and love seems a fallacious theory, contradicted aud disproved by
the facts of everyday life. And so our author, after bidding his readers to wait
patiently for the manifestation of God’s justice against evil-doers, gives utterance to
the perplexity and distress occasioned by his long delay. He thinks of the successful
oppressor, prosperous in life and honoured in burial, and contrasts with him the
righteous driven into exile, and dying in obscurity and forgotten by all his fellows.
Such seems to be the meaning of these verses, according to the translation given in the
Revised Version, “‘ All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work under
the sun: there ts a time wherein one man hath power over another to his hurt. And
withal I saw the wicked buried, and they came to the grave; and they that “had done
right went away from the holy place, and were forgotten in the city: this also is
vanity.” It is just the state of matters described in the first part of the parable of the
rich man and Lazarus—the one enjoying in this life good things, the other evil—and
because the Preacher is not able to draw aside the veil that divides the temporal from
the eternal, he cannot be sure that the inequality of the lots of the wicked and the
righteous is ever remedied. He describes (1) the prosperity of the wicked ; and (2) the
adversity of the righteous.

I. THE PROSPERITY OF THE WICKED. It is still the despot whom he has in his
mind’s eye. He sees him ruling over others to their hurt, and at last receiving honour-
able burial, and finding rest in the grave. No insurrection of oppressed and pillaged
subjects cuts short his tyrannous rule; he is undisturbed by enemies from without;
he escapes the dagger of the assassin, and dies peacefully in his bed. And even then,
when the fear he inspired in his lifetime is relaxed, no outbreak of popular indignation
interferes with the stately ceremonial with which he is laid in the tomb. “ There is
not wanting the long procession of the funeral solemnities through the streets of
Jerusalem, the crowd of hired mourners, the spices and ointment very precious,
wrapping the body ; nor yet the costly sepulchre, with its adulatory inscription.” He
might have been the greatest benefactor his subjects had known, the holiest of his
generation, so completely has he received the portion of those who have lived prosperous
and honoured lives (cf. 2 Chron. xvi, 14; xxvi. 23; xxviii. 27). The punishment
merited by an evil life has not fallen upon him; the Divine Judge has delayed his
coming until it is too late, as far as this life is concerned, for justice to be done, and
therefore the faith of those who wait patiently upon God is subjected to a severe
aT Tae ADVERSITY OF THE RIGHTEOUS, While the wicked flourish in undisturbed
peace, the righteous have often to endure hardships. The decree of banishment goes
out against them; with slow and lingering steps they are compelled against their will
to depart from the place which they love, They must go forth, and only too soon are
they forgotten in the city, te. the holy city; a younger generation knows nothing
more of them, and not even a gravestone brings them back to the memory of their
people. This also is vanity, like the many others already registered—this, viz., that
the wicked while living, and also in their death, possess the sacred soil; while, on the
contrary, the upright are constrain-d to depart from it and are soon forgotten
(Delitzsch). It seemsa stain upon the Divine righteousness that this should be so;
that so long an interval should elapse between the commission of the offence and the
dawning of the day of retribution, and that in so many cases it would appear as if


222 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (cx. var. 1—17.


retribution never came. This is calculated to try our faith, and happy are we if the
trial strengthens our faith. But one thing must not be left out of account—the
Preacher dwells upon it in a subsequent verse—and that is that external cireumstances
of prosperity or adversity are not of supreme importance; that righteousness even with
misfortunes is infinitely preferable to wickedness, whatever measure of external
prosperity it may enjoy. Whether happiness or misery in this life be their outward
lot, in the end “it shall be well with teem that fear God ” (ver. 12).—J. W,


Vers. 11—13.—Retribution certatn. The prosperity of the wicked is not only
an evil in itself, but it leads the way to a more deliberate and unrestrained course of
sin. ‘The fact that the Divine sentence that condemns evil is not executed speedily,
leads many to think that they can sin with impunity. They do not see that the
slowness with which the messenver of vengeance often travels gives opportunity for
repentance and amendment before the stroke of punishment falls. Men think they are
secure, and give themselves fearlessly to the practice of evil. Yet the Preacher could
not give up his conviction that punishment of evil was but delayed and not averted.
Though he saw the sinner do evil a hundred times and prolong his days, he knew
that the righteousness of God, which in the present world seems so often obscured
and thwarted, would in the end assert itself (ver. 12), Though the sinner enjoyed
prosperity, it was a deceitful calm before the storm; but the righteous who truly
feared God had a peace of spirit which no outward misfortunes or persecutions could
disturb. ‘Appearances, the Preacher saw clearly enough, were against him, yet his
faith was strong even under all such difficulties, and through it he was victorious”
(Wright) (cf. 1 John v. 24). The prosperity of the wicked is, after all, only apparent.
It has no sure foundation; can anticipate no long duration. His days may be many
in number, but they soon pass away “as a shadow;” and when the last comes, every
wish for prolonged life will be in vain. He may be at the very height of enjoyment
when the hour strikes for his enforced departure from the world in which he has
abused the long-suffering of God; and no prayers or entreaties or struggles will avail
to prolong his days. The shadow on the dial cannot be forced to retrace its course, or
to journey more slowly. ‘His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his dust; in that
very day his thoughts perish.”—J. W.


Vers. 14, 15.—One way out of perplexity. The Preacher has just attained for a
moment to higher ground, from which he may get a wider view of life with all its
changes and anomalies (vers. 12, 13). His hope revives, his faith comes back. “ For
a moment he has pierced through the ring which has confined him to the interests of
common life, and risen also above his own dark misgivings;-and there has flashed
across his soul for a moment the certainty that there is a power in the world that
‘makes for righteousness,’ a Divine and supreme law behind all the puzzles and
anomalies of life, which will solve them all. He lays his hand on this, but he cannot
grasp it” (Bradley). The inequalities in human lots, the just suffering as though they
had been wicked, the wicked prospering as though they had been righteous, afflict his
heart once more (ver, a6) His recurrence so often to this perplexing phenomenon is
almost painful; it reveals a distress so deep that no arguments can diminish it, no
exercise of faith can charm it away. Nothing but fresh light upon the mysteries of
life and death can givs relief, and this is denied him. He is one of those of whom
the Saviour spoke (Luke x. 24) who desired to see and hear the things seen and heard
by those who were privileged to receive a revelation of God in Christ, but whose
longings were doomed never to be satisfied on earth. In the mean time to what con-
clusion did the Preacher come? To that which he has already expressed four times
over (ch, ii. 24; iii, 12, 22; v. 18)—that it is better to enjoy the good things of life
than to pine after an impossible ideal; to eat the fruit of one’s toil in spite of all
that is calculated to sadden and perplex (ver. 14), Yet we must be fair to him. He
does not recommend riot and excess, or a life of mere epicurean enjoyment. There is
work to be done in life before enjoyment is won; there is a God from whom the
blessings come as a gift, and the remembrance of this fact will prevent mere brutish
self-indulgence, ‘he fear of God gives a dignity to his counsel which is wanting in
the somewhat similar words of heathen poets, in which we have epicureanism pure and


Ox, rx. 1—18.] EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 223


simple—in the songs of Anacreon and Horace and Omar Khayyam. It would indecd
be a mistake to imagine that the advice he gives, however often it is repeated, is the
best that can be given, or even the best that he has to give. It prescribes but a
temporary relief from sorrow and care and perplexity, And even when he makes the
most of the satisfaction gained by “ eating and drinking and being merry,” we remember
his own words, that “ it is better to go to the house of mourning than to the house of
feasting ” (ch, vii. 2).—J. W.


Vers. 16, 17.— Vanity of philosophizing. The endeavour had been in vain to discover
the principle according to which it happens that the just sometimes receive the reward
of the wicked, and the wicked that of the righteous (ch. viii. 14). Equal failure attends
the endeavour to understand the purpose and end of the toil and labour in which men
are ceaselessly engaged. That all that was done was “a work of God,” the carrying out
of a Divine law, the accomplishment of a Divine plan, he did not doubt (ver. 17); but
he was unable to see the connection of the individual parts with the whole—the order
and symmetry of events in their course he could not recognize. Two things he had
sought to attain; (1) to know wisdom, to understand the essence and causes and objects
of things; and (2) to bring this wisdom to bear upon the facts of life, to find in it a clue
for the interpretation of that which was perplexing and abnormal. But success in his
endeavour was denied him. The toils and cares which fill up laborious days, and drive
away sleep from the eyes of the weary, seemed to him to be in many cases utterly
fruitless; to be imposed upon men for no end; to have no connection with any higher
plan or purpose by which one might suppose the world to be governed. What, then, is
his conclusion? It is that the finite cannot comprehend the infinite; that no effort is
adequate for the task; that the highest human wisdom is but as folly when it is bent
upon forcing a solution of this great problem (ver. 17). “Then I beheld all the work
of God, that man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun: because liowever
much a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it; yea, moreover, though a
wise man think to know it, yet he shall not be able to find it.” ‘he agnosticism of the
writer does not tend to atheism. He does not deny—on the contrary, he affirms—his
faith in agreat Divine plan to which all the labours of men are related, though what
it is and how it is being fulfilled he does not know. ‘The tone in which he records his
failure is not without a strain of bitterness; but one would wish to believe that its
prevailing note is that of reverent submission to the Almighty, whose ways he could
not comprehend, and that the writer’s thoughts would find adc quate expression in the
devout ejaculation of the apostle, “Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding
out!” (Rom. xi, 33). The pregnant words of Hooker describe the attitude appropriate
for creatures in presence of their Creator: ‘Dangerous it were for the feeble brain of
man to wade far into the doings of the Most High; whom although to know be life, and
joy to make mention of his Name; yet our soundest knowledge is to know that we
know him notas indeed lie is, neither can know him, and our safest eloquence con-
cerning him is our silence, when we confess without confession that his glory is
inexplicable, his greatness above our capacity and reach. He is above, and we upon
the earth; therefore it behoveth our words to be wary and few” (‘Kccl. Pol.,’
i, 2, 3).—J. W.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER IX,


Vers, 1—6.—One fate happens to all, and
the dead are cut off from all the feelings and
interests of life in the upper world.

Ver. 1.—This continues the subject treated
above, confirming the conclusion arrived at
in ch. viii. 17, viz. that God’s government
of the world is unfathomable. For all this


I considered in my heart even to declare all
this ; literally, for all (his luid I in my heart,
and all thia I have been about (equivalent to I
sought) to clear up. The reference is both to
what has been said and to what is coming,


| The ki, “for” (which the Vulgate omits),


at the beginning gives the reason fur the
truth of what is advanced; the writer has
omitted no means of arriving at @ con-


224


clusion. One great result of his considera-
tion he proceeds to state. The Septuagint
connects this clause closely with the last
verse of the preceding chapter, “For Iapplicd
all this to my heart, and my heart saw all
this.” The righteous, and the wise, and their
works, are in the hand of God (Ps. xxxi. 15;
Prov. xxi. 1); ¢.e.in his power, under his direc-
tion. Man is not independent. Even the god
and wise, who might be supposed to afford
the plainest evidence of the favourable side
of God’s moral government, are subject to the
same unsearchable law. The very incompre-
hensibility of this principle proves that it
comes from God, and men may well be con-
tent to submit themselves to it, knowing that
he is as just as he is almighty. No man
knoweth either love or hatred. God’s favour
or displeasure are meant. Vulgate, Ht tamen
nescit homo, utrum amore ‘an odio dignus sit.
We cannot judge from the events that befall
a man what is the view which God takes of
his character. We must not, like Job’s
friends, decide that a man is a great sinner
because calamity falls upon him, nor again
suppose that outward prosperity is a proof
of a life righteous and well-pleasing to God.
Outward circumstances are no criterion of
inward disposition or of final judgment.
From the troubles or the comforts which we
ourselves experience or witness in others we
have no right to argue God’s favour or dis-
pleasure. He disposes matters as seems best
to him, and we must not expect to see every
one in this world treated according to what
we should deem his deserts (comp. Prov. i.
82 with Heb. xii. 6). Delitzsch and others
think that the expressions “love” and
“hatred” are too general to admit of being
interpreted as above, and they determine the
sense to be that no one can tell beforehand
who will be the objects of his love or hate,
or how entirely his feelings may change in
regard of persons witli whom he is brought
in contact. The circumstances which give
rise to these sentiments are entirely
beyond his control and foresight. This is
true enough, but it does not seem to me to
be intended. ‘The author is concerned, not
with inward sentiments, but with prosperity
and adversity considered popularly as indi-
cations of God’s view of things. It would
be but a meagre assertion to state that you
cannot know whether you are to love or hate,
because God ordains all such contingencies;
whereas to warn against hasty and infidel
judgments on the ground of our ignorance
of God’s mysterious ways, is sound and
weighty advice, and in due harmony with
what followsin the next verses, The inter-
pretation, “No man knows whether he shall
meet with the love or hatred of his fellows,”
has commended itself to some critics, but
fe as inadmissible as the one just mentioned.


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(cu. xx. 1—18.


By all that is before them. The Hebrew is
simply, “all [lies] before them.” All that
shall happen, all that shall shape their
destiny in the future, is obscure and un-
known,and beyond their control. Septuagint,
Td rdvra mpd mpordnov abtav. The Vulgate
mixes this clause with the following verse,
But all things are kept uncertain for the future.
St. Gregory, “ As thou knowest not who are
converted from sin to goodness, nor who turn
back from goodness to sin; so also thou dost
not understand what is doing towards thy-
self as thy merits deserve. And as thou
dost not at all comprehend another’s end, so
art thou also unable to foresee thine own.
For thou knowest now what progress thou
hast made thyself, but what I [God] still
think of thee in secret thou knowest not.
Thou now thinkest on thy deeds of righteous-—
ness ; but thou knowest not how strictly they
are weighed by me. Woeeven to the praise-
worthy life of men if it be judged without
mercy, because when strictly examined it is
overwhelmed in the presence of the Judge
by the very conduct with which it imagines
that it pleases him” (‘Moral.,’ xxix. 34,
Oxford transl.).

Ver. 2.—All things come alike to all; lite-
rally, all things [are] like that which [happens]
to all persons. There is no difference in the
treatment of persons; all people of every
kind meet with circumstances of every kind.
Speaking generally, there is no discrimina-
tion, apparently, in the distribution of good
and evil. Sun and shade, calm and storm,
fruitful and unfruitful seasons, joy and
sorrow, are dispensed by inscrutable laws.
The Septuagint, reading differently, has,
“* Vanity is in all;” the Syriac unites two
readings, “ All before him is vanity, all as to
all’ (Ginsburg). There is one event to the
righteous, and to the wicked. All men have
the same lot, whether it be death or any
other contingency, without regard te their
moral condition. The classes into which men
are divided must be noted. “Righteous”
and ‘“ wicked” refer to men in their conduct
to others. The good. The Septuagint,
Vulgate, and Syriac add, “to the evil,”
which is said again almost immediately.
To the clean, and to the unclean. “The
good” and “clean” are those who are not
only ceremonially pure, but, as the epithet
“ good” shows, are morally undefil To
him thai sacrificeth ; #.e. the man who attends
to the externals of religion, offers the obli-
gatory sacrifices, and brings his free-will
offerings. The good ... the sinner; in the
widest senses. He that sweareth, as he that
feareth an oath. He who takes en oath
lightly, vonueree{ or falsely (comp. Zech.
v. 3), is contrasted with him who regards it
as a holy thing, or shrinks in awe from
invoking God’s Name in such acase. This


ou. rx. 1—18.]


ECCLESTASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.


225


last idea is regarded as a late fsenio ; and passions, and care little for God’s will


development (see Josephus, ‘ Bell. Jud.,’ ii.
8. 6); though something like it is found in
the sermon on the mount, ‘I say unto you,
Swear not at all,” etc. (Matt. v. 34—37).
Dean Plumptre, however, throws doubt on
the above interpretation, owing to the fact
that in all the other groups the good side is
placed first ; and he suggests that “he who
swearcth ” may be one who does his duty in
this particular religiously and well (comp.
Deut. vi. 13; Isa. lxv. 16), and “ he who fears
the oath ” is a man whose conscience makes
him shrink from the oath of compurgation
(Exod. xxii. 10, 11; Numb. v. 19—22), or
who is too cowardly to give his testimony in
due form. The Vulgite has, Ut perjurus,
sta et ille qui verwm dejerat; and it seems
unnecessary to present an entirely new view
of the passage in slavish expectation of a
eoncinnity which the author cannot be
proved to have everaimed at. The five con-
trasted pairs are the righteous and tlie
wicked, the clean and the unclean, the sacri-
ficer and the non-sacrificer, the good and the
sinner, the profane swearer and the man who
reverences an oath. The last clause is ren-
dered by the Septuagint, “So is he who
sweareth (6 éuvdwy) even as he who fears the
oath,” which is as ambiguous as the original.
A cautious Greek guome says—
“Opxov 8& peiye, Kav dicalws duvups.
“* Avoid an oath, though justly you might
swear.”

Ver. 3.—This is an evil among all things
that are done under the sun. The “evil”
is explained in the following words, which
speak of the common fate. The Vulgate
(followed by Ginsburg and others) takes the
first words as equivalent to a superlative:
Hoc est pessimum inter omnia, “ This is the
greatest evil of all that is done under the
gun.” But the article would have been used
in this case; nor would this accurately ex-
press Koheleth’ssentiments. He looks upon
death only as one of the evils appertaining
to men’s career on earth—one of tle phases
of that identity of treatment so certain and
so inexplicable, which leads to disastrous
results (ch. viii. 11). That there is one
event unto all. The “one event,” as the
end of the verse shows, is death. We
have here the old strain repeated which is
found in ch. ii, 14—16; iii. 19; v.15; vi. 12;
«“ Omnes eodem cogimur ” (Horace, ‘ Carm..,’
fi, 3. 25). Yea, also the heart of the sons of
men is full of evil. In consequence of this
indiscriminating destiny men sin recklessly,
are encouraged in their wickedness. Mad-
ness is in their heart while they live. The
“madness” is conduct opposed to the dictates
of wisdom and reason, as ch. i. 17; ii. 2, 12.
All their lifelong men follow their own lusts

EOCOLESIASTES,


and law, or their own best interests. This
is well called “ want of reason ” (repidépeca,
Septuagint), And after that they go to the
dead. The verb is omitted in the Hebrew,
being implied by the preposition be, SCOR ie
the omission is very forcible. Delitzsch,
Wright, and others render, “after him,” ¢.e.
after man’s life is ended, which seems rather
to say, “ after they die, they die.” The idea,
however, appears to be, both good and evil
go to the same place, pass away into nothing-
ness, are known no more in this world. Here
at present Koheleth leaves the question of
the future life, having already intimated his
belief in ch. iii. and viii, 11, ete.

Ver. 4.—For to him that is joined to all the
living there ishope. As long as a man lives
(is one of living beings) he has some hope,
whatever it be. This feeling is inextinguish-
able even unto the end.

“AcAmroy ovdév' mavta » eralley xpedy.

‘‘ Hope springs eternal in the human breast.”
Thus Bailey sings, in ‘ Festus ’—
“ All
Have hopes, however wretshed they may be,
Or blessed. It is hope which lifts the lark
so high,
Hope of a lighter air and bluer sky ;
And the poor hack which drops down on the
flints,
Upon whose eye the dust is settling, he
Hopes, but to die. No being exists, of hope,
Of love, void.”


This clause gives a reason for the folly of
men, mentioned in ver. 8. Whatever be
their lot, or their way of life, they- see no
reason to make any change by reformation
or active exertion. They go on hoping, and
do nothing. Something may turn up; amid
the inexplicable confusion of the ordering of
events some happy contingency may arrive.
The above is the reading according to the
Keri. ‘Thus the Septuagint: “O71 rls ds
kowwvel ; “For who is he that has fellowship
with all the living?” Symmachus has,
“For who is he that will always continue to
live?” while the Vulgate gives, Nemo est qué
semper vivat. The Kietib points differ-
ently, offering the reading, “For who is
excepted?” ¢.e. from the common lot, the
interrogation being closely connected with
the preceding verse, or “‘ Who can choose?”
#.e. whether he will die or not. The sentence
then proceeds, “To all the living there is
hope.” But the rendering of the Authorized
Version has good authority, and affords the
better sense. For a living dog is better
than a dead lion. The dog in Palestine was
not made a pet and companion, as it is
among us, but was regarded as a loathsome
and despicable object (comp. 1 Sam. xvik
Q


226


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


[on. rx. 1—18,


Sn eed


43; 2 Sam. iii. 8); while the lion was ccn-
sidered as the noblest of beasts, the type of
power and greatness (comp. Prov. xxx. 30;
Isa. xxxi. 4). So the proverbial saying in
the text means that the vilest and meanest
creature possessed of life is better than the
highest and mightiest which-has succumbed
to death. ‘There is an apparent contradic-
tion between this sentence and such passages
as claim a preference for death over life, e.g.
ch. iv. 2; vii. 1; but in the latter 1.e
writer is viewing life with all its sorrovs
and bitter experiences, here he regards it as
affording the possibility of enjoyment. In
the one case he holds death as desirable,
because it delivers from further sorrow and
puts an end to misery; in the other, he
deprecates death as cutting off from pleasure
and hope. He may also have in mind that
now is the time todo the work which we
have to perform: “The night cometh when
no man can work;” LEcclus. xvii. 28,
“ Thanksgiving perisheth from the dead, as
from one that is not; the living and sound
shall praise the Lord” (comp. Isa. xxxviili.
18, 19. -

Ver. 5.—For the living know that they
shall die. This is added in confirmation
of the statement in ver.4. The living have
at least the consciousness that they will
soon have to die, and this leads them to
work while it is day, to employ their
faculties worthily, to make use of oppor-
tunities, to enjoy and profit by the present.
They have a certain fixed event to which
they must look forward ; and they have not
to stand idle, lamenting their fate, but their
duty and their happiness is to accept the
inevitable and make the best of it. But the
dead know not anything. They are cut off
from the active, bustling world; their work
is done; they have nothing to expect, nothing
to labour for, What passes upon earth
affects them not; the knowledge of it
reaches them no longer. Aristotle’s idea
was that the dead did know something, in a
hazy and indistinct way, of what went on
in the upper world, and were in some slight
degree influenced thereby, but not to such a
degree as tochange happiness into misery, or
vice versed (‘Eth. Nicom.,’ i. 10 and 11),
Neither have they any more a reward; ¢.¢. no
fruit for labour done. There is no question
here about future retribution in another
world. The gloomy view of the writer at
this moment precludes all idea of such an
adjustment of anomalies after death. For
the memory of them is forgotten. They
have not even the poor reward of being
remembered by loving posterity, which in
the mind of an Oriental was an eminent
blessing, to be much desired. There is a
paronomasia in seker, “memory,” and sakar,
“reward,” which, as Plumptre suggests,


may be approximately represented in Eng:
lish by the words “ record ” and “ reward.”

Ver. 6.—Also their love, and their hatred,
and their envy, is now (long ago) perished.
All the feelings which are exhibited and
developed in the life of the upper world are
annihilated (comp, ver. 10), Three are
selected as the most potent passions, such as
by their strength and activity might ideally
be supposed to survive even the stroke of
death. But all are now at an end. Neither
have they any more a portion for ever in any
thing that is done under thesun. Between
the dead and the living an impassable gulf
exists. The view of death here given, in-
tensely gloomy and hopeless as it appears to
be, is in conformity with other passages of
the Old Testament (see Job xiv. 10—14;
Ps. vi. 5; xxx. 9; Isa. xxxvili. 10—19;
Eeclus. xvii. 27, 28 ; Bar. iii. 16—19), and that
imperfect dispensation. Koheleth and his
contemporaries were of those “ who through
fear of death were all their lifetime subject
to bondage ” (Heb. ii. 15); it was Christ who
brightened the dark valley, showing the
blessedness of those who die in the Lord,
bringing life and immortality tolight through
the gospel (2 Tim, i. 10). Some expositors
have felt the pessimistic utterances of this
passage so deeply that they have endea-
voured to account for them by introducing
an atheistic objector, or an intended oppo-
sition between flesh and spirit. But there
is not a trace of any two such voices, and
the suggestion is quite unnecessary. The
writer, while believing in the continued
existence of the soul, knows little and- has
little that is cheering to say about its con-
dition; and what he does say is not incon-
sistent with a judgment to come, though he
has not yet arrived at the enunciation of
this great solution. The Vulgate renders
the last clause, Neo habent partem in hoo
sxculo et in opere quod sub sole geritur. But
“for ever” is the correct rendering of peipd,
and Ginsburg concludes that Jerome’s trans-
lation can be traced to the Hagadistic inter-
pretation of the verse which restricts its
scope tothe wicked Theauthor of the Book
of Wisdom, writing later, takes a much more
hopeful view of death and the departed (see
ch. i. 15; ii, 22—24; iii. 1; vi. 18; viii. 17;
xv. 3, etc.).

Vers. 7—12.—These verses give the appli-
cation of the facts just mentione!. The
inscrutability of the moral government of
the world, the uncertainty of life, the con-
dition of the dead, lead to the conclusion
again that one should use one’s life to the
best advantage; and Koheleth repeats his


caution concerning the issues and duration
of lite,


ou. rx. 1—18.]


_ Ver. 7.—Go thy way, eat thy bread with
joy. This is not an injunction to lead a
selfish life of Epicurean pleasure; but taking
the limited view to which he here confines
himeelf, the Preacher inculcates the prac-
tical wisdom of looking at the bright side of
things; he says in effect (though he takes
care afterwards to correct a wrong impres-
sion which might be given), “ Let us eat and
drink ; for to-morrow we die” (1 Cor. xv. 32).
We have had the same counsel in ch. ii.
24; iii. 12, 13, 22; v. 18; viii. 15. Drink
thy wine with a merry heart. Wine was
not an accompaniment of meals usually ; it
was reserved for feasts and solemn occasions.
Bread and wine are here regarded as the
necessary means of support and comfort
(comp. ch. x. 19; Gen. xiv. 18; 1 Sam. xvi.
20, etc.). The moderate use of wine is
nowhere forbidden; there is no law in the
Old Testament against the use of intoxi-
cating drinks; the employment of such
fluids as evrdials, exhilarating, strengthen-
ing and comforting, is often referred to
(comp. Judg. ix. 13; Ps. civ. 15; Prov.
xxxi. 6, 7; Ecclus. xxxi. 27, 28). Thus
Koheleth’s advice, taken even literally, is
not contrary to the spirit of his religion, For
God now (long ago) accepteth thy works.
The “works” are not moral or religious
dvings, in reward of which God gives
temporal blessings, which is plainly opposed
to Koheleth’s chief contention in all this
passage. The works are the eating and
drinking just mentioned. By the consti-
tution of man’s nature, and by the ordering
of Providence, such capacity of enjoyment
is allowable, and there need be no ecruple
in using it. Such things are God’s good
gifts, and to be received with reverence
and thanksgiving; and he who thus employs
them is well-pleasing unto the Lord (ch. ii.
24; viii. 15).

Ver. 8.—Let thy garments be always
white. The Preacher brings into promi-
nence certain particulars of enjoyment, more
noticeable than mere eating and drinking.
White garments in the East (as among
ourselves) were symbols of joy and purity.
Thus the singers in Solomon’s temple were
arrayed in white linen (2 Chron. v. 12).
Mordecai was thus honoured by King
Ahasuerus (sth. viii. 15), the angels are
seen similarly decked (Mark xvi. 5), and
the glorified saints are clothed in white
(Rev. iii. 4, 5, 18). So in the pseudepi-
graphal books the same imagery is retained.
Those that “ have fulfilled the Law of the
Lord have received glorious garments, and
are clothed in white” (2 Esdr. ii. 39, 40).
Among the Romans the same symbolism
obtained. Horace (‘Sat.,’ ii. 2. 60)—

* Tile repotia, natales aliosve dierum

Westos albatus celebret.”


ECCLESIAST<S; OR, THE PREACHER,


227


“ Though he in whitened toga celebrate
His wedding, birthday, or high fi stival.”


Let thy head lack no ointment. Oi! and
perfumes were used on festive occasions not
only among Eastern nations, but by Greeks
and Romans (see on ch. vii. 1). Thus Tele-
machus is anointed with fragrant oil by the
fair Polykaste (Homer, ‘Od.,’ iii. 466),
Sappho complains to Phaon (Ovid, ‘ Heroid.,’


| xv. 76)—


“Non Arabo noster rore capillus olet.”
“No myrrh of Araby bedews my hair.”


Such allusions in Horace are frequent and
commonly cited (see ‘Carm.,’ i. 5. 2; ii. 7.
7, 8; ii. 11. 15, etc.). Thus the double
injunction in this verse counsels one to
be always happy and cheerful. Gregory
Thaumaturgus (cited by Plumptre) repre-
sents the passage as the error of “men of
vanity;” and other commentators have
deemed that it conveyed not the Preacher’s
own sentiments, but those of an atheist
whom he cites. There is, as we have
already seen, no need to resort to such an
explanation. Doubtless the advice may
readily be perverted to evil, and made to
sanction sensuality and licentiousness, as we
sve to have been done in Wisd. ii. 6—9;
but Koheleth only urges the moderate use
pasha goods as consecrated by God’s
gift.

Ver. 9.—Live joyfully with the wife
whom thou lovest; literally, see life with a
wife whom thou lovest. The article is omitted,
as the maxim is to be taken generally. In
correction of the outspoken condemnation of
women in ch. vii, 26, Koheleth here recog-
nizes the happiness of a home where is
found a helpmate beloved and worthy of love
(comp. Prov. v. 18, 19; xvii. 22, on which
our passage seems to be founded; and Ecclus.
xxvi. 13—18). (For the expression, “see life,”
vide note on ch.ii.1.) St. Jerome’s comment
is misleading, “ Queacumque 1ibi placuerit
feminarum ejus gaude complexu.” Some
critics translate ¢shshah here “ woman.”
Thus Cox: “ Enjoy thyself with any woman
whom thou lovest;” but the best com-
mentators agree that the married state is
meant in the text, not mere sensual en-
joyment. All the days of the life of thy
vanity; ¢.e. throughout the time of thy
quickly passing life. This is repeated after
the next clause (though there omitted by the
Septuagint and Svriac), in order to empha-
size the transito:i » ss of the present and the
consequent wisduim of enjoying it while it
lasts. So Horace bids man “carpe diem”
(‘Carm.,’ i. 11. 8), “ enjoy each atom of the
day;’” and Martial sings (‘ Epigry’ vii
47, 11)—


“ Vive velut rapto fugitivaque gaudia carpe.”


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(ow. sx. 118,


a


“ Live thou thy life as stolen, and enjoy
Thy quickly fading pleasures.”


Which he (God) hath given thee under the
sun. The relative may refer to either the
“wife’’ or “the daysof life”? The Septuagint
and Vulgate take it as belonging to the latter,
and this seems most suitable (comp. ch. v.
17). That is thy portion in this life, and in
thy labour, etc. Such moderate enjoyment
is the recompense allowed by God for the
toil which accompanies a properly spent life.
Ver. 10.—Whatsoever thy hand findeth to
do, do it with thy might. In accordance
with what has been already said, and to
combat the idea that, as man cannot control
his fate, he should take no pains to work his
work, but fold his hands in resigned in-
action, Koheleth urges him not to despair,
but to do his part manfully as long as life
is given, and with all the energies of his
soul carry out the purpose of his-being.
The Septuagint gives, “ All things whatso-
ever thy hand shall find to do, do it as
thy power is (és 7 dtvauls cov);” Vulgate,
Quodcumque facere potest manus tua, in-
stanter operare. The expression at the
commencement may be illustrated by Lev.
xii. 8; xxv. 28; Judg. ix. 33, where it im-
plies ability to carry out some intention,
and in some passages is thus rendered, “is
able,” etc. (comp. Prov. iii. 27). It is there-
fore erroneous to render it in this place,
“ Whatever by chance cometh to hand;” or
“Let might be right.” Rather it is a call
to work as the prelude and accompaniment
of enjoyment, anticipating St. Paul’s maxim
(2 Thess. iii. 10), “If any would not work,
neith:r should he eat.” Ginsburg’s inter-
pretation is dishonouring to the Preaclier
and foreign to his real sentiments, “ Have
recourse to every source of voluptuous
tification, while thou art in thy strength.”

he true meaning of the verse is confirmed
by such references as John ix. 4, “I must
work the works of him that sent me, while
it is day: the night cometh, when no man
can work;” 2 Cor. vi. 2, “Now is the
accepted time; now is the day of salvation;”
Gal. vi. 10, “ As we have opportunity, let us
do good untoall men.” For there is no work,
nor-device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in
the grave. The departed have no more work
which they can do, no plans or calculations
to make; their knowledge is strictly limited,
their wisdom is ended. It needs body and
soul to carry on the labours and activities of
this world ; when these are severed, and can
no longer act together, there is a complete
alteration in the man’s relations and capu-
cities, “The grave,” sheol (which is found
nowhere else in Ecclesiastes), is the place to
which go the souls of the dead—a shadowy
region. Whither thou goest ; to which all are


bowed. It is plain that the writer believes


in the continued existence of the soul, as he
differentiates its life in sheol from its life on
earth, the energies and operations which are
carried on in the one case being curtailed or
eclipsed in the other. Of any repentance,
or purification, or progress, in the unseen
world, Koheleth knows and says nothing.
He would seem to regard existence there as
a sleep or a state of insensibility; at any
rate, such is the natural view of the present
passage.

Vers. 11, 12.—Section 8. It ¢s impossible
to calculate upon the tssues and duration of
life.

Ver. 11.—He reverts to the sentiment of
ver. 1, that we cannot calculate on the
issues of life. Work as we may and must
and ought, the results are uncertain and
beyond our control. This he shows by his
own personal experience. I returned, and
saw under the sun. The expression here
does not indicate a new departure, but
merely a repetition and confirmation of a
previous thought—the dependence and con-
ditionality of man. It implies, too, a cor-
rection of a possible misunderstanding of
the injunction to labour, as if one’s own
efforts were sure to secure success. The race
is not to the swift. One is reminded of the
fable of the hare and tortoise; but Kohe-
leth’s meaning is different. In the instances
given he intimates that, though a man is
well equipped for his work and uses all
possible exertions, he may incur failure. So
one may be a ficet runner, and yet, owing
to some untoward accident or disturbing
circumstance, not come in first. Thus
Ahimaaz brought to David tidings of Absa-
lom’s defeat before Cushi, who had had the
start of him (2 Sam, xviii. 27, 31). There
is no occasion to invent an allusion to the
foot-race in the formal Greek games. The
battle to the strong. Victory does not
always accrue to mighty men. heroes. As
David, himself an instance of the truth of
the maxim, says (1 Sam. xvii. 47), “The
Lord saveth not with sword and spear; for
the battle is the Lord’s” (comp. 2 Chron.
xx. 15; Ps, xxxiii. 16). Neither yet bread
to the wise. Wisdom will not ensure com-
petency. To do this requires other endow-
ments. Many a man of cultivated intellect
and of high mental power is left to starve.
Riches to men of understanding. Aristo-
phanes accounts for the unequal distribution
of wealth thus (‘ Plutus,’ 88), the god himself
speaking—

“T threatened, when a boy,
On none but just and wise and orderly
My favours to bestow; so Zeus in jealousy
ae made me blind, that I may none of
these ;


Distinguish.”


‘om. rx. 1—18.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


229


Nor yet favour to men of skill. “Skill”
here does not mean dexterity in handicrafts
or arts, but knowledge generally; and the
gnome says that reputation and influence do
not necessarily accompany the possession of
knowledge and learning; knowledge is not
a certain or indispensable means to favour.
Says the Greek gnomist—


Téxns Td Ovntav mpdypuar’, ove ebBovalas.


“Not prudence rules, but fortune, men’s
affairs.”


But time and chance happeneth to them all,
We have had tle word eth, “time,” all
through ch. iii, and elsewhere; but ya»,
rendered “chance,” is uncommon, being
found only in 1 Kings v. 4 (18, Hebrew).
Everything has its proper season appointed
by God, and man is powerless to control these
arrangements. Our English word “chance”
conveys af erroneous impression. What is
meant is rather “incident,” such as a
calamity, disappointment, unforescen occur-
rence. Ali human purposes are liable to be
changed or controlled by circumstances be-
yond man’s power, and incapable of explana-
tion. A hand higher than man’s disposes
events, and success is conditioned by superior
laws which work unexpected results.

Ver. 12,—Man also knoweth not his time;
Vulgate, Nescit homo finem suum, under-
standing “ his time” to mean his death-hour;
but it may include any misfortune or acci-
dent. The particle gam, “also,” or “ even,”
belongs to “ his time.” Not only are results
out of man’s control (ver. 11), but his life is
in higher hands, and he is never sure of a
day. As the fishes that are taken in an evil
net, etc. The suddenness and unforeseen
nature of calamities that befall men are
here expressed by two forcible similes
(comp. Prov. vii. 23; Ezek. xii. 13; xxxii.
8). Thus Homer (‘ Iliad,’ v. 487)—


“Beware lest ye, as in the meshes caught
Of some wide-sweeping net, become the


prey
And booty of your foes.”
(Derby.)

So are the sons of men snared in an evil
time. Men are suddenly overtaken by
calamity, which they are totally unable to
foresee or provide against. Our Lord says
(Luke xxi. 35) that the last day shall come
as a snare on all that dwell in the earth
(comp. Ezek. vii. 7, 12).

Vers. 13—16.—Section 9. That wisdom,
even when it does good service, is not always
rewarded, ia shown by an example.


Ver. 13.—This wisdom have I seen also
ander the sun; better, as the Septuagint,
This also I saw to be wisdom under the sun.


The experience which follows he recognized
as an instance of worldly wisdom. To what
special event he alludes is quite unknown.
Probably the circumstance was familiar to
his contemporaries. It is not to be con-
sidered as an allegory, though of course it
is capable of spiritual application. The
event in Bible history most like it is the
preservation of Abel-Beth-maachah by the
counsel of the wise woman (whose name is
forgotten) narrated in 2 Sam. xx. 15—22.
And it seemed great unto me; Septuagint,
Kal peydAn éor: pds pe, “ And it is great
before me.” To my mind it appeared an
important example (comp. Esth. x. 3).
Some critics who contend for the Solomonic
authorship of our book, see here an allegorical
reference to the foreseen revolt of Jerohoam,
whose insurrection had been opposed by cer-
tain wise statesmen, but had been carried
out in opposition to their counsel. Words-
worth considers that the apologue may be
illustrated by the history of Jerusalem, when
great powers were arrayed against it in the
time of Isaiah, and the prophet by his prayers
and exhortations delivered it (2 Kings Eix.
2, 6, 20), but was wholly disregarded aft. r-
wards, nay, was put to death by the son of
the king whom he saved. But all this is
nthil ad rem. As Plautus says, “ Hao
quidem deliramenta loquitur.”

Ver. 14.—There was a little elty. The
substantive verb is, as commonly, omitted.
Commentators have amused themselves with
endeavouring to scouts the city here men-
tioned. Thus some see herein Athens, saved
by the counsel of Themistocles, who was
afterwards driven from Athens and died in
misery (Justin., ii. 12); or Dora, near Mount
Carmel, besieged unsuccessfully by Antio-
chus the Great, B.c. 218, though we know
nothing of the circumstances (Polyb., v. 66);
but see note on ver. 13, The Septuagint
takes the whole paragraph hypothetically,
“Suppose there was a little city,” ete.
Wright well compares the historical allusions
to events fresh in the minds of his hearers
made by our Lord in his parable of the
pounds (Luke xix. 12, 14, 15, 27). So we
may regard the present section as a parable
founded on some historical fact well known
at the time when the book was written. A
great king. The term points to some Per-
sian or Assyrian potentate; or it may mean
merely a powerful general (see 1 Kings xi.
24; Job xxix. 25). Built great bulwarks
against it. The Septuagint has xuparas
peydaAous, “great palisades;” the Vulgate,
Extruzitque munitiones per gyrum. What
are meant are embankments or mounds
raised high enough to overtop the walls of
the town, and to command the positions of
the besieged, For the same purpose wooden
towers were also used (see Deut. xx. 20;


230


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(ox. rx. 1—18


ee ett ttntEEEEEE SSE!


2 Sam. xx. 15; 2 Kings xix. 82; Jer. lii. 4).
The Vulgate rounds off the account in the
text by adding, et perfecta est obsidio, “and
the beleaguering was completed.”

Ver. 15.—Now there was found in it a
poor wise man. The verb, regarded as im-
personal, may be thus taken. Or we may
continue the subject of the preceding verse
and consider the king as spoken of: “ He
came across, met with unexpectedly, s poor
man who was wise.” So the Septuagint.
The word for “poor” in this passage is
misken, for which see note on ch. iv. 138.
He by his wisdom delivered the city. When
the besieged city had neither soldiers nor
arms to defend itself against its mighty
enemies, the man of poor estate, hitherto un-
known or little regarded, came forward, and
by wise counsel relieved his countrymen
from their perilous situation. How this was
done we are left to conjecture. It may have
been by some timely concessions or nego-
tiations; or by the surrender of a chief
offender as at Abel-Beth-maachah; or by
the assassination of a general, as at Bethulia
(Jud. xiii. 8); or by the clever application
of mechanical arts, as at Syracuse, under the
direction of Archimedes (Livy, xxiv. 34;
Plutarch, ‘Marcell.,’ xv.—xviili.). Yet no
man remembered that same poor man, As
soon as the exigence which brought him
forward was past, the poor man fell back
into his insivnificance, and waa thought of
no more; he gained no personal advantage
by his wisdom; his ungrateful countrymen
forgot his very existence. Thus Joseph was
treated by the chief butler (Gen. xl. 23).
Classical readers will think of Coriolanus,
Scipio Africanus, Themistocles, Miltiades,
who for their services to the state were
rewarded with calumny, false accusation,
obloquy, and banishment. The author of
the Book of Wisdom gives a different
and ideal experience. “I,” he says, “ for
the sake of wisdom shall have estimation
among the multitude, and honour with the
elders, though I be young.... By the
means of her I shall obtain immortality, and
leave behind me an everlasting memorial ”
(Wisd. viii. 10—13),

Ver. 16.—Then said I, Wisdom is better
than strength. The latter part of the verse
is not a correction of the former, but the
whole comes under the observation intro-
duced by ‘“‘I said.” The story just related
leads to this assertion, which reproduces the
gnome of ch. vii. 19, wherein it is asserted
that wisdom effects more than mere physical
strength. There is an interpolation in the
Old Latin Version of Wisd. vi. 1 which
seems to have been compiled from this
passage and Proy. xvi. 13, “ Melior est sapi-
entia quam vires, et vir prudens quam fortis.”
Nevertheless the poor man’s wisdom is de-


spised, eto. In the instance above mentioned
the poor man’s wisdom was not despised,
and his words were heard and attended to;
but this was an abnormal case, occasioned
by the extremity of the peril. Koheleth
states the result which usually attends wis-
dom emanating from a disesteemed source.
The experience of Ben-Sira pointed to the
same issue (see Ecclus. xiii. 22,23). Horace,
‘Epist., i. 1. 57—


“Est animus tibi, sunt mores et lingua


fidesque, '
Sed quadringentis sex septem millia de-
sunt;


Plebs eris.”


“Tn wit, worth, honour, one in vain abounds;

If of the knight’s estate he lack ten

pounds,

He’s low, quite low!”

(Howes.)
“Ts not this the carpenter's Son?” asked
the people who were offended at Christ
(Mark vi. 2, 3). ’

Vers. 17, 18.—Section 10. Here follow
some proverbial sayings concerning wisdom
and its opposite, which draw the moral from
the story in the text.

Ver. 17.—The words of wise men are
heard in quiet more than the cry #€ him
that ruleth among fools, This ver would
be better translated, Words of the wise in
quiet are heard better than the shout of a
chief among fools. The Vulgate takes the
tranquillity to appertain to the hearers, thus:
Verba sapientium audiuntur tn silentio; but,
as Delitzsch points out, the contrast between
“quiet” and “cry” shows that it is the
man, and not his auditors, who is quiet.
The sentence says that a wise man’s words,
uttered calmly, deliberately, without pom-
pous declamation or adventitious aids, are of
more value than ‘the blustering vociferation
of an arch-fool, who seeks to force acceptance
for his folly by loudness and swagger (comp.
Isa. xxx. 15; and see Isa. xlii. 2 and Matt.
xii. 19, passages which speak of the peaceful-
ness, reticence, and unobtrusiveness of true
wisdom, as seen in the Son of God). The
verse introduces a kind of exception to the
general rejection of wisdom mentioned above.
Though the multitude turn a deaf ear to a
wise man’s counsel, yet this tells in the long
run, and there are always some teachable
persons who sit at his feet and learn from
him. ‘ He that ruleth among fools” is not
one that governs a silly people, but one who
is a prince of fools, who takes the highest
place among such.

Ver. 18.— Wisdom is better than weapons
of war. Such is the moral which Koheleth
desires to draw from the little narrative
given above (see vers. 14—16; and ch. vii.


on. rx. 1—18,]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


231


—eeeeaes=S<Sa_ _—OOO


19). Wisdom can do what no material force
can effect, and often produces results which
all the implements of war could not com-
mand. But one sinner destroyeth much
good. The happy consequences which the
wise man’s counsel might accomplish, or
has already accomplished, may be over-
thrown or rendered useless by the villany
or perversity of a bad man. The Vulgate,
reading differently, has, Qué in uno peccaverit,
multa bona perdet. But this ssems to be


out of keeping with the context. Adam’s
sin infected the whole race of man; Achan’s
transgression caused Israel’s defeat (Josh.
vii. 11, 12); Rehoboam’s folly occasioned the
great schism (1 Kings xii. 16). The wide-
reaching effects of one little error are illus-
trated by the proverbial saying which every
one knows, and which runs in Latin thus:
“Clavus unus perdit equi soleam, solea
equum, equus equitem, e@ques Castra, castra


rempublicam,’


HOMILETICS,


Vers, 1—6.— All things alike to all. I. ALL MEN EQUALLY IN THE HANDS oF Gop.
1, Their persons. ‘The righteous and the wise (ver. 1), but not less certainly tlie
unrighteous and the foolish. God’s breath sustains all; God’s providence watches over
all; God’s power encircles all; God’s mercy encompasses all, 2. Their works. Their
actions, whether good or bad, in the sense explaincd in the last homily, “are con-
ditioned by God, the Governor of the world and the Former of history” (Delitzsch).
3. Their experiences. “ All lies before them; ” #.e. all possible experiences lie before
men; which shall happen to them being reserved by God in his own power.

II. ALL MEN EQUALLY IGNORANT OF THE FUTURE. ‘“ No man knoweth either love
or hatred,” or “ whether it be love or hatred, no man knoweth;” which may signify
either that no man can tell whether “ providences of a happy nature proceeding from
the love of God, or of an unhappy nature proceeding from the hatred of God,” are to
befall him (J. D. Michaelis, Knobel, Hengstenberg, Plum) tre); or that no man can
predict whether he will love or hate (Hitzig, Ewald, Delitzsch). In either case the
meaning is that no man can certainly predict what a day may bring forth. In so far
as the future is in God’s hand, man can only learn what it contains by waiting the
evolution of events; in so far as it is moulded by man’s free determinations, no man
can predict what these will be until the moment arrives for their formation.

Ill. ALL MEN EQUALLY SUBJECT TO DEATH. “ All things come alike to all: there is
one event” (ver. 2). 1. To the righteous and to the wicked ; i.e. to the inwardly and
morally good and to the inwardly and morally evil. 2. Tv the clean and to the unclean ;
i.e. to the ceremonially pure and to the ceremonially defiled. 38. To him that sacrificeth
and to him that sacrificeth not ; i.e. to him who observes the outward forms of religion
and to him who observes them not. 4. To him that sweareth and to him that feareth
an oath ; i.e. to the openly sinful and to the outwardly reverent and devout. “ All
alike go to the dead ” (ver. 3).

IV. ALL MEN EQUALLY DEFILED BY sin. “The heart of the sons of men is full of
evil, and madness is in their heart while they live” (ver. 3). From which may be
learnt: 1. That sin 4s a kind of madness. This will not be doubted by those who
consider that sin is the rebellion of a creature against the Creator, and that sinners
generally hope both to escape punishment on account of their sin, and to attain felicity
through their sin. 2. That the seat of this madness is in the soul. It may affect the
whole personality of the man, but the perennial fountain whence it springs is the
heart, in its alienation from God. “The carnal mind is enmity against God” (Rom.
viii. 7). 3. That the heart is not merely tainted with this madness, but is full of tt.
In other words, itis, in its natural condition, wholly under the power of sin. The
total corruption of human nature, besides being taught in Scripture (Gen. vi. 5; viii.
21; Job xv. 14; Ps. xiv. 2,8; ch. vii. 20; Isa. lili. 6; Matt. xv. 19; Rom. iii. 23 ;
fiph. ii. 1—8), is abundantly confirmed by experience. 4. That, apart from Divine
grace, this madness continues unchanged throughout life. ‘There is nothing in human
nature itself or in its surroundings that has power to subdue and far less to eradicate
this madness. A new birth alone can rescue the soul from its dominion (John iii. 3).

VY. ALL MEN EQUALLY THE SUBJECTS OF HOPE. 1. Hope @ wniversal possession.
“To him that is joined to all the living there is hope” (ver. 4); ¢.e. while man lives
he hopes. Dum spirat, sperat (Latin proverb). “ Hope springs eternal in the human


232 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. x. 1—18


ee


breast” (Pope). Even the most abject are never, or only seldom, abandoned by this
passion. On the contrary, “the miserable hath no other medicine, but only hope
(Shakespeare). When hope expires, life dies. 2. Hope a potent inspiration, In
ordinary life “we are kept alive by hope” (Rom. viii. 24). The pleasing expectation
of future good enables the heart to endure present ills, and nerves the resolution to
attempt further efforts. Though sometimes, when ill-grounded, “ kings it makes gods,
and meaner creatures kings ” (Shakespeare), yet when soundly based it


« Like a cordial, innocent though strong,
Man’s heart at once inspirits and serenes,”


(Young.)


Especially is this the case with that good hope through grace (2 Thess. ii. 16) which
pertains to the Christian (Rom. v. 5; 2 Cor. iii. 12; Phil. i. 20; 1 Pet. ib 13).

VI. ALL MEN EQUALLY POSSESSED OF INTELLIGENCE. Not of equal intelligence, but
equally intelligent. In particular: 1. Adl know themselves to be mortal. “The living
know that they shall die” (ver. 5). They may frequently ignore this fact, and
deliberately shut their eyes upon it, but of the fact itself they are not ignorant. 2. In
this knowledge they are superior to the dead, who “know not anything, neither have
they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten ;” who in fact, having
dropped out of life, have for ever ceased to take an interest in anything that is done
under the sun. i ;

Learn: 1. The essential equality of all men. 2. The inherent dignity of life. 3.
The value of the present.


Ver. 4—“* A living dog better than a dead lion.” I, ANIMATED BEING BETTER THAN
INANIMATE. Life a higher product than matter; and a lion without life is only
matter. Life added to matter in its meanest forms imparts to it a dignity, worth, and
use not possessed by matter in its most magnificent shapes where life is absent. The
higher life, the nobler being,

Il. CoMPLETED BEING BETTER THAN INcoMPLETE, A living dog is a complete
organism ; a dead lion an organism defective. The living dog possesses all that is
necessary to realize the idea of “‘dog;” the dead lion wants the more important
element, life, and retains only the less important, matter. In the living dog are seen
the “spirit ” and “ form” combined; in the dead lion only the “ form” without the
“spirit.” If presently man is complete naturally, he is incomplete spiritually. Here-
after redeemed and renewed, man will be “ perfect and entire, wanting nothing.”

III. AcTIVE BEING BETTER THAN INACTIVE. The living dog, if not a person, is yet
more than a thing. Along with life and an organism, it has powers and functions it
can exercise ; senses through which it can perceive, a measure of intelligence through
which it can understand, at least rudimentary affections it can both feel and express,
instincts and impulses by and under which it can act. On the other hand, the dead
lion has none of these, however once it may have owned them all. It is now passive,
still, inert, powerless—an emblem of the soul dead in sin, as a living dog is of the
same soul energized by religion.

IV. SERVICEABLE BEING BETTER THAN UNSERVICEABLE. A living dog of some use,
a dead lion of none. The gigantic powers of the forest king are by death reduced to a
nullity, and can effect nothing; the feeble capacities of the yelping cur, just because it
is alive, can be turned to profitable account. So magnificent powers of body and intellect
without spiritual life are comparatively valueless, while smaller abilitics, if inspired by
grace, may accomplish important designs.

Lessons. 1, Be thankful for life. 2. Seek that moral and spiritual completeness
which is the highest glory of life. 38. Endeavour to turn the powers of life to the best
account. 4. Serve him from whom life comes.


Vers. 7—10.— The picture of an idea! life. I. A LIFE OF PERENNIAL Joy. The joy
should be fourfold. 1. Material enjoyment. “Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy,
and drink thy wine with a merry heart” (ver. 7). The permission herein granted to
make a pleasurable use of the good-things of this world, of its meats and its drinks, haa
not been revoked by Christianity. Not only did the Son of man by his example (Matt,


om, rx.1—18.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 238
ee See


xi. 19; Luke vii. 34; John ii. 1—11) show that religion did not require men to be
ascetics or monks, Rechabites or Naaarites, but the apostolic writers have made it clear
that Christianity is not meats or drinks (Rom. xiv. 17; 1 Tim. iv. 3; Heb. ix. 10), and
that while no one has a right to over-indulge himself in either, thereby becoming
gluttonous and a wine-bibber, on the other hand no one is warranted in the name of
Christianity to impose on believers such ordinances as— Touch not, taste not, handle
not ” (Col. ii. 21). 2. Domestic happiness. “Live joyfully with the wife whom thou
lovest all the days of the life of thy vanity” (ver. 9). Marriage is not only honourable
and innocent (Heb. xiii. 4) as being a Divine institution (Matt. xix. 4—6), but is one of
the purest sources of felicity open to man on earth, provided it be contracted in the fear
of God, and cemented with mutual love. As woman was made for man (1 Cor. xi. 9),
to be his helpmeet (Gen. ii. 20), de. his counterpart and complement, companion and
counsellor, equal and friend ; so he that findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth
favour of the Lord (Prov. xviii. 22)—findeth one in whose love he may indulge himself,
in whose sympathy he may refresh himself, in whose grace he may sun himself without
fear of sin. The notion that a higher phase of the religious life is attained by celibates
than by married persons is against both reason and revelation, and is contradicted by
the fruits which in practical experience it usually bears. Neither the Preacher nor the
great ‘l'eacher grants permission to men to live joyfully with unmarried females or
with other people’s wives, but only with their own partners; and neither Old Testament
‘nor New favours the idea that men should take as wives any women but those they
love, or should treat otherwise than with affection those they marry (Eph. v. 28).
3. Religious felicity. Arising fromtwo things. (1) The cultivation of personal purity.
“Let thy garments be always white.” Though “ white garments ” were most probably
intended by the Preacher to be a symbol of joy and gladness, they may be used as an
emblem of purity, since they are so explained in the Talmud and Midrash. (2) The
realization of Divine favour. ‘‘God now accepteth thy works,” or “ God hath already
accepted thy works.” Here again the Preacher’s intention was no doubt to say that
such enjoyment as he recommended was not discommended, but rather distinctly
approved of by God; that God did not reject, but from long ago had accepted, such works
as eating and drinking, etc., and had shown his mind concerning them by furnishing in
abundance the materials for them. Yet with greater emphasis the Preacher’s words
will apply to the works of the Christian believer, who with all his activities is accepted
in the Beloved (Eph. i. 6), and entitled to derive therefrom an argument, not for sinful
indulgence, but for the cultivation of a joyous and holy life.

II. A LIFE OF UNWEARIED activity. The work of a good man ought to be:
1. Deliberately chosen. Voluntarily undertaken, not reluctantly endured; the work
of one whose hands have been stretched out in search of occupation, ‘“ What-
soever thy hand findeth todo.” 2. Widely extended. A good man’s labours should
not be too restricted either as to number, character, or sphere. “ This one thing I do”
(Phil. iii. 13) does not signify that never more than one business at a time should
engage a good man’s attention. The ideal good man should put his hand to every sort
of good work that Providence may place in his way (Gal. vi. 9, 10)—at least so far as 5


time and ability allow. 3. Energetically performed. Whatsoever the hands of a “”'


good man find to do, he should do with his might. Earnestness an indispensable con-
dition of acceptable service. Fitful and intermittent, half-hearted and indifferent, labour ‘
especially in good work, to be condemned (1 Cor. xv. 58). 4. Religiously inspired, A
good man should have sufficient reasons for his constant activity. The argument to
which the Preacher alludes, though not the highest, but the lowest, is nevertheless
powerful, viz. that this life is the only working season a man has. “There is no work,
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave, whither thou goest” (ver. 10).
The inhabitants of the under-world are for ever done with the activities of earth, The
good man no more than the wicked can pursue his schemes when he has vanished from
this mundane scene. Hence the urgency of working while it is called to-day (John ix.
4). Though the Christian has loftier and clearer conceptions of the after-life of the
good than Old Testament saints had, the Preacher’s argument is not possessed of less,
but rather of more, force as an incitement to Christian work, seeing that the “ now Bor
the present life is the only accepted time, and the only day of salvation (2 Cor. vi. 2).
Learn: 1. The twofold aspect of every true life—as one of receiving and giving, of


284 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fom. rx. 1—18,


enjoying and working. 2. The essential connection between these two departments of
life—the joy being a necessary condition as well as natural result of all true work, and
the work being a necessary expression and invaluable sustainer of the joy. 3. The
true way of redeeming life—to consecrate its days and years to serving the Lord with
gladness, or to rejoicing in God and doing his will.


Ver. 10.— Words to a worker, I, THE WORKER DESCRIBED: MAN. 1. Furnished with
capacities for work, With bodily organs and mental endowments, with speech and
reason. 2. Located in a sphere of work. The world a vast workshop, in which every
creature is busily employed—not only the irrational animals, but even things without
life. 38. Appointed to the destiny of work. As while sinless in Eden man was set to
dress the garden and to keep it, and after the Fall beyond its precincts he was commanded
to till the ground and to earn his bread through the sweat of his brow, so is he still
charged to be a worker, a Christian apostle even saying that “if a man will not work
neither shall he eat” (2 Thess. iii. 10). 4. Impelled by a desire of work. Under the
compulsion of his own nature and of the constitution of the world, man is constrained
to go forth in search of work, of labour for his hands, of exercise for his mind, and
generally of employment for his manhood.

Il. THE WORKER COUNSELLED,. 1, To do the duty that lics nearest. This the obvious
import of the words, “ Whatsoever thy hand finet!: to do, do it.” To men in earnest
about finding their life-work, the duties that lie nearest will commonly be the most
urgent; and vice versd, the duties that are most urgent will usually be found to lie nearest.
Among these will stand out conspicuously (1) the preservation of the body, (2) the
cultivation of the mind, (8) the salvation of the soul; while others will assume their
places in the order of succession according to their importance. 2. To do every duty
with energy. ‘‘Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.” Half-
hearted labour, besides wasting time, spoils the work and demoralizes the worker. It
is due to God, whose servant man is, to the importance of the work in which he is
engaged, and to himself as one whose highest interests are involved in all he doca, that
man should labour with enthusiasm, diligence, and might. 3. To do each duty from an
impulse of individual responsibility. ‘“ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, that do
thou!” As no man can tell what his neighbour’s duty is in every instance, so can no
man in any case devolve his duty on another. ‘'T’oevery man his work!” is God's great
labour law. If other workers are unfaithful, be not thou unfaithful. 4. Zo do all
duties under a sense of the value of time. Remembering that this life is man’s only
opportunity of working, that it is swiftly passing, that death is near, and that there is
neither wisdom, knowledge, nor device in the grave whither man goes.


Vers. 11, 12.—Time and chance for all, |. AN UNDENIABLE PROPOSITION—that the
issues of life are incalculable. This truth set forth in five illustrations. 1. The race
not to the swift. Sometimes, perhaps often, it is, yet not always or necessarily, so that
men can calculate the issue of any contest. Just as swiftness of foot is no guarantee
that a runner shall be first at the goal, so in other undertakings the possession of
superior ability is no proof that one shall attain pre-eminence above his fellows.
2. The battle not to the strong. By many experiences Israel had been taught that “the
battle is the Lord’s (1 Sam. xvii. 47), and that there is “no king saved by the multi-
tude of a host” (Ps, xxxiii. 16). Neither Pharaoh (Exod. xiv. 27), nor Zerab the
Ethiopian (2 Chron. xiv. 12), nor the Moabites and Ammonites who came against
Jehoshaphat (2 Chron, xx. 27), nor Sennacherib (2 Kings xix. 35), were the better for
their innumerable armies; and though Napoleon was wont to say that God was always
on the side of the strongest battalions, instances can be cited in sufficient numbers to
show that it is God who giveth the victory to kings (Ps. cxliv. 10), and that he does
not always espouse the side of those who can summon the most warriors into the field.
8. Bread not to the wise. Here again the sense is that while capacity and diligence
are usually rewarded, yet the exceptions to the rule are so numerous as to prove that
it cannot certainly be predicted that a man of sagacity will always be able to secure
for himself the means of subsistence. 4. Riches not to men of understanding. At
least not always. Men of talent, and even of industry, sometimes fail in amassing
riches, and when they do succeed, cannot always keep the riches they have amassed.


on. rx, 1—18.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 285


Nothing commoner than to find poor wise men (ver. 15) and rich fools (Luke xii. 20).
Though as a rule the hand of the diligent maketh rich (Prov. x. 4), men of splendid
abilities often spend their strength for nought. Riches are no sign of wisdom. 65.
Favour not to men of skill. Even genius cannot always command the approbation
and appreciation it deserves. ‘The world’s inventors and discoverers have seldom been
rewarded according to their merits. The world has for the most part coolly accepted
the productions of their genius, and remanded themselves to oblivion. The fate of the
poor wise man after mentioned (ver. 15) has often been experienced.

II, AN INCONTROVERTIBLE ARGUMENT—that death, though certain as to fact, is
uncertain as to incidence. 1. The momentous truth stated. “Man knoweth not his
time,” t.e. of his death, which ever falls upon him suddenly, as a thief in the night.
Even when death’s approach is anticipated, there is no reason to suppose its actual
occurrence is not always unexpected. 2. The simple illustration given. “As the
fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, even
so are the sons of men snared in an evil time,” viz. that of death, “ when it falleth
suddenly upon them.” 3. The easy argument applied. This being so, it is obvious
that no one can surely reckon upon the issues that seem naturally to belong to his
several qualities or abilities, to his swiftness, or strength, or wisdom, or understanding,
or skill. Death may at any moment interpose—as, for instance, before the race is
finished and the goal reached, before the battle is concluded, before the wise plan has
been matured or carried out; and then, of course, man’s expectations are defeated.

Lessons. 1. Diligence: let every man do his best. 2. Humility: beware of over-
confidence, $8. Prudence: neglect not the possibility of failure. 4, Submission:
accept with meekness the allotments of Providence.


Vers. 13—18.— The parable of the little city. 1. THe PARABLE. 1. The picture
delineated. A little city threatened by a powerful assailant, deserted through fear by
the main body of its inhabitants, and occupied by a small garrison of men capable of
bearing arms, among them a poor wise man. Advancing against it a mighty monarch,
who besieges and storms it with armies and engines, but is ultimately compelled to
raise the siege by the skill of the aforesaid wise poor man. 2. The historical foundation.
Probably (1) the deliverance of Abel-Beth-maachah through the wisdom of a wise
woman (2 Sam. xx. 15—22) (Wright); or (2) some event not recorded in history, but
well known to the public for whom the Preacher wrote (Graetz); rather than (8) an
incident which may have occurred in the siege of Dora by Antiochus the Great, in
B.0. 218 (Hitzig), since Josephus (‘ Ant.,’ xiii. 7. 2), who describes this siege, relates
nothing corresponding to the Preacher’s statements, and certainly does not mention
its deliverance by any wise man, either rich or poor. 3. Some suggestive parailels.
Incidents resembling that to which the Preacher here alludes may have happened
often; as e.g. the deliverance of Athens by the counsel of Themistocles (Smith’s
‘History of Greece,’ xix. § 5; Thucydides, i. 74), and of Syracuse by the skill of
Archimedes, who for a time at least delayed the capture of the city by the wonderful
machines with which he opposed the enemy’s attacks (Livy, xxiv. 34), according to
some doubtful accounts, setting fire to their ships by means of mirrors. 4. Spiritual
applications. (1) “The poor man with his delivering wisdom is an image of Israe! ”
(Hengstenberg); on which hypothesis the little city will be the suffering Hebrew
nation, and the great king their Persian oppressors. (2) “The beleaguered city is the
life of the individual ; the great king who lays siege to it is death and the judgment of
the Lord” (Wangemann). (8) “The little city is the Church of God; the great king
Satan, the prince of hell and darkness; the poor wise man, the Lord Jesus Christ ”
(Fausset).

Il. Tut LESSONS OF THE PARABLE. 1. That wisdom and poverty are frequently
allied. Not always, Solomon being witness (1 Kings iii. 12, 13); but mostly, God
seldom bestowing all his gifts upon one individual, but distributing them according to
his good pleasure—to one wealth and to another wisdom, dividing to each severally
as he will (1 Cor. xii. 11), Nor is it difficult to discern in this marks of special wisdom
and goodness. (1) Wisdom in not always conjoining with riches high mental endow-
ments; partly in case of leading to undue exaltation on the part of the recipients, and

to convines such recipients of the wertblessness of wealth apart from knowledge


236 : - ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (ou. rx. 1—18
Se eee


secular, and much more religious, and to show observers how hard it is to guide wealth
without wisdom, especially the highest. (2) Goodness towards the poor, whose scanty
share of this world’s goods he not unfrequently compensates with great intelle: tual
capacity, and even with celestial wisdom. Nothing more remarkable than tne
number of the world’s thinkers, philosophers, poets, painters, writers, astronomers,
chemists, inventors, and discoverers that have sprung from the poor; while in religion
it is everywhere apparent that God hath not chosen the mighty and the ncble and
the wealthy as such, but rather the poor of this world, rich in faith, to be heirs of the
kingdom (1 Cor. i. 26, 27; Jas. ii. 5). 2. That wisdom és superior to force. ‘‘ Wisdom
is better than strength,” and “ wisdom is better than weapons of war.” (1) ‘True of
merely human wisdom. [Illustrations almost numberless might be furnished of the
superiority of wisdom to force, in the way both of overcoming force and of effecting
what force is unable to accomplish. Had the Preacher lived to-day, he might have
penned a brilliant commentary on his own text in both of these respects. The history
of modern civilization but another name for the record of man’s victories over brute
strength and material force through the power of mind; and the all-important moral
of its story, that vast as are nature’s powers, huge, gigantic, and irresistible as are the
forces slumbering everywhere within its bosom, the human intellect can control and
combine these, and compel them to subserve its purposes and schemes. (2) ‘True of
wisdom spiritual and Divine. Not only is this not destructible by force, else it would have
long since been banished from the world, but it can stand up, as through past centuries
it has done, against the fiercest assaults, fixed and immovable, smiling defiance on every
assailant, feeling inwardly confident that no weapon formed against her shall prosper
(Isa. liv. 17), and that even the vates of hell shall not prevail ayainst her (Matt. xvi.
18); yea, anticipating confidently the advent of a time when she should trample this
grim adversary of brute force beneath her feet, and even chase it from the field (Isa. xi. 9;
Ix. 18). And more, she can do what mere force and weapons of war are powerless to
accomplish—change hearts of unbelief and sin into hearts of faith and holiness, rein in,
hold down, and even crush out impure lusts and fierce passions, tame and sway human
wills, and convert children of the devil into sons of God (Job xxviii. 28; Jas. iii. 17),
3. That wisdom mostly speaks into unwilling ears. ‘‘ Nevertheless the poor man’s
wisdom is despised.” Partly because of the world’s want of appreciation of the intrinsic
excellence of wisdom, the world usually possessing a keener relish and finer instinct for
folly ; and partly, perhaps chiefly, because of the wise man’s poverty. At all events,
it has usually been the world’s way to treat its wise men with disdain. The picture of
wisdom crying aloud in the street into unheeding ears (Prov. i, 20—25) has often been
reproduced, as eg. in the persons of Jehovah’s prophets (Lev. xxvi. 43; 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 16; Isa. liii, 1; Matt. xxi. 834—386) and of Christ (John v. 40). ‘To this day
the world’s treatment of Christ is not dissimilar, his words of wisdom being by men
for the most part despised, and in particular the special wisdom he displayed in effecting
their deliverance from sin and Satan by himself submitting to shame and death, and
extending to them the offer of a full and free forgiveness, being frequently regarded with
scorn and contempt. 4. That wisdom is more influential than folly. ‘The words of
the wise,” spoken “in quiet, are more than the cry of him that ruleth among fools,” or
that is the ringleader among fools, their very prince and chief. This assertion may
seem to conflict with that of the preceding verse, but in reality it does not. ‘Uhe noisy
deniagogue who by sheer vociferation stirs the unthinking populace may appear to be
more influential than the quietly speaking man of wisdom, but in the long run it is
the latter that prevails. After all, it is ideas that move the world, in science, in philo-
sopby, in religion, and these have their birth in meditative souls rather than in fiery
spirits, and diffuse themselves, not amid the tempests of passion, but through the
medium of calm and earnest speech. Remarkably was this exemplified in Christ—read
in connection Col. ii. 3; John vii. 37; Isa. xlii. 3; and to this day the most powerful
force operating in and on society is not that of eluquence, or of intellect, or of
learning, all confessedly influential, but of goodness, which works silently and often out
of sight like leaven. 5. That wisdom is commonly repaid with ingratitude. “No man
reuembered that same poor man.” ‘he Preacher says it with a touch of sadness, as if
after all it was a strange and almost a new thing beneath the sun—which it is not.
Whether the wise woman who saved the city Abel was remembered by her citizens is


ou. rx. 1—18,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 237
So ne Te a ll


not recorded; but history reports that Themistocles, who delivered Athens from the
Persians, was afterwards ostracized by his countrymen. Alas! ingratitude has never
been an uncommon sin among men. Pharaoh’s butler has had many a successor
(Gen. xl, 23). The world has never been guilty of overlauding its benefactors or over-
loading them with gratitude. Rather the poet accurately likens Time to » sturdy
beggar with a wallet on his back—


“ Wherein he doth put alms for oblivion,
A great-sized monster of ingratitudes.”


And goes on to add—


“ Those scraps are good deeds past, which are devoured
As fast as they are made, forgot as soon


As done,” eto, f
(‘ Troilus and Cressida,’ act iil. se. 8)


Nor is it merely the world of which such ingratitude can be predicted, but the Church

also has been too often guilty of forgetting him to whom she owes her deliverance.

How many of his words, for instance, are not heard by those who profess to have been

redeemed and saved by him—words of counsel for the path of duty, words of comfort

for the day of trial, words of cautivn for the hour of danger! And yet the remembrance

Sica would be the highest tribute of gratitude they could offer their Divine
eemer.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1—3.—The antidote to despondency. It was said by a famous man of the
world, “ Life is a comedy to those who think, a tragedy to those who feel.” The
epigram is more sparkling than true; reflecting men in every age have been oppressed
by the solemnity of life’s facts, and the insolubility of life’s problems. Some men are
roused to inquiry and are beset by perplexities when trouble and adversity befall them-
selves; and others experience doubts and distress at the contemplation of the broad and
obvious facts of human life as it unfolds before their observation. Few men who both
think and feel have escaped the probation of doubt; most have striven, and many have
striven in vain, to vindicate eternal Providence, and justify the ways of God to men.

I. Tue FACT THAT IN THIS EARTHLY STATE THERE IS AN ABSENCE OF COMPLETE
RETRIBUTION. “ All things come alike to all;” “There is one event unto all.” The
righteous, the good, and the wise do not seem to meet with more prosperity and greater
happiness than the wicked and the foolish. The man who offers due religious observance,
and who reveres his oath, is subject to misfortune and calamity equally with the
negligent, the impious, the false swearer. No thunderbolt of vengeance smites the
sinner, no miraculous protection is round about the upright and obedient. Nay, the
righteous is sometimes cut off in the prime of his manhood; the sinner’s days are
sometimes lengthened, and he dies in a delusive peace.

Il. THE DIFFICULTY, DOUBT, AND PERPLEXITY OCOASIONED BY THE OBSERVATION
oF THIS Fact. The writer of Ecclesiastes laid to heart and explored the mysteries of
Providence; and in this he was not peculiar. Every observant and thoughtful person
is sometimes compelled to ask himself whether or not there is a meaning in the events
of life, and, if there be a meaning, what it is. Can our reason reconcile these events, as
a whole, with belief in the existence, in the government, of a God at once almighty
and benevolent? Are there considerations which can pacify the perturbed breast ?
Beneath the laws of nature is there a Divine heart ? or is man alone sensitive to the
inequalities of human fate, to the moral contradictions which seem to thrust themselves
upon the attention ?

III. Tue TRUE SOLUTION OF THESE DOUBTS TO BE FOUND IN THE CONVICTION THAT
ALL ARE IN THE HAND oF Gop. It is to be observed that faith in God can do what
the human understanding cannot effect. Men and their affairs are not in the hand of
chance or in the hand of fate, but in the hand of God. And by God is meant not
merely the supreme Power of the universe, but the personal Power which is characterized


a


‘288 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. rx. 1—18.


EE EEy aE EnssssSsnn San


by the attributes Holy Scripture assigns to the Eternal. Wisdom, righteousness, and
benevolence belong to God. And by benevolence we are not to understand an intention ©
to secure the enjoyment of men, to ward off from them every pain, all weakness, want,
and woe, The purpose of the Divine mind is far higher than this—even the promotion
of men’s spiritual well-being, the discipline of human character, and especially the
perfecting of obedience and submission. Sorrow and disappsintment may be, and in
the case of the pious will be, the means of bringing men into harmony with the will
and character of God himself.—T.


Vers. 4—6.—Life and death. No thoughtful reader can take these remarks upon
the living and the dead as complete and satisfactory in themselves. The writer of this
book, as we know from other passages, never intended them so to be taken. They are
singularly partial; yet when they are scen to be so, they are also singularly just. Just
one aspect of life and of mortality is here presented, and it is an aspect which a wise
and reflecting reader will see to be of great importance. Life is a fragment, it is an
opportunity, it is a probation. Death is an end, that is, an end of this brief existence,
and of what especially belongs to it. If we thought of life and death ouly under these
aspects, we should err; but we should err if we neglected to take these aspects into
consideration.

I. THE LOSSES OF THE DEAD, 1, They part with opportunities of knowledge which
they enjoyed on earth. 2. They part with passions which they experienced whilst in
the bodily life. 8. They part with possessions which they acquired in this world.
4, They are soon forgotten ; for those who remember them themselves depart, and a faint
memory or utter forgetfulness must follow. Death is a great change, and they who
uuniderge it leave much behind, even though they may gain immeasurably more than
they lose.

II, THe PREROGATIVES OF THE LIVING. 1. They have knowledge. This is doubtless
very limited, but it is very precious. Compared with the knowledge which awaits the
Christian in the future state, that which is within our reach now and here is as what
is seen dimly in a mirror. Yet how can men be too grateful for the faculty in virtue
of which they can acquaint themselves with truth of the highest importance and value?
Knowledge of self, and Knowledge of the great Author of our being and salvation, is
within our reach. We know the limitation of our period of earthly education and
probation; we know the means by which that period may be made the occasion of our
spiritual good. 2, With all the living there is hope. Time is before them with its
golden opportunities ; eternity, time’s harvest, is before them with all its priceless
recompense. Even if the past has been neglected or abused, there is the possibility that
the future may be turned to good account. For the dead we know that this earthly life
has nothing in store. But who can limit the possibilities which stretch before the
living, the progress which may be made, the blessing that may be won?

AppLicaTion. It is well to begin with the view of life and death which is presented
in this passage; but it would not be well to pause here. It is true that there is loss
in death ; but the Christian does not forzet the assertion of the apostle that “to die is
gain.” And whilst there are privileges and prerogatives special to this earthly life,
still it is to the disciple of Christ only the introduction and preparation for a life which
is life indeed—life glorious, imperishable, and Divine—T,


Vers. 7—9.— The joy of human life. Optimists and pessimists are both wrong, for
they both proceed upon the radically false principle that life is to be valued according
to the preponderance of pleasure over pain; the optimist asserting and the pessimist
denying such preponderance. It is a base theory of life which represents it as to
be prized as an opportunity of enjoyment. And the hedonism which is common to
optimist and to pessimist is the delusive basis upon which their visionary fabrics are -
reared. Pleasure is neither the proper standard nor the proper motive of right conduct.
Yet, as the text points out, enjoyment is a real factor in human life, not to be
depreciated and despised, though not to be exaggerated and overvalued.

I, ENJOYMENT I8 A DIVINELY APPOINTED ELEMENT IN OUR HUMAN EXISTENCE.
Man’s bodily and mental constitution, taken in connection with the circumstances of
the human Jot, are ® sufficient proof of this, We drink by turns the sweet and the


oo ~~. _


on, rx. 1—18.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 289
ee


bitter cup; and the one is as real as the other, although individuals partake of the two
in different proportions.

II. Many PROVISIONS ARE MADE FOR HUMAN ENJOYMENT. Several are alluded to in
this passage, more especially (1) the satisfaction of natural appetite; (2) the pleasures
of society and frstivity ; (3) the happiness of the married state, when the Divine idea
concernin¢ it is realized. ‘These are doubtless mentioned as specimens of the whole.

III. Tue RELATION OF ENJOYMENT TO LABOUR. The Preacher clearly saw that those
who toil are those whu enjoy. It is by work that most men must win the means of
bodily and physical enjoyment ; and the very labour becomes a means of blessing, and
sweetens the daily meals. Nay, “the labour we delight in physics pain.” The
primeval curse was by God’s mercy transformed into a blessing.

IV. THE PARTIAL AND DISAPPOINTING VIEW OF HUMAN LIFE WHICH CONSIDERS ONLY
128 ENJOYMENTS. 1. Pain, suffering, and distress are as real as happiness, and must
come, sooner or later, to all whose life is prolonged. 2. Neither pleasure nor pain is
of value apart from the moral discipline both may aid in promoting, apart from the
moral progress, the moral aim, towards which both may lead. 3. It is, therefore, the
part of the wise to use the good things of this life as not abusing them; to be ready
to part with them at the call of Heaven, and to turn them to golden profit, sv that
occasion may never arise to remember them with regret and remorse.—T,


Ver. 10.—Diligence. The prospect of death may add a certain zest to life’s enjoy-~


ments, but we are reminded in this passage that it is just and wise to allow it to
influence the performance of life’s practical duties.

I, RELIGION HAS REGARD TO MAN’S PRACTICAL NATURE. The hand is the instrument
of work, and is accordingly used as the symbol of our active nature. What we do is
of supreme importance, both by reason of its cause and origin in our character, and by
reason of its effect upon ourselves and upon the world. Religion involves contempla-
tion and emotion, and expresses itself in prayer and praise; but without action all
is in vain.

II. RELIGION FURNISHES THE LAW TO MAN’S PRACTICAL NATURE. We are expected
to put up the prayer, “ What wilt thou have me todo?” In response to this prayer,
precept and admonition are given; and so the “hand findeth” its work. 1. True
religion prescribes the quality of our work—that actions should be just and wise, kind
and compassionate. 2. And the measure of our work. “ With thy might” is the Divine
law. This is ojposed to languor, indolence, depression, weariness. He who considers
the diligence and assiduity with which the powers of evil are ever working in human
society will understand the importance of this urgent admonition.

Ill. RELIGION SUPPLIES THE MOTIVES TO DILIGENCE IN THE EMPLOYMENT OF THE
PRACTICAL NATURE. 1. There is the very general motive suggested in the context,
that what is to be done for the world’s good must be done during this present brief and
fleeting life. There is doubtless service of such a nature that, if it be not done here
and now, can never be rendered at all. 2. Christianity presents a motive of pre-
eminent power in the example of the Lord Jesus Christ, who came to work the work
of him who sent him, who went about doing good, who found it his food to do his
Father’s will, whose aim it was to finish the work given him to do. 3. Christianity
enforces this motive by one deeper still; the Christian is inspired with the desire to
live unto the Lord who lived and died for him. Grateful love, enkindled by the Divine
sacrifice, expresses itself by consecrated zeal.

APPLICATION. Let the hand first be stretched out that it may grasp the hand of
the Saviour, God; and then let it be employed in the service of him who proves himself
first the Deliverer, and then the Lord and Helper of all those who seek him.—T.


Vers. 10, 11.—The powerlessness of man, The reflections contained in these verses
are not peculiar to the religious. No observer of human life can fail to observe how
constantly all human calculations are falsified and all human hopes disappointed.
And the language of the Preacher has naturally become proverbial, and is upon the
lips even of those for whom it has no spiritual significance or suggestion, Yet it is
the devout and pious mind which turns such reflections to profitable uses,

I, Human mzrrorativ®, 1 is naturel to look for the success and prosperity of


240 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (ou. rx. 118.


those who are highly endowed, and who have employed and developed their native
gifts. Life is a race, and we expect the swift to obtain the prize; it is a battle, and
we look for victory to the strong. We think of wealth and prosperity as the guerdon
due to skill and prudence; we can hardly do otherwise. When the seed is sown, we
anticipate the harvest. There are qualities adapted to secure success, and observation
shows us that our expectations are justified in very many cases, though not in all.
When we behold a young man begin life with every advantage of health, ability,
fortune, and social recommendations, we forecast for such @ one a career of advance-
ment and a position of distinction and eminence. Yet how often does such an
expectation prove vain!

Il, Human DISAPPOINTMENT. Human endeavour is crossed and human hope is
crushed. The swift runner drops upon the course, and the bold warrior is smitten
upon the battle-field. As the fishes are caught in the net, and the birds in the snare,
so are the young, the ardent, the gifted, and the brave cut short in the career of
buoyant effort and brilliant hope. All our projects may prove futile, and all our pre-
dictions may be falsified. The ways of Providence are inscrutable to our vision. We
are helpless in the hands of God, whose thoughts are not as our thoughts. ‘‘ Man also
knoweth not his time.’ Attention is called to the suddenness with which our aims
may be frustrated, our anticipations clouded, and our efforts defeated. And the
observation of every experienced mind confirms the warning of the text. It is often
when the sun is brightest that the cloud sweeps across its disc, when the sea is
calmest that the storm arises in which the barque is foundered.

III. THe RELIGIOUS LESSONS TAUGHT BY THESE OVERTURNINGS OF HUMAN ANTICIPA- ©
tions. 1. They rebuke human pride and self-confidence. It is natural for the young,
the vigorous, the prosperous, to glory in their gifts, and to indulge bright hopes of the
future, based upon their consciousness of power. Yet we have this lesson which the
strong and fortunate will do well to lay to heart, “ Let not the strong man glory in
his strength,” etc. 2. They check worldliness of spirit. We are all prone to attach
importance to what is seen and temporal, and to allow our heart’s affections to
entwine around what is fair and bright, winsome and hopeful. God would teach us
the supreme importance of those qualities which are imparted by his own blessed
Spirit, and which endure unto everlasting life. 3. They lead the soul to seek a higher
and more enduring satisfaction than earthly prosperity can impart. When riches take
to themselves wings and fly away, this may enhance the value of the true, the
unsearchable riches. When a fair, bright youth is plucked like a rosebud from the
stem, and beauty withers, this may lead our thoughts and our hearts’ desires away
from this transitory scene to that region into which sorrow and death can never enter,
and where God wipes away every tear.—T.


Vers. 13—18,—The praise of wisdom. It has been remarked that, whilst the leading
idea of religion in the earliest stage of Israel’s history was the Law, this idea took
at a later period the form of wisdom. It is not well to discriminate too carefully
between that wisdom which is shown in great works and that which is synonymous
with piety. All light is from God, and there is no holier prayer than that in his light
we may see light. It is a commonplace remark that men may be clever and yet not
good ; but every reflecting mind discovers in a character so described a lack of harmony.
The philosopher, the sage, the leader in learning or science, should, beyond all men
be religious. ‘An undevout astronomer is mad.” No more melancholy and pitiable
spectacle is to be seen on earth than the able man whose self-confidence and vanity
have led him into atheism. In considering the case of the truly wise man, it is well
ie regard him as displaying wisdom not only upon the lower but upon the higher
plane.

I, WisDOM MAY BE ASSOCIATED WITH LOWLY STATION. Solomon was an example of
an oor and ge se who was famed for wisdom. But the instance of the

xt is striking; poverty and obscurity are not necessarily inconsis i
insight, ability, ana skill, J anil on Roe

I], WispoM MAY ACCOMPLISH GREAT WORKS WITH SMALL MEANS. A mighty king
with a numerous and formidable army besieges a small city. How shall the besieged
offer resistance to the foe? The inhabitants are few, feeble, ill-armed, half-starved ;


on. rx. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 241
ee ee


and their case seems hopeless. But a citizen hitherto unknown, with no apparent
resources, arises to lead the dispirited and helpless defenders. Whether by some
marvellous device, or by the magnetic power of his presence and spirit, he accomplishes
a task which seemed impossible—vanquishes the besiegers and raises the siege. Such
things have been, and they are a rebuke to our worldly calculations, and an inspiration
to courage and to faith.

III]. WispoM MAY NEVERTHELESS IN PUBLIC BE OVERLOOKED AND DESPISED. “No
man remembered that same poor man.” How often does it happen that the real
originator, the prime mover, gains no credit for the enterprise which he conceived,
and for whose success he prepared the way; whilst praise is given to some person of
social or political eminence who joined the movement when its success was assured !
It is “the way of the world.”

IV. YET WISDOM, UNHONOURED IN PUBLIO, MAY BE ACKNOWLEDGED IN SECRET AND
IN quietness. Those who look below the surface and are not dazzled by external
splendour, those who listen, not merely to the earthquake, the thunder, and the
tempest, but to the “still, small voice,” digeever the truly wise, and, in their heart of
hearts, render to them sincere honour. Much more he who seeth in secret recognizes
the services of his lowly, unnoticed servants who use their gifts for his glory, and
work in obscurity to promote his kingdom, by whose toil and prayer cities are sanctified
and saved. \

V. THUS WISDOM I8 SEEN TO BE THE BEST OF ALL POSSESSIONS AND QUALITIES. There
is greatness. which consists in outward splendour, and this may awe the vulgar, may
dazzle the imagination of the unthinking. But in the sight of God and of just men,
true greatness is that of the spirit; and the truly wise shine with a lustre which
poverty and obscurity cannot hide, and which the lapse of ages cannot dim.—T.


Ver. 4.—Life ts everything. In a world like ours, where appearance goes so far
and counts for so much, there is much in form. There is much in machinery, in
organization ; when this is perfected, power is powerlul indeed. There is much in
original capacity—in that invisible, immeasurable germ out of which may grow great
things in the future. But it is hardly too much t» say that everything is in life.
Where that is absent, nothing of any kind will avail; where that is present, all things
are possible. It is better to have life even in the humblest form than to have the
most perlect apparatus or the most exquisite form without it. A living dog, with its
power of motion and enjoyment, is better than a dead lion, for which there is nothing
but unconsciousness and corruption. Of the many illustrations of this principle, we
may take the following :—

I. AN EARNEST STUDENT IS BETTER THAN A DEAD WEIGHT OF LEARNING. A man
whose mind is nothiny more than a storehouse of learning, who does not communicate
anything to his fellows, who does not act upon them, who is no source of wisdom or of
worth, is of very little account indeed; he has not what he has (see Matt. xxv. 29).
Lut the earnest student, though he be but a youth or even a child, who is bent on
acquiring in order that he may impart, in whom are the living springs of an honourable
aspiration, is a great treasure, from whom society may look for many things.

Ii. AN AWAKENED CONSCIENCE IS BETTER THAN UNCONSECRATED GENIUS. Uncon-
secrated power may be eulisted on the sile of peace and virtue. But it is a mere
accident if it be so. It is quite as likely that it will be devoted to strife, and will
espouse the cause of moral wrong; the history of our race has had too many painful
proofs of this likelihood. But where there is an awakened conscience, and, consequently,
a devotion to duty, there is ensured the faithful service of God, and an eudeavour, more
or less successful, to do good to the world.

Ill. One LIVING 80UL IS BETTER THAN A STAGNANT CuurcH. A Christian Church
may be formed after the apostolic model, and its constitution may be irreproachably
scriptural, but it may fall into spiritual apathy, and care for nothing but its own
edification. A single human soul, with an ear sensitive to “the still sad music of
humanity,” with a heart to feel the weight of “the burden of the Lord,” with courage
to attempt great things for Christ and for men, with the faith that “removes mountains,”
may be of far more value to the world than such an apathetic and inactive Church.
Similarly, we may say that—

BOOLESLASTES, 3


242 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. on. rx, 1—18.


ee


TV. One tivine CHURCH IS BETTER THAN A LARGE COMMUNITY THAT HAS LOST ITS
SPIRITUAL ENERGY.—O,


Ver. 10.—The day of opportunity. There is great force in the Preacher’s words,
demanding present diligence and energy in view of future silence and inaction. It
/may be well to consider—

I, THE TRUTH LEFT UNSTATED. There is no work in the grave; but what is ther:

/ beyond it? We who have sat at the feet of Jesus Christ know well that the hour ia
coming in which all who are in their graves shall hear his voice, etc. (John v. 28, 29).
The rest which remaineth for the people of God is not the rest of unconsciousness or
repose, but of untiring activity; of knowledge that will be far removed from the dim
visions of the present (see 1 Cor. xiii. 12); of wisdom far surpassing the sagacity to
which we now attain. In that heavenly country we hope to address ourselves to
nobler tasks, to work with enlarged and liberated faculties, to accomplish far greater
things, to be “ ministers of his that do his pleasure” in ways and spheres that are far
beyond us now. But what we have first to face, and have all to face, is—

II, AN ON-COMING EXPERIENCE. “The grave, whither thou goest.” Our life is, as we
say, @ journey from the cradle to the grave. Death is a goal which: 1. Is absolutely
inevitable. We may elude many evils, but that we must all encounter. 2. We may
reach soon and suddenly. It may be the very next turn of the road which will bring
us to it. No man can tell what mortal blow may not be struck on the morrow, what
fatal disease may not discover itself before the year is out. 3, Will certainly appear
before we are expecting it. So swiftly does our life pass—so far as our consciousness is
concerned—with all its pressure of business and all its growing and gathering excite-
ments, and so pertinacious is our belief that, however it may be with others, we
ourselves have some life left in us still, and some work to do yet, that when death
comes to us it will surprise us. What, then, is—

III. THE concLUSION OF THE wisE? It is this: To do heartily and well all that lies
within our power. The Master himself felt this (John ix. 4), He knew that there
was glorious “ work ” for him in the long future, even as there had been for his Father in
the long past (John v. 17). But he knew also that between the hour of that utterance
and the hour of his death on the cross there was that work to be done which could
only be done then and there. So he girded himself to do all that had to be done, and
to bear all that had to be borne, in that short and solemn interval. We should feel
and act likewise. We look for a very blessed and noble sphere of heavenly activity ;

,| but between this present and that future there is work to be done which is now within
;_our compass, but will soon be withont it. There is: 1. Good work to be done in the
| direction of self-culture, of gaining dominion over self, in casting out evil from our own
soul and our own life. 2. Good service to be rendered to our kindred, to our friends,
to our neighbours, whom we can touch and bless now but who will soon pass beyond
our reach. 3. A good contributivn, real and valuable, if not prominent, towards the
establishment of the kingdom of Jesus Christ upon the earth. All, therefore, that our

“hand findeth to do” because our heart is willing to do it, let us do with our might,

lest we leave undone that which no future time and no other sphere will give us the
opportunity to attempt.—C,


Vers. 11, 12.—Prosperity—the rule and the exception. We shall find our way to the
true lessons of this passage if we consider—

[, THE RULE UNDER GOD'S RIGHTEOUS GOVERNMENT. The Preacher either did not
intend his words to be taken as expressing the general rule prevailing every where, or else
be wrote these words in one of those depressed and doubtful moods which are frequently
reflected in his treatise. Certainly the rule, under the wise and righteous government
of God, is that the man who labours hard and patiently to win his goal succeeds in
gaining it. It is right that he should. It is right that the race should be to the swift
for swiftness is the result of patient practice and of temperate behaviour. It is right
that the battle should be to the strong, for strength is the consequence of discipline
and virtue. It is right that bread and riches and the favour of the strong should fall
to wisdom and to skill, And so, in truth, they do, Where the natural order of things
ts net positively subverted by the folly and the guilt of men, it is the case that human


on. rz. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 243


industry, resting on human virtue as its base, conducts to competence, to honour, te
success. It does, indeed, happen that the crown is placed on the brow of roguery and
violence ; yet is it not the less true that wisdom and integrity constitute the well-worn
and open road to present and temporal well-being.

TI. Tue oBvious aND seRious EXcEPTION. No doubt it is frequently found that
“the race is not to the swift,” etc. No doubt piety, purity, and fidelity are often left
behind, and do not win the battle in the world’s campaign. This is due to one of two
very different and, indeed, opposite causes. It may be due to: 1. Man’s interfering
wrong. The human oppressor comcs down upon the industrious and the frugal citizen,
and sweeps off the fruit of his toil and patience. The scheming intricuer steps in, and
carries off the prize which is due to the laborious and persevering worker. The seducer
lays his nets and ensnares his victim. There is, indeed, a lamentable frequency in
human history with which the good and true, the wise and faithful, fall short of the
honourable end they seek. 2. God’s intervening wisdom, It may often happen that
God sees that human strength or wisdom has outlived its modesty, its beauty, and its
worth, and that it needs to be checked and broken. So he sends defeat where victory
has been assured, poverty where wea!th has been confidently reckoued upon, discomfiture
and rejection where men have been holding out their hand for favour and reward.
What, then, are—

Ill. Tus pracrioaL conciusions? 1. Do not count too confidently on outward good.
Work for it faithfully, hope for it with a_well-moderatcd expectation, but do not set
your heart upon it as an indispensable blessing. Be prepared to do without it. Have
those inner, decper, diviner resources which will fill the heart with grace and the life
with an admirable contentment, even if the goal is not gained and the prize is not
secured. Be supplied with those treasures which the thief cannot steal, and which
will leave the soul rich though the bank be broken and the purse be emptied.
2. Guard carefully against the worst evils. Be so fortified with Divine truth and
sacred principles within, and secure so much of God’s favour and protection from above,
that no snares of sin will be able to mislead and to betray—that the feet will never be
found entangled in the nets of the enemy. 3. Anticipate the Divine discipline. Live
in such conscious and in such acknowledged dependence upon God for every stroke
that is struck, for all strength and wisdom that are gained, for all bounties and all
honours that are reaped, that there will be no nced for the intervening hand of heaven
to break your schemes or to remove your treasures.—C.


Vers. 13—18.— Wisdom and strength. The picture which is here drawn is both
picture and parable; it portrays a constantly recurring scene in human history. It
speaks to us of—

I, THe RANGE OF WispoM. Wisdom is a word that covers many things; its import
varies much. It includes: 1. Knowledge; familiarity with the objects and the laws
of nature, and with the ways and the history of mankind. 2. Keenness of intellect;
that quickness of perception and subtlety of understanding which sees through the
devices of other men, and keeps a watchful eye upon all that is passing, always ready
to take advantage of another’s mistake. 38. Sagacity; that nobler quality which
forecasts the future; which weighs well many considerations of various kinds; which
baffles the designs of the wicked; which defeats the machinati ns and the measures of
the strong (vers. 14,15); which is worth far more than mucli enginery (ver. 18);
which builds up great institutions; which goes forth on hazardous and yet admirable
enterprises. 4, Wisdom itself; that which is more properly considered and called such,
viz. the discernment of the true end, with the adoption of the best means of attaining
it; and this applied not merely to the particulars of human life, but to human litle
itself; the determination to seek that good thing, as our true heritage, which is in
harmony with the will of God, and to seck it in the divinely appointed way. ‘l'o us
who live in this Christian era, and to who Jesus Christ is himself “the Wisdom of
God,” this is found in seeking and finding, in trusting and following, in loving and
serving him.

II. Ivs FAILURE TO BE APPRECIATED. ‘No man remembered that same poor man.”
Wisdom in each one of its particular spheres is valuable; in the larger and higher
spheres it is of very great account, being far more effective than any quantity of mere


244 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. —[om. rx. 1—18,


a  — _——eees_


material force or of worldly wealth ; in the highest sphere of all it is simply invaluable.
But it is liable to be disregarded, especially if it be found in the person of poverty and
obscurity. 1. It is often forgotten, and thus overlooked (text). 2. It is either rejected
or visited with contumely in the person of its author. “Is not this the carpenter’s
Son?” it is asked. “And they were offended in him,” it is added. Many a man, with
much learning in his head, much shrewdness in his speech, much weight in his couusel,
much wisdom in his soul, walks, unrecognized and unhonoured, along some very lowly
ath of life.

3 ILI. Ivs rewarp. 1. It is often heeded when mere noise and station are disregarded.
“The words of the wise are listened to with more pleasure than the loud behests of a
foolish ruler (ver. 17)” (Cox). And it is a satisfaction to the wise that they do often
prevail in their quietness and their obscurity when the clamorous and the consequential
are dismissed as they deserve to be. 2. ‘I'he time will come when they who speak the
truth will gain the ear of the world; there are generations to come, and we may leave
our reputation to them, as many of the wisest and worthiest of our race have done.
3. To be useful is a better reward than to be applauded or to be enriched; how much
better to have “delivered the city ” than to have been honoured by it! 4. Our record
is on high.—C.


Ver. 18.—The destructiveness of one evil life. How much of destruction may flow
from one single life may be seen if we look at the subject—

I. NEGATIVELY. We may judge of the magnitude of the evil by considering:
1. How one evil life may hinder the work of God; e.g. Achan, Sanballat, Herod, Nero.
Who shall say how much of Christian influence has been arrested by one grossly
inconsistent member of a Church, or by one arch-persecutor of the gospel of Christ ?
2. How much a man may fail to do by refusing to spend his powers in the service of
God. To a man with large means, great resources, brilliant capacities, almost any-
thing is open in the direction of holy usefulness, of widespread and far-descending
influence. All this is lost, and in a sense destroyed, by a sclfish and guilty withhold-
ment of it all from the service of God and man.

II. Postrtvety. We may estimate the serious and lamentable mischief of an evil
life if we think that a godless man may be injuring his neighbours: 1. By weakening
or undermining their faith; causing them to lose their hold on Divine truth, and thus
sinking into the miseries of doubt or into the darkness and despair of utter unbelief.
2. By undoing the integrity of the upright; leading them into the fatal morass of an
immoral life. 3. By cooling, or even killing, the consecration of the zealous; causing
them to slacken their speed or even to leave the field of noble service. One man, by
his own evil example, by his words of folly and falsity, by his deeds of wrong, may
enfeeble many minds, may despoil many hearts, may misguide many souls, may blight
and darken many lives.—C.


Vers. 1—6.—Inexor able destiny. ‘The teaching in this section of the book is very
similar to that in ch. vi. 1O—12. The Preacher lays stress upon the powerlessness
and short-sightedness of man with regard to the future. A higher power controls all
the events of human life, and fixes the conditions in which each individual is to live—
conditions which powerfully affect his character and destiny. Such a thought has been
to mauy a source of consolation and strength. “My times,” said the psalmist, “are in
thy hand” (Ps. xxxi. 15). “Your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all
these things,” said Jesus (Matt. vi. 32), when he counselled his disciples against undue
aixiety for the future. But no such comfort is drawn by the Preacher from the
consideration that “the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
God” (ver. 1). It suggests to him rather an iron destiny, a cage against the bars
of which the soul may beat its wings in vain, than a gracious Providence. The loss of
ireedom implied in it afflicts him—the thought that not even the feelings and emotions
of the heart are under man’s control. They are excited by persons and things with
whom or with which he is brought in contact. A slight change of circumstances
would make his love hatred, and his hatred love; and these circumstances he cannot
change or modify. Events of all kinds are before us, and God arranges what is to
happen to us. “Whether it be love or hatred, man knoweth it not; all is before


OH, x, 1—18,] EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 246


~


hy Py 4

them” (ver. 1b, Revised Version). “The river of life, along which his course lies, is
wrapped in mist. Man’s destiny is wholly dark, and is out of his own control. But
it is not man’s ignorance that cuts him to the heart; it is that the injustice of earthly
tribunals seems to have its counterpart in a higher region. No goodness, no righteous-
ness, will avail against the persistent injustice of the laws by which the world seems
ruled. What a half-blasphemous indictment, what passionate recalcitration against
the God whose fear is in his mouth, is embodied in the cold and calm despair of the
words which follow in the next verse (ver. 2)!” (Bradley). He names five classes of
persons, embracing all the various types of righteousness and wickedness, and affirms
that one event comes to them all, that no discrimination on the part of the Diyine
Ruler between them appears in their earthly lot. The first group is perhaps that of
those whose conduct towards their neighbours is righteous or wicked; the second that
of those who are pure or impure in heart; the third that of the religious and the
irreligious; the fourth perhaps that of those whose characters are in all these relations
good or evil; the fifth that of the profane swearer and the man who reverences the
solemn oath (Isa. xv. 16). “There is no mark at all of a moral government in this
world; The providence of God is as indiscriminating as the falling tree, or the hungry
tiger, or the desolating famine. If the fittest survive for a time, that fitness has
nothing in common with goodness or righteousness.” And one of the evil consequences
of this state of matters is, as already referred to in ch. viii. 11, that those evilly
disposed are subject to less restraint than they would be if Divine Providence in all
cases meted out reward and punishment immediately to the righteous and the wicked.
“Yea, also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart
while they live, and after that they go to the dead” (ver. 3), The gloomy thoughts
concerning death and the world beyond it which filled his mind, made the “ one event *
that comes to all seem all the more unjust. For some, doubtless, it is a deliverance
from misery, but to others it is an escape from merited punishment. Even life with
all its inequalities and wrongs is better than death, and yet the righteous are swept
away from the earth indiscriminately with the wicked.


“Streams will not turn aside
The just maa not t’ entomb,
Nor lightnings go aside
To give his virtues room;
Nor is that wind less rough which blows a good man’s barge.”


That a strong faith in Divine Providence in spite of all outward appearances, and a
firm grasp of the truth of immortality, were denied to the Preacher, need not surprise
us, when we remember that the confidence we have in God’s fatherly love, and in the
eternal happiness of those who are faithful to him, is derived from the teaching of
Christ, and his triumphant resurrection from the dead. The Preacher had not the
consolations which the gospel affords us. To him the world beyond the grave was
dreary and uncertain. He was one of those ‘‘ who through fear of death were all their
lifetime subject to bondage” (Heb. ii. 15). The meanest form of life was superior to
the condition of even the noblest who had passed within the grim portals of the grave.
The living dog, loathed and despised, feeding on the refuse of the streets, was better
than the dead lion (ver. 4), Hope survives while life remains, even though it may be
illusive; but with death all possible amelioration of one’s lot is cut off. The bitterness
of the thought is displayed in the touch of sarcasm which marks his words. “ For the
living know that they shall die: but the dead know not anything, neither have they
any more a reward; for the memory of them is forgotten” (ver. 5). The very con-
sciousness of the coming doom gives a distinction to the living which is denied to the
dead, The very memory of those who have passed away soon perishes. Others take
their place, and carry on the business of the world. A new generation springs up, with
interests and concerns and passions with which the dead have nothing to do. The
strongest passions of love, hatred, and envy are quenched by the cold hand of death
(ver. 6), and those who may in life have been bosom friends, or mortal enemies, or
jealous rivals, lie side by side in the grave, in silence and oblivion. Nothing that is
done in the earth concerns them any more (cf, Isa. xxxviii. 9—20). The view here
given us of the state of the dead is gloomy in the extrema The darkness is more


246 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREAOHER. [ou. rx. 1—18,


i NT


intense and palpable thar: ¢#at with which the same subject 12 :avested in the Book of
Job, and even in some of the psalms. But we must remember that though the world
beyond the grave is represented by him as dim and shadowy, he affirms at the same
time that “God will bring every secret thing into judgment” in “his own time and
season.” ‘Consequently, the dead, even though regarded by him as existing in a
semi-conscious state in Hades, are supposed to be still in existence, and destined at
some future period to be awakened out of this dreary slumber, and rewarded according
to the merit or demerit of their actions on earth. He does not, it is true, speak of this
awakening out of sleep, still less does he allude to the resurrection of the body. His
book is mainly occupied with the search after man’s highest good on earth, and it is
only incidentally that he refers at all to the state of the dead” (Wright). The doctrine
of a future judgment, in which every man will appear and receive the reward or
punishment due to him, is repeatedly dwelt upon by our author; and this of itself
implies a conscious existence after death in the case of all. So far, however, as this -
life is concerned, the grave puts a period to all activity, extinguishes all the passions
which animate the children of men. They pass into another state of existence, and
have no further concern with that which is done here on earth.—J. W.


Vers. 7—10.—Enjoyment of the present. No one who is at all familiar with the
Preacher’s thoughts can be surprised with the advice here given, following so closely as
it does upon the gloomy reflections on death to which he has just given expression.
He for the sixth time urges upon his hearers or readers the practical wisdom of enjoy-
ing the present, of cheerfully accepting the boons which God puts within our reach, and
the mere thought that he is the Giver, will of itself rebuke all vicious indulgence. He
permits enjoyment; nay, it is by bis appointment that the means for it exist. “Go
thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now
accepteth thy works” (ver. 7). That is, God approves of these works—a cheerful,
thankful enjoyment of food and drink. The white garment symbolical of a glad heart,
the perfume sprinkled upon the head, are not to be slighted as frivolous or as inappro-
priate for those who are so soon to pass from life unto death (ver. 8). Asceticism, self-
imposed scruples, half-hearted participations in the geod things that lawfully fall to us,
mean loss of the present, and are not in themselves a preparation for the future. The
ascetic may have his heart set upon the very pleasures he denies himself, may value
them more highly, than he who takes them as they come, and exhausts them ofall the
satisfaction they contain. The happiness, too, which marriage yields is commended by
him. He speaks elsewhere of the wretchedness and shame into which sensuality leads,
and of the hateful types of womanhood with which it brings the sensualist into contact
(ch. ii. 8; vii. 26); but here he alludes to the calm peacefulness of a happy home,
which, though it caunot remove the sense of the vanity and transitoriness of life, at
least makes it endurable (Plumptre). A happy life, a useful life, a life filled by a
wholesome activity, may be lived by all or by most, and the fact that the end is near,
the grave in which there is neither “ work, nor device, nor wisdom,” should be a
stimulus to such activity (ver. 10). Honest, earnest labour, together with whatever
enjoyments God’s providence brings within our reach, and not an indifference to all
sublunary concerns because of their transitoriness, is asserted to be our bounden duty.
Had he recominended mere sensuous indulgence, we should turn from him con-
temptuously. Had he recommended an ascetic severity, we might have felt that only
some could follow his advice. But as it is, his ideal is within the reach of us all, and
is worthy of us all. And those who speak censoriously of the conclusion he reaches and
expresses in these words, would find it a very hard task to frame a higher ideal of life,
Zealous performance of practical duties, a reasonable and whole-hearted enjoyment of all
innocent pleasures, and mindfulness of judement to come, are commended to us by the
Preacher, and only a stupid fanatic could object to the counsel he gives.—J. W.


Vers. 11, 12.—7Time and chance. In the preceding passage our author has exhorted
the timid and slothful to bestir themselves and put forth all their powers, since death
is ever at hand, and when it comes a perivd will be put to all erdeavours; the wisdom
that guides, the hand that executes, will be silent and still in the grave. He now
exhorts the wise and strong not to be too confident about success in life, to be prepared


ou. rx. 1—18.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 247


———————eeee—eeee


for possible failure and disappointment. So full and varied is his experience of life that
he has useful counsels for all classes of men. Some need the spur and others the curb.
Some would from timidity hang back and lose the chances of usefulness which life
gives; others are so self-confident and sanguine that they need to be warned of the
dangers and difficulties which their wisdom and skill may not succeed in overcoming,
Plans may be skilfully constructed and every effort made to carry them into effect, but
some unforeseen cause may defeat them, some circumstance which could not have
been provided against, may bring about failure. The Preacher records the observations
he had made of instances of failure to secure success in life, and gives an explanation
of how it is that the strenuous efforts of men are so often baffled.

I. THE PHENOMENA OBSERVED. (Ver. 11.) Five instances of failure are enumerated :
the swift defeated in the race, the strong in battle, the wise unable to make a livelihood,
the prudent remainin: in poverty, the gifted in obscurity. In none of the cases is the
fault to be traced to the want of faculties or abilities of the kind needed to secure the eud
in view, or to a half-hearted use of them. The runner endowed with swiftness might
reasonably be expected tv be first in at the goal, the strong to be victorious iu fight,
the wise and prudent to be successful in acquiring and amassing riches, the clever to
attain to reputation and influence. It is taken for granted, too, that there is no omissiun
of effort; for if there were, the cause of failure would easily be discovered. But the
phenomena being noted as extraordinary and perplexing, we are to understand that in
none of the cases observed is there anything of the kind. And it is implied that while
those who fulfil all the conditious of success sometimes fail, those who do not sometimes
succeed. The phenomena referred to are familiar to us all. We have known many
who have begun life with the fairest prumise, and who have apparently, without any
fault of their own, failed to make their mark. The impression they have made upun
us has convinced us that they have ability enough to win the prizes in life; but some-
how or other they fail, and remain in obscurity. And, at the same time, others whose
abilities are in our opinion of a commonplace order come to the front, and succeed in
gaiuing and keeping a foremost place.

Il. THE EXPLANATION OF THE MATTER. (Ver. 116.) ‘Time and chance happeneth to
them all.” There need to be favourable circumstances as well as the possession and
use of the requisite faculties, if success is to be won. The time must be propitious, and
give opportunities for the exercise of gifts and abilities. ‘There are favourable and
unfavourable times in which men’s lot may be cast; and such times, too, may occur
alternately in the experience of the same individual. A man of very inferior talent,
should he fall on a favourable time, may succeed with comparative ease; whereas, in a
time that is not propitious, abilities of the first order cannot preserve their possessor
from failure and disappointment. And even the same period may be advantageous to
one description of business, and miserably the reverse to another; and it may thus be
productive of prosperity to men who prosecute the former, and of loss and ruin to those
engaged in the latter; although the superiority in knowledge, capacity, and prudence
may be all, and even to a great degree, on the losing side” (Wardlaw). At first sight
it might seem as if the explanation given of the reason why the race is not always to
the swift, or the battle to the strong, were based on a denial of the Divine providence,
and unworthy of a placein the Word of God. But this opinion is considerably modified,
if not contradicted, if we find a reference, as we may fairly do, in the word “time” to
the statements in ch. iii., that there are “ times and seasons,” for all things are appointed
by God himself. And so far from the conclusion here announced by our author being
a solitary utterance, out of harmony with the general teaching of Scripture, we may
find many parallels to it; eg. “The Lord saveth not with sword and spear: for the
battle is the Lord’s, and he will give you into our hands” (1 Sam. xvii. 47). “Some
trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the Name of the Lord our
God” (Ps. xx. 7). “There is no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty
man is not delivered by much strength” (Ps. xxxiii. 16), Probably the unfavourable
impression of which I have spoken arises from the ideas suggested by the word “ chance”
in our English Version, which does not convey exactly the meaning of the Hebrew
pega’. It is a word only found twice in Scripture, here and in1 Kings v.4, and means
a stroke, The general idea is that of adversity or disappointment inflicted by a higher
power, and not merely that of something accidental or fortuitous interlering with


248 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREAOHBR. (on. rx. 1—18.


human plans. “Chance,” therefore, must here refer to the great variety of eircum-
stances over which we have no control, but by which our schemes and endeavours are
affected, which may take away success from the deserving, and in all cases render it
extremely difficult to calculate beforehand the probabilities of success in an under-
taking. The final result, whatever we may do, is conditioned by God. Though our
author does not here use these terms, yet we cannot doubt that they express his mean-
ing. He does not say that life is a lottery, in which the swift and the slow, the strong
and the weak, the wise and the simple, the industrious and the lazy, have equal chances
of drawing prizes. He knew, as we all know, that success is won in most cases by
those who are best qualified in ability and character for securing it; that the race is
generally to the awift, and the battle to the strong. It is the exception to the rule
that excites his astonishment, and leads him to the conclusion that mere human skill and
power are not sufficient of themselves to carry the day. Failure and disappointment
may at any moment and in any case overtake man, and these from causes which no
wisdom could have foreseen or exertion have averted. Such a consideration is calcu-
lated to humble human pride, and create in the heart feelings of reverent submission to
the great Disposer of events. “So then it is not of him that willeth, nor of him that
runneth, but of God that showeth mercy” (Rom. ix. 16). This thought of the limi-
tation of man in his efforts, in spite of all his gifts and abilities, is expressed again with
still greater emphasis in ver. 12, The time when life must close is a secret hidden from
each of us, and we may be arrested in the mid-course of our endeavours just when our
labours are about to be crowned with success. It may come upon us so unexpectedly
as to take us as fishes are taken in a net or birds in asnare. This may be the event
that snatches the prize from the runner, the victory from the strong (2 Chron. xviii.
83, 34). The arrow shot at random may strike down the brave soldier who has success-
fully borne the brunt of battle, and lay his pride in the dust. To those whose whole
interests are centred in the business and pleasures of the world, the sudden summons of
death comes in an evil time (Luke xii. 19, 20); but those who are wise are not taken
by surprise—“ they understand and consider their latter end.”—J. W.


Vers. 13—16.—An apologue. The truth of the aphorism, that “the battle is not
to the strong... nor yet favour to men of skill” (ver. 11), is illustrated by the
Preacher in a striking little story or apologue, taken doubtless from the history of
some campaign familiar to his readers. It represents in a vivid manner the power of
wisdom, and also the ungratelul treatment which the possessor of it frequently receives
from those who have found him a deliverer in time of danger. A little city, with few
in it to defend it, is besieged by a great king. The place is surrounded by his army,
and round about it great mounds are erected from which missiles are hurled into it.
All hope seems to be gone; no material forces which the besieged can muster for their
defence ate at all adequate to repel the assailants. When suddenly some poor man,
whose name was perhaps known to few in the city, delivers it by his wisdom. The
great king and his army are compelled to retire baffled from before the walls of the
city, which probably when they first beheld them moved them to scornful laughter by
their apparent insignificance and weakness, The picture is not overdrawn; history
affords many parallel instances. The defence of Syracuse against the Romans by
Archimedes the mathematician (Livy, xxiv. 34), of Londonderry against James II. by
Walker, and in later times of Antwerp by Carnot (Alison, ‘ Europe,’ Ixxxvii.), show how
inferior material is to moral force. This is the bright side of the picture. ‘ Wisdom
is better than strength” (ver. 16); “ wisdom is better than weapons of war” (ver. 18).
The dark side is that it i ~ften rewarded by the basest ingratitude, It was the wisdom
of a poor man that delivered the city in which he dwelt ; but when the danger was past
he sank again into obscurity. No une thought of him as he deserved to be thought of.
The public attention was caught by some new figure, and the saviour of the city
remained as poor ..ad unnoticed as he had been before the great crisis in which his
wisdom had been of such great service. Had he been high-bora and rich, his great
services would have been acknowledged mm some notable manner; but the meanness of
his surroundings obscured his merit in the eyes of the thoughtless multitude. It was
this vulgar failing which prompted some to despise wisdom itself incarnate in Jesus of -
Nazareth, and to ask scornfully, “Is not this the carpenter ?” (Mark vi. 2,3). Wisdom


OH. X. 1—20,]


ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.


249


a


is unassuming, calm, and deliberate (cf. Isa. xlii. 2; Matt. xii. 19), yet full ot strength
and resources, and the pity is that it should so often lose its reward, and the public
attention be caught by the blustering cry of fools (ver. 17). It is, indeed, often a better
defence than weapons of war; and therefore it is sad that it stiould sometimes |»
nullified by folly, that one perverse blunderer should sometimes be able through car
lessness or passion to destroy all the defences that wisdom has carefully erected.—J_ \\


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER X.,


Vers. 1—8.—Section 11. A Uttle folly


mars the effect of wisdom, and is sure to |


make itself conspicuous.

Ver. 1.—Dead flies cause the ointment of
the apothecary to send forth a stinking
savour. This is a metaphorical confirma-
tion of the truth enunciated at the end of
the last chapter, “One sinner destroyeth
much good.” It is like the apostle’s warning
to his converts, “ A little leaven leaveneth
the whole lump” (1 Cor. v. 6). The Hebrew
expression is literally, “flies of death,”
which may mean either “‘ dead flies,” as in
our version and the Vulgate (muscw mori-
entes), or “ deadly, poisonous flies,” as in the
Septuagint (uvia Gavarodca). The latter
rendering seems preferable, if we regard the
use of similar compound phrases, 6g. “in-
struments of death” (Ps. vii. 14 [13)]);
“ snares of death” (Ps. xviii. 5); and in New
Testament Greek, 7 mAnyh Tod Gavdrou, “ the
death-stroke” (Rev. xiii. 3, 12). The flies
meant are such as are poisonous in their
bite, or carry infection with them. Such
insects corrupt anything which they touch—
food, ointment, whether they perish where
they alight or not. They, as the Hebrew
says, make to stink, make to ferment, the oil of
the perfumer. ‘Uhe singular verb is here used
with the plural subject to express the unity
of the individuals, “‘ flies” forming oue com-
plete idea. The Septuagint rendering omits
one of the verbs: Zamptovor oxevaclay édatov
7,5bcpnaros, “ Corrupt & preparation of sweet
ointment.” The point, of course, is the com-
parative insignificance of the cause which
spoils a costly substance compounded with
care and skill. Thus little faults mar great
characters and reputations. “A good name
is better than precious ointment” (ch. vii.
1), but a good uame is ruined by follies, and
then it stinks in men’s nostrils. The term,
“ointment of the apothecary,” is used by
Moses (Exod. xxx. 25, etc.) in describing
the holy chrism which was reserved for
special occasions. So doth a little folly him
that is in reputation for wisdom and honour.
The meaning of the Authorized Version is
tolerably correct, but the actual rendering


will hardly stand, and one wants some verb


to govern “him that,” ete. The other ver-
sions vary. Septuagint, “A little wisdom
is more precious (r{usov) than great glory of
folly ;” Vulgate, “ More precious are wisdom
and vlory than small and short-lived folly ;”
Jcrome, *‘ Precious above wisdom and glory
is u little folly.” This last interpretation
proceeds upon the idea that such “ folly” is
at any rate free from pride, and has few
glaring faults. “Dulce est desipere in loco,”
says Horace (‘Carm.,’ iv. 12. 28). But the
original is best translated thus: “ More
weighty than wisdom, than honour, is a
little folly.” It is a painful fact that a
little folly, one foolish act, one silly peculi-
arity of manner or disposition, will sufficc to
impair the real value of a man’s wisdum
and the estimation in which he was held.
The little element of foolishness, like the
little insect in the ointment, obscures the
real excellence of the man, and deprives
him of the honour that is really his due.
And in religion we know that one fault
unchecked, one secret sin cherished, poisons
the whole character, makes a man lose the
grace of God. (For the same effect from
another cause, see Ezek. iii. 20; xxxiii, 13.)
Jerome sees in the “dead flies” wicked
thoughts put into the Christian’s mind by
Beelzebub, “the lord of flies.”


Vers. 2, 8.—A tetrastich contrasting wis-
dom and folly.


Ver. 2.—A wise man’s heart is at his
right hand; but a fool’s heart at his left.
There is here no reference to the classical
use of right and left, as ominous of success
and disaster, which is never found in the
Old Testament. The right hand is the
place of honour, the left of inferiority, as a
matter of fact, not of superstition and luck.
The symbolism is intimated in Christ’s
account of the judgment (Matt. xxv. 31,
etc.). But in the present passage we should
best paraphrase—The wise man’s heart, his
understanding and sentiments, lead him to
what is right and proper and astraightfor-
ward; the fool’s heart leads him astray, in
the wrong direction. The former is active
and skilful, the latter is slow and awkwaril.
One, we may say, has no left hand, the
other has no right. To be at the right
hand is to be ready to help and guard,


260


‘The Lord is at thy right hand,” to protect
thee, says the psalmist (Ps. cx. 5). The
wise man’s mind shows him how to escape
dangers and direct his course safely; the
fool’s mind helps him not to any good pur-
pose, causes him to err and miss his best
object.

Ver. 3.—Yea, also, when he that is a fool
walketh by the way. As soon as ever he
sets his foot outside the house, and mixes
with other men, he exhibits his folly. If
he remained at home he might kecp his
real ineptitude conccaled; but such persons
as he are unconscious of their inanity, and
take no pains to hide it; they go where,
they act as, their foolish heart prompts
them. There is no metaphor here, nor any
reference to the fool being put in the right
path aud perversely turning away. It is
simply, as the Septuagint renders, Kal ye év
656 Stay Udpwy mopevntu, His wisdom
(Hebrew, heart) faileth him. Ginsburg and
others render, “ He lacketh his mind,” want
of heart being continually taken in the
Book of Proverbs as equivalent to deficiency
of understanding (Prov. vi. 32; vii. 7, etc.).
But Delitzsch and Wright consider the order
of the words and the suffix to be avainst this
view, and they translate as the Authorized
Version, ¢.e. his understanding is at fault.
And he saith to every one that he is a fool.
The sentence is ambiguous, and capable of
two interpretations. The Vulgate has, Cum
ipse tnetpiens stt, omnes stultos sxstimat.
Jerome quotes Symmachus as rendering,
‘“¢ He suspects all men that they are fools.”
According to this view, the fool in his con-
ceit thinks that every one he meets is a fool,
says this in his mind, like the sluggard in
Prov. xxvi. 16, “ Who is wiser in his own
conceit than ten men that can render a
reason.” Another explanation, more closely
in accordance with the foregoing clauses,
takes the pronoun in “he is a fool” to refer
to the man himself, se esse stultum (comp.
Ps. ix. 21 (20), “Let the nations know
themselves to be but men”). As soon as he
goes abroad, his words and actions display
his real character; he betrays himself; he
says virtually to all with whom he has to
do, “I am a fool” (comp. Prov. xiii. 16;
Xviii. 2). It is hard to say to which inter-
pretation the Septuagint inclines, giving,
Kal & Aoytetrar rdvra ahpooivn éorly, * And
all that he will think is folly.”


Vers, 4—7.—Section 12. Illustration of
the conduct of wisdom under capricious rulers,
or when fools are exalted to high stations.

Ver. 4.—If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee. “Spirit” (ruach) is here
equivalent to “anger,” as Judg, viii. 3;
Prov. xxix.11. The idea seems to be that a


statesman or councillor gives wise advice to |


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


—


[on. x. 1—20,


s monarch, which the latter takes in bad
part, and shows strong resentment against
the person who offered it. Now, when a
man knows himself to be in the right, and
yet finds his counsel rejected, perhaps with
scorn and reproach added, he is naturally
prove to feel sore, aud to show by some
overt act his sense of the ill treatment which
he has received. But what says wisdom?
Leave not thy place (mukum); i.e. position,
post, office, Do not hastily resign the
situation at court to which you have been
appointed. Some, not so suitably, take the
expre-sion, “leave thy place,” figuratively,
as equivalent to “give way to anger, re-
nounce the temper which becomes you, lose
your self-posxession.” But Wright, from
the analogous use of matstsale and maamad
in Isa. xxii. 19, confirms the itcrpretation
which we have adopted. Couupare the
advice in ch. viii. 4, where, however, the
idea is rather of open rebellion than of a
resentment which shows itself by with-
drawal. Origen (‘De Princip.,’ ili. 2) ex-
plained “the spirit of the ruler” to be the
evil spirit; and Gregory, commenting on
this passage, writes (‘ Moral.,’ iii. 43), “As
though he had said in plain words, ‘If thou
perceivest the spirit of the tempter to pre-
vail against thee in aught, quit not the
lowliness of penitence;’ and that it was the
abasement of penitence that he called ‘ our
place,’ he shows by the words that follow,
‘for healing [Vulgate] pacifieth great of-
fences.’ For what else is the humility of
mourning, save the remedy of sin?” (Ox-
ford transl.). For yielding pacifieth great
offences. Marpe, “yielding,” is rendered
“healing” by the versions. Thus Yaua
(Septuagint); curatio (Vulgate). But this
translation is not so suitable as that of Sym-
machus, cwdpoctvn, “moderation.” The
word is used in the sense of “ gentleness,”
“ mcekness,” in Prov. xiv. 30; xv. 4; and the
gnome expressvs the truth that a calm, con-
ciliating spirit, not prone to take offence,
but patient under trying circumstances,
obviates great sins. The sins are those of
the subject. This quiet resignation saves
him from conspiracy, rebellion, treason, etc.,
into which his untempered resentment might
hurry him. We may compare Prov. xv. 1
and xxv. 15; and Horace, ‘Carm.,’ iii. 3,
“ Justum et tenacem propositi virum,” ete.


“The man whose soul is firm and strong,
Bows not to any tyrant’s frown,
And on the rabble’s clamorous throng
In proud disdain looks coldly down.”
(Stanley.)
They who regard the “offences” as those
of the ruler explain them to mean oppressior
and injustice; but it seems plain from the
ran of the sentence that the minister, not


ou. x. 1—30.]


EOCOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


251


LL


the monarch, is primarily in the mind of
the writer, though, of course, it is quite true
that the submission of the former might
save the ruler from the commission of some
wrong.

Ver. 5,—Koheleth gives his personal ex-
perience of apparent confusion in the ordering
of state affairs. There is an evil which I
have seen under the sun. Power gets into
the hands of an unwise man, and then errors
are committed and injustice reigns. As an
error which proceedeth from the ruler, The
> here is caph veritatis, which denotes not
comparison, but resemblance, the idealiza-
tion of the individual, the harmony of the
particular with the general idea. The evil
which he noticed appeared to be (he does
not affirm that it is) a mistake caused b
the ruler; it so presented itself to his mind,
The caution observed in the statement may
be owing partly to the tacit fecling that
such blots occasioned difficulties in the view
taken of the moral government of the
world. He does not intend to refer to

‘God under the appellation “Ruler.” The
Septuagint renders, ‘Ns dkovcioy ééjAOev,
* As if it came involuntarily ;” Vulgate, to
much the same cilect, Quasi per errorem
egrediens. ‘Che idea here is either that the
evil is one not produced by any intentional
action of the ruler, but resulting from human
imperfection, or that what appears to be a
mistake is not so really. But these inter-
pretations are unsuitable. Those who adhere
to the Solomonic authorship of our book see
here a prophetic intimation of the evil of
Jeroboam’s rule, which evil proceeded from
the sins of Solomon himself and his son
Rehoboam. (So Wordswortli, Motais, ete.)

Ver, 6.—Folly is set in great dignity,
and the rich sit in low place. This is an
instance of the error intimated in the pre-
ceding verse, A tyrannical ruler exalts
inconpetent persons, unworthy favourites,
to “ great heights” (év tpeot peydaos, Sep-
tuagint), as it is literally—puts them into
eminent positions, ‘ Folly” is abstract for
concrete, “ fools.” And the rich sit in low

lace. “The rich” (ashtrim) are not sey
those who have wealth, however obtained,
but men of noble birth; dpyadmAouro., as
Plumptre appositely notes, persons of ances-
tral wealth, who from natural position might
be looked upon as rulersof men. Such men
would seek eminent stations, not from base
motives of gain, but from an honourable
ambition; and yet they are often slighted
by unworthy princes and kept in low estate

(comp. 1 Sam, ii, 7,8; Prov. xix. 10; Eeclus.
xi. 5,6). The experience mentioned in this
and the following verses could scarcely have
been Solomon’s, though it has been always
common enough in the East, where the most
startling changes have been made, the lowest


persons have been suddenly raised to emi-
nence, mistresses and favourites loaded with
dignities, and oppression of the rich has
been systematically pursued.


Ver. 7.—I have seen servants upon horses.
A further description of the effect of the
tyrant’s perversion of equity. Such an allu-
sion could not have been made in Solomon’s
reign, when the importation of horses was
quite a new thing (1 Kings x. 28). Later,
to ride upon horses was a distinction of the
nobility (Jer. xvii. 25). Thus Amaziah’s
corpse was brought on horses to be buried
in the city of David (2 Chron, xxv. 2s);
Mordecai was honoured by being taken round
the city on the king’s own steed (Esth. vi. 8,
etc.). Princes walking as servants upon the
earth. ‘ Princes” (sarim); i.e. masters,
lords. Some take tle expressions here us
figurative, equivalent to “those who are
worthy to be princes,” aud “those who ure
fit only to be slaves;” but the literal is the
true interpretation, Commentators quote
what Justin (xli. 3) says of the Parthians,
“ Hoc denique discrimen inter servos liberos-
que, quod servi pedibus, liberi non nisi equis
incedunt.” Ginsburg notes that early tra-
vellers in the East record the fact that
Kuropeans were not allowed by the Turks
to ride upon horses, but were compelled
either to use asses or walk on foot, In some
places the privilege of riding upon horseback
was permitted to the consuls of tlie great
powers—an honour denied to all strangers
of lower degree. Among tle Greeks and
Romans the possession of a horse with its
war-trappings implied a certain amount of
wealth and distinction. St. Gregory, treat-
ing of this passage (‘ Moral.,’ xxxi. 43), says,
“ By the name horse is understood temporal
dignity, as Solomon witnesses. ... For
every one who sins is the servant of sin, and
servants are upon horses, when sinners are
elated with the dignities of the present lile.
But princes walk as servants, when no honour
exalts many who are full of the dignity of
virtues, but when the greatest misfortune
here presses them down, as though un-
worthy.”

Vers. 8—11.—Section 13, Various pro-
verbs expressing the benefit of prudence and
caution, and the danger of folly. The con-
nection with what has preceded is not closely
marked, but is probably to be found in the


| bearing of the maxims on the conduct of


the wise man who has incurred the rescnt-
ment of a ruler, and might be inclined to
disaffection and revolt. They are inten-
tionally obscure and capable of a double
sense—a necessary precaution if the writer
lived under Persian despots.


Ver. 8.—He that diggeth a pit shall fall
into it. This proverb occurs in Prov. xxvi. 27,
an|, as expressive of the retribution that
awzits evil-doers, finds parallels in Ps. vii.
15, 16; ix. 15; x. 2; Ecclus. xxvii. 25, 26.
The “ pit ” (gummats, drat Acyduevov) is such
a, one as was made to capture wild animals,
and the maker of it is supposed to approach
it incauticusly, and to fall intoit. But the
scope of our passage is rather to speak of
what may possibly occur than to insist on
the Nemesis that inevitably overtakes trans-
gressors. Its object is to inspire caution in
the prosecution of dangerous undertakings,
whether the enterprise be the overthrow of
a tyrant, or any other action of importance,
or whether, as some suppose, the arraign-
ment of the providential ordering of events
is intended, in which case there would be
the danger of blasphemy and impatience.
And whoso breaketh a hedge, a serpent shall
bite him. The futures throughout vers. 8
and 9 are not intended to express certainty,
as if the results mentioned were inevitable,
but rather possibility, and might be ren-
dered, with Delitzsch, “may fall,” “may
bite,” etc. The “hedge” is rather a wall
(Prov. xxiv. $1), in the crevices of which
poisonous snakes have made their abode,
which are disturbed by its demolition (comp.
Amos v. 19). Nachash, here used, is the
generic name of any serpent.
of the snakes found in Palestine are harm-
less; but there are some which are very
deadly, especially the cobra and those which
belong to the viper family. There is no
allusion here to the illegal removal of land-
marks, a proceeding which might be sup-
posed to provoke retribution ; the hedge or
wall is one which the demolisher is justified
in removing, only in doing so he must look
out for certain contingencies, and guard
against them. Metaphorically, the pulling
down a wall may refer to the removal of
evil institutions in a state, which involves
the reformer in many difficulties and perils,

Ver. 9.—Whoso removeth stones shall be
hurt therewith. It is natural to consider
this clause as suggested by the breaking of
® wall in the preceding verse; but as this
would occasion a jejune repetition, it is better
to take it of the work of the quarryman, as
in 1 Kings v. 17, where the same verb is
used. The dangers to which sucl: labourers
ar: exposed are well known. Here, again,
but unsuccessfully, some have seen a refer-
ence to the removal of landmarks, comparing
2 Kings iv. 4, where the word is translated
“get aside.” As before said, the paragraph
does not speak of retribution, but advises
caution, enforcing the lesson by certain
homely allusions to the accidents that may
eccur in customary occupations. He that
eleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby.


ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER.


The majority’


[ox. x. 1—20,


Cutting up logs of wood, a man may hurt
himself with axe or saw, or be injured by
splinters, etc. If we take the idea to be the
felling of trees, there is the danger of being
crushed in their fall, or, according to the
tenor of Deut. xix. 5, of being killed inad-
vertently by a neighbour’s axe. Vulgate,
Qui scindit ligna vulnerabitu: ab eis, which
is more definite than the general term “ en-
dangered ;” but the Septuagint has, Kivduves-
cet ev avrois, as in the Authorized Version.
Plumptre sees here, again, an intimation of
the danger of attacking time-honoured in-
stitutions, even wlien decaying and corrupt.
Ver. 10.—If the iron be blunt, and he do
not whet the edge. The illustration at th
end of the last verse is continued. The
“iron” is the axe used in cutting wood; if
this be blunted by the work to which it is :
put, and he, the labourer, has not sliarpened’
the edge (Hebrew, the face, as in Ezek,
xxi. 1), what is the consequence? How is he,
to carry on his work? Then must he put ti
more strength. He must put more force!
in his blows, he must make up for the want!
of edge by added power and weight.
is the simplest explanation of the passage,
which contains many linguistic difficulties.
These may be seen discussed at length in
the commentaries of Delitzsch, Wright,
Nowack, etc. The translation of Ginsburg
is not commendable, “If the axe be blunt,
and he (the tyrant’s opponent) do not
sharpen it beforehand (phaném, taken as an
adverb of time), he (the tyrant) shall only
increase the army.” The Septuagint is ob-
seure, "Edy éxméon 1d a1dhpiov, Kal adrds
mpdcwmoy érdpate’ kal duvduers Svvaudoet, “If
the axe should fall, then he troubles his
face, and he shall strengthen his forces
(? double his strength);” Vulgate, Si retu-
sum fuerit ferrum, et hoc non ut prius, sed
hebetatum fuerit, multo labore exacuetur,
“If the iron shall be blunted, and it be not
as before, but have become dull, it shall be
sharpened with much labour.” But wisdom/
is profitable to direct; rather, the advantage!


glen
a 4
Law


This)


p 2


of setting right is (on the stde of) wisdom.) | a


Wisdoi teaches how to conduct matters tow...“
“)


\


a successful termination; for instance, it
prompts the worker to sharpen his tool \


instead of trying to accomplish his task by |“


an exertion of mere brute strength. The?


gnome applies to all the instances which||
have been mentioned above. Wisdom alone! |


|


dangers and difficulties which beset his _


enables « man to meet and overcome the


social, common, and political life.-If we
apply the whole sentence to the case of
disaffection with the government or open
rebellion, the caution given would signify
—See that your means are adequate to the
end, that your resources are sufficient to
conduct your enterprise to success. Septua


Lp
J
aS
a
re,


ee


1m x. 1—20.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


gint Vatican, Kal mepfocca r¢ dvdp) ov
copia, “And the advantage to man is not
wisdom.” But manuscripts A and O read,
Kal mweplocea tod aydpiov cola: Vulgate,
Post industriam sequetur sapientia, “ After
industry shall follow wisdom.”

Ver. 11.—The last proverb of this little
series shows the necessity of seizing the
tight opportunity. Surely the serpent will
bite without enchantment. The Autho-
rizel Version is not quite correct. The
particle ox, with which the verse begins, is
liere conditional, and the rendering should
be, If the serpent bite, etc.; the apodosis
comes in the next clause. The idea is
taken up from ver. 8. If one handles a
serpent without due precaution or without
knowing the secret of charming it, one will
suffer for it. The taming and charming
of poisonous snakes is still, as heretofore,
practised in Egypt and the East. What
the secret of this power is has not been
accurately determined; whether it belongs
especially to persons of acertain idiosynerasy,
whether it is connected with certain words or
intonations of the voice or musical sounds,
we do not know. Of the existence of the
power from remote antiquity there can be
no question. Allusions to it in Scripture
are common enough (see Exod. vii. 11; Ps.
lviii. 5; Jer. viii. 17; Ecclus. xii. 13). If
a serpent before it is charmed is dangerous,
what then? The Authorized Version affords
no sensible apodosis: And a babbler is no
better. The words rendcred “ babbler”
(baal hallashon) are literally “master of the
tongue,” and by them is meant the éraodés,
“the serpent-charmer.” The clause should
run, Then there ¢s no use én the charmer. If
the man is bitten before he has time to use
his charm, it is no profit to him that he
has the secret, it is too late to employ it
when the mischief is done. This is to shut
the stable door after the steed is stolen.
The maxim enforces the warninz against
being too late; the greatest skill is useless
unlcss applied at the right moment. The
Septuagint translates virtually as above,
“If a serpent bites when not charmed (év
ov W0upicu@), then there is no alvantage to
the charmer (7@ émddovtt).” ‘The Vulgate
departs from the context, rendering, S¢
mordeat serpens in silentio (i.e. probably
“uncharmed” ), nihil eo minus habet qui
oceulte detrahit, ‘He ig nothing better who
slanders secretly,” which St. Jerome thus
explains: the serpent and the slanderer are
alike, for as the serpent stealthily infuses
its poison, so the secret slanderer pours his
venom into another’s breast.


Vers. 12—15.—Section 14. ‘The mention
of “the master of the tongue” im ver. 11
leads ihe author to introduce some maxims


concerned with the contrast between the words
and acts of the wise, and the worthless prating
and useless labours of the fool. ‘


Ver. 12.—The words of a wise man’s
mouth are gracious; literally, are grace
(xdpts, Septuagint); te. they not only are
pleasing in form and manner, but they con-
ciliate favour, produce approbation and
good will, convince and, what is more, per-
suade. So of our blessed Lord it was said,
“All bare him witness, and wondered at
the gracious worls (rots Adyors tijs xdpiTos)
which proceeded out of his mouth” (Luke
iv. 22; comp. Ps. xlv. 2). In distinction
from the unready man, who, like the snake-
charmer in the preceding verse, suffers by
reason of his untimely silence, the wise
man uses his speech opportunely and to
good purpose. (A different result is given
in ch, ix. 11.) But the lips of a fool will
swallow up himself. This isa stronger ex-
pression than “ruin” or “destroy.” Speak-
ing without due forethought, he compromises
himself, says what he has shamefully to
withdraw, and brings punishment on his
own head (comp. Prov. x. 8, 21; xviii. 7).


‘Pipa wapd xaupdy pipbty dvarpéwe: Blov.
“Untimely speech has ruined many a life.”


Ver. 13.—The beginning of the words of
his mouth is foolishness. A confirmation of
the last clause of the preceding vers.. The
fool speaks according to his nature. ‘“ As
saith the proverb of the ancients, Out of the
wicked cometh forth wickedness” (1 Sam.
xxiv. 13; comp. Prov. xv. 2; Isa. xxxii. 6).
As soon as he opens his mouth he utters
folly, unwisdom, silliness. But he does not
stopthere. The end of his talk is mischievous
madness. By the time he has finished, he
has committed himself to statements that
are worse than silly, that are presumptuous,
frenzied, indicative of mental and moral de-
pravity. Intemperate language about the
secrets of God’s providence and the moral
government of the world may be intended.
Some think that the writer is still alluding
to dangerous talk concerning a tyrannical
ruler, seditious proposals, secret conspiracies,
etc. The text itself does not confirm such
notion with any certainty.

Ver. 14.—A fool also is full of words,
The word for “fool” here is sakal, which
implies a dense, confused thinker. Above
the word was kesil, which denotes rather
the self-confidence of the dull and stupid
man. Moreover the fool multiplieth words.
He not only speaks foolishly, but he says
too much (comp. ch. v. 2). It is not mere
loquacity that is here predicated of the fool,
though that is one of his characteristics, but,
as the reat of the verse shows, the prating of
things about which he knows nothing. He


254


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


lou. x. 1—20,


talks as though he knew everything and
there were no limitation to human cognition.
A man cannot tell what shall be, And yet,
or although, no man can really predict the
future. ‘The fool speaks confidently of such
things, and thereby proves his imbecility.
Tustead of * what shall be,” the Septuagint
has, Ti 7d yevduevov rat tl 7d éoduevor, “ What
has been and what shall be;” the Vulgate,
Quid ante se fuertt, “What has been before
him.” This reading was introduced pro-
bably to obviate a seeming tautology in the
following clause, And what shall be after
him, who can tell? But this clause has a
different signification from the former, and
presents a closer definition, The future
intended may be the result of tle fool’s in-
considerate language, whicli may have fatal
and lasting consequences; or it may refer
to the visitation of his sins upon his children,
in accordance with the denunciation of Deut.
v. 9; xxix. 20—22; or it may include the
life beyond the grave. The uncertainty of
the future is a constant tleme; see ch. iii,
22; vi. 11, 12; vii. 14; viii. 17; and compare
Christ’s parable of the rich fool (Luke xii.
16—20), and St. James’s warning in his
Epistle (iv. 13—16).

Ver. 15.—The labour of the foolish
wearieth every one of them, because he
knoweth not how to go to the city. A
transition from plural to singular is here
made, The work of fools wearieth him that
knoweth not, etc. “ Fools’ work” signifies,
perhaps, the vain speculations about Provi-
dence which Kvheleth constantly condemns;
or at any rate, all vain and objectless toil
and trouble. Not to know the way to the
city is probably a proverbial saying expres-
sive of gross ignorance concerning the most
obvious matters. How should one, who
fails in the knowledge open to all experi-
ence, be able to investigate and give an
opinion about abstruse questions (comp. Isa.
xxxv. 8)? For the last clause other inter-
pretations have been proposed, such as, the
fool knows not how to transact public busi-
ness (which is introducing a modern idea) ;
the oppressed peasant knows not the way
to the town where he might obtain redress;
he is so foolish that he does not understand
where he may find patrons whom he may
bribe to plead his cause; he is an Essene,
who avoids cities; he cannot make his way
to the new Jerusalem, the city of God.
But these artificial explanations are to be
rejected, while the simple interpretation
given above is plainly consistent with tlie
context. The lesson is not to meddle with
things too high, especially when you are
ignorant of the commonest matters, A
little wisdom would prevent endless and
uselegs trouble.


Vers. 16—20.—Section 15. Kobeleth re-


turns to the theme mentioned in vers. 4—7,
and speaks of folly in one who holds the post«
tion of king, and the need of wisdom and
prudence in the subjects of an unworthy ruler.


Ver. 16.—Woe to thee, 0 land, when thy
king is a child! “Child” is naar, which
term included any age up to manhood. Some
interpret the word here, as wais in Greek,
in the sense of “slave,” contrasting it with
“tle son of nobles” in the following verse.
But it can hardly siguify more than servitor,
attendant; and in ver. 7 the antithesis to
* prince” is ebed, not naar. The child in
the present case is a youthful, inexperienced
ruler, who does not realize his responsi-
bilities, and is the tool of evil advisers.
What particular instance, if any, Koheleth
had in view it is impossible to say. Of
course, many expositora see a reference to
Rehoboam, whom, at forty years of age, his
own son Abijah calls naar (2 Chron. xiii. 7),
and who was certainly childish in his con-
duct (1 Kings xii. 1—14). Hitzig connects
the passage with the reign of Ptolemy
Epiphanes, who was but five years old at
the death of his father, B.c. 205, the reins
of government being assumed by Agathocles
and his sister Agathoclea, who occasioned
serious disasters to tle land. To support
this opinion, the date of our book has to be
considerably reduced (see Introduction).
It is best to take the gnome as a general
expression, like that in Isa. iii, 12, “‘ As for
my people, children are their oppressors,
and women rule over them.” Thy princes
eat in the morning. Eating here implies
feasting and banqueting, beginning the
day with sensual enjoyment instead of such
honest work as attending to state matters,
administering justice, ete., as becomes good
rulers. None but profligates would thus
spend the early morning. “These are not
drunken, as ye suppose; seeing it is but
the third hour of the day,” says St. Peter,
repudiating the charge of intoxication (Acts
ii, 15). “Woe unto them,” cries Isaiah
(v. 11), “that rise up early in the morn-
ing, that they may follow strong drink!”
Even the heathen censured such debauchery.
Cicero thus abuses Antonius: “At quam
multos dies in ea villa turpissime es per-
bacchatus. Ab hora tertia bibebatur, lude-
batur, yvomebatur” (‘Philipp., ii. 41).
Curtius (v. 7, 2) reprehends “ de die convivia
inire.” The Greeks had a proverb to
denote abnormal sensuality, 'Ag’ judpas
mivew.

Ver. 17.—Blessed art thou, 0 land, whem
thy king is the son of nobles! eujus reg
nobilis est (Vulgate); vids erevdépar, “son
of free men” (Septuagint), Some would
regard “son of nobles” as a periphrasis
expressive of character, equivalent to the


on. x. 1—20.]


Latin generosus,as “son of strength,” equiva-
lent to “strong man;” “son of wicked-
ness,” equivalent to “wicked man;” but
the phrase may well be taken literally.
Koheleth (ver. 7) has expressed his disgust
at the exaltation of unworthy slaves to high
positions; he here intimates his adherence to
the idea that those who descend from noble
ancestors, and have been educated in the
higher ranks of society, are more likely to
prove a blessing to their land than upstarts
who have been placed by caprice or favourit-
ism in situations of trust and eminence. Of
course, it is not universally true that men
of high birth make good rulers; but proverbs
of general tenor must not be pressed in par-
ticulars, and the author must be understood
to uffirm that the fact of having distinguished
ancestors is an incentive to right action,
stirs a worthy emulation in a man, gives
him a motive which is wanting in the low-
born parvenu. The feeling, noblesse oblige,
has preserved many from baseness (comp,
John viii, 39), Thy princes eat in due
season; not like those mentioned in ver. 16,
but in tempore, rps kopdy, at the right
time, the “season” which appertains to all
mundane things (ch. iii. 1—8). For strength,
and not for drunkenness. The preposition
a here is taken as expressing the object—
they eat to gain strength, not to indulge
sensuality; but it is more in accordance
with usage to translate “in, or with, manly
strength,” #6. as man’s strengtli demands,
and not degenerating into a carouse. If it
ig thought incongruous, as Ginsburg deems,
to say, “princes eat for drunkennvss,” we
may take drunkenness as denoting excess
of any kind, The word in the form here
used occurs uowhere else.
regarding rather the consequences of intoxi-
cation than the actual word in the text,
renders, Ka) otk aicxuvOjoovrm, “ And they
shall not be ashamed.” Thus, too, St.
Jerome, Ht non in confusione. St. Augustine
(‘De Civit.,’ xvii. 20) deduces from this
ssage that there are two kingdoms—that
of Christ and that of the devil, and he
explains the allegory at some length, going
into details which are of homiletic utility.
Another interpretation is given by St.
Jerome, quoted at length by Corn.’ Lapide,
in his copious commentary. ;
Ver. 18.—By much slothfulness the build-
ing decayeth. The subject is still the state.
Under the image of a house which falls into
ruin for lack of needful repairs, is signified
the decay that surely overtakes a kingdom
whose rulers are given up to indolence
and debauchery, and neglect to attend to
the affairs which require prompt care (comp.
Amos ix. 11). Such were they whom Amos
(vi. 6) denounced, “That drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief


The Septuagint, |


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


ointments; but they are not grieved for the
affliction of Joseph.” ‘“ Much slothfulness ”’


‘is expressed in the original by a dual form,


which gives an intensive signification.
Ewald and Ginsburg take it as referring to
the “two idle handa;” but the intensifica-
tion of the dual is not unprecedented (see
Delitzsoh, tn loc.). The rest of this clause
igs more accurately rendcred, the rafters
sink, ie. the timber framework, whether of
roof or wall, gives way. This may possibly
not be noticed at once, but it makes itself
known unmistakably ere long. And through
idleness of the hands the house droppeth
through; rather, the house leaketh, the roof
lets in the rain, Septuagint, Ev dpyla yeipav
ordées 7 oixta, “Through laziness of hands
the house will drip.’ The very imperfect
construction of the flat roofs of Mastern
houses demanded continual attention. Such
common ani] annoying occurrences as a leaky
roof are mentioned in the Book of Proverbs
(see xix. 13; xxvii. 15). Plautus, ‘ Mostell.,’
i, 2, 23—


“ Ventat imber, lavit parietes; perpluunt
Tigna; putrefacit aér operam fabri.”


'“The rain comes down, and washes all the


walls,
The roof is leaky, and the weatler rough
Loosens the architect’s most skilful work.”


Ver. 19.—A feast is made for laughter,
and wine maketh merry. Here is a cause
of the decay spoken of above. The rulers
spend in revelry and debauchery the time
and energy which they ought to give to
affairs of state. More literally, for merré-
ment they make bread, and wine [that] cheereth
life; i.c. they use God’s good gifts of bread
and wine as means of intemperance and
thougiitless pleasure. So a psalmist speaks
of wine as making glad the heart of man
(Ps. civ. 15); and Ben-Sira says, “ Wine is
as good as life to a man, if it be drunk
moderately: what life is there to a man
that is without wine? for it was created to
make men glad. Wine measurably drunk
and in season bringeth gladness of the
heart, and cheerfulness of the mind” (Keclus.
xXxxi. [xxxiv.] 27, 28). But money answereth
all things; #.e. grants all that such persons
want. It requires money to provide rich
food and costly wines; this they possess,
and they are thus able to indulge their
appetites to the utmost. It concerns them
not how such resources are obtained —won
by extortion from a starving people, exacted
in exorbitant taxation, pillaged by unscru-
pulous instruments; they want gold to ex-
pend on their lusts, and they get it some-
how, and with it all that in their view
makes life worth living. Commentators cite
Horace, ‘ Ep.,’ i. 6. 36, “Scilicet uxorem,” ete,


256


“ For why—a portioned wife, fair fame, and
friends,
Beauty and birth on sovereign Wealth
attends.
Blest is her votary throned his bags
among! i
Persuasion’s self sits perched upon his
tongue ;
Love beams in every feature of his face,
And every gesture beams celestial grace.”’
(Howes. )


Corn, & Lapide appositely quotes—


“. . . quidquid nummis prasentibus opta,
Kit veniet; clausum possidet arca Jovem.”


“Tf thou hast gold, then wish for anything,
And it will surely come; the money-box
Hath in it a most potent deity.”


Pincda, followed by Motais, suggests that
this verse may be taken in a good sense.
He would make ver. 18 correspond to ver.
16, characterizing the government of de-
bauchees, and ver. 19 correspond to ver. 17,
representing the rule of temperate princes
where all is peace and prosperity. But
there is nothing grammatical to indicate
this arrangement; and the explanation
given above is doubtless correct. The
Scptuagint Version is not faithful to our
gee text, though it is followed virtually
y the Syriac: Eis yéAwta ro.ovct &pror, kat
olvoy kal €Aatov Tod evppavOjvar (avtas, Kat
Tov apyupiov Tamervdoe: emakotoeTal TA TATA,
“For gladness they make bread and wine
and oil, that the living may rejoice, and to
money all things will humble themselves,
will obey ” (doubly translating the word),
Vor. 20.—Curse not the king, no not in
thy thought. Under the above-mentioned
circumstances, a man might be tempted to
abuse and curse these ill-conditioned rulers,
Koheleth warns against this error; it is
dangerous to give way to it (comp. Exod,
xxii, 28). In ch. viii. 2 the motive for sub-
mission to the king is placed on religious
grounds; in the present passage the ground
is prudence, regard for personal safety,
which might be compromised by plain
speaking, especially when one has to do
with such depraved and unscrupulous
persons. We may compare David’s generous
conduct to his crnel persecutor Saul, whom
he spared because he was the Lord’s
anointed (1 Sam. xxiv. 6, 10; xxvi. 9, etc. ;
2 Sum. i. 14). Madda, “ thought,” “ con-
sciousness,” ig rare, and is supposed to
belong to late Hebrew (see 2 Chron. i. 10,
11, 12; Dan. i, 4, 17). The Septuagint
translates it cuvefSnois: Vulgate, cogitatio.
To encourage such thoughts in the mind is
to run the risk of openly expressing them at


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


ES


(ou. x. 1-20


some unguarded moment; for “out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh.”
Curse not the rich in thy bedchamber. In
ability to injure, the rich stand in the same
category as the king. You are not safe éy
Tamielors Korréywy gov, “in your very bed-
chamber,” where, if anywhere, you would
fancy yourself free from espionage. But
“ walls have ears,” says the proverb (comp.
Hab. ii. 11; Luke xix. 40); and the King of
Syria is warned, “ Elisha, the prophet that
is in Israel, telleth the King of Israel the
words thou speakest in thy bedchamber”
(2 Kings vi. 12). “That which ye have
spoken in the ear in closets (éy rots rapcefots)
shall be proclaimed upon the housetops”
(Luke xii. 8). For a bird of the air shall
carry the voice. A proverbial saying,
common to all languages, and not to be re-
ferred especially to the story of the cranes
of Ibycus (see Erasiuus, ‘ Adag.,’ s.v. “ Ultio
malefucti”) or to the employment of carrier
pigeons. We say of secret information, “a
little bird told me.” Plumptre quotes
Aristophanes, ‘ Aves,’ 575—


Oddels oldev Toy Onoaupdy Toy epdy wAdp et Tus
&p’ opus.
“ No one knows of my treasure, save, it may
be, a bird.”


On which the Scholiast notes, “There is a
proverb extant, ‘ No one observes me but the
passing bird’” (comp. Erasmus, ‘ Adag.,’ 8.0.
“Occulta”). In Koheleth’s day informers
evidently plicd their trade industriously,
and here meet, not only with notice, but
ironically with reprobation. On the general
sentiment of the verse, we may quote
Juvenal, ‘Sat.’ ix. 102, “O Corydon,
Corydon,” thus versified in Ginsburg’s com-
mentary—


“ And dost thou seriously believe, fond swain,
The actions of the great unknown remain ?
Poor Corydon! even beasts would silence

break,
And stocks and stones, if servants did not,
speak.
Bolt every door, stop every cranny tight, '
Close every window, put out every light;
Let not a whisper reach the listening ear,
No noise, no motion; let no soul be near;
Yet all that passed at the cock’s second
crow, :
The neighbouring viutner shall, ere day-
break, know.”


That which hath wings (compare Latin ales);
the possessor (baal) of a pair of wings, a
periphrasis for “a bird,” as in Prov. i. 17.
We had “master of the tongue,” ver. 11;
so in Dan. viii. 6, 20, “having horns,” ig
“ master (baad) of horns.”


on. x. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACAER. ‘287


—_——— eee


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—7, 12—15.— The dispraise of folly. I. FoLLY MARS THE FINEST REPUTATION.
As one sinner destroyeth much good (ch. ix. 18), and flies of death, or poisonous flies,
cause the ointment of the perfumer to send forth a stinking savour, so doth a little folly
outweigh wisdom and honour. 1. Jt mars their beauty. As the poisonous flies go affect
the perfumer’s ointment that it begins to ferment and lose its fragrance, a little folly
mixed up with a great deal of wisdom and honour impairs these in such a fashion and
to such an extent, that they cease to attract the good opinion of beholders, and the
person possessed of them is rather known as a fool than esteemed as a wise man. 2. Fé
d-stroys their value. As the dealer in ointments cannot sell his corrupted pigment, so
neither can the man whose wisdom and honour are tainted with folly any longer wield
that power for good he might otherwise have done. The influence exerted by his
ee and honour is directly counteracted and frequently overbalanced by the influence
of his folly.

Il. FoLLy cONSTITUTES AN UNSAFE GUIDE. “The wise man’s heart is at his right
hand; but a fool’s heart at his left.” This has been thought to mean: 1. The fool’s
heart is in the wrong place, in contrast to the wise man’s, which is always in the right
place (Hengstenberg). This sentiment is true. The fool’s heart is not directed towards
those objects upon which its affections ought to be set, while the wise man’s is. This
enough to make folly an unsafe conductor. 2. The fool’s heart never acts at the right
time, while the wise man’s does (Ginsburg), because the wise man’s heart is always at
his right hand, his acting hand, his working hand; while the fool’s is always at the left
hand, the wrong hand, the hand with which a person usually finds it difficult to act.
This a second reason why no man should accept folly as a leader. It can never seize
the opportunity, never strike while the iron is hot, never do anything at the proper
moment or in an efficient manner. 3. The fool’s heart is always unlucky in tts auguries,
whereas the wise man’s heart is always lucky (Plumptre). If this were the correct
interpretation—which we think it is not—it would state what would not be surprising,
were it true, that the fool’s forecasts were usually falsified, and would present another
argument for not committing one’s self to the directorship of folly. 4. The fool’s heart
always leads in the wrong direction, as distinguished from the right direction in which the
wise man’s heart ever goes. This, undoubtedly, is true. The fool is a person wholly

destitute of that wisdom which is profitable to direct (ver. 10), and without which no
man can walk safely (Prov. iii. 23). A final consideration against enrolling beneath the
banner of folly.

II]. FoLuy INVARIABLY BETRAYS ITS OWN STUPIDITY. “ Yea also, when the fool
walketh by the way, his understanding faileth him, and he saith to every one that he
is a fool.” As it is certain that no man can conceal his true character for ever, or even
for long, so likewise is it certain that a zany, a buffoon, a fool, will discover his sooner
than most people. He will proclaim himself to be a fool: 1. By his irrational
behaviour. His understanding will fail him at critical times and on important subjects.
He will reveal his ignorance, want of sense, lack of principle, emptiness of grace.
2. In the most public manner. As he walks by the way. As not being in the least
degree ashamed of his folly, perhaps hardly conscious he is making such an exhibition
of himself. 3. Yo the most unlimited extent. He will make himself known, not to his
friends in private, but to his neighbours in the street, and not to one or two merely of

‘these, but to every one he meets.

IV. FoLLy FREQUENTLY ASCRIBES ITS OWN CHARACTER TO OTHERS. The fool saith of
every one he meets, “ He is a fool,” ¢-e. the individual whom he meets is (Vulgate,
Luther, Plumptre). Though this translation is doubtful, it supplies a true thought;
that as insane people often count all but themselves insane, so fools—intellectual,
moral, and religious—not infrequently regard themselves as the only truly wise persons,
and look upon the rest of mankind as fools. 4

V. Fou.y Is OFTEN QUILTY OF GREAT RASHNESS, “If the spirit of the ruler rise up
against thee, leave not thy place; for yielding allayeth great offences ” (ver. 4). The
folly here alluded to consists in three things. 1. In flaming up into indignation at an
w~serited accusation, Charges of such sort were to be expected by one who served an

NCOLESIASTES. 8


53 ROCLES! \STES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. x. 1-90,


———


ae


Oriental despot, and are not urcommon in ordinary life in the experience of subordi-
nates who serve choleric masters. “The spurns that patient merit of the unworthy
takes” are no doubt hard to bear ; but it is not a sign of wisdom to fume against them,
and fret one’s self into anger. 2. In hastily retiring from the post of duty. As a states-
man might resign his seals of office on being reprimanded by his sovereign, or a work~-
man lay down his tools on being challenged by his master, or a domestic servant
throw up her situation on being found fault with by her mistress. 3. In failing to see
the better way of meekness and submission. The advantages of gently and patiently
bearing false accusations or unjust ebullitions of temper against one are obvious. Such
yielding (1) usually has the effect of softening the anger and checking the railing of
the accuser (Prov. xv. 1); (2) puts an end to further offences on the part of the irate
superior, whether ruler or master, who, were his raze to be increased by resistance, might
proceed to greater manifestations of his temper; and (3) prevents the offended himself
from rushing into more serious transgressions, as he might do were he to give way in
turn to his angry passions,

VIL. FoLiy soMETIMES ATTAINS TO UNDESERVED HONOUR. “ There is an evil which I
have seen under the sun . . . folly set in great dignity, and the rich in low place...
servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the earth” (vers, 5—7).
1. The commonness of this phenomenon. “The eunuch Bagoas long all-powerful at
the Persian court ” (Delitzsch), Louis XI. exalting the base-born to places of honour, and
Edward IL, James I. of England or Henry III. of France, lavishing dignities on their
minions, may be cited as examples. Nothing more frequent in everyday life than to
see persons of small capacity and little worth promoted over the heads of their superiors
in talent and goodness. 2. The cause of this phenomenon. In one sense the wisdom
of God, the chief Ruler of men and things (Hengstenberg), but in another sense, and
that the one here intended, the arbitrary power of men “dressed in a little brief
authority.” 3. The evil of this phenomenon. It discourages merit, and inflates folly
with pride; rewards incapacity, and despises real ability ; places influence in wrong
hands, and weakens the power of good men to benefit their age.

VII. FouLy SELDOM KNOWS WHEN TO HOLD ITs TONGUE. “The lips of a fool will
swallow up himself,” etc, (vers. 12—14). 1. The wise man’s words are few, the fool’s
endivss, Vhe former is “swift to hear, but slow to speak ” (Jas. i. 19); he latter hears
nothing, learns less, and chatters incessantly. The former is known by his silence
(Prov. xvii, 28; xxix. 11); the latter, by the multitude of his words (ver. 3), 2, The
wise man’s words are gracious, thefool’s ruinous. The lips of the wise are a tree of life
(Prov. xi. 30; xv. 4), and disperse knowledge amongst their fellows (Prov. xv. 7),
whilst they preserve themselves (Prov. xiv.3); but a fool’s mouth is his own destruction
(Prov. xvii. 7), and the complete beggarment of all that listen to him (Prov, xiv. 28;
xvii. 7). 8. The wise man’s words tmprove as they proceed, the fool's deteriorate as they
flow. The former carry with them the ripe fruits of thought and experience, growing
richer and weightier as they move slowly on; the latter progress from bad to worse,
beginning with foolishness and ending with mischievous madness,

VIII, FouLy 18 FREQUENTLY UNABLE TO DO THE SIMPLEST THINGS. ‘The labour of
fools wearieth every one of them, for he knoweth not how to go to the city” (ver. 15).
1. The fool’s ignorance is dense. So simple a matter as finding his way along a country
road to the city is beyond his comprehension. Plumptre cites in illustration the
proverbs, “None but a fool is lost on a straight road,” and ‘“ The ‘why’ is plain as
way to parish church.” 2. The fool’s presumption is immense. He who cannot do so
small a matter as find his way to the city proposes to “enlighten the world and make
it happy ” through his words or his works. So people who know nothing about a sub-
ject often imagine themselves qualified to teach it to others, and persons of no capacity
put themselves forward to attempt undertakings of greatest difficulty. 3. The Sool’s

abour ts vast. Having neither knowledge nor ability, he labours with “ creat travail”
to expound what he does not understand, and perform what he has neither brains nor
hands to execute.

Lessons. 1. Forsake the foolish and live (Prov. ix. 6). 2. Get wi :
standing (Prov. iv. 5). ¢ pies Winton | ae Modan


Vera, 8—11.—Gnomic wisdom ; or, a string of double-edged proverbs. 1, Dicarxe


on. x 1—20.] | ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 259


PITS AND FALLING INTO THEM. “ He that diggeth a pit shall for, ‘may ’] fall into it”
(ver. 8). An old proverb, borrowed from Solomon (Prov. xxvi. 27), who in turn may
have learnt it from David (Ps. vii. 15; ix. 15; lvii. 6), it may point to one or other of
two thoughts. 1. The necessity of exercising caution in all works of danger. One who
hollows out a trench or pit for the purpose of snaring wild animals—a perfectly legiti-
mate design—may, either by standing too near the edge and causing the treacherous
earth to give way, or by stumbling on it in the dark at an unexpected moment, full in,
in which case he will suffer not for having done wrong, but merely for having failed
to act with circumspection and prudence (Prov. xiv. 15; xxii. 3; xxvii. 12). 2. The
possibility of evil-doers overreaching themselves. In this case the pit is supposed to be
dug for a wicked purpose, as e.g. to ensnare another to his ruin. In this sense the
proverb has found expression in almost all literatures. Shakespeare speaks of the
engineer being “ hoist with his own petard.” Haman was hanged upon the gallows he
had built for Mordecai (Esth. vii. 10). ‘“ Plots and conspiracies are often as fatal to the
conspirators as to the intended victims” (Plumptre).

Il, BrokEN HEDGES AND BITING SERPENTS. “ Whoso breaketh through a fence, a
serpent shall bite him” (ver. 8). The hedge, or rather fence, or stone wall, was a
customary haunt of serpents; so that one engaged in breaking down such a structure
had need to beware of being bitten by the reptiles infesting it. Hence a variety of
lessons according as the words are viewed. 1. An admonition to workers. To go
cautiously about their employments, if these are dangerous, as a person would who had
to pull down or break through an old wall in which serpents were lodged. Many
accidents occur, inflicting damage on the workers, for want of a little foresight. 2. 4
warning to transgressors. ‘That Nemesis may overtake them in the very act of their
evil-doing. If they break through a neighbour’s fence to steal his fruit, or pull down
his wall so as to injure his property, they need not be surprised if they are caught in
the act. Wickedness has a habit of avenging itself, sometimes with great rapidity
and with terrible severity, on those who perpetrate it, This is true of all breaking
down of those fences or laws with which God has girt man. Every violation of law
—physical, intellectual, moral, social, religious—is visited with its own particular biting
serpent of penalty. 3. A caution to reformers. If they will set themselves to pull
down the old walls of decayed and worthless institutions, or to break through the
fences of time-honoured customs, they must prepare themselves for being bitten by
the serpents in the crannies—for encountering the opposition, criticism, hate, and often
persecution of those who have vested interests in the abuses proposed to be rectified
or swept away. Reformers should count the cost before beginning their work of
reformation.

III. Hewine 0B REMOVING STONES AND HURTING ONE’S SELF. “ Whoso heweth out [or,
*moveth’] stones shall be hurt therewith” (ver. 9). Again of double import, teaching:
1. The duty of guarding one’s self against the perils that may attend a perfectly legitimate
occupation. Viewed in this light, the stone-moving may simply mean the pulling down
of a wall, which, if it be carelessly performed, may fall and inflict a hurt upon the
worker; and the stone-hewing may refer to the work of quarrying, which may be
attended with great risk from the flying about of chips. 2. The inevitable recompense
of all wrong-doing. If the stone-moving alludes to the removing of a neighbour's land-
mark, then the prowerb stands as a reminder of the curse pronounced against that
ancient sin (Deut. xix. 14; xxvii. 17). The use of landmarks, at least as then
employed, has ceased; but the distinction between “mine” and “thine ” remains ;
aud every invasion of another’s rights is a wickedness which in course of providence
will receive its just recompense of reward (Exod, xx. 15).

IV. CLEAVING LOGS AND CUTTING FINGERS. “ He that cleaveth wood is endangered
thereby ” (ver. 9), The three thoughts already mentioned are again repeated. 1. The
need of caution. Wood-splitting being a dangerous occupation. 2. The certainty of
retribution. The cutting down of trees, especially fruit trees, being regarded as an act
of wrongful oppression, and as such forbidden by the Law, even in a siege (Deut.
xx. 19, 20), the hurt that might come to one in wood-cutting (Deut. xix. 5) may be
viewed as suggestive of the penalty of disobedience. 3. The pertl of reform. The
cutting down of trees is, in this instance, taken as symbolic of the hewing down of


decayed institutions,


ee
Stet
ar » te
et aa =
| 7
4 wo


.


b AS” «sph At Sa
haa


gee ee
ag


260 ECCLESIASTES; OR, HE PREACHER. fon. x. 1—20.


VY. Buuwr Toons AND HEAVY BLows. “If the iron be blunt, and one do not whet the
edge, then must he put to more strength: but wis 1om is profitable to direct” (ver. 10). The


\ lessons are two. 1. Every work has its own ag propriate tools. Wood-cutting requires


‘axes, and not merely blunt pieces of iron; pit-digging demands spades; stone-hewing


, chisels, Each occupation has its own implement. This the dictate of common sense.


2. Every tool should be kept in a fit condition for its work. This the teaching of wisdom.
A woodman with a blunt axe must strike oftener and heavier than he would need to do
were his axe sharp. So themanwho enters on any task without the requisite sharpness
of intelligence and sagacity. will find his work proportionately hindered.

VI. BirmNG SERPENTS AND TARDY CHARMERS. “If the serpent bite before it is
charmed, then is there no advantage in the charmer; ” or, “ Surely the serpent will bite
without, or where there is no, enchantment ” (ver. 11); which again offers two thoughts.
1. That the serpent of temptation will do its deadly work unless timeously repressed.
This may be done by resisting its first. approaches, if they cannot be eluded altogether
(Jas. iv. 7), by crushing down the rising inclination within one to yield, by diligently
considering the sinfulue-s of that to which one is solicited (Gen. xxxix. 9), by calling
in the help of God against the adversary (Eph. vi. 10—18). 2. That if once the serpent
of temptation has done its deadly work there is no use whutever of resorting to such
means of repression. Such means are then too late. To employ them then is much
the same thing as to shut the stable door when the steed has been stolen.


Vers. 8—11.—Good thoughts for bad times; or, words from the wise. I. THE
NECESSITY OF CAUTION. Especially in difficult and dangerous works. He who digs a
pit must be on his guard against falling into it; he who pulls down a stone wall must
louk out for serpents; he who hews stones or removes them must be careful not to
hurt himself in the process; he who cleaves or splits timber must see that he is not
endangered thereby. ‘‘ The prudent man looketh well to his goins.”

II. THE RECOMPENSE OF WRONG-DOING. 1. Springing out of the wrong act. As
when one, having dug a pit to ensnare another, falls into it himself. 2. Suddenly
smiting the transgressor. As when a serpent bites him who pulls down a wall. 3.
Swiftly following on the heels of crime. As when one who, hewing stones, injures himself
with the chips, or, removing a neighbour’s landmark, is punished for his offence.
ms Certainly overtaking the evil-doer. As when one cutting wood strikes himself with
the axe.

III. THe PERIL OF REFORM. The propriety of counting the cost before entering
on the arduous career of a reformer. Illustrated by the two proverbs about breaking
through fences and cutting down trees. Men are not to be deterred from attempting
reforms because of difficulties and dangers; only they should not be surprised when
these are experienced.

IV. THE SELECTION OF INSTRUMENTS. Many enterprises fail because the proper
instruments have not been selected; or, if selected, have not been managed with
wisdom. The man who intends to cut down a tree must first have an axe and then
keep it sharp.

V. THE CHOICE oF TIMES. Many good undertakings fail because not begun at the
right time. Many dangers might be avoided were precautions against them not adopted
too late. To every work there is a time. Strike while the iron is hot. Beware of
being too late.


Vers. 16-—20.—The picture of a happy land. I. A NoBLE KING. 1. Of royal blood.
“Happy art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles”—like Horace’s
“‘Macenas atavis edite regibus,” descended from a long line of crowned heads. If
countries are to have kings, then decidedly the scion of kingly (more especially if
also honourable and good) ancestors is better than the upstart who was yesterday a
gentleman of the pavement, but is to-day the occupant of a throne (ch. iv. 14).
2. Of mature manhood. ‘“ Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child.” The
experiment of boy-kings has seldom proved successful. Witness the case of Joash
(2 Chron, xxiv. 1), who made a tolerable sovereign only so long as Jehoiada lived.
When the king is a minor there is too much scope for ambition on the part of the
regent and of the nobles, who would like to be regents or even kings. 3, Of princely


on. x. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER. 261


intellect. The man who is to rule others should be every inch a king, not in bodily
appearance only, but in-mental capacity as well. No greater calamity can befall a
country than to have its throne filled by a fool or an intellectual baby. In this
sense, to be ruled by a “child” is surely the last indignity that can be offered to
reasoning and reasonable men. 4. Qf large experience. Unlike a child, or a boy, or a
youth, whose knowledge of men and things must at the best be limited, the ideal
sovereign should be one whose accumulated stores of wisdom, gathered in many ways
and from many lands, may be used for promoting the welfare of his people. :

II. A TEMPERATE ARISTOORAGY. 1. Dissipation, shameful in all, is specially so tn
princes. Noblesse oblige. The higher one’s rank, the more incumbent on one is
virtue. Hence for princes to eat in the morning, or to be addicted to gluttony and
other bodily gratifications, to be so intent upon them as not merely to sit up late
indulging them, but to rise up early for the purpose of renewing them, is to degrade
their dignity, and trail their honour in the mire, besides shaming virtue and outraging
decency. 2. Moderation, dutiful in all, is specially promotive of health. Those who
live to eat and drink seldom live so long as they might, but by indulgence, setting up
disease in their bodies, often shorten their days and die before their time. Those who
eat and drink to live, and therefore eat in due season and in due measure, which is
what is meant by temperance, take the best means of maintaining themselves in health
and strength.

Ili. A virtuous PEOPLE. 1. Industrious. “By slothfulness the roof sinketh in;
and through idleness of the hands the house leaketh” (ver. 18). What is true of a
material edifice is also true of the body politic. As the timbers or rafters of a private
dwelling will decay unless watched over and from time to time repaired by its inmate,
go the fabric of the state will go to ruin unless it be surveyed by vigilant eyes and upheld
by untiring hands. 2. Joyous. Not only is there nothing sinful in feasting and
wine-drinking when these are kept in virtuous moderation, but the absence of gladness
from the face of any people is a bad omen. Gloom on the countenance and wretched-
ness in the heart mean that social disorder and perhaps revolution are at hand. Every-
thing that contributes to the happiness and contentment of a people is a distinct
contribution to the stability of a state. 3. Moneyed. A people without money or
money’s worth is a people on the verge of starvation; and no state can stand long
whose population consists of paupers. Money there must be, or its equivalent in
material goods, and this not concentrated in a ‘few hands, but distributed as widely as
possible. The main problem of statesmen should be to secure a population, not only
industrious and happy, but well paid, and therefore well fed, well clothed, and well
housed. 4. Loyal. A people given to treasonable practices cannot be either prosperous
or happy. Hence the Preacher dissuades all good subjects from cursing the king even
in their thoughts. The impossibility of escaping detection under the all-pervading
espionage of an Oriental despotism rendered it unsafe in the times of the Preacher;
but, even in times when the liberty of the subject is respected, it is not always
prudent to be hatching conspiracies against the crown, however secret these may be;
and certainly it is not conducive to the welfare of a people that such shou!d be common
in the land. 5. Law-abiding. As little given to curse the rich as to plot against the
king. Not communistic, socialistic, or revolutionary in the bad sense of these expres-
sions; since a people may be all of these in a good sense without losing its character
for virtue,


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1, 3.—Folly self-betrayed. To the writer of this book it seemed that the great
antithesis of human life, of human society, was pointed out by the distinction between
wisdom and folly. As by wisdom he meant not merely speculative knowledge or
profound statecraft, but, much rather, reflective habits, deliberate judgment, and
decisive action, in the practical affairs of life; so by folly he intended exactly the
opposite of such character and mental habits. A certain contemptuous and weary
abhorrence of the foolish breathes through his language. His remarks are full of sagacity
and justice.


262 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [ou. x. 1—20,


—


I, Fonny MAY FOR A TIME BE CONCEALED, A grave countenance, a staid demeanour,
a reticent habit, may convey the impression of wisdom which does not exist. Men are
disposed to take a favourable view of those occupying high station, and even of those
possessing great estates. The casual acquaintances of men who are slow and serious
in speech, or are exalted in rank, often credit them with wisdom, when there has been
no proof of its existence.

II. FoLty WILL CERTAINLY, SOONER OR LATER, BE REVEALED BY CIRCUMSTANCES. A
little folly is the ill savour that vitiates the perfume. The understanding of the fot
faileth him while he walketh by the way. The test is sure to be applied which will
prove whether thecoin is genuine or counterfeit. The hollow reputation must collapse.
A critical time comes when counsel has to be given, when action has to be taken, and
at such a time the folly of the pompous and pretentious fool is made manifest to all.
Sounding phrasvology may impose upon men for a season; but there are occasions
when something more than words is needed, and such occasions reveal the emptiness
and vanity of the foolish. Pedantry is not learning, profession is not religion, pretence
is not reality; neither can the show be, for any length of time, taken for the
substance.

III. FoLLy, THUS EXPOSED, DESTROYS A MAN’S REPUTATION AND INFLUENCE. The
revulsion is sudden and complete, and may even go to unreasonable lengths, It is
presumed that, because the highest expectations have becn disappointed, not even the
slightest respect or confidence is justifiable. A little folly outweighs wisdom and honour,

AppiicatTion. The chicf lesson of this passage is the value of sincerity, thorough-
ness, and genuinencss of character. It is not every man who has the knowledge, the
natural insight, the large experience of life, which go tomake up wisdom, But no man
need pretend to be what he is not; no man need proclaim himself a sage or a mentor ;
no man need claim for himself the deferential regard and homage of others. He who
will order his way by such light as he can gaiu by reflection, by the study of the
Scriptures, and by prayer, will not go far astray. Sincerity and modesty may not gain
a temporary reputation for profundity of wisdom; but they will not expose their
possessor to the humiliation and shame of him who, professing himself to be wise,
becomes manifest to aJl men as a fool.—T.


Ver. 4.—A pacifying spirit. The circumstances which suggested this admonition
“ere special; we seem to be introduced to the court of a powerful and arbitrary
Oriental sovereizn. The caprice and injustice of the monarch arouses the indignation
of the courtier, who is ready to rise in resentment and anger. But the counsel is
given, “Leave not thy place.” Resentment fans the flame of wrath; submission
assuages it. ‘‘ Yielding allayeth great offences.” Now, the circumstances apply only
to a few, but the principle which they suggest is of wide and gencral application. A
submissive and pacificatury spirit promotes harmony.

I, MEN MUST EXPECT TO ENCOUNTER ANGER AND ARROGANCE FROM THEIR FELLOW-
MEN. ‘hose who occupy positions of authority expect deference from their inferiors.
Birth, rai.k, station, are apt to foster an arbitrary habit in their possessors. And
whilst there are many and beautiful exceptions to this rule, especially owing to the
influence of Christ’s example and spirit, it is not to be questioned that arrogance is the
special fault of the officially great.

II. ANGER AND ARROGANCE NATURALLY AROUSE RESENTMENT. We are so consti-
tuted that, apart from the controlling and restraining influence of reason and religious
principles, we return blow for blow. Anger enkindles anger, as flint and steel enkindle
fire. Hence words are spoken which may never be forgotten, and may ever be regretted ;
estrangements take place which may lead to bitter feuds; blows may follow, or duels,
or war.

III. THE WIsDOM AND THE DUTY OF SELF-CONTROL. The common proverb is, “ It
takes two to make a quarrel.” Because offence is given, offence necd not be taken;
because injury and insult are inflicted, it does not of necessity follow that they should
be avenged. Several motives concur to restrain resentment. 1. Self-respect. The
man who loses temper and self-commmand, upon subsequent reflection, feels himself so
much less a man; he despises himself. 2. Prudence. This is the motive specially
relied upon in this passage. In dealing with “the ruler,” whose spirit rises up


ca, x. 1—20,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 263
es at ET Se


against him, the courtier is reminded of the ruler’s power, and is admonished not to
provoke him to the exercise of that power, for in that case disfavour may lead to
disgrace and degradation. 3. Religious principle. This is the motive which, in the
case of the Christian, is most powerful. The example of the patient and meek
Redeemer, who reviled not again, and who besought mercy for his murderers, is never
absent from the mind of those who trust and love him. His love constrains, hia
precept controls, hisexample impels. And thus forbearance and forgiveness characterize
Christ’s disciples, in those circumstances in which otherwise resentment and revenge
wight animate the heart.

IV. THE PACIFYING POWER OF PATIENT suBMISsION. “ Yielding pacifieth [allayeth]
great offences.” It is not required that the injured party should approve the action of his
injurer; or affirmed that no opportunity may occur of just and dignified rebuke. But
silence, quietness of ae and control of natural impulse, will in many cases produce a
good result. He who bears wrong patiently is the stronger and better for the discipline;
and his demeanour may melt the wrong-doer to contrition, and will at all events lead him
to reflection. Thus the threatened conflict may be avoided ; a lesson may be adminis-
tered to the hasty and arrogant, and the best interests of society may be promoted.
Thus the Word of God is honoured, and witness is given to the power which Christ
possesses to subdue and govern the unruly nature of man.—T.


Vers. 5—7.—Social paradomes. The evil which the writer of Ecclesiastes here
eondemns is one of which the history of every nation affords many examples. Princes’
favourites have too often been chosen from amongst the worthless herd who seek their
own elevation and advantage by ministering to the vices of the young, profligate, and

werful. How many a reign has been marred by this mischief! How many a king

as been misled, to his own and his country’s harm, by the folly of choosing companions
and counsellors not for wisdom, sincerity, and patriotism, but because those chosen are
of congenial tastes and habits, or are flatterers and parasites !

J, THE ELEVATION OF FOOLISH FAVOURITES TO POWER 18 INJURIOUS TO THOSE 80
PROMOTED. Men who might have been respectable and useful in a lowly station are
corrupted and morally debased by their elevation to posts of undeserved dignity and
emolument, Their heads are turned by the giddy height to which they are raised.

Il. THe ELEVATION OF FOOLISH FAVOURITES TO POWER I3 INJURIOUS TO THE PRINCES
WHOM THEY PROFESS TO sERVE. What kings and rulers need is to be told the truth.
It is important that they should know the actual state and needs of the nation. And
it is important that any weakness or wrong bias, natural or acquired, should be cor-
rected. But the fools whoare set in high places make it their one great rule of conduct
never to utter unpalatable truth. They assume the faultlessness of their master ; they
paint the condition of his subjects in glowing colours, and give the ruler all the credit
for national prosperity. Their insincerity and flattery are morally injurious to the
prince, who by the companionship of the wise might have been morally benefited.

Il], THE ELEVATION OF FOOLISH FAVOURITES TO POWER IS INJURIOUS TO THE
community. ‘Ihe example of injustice thus presented is discouraging to the upright
and depressing to the reflecting. The throne becomes unpopular, and the people
generally are demoralized. The evil is no doubt greater in despotic than in consti-
tutional states, for these latter afford fewer opportunities for rapacity and oppression.
Yet nothing more injuriously affects the community generally than the spectacle
of a court which prefers folly to wisdom, fashion to experience, vice to virtue, frivolity


to piety. —T.


Vers, 8, 9.—The rebound of evil. Under these picturesque and impressive figures of
speech, the Preacher appears to set forth the important moral lesson, that they who
work harm and wrong to their fellow-men shall not themselves escape with impunity.

I. TH# SIGNS AND THE SIN OF MALICE. The case is one of intentional, deliberate
malevolence, working itself out in acts of mischief and wrong. Such a spirit so
expressing itself may be characterized (1) as a perversion of natural sentiment; (2) as
a wrong to our social nature, and a violation of the conditions of our social life; and (3)
as in flagrant contradiction to the commands of God, and the precepts of our gracious


and compassionate Saviour.


264 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [ou. x. 1—20.


IL. Tue RereiBuTion oF MALice. The proverbial language of the text is paralleled
by somewhat similar apophthegms in various languages, as, for example, in the
Oriental proverb, “ Curses, like chickens, come home to roost.” 1. Such retribution
is often wrought by the ordinary operation of natural laws. The story of the pirate-
rover who was wrecked upon the crags of Aberbrothock, from which he himself had cut
off the warning bell, is an instance familiar to our minds from childhood. 2, Retribu-
tion is sometimes effected by the action of the laws enforced in all civilized communities,
The lea talionis, “an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth,” may be taken as an example
of a principle the applications uf which are discernible in all the various states of
society existing among men. 3. Those who escape the penalties of nature and the
indignation of their fellow-men cannot escape the righteous judgment of God; they
shall not go unpunished.—T.


Ver. 10.—Force and wisdom. The homely adage in the first part of this verse
prepares for the broad general statement by which it is followed.

J]. IN MECHANICAL UNDERTAKINGS THE SUPERIORITY OF SKILL TO BRUTE FORCE Is
MOST APPARENT. This is obvious in the superiority of the workmanship of the civilized


* and cultured to that of the barbarian.


Il. WispoM Has A VAST ADVANTAGE IN THE ORDINARY AFFAIRS OF HUMAN LIFE.
The old fairy stories usually represented the muscular giant as a simpleton easily out-
witted by the youth or the dwarf; the lesson being that mere strength avails but little
for those ends which men most seek and prize. It is wisdom which is profitable to
direct—a truth which applies not merely to mechanics, but to the various arts which men
cultivate. What vocation is there in which thought, investigation, the adaptation of
means to ends, a calm deliberate judgment, are not serviceable? It is the wise who
reap the harvest of life, who sway the realm of humanity.

If]. WispoM IS PRE-EMINENTLY OF SERVICE IN ALL TRUE RELIGIOUS LIFE AND
ENTERPRISE. It is true that human wisdom is depreciated in some passages of
Holy Writ. But careful attention will show that it is only the lower type of wisdom
which inspiration disparages. They who have only “the wisdom of this world,” who
are “ wise in their own conceit,” are indeed condemned, But, on the other hand, they
are approved who receive the wisdom of God in Christ, and who are wise unto salvation.
It is the enlightening influence of God’s Holy Spirit that leads to an appreciation of
the gospel itself, and that directs those whose endeavour and aim it is to bring their
fellow-men into the enjoyment of those blessings which that gospel secures.—T.


Vers. 11—15.—The obtrusiveness and the condemnation of folly. Although some
of the language employed in this passage is unquestionably obscure, the general tenor
of it is clear enough. The contrast which is drawn between wisdom and folly is what
we meet with, under other forms, in other portions of the book, and the exposure and
censure of the thoughts and the ways of the fool are fitted to warn the young against
forsaking the rough but safe paths of true wisdom.

I, FoLLY 18 SHOWN IN THE UNNECESSARY MULTIPLICATION OF woRDs. Fools
speak when there is no occasion, when they have nothing to say, or when they have
already said all that was needful.

Il, FoLLY REVEALS ITSELF, THOUGH WITHOUT PROVOCATION. It cannot be concealed ;
it is obtrusive and glaring. The fool is his own enemy: “his lips will swallow up
himself.”

111, Fouy Is DISPLAYED IN DOGMATIC UTTERANCES UPON MATTERS WHICH ARE
BEYOND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE. ‘T'here are many subjects upon which modesty and
reticence are required by wisdom. Especially is this the case with regard to the
future. But it is presumed in this passage that the fool will not restrain himself from
pronouncing upon what is beyond human knowledge or human prescience.

IV, FoLLy 18 WEARISOME TO THOSE WHO WITNESS THE WORKS AND WHO LISTEN
TO THE WORDS BY WHICH IT REVEALS ITSELF.

V. FoLLY 18 MANIFESTED IN INCOMPSTENCY FOR THE MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC
aFrairs, The fool “knoweth not how to go to the city,” te. how to transact public
business, and to give advice regarding civic action.


VI, FoLLy Is sURE TO issUE IN MISCHIEF AND DISASTER. It is sometimes repre-


cu. x. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 265


—_e_—— i


sented that fools can do no harm; that real mischief is wrought by malice, by criminal
designs and actions. But a careful inquiry into the facts would show that very much
of the evil that afflicts society is brought to pass by mere folly. The Hebrews and the
Greeks were agreed in representing wisdom as a cardinal virtue. It is men’s duty to
cultivate wisdom. If they neglect to do so, it matters not that they have no criminal
intentions; the absence of wisdom must needs lead to conduct which will involve
themselves and others in much suffering, and even in terrible calamities.—T.


Vers. 16, 17.—Statesmanship. It is sometimes assumed that moral qualities are
unimportant in relation to political affairs. If a king be brave in his warlike expedi-
tions, splendid in his court, and affable in his demeanour; if a statesman be sagacious
in counsel and determined in action, it is too generally assumed that nothing further is
wanting to secure national greatness and prosperity. The writer of Ecclesiastes looked
far deeper, and saw the necessity of a self-denying and laborious character in order to
true kingly and statesmanlike service.

I. INCOMPETENCE AND SELF-INDULGENOE IN THOSE WHO OCCUPY HIGH PLACES ARE
4 CURSE TO A NATION. Men who are flung into power by the wave of royal
favouritism, or by popular caprice and applause, are apt to use their exalted station as a
means to personal enjoyment and to the gratification of vanity. Statesmen who pass
their time in luxury and social ostentation will certainly neglect the public interests.
They account their power and rank as their possession, and not as @ sacred trust.
Their example tends to debase the national morals, and to lower the standard of public
life. They surround themselves with flatterers, and they neglect their proper duty,
until they awake to find their country plunged into calamity or threatened with
enslavement.

II. SELF-DENIAL, EXPERIENCE, AND DILIGENCE ARE QUALITIES WHIOH ENSURE TRUE
STATESMANSHIP. In despotic governments it is obvious that the national prosperity
depends very largely upon the patriotism and justice, the assiduity and unwearied
devotion to duty, of those in high station. The conditions of national life under a
constitutional government are different. Yet there is no political community in which
unselfishness, temperance, and diligent application to the public service are not
valuable qualities on the part of those who deliberate and decide upon great public
questions, and of those who administer a nation’s affairs.

AppLicaTion. In modern states, where the representative principle so largely
obtains, great power is placed in the hands of the citizens and subjects. With them
accordinely rests much of the responsibility for the righteous government and the true
prosperity of the nation. It behoves Christian men to beware of being misled by party
spirit, and so of overlooking the grave moral faults of those who solicit their confidence.
It is in the power of the people to raise to positions of eminence and authority men
whose aim is not personal aggrandizement and enjoyment, but the public good. If
this power be wisely and firmly exercised, vice and crime will be repressed, order and
liberty will be maintained, and the nation will maintain a high position and exercise
a noble influence among the nations of the earth. Then the spectator will be inspired
to utter the exclamation, “ Happy art thou, O Jand!”—T.


Ver. 18.—The curse of sloth. Religious teachers sre sometimes unwilling to touch
upon common faults, such as are noticeable by every observer as prevailing too generally
in the everyday life of their fellow-men. The Scriptures give no countenance to such
negligence, but, on the contrary, deal faithfully with those errors and evil habits which
are alien from the Christian character, and which are injurious to human society.
Slothfulness was peculiarly hateful to the writer of this book, who inculcated diligence
as a religious duty, and exhibited in homely but effective ways the results of its
prevalence. } :

I. TEMPTATIONS TO SLOTH ARE MANY. Work must be done, some will admit; but
it may be left to others, or it may be put off to a more convenient season. Work need
not be done, others will declare; much may be left undone which some people think
of importance, but which is not really so. Upon the plea of ill health, or mental
inability, or preoccupation, multitudes, in this world where there is so much to be
done, sink into slothful, indelent habits and a useless life,


266 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. x. 1—20,


ee eee SS


II. Tae FoLLY oF SLODH 18 EASILY MADE EvIDENT. 1. The slothful man is his
own enemy, Had he exerted himself and exercised his powers, he would have grown
an abler and a better man. Who does not know persons with undeniable gifts who
have “ wrapped their talent in a napkin,” and who have morally deteriorated, until
they have become worthless members of society? 2. The slothful man wrongs society.
Every man is bora into this world to do a work for the general good. To live in idle-
ness and comfort upon the produce of others’ toil is to inflict a positive injury. Others
have to labour in order that the idle may be fed. Work is left undone for which the
indolent possess, it may be, some peculiar gift. For the life of the slothful the world
is none the better.

III. THe sIN OF SLOTH Is CONDEMNED By THE Worp oF Gop. The Book ot
Proverbs contains some very striking reflections and statements upon this point. And
for the Christian it is enough to consider the example of the Lord Jesus, who with
all his consecrated energy devoted himself to his Father’s will and work. How alien
from the Master’s spirit is the habit of the indolent! We cannot lose sight of the fact
that, in the last judgment, the “wicked and slothful servant” must hear words ot
condemnation. G

IV. PRESERVATIVES FROM SLOTH MAY BE FOUND IN THE PROVISIONS OF Gop's
apace. 1. Prayer prompts to watchfulness and toil. 2. Attention to the counsels
and admonitions of God’s Word cannot fail to be serviceable in delivering us from
temptations to slothfulness. 3. Meditation upon the example of our Saviour and Lord
will stimulate to diligence and zeal. They who by the indwelling of his Spirit are
one with him will share his devotion to the Father’s will, his consecration to the
welfare of mankind.—T.


Ver. 1.—The dead fly in the ointment. “So doth a little folly outweigh wisdom
and honour ” (Revised Me It is a fact well worth a wise man’s thought, that
the presence of even a very little evil is found to be enough to counterbalance or undo
much that is good. We find this in circumstance, in action, in character. Our every-
day life supplies many illustrations.

if THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF A MAN. Not without reason does the moralist speak of
the “one crumpled leaf” spoiling the worth of the “ bed of roses.” Ahab still makes
himself miserable because he cannot have Naboth’s vineyard in addition to all his
property. It is not only true that “some murmur when their sky is clear” if one
**gmnall speck of dark appear” in their heavens; it is true that very many do. If we
are depending on our surroundings for our satisfaction, we shall give one more
illustration of “the dead fly in the ointment.”

1]. Human apvooacy. A man may present an important case to his audience; he
may have made diligent and ample preparation; he may deliver his address with
much logical force, with much felicity of style, with much animation of spirit; and
yet he may fail to convince, and he may lose his cause through one mistake. He may
make use of one offensive expression, or he may produce one palpably weak argument,
on which his opponents fasten; then all the good gained by his persuasiveness is
ie by ee harm done by his simple indiscretion. Much wisdom is outweighed by a
ittle folly.

III, HUMAN CHARACTER, AND THE INFLUENCE IT EXERTS. We are always acting
upon our kindred and our neighbours by our character, and by the conduct of which it
is the source. And, as a rule, the good and wise man is thus helping to make others
good and wise; but there may be the “ dead fly in the ointment” here. Truthfulness,
righteousness, purity, kinduess,—these qualities are calculated to tell powerfully upon
those who daily witness them; but if there be in the midst of these an admixture of
severity, or of exaggeration, or of parsimoniousness, or of sarcasm, much if not most of
the good influence may be lost; the virtues and the graces are forgotten, while the
oue blemish is remembered, The same thing, in much the same way, applies to—

1V. [Luma REPUTATION. A man may be building up a most honourable reputation
through many ak of toilful and virtuous life; he may succeed in winning the
regard of his fellow-citizens, and then by one serious indiscretion—pecuniary, social,
domestic, political, ecclesiastical—he may have to step down from his high position,
It way not be a crime or @ sin, but a serious mistake, an act in which he was very


vu. X, 1—20.] EOOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 267
~ ae EE


ill advised, a Preaeding in which his judgment was sidly at fault—but it is enough;
it upsets the fabric which had been laboriously constructed, and but little honour wqill
be accorded to him.

1, In our judgment of others we should distinguish between the superficial and the
essential, between the exceptional and the common. 2. We should refuse to allow
the one insignificant evil to disturb the harmony of our spirit, to spoil the brightnesa
and excellency of our life. 3. We are bound to be devoutly careful lest we permit our
influence over others to be materially weakened by a blemish in our character or wa
indiscretion in our conduct.—C.


Ver. 8 (former part).—Sin suicidal, “He that sinneth against me wrongeth his
own soul” (Prov. viii. 36); he that seeks to do injury to others brings trouble upon
himself; with the measure and after the manner with which he decals will he himself
be dealt with. Evil intents, as also good ones, recoil upon their -author—in the one
case in penalty, and in tle other in blessing. As we observe, we see that—

1, EVIL BEGETS EVIL AFTER ITS OWN KIND, 1. Violence begets violence. ‘They
tliat take the sword perish with the sword ;” not, of course, with absolute and unfail-
ing regularity, but generally; so commonly that the professional warrior and, sti!]
more, the uncontrollably passionate man may expect to come to a violent end. But,
apart from fatal consequences, it is a constantly recurring fact that men give back
blow for blow, litigation for litigation, hard measure for hard measure. 2. Cunning
begets cunning. The crafty man is the likeliest of all to be caught with guile) Men
have a peculiar pleasure and take especial pride in outwitting the neighbour who is
trying to take advantage of them. So that he who is always laying traps for his
fellows is in greatest danger of being himself entrapped. 3. Contempt begets aversion.
There are those who from the pedestal of (often imaginary) superiority look down
ipon their companions with supercilious disregard; their attitude is one of haughtiness,
their language and conduct that of condescension. These proud ones suffer as they
deserve; they pay an appropriate penalty; their neighbours resent their assumption;
they pass them by with aversion; they speak of them with condemnation; they leave
them to loneliness and friendlessness. 4. Slander begets reproaci. Men that are
unscrupulously complaining of others, hastily or ill-naturedly ascribing to them
mistakes or misdeeds, are the men whose own shortcoming is quickly detected and
unsparingly condemned (see Matt. vii. 1, 2). Thus sin (or folly) simites itself; it
thinks to injure others, but it finds in the end that the stone which it threw up into
the air comes down upon its own head. On the other hand, we see—

II, Goop BEGETS GooD AFTER ITS KIND. 1, The man of peace is permitted to dwell
in peace. 2, Fraukness, sincerity, are met with reciprocated open-mindedness and
honesty. 8. Honour rendered to worth and to our common manhwod creates respect,
and calls forth the best that isin men, 4. Generosity in judgment receives in return
a kind and brotherly estimate of its own actions and character. \Vhile he that digs
a pit for others falls into it himself, he that raises a ladder for others’ elevation himself
rises upon its rungs.—O.


Ver. 8 (latter part).—The broken hedge. There are many fences which we have
constructed, or which the Lord of our life has erected, and we discover that if we break
them we shall find ourselves attacked and bitten by the serpent which is within or
upon the other side.

I. THE HEDGE OF SOCIAL REQUIREMENTs. There are certain understood enactments
of society which must be regarded by us. They may have no claim to be moral lawe-
they may not have any place in the statutes of the land; still they are obligatory
upon us. If we are so self-willed or self-sufficient, if we are so ignorant or so careless,
as to violate these, we must pay the appropriate penalty of general disregard. Kven
though we be free from all vice and all crime, we shall be numbered among trans-
gressors of tho unwritten law of society, and our position will be lowered, our influence
will be lessened, our reputation will be reduced, our usefulness will be impaired.

Il. Tux HEDGE oF HUMAN Law. Himan iaw requires of us that we shall pay the
debts we owe, that we shall make our contribution to the protection of the suciety of
which we are membera, that we shall respect the rights of our neighbours, HKreaking


268 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACEER. [om x. 1—20,


this hedge, we pay the penalty which the law inflicts; this “serpent” may be only a
small fine, or it may be loss of liberty or even life.

IIL. Tae HEDGE oF Divine LimiTaTion. God has set a limit to our faculties, and
thus to our enjoyment, our activity, our achievement; and if we heedlessly or

_ambitiously pass this limit, we are bitten and we suffer. If we break the hedge of:
1. Physical appropriation, or exercise, we suffer in bodily sickness, in nervous
prostration, in premature decline. 2. Mental activity. If we think, study, strive,
labour on at our desk, beyond the limit of our powers, we pay the penalty in irrita-
bility, in softening of the brain, in insanity. 3. Spiritual faculty. If we attempt to
enter regions that are beyond our God-given powers, we end either in a scepticism
which robs us of our highest heritage, or in a mysticism which fascinates and
tnisleads us.

IV. THE HED@E OF CONSCIENCE. Conscience commands us, with imperative voice,
to keep well within the line of purity, of sobriety, of truthfulness, of reverence. If
we go beyond that line, we suffer. We suffer: 1. The condemnation of God. 2. The
disapproval of the wise and good. 3. The reproach of our own soul. 4. The loss of
self-respect and the consequent enfeeblement of our character ; and of all losses this is,

thaps, the worst, for it is one of a series of downward steps at the foot of which
is death.

1. Be right at heart with God; you will then have within you a force of spiritual
rectitude which will keep you in the path of wisdom and virtue. 2. Be vigilant;
ever watching character and conduct, so that you are not betrayed unawares into
error and transgression. 3. Be docile; always ready to receive the counsel and heed
the warning of true and faithful friends. 4. Seek daily the guidance and guardianship


of God.—O,
sb Vers. 9 (latter part), 10.—Good workmanship—ourselves and owr tools. This much-
vs pon “= debated passage may suggest to us some lessons which may not have been in the mind
_| “* 88%» of the Preacher, but which are appropriate to our time and our circumstances. The


tree,


_ ¥ question of ck a te © man en sore me ey palgrieg on two bees his
“<_ own strength and skill, and on the quality of the tools he is using. weak and
Giried man with “post tools will not 5 mee much as a strong experienced man
—with good ones in his hand. 22),
I. THE FIELD oF woRK. This is very broad; it includes not only: 1. All manual “~*~
labour, to which the passage more immediately applies; but: 2. All business trans: 7/>...
actions, all household activities, all matters of government in which men are often
“the tools” with which work is done. And it includes that to which our attention, |
may be especially directed: 3. All Christian work. ‘his is a great field of its own, 9% mi
with a vast amount of work demanding to be done. Here is work (1) of vast magni- “Ai
tude ; (2) of great delicacy; (8) of extreme difficulty, for it means nothing less than
that change of condition which results from a change of heart and life. In view of
this particular field we regard—
II. THE CONDITIONS OF GOOD WORKMANSHIP. And these are: 1. Good tools. Of
these tools are: (1) Divine truth; and to be really good for the great purpose we have
at heart we need to hold and to utter this truth in (a) its integrity, not presenting or
exaggerating one or two aspects only, but offering it in its fulness aad symmetry ;
(6) its purity, uncorrupted by the imaginations and accretions of our own mind;
(c) its adaptation to the special spiritual needs of those to whom we minister. (2) An
elastic organization; not such as will not admit of suiting the necessities of men as
they arise, but one that is flexible, and that will lend itself to the ever-varying con-
ditions, spiritual and temporal, in which men are found, and in which they have to be
helped and healed. 2. Good workmen. Those that have: (1) Wisdom “ profitable to
direct,” that have tools, skill, discretion, a sound judgment, a comprehensive view.
(2) Strength ; those who can use bad tools if good ones are not at band, who can work
on with sustained energy, who can “ bear the burden and heat of the day,” who can
stand criticiam and censoriousness, who will not be daunted by apparent failure or by
occasional desertion, who can wait “ with long patience” for the day of harvest.
1. Seek to be supplied with the most perfect tools in Christian work; for not enly
will good tools do much more work than poor ones, but bad tools will result in mischief


p %


all Ne
Mt wea


on. x. 1—20.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 269


to the workman. “He that cleaveth ... is endangered.” MHalf-truths, or truth . i
unbalanced by its complement, or a badly constructed organization, may do real pres of h tH
and serious harm to those who preach the one or work through the other. 2, Put WLS rt
_your.whole-strength—physical, mental, spiritual—into the work of the Lord...With

the very best tools we can wield, we shall wish we had done—more..than..we.shall _
Saal hava. accomplished, when our last blow has been struck for the Master and for

man nd Oe Manse ;
Spot eae rey


Vers. 17, 18.— Rutn—tts forms and its sources. A material “ruin” may be a very
picturesque and even pleasant sight, when that which has answered its end I}aes its
form and does well to disappear. But otherwise a ruin is a pitiable spectacle.

I. THREE FORMS OF RUIN. 1. Health. When a man should be in his prime, with
all his physical and mental forces at their best; when he should be able to work
effectively and continuously, and should be the stay of his home and a strength to his
Church and to his friends; and when, instead of this, he is worn, feeble, incapable,
obviously declining, and clearly drawing towards the end,—we have a melancholy ruin.
2, Circumstance. The once wealthy merchant, or the once powerful family, or the
once strong and influential state, is brought down to poverty, helplessness, and general
disregard ; this also is a pitiful sizht. But the worst of al) is that which relates to:
8. Character. When a man once upright, pure, godly, respecting himself and living
in the enjoyment of general esteem, is brought down to moral ruin and becomes a
human wreck, then we see the saddest sight beneath the sun. What was once the
fairest and noblest thing in the world—a sound, strong, beautiful human character—
has lost all its excellency and become foul and ugly. How does this happen?
Here are—

II. Two sources oF Ruin. 1. Self-indulgence. To “eat for strength and not for
revelry ” (drunkenness) is the right and the becoming thing; “to éat (feast) in the
morning,” when the precious hours should be given to duty,—this is a shameful and a
fatal thing. Self-indulgence, which constantly tends to become greater and grosser,
leads down fast to feebleness, to poverty, to demoralization, to shame, to death.
2. Idleness, or carelessness. (1) The man who does not think it worth his while to
study the laws of health, and to take pains to keep them, need not wonder if he
becomes weak and sickly, if his life is threatened. (2) The man who pursues his
pleasure when he should be doing his work will certainly find his business “ decaying,”
his credit failing, his prospects of success “dropping through.” So also the housewife,
the student, the minister, the secretary, the statesman. (3) The man who treats his
own spirit as something of secondary importance, who does not read that he may be
enlightened, who does not worship that he may be edified, who does not pray that he
may be guarded and sustained, who does not seek the companionship of the good
and fellowship with Christ, who leaves his spiritual nature at the mercy of all the
adverse forces that are circling round him and acting on him, may expect that his soul
will be impaired, that his character will decay, that the most precious “house” which
man can build will fall, and great and sad will be the fall of it (Matt. vii. 27).—C.


Ver. 1.—Dead flies, Among the Jews oil rendered fragrant by being mixed with
precious drugs was used for many different purposes. With it priests and kings were
anointed when they entered upon their offices; guests at the tables of the rich were
treated to it as a luxury. It was used medicinally for outward application to the
bodies of the sick, and with it corpses and the clothes in which they were wrapped
were besprinkled before burial. Very great care was needed in the preparation of the
material used for such special purposes. Hlaborately confected as the ointment was, it
was easily spoiled and rendered worthless. It was, accordingly, necessary not only to
take great pains in making it, but also in preserving it from contamination when made.
If the vase or bottle in which it was put were accidentally or carelessly left open, its
contents might soon be destroyed. A dead fly would soon corrupt the ointment, and
turn it into a pestilent odour. So, says the Preacher, a noble and attractive character
may be corrupted and destroyed by a little folly—an insignificant-looking fault or
weakness may outweigh great gifts and attainments. It is nota case of the unthinking
multitude taking advantage of a foible, or inconsistency, or little slip, to depreciate the


270 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, _[on. x. 1—20.


character of one raised far above them in wisdom and honour, in order to bring it down
to their level; of envy leading to an unjust and ungrateful sentence being pronounced
upon an almost faultless character. But the warning is that deterioration may really
set in, the precious ointment be actually changed into a disgusting odour, the wisdom
and honour be outweighed by the little folly (“‘ outweigh,” Revised Version), The
same teaching is given in the New Testament. In 1 Corinthians St. Paul warns his
readers that their toleration of a heinous sin in one of their members was poiaoxing
the whole spiritual life of the Church (ch. v.). The fervour of their religious emct&ze,
the hatred of siu and love of holiness which had led them to separate themselves firoin
heathen society, the aspirations and endeavours after purity and righteousness which
naturally follow upon an intelligent and earnest acceptance of Christian truth, were
all being undermined by their omission of the duty that lay upon them, that of
isolating the gross offender, and of expelling him from their community if he gave no
signs of penitence and amendment. They might themselves be orthodox in belief and
unblamable in conduct, but this sin would soon, if unchecked, lower the whole tone of
the community, and nullify all the good that had been attained to, ‘ Know ye not,”
he said, “that. little leaven leaveneth the whole lump?” It was impossible to allow
the fault to remain and to keep the evil influence it exerted within bounds; it would
spread like infection, and be persistent until it had corrupted the whole community.
And what is true of a society is true of an individual. The fault which shows itself in
a character is not like a stain or flaw in a marble statue, which is confined to one spot,
and is no worse after the lapse of years, but like a sore in a living body, which weakens
and may destroy the whole organism. One cause why the evil influence spreads is
that we are not on our guard against it, and it may grow to almost ungovernable
strength before we are really convinced that there is any danger. We can recognize at
once great errors and heinous vices, and the alarm and disgust they excite, prepare us to
resist them; but little follies and weaknesses often fill us with an amused contempt for
them, which blinds us to their great power for evil. The dead body of the fly in the
vase of ointment is so insignificant a source of corruption, that it surprises us to discover
that the fermentation it has produced has tainted the whole mass. Weight for weight,
there is an enormous disproportion between the precious fluid and the wretched little
object which has corrupted it; yet there is no ignoring of the fact that the mischief
has been done. In like manner does a little folly outweigh wisdom and honour; an
uncorrected fault spreads its influence throughout a whole character and life. How
often has the lesson been brought home to us, both in our reading of histories and
biographies and in our own experience, of the widespread mischief done by a small
foible or weakness |—


“The little rift within the lute
That by-and-by will make the music mute.”


So numerous are the sources from which danger arises, that a long list might be made
of the little sins by which the characters of many good men and women are often
marred—indolence, selfishness, love wf ease, procrastination, indecision, rudeness
irritability, over-sensitiveness to praise or blame, vanity, boastfulness, talkativeness,
love of gossip, undue laxity, undue severity, want of self-control over appetites and
passions, obstinacy, parsimony. Such are some of the follies which outweigh wisdom
and honour—which stamp the character of a man as unworthy of that respect which
his gifts and graces would otherwise have secured for him. Numerous though these
es they may be reduced to two great classes—faults of weakness and faults of
strength.

I, Faunts oF weakness. This class is that of those which are largely negative, and
consist principally in omission to give a definite and worthy direction to the nature ;
e.g. want of self-control, love of ease, indolence, procrastination, indecision selfishness,
heartlessness. That these are faults which create widespread mischief, and excite a
general contempt for the characters of those in whom they appear, will scarcely be
denied by any, and illustrations of them are only too abundant. Want of self-control
over appetites and passions led David into the foulest crimes, which, though sincerely
and passionately repented of, were most terribly avenged, and have for ever left a stain
upon his mame, Love of ease is the only fault whieh is implied in the description of


}


cH. X. 1—20.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 271
—————


the rich man in the parable (Luke xvi. 19), a desire to be comfortable and avoid all
that was disagreeable, but it led him to such callous indifference to the miseries of his
fellows as disqualified him for happiness in the world to come, A similar fault stained
the character of that young ruler who came running to Christ and asked, “ Good
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?” From his youth up he had obeyed
the commandments, and his ingenuous, sweet character and disposition attracted the
love of the Saviour. But his love of the world made him unwilling to practise the
self-denial needed to make him perfect. He went away sorrowful, for he had great
possessions (Mark x. 17—22). His cowardice that led him to make “ the great refusal”
was the dead fly that corrupted the precious ointment. A very striking illustration
of the deterioration of a character through the sin of weakness and indecision is to be
found in the life of Eli. He was a man possessed of many beautiful qualities of mind
and spirit—gentle, unselfish, devoid of envy or jealousy, devout and humble; but
was “‘a wavering, feeble, powerless man, with excellent intentions but an utter want
of will.” His parental indulgence led him to exercise no restraint over his children,
and the consequence was that when they grew up their conduct was grossly scandalous
and depraved, His authority and power as aruler were not used to check the evils
which in his heart he loathed, and so his folly outweighed all the wisdom and honour
he possessed. His good qualities have not preserved his memory from contempt.
For contempt is the feeling instinctively excited in those who witness moral weakness
and indecision. This is the sting of the rebuke addressed to the Church of Laodicea,
“T know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot: I would thou wert cold or hot,
So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of
my mouth” (Rev. iii. 15, 16). In Dante’s description of the lower world special
infamy is attached to this class of offenders—that of those who have never really lived,
who have never awakened to take any part either in good or evil, to care for anything
but themselves. They are unfit for heaven, and hell scorns to receive them. ‘“ This
miserable mode the dreary souls of those sustain who lived without blame and without
praise. They were mixed with that caitiff choir of angels, who were not rebellious
nor were faithful to God, but were for themselves. Heaven chased them forth to keep
his beauty from impair; and the deep hell receives them not, for the wicked would have
some glory over them. They are unknown to fame. Mercy and judgment disdain
them. Let us not speak of them, but look and pass.”

Il. Fauuts oF sTRENGTH. This class includes those faults which are of a positive
character, and consist largely in an abuse of qualities which might have been virtues,
For these are not open vices by which characters otherwise good are depraved, but
insignificant, unsuspected sources of danger. The very strength of character by which
men and women are distinguished-may lead, by over-emphasis, into very offensive
deterioration. Thus firmness may degenerate into obstinacy, frugality into parsimony,
liberality into extravagance, light-heartedness into frivolity, candour into rudeness,
and soon. And these are faults which disgust and repel, and cause us to overlook
even very great merits in a character; and not only so, but, if unchecked, gradually
nullify those merits, We may find in the character of Christ all the virtues which
go to make up holiness so admirably balanced that no one is over-prominent, and,
therefore, no one pushed to that excess which so often mars human excellence. Over
against the sterner and more masculine qualities of mind and spirit we find those that
are gracious and tender, and both within such limits as render his a faultless and
perfect example of goodness. His tender compassion for the sinful did not lead him
to condone their faults or to lower the standard of holiness for their sake. His righteous
indignation against sin did not show itself in impatience, censoriousness, or irritability,
as he met it from day to day. “ His tender tone was the keen edge of his reproofs,
and his unquestionable love infused solemnity into every warning.”

Two practical lessons may be drawn from our text. The first is that all human
excellence is exposed to risk. It is not sufficient to have attained to a certain measure
of righteousness ; there needs also to be care against declining from it. The ointment
carefully distilled must be guarded against corruption, And the second is that the
danger often springs from insignificant and unsuspected quarters. The dead fly, carried
by some stray breeze into the unguarded vial, is the centre of a fermentation which
in a yery short time will destroy the value of all its contenta.—J. W,


#72 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER _ [ou x. 1—20,


Vers, 2—15.—From the second verse of this chapter to the fifteenth we have a series
of proverbs loosely strung together, but all bearing upon the wholesome influence of
wisdom and the baneful effects of folly in the varying circumstances of daily life. It
would be waste of ingenuity to try to show any logical connection between the proverbs
that are thus crowded together in a small space. And we must content ourselves with
a few elucidatory remarks upon them in the order in which they come.

L A DOUBLE PROVERB ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN WISDOM AND FOLLY. (Vers. 2, 3.)
“The wise man’s heart is at his right hand; but a fool’s at his left ;” better, “ inclines
towards his rizht, towards his left.” The heart of the wise man leads him in the proper
direction, that of the fool leads him astray. It would be absurd to speak of their hearts
as differently situated. The 5 is that of direction; and that which is at the right hand
means the duty and work which belong to us, that at the left what concerns us less,
The wise man recognizes the path of duty, the fool wanders aimlessly away from it.
Others give a slightly different turn to the thought. “The one with his heart, ¢.e. his
mind, ready, at his right side, as he walks along the track that images human life, ready
to sustain and guide him; the other, the fool with his wits at the left side, not available
when needed to lean upon” (Bradley). The fool proclaims his folly to all (ver. 3);
every step he takes reveals his deficiency, but, so far from being ashamed of himself,
he displays his absurdity as though it were something to be proud of.

II. WisDoM A PROTECTION IN TRYING CIRCUMSTANCES. (Vers. 4—7.) The first picture
(ver. 4) is that of the court of a despotic king, where an official has either deservedly
or undeservedly incurred the anger of the sovereign (“‘ spirit” equivalent to “anger,”
as in Judg. viii. 3; Prov. xxix. 11). The natural feeling of indignation or resentment
would prompt such a one to throw up the office entrusted to him, and by so doing
probably draw down on himself a still greater storm of anger. The wise courtier will
yield to the blast and not answer wrath with wrath, and either pacify the anger he has
deservedly incurred, or, if he be innocent, by his patience under injury, avoid giving
real cause for offence. We must remember that it is of an Hastern court our author
is speaking, in which the Divine right of kings, and the duty of passive obedience
on the part of subjects, are doctrines which it would be thought impious to deny.
Similar advice is given in Prov. xv.1. It is not to be supposed, however, that the
Preacher regarded all existing governments as commanding respect, and taught only
servile maxims. In vers. 5—7 he speaks of grievous inequalities in the state ; faults of
rulers, the frequent exaltation of the base and the depression of the worthy. His words
are studiously cautious, but yet they describe the evil in sufficiently clear terms. It
may often be prudent to bow to the wrath of rulers, but rulers are not always in the
right. One class of evils he had seen arising from “ something like an error ” (so cautious
is he of speaking evil of dignities), which proceedeth from the ruler—the selection of
unworthy men for hizh positions in the state. “Folly is set in great dignity, and the
rich sit in low place.” By therich he means the nobles—those endowed with ample
inheritances received from a line of ancestors who have had the leisure, and opportunities
and means for training themselves for serving the state, and from whom a wise kin
would naturally choose counsellors and magistrates. But in Oriental courts, where “the
eunuch and the barber held the reins of power,” men of no reputation or character had
a chance of promotion. And even in Western courts and more modern times the same
kind of evils has been only too common, as the history of the reigns of Edward II. and
James I. of England, and of Louis XI. and Henry III. of France, abundantly proves.
The reason for making favourites of low-born and unprincipled adventurers is not far to
seek ; they have ever been ready tools for accomplishing the designs of unscrupulous
princes, for doing services from which men who valued their station and reputation in
society would shrink. “ Regibus multi,” says Grotius, “ suspecti qui excellunt sive
sapientia sive nobilitate aut opibus.” Even the Preacher’s self-control is insufficient to
suppress the indignation and contempt which any generous mind must feel at such a
state of matters, and he concentrates his scorn in the stinging sentence, “I have seen
servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants upon the earth ” (ver. 7). Among
the Persians only those of noble birth were permitted to ride on horseback. Thus one
of the circumstances of the special honour bestowed on Mordecai was his riding on horse-
back through the streets of the city (Esth. v. 8,9). But this distinction the Preacher
had seen set aside; his eyes had been offended by the spectacle of princes walking on


om. x.1—20.] - ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER 27


foot like common people, and slaves mounted on horses and clothed with authority
(Prov. xix. 10).
III. WispoM SHOWN IN PROVIDING AGAINST POSSIBLE DANGERS. (Vers. 8, 9.) We need
spend no time in the fruitless endeavour to connect vers. 8—11 with those that have
gone before. The writer seems to consider wisdom in another of its aspects. He has
Just spoken of it as prompting one who is under its influence to be patient and resigned
in the presence of irradicable evils ; he now speaks of it as giving foresight and caution
in the accomplishment of difficult and perhaps even dangerous tasks. He mentions
four undertakings in which there may be danger to life or limb. He that digs a pit
may accidentally fall into it; he that removes a crumbling wall may be bitten by
serpent that has sheltered itself in one of its crannies; the quarryman may be crushed
by one of the stones he has dislodged ; and the woodcutter may maim himself with his
own axe. Whether underneath this imagery he refers to the risks attending all
attempts to disturb the existing order of things and to overthrow the powers that be, one
cannot say. ‘‘ The sum of these four classes is certainly not merely that he who under-
takes a dangerous matter exposes himself to danger; the author means to say in this
series of proverbs which treat of the distinction between wisdom and folly, that the wise
man is everywhere conscious of his danger, and guards against it... . Wisdom has
just this value in providing against the manifold dangers and difficulties whieh every
undertaking brings with it ” (Delitzsch). p
IV. THE WISDOM OF ADAPTING MEANS TO ENDS. (Ver. 10.) Such, we think, is the <2.-0~
general meaning of the words, which are perhaps more difficult to interpret than any | #/>, » 44
others in the whole Book of Ecclesiastes. “If the iron be blunt,” if it will not readily “__$. _——"~_
lend itself to the work of felling a tree, more strength must be put forth, the stroke s
must be heavier to penetrate the wood. If there be little sagacity and preparation A) Ari
before entering on an enterprise, greater force will be needed to carry it out. The fore- |, ~° kis
sight which leads to sharpening the axe will make the labour in which it is used much Me wis ha
easier. ‘ But wisdom is profitable to direct ” (ver. 10); it. suggests means serviceable..,.aa.4.—
for the end in view. _ It will save a useless expenditure of time and strengt ;
: . THE FOLLY OF TAKING PRECAUTIONS AFTER THE EVIL HAS BEEN DONE. (Ver. 1T:)”
“Tf the serpent bite before it be charmed, then is there no advantage in the
charmer ” (Revised Version). The picture is that of a serpent biting before the charmer
has had time to make use of his skill in charming; and the point of the aphorism is
that no skill or wisdom is of any avail if made use of too late. ‘It is too late to lock
the stable door when the steed is stolen” (Wright).
VI. WIsDoM AND FOLLY IN HUMAN SPEECH. The winning character of the wise man’s
words, the mischievous and tedious prating of fools (vers, 12—15). The tongue has
just been spoken of (ver. 11) as theinstrument used by the charmer for taming serpents,
and there follows in these verses a reference to wisdom and folly displayed in the words
of the wise man and of the fool. “The words of the wise man are gracious ” (cf. Luke
iv. 22), they win favour for him; both the subject-matter and the manner of his speech
gain for him the good will of those that hear him. The words of the fool are self-
destructive ; they ruin any chance he had of influencing those who were prepared to be
persuaded by him, whom he meets for the first time, and who were therefore not biassed
against him by previous knowledge of his fatuity. He goes from bad to worse (ver. 13).
“The words point with a profound insight into human nature to the progress from bad
to worse in one who has the gift of speech without discretion. He begins with what
is simply folly, unwise but harmless, but vires acquirit ewndo, he is borne along on the
swelling floods of his own declamatory fluency, and ends in what is ‘ mischievous mad-
ness’” (Plumptre). Especially is this the case when his talk is on subjects as to which
even the wisest are forced to confess their ignorance (ver. 14). He speaks volumin-
ously, as though he knew all things past and to come, as though all the mysteries of
life and death were an open book to him. And he wearies out every one who hears
him or has todo with him. His crass ignorance in all matters of common life forbids
any trust being placed in his speculations and vaticinations as to things that are more
recondite. The well-known beaten road that leads to the city (ver. 15) he does not
know. What kind of a guide would he be in less-frequented paths ?
In these various ways, therefore, the contrast is drawn between wisdom which leads
men in the right way, which directs their course through the difficulties and dangers
EOOLESIASTES, ?


vf


Cnet


‘974 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. fom. x. 1-26


|
jie y


that often beset them, and enables them to make the best use of their resourees, and
that folly which, if it is the ruling element in a character, no art or skill can conceal,
which so often renders those in whom it appears both mischievous and offensive to all
who have anything to do with them.—J. W.


Vers. 16—20.—Duties of rulers and subjects. Some of the evils of life arise from errors
and follies which may be corrected by diligence and prudence, and among them are
the caprices of unworthy princes, the vices uf courtiers, and the disloyalty of subjects.
Both kings and those over whom they rule have duties towards each other, the violation
of which bring many mischiefs; both need to have before their minds the ideal of
righteousness belonging to their respective stations.

I. THE EVILS OF MISGOVERNMENT. The land is miserable whose king is a child in
years or in heedlessuess, whose princes begin the days with revels instead of attending
to the management of affairs of state and the administration of justice. The incapacity
of the prince leads to the appointment of unworthy ministers, and prevents a proper
check being put upon their profligacy and neglect. The result is soon seen in the
disorders of the state. “Through the slothfulness of rulers,” he goes on to hint, “ the
fabric of thy state decays; the neglected roof lets the water through. And meantime
there is high revelry within the palace walls; and gold and silver supply all their needs ”
(vers, 18, 19). Illustrations of such an unhappy state of matters recur only too readily
to the student of history. ‘ \Ve may see it exemplified in the condition, shall we say,
of some native state within our Indian frontier ? or some Eastern empire tottering to its
fall nearer home? or a European monarchy at the close of the last century, with luxury
and state in the palace, and a hunary people outside its door, and the shadow of the guil-
lotine, and head-crowned pikes and September massacres in the background ?” (Bradley).

JI. THE BLESSINGS OF A WELL-ORDERED GOVERNMENT. That land is happy, governed
by a king of undisputed title (ver. 17), who sets an example of integrity, and not by
some upstart adventurer. He derives his title from his noble descent, but he may
establish his power on a firmer foundation if the excellences of his ancestors are repro-
duced in him; he will secure a large measure of prosperity for his people if he choose
for his officers men of simple tastes, who think more of discharging their duties than
of self-ind: sence,

III. THE purY OF LOYALTY ON THE PART OF SUBJECTS, (Ver. 20.) Even if the sovereign
is personally unworthy of respect, the office he holds should be honoured ; he is still the
servant of God, even if he is grossly neglectful of his duties. There is a worse evil
than misgovernment, and that is anarchy. “ Ourse not the king ”—he may not deserve
it; there may be reasons of state to explain what seems to be capricious or unjust in
his conduct ; yicld him reverence for conscience’ sake, because itis right todoso, And
even if he be in the wrong, it is prudent to abstain from words of blame, since he has
the power to punish those that speak against him, and may hear in unexpected ways
what has been said about himin secrecy. Such counsels are of a kindred character with
those which the apostles have given (Rom. xiii. 1—7; 1 Pet. ii. 18—17). At first it
might seem as if they commended the cultivation of a slavish spirit on the part of
subjects towards their rulers, and it is well known that many have deduced from them
the preposterous doctrine of “ passive obedience.” But it must be ket in mind that
while these portions of Scripture prescribe the duties of subjects, they prescribe also the
duties of kings; and that it is no slavish doctrine to hold that those who rule in equity
have an absolute right to the devotion and loyalty of their subjects. When they depart
from equity their claim to implicit obedience is proporti mately diminished, The
prudential maxim of ver. 20 warns men to count the cost before they assail the power
of even a bad king—to beware of provoking his wrath by heedless conduct—but docs
not command passive obedience to him. Misgovernment may reach such a pitch ae
to make it a duty for subjects to brave the wrath of kings, and to attempt to put
check upon their folly. We have not here a mean-spirited and time-serving piece of
advice, suitable only for those who languish under the tyrauny of Eastern despots, but
a warning against rashness which is not inapplicable to the most public-spirited citizen
of the freest state. The examples of Isaiah under Ahaz, of Jeremiah under Zedekiah,
and of St. Paul under Nero, show that it is possible to have a love of righteousness and
hatred of iniquity, and yet not be wanting in respect to a bad king.—J, W,


ou. x1, 1—10.]


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


375


a ey


EXPOSITION,


OHAPTER XI.


Approaching the end of his treatise, Kohe-
leth, in view of apparent anomalics in God’s
moral government, and the difficulties that
mect man in his social and politicil relations,
proceeds to give his remedies for this state
ef things. These remedies are (1) bene-
once and active life (vers. 1—6); (2) joyful
Lyght-heartedness (vers. 7—9); (8) piety
(ver. 10—ch. xii. 7).


Vers. 1—6.—Section 16. Leaving alone
unanswerable questions, man’s duty and
happiness are found in activity, especially in
doing all the good in his power, for he knows
not how soon he himself may stand in need
of help. Thisis the first remedy for the per-
plextties of life. The wise man will not
charge himself with results.


Ver. 1.—Cast thy bread upon the waters.
The old interpretation of this passage, which
found in it a reference to the practice in
Egypt of sowing seed during the inundation
of the Nile, is not admissible. The verb
shalach is not used in the sense of sowing or
scattering seed; it means ‘‘to cast or send
forth.” Two chief explanations have been
given. (1) As to sow on the water is
equivalent to taking thankless toil (compare
the Greek proverb, S7elpew én) mdvrw), the
gnome may be an injunction to do good
without hope of return, like the evangelical
precept (Matt. v. 44—46; Luke vi. 32—35).
(2) It is a commercial maxim, urging men
to make ventures in trade, that they may
receive a good return for their expenditure.
In this case the casting seed upon the waters
is a metaphorical expression for sending
merchandise across the sea to distant lands.
This view is supposed to be confirmed by
the statement concerning the good woman
in Prov. xxxi. 14, ““She is like the mer-
ehants’ ships; she bringeth her bread from
far;” aud the words of Ps. cvii. 23, “ They
that go down to the sea in ships, that do
business in great waters.” But one sees no
reason why Koheleth should suddenly turn
to commerce and the trade of a maritime
city. Such considerations have no reference
to the context, nor to the general design of
the book. Nothing leads to them, nothing
comes of them. On the other hand, if we
take the verse as urging active beneficence
as the safest and best proceeding under
men’s present circumstances, we have a
maxim in due accordance with the spirit of
the rest of the work, and one which conduces


to the conclusion reached at the end. So
we adopt the firat of the two explanations
mentioned above. The bread in the East is
made in the form of thin cakes, which would
float for a time if thrown into a stream; and
if it be objected that no one would be guilty
of such an itrational action as flinging bread
into the water, it may be answered that this
is just the point aimed at. Do your kind-
nesses, exert yourself, in the most unlikely
quarters, not thinking of gratitude or return,
but only of duty. And yet surely a recom-
pense will be made in some form or other,
Thou shalt find it after many days. This is
not to be the motive of our acts, but it will
in the course of time be the result; and this
thought may be an encouragement. In the
Chaldee Version of parts of Kcclesiasticus
there is extant a maxim identical with our
verse, “Strew thy bread on the water and
on the land, and thou shalt find it at the
end of days” (Dukes, ‘Rabb. Blumenl.,’ p.
73). Parallels have been found in man
quarters. Thus the Turk says, “Do good,
throw it into the water; if the fish does
not know it, God does.” Herzfeld quotes
Goethe—


“ Was willst du untersuchen,
Wohin die Milde fliesst !
Ins Wasser wirf deine Kuchen;
Wer weiss wer sie geniesst? ”


“ Wouldst thou too narrowly inquire
Whither thy kindness goes !
Thy cake upon the water cast ;
Whom it may feed who knows?”


Voltaire paraphrases the passage in his
*Précis de |’ Ecclésiaste’—


“ Répandez vos bienfaits avec magnificence,
Méme aux moins vertueux ne les refusez
as.
Narrabs informez pas de leur reconnois-
BANCO ;
Tl est grand, il est beau de faire des
ingrats.”


Ver. 2.—Give a portion to seven, and also
to eight. This further explains, without any
metaphor, the injunction of beneficence in
ver. 1. Give portions of thy “bread ” to any
number of those who need. Delitzech and
others who interpret the passage of maritime
enterprise would see in it a recommendation
(like the proceeding of Jacob, Gen. xxxii.
16, etc.) not to risk all at once, to divide
one’s ventures into various ships. But the
expression in the text is merely a mode of
enjoining unlimited benevolence. The num-
bers are purposely indefinite. Instances of
this form of speech are common enough (see
Prov. vi 16; xxx. 7—9, etce.; Amos i. 3,


276


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. xx. 1—10.


nnn


etc.; Micah v: 5; Eeclus. xxiii. 16; xxvi. 5, 28).
Wordsworth notes that the word for “ por-
tion ” (chelek) is that used specially for the
portion of the Levites (Numb. xviii. 20); and
in accordance with his view of the date of the
book, finds here an injunction not to confine
one’s offerings to the Levites.of Judah, but
to extend them to the refugees who come
from Israel. For thou knowest not what
evil shall be upon the earth. A time may
come when you yourself may need help; the
power of giving may no longer be yours;
therefore make friends now who may be
your comfort in distress. Sothe Lord urges,
“ Make to yourselves friends by means of the
mammon of unrighteousness” (Luke xvi. 9).
It seems a low motive on which to base
charitable actions; but men act on such
secondary motives every day, and the morale
ist caunot ignore them. In the Book of
Proverbs secondary and worldly motives are
largely urged as useful in the conduct of
life (see the Introduction to Proverbs, pp.
viii. ix.). St. Paul reminds us that we
some day may need a brother’s help (Gal.
vi. 1). The Fathers have spiritualized
the passage, so as to make it of Christian
application, far away indeed from Kohe-
leth’s thought. Thus St. Gregory: “By
the number seven is understood the whole
of this temporal condition . . . this is
shown more plainly when the number eight
is mentioned after it. For when another
number besides follows after seven, it is set
forth by this very addition, that this temporal
state is brought to an end and elosed by
eternity... . For by the number seven
Solomon expressed the present time, which
is passed by periods of seven days. But by
the number etght he designated eternal life,
which the Lord made known to us by his
resurrection, For he rose in truth on the
Lord’s day, which, as following the seventh
day, t.e. the sabbath, is found to be the
eizhth from the creation. But it is well
said, ‘Give portions,’ etc. As if it were
plainly said, ‘So dispense temporal goods,
as not to forget to desire those that are
eternal, For thou oughtest to provide for
the future by well-doing, who knowest not
what tribulation succeeds from the future
judgment’” (‘Moral.,’ xxxv. 17, Oxford
transl.).

Ver. 3.—If the clouds be full of rain, they
empty themselves upon the earth. This
verse is closely connected with the pre-
ceding paragraph. The misfortune there
intimated may fall at any moment; this is
as certain as the laws of nature, unforeseen,
uncontrollable. When the clouds are over-
charged with moisture, they deliver their
burden upon the earth, according to laws
which man cannot alter; these are of irre-
sistible necessity, and must be expected and


endured. And if the tree fall toward the
south, ete.; or, it may be, im the south; ie.
let it fall where it will; the particular
position is of no importance. When the
tempest overthrows it, it lies where it has
fallen. When the evil day comes, we must
bend to the blow, we are powerless to avert
it; the future can be neither calculated nor
controlled. The next verse tells how the
wise man acts under such circumstances.
Christian commentators have argued from
this clause concerning the unchangeable
state of the departed—that there is no re-
pentance in the grave; that what death
leaves them judgment shall find them. Of
course, no such thought was in Koheleth’s
mind; nor do we think that the inspiring
Spirit intended such meaning to be wrung
from the passage. Indeed, it may be said
that, as it etands, the clause does not bear
this interpretation. The fallen or felled tree
is not at once fit for the master’s use; it has
to be exposed to atmospheric influences,
seasoned, tried. It is not left in the place
where it lay, nor in the condition in which
it was; so that, if we reason from this
analogy, we must conceive that there is
some ripening, purifying process in the in-
termediate state. St. Gregory speaks thus:
“ For when, at the moment of the falling of
the human being, either the Holy Spirit or
the evil spirit receives the soul departed
from the chambers of the flesh, he will keep
it with him for ever without change, so that
neither, once exalted, shall it be precipitated
into woe, nor, once plunged into eternal woes,
any further arise to take the means of
escape” (‘ Moral.,’ viii. 30).

Ver. 4.—He that observeth the wind shall
not sow. The fact of the uncertainty and
immutability of the future ought not to
make us supine or to crush out all diligence
and activity. He who wants to anticipate
results, to foresee and provide against all
contingencies, to be his own providence, is
like a farmer who is always looking to wind
and weather, and misses the time for sowing
in this needless caution. The quarter from
which the wind blows regulates the downfall
of rain (comp. Prov. xxv. 23). In Palestine
the west and north-west winds usually
brought rain. He that regardeth the clouds
shall not reap. For the purpose of softening
the ground to receive the seed, rain was
advantageous; but storms in harvest, of
course, were pernicious (see 1 Sam. xii. 17,
etc.; Prov. xxvi. 1); and he who was anxi-
ously fearing every indication of such
weather, and altering his plans at every
phase of the sky, might easily put off reap-
ing his fields till either the crops were
spoiled or the rainy season had set in. A
familiar proverb says, “ A watched pot never
boils.” Some risks must always be run if


on. x1. 1—10.]


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


277


cGoTESEEST VE ee


we are to do our work in the world; we
cannot make a certainty of anything; pro-
bability in the guide of life. We cannot
secure ourselves from failure; we can but
do our best, and uncertainty of result must
not paralyze exertion. “It is not of him
that willeth, nor of him that runneth, but of
God that hath mercy” (Rom. ix. 16). St.
Gregory deduces a lesson from this verse:
“ He calls the unclean spirit wind, but men
who are subjected to him clouds; whom he
impels backwards and forwards, hither and
thither, as often as his temptations alternate
in their hearts from the blasts of suggestions.
He therefore who observes the wind does
not sow, since he who dreads coming tempta-
tions does not direct his heart to doing good.
And -he who regards the clouds does not
reap, since he who trembles from the dread
of human fickleness deprives himself of the
recompense of an eternal reward ” (‘ Moral.,’
xxvii. 14).

Ver. 5.—As thou knowest not what is the
way of the spirit. In this verse are presented
one or two examples of man’s ignorance of
natural facts and processes as analogous to
the mysteries of God’s moral government.
The word translated “spirit” (ruach) may
mean also “ wind,” and is so taken here by
many commentators (see ch.i.6; viii.8; and
comp. John iii. 8). In this view there would
be two instances given, viz. the wind and
the embryo. Certainly, the mention of the
wind seems to come naturally after what has
preceded; and man’s ignorance of its way,
and powerlessness to control it, are em-
blematic of his attitude towards Divine
providence. The versions, however, seem
to support the rendering of the Authorized
Version. Thus the Septuagint (which con-
nects the clause with ver. 4), év ois (“among
whom,” i.e. those who watch the weather),
“There is none that knoweth what is the
way of the spirit (rod mvetparos);” Vulgate,
Quomodo ignoras que sit via spiritus. If
we take this view, we have only one idea in
the verse, and that is the infusion of the
breath of life in the embryo, and its growth
in its mother’s womb. Nor how the bones
do grow in the womb of her that is with
child. Our version, by its insertions, has
made two facts out of the statement in the
Hebrew, which is literally, how the bones
(are) in the womb of a pregnant woman.
Septuagint, “As (és) bones are in the womb,”
etc.; Vulgate, Ht qua ratione compingantur
ossa én ventre pregnantis, “ And in what way
the bones are framed in the womb of the
pregnant.” The formation and quickening
of the foetus were always regarded as mys-
terious and inscrutable (comp. Job x. 8, 9;
Ps. oxxxix. 15; Wisd. vii. 1, etc.). Wright
compares M. Aurelius, x. 26, “The first
principles of life are extremely slender and


mysterious; and yet nature works them up
into a strange increase of bulk, diversity,
and proportion.” Controversies concerning
the origin of the soul have been rife from
early times, some holding what is called
Traducianism, 7.6, that soul and body are
both derived by propagation from earthly
parents; others supporting Creationism, é.e.
that the soul, created specially by God, is
infused into the child before birth. St.
Augustine confesses (‘ Op. Imperf.,’ iv. 104)
that he is unable to determine the truth of
either opinion. And, indeed, this is one of
those secret things which Holy Scripture
has not decided for us, and about which no
authoritative sentence has been given. The
term “ bones” is used for the whole confor-
mation of the body (comp. Prov. xv. 30; xvi.
24); meleah, “pregnant,” means literally,
“full,” and is used like the Latin plena
here and nowhere else in the Old Testament,
though common in later Hebrew. Thus
Ovid, ‘ Metam.,’ x, 469—


“Plena patris thalamis excedit, et impia
diro
Semina fert utero.”
And ‘ Fast.,’ iv. 633—


“Nunc gravidum pecus est; gravide: sunt
semine terra.
Telluri plens victima plena datur.”


Even so thou knowest not the works of
God who maketh all. Equally mysterious
in its general scope and in its details is
the working of God’s providence. And as
everything lies in God’s hands, it must needs
be secret and beyond human ken. This is
why to “the works of God” (ch. vii. 13) is
added, “who maketh all.’ The God of
nature is Lord of the future (comp. Amos
iii. 6; Ecclus. xviii. 6); man must not dis-
quiet himself about this.

Ver. 6.—In the morning sow thy seed.
Do not let your ignorance of the future and
the inscrutability of God’s dealings lead you
to indolence and apathy; do your appointed
work ; be active and diligent in your calling.
The labour of the farmer is taken as a type
of business generally, and was especially
appropriate to the class of persons whom
Kolheleth is instructing. The injunction
occurs naturally after ver. 4. And in the
evening withhold not thine hand. Labour
on untiredly from morn till evening. It is
not an advice to rest during midday, as that
was too hot a time to work (Stuart), but a
call to spend the entire day in active em-
ployment, the two extremities being men-
tioned in order to include the whole. Work
undertaken in a right spirit is a blessing,
not a curse, shuts out many temptations,
encourages many virtues. Some sce here @


278


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


[ou. xr. 1-10,


2, 2 ee ee


special reference to the maxim at the begin-
ning of the chapter,as though the author
meant, “Exercise thy charity at all times,
early and late,” the metaphor being similar
to that in 2 Cor. ix. 6, “He which soweth
sparingly,” ete. Others find a figure of the
ages of man in the “ morning and evening,

thus, “From earliest youth practise piety
and purity, and continue such conduct to
its close.” This leads naturally to the sub-
ject of the following section ; but it may be
doubted whether this thought was in the
author’s mind. It seems best to tuke the
paragraph merely as commending activity,
whether in business or in benevolence, with-
out anxious regard to results which are in
higher hands. “ Withhold not thy land,”
fe. from sowing; My aderw 7 xelp cov
(Septuagint). For thou knowest not wnether
shall prosper, which of the two sowinys,
either this or thet, the morning or evening
sowing. It is a exusuce, und a man must
risk something; .f one fails, the other may
succeed. Or whether they both shall be
alike good. The uncertainty rouses to
exertion; labour may at any rate a cure half
the crop, or even give a double produce, if
both sowings succeed. So in religion and
morality, tlle good seed sown eurly and late
may bear fruit early or late, or may have
blessed results all along. The Vulgate is
less correct, Ht si utrumque simul, melius
erit, “And if both together, it will be
better.”


Vers. 7—9.—Section 17. The second re-
medy for the perplexities of the present life
is cheerfulness—the spirit that enjoys the
present, with a chastened regard to the
future.


Ver. 7.—Truly the light is sweet. The
verse begins with the copula vav, “ and,”
which here notes merely transition, as ch,
iii, 16; xii. 9. Do not be perplexed, or
despondent, or paralyzed in your work, by
the difficulties that meet you. Confront
them with a cheerful mien, and enjoy life
while it lasts. ‘The light” may be taken
literally, or as equivalent to life. The very
light, with all that it unfolds, all that it
beautifies, all that it quickens, is a pleasure;
life is worth living, and affords high and
merited enjoyment to the faithful worker,
The commentators quote parallels. Thus
Euripides, ‘Iph. in Aul.,’ 1219—


Mf p’ droddons &wpov Adv yap Td bas
Actacey, Ta 8 ind viv uh pw’ ideiv dvayndops.


“O slay me not untimely ; for to see
The light is sweet; and force me not to
view
The secrets of the nether world.”


Plumptre cites Theognis—


Kelcoua Sore ALBos
“Apborvyos, Aelipw 8° épardy pdos HeAlouo.


“ Then shall I lie, as voiceless as a stone,
And see no more the loved light of the
sun.”


A pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold
the sun. To behold the sun is to enjoy
life ; for light, which is life, is derived from
the sun. Virgil speaks of “coli spirabile
lumen” (‘ Ain.,’ iii. 600). Thus Ifomer,
*Od,,’ xx. 207—


Ef ov &ri (dei Kal dpa paos neAloto-
Ei 8 457 réOvnxe nad ciy AtSao Sduoiow.


“If still he live and see the sun’s fair light,
Or dead, be dwelling in the realms of
Hades.”


Ver. 8.—But if a man live many years,
and rejoice in them all. The conjunction kd
at the commencement of the verse is causal
rather than adversative, and should be ren-
dered * for.’ The insertion of “and” before
“rejoice” mars the sentence. The apodosis
begins with “rejoice,” and {t+ translation
is, For if a man live many geers, he ought to
rejoice in them all. Koheleth |.as said (ver.
7) that life is swect and precious; now he
ads that it is therefore man’s duty to enjoy
it; God has ordained that he shoul do go,
whether his days on earth be many or few.
Yet let him remember the days of darkness.
The apodosis is continned, and the clause
should run, And remember, etc. “The days
of darkness” do not mean times of calamity
as contrasted with the light of prosperity,
as though tle writer were bidding one to be
mindful of the prospect of disastrous change
in the midst of happiness; nor, again, the
period of old age distinguished from the
glowing light of youth (Virgil, ‘ Aneid,’ i,
590, 591). The days of darkness signify
the life in Hades, far from the light of the
sun, gloomy, uncheered. The thought of
this state should not make us hopeless and
reckless, like the sensualists whose creed is
to ‘feat and drink, for to-morrow we die”
(1 Cor, xv. 32; Wisd. ii. 1, ete.), but rouse
us to make the best of life, to be contented
and cheerful, doing our daily duties with
the consciousness that this is our day of
labour and joy, and that “the night zometh
When ho man can work” (John ix. 4). Wisely
says Ben-Sira, “ Whatsoever thou tukest in
hand, remember the end, and thou shalt
never do amiss” (icclns, vii. 86). We are
reu.inded of the Egyptian custom, mentioned
by Herodotus (ii. 78), of carrying a figure of
& corpse among the guests at a banquet, not
in order to damp pleasure, but to give a
zest to the enjoyment of the present and te


oH. XX. 1—-10,]


EQOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


279


keep it under proper control. “Look on
thip|” iC was oHlods drink, and enjoy thy
self; for when thou diest thou shalt be
such.” ‘The Roman poet has many a pas-


sage like this, though, of course, of lower
tendency. ‘Thus Horace, ‘ Carm,,’ ii. 3—


“Preserve, O my Dellius, whatever thy |
tunes,
A mind undisturbed, “midst life's changes | the impulses and thoughts of th


Not cast down by its sorrows, nor too much | identity, the “I” and the thought were


If faigen ewsd fortune thy cup over-


(Stanley:)


(Bee also ‘Oarm.. i. 4.) For they shall be
many ; rather, that they shall be many. This
is one of the things toremember. ‘The time
in Sheol will be long. How to be passed—
when, if ever, to end—he says not; he looks
forward toa dreary protracted period, when
joy shal] be unattainable, and therefore he
bids men to use the present, which is all
they can claim. All that cometh is vanity.
All that comes after this life is ended, the
great future, is nothingness; shadow, not
substance; a state from which is absent all
that made life, and over which we have no
coutrol. Koheleth had passed the sentence
of vanity on all the pursuits of the living
_ man; now he gives the same verdict upon
the unknown condition of the departed soul
(comp. ch. ix.5). Fill the gospel had brought
life and immortality to light, the view of the
future was darkand gloomy. So we read in
Job (x. 21, 22), “I go whence I shall not re-
turn, even to the land of darkness and of the
shadow of death ; a land of thick darkness,
as darkness itself; a land of the shadow of
death, without any order, and where the
light is as darkness?? The Vulgate gives
quite a different turn to the clause, render-
ing, Meminisse debet tenebrosi temporis, et
dierum multorum ; qui cum venerint, vanitatis
arguentur  Aaprees, “He ought to remem-
ber... the many days; and when these
haye come, things passed shall be charged
with vanity ””—which implies, in accordance
with an hagadic interpretation of the
passage, that the sinner shall suffer for his
transgressions, and shall then learn to
acknowledge this folly in the past. It is
unnecessary to say that the present text is
at yariance with this rendering.

Ver. 9.—Rejoice, 9 young man, in *y
youth. Koheleth continues to inculcate the
duty of rational enjoyment. “In youth” ia
during youth; not in the exercise of, or by
reason Of, thy fresh, unimpaired powers.
The author urges bis hearers to begin be-
times to enjoy the blessings with which God
surrounds them. Youth is the season of
innocent, unalloyed pleasure; then, if ever,


casting aside all tormenting anxiety con-
cerning an unknown future, one may, as it
is called, enjoy life. Let thy heart cheer
thee in the days of thy youth. Let the
lightness of thy |.eart show itself in thy bear-
ing and manner, even as it is said in Pro-
verbs (xv. 13), “A merry heart maketh a
cheerful countenance.” valk in the ways
of thine heart (comp. Isa. lvii. 17). “Where

heart lead
thee. The wording looks as if the personal


distinct. We have a similar severance in
ch, vii. 25, only there the personality directs


| the thought, not the thought the “I.” And


in the sight of thine eyes. Follow after that
on which thy eyes fix their regard (ch. ii.
10); for, as Job says (xxxi. 7), “The heart
walketh after the eyes’? The Septuagint,
in deference to the supposed requirements
of strict morality, has (at least according to
the text of some manuscripts) modified the re-
ceived reading, translating the passage thus :
Kal mepimdres dy d80%s kapdlas eov &uwpuos Kar
bh & dpdoer bpOadrpay cov, “ And walk in the
ways of thine heart blameless, and not in the
sight of thine eyes.” But «} is omitted by
A, ©, 8". Others besides the Seventy have
felt doubts about the bearing of the passage,
as though it recommended either unbridled
licence in youth, or at any rate an unhal-
lowed epicureanism. ‘To counteract the
supposed evil teaching, some have credited
Koheleth with sternirony. He is not recom-
mending pleasure, say they, but warnin
against it. “Go on your way,” he cries,
“do as you list, sow your wild oats, live dis-
solutely, but remember that retribution will
some day overtake you.” But tlie counsel is
seriously intended, and is quite consistent
with many other passages which teach the
duty of enjoying life as man’s lot and part
(seé ch. ii-24; ili. 12,18, 22; v.18; viii. 15,
ete.). The seeming opposition between the
recommendation here and in Numb. xv. 39
is easily reconciled. The injunction in the
Pentatéuch, which was connected with a
ceremonial observance, ran thus: “‘ Remem-
ber all the commandments of the Lord, and
do them; and that ye go not about after
your own heart, and your own eyes, after
which ye used to go a-whoring.” ‘Here un-
lawful pleasures, contrary to the command-
ments, are forbidden; Ecclesiastes urges the
pursuit of innocent pleasures, such as will
stand scrutiny. Hoelemann, quoted by
Wright, observes that this verse is the origin
of a famous student-song of Germany, a
stanza or two of which we may cite—


Gaudeamus igitur, juvenes dum sumus;
Post exactam juventutem, post molestam
senectutem, ©


Nos habebit humus, .. .


280


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


for. xx. 1—10.


ee


“ Vita nostra brevis est, brevi finietur,
Venit mors velociter, rapit nos atrociter,
Nemini parcetur.”


It is not epicureanism, even in a modified
form, that is here encouraged. For moderate
and lawful pleasure Koheleth has always
uttered his sanction, but the pleasure is to
be such as God allows. his is to be
accepted with all gratitude in the present,
as the future is wholly beyond our ken and
our control; it is all that is placed in our
power, and it is enough to make life more
than endurable. And then to temper un-
mixed joy, to prove that he is not recom-
mending mere sensuality, to correct any
wrong impression which the previous utter-
ances may have conveyed, the writer adds
another thought, a sombre reflection which
shows the religious conclusion to-which he
is working up. But know thou, that for all
these things God will bring thee into judg-
ment (mishpat). It has been doubted what
is meant by “judgment,” whether present or
future, men’s or God’s. It has been taken
to mean—God will make thy excesses prove
scourges, by bringing on thee sickness,
poverty, a miserable old age; or these dis-
tresses come as the natural consequences of
youthful sins; or obloquy shall follow thee,
and thou shalt meet with deserved censure
from thy fellow-men. But every one must
feel that the solemn ending of this paragraph
points to something more grave and im-
portant than any such results as those men-
tioned above, something that is concerned
with that indefinable future which is ever
looming in the dim horizon. Nothing satis-
fies the expected conclusion but a reference
to the eternal judgment in the world beyond
the grave. Shadowy and incomplete as was
Koheleth’s view of this great assize, his
sense of God’s justice in the face of the
anomalies of human life was so strong that
he can unhesitatingly appeal to the con-
viction of a coming inquisition, as a motive
for the guidance of action and conduct.
That in other passages he constantly appre-
hends earthly retribution, as the Pentateuch
taught, and as his countrymen had learned
to expect (see ch. ii, 26; iii. 17; vii. 17, 18),
is no argument that he is not here rising to
a higher view. Rather, the fact that the
doctrine of temporal reward and punish-
ment is found by experience to fail in many
cases (comp. ch. viii. 14) has forced him to
state his conclusion that this life is not the
end of everything, and that there is another
existence in which actions shall be tried,
justice done, retribution awarded. The
statement is brief, for he knew nothing more
than the fact, and could add nothing to it.
His conception of the soul’s condition in
Sheol (see ch. ix. 5, 6, 10) seems to point to
some other state or period for this final judg-


ment; but whether a resurrection is to pre-
cede this awful trial is left in uncertainty
here, as elsewhere in the Old Testament.
Cheyne and some other critics consider this
last clause to be an interpolation, because it
appears to militate against previous utter-
ances; but this argument is unreasonable,
as the paragraph comes in quite naturally as
the needed conclusion, and without it the
section would halt and be incomplete. A
similar allusion is contained in the epilogue
(ch. xii. 14). A corrector, who desired to
remove all seeming contradictions and dis-
crepancies from the work, would not have
been satisfied with inserting this gloss, but
would have displayed his remedial measures
in other places. Of this promote: how-
ever, no traces are discernible by an unpre-
judiced eye.

Ver. 10—ch. xii. 7.—Section 18. The
third remedy is piety, and this ought to be
practised from one’s earliest days; life
should be so guided as not to offend the
laws of the Creator and Judge, and virtue
should not be postponed till the failure of
facultics makes pleasure unattainable, and
death closes the scene. The last days of
the old man are beautifully described under
certain images, metaphors, and analogies.


Ver. 10.—Therefore remove sorrow from
thy heart. The writer reiterates his advice
concerning cheerfulness, and then proceeds
to inculcate early piety. Kaas, rendered
“sorrow,” has been variously understood.
The Septuagint has @uydy, the Vulgate
tram; so the margin of the Authorized
Version gives “anger,” and that of the Re-
vised Version “ yvexation,” or “ provocation.”
Wordsworth adopts this last meaning (re-
ferring to 1 Kings xv. 30; xxi. 22; 2 Kings
xxiii. 26, etc., where, however, the significa-
tion is modified by the connection in which
the word stands), and paraphrases, “ Take
heed lest you provoke God by the thoughts
of your heart.” Jerome affirms that in the
term “anger” all perturbations of the mind
are included—which seems rather forced.
The word is better rendered, low spirits,
moroseness, discontent. These feelings are
to be put away from the mind by a deliberate
act. Put away evil from thy flesh. Many
commentators consider that the evil here
named is physical, not moral, the author en-
joining his young disciple to take proper
care of his body, not to weaken it on the
one hand by asceticism, nor on the other by
indulgence in youthful lusts. In this case
the two clauses would urge the removal of
what respectively affects the mind and body,
the inner and outer man. But the ancient
versions are unanimous in regarding the
“ evil” spoken of as moral. Thus the Septu-


‘om, x1. 1—10,]


agint gives movnplay, “ wickedness;” the
Vulgate, malitiam. Similarly the Syriac
and Targum. And according to our inter-
pretation of the passage, such is the mean-
ing here. It is a call to early piety and
virtue, like that of St. Paul (2 Cor. vii. 1),
“ Having these promises, let us cleanse our-
selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
ae perfecting holiness in the fear of

od.” Do not, says Koheleth, defile thy
body by carnal sins (1 Cor. vi. 18), which
bring decay and sickness, and arouse the
wrath of God against thee. For childhood
and youth are vanity. This time of youth
goon passes away; the capacity for enjoy-
ment is soon circumscribed; therefore use
thy opportunities aright, remembering the
end. The word for “youth” (shacharuth)
occurs nowhere else in the Old Testament,
and is probably connected with shachon,
black,” used of hair in Ley. xiii. 31.
Hence it means the time of black hair, in
contradistinction to the time when the hair


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


281


refers it to the time of dawn (Ps. cx. 8)
seems to be erroneous, as it would then be
identical with “childhood.” The Septuagint
renders it advo, “folly;” the Vulgate,
voluptas, “ pleasure ;” the Syriac, “and not
knowledge ;” but the word cannot be rightly
thus translated. The two terms are childe
hood and manhood, the period during which
the capacity for pleasure is fresh and strong.
Its vanity is soon brought home; it is evan-
escent; it brings punishment. Thus Bailey,
‘ Festus ’—


“T cast mine eyes around, and feel
There is a blessing wanting;
Too soon our hearts the truth reveal,
That joy is disenchanting.”
And again—
“ When amid tha world’s delights,
How warm soe’er we feo] 2 moment among


them—
We find ourselves, when the hot blast hath
blown,


has become grey. The explanation which | Prostrate, and weak, and wretched.”


HOMILETICS.


Vers. 1—6.— Bread upon the waters ; or, rules and reasons for practising beneficence,
I. Ruxes. Beneficence should be practised: 1. Withowt doubt as to tts result. One’s
charity should be performed in a spirit of fearless confidence, even though the recipients
of it should appear altogether unworthy, and our procedure as hopeless and thankless
an operation as “casting one’s bread upon the waters” (ver. 1), or “sowing the sea”
(Theognis). 2. Without limit as to its distribution. “Give a portion to seven, yea
even unto eight” (ver. 2); that is, “Give to him that asketh, and from him that would
borrow of thee turn not thou away” (Matt. v. 42). Social economics may, but the
sermon on the mount does not, condemn indiscriminate or promiscuous giving. One’s
bread should be cast upon the waters in the sense that it should be bestowed upon the
multitudes, or carried far and wide rather than restricted to a narrow circle. 3. With-
out anxiety as to its seasonableness. As “he that observeth the wind will not sow, and
he that regardeth the clouds shall not reap” (ver. 4), so he who is always apprehensive
lest his deeds of kindness should be ill-timed is not likely to practise much beneficence,
The farmer who should spend his days in watching the weather to select just the right
moment to plough and sow, or reap and garner, would never get the one operation or the
other performed; and little charity would be witnessed were men never to give until
they were quite sure they had hit upon the right time to give, and never to do an act
of kindness until they were certain the proper objects to receive it had been found.
4. Without intermission as to its time. “In the morning sow thy seed, and in the
evening withhold not thine hand” (ver. 6). Who would practise beneficence as it
should be practised must be as constantly employed therein as the husbandman is in
his agricultural operations. Philanthropy is a sacred art, which can only be acquired
by pains and patience. Intermittent goodness, charity performed by fits and starts,
occasional benevolence, never comes to much, and never does much for either the giver
or receiver. Charity to be efficient must be a perennial fountain and a running stream
(1 Cor. xiii. 8), The charitable man must be always giving, like God, who maketh
his sun to rise on the evil and the good, etc. (Matt. v. 45), and who giveth unto all
iberally (Jas. i. 5).
Il. ee betacees should be practised for the following reasons: 1. Zt ¢e
certain in the end to be recompensed. (Ver. 1.) The kindly disposed individual, who
fearlessly casts his bread upon the waters by doing good to the unkind and the
wothankful (Matt. v.45; Luke vi. 35), may have a long time to wait for a return


282 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. = [on. xt 1-10


from hie venture in practical philanthropy; bet eventually that return will come, here
on earth, in the inward satisfaction that springs from doing good, perhaps in the
gratitude (or, it may be, the temporal and spiritual elevation) of those who experience
his kindness, hereafter in the welcome and the glory Christ bas promised to such a

are mindful of his needy brethren on earth (Matt. xxv. 40). 2. No one can predict how
soon himself may become an object of charity. As surely as the clouds when full of
rain will empty themselves upon the earth, and a tree will lie exactly in the place
where it falls (ver. 3), so surely will seasons of calamity, when they come, descend on
rich and poor alike; yea, perhaps strike the wealthy, the great, and the good with
strokes which the indigent, the obscure, and the wicked may escape. Hence the bare
consideration of this fact, that bad times may come—not only depriving one of the
ability to practise beneficence, but rendering one a fit subject for the same (the latter
of these being most likely the Preacher’s thought)—should induce one to be charitable
while he may and can, ‘This may seem a low, selfish, and unworthy ground on which
to recommend the practice of philanthropy; but does its meaning not substantially
amount to this, that men should give to others because, were bad times to strip them
of their wealth, and plunge them into poverty, they would wish others to give to
them? And how much is this below the standard of ‘the golden rule (Matt. wii. 12)?
8. No amount of forethought will discover a better time for practising beneficence than
the present. As no one knows the way of the wind (John iii. 8), or the secrets of
embryology (Ps. cxxxix. 15)—in both of which departments of nature, notwithstanding
the discoveries of modern science, much ignorance preyails—so can no one predict what
kind of future will emerge from the womb of the present (Prov. xxvii. 1; Zeph. ii. 2),
or what shall be the course of providence on the morrow. Hence to defer exercising
charity till ome bas fathomed the unfathomable is more than merely to waste one’s
time; it is to miss a certain opportunity for one that may never arrive. As to-day
only is ours, we should never cast it away for a doubtful to-morrow, but


“ Act in the living present,
Heart within and God o’erhead,”
(Longfellow.)


4. The issues of beneficence, in the recipients thereof, are uncertain. That an act of
charity, or deed of kindness, whensoever done, will prosper without fail in the expert-
ence of the doer thereof, has been declared (ver. 1); that it will turn out equally well
in the experience of him to whom it is done is not so inevitable. Yet from this
problematical character of all human philanthropy as to results should be drawn an
argument, not for doing nothing, but for doing more. An atrabiliar soul will conclude
that, because he is not sure whether his charity may not injure rather than benefit the
recipient, he should hold his hand; a hopeful and happy Christian will feel impelled
to more assiduous benevolence by reflecting that he can never tell when his kindly
deeds will bear fruit in the temporal, perhaps also spiritual, salvation of the poor and
needy. “The seed sown in the morning of life may bear its harvest at once, or not
till the evening of age. The man may reap at one and the same time the fruits of
his earlier and later sowing, and may find that both are alike good” (Plumptre).

Lxssoxs. 1, “ As therefore ye have opportunity, do good unto all men ” (Gal. vi. 10).
2. Weary not in well-doing (Gal. vi. 9). 8. Take no thought for to-morrow (Matt. vi.
84). 4. Cultivate a hopeful view of life (Prov. x. 28). sae


Vers. 1—6.—Conditions of success in business. I. THE MEASURES TO BE ADOPTED.
1. Enterprises not free from hazard, ‘Cast thy bread upon the waters,” eer
launch out upon the sea of business speculation.” The man who would succeed must
be prepared to venture somewhat, A judicious quantity of courage seems indispensable
to getting on. ‘The timid merchant is as little likely to prosper as the shrinking lover,
2. Prudence in dividing risks. “ Divide the portion into seven, yea, eight parts,” which
again signifies that one should never put all his eggs into one basket, commit all his
goods to one caravan, place all his cargo in one ship, invest all his capital in one
undertaking, or generally yenture all on one card. 8. Confidence in going forward.
The agriculturist who is always watching the weather—“observing the wind and
regarding the clouds” (ver. 4)—will make bus a poor farmer; and he who is constantly,


ti xi 110]  HOOLESLASTHS; OR, THE PREACHRE, 288


taking fright at thé fluctuations of thé market will prove oily an indifferent merchant,
In business, ds in love and war, thé man who hesitates is lost. 4, Diligencé aid
constancy in labour. The person who dims at succésé in business must bea hard and
incessant, not @ fitful and imtermittent, worker. If a farmer, he thust sow betimes in
thé morning, and pause hot until hindered by the shades of night. If a merchant, he
must trade both early and late. If dn artisan, he must toil week in and week out. It
is “the hand of the diligent ” that “maketh tich ” (Prov. x. 4).

U. Toe Motives ro Be GHERIsHED. 1. Thé expectation of a futuré reward. “Thou
shalt find it [thy bread] after many days.” Such enterprises, though attended with
risk, will not all fail, but will generally prove succéssful—not immediately, perhaps,
but after an interval of waiting, as the ships of a foreign merchant requiré inoviths,
or even years, beforé they return with the desired profits. 2: The anticipation of
impending calamity. Aa no man can foréseé the future, the prudent merchant lays hid
account with one or moré of his ventures coming to’ grief. Hence, in the customary
phrase, hé “dividés the risk,” and does not hazard all in oné expédition. 3. The
consciousness of inability to forécast the future. Just because of this—illustrated if
vers. 3 and 5=the man who aspires to prosper in his whdertakings dismisses all over-
anxious Gare, and instead of waiting for opportunitics and markets, makes ther.
4. The hope of ultinately succeeding. Though hé may oftén fail, he expects he will
not always fail; henée he redoubles his energy and diligence. “In the morning hé
sows his seed, and in the evéning withholds not his hand,” believing that in the end
his labours will be ¢rowned with success. -

_ Learn 1. That businéss ig not incompatible with piety. 2. That piety need be no
hindrance to business. 3, That each may be helpful to thé other. 4. That both


. Should be, and aré, 4 source of blessing to the world.


\


Vers. 7, 8.—Oarpe diem: memento mori ; or, hére and hereafter contrasted, 1. Hine,
A SCENE OF LIGHT; HEREAFTER, A PLACE OF DARKNESS. Under the Old Testament the
abode of departed spirits was usually conceived of as a realm from which thé light of
day was excluded, or only dimly admitted (Job x. 21, 22).

Il, Hike, A GARDEN OF DELIGHT; HEREAFTER, A WILDERNESS O¥ VANITY. Life
beneath the stin, even to thé most miserablé, has pleasures which aré wanting to thé
bodiless inhabitants of the underworld (ch. ix. 10).

Til. Here, a PERIOD OF FEW DAYS; HEREAFTER, A TERM oF MANY. At thé
longest, man’s duration upon earth is short (Job xiv. 1; Ps. xxxix. 5); in comparison,
his Gontiiitianée in the Harrow house, or in thé unseen world, will be long. Ae

Lessons. 1. Enjoy life héartily, as a good gift of God. 2. Use life wisely, in


préparation for thé world to come.


Vers. 9, 10.—Advice to a young man or woman. I. A GBAND PERMISSION—to
enjoy life. ‘Rejoice,O young man, in thy youth,” etc. 1. Not a sanction to sel/-
indulgence. The Preacher does not teach that @ young man (6r, indeed, any man) is
at liberty to “make provision for the flesh to fulfil the lusts thereof” (Rom. xiii. 14);
to have asserted or stiggésted that a youth was permitted by réligion to follow his
inclinations wherever they might lead, to plunge into sensuality; to sow his wild oats
(as the phrase is), would havé been to contradict the Law of God as given by Moses
(Numb. xv. 39). 2. Not @ protest (ironical) against asceticism. The Preacher does not
say that God will judgé men if they despise his gilts and refuse to enjoy then.
Doubtless, it so far as asceticism springs from a contemptuous disregard of God's
providential meérciés, it is sinful; but this is hardly the case the Preacher has in view.
8, But a warrant for redsonablé pleastire, The young man or maiden is informed that
he or she may enjoy the morning of life to the utmost of hia or her bent, “ walking in
the ways of his or hér héatt, and in the sight of his or her eyes,” provided always such
pleasures as ate sitiful aré eschewed. Moreover, the Preacher's language appears to
hint that such enjoyment as is here allowed is both appropriate to the séason, the days
of youth, and déemandéd by the naturé of youth, being the legitimate gratification of
thé heart and éyés. |

Il; A sonimn WARNING—the certainty of judgment, “But know thou that for all
these things,” etc. The judgment of which the Preacher speaks is: 1. future: The


284 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. x1. 1—10.


eT


great assize will be held, not on earth, but in the unseen world; not in time, but in
eternity. That the Preacher had no clear perception of either the time, place, or
nature of this judgment, is probably correct, but that he alluded to a dread tribunal
in the great hereafter seems a legitimate conclusion from the circumstance that he
elsewhere (ch. viii. 14) adverts to the fact that in this life men are not always
requited either for their righteousness or for their wickedness. What was com-
paratively dark to the Preacher is to us clearly illumined, viz. that after death is the
judgment (Heb. ix. 27). 2. Divine. The Judge will not be man, but God (ch. iii. 17;
Ps, lxii, 12; Isa. xxx. 18). This fully discovered in the New Testament, which
states that God shall judge men by Jesus Christ (Acts xvii. 31; Rom. ii. 16; 2 Tim.
iv. 1). 3. Individual. The judgment will be passed, not upon mankind in the mass,
or upon men in groups, but upon men as individuals (2 Cor. v.10). 4. Certain. As
the Preacher himself was not dubious, so would he have the young to know that the
future judgment will be a momentous reality (Heb. xii. 23; 2 Pet. ii. 9).

III. AN URGENT puTY—to banish sorrow and evil. 1. To remove sorrow from the
heart. Hither (1) the sorrow of vexation, in which case the counsel is to avoid
cherishing a peevish, morose, or discontented spirit, such as arises from looking at the
dark side of things, and to cultivate a cheerful disposition—a state of mind which
accepts whatever lot falls to it in providence (Phil. iv. 11). Or (2) that which causes
sorrow to the heart, viz. sin; in which case, again, the exhortation is to abstain from
all ungodliness, the real root of heart-bitterness (Deut. xxix. 18; Prov. i. 31; Gal. vi.
8), and to follow holiness, which alone contains the secret of happiness (Ps. evi. 3;
Tsa. xlviii. 18). 2. To put away evil from the flesh. Doubtless (1) physical evil, pain,
sufiering, affliction, whether occasioned by the self-inflicted tortures of asceticism or
by the accidentally incurred strokes of disease—a clear injunction to promote the
body’s comfort and health. But also (2) everything that may induce suffering or evil
in the flesh; hence once more sin which, apart altogether from those wickednesses
which are against the body (1 Cor. vi. 18), has a tendency to engender disease and
accelerate death.

IV. A seRIous REASON—the vanity of boyhood and manhood. 1. Both are
transient. Youth and the prime of life will not last, but will pass away. Hence they
should be kept as joyous and pure as possible, Only one thing more unfortunate for
the after-development of the soul than a sunless youth, namely, a sinful youth. If
the opening years of man’s pilgrimage on the earth should be radiant with happiness,
much more should they be glorified with holiness. 2. Both are inexperienced. Hence
their fervid impulses should be moderated and restrained by the solemn considerations
that spring from the brevity of life and the certainty of a future judgment.

Learn: 1. That youth should be happy and serious. 2. That man’s existence has
a future and a present. 3. That privilege and responsibility ever go together.


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Vers. 1, 2.— Works of charity. There can be little doubt that these admonitions
apply to the deeds of compassion and beneficence which are the proper fruits of true
religion, Especially in some conditions of society almsgiving is expedient and beneficial.
In times of famine, in cases of affliction and sudden calamity, it is a duty to supply
the need of the poor and hungry. At the same time, the indiscriminate bestowal of
what is called charity unquestionably does more harm than good, especially in a state
of society in which few need suffer want who are diligent, frugal, temperate, and
self-denying. But there are many other ways in which benevolence may express
itself beside almsgiving. The Christian is called upon to care both for the bodies and
for the souls of his fellow-men—to give the bread of knowledge as well as the bread
that perisheth, and to provide a spiritual portion for the enrichment and consolation
of the destitute.

I. THE NATURAL EMOTION OF BENEVOLENOE I8 RECOGNIZED AND HALLOWED BY TRUE
RELIGION. It may be maintained with confidence that sympathy is as natural to man
as selfishness, although the love of self is too often allowed by our sinful nature to
overcome the love of others. But when Christ takes possession, by his Spirit, of a


.


ou. xt. 1—10.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 285
oe Se a a el i


man’s inner nature, then-the benevolence which may have been dormant is aroused,
and new direction is given to it, and new power to persevere and to succeed in the
attainment of its object.

II. RELIGION PROMPTS TO A PRACTICAL EXPRESSION OF EENEVOLENT FEELING. Too
often sympathy is a sentimental luxury, leading to no effort, no self-denial, The poet
justly denounces those who,


“‘ Nursed in mealy-mouthed philanthrcpies,
Divorce the feeling from her mate—the deed.”


But the spirit of the Saviour urges to Christ-like endeavour, and sustains the worker
for men’s bodily, social, and spiritual good. The bread must be cast, the portion must
be given.

I], BENEVOLENCE MEETS IN ITS EXERCISE WITH MANY DISCOURAGEMENTS. The
bread is cast upon the waters. This implies that in many cases we must expect to
lose sight of the results of our work; that we must be prepared for disappointment;
that, at all events, we must fulfil our service for God and man in faith, and rather from
conviction and principle than from any hope of apparent and immediate success.

IV. A PROMISE IS GIVEN WHICH IS INTENDED TO URGE TO PERSEVERANCE. What is,
as it were, committed to the deep shall be found after the lapse of days. The waters
do not destroy, they fertilize and fructify, the seed. Thus “they who sow in tears
shall reap in joy.” In how many ways this promise is fulfilled the history of the
Christian Church, and even the experience of every individual worker for God, abundantly
show. In places and at times altogether unexpected and unlikely, there come to
light evidences that the work has been cared for, watched over, and prospered by God
himself. He does not suffer the efforts of his faithful servants to come to nought.
The good they aim at, and much which never occurred to them to anticipate, is
effected in God’s time by the marvellous operation of his providence and his Spirit.
“ Be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord.” —T.


Ver. 1.—Encouragement to Christian toilers. The lesson of this verse, if the fi
be dropped, may be expressed thus: Act upon principles and not upon likelihoods.

I. A siminituDE. ‘The good we give to men when we preach and teach Divine truth,
when we exercise Christian influence, is seed—fruit-bearing seed. It is a blessed, but
a sacred and serious, occupation to sow the seed of spiritual life.

II. A pirEction. Christian sowers! cast your bread even upon the waters, 1, Even
upon an unkindly soil, 2. Even in an unpromising season, 3. Liberally, though at
the cost of self-sacrifice. 4, Constantly, even though it seems that the sowing has been
long carried on in vain. 5, Bravely and hopefully, although the calculating, short-
sighted world deride your efforts. :

Ill. A promise. After lapse of days you shall find the bread you have dispersed.
1. What is cast abroad is not destroyed. 2. Neither is it lost sight of. 3. It shall,

rhaps after many days, be found again. It may be in time; it shai be in eternity.

hen “he that soweth and he that reapeth shall rejoice together.”—T.


Vers. 6.—Fulfil duty and disregard consequences, These statements and
ciated es peer and spiritual toil, The husbandman who labours
in the fields, and the pastor and the missionary who seek a harvest of souls, alike need
guch counsel. ‘The natural and the supernatural alike are under the control and
government of God; and they who would labour to good purpose in God’s universe
must have regard to Divine principles, and must confide in Divine faithfulness and

ness.
gor THE DUTY OF DILIGENCE. Good results do not come by chance; and although
the blessing and the glory are alike God’s, he honours men by permitting them to be
his fellow-workers. ‘There is no reason to expect reaping unless sowing has preceded ;
“ What a man soweth that shall he also reap.” Toil—thoughtful, patient, persevering
toil—such is the condition of every harvest worth the ingathering. = :

II, Dissvasivks FROM DILIGENCE. If the husbandman occupy himeeif in studying
¢he weather, and in imagining and anticipating adverse seasons, the operations of


286 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, (ox. x1. 1—10,


i


agriculture will come to a standstill. There are possibilities and contingencies before
every one of us, the consideration and exaggeration of which may well paralyze the
powers, hinder effective labour, and cloud the prospect of the future, so as to prevent
a proper use of present opportunities. This is a temptation which besets some
temperaments more than others, from which, however, few are altogether free. If the
Christian labourer fixes his attention upon the difficulties of his task, upon the obdura¢y
or ignorance of the naturés’ with’ which he has’ to deal, upon the slenderness of his
resources, upon the failures 6f many of his companions’ and colleagues, leaving out of
. sight all counteracting influences, the likelihood is that his powers will be crippled,
that his work will stand still, and that his whole life will be clouded by disappointment.
The field looks barren, the weeds grow apace, the enemy is sowing tares, the showéra
of blessing are withheld: what, then, is the use of sowing the gospel seed ?. Such aré
the reflections and thé questionings which take possession of many minds, to their
diseonragement and enfeeblement and distress. Peery fh tpt :
Til. INDUCEMENTS To DILIGEeNcH, It is not questioned that thé work, is ardwous,
that the difficulties aré real, that the foes are many and powerful, that citcumstancés
may be adverse, that. the prospect (to the eye of mere human reason) may be sombre.
But even granting all this, the Christian labourer has ample grounds for earnest a id
persevering effort. Of thesé, two come before us as we read these verses. 1. Our own
ignorance of results. We have not to do with the consequéndes, and we certainly
cannot foresee them. Certain it is that amazing blessings have sometimes rested upor
toil in most unpromising conditions, in places and among people that have almést
stricken the heart of the observer, with despair. “Thou knowest not whéther shall
prosper, this or that;” “ With God nothing is impossible.” 2. The express command
of our Divine Lord. Results we cannot foresee. But direct commands we ¢ai
understand and obey. “In the morning sow thy seed, and in the évening withhold
not thine hand.” Such is the voice, the behest, of him who has a right to order our
actions—to control and inspire our life. Whilst we have this commission to éxécutée, We
are not at liberty to waste our tims and cripple our activities by moodily questioning
what is likely to follow from our efforte. Surely the Christian may have faith to leave
this in the hand of God |—T.


Vers. 7, 8.—Light and darkness. The alternation of day and night is Hot only
contributive to human convenience, it is symbolical of human experiencé.

I. THERE 18 APPOINTED FOR MEN THE LIGHT OF YOUTH, HEALTH, AND PROSPERITY.
He who rises betimes, and, turning to the east, watches for thé sunrise, and thén
beholds the glorious orb of day rise from the plain or from the séa, and flood hill and
valley, corn-field and pasture, with the radiant splendour of thé morning, éan enter
into the language of the preacher, “Truly thé light is sweét, and a pleasant thing it
is for the eyes to behold the sun.” And if then he looks into the face of a companion,
a noble and generous youth, unstained by sin, undimméd by care, untouched by disease,
he can well understand what is meant by the morning of life, the lustre of youth, and
can thank God that such a period, and such strength, joy, and hope, have béén
appointed as a part of human experience. In youth and bounding health and high
spirits, how fresh and winsome is the present! how alluring the future! Who would
wish to cast a shadow upon the brightness which God himself has created ?

Il, THERE Is APPOINTED FOR MEN THE DARKNESS OF AGE, INFIRMITY, ADVERSITY,
AND DeaTtH. The same individual whom we have regarded in the prime of his powers
and the beauty of his joy will, if his life be prolonged, pass through quite other
experiences, Clouds will gather about his head, the storm will smite him, thé dark
midnight will shroud him. There is no discharge in that war—no exemption from thé
common lot. He may lose his health, his powers of body or of mind, his property, hig
friends. He wiust walk through the valley of death-shade, In somé fotta of othét
trouble and sorrow must’ be his portion,

Til, THE DUTY AND THE WISDOM OF REMEMBERING THE APPROACH OF THE TIME OF
DARKNESS. It may be objected that it will be time enough to think of thé afflictiong
of life when they are actually present, and that it is a pity to cloud the dinmny present
by gloomy forebodings. Thosé who know the young and prospéroug dré, however,
well aware that their natursl téiideticy is altogether to ighoré the likelihood of & gfoat


eo a


of, x1, 1—16,] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 267


change in circumstances and experience. And to remember the providential appoint-
ment that our life cannot, be eternal sunshine is, in many respects, a most desirablé
and profitable exercise. Thus shall we learn to place a due value, and no moré than
a due value, upon the pleasures, the diversions, the congenial pursuits of youth and
prosperity: And, what is still better, thus may we be led to seek a deeper and surer
foundation for our life—to acquire spiritual treasures, of which we cannot be deprived
by lapse of time or change of circumstances. And thus shall we, by God’s mercy,
find that the darkness through which we needs must walk is but for a season, and that
through it the people of God shall pass into the blessed sunshine of eternal day.—'T’.


Vers. 9, 10.—In joy remember fudgment! There is certainly no asceticism in the
teaching of this book. On the otler hand,there is no commendation of worldliness
and voluptuousness. Human naiure is prone to extremes; and even religious teacher's
are not always successful in avoiding them. But we seem in this passage to listen to
teaching, which at once recognizes the claims of human nature and of the earthly life,
and yet solemnly maintains the subordination of all our pleasures and occtpations to
the service of our Master, and to our preparation for the great account.

I. Tae Divine PROVISION OF LIFE’s Joys. If this language be not the language of
irony—and it seems better to take it as sober serious truth,—then we are taught that
the delights of this earthly existence, however they are capable of abuse, aré in
themselves not evil, but proofs of the Creator’s benevolence, to be accepted with
devout thanksgiving. In dealing with the young it is especially important to avoid
warring with their innocent pleasures. These may sometimes seem to us trivial and
unprofitable ; but a juster view of human nature will convince us that they are wisely
appointed to fulfil a certain place and office in human life.

TL THE DIVINE APPOINTMENT OF FUTURE JUDGMENT. Conscience suggests that we
are responsible beings, and that retribution is a reality. What conscience suggests
revelation certifies; ‘The Bible lays the greatest stress upon individual accountability.
We are taught in the text that we are not only responsible for the work we do in life,
but for the pleasures we pursue. Certainly it is of the greatest advantage that men
should recollect in the days of happiness the assurances of Scripture, that God shall ere
long bring them into judgment. Such recollection will check any inclination to
unlaw/ul enjoyments, and will prevent undue absorption in enjoyménts which are in
themselves lawful, but to which a disproportionate value may be attached. Theré is
a sense in which, as we are here reminded, “youth and the prime of life are vanity.”
They will prove to be so to those who imagine that they will last, to those who pride
themselves in them and boast of them, to those who use them only as the opportunity
of personal pleasure, to those who forget their Creator, neglect his Law, and despise
his Gospel. Pn ene

If. THE PossIBILITY OF ACCEPTING GOD'S GIFTS AND OF USING THEM UNDER A


SENSE OF RESPONSIBILITY, AND WITH A VIEW TO THEGREAT ACcouNT. If every blessing
in this life be taken as Coming directly from the great Giver’s hand, as a token of his


‘favour, and as the résult of the mediation of his blessed Son, then may the very


enjoyments of this life become to Christians the occasion of present grace and the
earnest of fulness of joy.—T.


Vers; 1—4, 6.— Incentives to Ohristian work. These are not the words of some véry

oung man who has much fervour and little experience; they are those of one who has

tows the disappointment and disenchantment of life. They come, therefore, with the
greater force to us. We gather fromthem—  —

I, THAT IT IS WELL WORTH WHILE TO SPEND OUR WHOLE STRENGTH IN LOVING
sERVIcE. “Cast thy bread upon the waters ”—scatter the precious bread-corn, drop it
into the flood; that is not the act of a fool, but of a wise man, “Give a portion to
seven ;” ay, go further than eyen that in your liberality—spend your whole strength in
that which is good and beneficent, lavish your resources, let there be a generous over-
flow rathér than a cool calculation in your service; and this whether you are acting
as 2 citizen, as a neighbour, or as a member of the Church of Christ.

Il: THAT, iF WE ARE WISE, WE SHALL LET OUB VERY IGNORANOE STIMULATE Us
TO EXERTION. Is it worth while to sow when we cannot be sure that we dhall ever


288 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. x1. 1—10
a


reap? since we do not know what evil may come in a week ora day, had we not better
turn the seed of the sower into bread for the eater? No; let our ignorance concerning
the future be rather an incentive to activity. Say not, “Ido not know what changes
may come upon the earth; how little my labours may prove to be profitable; who
will appreciate my devotion, and who will be unresponsive and ungrateful ; therefore I
shall suspend my exertions.” Say rather, “I cannot tell what is coming; how socn
I may be rewarded; how short may be the term of my life and of my opportunity
here; I must therefore lose no time and waste no strength; I must do whole-heartedly
all that is in my power. Because I cannot tell which of my words will fall like water
on the rock, and which like seed upon the irtile sil, whether the morning or the
evening labours will be rewarded, therefore £ will do my best; perhaps this present
effort I am now making may be the very one which has in it the seed of a glorious
harvest.” Thus our very ignorance may stimulate us to holy and fruitful action.

III. THAT WE SHOULD NOT ALLOW OURSELVES TO BE DISTURBED BY THE UNSYM-
PATHETIO FORCES ROUND vs. If the clouds are full of rain, they will empty them-
selves on the earth without any regard to our necessity for fine weather; the tree will
fall this way or that, according to the wind, whomsoever or whatsoever it will crush by
its weight. The forces of nature are quite unsympathetic. Feebleness may incapaci-
tate or death may take away our most efficient fellow-labourer; the changes that affect
our human lives may reduce our means or remove our agents, or even close our
agencies; but we must not be daunted, nor must we stay our hand on this account.
The full mind, like the full cloud, must pour itself forth, and may do so in words and
ways we do not like; the man, like the tree, must take the line toward which he
strongly inclines, and this may be one that traverses our tastes and wishes. Never
mind! We are not to let our good work for Christ be arrested by such incidental
difficulty as that. Weare to “ quit us like men, and be strong,” and we are to triumph
over such hindrances as these.

IV. ''HAT WE ARE NOT TO BE IN ANY HURRY FOR THE HARVEST. ‘The seed we
cast “shall be found after many days.” ‘The husbandman hath “long patience,”
waiting for the fruits of the earth. The history of the noblest men is one long sermon
on the blessedness of patience. It says to the Christian pilgrim and workman, “ Work
and wait; work diligently, intelligently, devoutly, then wait prayerfully and hope-
fully. Be not surprised, much less distracted, because the harvest is still far in the
future; in due season you will reap, if yuu faint not.”—O.


Ver. 4.—The true workman. The idea of the text is that something must be
endured, and something must be dared, if we mean to achieve anything of any account.
If a man wants to sow, he must not mind being assailed by the wind while he is at
work; or if he wants to reap, he must not stay indoors because it threatens to rain.
We must be ready to endure, we must be prepared to run risks, if we have any thought
of taking rank among the successful workers of our time. God does not give his
bounties to those who will only walk the road when it is perfectly smooth and
sheltered; nor does he permit us to win triumphs if our heart misgives us at the sight
of difficulty or danger. Success is for those, and those only, who can brave wind and
rain in the open field of labour, in the wide spheres of usefulness.

I, THE FACT, AS OUR EXPERIENCE TESTIFIES. Everything that is done which is
really worth doing is wrought with trouble, with some measure of difficulty and of risk
with the possibility or likelihood of failure, with struggle and some degree of dis-
appointment—e.g. the little child in learning to walk and to talk; the boy in mastering
his lesson or even his game, or in finding and taking his place in the schoolroom and the
playground; the student in acquiring his knowledge, and in facing and passing his
examination ; the tradesman and merchant in making their purchases and investing
their money ; the author in writing aud printing his book; the statesman in planning
and submitting his measure, etc. In all these, and in all such cases, we have to
contend with adverse “winds” that blow upon us; we have to “ put our foot down”
firmly on the ground; we have to run the risk of unpleasant “ rains,” of falling and of
oe It is the constant condition of human endeavour.

II. THE BENEFICENT RESULT. This is not to be regretted; on the cont
thankful for it. It develops human character ; it eile forth and strangticagiall abe


on.x1—10.]  ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, =——s289


is best within us. 1. It nourishes fortitude—a commendable capacity to endure; a
readiness to accept, unmoved and untroubled at heart, whatever may befall us. 2. It
creates and sustains cowrage—a deliberate determination to face the evil that may
possibly await us. 3. It contributes to true manliness—the power to do and to endure
anything and everything as God may will, as man may want. We pity those whose
field of work, whose path of life, is unvisited by adverse winds and unpleasant rains,
If they do grow up into strong and brave souls, it will be in spite of the absence of
those circumstances which are most helpful in the formation of character. We have
no condolence for those who have to face the strong wind and the rain; we con-
gratulate them that they are placed where the noblest characters are shaped.

III. Irg LEsson FoR THE CHRISTIAN WORKER. Too often the workman in the
Master’s vineyard is inclined to lay down his weapon when the clouds gather in the
heavens. But to act thus is not worthy of him. Not thus did he who “ bore such
contradiction of sinners against himself.” Not thus have the worthiest of his disciples
done—they who have done the most, and have left behind them the most fragrant
memories. Not thus will they have acted who receive the gladdening commendation
of their Lord “in the day of his appearing.” Not thus shall we finish the work our
Father has given us todo. Let the strong winds of even an unkindly criticism blow,
let the dark cloud of possible failure show itself in the horizon, we will not be daunted ;
we will go forth to sow the good seed of the kingdom, to reap its precious harvest.—O,


Vers. 7, 8.—The shadow of the tomb. Let a man rejoice, says the Preacher, in his
long bright days of prosperity; but let him remember that the time is drawing on
when he will sleep his long sleep beneath the ground; and many as his days have
been when the light of the sun was sweet to his eyes, very many more will be the days
of darkness which will follow. It is open to us all to indulge in some—

I, SENTIMENTAL SADNESS, IN VIEW OF THIS LONG FUTURE. We may stroll in the
churchyard, and as we read the names and ages of men who lived for thirty or forty
years, but who have been in their graves for, it may be, two hundred years, we may
think how small was the measure of the light on which they looked compared with
that of the darkness in which they have been sleeping. And as we yield to these
thoughts we feel the vanity of human affairs. Thus the shadow of the tomb falls
upon and darkens the brightness of our life. It seems to us a poor thing for a man to
come out of the infinite darkness behind; to walk in the sunshine for a few swiftly
passing, soon-departed decades, and then go out into the immeasurable darkness on the
other side. There is, however—

II. A corREcTiIne THOUGHT. Why should the excellency of human life be spoiled
to us by the reflection that it is limited, bound by a line which is not far off us? If it
be so that there is nothing but darkness beyond, if it be true that what we see
comprises all that is to be seen, then let us, for that very reason, make the most of all
that we hold. If the worth of our existence is confined to the present, let us com-

ress into the present time all the action and all the enjoyment which it will hold,
Bhall we not say—


«“T will drink
Life to the lees. . . . Life piled on life
Were all too little, and of one to me
Little remains: but every hour is saved
From that eternal silence ” ?


II. Tue CurisTiaAN ASPECT OF THE suBJECT. We know that this life will soon be
over, may reach its terminus any day, and must come to its conclusion before many
years have gone. What shall we be concerned about in this? 1. Not the hour or act
of dying. Common human fortitude will carry us through that experience, as it has
done in countless millions of cases already; much more will Christian faith and hope.
2. Not the silence and darkness of the grave. What does it signify to us that our
mortal body will lie long in the grave, when we are hoping to be “ clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven’? 38. The long future of heavenly life. Not the
many days of darkness, but the long, the everlasting day of glory is before us who
believe in Christ, and who hope to dwell with him for ever. For that endless day of

EOCLESIASTES. v


290 EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER _—[on. xr. 1-10


blessedness the life we are now living is not only the preliminary but the preparation.

herefore let every day, every hour, be sacred ; be so spent in faith, in love, in holy
labour, in ennobling joy, that the future will be but the continuance of the present—
the continuance, but also the enlargement, the glorification. Thur shall there not fall
upon the life that now is the shadow of the tomb; there shall shine upon it some beama
from the glory that is beyond.—O,


_ Vers. 9, 10.—Human joy and Divine judgment, That these words are not to be
taken ironically is probable, if not certain, when we consider kow frequently the
Preacher had given substantially the same counsel before (see ch. ii, 245 iii. 12, 225 v.
18; viii. 15; ix. 9). Moreover, we obtain an excellent meaning by taking them in
their natural sense, We may indeed ask for— :

I. Tux nucessiry For sucH counsen. It may be said—-What need is there for
offering such an exhortation? Young manhood is certain to take all the indulgence
which is good for it, without any man’s bidding; the danger is not on the side of
defect, but of excess. That certainly is so generally, But there is the religious devotee,
who thinks he is pleasing God by abstaining from all bodily comforts, and enduring all
physical sufferings. 'lhere is also the ascetic moralist, who thinks that he is conforming
to the highest standard of ethics when he practises a rigorous abstinence, and goes
through life denying himself the delights to which outward nature and inward instincts
invite him, There is also the man of prudent policy, who thinks that in a state of
society such as that in which the Preacher lived and wrote, where there is no security

or life or property, it is better not to enter into new relationships or to embark in
great enterprises; let life be cut down to its smallest limits. Hence the necessity for
such a cheery invitation as thatin the text. But we must mark—

Il. THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT GOES. Clearly the words must not be taken in their
widest possible sense. That would be not liberty, but licence; that would not encourage
enjoyment, but sanction vice. The Preacher would have the young man, who is full
of strength, energy, hope, affection, have the full heritage which the Father of spirits
and Author of this world intended aud provided for him. Let him give play to all
the sound impulses of his nature; let him taste the exquisite enjoyment of a pure
affection and of happy friendship; let him be an eager and earnest competitor in the
contest of strength, of skill, of the studio, of the mart, of the council, of the senate; let
him throw his full energies into the activities, recreations, ambitions, aspirations, of his
time; let him play his part as his heart inclines and as his capacities enable him:
But let him not eross the line which divides virtue from vice, wisdom from fully,
eonscientiousness from unscrupulousness; For there has to be taken into account—

III. ONE POWERFULLY RESTRAINING THOUGHT. God will bring him into judgment;
And God’s judgment is threefold. 1, He judges us every moment, deciding whether
our thought, our feeling, our action, is right or wrong; aud he is thus continually
approving or disapproving, and is constantly pleased or displeased. Surely this is not
a Divine judgment to be disregarded. 2. He causes an evil habit to be visited; sooner
or later, with the penalty which appropriately follows it—sickness, feebleness, poverty,
mental incapacity, human condennation, ruin, death, as the case may be. 8. He
reserves the day of trial and of account for the hour when lifé is over.—O.,


Ver. 10.—The vanity and glory of youth. (See homily on ch, xii. 1 )—O.


Vers, 1—6.— Provision for the future. Fruitless though many of the quests had beer on
which the Preacher had set out, lost though he had often been in the mazes of barren and
withering speculation, something he did succeed in gaining; which he now places on
record among the concluding sentences of his book. ‘Though truth in its fulness is out
of man’s reach; the path of duty is plain; essential wisdom may never be discovered,
but some practical lessons for the guidance of life, which after all are what most we need,
are to be won from the search. Perhaps to many minds these may seem commonplace,
It may be thought that alter all the bustle of the enterprise, after all the zeal and
energy expended in carrying it through, the gain is small. Surely some new thing of
greater value might have been brought out of the far-off region of philosophy and specu=
lation than the counsels given here to be beneficent and active, since # time may come


ox. x-1—10]  EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. oon


when we shall need the help of others, and the harvest may far exceed all our expectations.
But from the very nature of the case such murmurings are —recmrebithe se thing
cau be brought to light in the moral world. Conscience proclaims the same duties age
after age ; and all that is left to him who would advance the cause of righteousness is to
give clearer utterance to the yoice of God in the heart, to show the imperative claims
of duty, and in some instances to suggest new and weighty motives for obedience to
them. None need, therefore, scorn the simple terms in which the Preacher sums up
the practical lessons he would have us Jay to heart. There is nothing novel or wonderful
in what he says, but probably those epithets would be fairly applicable to the change
that would be produced in our lives if we obeyed his counsels. There is a close con-
neotion between yerse and yerse in this section (vers. 15 but a formal division of it
into logical parts is impracticable. The Hebrew or Oriental mind had a different mode
= asoeialioe from ours, We may, however, note the stages in the current of

- :

I. In yers. 1, 24 THE PRACTICE OF BENEVOLENCE TOWARD OTHERS is commended to
us—a benevolence that is generous and profuse. ‘Cast thy bread,” he says, “upon the
waters.” “Do not be afraid of showing kindness, even where thou seest no prospect of
result or return; let the flat cake of bread, the type of food to the hungry, aid to the
needy, float down the stream of life. Thou wilt find one day that thou hast hit the
mark, won some grateful heart” (Bradley). His words remind us of the counsel in
the Gospels “to do good, hoping for nothing again, even to the unthankful and the
evil” (Matt. vy. 44—46; Luke vi. 32—35). i


# Bépendes vos bienfaits avec magnificence,
iéme aux moins yertueux ne les refusez pas.”
(Voltaire, ‘ Précis de l’Ecclesiaste.”)


Let many experience your beneficence, says the Preacher; confine it not within narrow
limits, He speaks of seven or eight, according to the Hebrew manner of indicating an
indefinite but large number (Micah y.5). His specification is not to be taken literally,
any more than our Lord’s “seyenty times seven” as indicating the literal number of
times we are to forgive (Matt. xviii. 22). ; ti

IL. A MOTIVE TO BENEFICENCE is laid down in ver. 26. “For thou knowest not what
evil shall be upon the earth.” In the time of prosperity remember that a day of
calamity and suffering may come, when the succour of the friends you haye made may
be of great service. Bad as men are, there are numerous instances of a grateful love
recompensing benefits received long ago, which perhaps even the benefactor has long
forgotten. “Peradventure for the good man some would even dare to die.” No one
can tell what vicissitudes of fortune are in store for him; and therefore it is prudent to
make sowe provision in the present against a day of adversity. The same teaching is
found in the parable of the unjust steward (Luke xvi. 1—9). ‘Those who spend some of
their wealth in doing deeds of kindness and mercy (Luke xiv. 12—14) are described as
jaying up treasure in bags that wax not old, as providing for themselves friends who
will, when this life is over, welcome them into everlasting habitations. ‘To some this
may seem but a sordid motive to benevolence; it may seem to turn that virtue into a
kind of refined selfishness. But, after all, there is nothing unworthy in the motive.
“ Self-love is implanted in man’s nature, and men who themselves affect to despise such
a motive are often themselves, with all their professed loftiness of aim, actuated by no
higher objects than those of pleasure, fame, or advancement ” (Wright).

IIL Over IGNORANCE OF THE FUTURE FORBIDS OUR KNOWING WHAT EVIL WILL COME
UPON THE EARTH. (Ver. 2b.) The world is governed by uniform laws; both good and evil
are subject to them. As it is an invariable law of nature that at a certain point the
clouds that are filled with rain begin to discharge their load upon the earth, and no
human power can seal them up, and as it is an invincible law that the forest tree must fall
before the blast, when the force with which it resists the fury of the wind is insufficient
to save it from overthrow, so the future is shaped by laws which man cannot control,
and it is a mark of prudence to be prepared for any contingencies. The tempest which
deluges the earth with rain, and levels the monarchs of the forest with the ground, can
peisher be foreseen nor averted by man; neither can the future, whether it be charged


202 ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. [on. x1. 1—10.
EE)


with prosperity or adversity. The interpretation of ver. 8 as teaching that the fate of
man is for ever fixed at death is utterly indefensible; there is nothing whatever in the
text to indicate that the writer had any such thought in his mind. And one may say, in
passing, that the teaching in question can have very little foundation, when it is
principally, if not altogether, founded upon @ misinterpretation of this passage. Why
the advocates of the doctrine, which in itself is repulsive to our ideas of reasonableness
and justice, should make so much of an obscure metaphor in the Book of Keclesiastes,
and shut their eyes to the historical statement in 1 Pet. iii, 18—20, which is decisive
upon the point in question, is difficult to understand. No outcry about the obscurity
of the latter passage can annul the plain statement of fact in it, viz. that Christ after
his death went and preached the gospel to the spirits of those who were overtaken by
the flood in the days of Noah. Uncertainty as to the future should not, however, lead
to present inactivity (ver. 5). We are not to allow “taking thought for the morrow
(Matt. vi. 25) te hinder our doing good to-day ; that would be as absurd as the conduct
of the farmer if he were to put off from day to day the sowing or reaping of his ficlds
because of wind or rain, until the time for sowing or for reaping had passed away.
Some risk we must run in our undertakings; and if some opportunities come to us
without any seeking or effort on our part, we can make others for ourselves by the
exercise of our good sense, energy, or tact. “The conditions of success cannot be
reckoned on beforehand ; the future belongs to God, the all-conditioning ” (Delitzsch).
This is the idea contained in ver. 5. Two examples are given of processes of nature
which are familiar to us all, but the ways and working of which are hidden from our
knowledge; they are the course of the wind (not the “spirit,” as in the Authorized
Version), which “ bloweth where it listeth ” (John iii, 8), and the formation of the babe
“in the womb of her who is with child.” These secrets being in nature, it is not
wonderful that the methods of the Divine government cannot be searched out by human
wisdom or ingenuity, that the ways of God should be inscrutable and past finding out.
“ Hven so thou knowest not the works of God who maketh all.”

IV. THE CALL TO BENEFICENT ACTIVITY IS REPEATED. (Ver. 6.) “Since the future
rests in the power of One who arranges all things, but who does not act arbitrarily, and
since a finite being cannot unravel the secrets of the Infinite, man should act faithfully
and fulfil energetically his appointed task” (Wright), The teaching is the same as
in ch. ix. 10, “ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might;” “In the
morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thine hand: for thou knowest not
whether shall prosper, either this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good”
(ver. 6). “In the morning of life be active; slumber not through its decline. Use
well the gifts of youth; use, too, the special gifts of age. Thou knowest not which
shall bear good fruit; it may be both.” As men sow, they reap; the greater their
exertions, the wider the area they cultivate, the richer usually is their harvest. The
whole precept, says Plumptre, “is a call to activity in good, not unlike that of him who
said, ‘1 must work the works of him that sent me, while it is called to-day: the night
cometh, when no man can work’ (John ix. 4); who taught men to labour in the
vineyard, even though they were not called to begin their work till the eleventh hour,
when it was toward evening, and the day far spent (Matt. xx. 1—16).”—J. W.


Vers. 7, 8.—Enjoyment of the present. The cloud of pessimism rises from the
Preacher’s mind as he thinks of the happiness which a well-ordered life may after all
yield. God has placed some pleasures within our reach, and if we do not by our wilful-
ness defeat his purpose, we may enjoy much innocent peace and happiness. And this
assertion, coming so closely as it does upon the admonition to be diligent in carrying
out the business that we have to do, implies that it is the well-earned reward of the
worker, and not the ease and luxury of the idle sensualist, that wins the word of
approval. “'This joy of life, based upon fidelity to one’s vocation, and sanctified by
the fear of God, is the truest and highest enjcyment here below” (Delitzsch). Only
those have a right to enjoy life who are zealous in the discharge of the duties that
belong to their lot. The order of thought is the same as in Rom. xii. 11, 12, “In
diligence not slothful . . . rejoicing in hope.” The Revised Version (in ver. 8) brings
out the full meaning more clearly than the Authorized Version : “Truly the light is sweet,
and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun, Yea, if a man live many


ox, xt, 1—10.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 298


years, let him rejoice in them all; but let him remember the days of darkness, for they
shall be many. All that cometh is vanity.” The light here praised is the light of
life ; the existence passed in the world on which the sun shines, as contrasted with the
darkness of the grave, the unseen world, which to the mind of the Preacher, unillumined
by the full revelation in Christ, seemed a region of shadows, dreary and insubstantial.
o our thoughts such a view of the world beyond the grave, if world it could be called,
in which all was dark and without any order (Job x. 21, 22), would seem calculated to
rob the present of all delights, But evidently our author did not regard it as neces-
sarily doing so. Neither did those ancient Egyptians, who had the representation of a
corpse in its cerements at their banquets. ‘lo grosser minds among them the sight
probably suggested the thought, “ Let us eat and drink; for to-morrow we die.” But
doubtless to graver minds it suggested something nobler—that pleasure, chastened and
restrained by wise foresight, is pure and more lasting than any other. So, too, the
enjoyment of life commended by the Preacher is not found by him incompatible with
a contemplation of death. He does not say, “ Let the young and thoughtless have out
their time of frivolity and short-lived mirth; the sad thoughts by which the closing
bak of life are naturally darkened will only come to them too soon.” He rather would
ve men to rejoice in all the years of their life, though they be many. “ Days of
evil may come; clouds may, during long hours of sorrow, obscure the glory of the sun;
but even if a man live many days, he should endeavour to rejoice in them all: and all
the more so, if a long night of darkness awaits him at the close of his earthly career”
(Wright). By the days of darkness, which are many, he evidently means the condition
after death; for he distinctly differentiates them from the days of life, in all of which
there should be joy, in spite of passing trials and distresses. For all men days of darkness
are in store; let all, therefore, make the most of the present, and by a wise guidance
of their conduct, by a beneficent activity, let them acquire the right and the ability to
enjoy the innocent joys with which God has been pleased to bless and enrich our lives,
seeing that “all that cometh” after life is vanity. It is true that to us the world beyond
the grave appears in a different light. We believe in the everlasting felicity of the
righteous in the “‘ many mansions” which remain for those who have during this life
been faithful to God, and have qualified themselves for higher service and more perfect
enjoyment of him in the world te come. But this belief need not, should not, lead us
to despise the bounties we have in this world from the land of God. A devout and
grateful acceptance and use of all the blessings he has bestowed upon us, a joy in living
and seeing the light of the sun, should be much easier to us if we are conscious of
reconciliation to God, and regard death as the entrance to a higher life—J. W.


Ver. 9—ch. xii. 7.— Youth and age. The greater part of the Book of Ecclesiastes is
of a sombre character. It records the experiences of one who sought on all sides and
with passionate eagerness for that which would satisfy the higher wants of his nature
—the hunger and thirst of the soul—but who sought in vain. Ordinary coarse, sensual
pleasures soon lost their- charm for him; for he deliberately tried—a dangerous experie
ment—to see if in self-indulgence any real satisfaction could be found. From this
failure he turned to a more promising quarter. He sought in “culture,” the pursuit of
beauty and maguificence in art, the pathway to the highest good, on the discovery of
which his soul was set. He used his great wealth to procure all that could minister to
a refined taste. He built palaces, planted vineyards and gardens and orchards; he
filled his palaces with all that was beautiful and costly, and cultivated every pleasure
which is within the reach of man. “ Whatsoever mine eyes desired,” he says, “I kept
not from them, I withheld not my heart from any joy. ... Then I looked on all the
works that my hands had wrought, and on all the labour that I had laboured to do: and,
behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun.”
From this he turned to the joys and employments of an intellectual life—acquired
knowledge and wisdom, studied the works of nature, analyzed human character in all
its phases, and applied himself to the solution of all those great problems connected with
the moral government of the world and the destiny of the soul of man. Here he was
baffled. The discoveries he made were, he found, useless for curing any of the evils of
life, and at every point he met with mysteries which he could not solve, and his sense
of failure and defeat convinced him that though “ wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light


294 EOQOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ton. xt. 1-10,


excelleth darkness,” it does not satisfy the soul. What, then, 1s the result of his inquiries,
of his pain and labour in searching after the highest good? Do his withering specu
lations leave anything untouched which may reasonably be the object of our pursuit,
and which may afford us the satisfaction for which he sought in vain in so many
quarters? ‘Does he decide that life is, after all, worth living, or is his conclusion that
it isnot? In the closing sections of his book some answer is given to these questions ;
something positive comes as a pleasing relief from all the negations with which he had
shut up one after another of the paths by which men had sought and still seek toattain
to lasting happiness. Two conclusions might have been drawn from the experience
through which he had passed. “Since the employments and enjoyments of life are
insufficient to give satisfaction to the soul’s craving, why engage in them, why not tum
away from them in contempt, and fix the thoughts solely on a life to come?” an ascetic
might ask. “ Since life is so transitory, pleasure so fleeting, why not seize upon every
' pleasure, and banish every care as far as possible? ” an Epicurean might ask. “Let us
eat and drink ; for to-morrow we die.” ‘Neither of these courses finds any favour in the
mature judgment of Solomon, or of the writer who draws his teaching from the expe-
rience of the Jewish king. “Rejoice,” ihe says, rebuking the ascetic; “know show
that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment,” headds, for the confusion
of the Epicurean. He speaks with the authority of one who had fully considered the
problems of life, and with the solemnity of one whose earthly career was hastening to
its close; and he addresses himself to the young, as more likely to profit by his expe-
rience than those over whom habits of life and thought have more power. But of
course all, both young and old, men and women, can learn from him if they will,
according to the gospel precept, “‘ become as little children,” and listen with reverence
and simplicity. ‘The counsel which the Preacher has to give is bold and startling,
* Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know
thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.” What does he
mean? Are his words ironical, or spoken in sober earnest? A very long time ago
they cansed some perplexity to translators and commentators. In the earliest transla-
tion of this book into another language, that into Greek, this passage was considerably

modified and toned down, ‘The translator put in the word “blameless” after ‘* walk,?
and the word “not” into the next part of the sentence. Walk blameless in the ways
of thine heart, and not after the sight of thine eyes,” But any such tampering with
the text was not only profane, but also senseless, for it simply destroyed the whole
meaning of the passage. But granting that we have in our English a fair reproduction
of the original, can there be any mistake about the interpretation of it? Is it possible
that it may mean, “ Rejoice if you will, follow your desires, have your fling, go forth
on the voyage of life, ‘ youth at the prow, and pleasure at the helm, but know that the
end of it all are the penal flames”? Some have thought that that is the meaning of
the words, But a little consideration of them, and comparison of them with other
passages in the book, will show us that it cannot be. Ourauthor on several occasions,
‘after showing us the vanity of earthly pursuits, falls back on the fact that there are

many alleviations of our lot in life, which it is true wisdom to make use of—many;
flowers of pleasure on the side of the hard road which one may innocently pluck.
Thus he says (ch. ii. 24), “ There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat
and drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This also I
saw that it was from the hand of God.’ And again (ch. ix. 7), “Go thy way, eat thy
bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart; for God now accepteth thy
works. Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no ointment. Live
joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of thy vanity . . . for that is thy
portion in this life”” And the same lesson he repeats there, but in a tone of deeper
solemnity, balancing and steadying the inclination to pleasure, which in few of us needs
to be stimulated, with the thought that for every oné of our actions we shall have to
give an account at the judgment-seat of God. Surely this thought is a sufficient
corrective to the abuse of the teaching which a perverse mind might make, and a proof
that the enjoyments spoken of are such as do not degrade the soul. A gloomy asceticiam
which would unlawfully diminish human happiness is forbidden ; a thankful acceptance
ofall the blessings God gives ua, and a constant remembrance of our responsibility te
4


= ‘ e


om. x1.1—10.] EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 208


him, is commended to us, With all the repugnance of a healthy mind, our author
recoils from that narrow and self-righteous fanaticism which has done so much to deepen
the gloom of life, and to turn religion into an oppressive yoke, He does not, however,
go to the other extreme; but while he bids the young to enjoy the morning of life, he
at the same time admonishes them in all things to have the fear of God before their
eyes, Youth and manhood are vanity; their joys are fleeting, and will soon be past.
Must we, therefore, neglect them, and indulge in equally vain and fleeting regrets ?
No; but rather put away all morose repining, and spare ourselves all unnecessary pain,
and cultivate a cheerful contentedness with our lot. If the morning will soon be past,
let us enjoy its light while it lasts, mindful of him who is the Giver of every good and
perfect gift. The thought of him will net dull any innocent happiness, for he has
made us capable of joy, and given us occasions of experiencing it, ‘That no fears need
be felt about the application of this teaching to actual life is abundantly proved by the
words that follow, in the solemn and stately passage with which the twelfth chapter
opens. The idea all through is that piety should be bound up with the whole life—
with the buoyancy and gaiety of youth, as well as with the decaying hopes and failing
strength of age, ‘That religion is not merely a consolation to which we may betake
when all other things fail, but all through the food by which the soul is nourished.
The fact is put very strongly. IPfin youth God is not remembered, it will be difficult
in age, when the faculties begin to lose their vigour, to think of him for the first time,
and consecrate one’s self to him. The mere accumulation of the weaknesses, both
physical and mental, which attend the close of life will absorb the attention and crowd
out other thoughts, ‘Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while
the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no pleasure
in them.” And then he goes on to draw a picture, full of pathos and solemnity, of the
gradual dissolution of human life with the advance of age, of the decay and death into
which the strongest fall, even if they endure for many years. One cannot make out all
the successive images with equal clearness, but the evident purpose of the whole passage
is clear enough. In the evil days the light of the sun, moon, and stars is darkened,
and the sky is time after time overcast with returning clouds, The light of youth has
fled, and with it the self-confidence and strength by which the life was sustained. Like
some household in Egypt when the plague of darkness came down upon it and put an
end to all tasks and pleasures, and filled every heart with a paralyzing terror, so is the
state of man “ perplexed with fear of change.” ‘‘The keepers of the house tremble,
the strong men bow themselves, the terrified servants cease their labour, none look out
of the windows, the street doors are shut, the sound of human bustle and activity dies
away, the shrill cry of the storm-bird is heard without, and all the daughters of music
are hushed and silent.” And then, in language still more enigmatical, other of the
humiliating characteristics of old age are set forth—its timidity and irresolution, the
blanched hair, the failing appetite. ‘These signs accumulate rapidly; for man goes to
his long, his eternal home, and the procession of mourners is already moving along the
street. “Remember,” he says, “ thy Creator ere the day of death; ere the silver cord
be loosened which lets fall and shivers the golden bowl that feeds with oil the flame of
life ; ere the pitcher be shattered by the spring, and the fountain of life can no longer
be replenished ; ere the wheel set up with care to draw up from the depths of earth the
cool waters give way and fall itself into the well, Therefore remember thy God, and
prepare while here to meet him, before that the dust shall return upon the earth dust
as it was; for the spirit shall then return to God who gave it.” “It wasa gift from him,
that spirit. To him it will return. More he says not. Its absorption, the re-entering
of the human unit into the eternal and unknown Spirit, would be a thought, it would
seem, alien toa Hebrew. But we must not press his words too far. As just now he
spoke of a judgment, but gave us no picture of the sheep on the right hand and the
goats on the left, so here he has no more to say, no clear and dogmatic assertion of @
conscious and separate future life. ‘Into thy hands I commend my spirit, said the
trustful psalmist. ‘ Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit,’ said he who bowed
his head upon the cross, who tasted death for our sakes. (ur Preacher leaves the spirit
with its God—that is all, and that is much. ‘ God will call us to judgment,’ he has said,
and now he adds, ‘ The body moulders, the spirit passes back to the God who gave it’”
(Bradley). Many are the reasons which might be adduced to give weight to the


296 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. xm. 1—14,
a en te EP re i in nn


admonition, “ Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth. The uncertainty
of life, ¢.g., renders it unwise in any who begin to realize their responsibilities, and to act
for themselves, to postpone self-consecration to God. If not done now, when the affec-
tions are fresh, when habits are beginning to form, there is risk of its not being done
at all. Certainly it is more difficult to make a change, and to enter upon the higher life
when the heart is taken up with a love of other things, when the attention and interest
are absorbed in other cares. Then, too, love of our Creator and service of hirr. are due
from us in the best of our days, in the time of our strength and energy, and not merely
when we are weary and worn out with following our own devices, and are anxious
merely to escape utter ruin and overthrow. True it is that the repentant prodigal is
welcomed when he returns to his Father’s house; the worker beginning even at the
eleventh hour receives his wages as though he had been the whole day in the vineyard,
But their sense of gratitude, wonder, and awe at the love which has overlooked their
faults and shortcomings is the source of a joy far inferior to that of those who have
never wandered, who have served faithfully with all the strength and all the day,
upon whom the sunshine of God’s favour has ever rested. Another and final reason
why it is wise to remember our Creator in the days of youth is that this is the secret of
a happy life. The happiness which is disturbed by remembrance of God is not worth
the name. That alone gives satisfaction—the satisfaction after which the Preacher
sought so long and in so many quarters—which springs from communion with God. It
alone is intense, it alone is lasting, Arising as it does from the relations of the spirit
of man with him who created it, it is raised above all the accidents of time and change.
The sooner, therefore, that we begin this life of holy communion and service, the longer
period of happiness shall we know, the surer will be our ground of confidence for the future,
when the day comes for leaving the world. “Over against the melancholy circumstances
of decay and decline, as the end of life draws on, will be set the bright memories of the
past, the consciousness of present help, and the hope of a joyous immortality. “ Vanity
of vanities; all is vanity!” was the sentence of one whose wisdom sprang only from his
experience of an earthly life, and upon whose mind the burden lay of human sorrows
and cares. But “a greater than Solomon,” One whose wisdom is Divine, whose power
to remove every burden is daily seen, has an infinitely more hopeful message for us.
“Let not your heart be troubled : ye believe in God, believe also in me. In my Father's
house are many mansions: if it were not so, 1 would have told you. I go to prepare a
place for you. . . . I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where I am,
there ye may be also.” —J. W.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTER XII.


Ver. 1—The divicion into chapters is
unfortunate here, as this verse is closely
connected with ver. 10 of the preceding
chapter. Remember now thy Creator in the
days of thy youth. Set God always before
thine eyes from thy earliest days; think who
made thee, and what thou wast made for,
not for self-pleasing only, not to gratify thy
passions which now are strong, but that
thou mightest use thy powers and energy in
accordance with the laws of thy being as a
creature of God’s hands, responsible to him
for the use of the faculties and capacities
with which he has endowed thee. The
word for “Creator” is the participle of the
verb bara, which is that used in Gen. i. 1
ete., describing God’s work. It is pluraf
in form, like Elohim, the plural being that of
majesty or excellence (comp. Job xxxv. 10;
Tea tiv. 5). It is used as an appellation


of God, because the young have to bethink
themselves that all they are and all they
have come from God. Such plurals are
supposed by some to be divinely intended
to adumbrate the doctrine of the Holy
Trinity—a dark saying containing a mys-
tery which future revelation should ex-
plain. “He that made thee” is a common
phrase in Ecclesiasticus (see iv. 6; vii. 30;
xxxix. 5). It is to be noted that Gratz
reads “cistern” or “fountain” in place of
“Creator,” and explains this term to mean
= wife,” as in Prov. v.15—18. But the altera-
tion has nothing to support it, and is most
unnecessary, though Cheyne seems inclined
to adopt it (‘Job and Solomon,’ én loe.).
While the evil days come not; ¢.e. before
they come. “ Days of evil;” af hudpu ris
koxias (Septuagint) (Matt. vi. 34); tempus
aflictionis (Vulgate). The phrase refers to
the grievances and inconveniences of old
age, which are further and graphically de-


on. xm, 1—14.]


scribed in the following verses, though
whether the expressions therein used regard
literal anatomical facts, or are allegorical
representations of the gradual decay of the
faculties, has been greatly disputed. Pro-
bably both opinions contain a partial truth,
as will be noted in our Exposition. Ginsburg
considers that the allusion is not to the ills
that in the course of time all flesh is heir to,
but rather to that premature decay and
suffering occasioned by the unrestrained
gratification of sensual passions, such as
Cicero. intimates (‘De Senect.,’ ix. 29),
“Libidinosa et intemperans adulescentia
effetum corpus tradit senectuti.” There is
nothing specially in the text to support
this view, and it is most reasonable to
see here generally a figurative description
of decay, whatever may be the cause. I
have no pleasure in them. Ere the time
comes when a man shall say, “I have no
pleasure in life.” Thus the aged Barzillai
asks, “ Can I discern between good and evil?
Can thy servant taste what I eat or what I
drink? Can I hear any more the voice of
singing-men and singing-women? ” (2 Sam.
xix. 35).

Ver. 2.—From this verse onwards there
is great diversity of interpretation. While
some think that the approach of death is
represented under the image of a storm,
others deem that what is here intended is
first the debility of old age, and then, at ver.
6, death itself, which two stages are described
under various metaphors and figures. While
the sun, or the light, or the moon, or the
stars, be not darkened. Under these figures
the evil days spoken of above, the advent
and infirmities of old age, are represented.
It would be endless and unprofitable to
recount the explanations of the terms used
in the following verses. Every commentator,
ancientand modern, hasexerted his ingenuity
to force the poet’s language into the shape
which he has imagined for it. But, as we said
above, there are at least two distinct lines of
interpretation which have found favour with
the great majority of expositors. One of
these regards the imagery as applicable to
the effects of a heavy storm upon a house and
its inmates, explaining every detail under
this notion ; the other regards tlie terms used
as referring to tle man himself, adumbrating
the gradual decay of old age, the various
members and powers that are affected being
represented under tropes and images. Both
interpretations are beset with difficulties,
and are only with some straining and accom-
modation forced into a consistent harmony.
But the latter seems to us to present fewer
perplexities than the other, and we have
adopted it here. At the same time, we
think it expedient to give the other view,
together with our own, as there is much to


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


297


be said in its favour, and many great writers
have declared themselves on its side. Wright
supposes (and makes @ good case for his
theory) that Koheleth is referring especially
to the closing days of winter, which in Pales-
tine are very fatal to old people. The
seven last days, indeed, are noted even now
as the most sickly and dangerous of all the
year. The approach of this period casts a
dark shadow upon all the inhabitants of the
house. The theory is partly borne out by
the text, but, like the other solutions, does not
wholly correspond to the wording. In the
present verse the approach of old age, the
winter of life, is likened to the rainy season
in Palestine, when the sun is obscured by
clouds, and the light of heaven darkened by
the withdrawal of that luminary, and neither
moon nor stars appear. And the clouds return
after the rain; 7.¢e. one storm succeeds another
(Job xxxvii. 6). The imagery is intended
to represent the abiding and increasing
inconveniences of old age. Not like the
spring-time of life and season, when sunshine
and storm are interchanged, winter and old
age have no vicissitudes, one dreary charac-
ter invests them both. The darkening of the
light is a common metaphor for sorrow and
sadness (see Job xxx. 26; xxxiii. 28, 30;
Ezek. xxxii. 7, 8; Amos viii. 9). The
symbolism of the details in this verse has
been thus elucidated: The diurnal lights
appertain to the soul, the nocturnal to the
body ; the sun is the Divine light which illu-
mines the soul, the moon and the stars are
the body and the senses which receive their
radiance from the soul’s effulgence. These
are all affected by the invasion of old age.
Some consider that this verse depicts the
changes which pass over the higher and
more spiritual part of man’s nature, while the
succeeding imagery refers to the breaking-
up of the corporeal frame. We should say
rather that ver. 2 conveys a general imprea-
sion, and that this is then elaborated into
particulars. According to the interpretation
mentioned above, a gathering tempest is
here depicted, the details of which are
worked out in the following verses.

Ver. 3.—The gradual decay which creeps
over the body, the habitation of the spirit,
is depicted under the figure of a house and
its parts (comp. Job iv. 19; 2 Cor. v. 1; 2
Pet. i.13, 14). In the day when the keepers
of the house shall tremble; é.e. this is the
case when, etc. ‘The hands and arms are
appropriately called the keepers of the
house, for with them (as Volck quotes frona
Galen) man é7Al(e kal ppovpet Td Tua, Tay-
rolws (“ arms and guards his body in various
ways”). Theshaking and palsy of old men’s
limbs are thus graphically described. This
would be one of the first symptoms discerned
by an observer. ‘Taking the alternative in-


298


terpretation, we should gee in these“ keepers”
the menscrvants who keep watch before the
house. These menials are appalled by the
approach of the tempest, and quake. And
the strong men shall bow themselves. The
“men of power” are the legs, or the bones
generally, which in the young are “ as pillars
of marble” (Cant. v. 15), but in the old
become feeble, slack, and bent. Delitzsch
quotes 3 Maco, iv. 5, where we read of a
multitude of old men being driven merci-
lessly, “stooping from age, and dragging
their feet heavily along.” In this clause it
is this stooping and bending of the body
that is noticed, when men are no longer
upright in stature, “swifter than eagles,”
“stronger than lions” (2 Sam. i, 23; 1
Chron. xii, 8), fit for war and active employ-
ment. It is therefore less appropriate to
see in the “keepers” the legs, and in the
“strong men” the arms. Otherwise, the
latter are the masters, the wealthy and
noble, in contradistinction to the menials
before mentioned: both lords and servants
are equally terrified at the approach of the
tempest, or, as Wright would say, at the
touch of the sickly season (see on ver. 2).
And the grinders cease because they are few.
The word for “grinders” is feminine (ai
GARGoveu, ‘the grinding-women,” Septua-
gint), doubtless because grinding was
especially women’s business (Matt. xxiv.
41). By them are meant the tceth, as we
speak of molars, though, of course, the term
here applies to all the teeth ; so the Greeks
used the term utAa for the dentes molares.
These, becoming few in number and no
longer continuous, cannot perform their
office. Otherwise, the grinding-women
leave their work or pause in their labours at
the approach of the storm, though one does
not quite see why they should be fewer than
usual, unless the sickly season has pros-
trated most of their companions, or that many
are too frightened to ply their task. Having,
therefore, harder work than usual, they stop
at times to recruit themselves, But the
analogy rather breaks down here ; one would
be inclined to suppose that their decreased
numbers would make them apply themselves
more assiduously to their necessary occupa-
tion, As the “keepers” in the former part
of the verse were slaves, so these grinders are
slaves, such occupation being the lowest
form of service (see Exod. xi. 5; Judg. xvi.
21; Job xxxi. 10). Those that look out of
the windows be darkened. These are the
eyes that look forth from the cavities in
which they are sunk; they are regarded as
the windows of the bodily structure, the
evelashes or eyelids possibly being deemed
the lattice of the same. Plumptre cites
Cicero, ‘De Nat. Deor., ii, 140: “ Sensus in-
terpretes ac nuntii rerum, in capite, tame


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


(ow. xu. 1—14,)


uam in arce, mirifice ad usus necessarios et
acti et collocati sunt. Nam oculi, tamquam
speculatores, altissimum locum obtinent ; ex
quo plurima conspicientes, fungantur suo
munere.” The dimness in the eye and the
failing in the powers of sight are well ex-
pressed by the terms of the text. It is
noted of Moses, as something altogether
abnormal, that at a hundred and twenty
years of age “his eye was not dim, nor his
natural force abated” (Deut. xxxiv. 7).
Taking the alternative interpretation, we
must regard those that look out of the
windows as the ladies of the house, who —
have no menial work to do, and employ
their time in gazing idly from the lattices
(comp. Judg. v. 28; 2 Sam. vi. 16; Prov.
vii. 6). These “are darkened,” they are
terror-stricken, their faces gather blackness
(Joel ii. 6), or they retire into corners in terror
of the storm. Tlese women are parallel to
* the strong men” mentioned above; so that
the weather affects all of every class—men-
servants and maidservants, lords and ladies,
Ver. 4.—The doors shall be shut in the
streets. Hitherto the symbolism has been
comparatively easy to interpret. With this
verse inextricable difficulties seem to arise.
Of course, in one view it is natural that in
the bitter weather, or on the appearance of
a tempest, the doors towards the street should
be closed, and none should leave the house,
But what are meant by the doors in the
metaphorical house, the body of the aged
man? Jewish expositors understood them
to be the pores, or excretive apertures of
the body, which lose their activity in old
age—which seems an unseemly allusion.
Plumptre will have them to be the organs
which carry on the processes of sensation and
nutrition from the beginning to the end;
but it seems a forced metaphor to call these
*double-doors.” More natural is it to see
in the word, with its dual form, the mouth
closed by the two lips. Soa psalmist speaks
of the mouth, tle door of the lips (Ps. oxli.
3; comp. Micah vii. 5). As it is only the
external door of a house that could be em-
ployed in this metaphor, the addition, “in
[or, ‘towards’] the streets,” is accounted for.
When the sound of the grinding is low. The
sound of the grinding or the mill is weak and
low when the tecth have ceased to masti-
cate, and, instead of the crunching and
grinding of food, nothing is heard but a
munching and sucking. The falling in of
the mouth over the toothless gums ig repre-
sented as the closing of doors. To take the
words in their literal sense is to make the
author repeat himself, reiterating what he
is supposed to have said before in speaking
of the grinding-women—all labour is less-
ened or stopped. The sound of grinding
betokened cheerfulness and prosperity; its


=


ex, xm. 1—14.] EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER 299


a


pessation would be an ominous sign (see
Jer. xxv. 10; Rev. xviii. 22). Another
interpretation considers this clause to ex-
press the imperfect vocal utterance of the
old man; but it is hardly likely that the
author would call speech “the voice of
the grinding,” or of the mill, as a metaphor
for “mouth.” And he shall rise up at the
voice of the bird. This is a very difficult
sentence, and has been very variously ex-
plained. It is usually taken to mean that
the old man sleeps lightly and awakes (for
“rises up” may mean no more than that)
at the chirrup of a bird. The objection to
this interpretation is that it destroys the
figurative character of the description, in-
troducing suddenly the personal subject.
Of course, it has another signification in the
picture of the terror-stricken household;
and many interpreters who thus explain the
allegory translate the clause differently.
Thus Ginsburg renders, “'The swallow rises
to shriek,” referring to the habits of that
bird in stormy weather. But there are
grammatical objections to this translation,
as there are against another suggestion,
“The bird (of ill omen) raises its voice.”
We need not do more than refer to the
mystical elucidation which detects here a
reference to the resurrection, the voice of
the bird being the archangel’s trumpet
which calls the dead frem their graves.
Retaining the allegory, we must translate
the clause, “ He [or, ‘it,’ ¢.e. the voice] rises
to the bird’s voice;” the old man’s voice
becomes a “childish treble,” like the piping
of a little bird. The relaxation of the
muscles of the larynx and other vocal organs
occasions a great difference in the pitch or
gel of tone (compare what Hezekiah says,
sa. Xxxviii. 14, “ Like a crane or a swallow
so did I chatter,” though there it is the low
murmur of sorrow and complaint that is
meant), And ali the daughters of musio
shall be brought low. “The daughters of
song” are the organs of speech, which are
now humbled and fail, so that the man
cannot sing a note. Some think that the
ears are meant, as St. Jerome writes, Hé
obsurdescent omnes filix carminis, which may
have some such notion. Others arrive ata
similar signification from manipulation of
the verb, thus eliciting the sense—The
sounds of singing-women or song-birds are
dulled and lowered, are only heard as a faint,
unmeaning murmur, This exposition rather
contradicts what had preceded, viz. that
the old man is awoke by the chirrup of a
sparrow ; for his ears must be very sensitive
to be thus easily affected; unless, indeed,
the “ voice of the bird” is merely @ note of
time, equivalent to early cock-crowing. We
must not omit Wright’s explanation, though
fit does net commend itself to our mind, He


makes a new stanza begin here: “ When
one rises at the voice of the bird,” and sees
here a description of the approach of spring,
as if the poet said, “ When the young and
lusty are enjoying the return of genial
weather, and the concert of birds. with
which no musician can compete, the aged,
sick in their chambers, are beset with fears
and are sinking fast.” We fail altogether to
read this meaning in our text, wherein we
recognize only a symbolical representation
of the old man’s vocal powers. It is obvious
to cite Juvenal’s minute and painful descrip-
tion of old age in ‘Sat.,’ x. 200, etc., and
Shakespeare’s lines in ‘As You Like It’
(act ii. sc. 7), where the reference to the
voice is very striking—
“His big, manly voice,

Turning again toward childish treble, pipes
And whistles in his sound.”


Cox paraphrases, “The song-birds drop
silently into their nests,” alarmed at the
tempest. :

Ver. 5—Also when they shall be afraid
of that which is high. There is no “ when”
in the original, which runs, “ Also, or yea,
they fear on high.” “They” are old men,
or, like the French on, “people” indefinitely;
and the clause says that they find difficulty
in mouuting an ascent, as the Vulzate
renders, Hacelea quoque timebané. Shortness
of breath, asthmatic tendencies, failure of
muscular power, make such an exertion
arduous and burdensome, just as in the
previous verse a similar cause rendered
singing impossible. The description is now
arriving at the last stage, and allegorizing
the closing scene. The steep ascent is the
via dolorosa, the painful process of dying,
from which the natural man shrinks; for eas
the gnome says— :


Tod (iv yap oddels ds db ynpdonwy épg.


“None dotes on life more than the aged
man.”


The old man is going on the appointed
road, and fears shall be in the way; or, all
sorts of fears (plural of intensity) are tn the
path; eas in his infirm condition he can
walk nowhere without danger of meeting
with some accident, so analogously, as he
contemplates his end and the road he has
to travel, “fearfulness and trembling come
upon him, and horror overwhelms him”
(Ps. lv. 5). Plumptre sees in these clauses
a further adumbration of the inconveniences
of old age, how that the decrepit man makes
mountains of mole-hills, is full of imaginary
terrors, always forecasting sad events, and so
on: but this does not carry on the picture
to the end which the poet has now in view,
and seems tame aaa commonplace. The
stipporters of the storm-theory explain the


800


EOOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


fox. x1. 1—14,


te


passage as denoting the fears of the people
at what 1s coming from on high—the gather-
ing tempest. these fears extending to those
on the hignway,— which is feeble. And the
almond tree wnall flourish; or, 7s én blossom.
The old man is thus figured from the ob-
served aspect of this tree. It blossoms in
winter upon a leafless stem, and its flowers,
at first of a pale pink colour, turn to a snowy
whiteness as they fall from the branches.
The tree thus becomes a fit type of the arid,
torpid-looking old man with his white hair.
So Wright quotes Virgil, ‘ Aineid,’ v. 416—


“ Temporibus canebat sparsa


senectus ; ”


though there the idea is rather of mingled
black and grey hair than of a head of snowy
whiteness. Canon Tristram (‘Nat. Hist.
of the Bible,’ p. 332), referring to the usual
version of this clause, adds, ‘‘ But the better
interpretation seems to be, that as the almond
blossom ushers in the spring, so do the signs
referred to in the context indicate the hasten-
tng (shaked, ‘almond,’ meaning also ‘hasten’)
of old age and death.” Plumptre adopts the
notion that the name of the tree is derived
from a stem meaning “to watch,” and that
thus it may be called the early-waking tree
(see Jer. i. 11), the enigmatic phrase describ-
ing the wakefulness that often attends old
age. But this seems a refinement by no
means justified by the use of the word.
Others find in the verb the signification “ to
disdain, loathe,’ and explain that the old
man has lost his taste for almond nuts, which
seems to be an unnecessary observation after
the previous allusions to his toothless con-
dition, the cracking and eating of such
things requiring the grinders to be in perfect
order. The versions are unanimous in
translating the clause as the Authorized
Version. Thus the Septuagint, avé@jon 7d
dptydadroyv: Vulgate, fiorebit amygdalus. (So
Venet. and the Syriac.) Wright takes this
clause and the next to indicate the opening
of spring, when nature reawakens from its
winter sleep, and the dying man can no
longer respond to the call or enjoy the happy
season. The expositors who adhere to the
notion of the storm would translate, “the
almond shall be rejected,” alluding to fear
taking away appetite; but the rendering is
faulty. And the grasshopper shall be a
burden. Chagab, rendered “ grasshopper”
here and Lev. xi. 22; Numb. xiii. 33, ete.,
is rightly translated “locust” in 2 Chron.
vii. 13. It is one of the smaller species of
the insect, as is implied by its use in Isa.
xl, 22, where from the height of heaven the
inhabitants of earth are regarded as chagabim.
The clause is usually explained to méan that
the very lightest burden is troublesome to
old age, or tuat the hopping and chirping of


geminis


these insects annoy the querulous senior.
But who does not see the incongruity of ex-
pressing the disinclination for labour and
exertion by the figure of finding a grass-
hopper too heavy to carry? Who would
think of carrying a grasshopper? Plumptre,
who discovers Greek allusions in the most
unlikely places, sees here an intimation of
the writer’s acquaintance with the Athenians’
custom of wearing a golden grasshopper on
their heads as a token that they were
autochthones, “sprung from the soil.” Few
will be disposed to concur with this opinion.
Ginsburg and others consider that Koheleth
is regarding the locust as an article of food,
which it was and still is in the East (Lev.
xi, 21, 22; Matt. iii. 4). In some places it
is esteemed a great delicacy, and is cooked
and prepared in a variety of ways. So here
the writer is supposed to mean that dainties
shall temptin vain; even the much-esteemed
locust shall be loathed. But we cannot
imagine this article of food, which indeed
was neither general nor at all seasons pro-
curable, being singled out as an appetizing
esculent. The solution of the enigma must
be sought elsewhere. The Septuagint gives,
kal maxuvéy 7 axpls: the Vulgate, imping-
uabitur locusta, “the locust grows fat.”
Founded on this rendering is the opinion
which considers that under this figure is
depicted the corpulence or dropsical swelling
that sometimes accompanies advanced life.
But this morbid and abnormal condition
could not be introduced into a typical descrip-
tion of the usual accompaniments of age,
even if the verb could be rightly translated
as the Greek and Latin versions give it,
which is more than doubtful. Delitzsch,
after some Jewish interpreters, considers that
under the term “locust” is meant the coza,
the loins or hips, or caput femoris, which is
thus named “ because it includes in itself the
meehanism which the two-membered foot for
springing, placed at an acute angle, presents
in the locust.” The poet is thought to allude
to the loss of elasticity in the hips and the
inability to bear any weight. We cannot
agree to the propriety of this artificial ex-
planation, which seems to have been invented
to account for the expressions in the text,
rather than to be founded on fact. But
though we reject this elucidation of the
figure, we think Delitzsch and some others
are right in taking the verb in the sense of
“to move heavily,” “to crawl along.” “ihe
locust crawls,” ¢.e. the old man drags his
limbs heavily and painfully along, like the
locust just hatched in early spring, and as
yet not furnished with wings, which makes
its way clumsily and slowly. The analogy
derives another feature from the fact, well
attested, that the appearance of the locust
was synchronous with the days considered


a


68. xm. 1—14.]


most fatal to old people, namely, the seven
at the end of January and the beginning of
February. So we now have the figure of the
old man with his snow-white hair, panting
and gasping, creeping painfully to his grave.
One more frattis added. And desire shall
fail, The word rendered “desire” (Ay?3s)
is found nowhere else in the Old Testament,
and its meaning is disputed. The Authorized
Version has adopted the rendering of some
of the Jewish commentators (and that of
Venet., 4 dpetis), but, according to Delitzsch,
the feminine form of the noun precludes the
notion of an abstract quality, and the etymo-
logy on which it rests is doubtful. Nor
would it be likely that, having employed
symbolism hitherto throughout his descrip-
tion, the writer would suddenly drop metaphor
and speak in unfigurative language. We are,
therefore, driven to rely for its meaning on
the old versions, which would convey the
traditionary idea. The Septuagint gives,
i xdamapis, and so the Vulgate, capparis, by
which is designated the caper tree or berry,
probably the same as the hyssop, which is
found thronghout the East, and was exten-
sively used as a provocative of appetite, a
stimulant and restorative. Accordingly, the
writer is thought here to be intimating that
even stimulants, such as the caper, affect the
old man no longer, cannot give zest to or
make him enjoy his food. Here, again, the
figurative is dropped, and a literal, unvar-
nished fact is stated, which mars the perfec-
tion of the picture. But the verb here used
(parar) is capable of another signification, and
is often found in the unmetaphorical sense of
“breaking” or “bursting;’’ so the clause
will run, “and the caper berry bursts.”
Septuagint, xa Siacxcdacby 4 Kdmrapis:
Vulgate, dissipabitur capparis. ‘The fruit of
this plant, when overripe, bursts open and
falls off—a fit image of the dissolution of the
aged frame, now ripe for the tomb, and show-
ing evident tokens of decay. By this inter-
pretation the symbolism is maintained, which
perhaps is further illustrated by the fact that
the fruit hangs down and droops from the
end of long stalks, as the man bows his head
and stoops his back to meet the coming
death. Because (ks) man goeth to his long
home. This and the following clause are
renthetical, ver. 6 resuming the allegory.

t is as though Koheleth said—Such is the
way, such are the symptoms, when decay
and death are approaching ; all these things
happen, all tliese signs meet the eye, at such
a period. “His long home; ” eis olkov aidvos
abrod (Septuagint), “to the house of his
eternity,” “his everlasting habitation,” ¢.e.
the grave, or Hades. There isa similar ex-
pression in Tobit iii. 6, eis rbv aidviov rér0r,
which in the Hebrew editions of that book
is given aa, “ Gather me to my fathers, to the


ECOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, sot


house appointed for all living,” with which
Canon Churton (én loo.) compares Job x. 21;
xxx. 23. So Ps. xlix. 11 (according to
many versions), “Their graves are their
houses for ever.’ The oxnval aidvro of
Luke xvi. 9 are a periphrasis for life in
heaven. Diodorus Siculus notes that the
Egyptians used the terms didio: ofxo: and
h aidvios olxnots of Hades (i. 51; i. 93).
The expression, “domus eterna,” appears
at Rome on tombs, as Plumptre observes,
both in Christian and non-Christian inscrip-
tions ; and the Assyrians name the world or
state beyond the grave “the house of eternity”
(‘ Records of the Past,’ i. 148). From the
expression in the text nothing can be deduced
concerning Koheleth’s eschatological views.
He is speaking here merely phenomenally.
Men live their little span upon the earth, and
then go to what in comparison of this is an
eternity. Much of the difficulty about
aidévos, etc., would be obviated if critics
would remember that the meaning of such
words is conditioned by the context, that
e.g. “everlasting” applied toa mountain and
to God cannot be understood in the same
sense. And the mourners go about the
streets. This can hardly mean that the
usual funeral rites have begun; for the
death is not coneeived as having already
taken place; thisis reserved for ver. 7. Nor
can it, therefore, refer to the relations and
friends who are sorrowing for the departed.
The persons spoken of must be the mourners
who are hired to play and sing at funerals
(see 2 Sam. iii. 31; Jer. ix. 17; xxxiv. 5;
Matt, ix. 23). These were getting ready to
ply their trade, expecting hourly the old
man’s death. So the Romans had their
preficz, and persons “qui conducti plorant
in funere” (Horace, ‘ Ars Poet.,’ 431),

Ver. 6.—Or ever; ¢.e. before, ere (ad asher
lo). The words recall us to vers. 1 and 2,
bidding the youth make the best use of his
time ere old age cuts him off. In the pre-
sent paragraph the final dissolution is
described under two figures. The silver
cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken.
This is evidently one figure, which would
be made plainer by reading “and” instead
of “or,” the idea being that the lamp is
shattered by the snapping of the cord that
suspended it from the roof. But there are
some difficulties in the closer explanation of
the allegory. The “bowl” (gullah) is the
reservoir of oil ina lamp (see Zech. iv. 3, 4),
which supplies nourishment to the flame;
when this is broken or damaged so as to be
useless, the light, of course, is extinguished.
The Septuagint calls it 1d avOémoyv rod
xpuctov: the Vulgate, ottta aurea, “the
golden fillet,” or “flower ornament” on a
column, which quite sinks the notion of a
light being quenched. The “cord” is that


308


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


[oH xm. 1~14,


ee es


by which the lamp is hung in a tent or a
room. But of what in man are these sym-
bols? Many fanciful interpretations have
been given. The “silver cord” is the spine,
the nerves generally, the tongue; the “golden
bowl” is the head, the membrane of the
brain, the stomach. But these anatomical
details are not to be adopted; they have
little to recommend them, and are incon-
gruous with the rest of the parable. The
general break-up of life is here delineated,
not the progress of destruction in certain
organs or parta of the human frame. The
cord is what we should call the thread of
life, on which hangs the body lit by the
animating soul; when the connection be-+
tween these is severed, the latter perishes,
like a fallen lamp lying crushed on the
ground. In this our view the cord is the
living power which keeps the corporeal
substance from falling to ruin; the bowl is
the body itself thus upheld. The mention
of gold and silver is introduced to denote
the preciousness of man’s life and nature.
But the analogy must not be pressed in all
possible details. It is like the parables,
where, if defined and examined too closely,
incongruities appear. We should be inclined
to make more of the lamp and the light
and the oil, which are barely inferred in
the passage, and endeavour to explain what
these images import. Koheleth is satisfied
with the general figure which adumbrates
the dissolution of the material fabric by the
withdrawal of the principle of life. What
is the immediate cause of this dissolution,
injury, paralysis, etc., is not handled; only
the rupture is noticed and its fatal rest.
Another image to the same effect, thou,‘h
pointing to a different process, is added
Or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or
(and) the wheel broken at (#n) the cistern.
The picture here is a deep well or cistern
with an apparatus for drawing water; this
apparatus consists of a wheel or windlass
with & rope upon it, to which is attached a
bucket; the wheel fails, falls into the well,
the bucket is dashed to pieces, and no water
can be drawn. It is best to regard the two
clauses as intended to convey one idea, as
the two at the beginning of the verse were
found to do. Some commentators, not
so suitably, distinguish between the two,
making the former cluuse say that the
pitcher is bruken on its road to or frum the
spring, and the latter that the draw-wheel
gives way. The imagery pointy to one
notion which would be weakened by being
divided intotwo. The motion of the bucket,
the winding up and down, by which water
is drawn from the well, is an emblem of the
movements of the heart, the organs of re-
spiration, etc. "When these cease to act, life
is-extinot, The fraction of the cord and the


demolition of the bowl denoted the separa«
tion of soul and body; the breaking of the
pitcher and the destruction of the wheel
signify the overthrow of the bodily organs
by which vital motion is diffused and main«
tained, and the man lives. The expressions
in the text remind one of the term, “earthen
vessel,” applied by St. Paul (2 Cor. iv. 7) ta
the human body; and “the fountain of
life,” “ the water of life,” so often mentioned
in Holy Scripture as typical of the grace of
God and the blesscdness of life with him
(see Ps, xxxvi. 9; Prov. xiii. 14; John iv.
10, 14; Rev. xxi. 6).

Ver. 7.—Then shall the dust return to
the earth as it was; rather, and the dust
return, etc.—the sentence begun above being
still carried on to the end of the verse,
Here we are told what becomes of the cous
plex man at death, and are thus led to the
explanation of the allegorical language used
throughout. Without metaphor now it is
stated that the materiul body, when life is
extinct, returns tojthat matter out of which it
was originally made (Gen. ii. 7; iii. 19; comp.
Job xxxiv. 15; Ps. civ. 29). So Siracides
calls man “dust and ashes,” and asserts
that all things that are of the earth turn to
the earth again (Ecclus. x. 9; xl. 11).
Soph., ‘ Electra,’ 1158—


"Avr pirtarns
Mop@ijs oroddy re kal oKidy dvwperF.


“ Instead of thy dear form,
Mere dust and idle shadow.”


Corn. & Lapide quotes a remarkable parallel
given by Plutarch (‘Apol. ad Apollon.,
110) from Epicharmuas, “ Life is compounded
and broken up, and again goes whence it
came; earth indeed to earth, and the spirit
to upper regions.” And the spirit shall
return unto God who gave it; or, for the
epirit—the clause being no longer subjune-
tive, but speaking indicatively of fact. In
the first clause the preposition “to” is Sy,
in the second 5x, as if to mark the distinc
tion between the downward aud the upward
way. The writer now rises superior to the
doubts expressed in ch. iii. 21 (where sea
note), “*Who knoweth the spirit of man,
whether it goeth upward,” ete.? It is not
that he contradicts himself in the two
passages, a8 some suppose, and have hence
regarded ver. 7 as un interpolation; but
that after all disoussion, after expressing
tlle course of his perplexities, and the
various phases of his thought, he comes to
the conclusion that there is a future for the
individual soul, and that it shall be brought
into immediate connection with a personal
God. ‘There is here no thought of its being
absorbed in the anima mundé, in accordance
with the heathem view, which, if it believed


~ ~~ —


om, xt, 1—14.] EOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


dimly in an immortality, denied the person-
ality of the soul (see Eurip., ‘Suppl.,’ 529
—534; Lucret., ii. 998, sqq.; iii. 455, eqq.).
Nor have we any opinion given concerning
the adverse doctrines of creationism and
traducianism, though the terme used are
most consistent with the former. God
breathed into man’s nostrils the breath of
life; when this departs, he who gave
receives it; God “gathereth in” man’s
breath (Ps. civ. 29). The clause, taken in
this restricted sense, would say nothing
about the soul, the personal “I;” it would
merely indicate the destination of the vital
breath ; and many critics are content to see
nothing more in the words. But surely this
would be a feeble conclusion of the author's
wanderings; rather the sentence signifies
that death, releasing the spirit, or soul, from
the earthly tabernacle, places it in the more
immediate presence of God, there, as the
Targum paraphrases the passage, returning
to stand in judgment before its Creator.
Ver. 8.—It has been much questioned
whether this verse is the conclusion of the
treatise or the commencement of the
epilogue. For the latter conclusion it is
contended that it is only natural that the
beginning of the final summing-up should
start with the same words as the opening of
the book (ch, i. 2); and that thus the con-
junction “ and,” with which ver. 9 begine,
is readily explained. But the treatise is


more artistically completed by regarding |


this solemn utterance as the conclusion of
the whole, ending with the same burden
with which it began—the nothingness of
earthly things. Koheleth has laboured to
show this, he has pursued the thought from
beginning to end, through all circumstances
and conditions, and he can only re-echo his
melancholy refrain. Vanity of vanities,
saith the Preacher. He does not follow the
destiny of the immortal spirit; it is not his
purpose to do so; his theme is the fragility
of mortal things, their unsatisfying nature,
the impossibility of their securing man’s
happiness; so his voyage lands him at the

int whence he set forth, though he has
tarcel and taught faith in the interval.
If all is vauity, there is behind and above
all a God of infiexible justice, who must do
right, and to whom we may safely trust our
cares and perplexities. Kohelcth,“ Preacher,”
here has the article, the Koheleth, as if some
special reference was made to the meaning
of the name—he who has been debating, or
haranguing, or gathering together, utters
finally his careful verdict. This is the
sentence of the ideal Solomon, who has
given his experiences in the preceding
pages.

Vers. 9—14.—Tue Epinocun, This con-
tains rome obeetvations commendatery of


the author, explaining his standpoint and
the object of the book, the great conclusion
to which it leads.


Vers. 9—11.—Koheleth as teacher of
wisdom.


Ver. 9.—And moreover; 1); Kal repioody
(Septuagint); rather, with the following
Y, besides that. The Preacher was wise.
If we render “because the Preacher was
wise,” we are making an unnecessary state-
ment, as the whole book has demonstrated
this fact, which goes without saying. What
the writer here asserts is that Kohvleth did
not merely possess wisdom, but had made

oud use of it for the instruction of others.

he author throws aside his disguise, and
speaks of his object in composing the book,
with a glance at the historical Svlomou
whom he had personated. That he uses the
third person in relation to himself is nothing
uncommon in historical memoirs, ete. ‘hiis
Daniel writes; and St, John, Thuoydides,
Xenophon, Cresar, mask their personality by
dropping their identity with the author
(comp. also ch. i. 2; vii. 27). The uttesius
tion that follows is compared witli that at
the end of St. John’s Gospel (xxi. 24), and
is plainly intended to confirm the authority
of the writer, and to enforce on the hearcr
the convictioa that, though Solomon himself
did not compese the work, it has every claim
to receive attention, end possesses intrinsic
value. He still taught the people know-
ledge. As well as being esteemed one of
the company of sages, he further (od) took
pains to instruct his contemporaries (rdy
&vOpwrov, Septuagint), to apply his wisdom
to educational purposes. Yea, ho gave good
heed; literally, he weighed (like our word
“ ponder ”); only thus used in this passage,
It denotes the careful examination of every
fact and argument before it was presented
to the public. Sought out, and set in order
many proverbs. There is no copula in the
original ; the weighing and the investigation
issued in the composition of “ proverbs,”
which term includes not only the wit aud
wisdom of past ages in the form of pithy
sayings and apophthegms, but also parables,
truths in metaphorical guise, riddlos, in-
structions, allegories, etc., all those forms
which are found in the canonical Book of
Proverbs. The same word (mishle) is used
here as in the title of that book. Koheleth,
however, is not necessarily referring to that
work (or to 1 Kings iv. 29, etc.), or implying
that he himself wrote it; he is only putting
forth his claim to attention by showing his
patient assiduity in the pursuit of wisdom,
and how that he adopted a particular
method of teaching. For the idea contained
in the verb ftagan, “to place or make


straight” (eh. i, 15, vii, 18), applied to


304


literary composition, Delitzsch compares the
German word for “ author” (Schriftsteller).
The notion of the mashal being similitude,
comparison, the writer’s pondering and
searching were needed to discover hidden
analogies, and, by means of the known and
familiar, to lead up to the more obscure and
abstruse. The Septuagint has a curious
aud somewliat unintelligible rendering, Ka)
ods eixmidoerat Kdéopioy wapaBoray, “ And
the ear will trace out the order of parables,”
which Schleusner translates, “elegantes
parabolas.”

Ver. 10.—The Preacher sought to find
out acceptable words; literally, words of
delight; Adyous OeAhparos (Septuagint) ;
verba utilia (Vulgate); so Aquila, Adyous
xpelas. The word chephets, “pleasure,”
occurs in ch. v. 4; xii. 1. Thus we have
“stones of pleasure” (Isa. liv. 12). He
added the grace of refined diction to the
solid sense of his utterances. Plumptre
reminds us of the “ gracious words” (Adyos
wis xdpiros, Luke iv. 22) which proceeded
from the mouth of him who, being the
Incarnate Wisdom of God, was indeed
greater than Solomon. On the necessity of
a work being attractive as well as conform-
ing to literary rules, Horace long ago wrote
(‘Ars Poet.,’ 99)—


“ Non satis est pulchra esse poémata ; dulcia
sunto,
Et quocunque volent animum auditoris
agunto.”


“Tis not enough that poems faultless be,
And fair; let them be tender too, and
draw
The hearer by the cord of sympathy.”


St. Augustine is copious on this subject
in his treatise, ‘De Doctr. Christ.;’ thus
(iv. 26): “Proinde illa tria, ut intelligant
qui audiunt, ut delectentur, ut obediant,
etiam in hoc genere agendum est, ubi tenet
delectatio principatum. . . . Sed quis move-
tur, si uescit quod dicitur? Aut quis tene-
tur ut audiat, si non delectatur?” And
that which was written was upright, even
words of truth. The Authorized Version,
with its interpolations, does not accurately
convey the sense of the original. The sen-
tence is to be regarded as containing
phrases in apposition to the “acceptable
words” of the first clause; thus: “ Koheleth
sought to discover words of pleasure, and a
writing in sincerity, words of truth,” The
Septuagint has, ral yeypaumévoy ebOirnros,
“a writing of uprightness;” Vulgate, et
conscripsit sermones rectissimos. The mean-
ing is that what he wrote had two charac-
teristics—it was sincere, that which he
really thought and believed, and it was
true objectively. If any reader was dis-
posed to cavil, and to depreciate the worth


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


(on. xm. 1-24.


of the treatise because it was not the
genuine work of the celebrated Solomon,
the writer claims attention to his produc-
tion on the ground of its intrinsic qualities,
as inspired by the same wisdom which
animated his great predecessor.

Ver. 11.—The words of the wise are as
goads. The connection of this verse with
the preceding is maintained by the fact
that the “acceptable words,” etc., are words
of the wise, emanate from the same persons,
Herewith he proceeds to characterize them,
with especial reference to his own work.
The goad was a rod with an iron spike, or
sharpened at the end, used in driving oxen
(see Judg. iii. 31; 1 Sam. xiii. 21; Ecclus.
Xxxviii. 25; Acts ix. 5). Words of wisdom
are called goads because they rouse to
exertion, promote reflection and action, re-
strain from error, impel to right; if they
hurt and sting, the pain which they inflict
is healthful, for good and not for evil. And
as nails fastened by the masters of assem-
blies. The proposition “by” is an inter-
polation, and the sentence should run: And
like nails fastened [are] the, etc.—masmeroth,
“nails,” as in Isa. xli. 7. There is much
difficulty in explaining the next words,
miapr ‘da (baale asuppoth). We have had
similar expressions applied to possessors in
eh, x. 11, “lord of the tongue,” and “lord
of wings” (ch, x. 20); and analogy might
lead us to apply the phrase here to persons,
and not things; but in Isa. xli. 15 we find
a threshing-instrument termed “lord of
teeth;” and in 2 Sam. v. 20 a town is called
Baal-Perazim, “Lord of breaches;” so we
must be guided by other considerations in
our exposition, The Septuagint, taking the
whole sentence together, and regarding baale
as a preposition, renders, “As nails firmly
planted, (ot rapa tay cvvOeudrwr edd0noay ex
mousevos évydés) which from the collections
were given from one shepherd.” Schleus-
ner takcs of mapa tay ocvvOeudtwy to mean,
“Ti quibus munus datum erat collectionem
faciendi,” ¢.e, the author, of collections, The
Vulgate has, Verba ... que per magistrorum
consilium data sunt a pastore uno. The
“masters of assemblies” can only be the
chiefs of some learned conclaves, like the
great synagogue supposed to exist in the
time of Ezra and later. The clause would
then assert that these pundits are like
fastened nails, which seems rather unmean-
ing. One might say that their uttered
sentiments became fixed in the mind as
nails firmly driven in, but one could not
properly say this of the men themselves.
A late editor, Gietmann, suggests that
“lords of collection” may mean “brave
men, heroes, gathered in line of battle,”
serried ranks, just as in Prov. xxii. 20 the
term shalishim, chariot-fighters, chieftains,


on, x11. 1—14.]


EOCOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER


808


—— ee


is applied to choice proverbs. Thus he
would say that the words of the wise are as
goads because they stimulate the intellect,
as nails because they readily find entrance,
and like men in battle array when they are
reduced to writing and marshalled ix a book.
This is certainly ingenious, but somewhat
too artificial to be regarded as the genuine
intention of the writer. It seems best to
take the word translated “assemblies” as
denoting collections, not of people, but of
proverbs; and the compound phrase would
thus mean proverbs of an excellent charac-
ter, the best of their sort gathered together
in writing. Such words are well compared
to nails; they are no longer floating loosely
about, they are fixed in the memory, they
secure other knowledge, and, though they
are separate utterances, they have a certain
unity and purpose. Nails are often used
proverbially as emblems of what is fixed
and unalterable. Thus Alschyl., ‘Suppl.,’
944—


Tay 3 ephrwra Topas
Téudos Siaumat, ds wevew apapdrws.


* Through them a nail is firmly fixed, that
they
May rest immovable.”


Cicero, ‘ Verr.,’ ii. 5. 21, “Ut hoc beneficium,
quemadmodum dicitur, trabali clavo figeret;”
é.e. to make it sure and steadfast (comp.
Horace, ‘ Carm..,’ i. 35. 17, et seg.). Which are
given from one shepherd. Ali these words
of the wise, collections, ete., proceed from
one source, or are set forth by one authority.
Who is this shepherd? Some say that ho
is the archisynagogus, the president of the
assemblies of wise men, to whose authority
all these public utterances are subjected.
But we do not know that such supervision
existed or was exercised at the time when
Koheleth wrote; and, as we saw above, there
is probably no reference to any such assem-
blies in the passage. The “one shepherd”
is doubtless Jehovah, who is called the
Shepherd of Israel, who feeds his people like
a flock, eto. (see Gen. xlviii. 15; xlix. 24;
Ps. xxiii. 1; 1xxx. 1, etc.), The appellation
is here used as concinnous with the thought
of the ox-goad, intimating that God watches
and leads his people like a tender shepherd
and a skilful farmer. This is an important
claim to inspiration. All these varied utter-
ances, whatever form they take, whether his
own or his predecessor’s, are outcomes of
wisdom, and proceed from him who is only
wise, Almighty God. Itisno disparagement
of this work to imply that it is not the pro-
duction of the true Solomon; Koheleth is
ready to avow himself the writer, and yet
claims a hearing as being equally moved by
heavenly influence. It is like St. Paul’s
ECOLESIASTES,


assertion (1 Cor. vii. 40), “I think that I
also have the Spirit of God.”


Vers, 12—14.—The author warns against
profitless study, and gives the final conclu-
sion to which the whole discussion leads.

Ver. 12.—And further, by these, my son,
be admonished; rather, and what 43 more
than these, be warned. Besides all that has
been said, take this additional and important
caution, viz. what follows. The clause,
however, has been differently interpreted,
asif it said, “ Do not attempt to go beyond
the words of the sages mentioned above ;”
or, “ Be content with my counsels; they will
suffice for your instruction.” This seems to
be the meaning of the Authorized Version.
The personal address, “my son,” so usual in
the Book of Proverbs, is used by Koheleth
in this place alone. It does not necessarily
imply relationship (as if the pseudo-Solomon
was appealing to Rehoboam), but rather the
condition of pupil and learner, sitting at the
feet of his teacher and friend. Of making
many books there is no end, Tiis could not
be said in the time of the historical Solomon,
even if we reckon his own voluminous
works (1 Kings iv. 32, 33); for we know of
no other writers of that date, and it is toler-
ably certain that none existed in Palestine.
But we need not suppose that Koheleth is
referring to extraneous heathen productions,
of which, in our view, there is no evidence
that he possessed any special knowledge.
Doubtless many thinkers in his time had
treated of the problems discussed in his
volume in a far different manner from that
herein employed, and it seemed good to
utter a warning against the unprofitable
reading of such productions. Juvenal
speaks of the insatiable passion for writing
in his day (‘ Sat.,’ vii. 51)—

“Tenet insanabile multos
Scribendi cacoethes et sgro in corde senes-
cit;”


which Dryden renders—


“The charms of poetry our souls bewitch ;
The curse of writing is an endless itch.”


As in taking food it is not the quantity
which a man eats, but what he digests
and assimilates, that nourishes him, so in
reading, the rule, Non multa, sed multum,
must be observed; the gorging the literary
appetite on food wholesome or not impedes
the healthy mental process, and produces
no intellectual growth or strength. The
obvious lesson drawn by spiritual writers
is that Christians should make God’s Word
their chief study, “turning away from the
profane babblings and oppositions of the
knowledge which is falsely so called” (1
Tim. vi. 20). For as St. Augustine says
x


806


ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.


fou. xm, 1—14,


(‘De Dootr. Christ.’), “Whereas in Holy
Scripture you will find everything which
has been profitably said elsewhere, to a far
greater extent you will therein find what
has been nowhere else enunciated, but which
has been taught solely by the marvellous
sublimity and the equally marvellous hu-
mility of the Word of God.” Much study
is a weariness of the flesh, The twoclauses
in the latter part of the verse are co-ordinate.
Thus the Septuagint, Tod wojoa: BiBAla
WOAAG ode Fors mepaopuds, Kal perérn WOAAH
kémwots (“weariness”) capxds. The word
for “study ” (lakug) is not found elsewhere
in the Old Testament, nor in the Talmud,
but the above meaning is sustained by
its connection with an Arabic word signify-
ing “to be eager for.” The Vulgate (like
the Septuagint) renders it meditatio. You
may weary your brain, exhaust your strength,
by protracted study or meditation on many
books, but you will not necessarily thereby
gain any insight into the problems of the
universe or guidance for daily life. Marcus
Aurelius dissuades from much reading:
“Would you examine your whole composi-
tion?” he says; “ pray, then let your library
alone; what need you puzzle your thoughts
and over-grasp yourself?” Again, “As for
books, never be over-eager about them; such
a fondness for reading will be apt to perplex
your mind, and make you die unpleased”
(‘ Medit.,’ ii. 2, 3, Collier). So Ben-Sira
affirms, “The finding out of parables is a
wearisome labour of the mind” (EKcclus.
xiii, 26).

Ver. 13.—The teaching of the whole book
is now gathered up in two weighty sen-
tences. Let us hear the conclusion of the
whole matter. The Revised Version gives,
This is the end of the matter ; all hath been
heard. The Septuagint has, TéeAos Adyou, 7d
way &xove, “The end of the matter, the sum,
hear thou;” Vulgate, Finem loquendi pariter
omnes audiamus. Another rendering is
suggested, “The conclusion of the matter
is this, that [God] taketh knowledge of
all things; ” literally, “ everything is heard.”
Perhaps the passage is best translated,
The end of the matter, when all ts heard,
és this. The first word of this verse,
soph, “end,” is printed in the Hebrew
text in large characters, in order to draw
attention to the importance of what is
coming. And its significance is rightly
estimated. These two verses guard against


very possible misconception, and give the
author’s real and mature conelusion. When
this is received, all that need be said hag
been uttered. Fear God (ha-Elohim), and
keep his commandments. This injunction
is the practical result of the whole dis-
cussion. Amid the difficulties of the moral
government of the world, amid the compli-
cations of society, varying and opposing
interests and claims, one duty remained
plain and uachanging—the duty of piety
and obedience. For this is the whole duty
of man. The Hebrew is literally, “ This ig
every man,” which is explained to mean,
“This is every man’s duty.” Septuagint,
“Ort rodTo was 6 kvOpwros: Vulgate, Hoc est
enim omnis homo. For this man was made
and placed in the world; this is his real
object, the chief good which he has to seek,
and which alone will secure contentment
and happiness. The obligation is put in
the most general terms as applicable to the
whole human family ; fur God is not the
God of the Jews only, but of Gentiles also
(Rom. iii. 29).

Ver. 14.—The great duty just named is here
grounded upon the solemn truth of a future
judgment. For God shall bring every work
into judgment. It will then be seen whether
this obligation has been attended to or not.
The judgment has already been mentioned
(ch. xi. 9); it is here more emphatically set
forth as a certain fact and a strong motive
ees The old theory of earthly retribution

ad been shown to break down under the
experience of practical life; the anomalies
which perplexed men’s minds could only be
solved and remedied by a future judgment
under the eye of the omniscient and un-
erring God. With every secret thing. he
Syriac adds, “and manifest thing.” The
Septuagint renders, “with everything that
has been overlooked ”—a very terrible, but
true, thought. The doctrine that the most
secret things shall be revealed in the dies
ire is often brought forward in the New
Testament, which makes plain the personal
nature of this final investigation, which the
earlier Scriptures invest with a more general
character (see Rom. ii. 16; xiv. 12; 1 Cor.
iv. 5). So this wonderful book closes with
the enunciation of a truth found nowhere
else so clearly defined in the Old Testament,
and thus opens the way to the clearer light
shed upon the awful future by the revelation
of the gospel.


HOMILETICS.


Ver. 1.—“ Remember thy Creator.” I. REMEMBER: WHoM? “Thy Creator.” The
langttage implies: 1, That man has a Creator. It would certainly be strange if he
had net, seeing that all things else have, And that Creator is not himself, simce he


_ ee
. 1


oH. x1. 1—14.] | ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. ‘807


is at best a Sepengent creature (Gen. ifi. 19); or an inferior divinity, since there is
none such (2 - Vii. 22; Isa. xliv. 6); but (1) God, the one living and true God
(1 Thess, i. 9), the Almighty Maker of the universe (Gen. i. 1; Exod. xx. 11; Ps,
exxiv. 8; Isa. xl. 28; Jer. x. 16), and therefore of man (Gen. i. 26; Deut. iv. 32;
Ps, c. 3; Acts xvii. 25, 26, 28); and (2) Jesus Christ, the Image of the invisible God
2 Cor. iv. 4; Col. i. 15), and the unbeginning Word of God (John i. 1), by whom all
things were made (John i. 3), whether they be things in heaven or on earth, visible or
invisible (Col. i, 16), and therefore from whom man derives his being. 2. That man
originally knows God. That even in his fallen condition he is not entirely destitute
of a knowledge of God—not, perhaps, a knowledge clear and full, but still real and true
—appears to be the teaching of Scripture (Rom. i. 21, 28) as well as of experience, no
man ever requiring to argue himself into a belief in God’s existence, thongh many try
to reason themselves out of it. 3. That man may forget God. Moses was afraid lest
Israel should be guilty of so doing (Deut. vi. 12), in which case they would be no
better than the heathen peoples around them (Ps, ix.17). Practically this is the
world’s sin to-day (1 John iv. 8), and the sin against which Christians have to guard
(Heb. iii. 12). It is specially the sin against which young persons should be warned,
that of allowing the thought of God to slip out of their minds,

IL RemempBer: How? 1. By thinking of his Person. A characteristic of the
wicked is that God is not in all their thoughts (Ps. x. 4); whereas a good man
remembers God upon his bed, and meditates upon him in the night watches (Ps. lx. 3),
2, By reflecting on hts character. The Creator being neither an abstract conception
nor an inanimate force, but a living and personal Intelligence, he is also possessed of
attributes, the sum of which compose his character or name; and one who would
properly remember him must frequently permit his thoughts to dwell on these
(Ps, xx. 7), as David (Ps. lx. 3) and Asaph (Ps. lxxvii. 3) did—on his holiness, his
loving-kindness, his faithfulness, his truth, his wisdom, his justice, all of which have
been revealed in Jesus Christ, and so made much more easily the subjects of study.
8, By acknowledging his goodness. God’s bounties in providence and mercies in grace
must be equally recalled and thankfully retained before the mind, as David aptly said
to himself (Ps. ciii. 1, 2) and protested before God (Ps. xlii. 6). One who simply
accepts God’s daily benefits as the lower animals do, for consumption but not for
consideration, is guilty of forgetting God; who knows about, but never pauses to thank
God for his unspeakable grace in Christ, comes far short of what is meant by remem-
bering his Creator, 4. By meditating in his Word. Those who lovingly remember
God will not forget that he has written to them in the Scriptures words of grace and
truth, and will, like the good man of the Hebrew Psalter (i. 2), meditate therein day
and night. Where God’s Law, with its wise and holy precepts, is counted as a strange
thing (Hos, viii. 12), no further proof is needed that God himself is forgotten. The
surest evidence that “‘no man remembered the poor wise man” was found in this, that
his wisdom was despised, end his words were not heard (ch. ix. 16). 5. By keeping his
commandments. As Joseph’s recollection of Jehovah helped him to resist temptation
and avoid sin (Gen. xxxix. 9), so a sincere and loving remembrance of God will show
itself in doing those things that are pleasing in his sight. When Christ asked his
disciples to remember him, he meant them to do so, not simply by thinking of and
speaking about him, or even by celebrating in his honour a memorial feast (Luke
xxii. 19), but also by doing whatsoever he had commanded them (John xv. 14).

Til. RememBeR: WHEN? “In the days of thy youth.” 1. Not then only. The
remembrance of God is a duty which extends along the whole course of life. No age
can be exempted from it, as none is unsuitable for it. The notion that religion, while

roper enough for childhood or youth, is neither demanded by nor becoming in man-
foo. is a delusion. ‘The heart-worship and life-service of God and Jesus Christ are
incumbent upon, needed by, and honourable to, old as well as young. 2. But then
firstly. The reasons will be furnished below; meantime it may be noticed that
Scripture writers may be said to be unanimous in recommending early Pe in
teaching that youth, above all other periods, is the season for seeking God. Moses
(Deut. xxxi. 13), David (Ps. xxxiv. 11), Solomon (Prov. iii. 1, 2), and Jesus (Matt.
vi. 33) combine to set forth the advantage as well as duty cé giving one’s early years
to and religion,


$06 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [on. xn. 1—14,
te Se eee


IV. Rememprrn: wHy? 1. Why remember one’s Creator? (1) Because he is
infinitely worthy of being remembered. (2) Because he is entitled to be remembered
on the simple ground of being Creator. (3) Because without this remembrance of
him both happiness is impossible here and salvation hereafter. (4) Because the human
heart is prone to forget him, and remember only either his creatures or his comforts.
2. Why remember him in the way above specified ? (1) Because any remembrance
short of that is incomplete, insincere, formal, external, and therefore essentially worth-
less. (2) Because the above is the sort of remembrance that is demanded by Scripture.
(3) Because only such remembrance is worthy of being presented to God. 3. Why
remember him in youth? (1) Because youth, as the first portion of a man’s life, is
due to God. (2) Because youth, as the formative period of life, is the most important
time for acquiring religious habits (Prov. xxii. 6). (3) Because youth, as the happiest
season in life, is the time in which God can most easily be remembered. Then “the
evil days” of business and worry, of temptation and sin, of affliction and_ sorrow, of
disease and decay, have not come; and the soul, besides being comparatively disengaged,
is also ina mood for yielding to devout and holy impressions. (4) Because if God is
not remembered in youth he is apt to be forgotten in age.

Learn: 1. The real essence of religion—fellowship with God. 2. The dignity of
man—that he is capable of such fellowship. 3. The responsibility of youth—for
shaping all one’s after-life. 4. The evanescence of earthly joys—all doomed to be
eclipsed by the darkness of evil days.


Vers. 2—8.—The last scene of all; or, “man goeth to his long home.” I. Tue
APPROACH OF DEATH. 1. The decay of man’s higher faculties. “ Or ever the sun, and
the light, and the moon, and the stars be darkened, and the clouds return after the
rain” (ver. 2), Accepting the guidance of the best interpreters (Delitzsch, Plumptre
—for other interpretations consult the Exposition), we may see: (1) In the sun an
emblem of man’s spirit, elsewhere compared to the lamp of Jehovah (Prov. xx. 27),
and described by Christ as “ the light that is in thee” (Matt. vi. 23), and in its light
a symbol of the spirit’s activity of apprehension—thought, memory, imagination, etc.
(2) In the moon a figure for the animal soul, “ by means of which the spirit becomes
the principle of the life of the body (Gen. ii. 7),” and which as the weaker vessel (it,
according to Hebrew ideas, being regarded as female, while the spirit is male) is
comforted by the spirit (Ps. xlii. 6). (3) In the stars an allegorical representation of
the five senses, by which the soul has cognizance of the outer world, and the light of
which is dim and feeble in comparison with that of the soul and spirit, or of the
reason and intelligence of man. (4) In the clouds that return after the rain, a
materialized picture of those calamities and misfortunes, sicknesses and sorrows,
“which disturb the power of thought, obscure the consciousness, and darken the mind,”
and which, though leaving man for a while, return again after a season “ without

rmitting him long to experience health” (Delitzsch). 2. The failure of man’s

ily powers. Picturing man’s corporeal frame as a house, the Preacher depicts its
Tuinous condition as old age approaches. (1) The keepers of the house tremble, The
aged person’s arms, “ which bring to the house (of the body) whatever is suitable for
it, and keep away from it whatever threatens to do it injury,” now, touched with
infirmity, shake, “so that they are able neither to grasp securely, to hold fast and use,
nor actively to keep back and forcibly avert evil” (Delitzsch). (2) The strong men
bow themselves. The legs, in young men like marble pillars (Cant. x. 15), are in aged
persons loose, feeble, and inclined to stoop. (3) The grinders, or the grinding-women,
cease. That these are the molars, or teeth, which perform the work of mastication, is
apparent; so is the reason why they are not now at work, viz. because in aged persons
they are few. (4) Those that look out of the windows are darkened. The eyes,
called by Cicero “the windows of the mind” (‘Tusc.,’ i. 20), become dim, and as a
consequence the soul’s eyes, which look through the body’s eyes, lose their power of
perception. (5) The doors are shut in the street. These are probably the lips, which
in old age are usually closed and drawn, because the teeth have disappeared. (6) The
sound of the grinding is low. The noise made by an old man in mastication is that of
a low munching, he being unable any more to crack, crunch, or break his food,
(7) One rises up at the sound of a bird. So timid and nervous, and so light a sleeper,


Oa. xm, 1—14.] EQOCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER, 809


is the old man, that if even a bird chirps he awakes, and, being put off his rest, is
obliged to rise. (8) The daughters of music are brought low. Not so much the old
man’s powers of singing are diminished, his once strong and manly treble having
become so feeble and low as to be scarcely audible (Isa. xxxviii. 14), as the old man,
like Barzillai (2 Sam. xix. 35), has now no longer an ear for the voice of singing-men
and singing-women, so that to him as a consequence “ the daughters of song” must
lower their voices, i.e. must retire so as no longer to disturb him, now so feeble as to
be “terrified by the twittering of a little bird.” (9) That which is high causes fear
(ver. 5). To the old man “even a little hillock appears like a high mountain; and if
he has to go a journey he meets something that terrifies him” (Targum, ‘ Midrash’).
Decrepit old men “do not venture out, for to them a damp road appears like a very
morass, a gravelly path as full of neck-breaking hillocks, an undulating path as fear-
fully steep and precipitous, that which is not shaded as oppressively hot and exhaust-
ing” (Delitzsch). (10) The almond tree blossoms, An emblem of the winter of age,
with its silvery white hair. (11) The grasshopper is a burden, or the grasshopper
drags itself along. Either so small a thing as the chirping of a grasshopper annoys
the old man (Zéckler)—the obvious sense of the former clause; or the middle of the
body, which in an old man resembles a grasshopper, drags itself along with difficulty
(Delitzsch). (12) The caper-berry fails. The appetite, which this particular condi-
ment is supposed to stimulate, ceases; the stomach can no more by means of it be
roused from its dormant and phlegmatic condition. So low and feeble is he that “no
quinine or phosphorus can help him now ” (Plumptre).

Il. THE DISSOLUTION OF THE SOUL AND BODY. 1. The loosening of the silver cord,
and the breaking of the golden bowl. (1) The figure. A golden bowl or lamp
suspended from the roof of a house or tent by a silver cord, through the sudden
snapping of which it, the golden bowl or lamp, is precipitated to the ground, thus
extinguishing its light. (2) The interpretation. If the silver cord be “the soul
directing and bearing the body as living,” the lamp or the golden bowl will be “‘ the
body animated by the soul and dependent on it” (Delitzsch) ; or, if the golden bowl
be “life as manifested through the body,” then the silver cord will be “that on
which the continuance of life depends” (Plumptre); or, again, if the silver cord be
the spinal marrow, then the golden bowl will be the brain to which the spinal
marrow stands related as silver to gold (Fausset), 2. The breaking of the pitcher at
the fountain, and of the wheel at the cistern. (1) The image. That of a pitcher,
which is used for letting down by a rope or chain into a well or fountain, becoming
shivered at the fountain’s side through the sudden breaking down of the wheel during
the process of drawing water. (2) The significance. The action of the lungs and the
heart, the one of which, like a pitcher or bucket, draws in the air-current which sustains
life, and the other of which pumps up the blood into the lungs; or the wheel and the
pitcher may be the breathing apparatus, and the pitcher at the fountain the heart
which raises the blood (Delitzsch).

IIL THE DESTINATION OF THE SEVERED PARTS. 1. Of the body. “The dust returns
to the earth as it was” (ver. 7). As the body came forth from the soil, so to the
soil it reverts (Gen. iii.19). 2. Of the soul. ‘“ The spirit returns unto God who gave
it.” Whatever may have been the Preacher’s opinion at an earlier period (ch. iii. 21),
he was now decided as to three things: (1) that man had, or was, a spirit, as distin-
guished from a body; (2) that this spirit, as to origin, proceeded from God (Gen. ii. 7;
Job xxxii. 8); and (3) that on separating from the body it did not cease to be, but
ascended to him from whom it came—not to be reabsorbed into the Divine essence, as
if it had originally emanated therefrom, but to preserve in God’s presence an‘indepen-
dent existence, as the Targum translates, “The spirit will return to stand in judgment
before God who gave it to thee.”

IV. Tae Last TRIBUTE OF AFFECTION. “The mourners go about the streets”
(ver. 5). 1. Sorrowing for the departed. Probably the Preacher describes either the
professional mourners who go about the streets, in anticipation of the dying man’s
departure, ready to offer their services the moment he expires (Delitzsch), or the actual
procession of such mourners following the dead man’s funeral to its place of sepulture
(Plumptre). Still, it is permissible to think of the deceased’s relatives, who, like
Abraham mourning for Sarah (Gen. xxiii. 2), and Martha and Mary for Lazarus


810 ‘ROCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER.  [ou. x1, 114.


(John xi. 81), give expression to their sadness by going about the strects in the garb of
sorrow. 2. Haciting the sympathy of theliving. ‘This is one reason why private griefa
are paraded in public. The heart in times of weakness, such as those occasioned by
bereavement, instinctively craves the compassion of others, to whom, accordingly, it
appeals by the visible cerements of woe.

Learn: 1. The mercy of God as seen in the gradual approach of death, 2, The
wisdom of improving the seasons of youth and manhood. 3. The solemn mystery of
death. 4. The duty of preparing for a life beyond the grave, 5. The lawfulness of
Christian mourning.


Vers, 9,10.—A model preacher, I. A wiszE MAN. 1, Possessed of secular knowledge.
Gathered as precious spoil from all departments of human learning and experience.
As much of this sort of wisdom as possible; the more of it the better, All knowledge
can be rendered subservient to the preacher’s art, and may be utilized by him for the
instruction of his hearers, 2. Endowed with heavenly wisdom. If that, much more
this, is indispensable to an ideal preacher. ‘The wisdom that cometh from above as
much superior to that which springeth from below as heaven is higher than earth, and
eternity longer than time. A preacher without the former wisdom may be rude;
without the latter he must be ineffective,

II, A DILIGENT stuDENT. Like Koheleth, he must ponder, seek out, and set in
order the truth he desires to communicate to others; like Timothy, he must give
attendance to reading (1 Tim. iv. 13). In particular, he should be a student: 1. Of
the sacred Scriptures. These divinely inspired writings, being the principal source of
heavenly wisdom accessible to man (2 Tim. iii, 16), should be the preacher’s vade
mecum, or constant companion. 2. Of human nature. Having to deal directly with
this, in the way of bringing to bear upon it the teachings of Scripture, he ought to
acquaint himself accurately with it, by a close and patient study of it in himself and
others, Much of a preacher’s efficiency is derived from his knowledge of the audience
to which he speaks. 3. Of the material creation, Like Job (xxxvii. 14), David (Ps.
viii. 3; cxliii, 5), and Koheleth (ch. vii. 13), he should consider the works of God.
Besides having much to tell him of God’s glory (Ps. viii. 1; Rom. i. 20), the physical
universe can impart to him valuable counsel of a moral kind concerning man and his
duties (Job xii. 7; Prov. vi. 6; Matt. v. 26).

III, A skiLrun TEAcHER, As Koheleth taughy the people knowledge, as Ezra
caused the people to understand the reading (Neh. viii. 8), as Christ according to his
Word taught such as listened to him (Mark x, 1), as the apostles taught the things of
the Lord to their hearers (Acts iv. 2; xi, 26; xviii. 25), so must a model preacher be
an instructor (1 Tim. iii. 2; iv. 11; vi. 2; 2 Tim. ii, 2). To be this successfully, in
addition to the wisdom and study above described, he will need four kinds of words,
1, Words of truth. These must constitute the burden of his discourse, whether oral
or written. What he publishes to others must be objectively true, and no mere guess-
work or speculation. Such a word of truth was the Law of God in the Hebrew
Scriptures (Ps. cxix. 43), and is the gospel or the doctrine of Christ in the New
Testament (Eph, i, 13; Col. i.5; 2 Tim. ii, 15; Jas. i, 18), 2, Words of uprightness.
Whether he writes or speaks, he must do so sincerely, with perfect integrity of heart,
“not handling the Word of God deceitfully” (2 Cor. iv. 2), but teaching out of
honest personal conviction, saying, “‘ We believe, therefore do we speak ” (2 Cor. iy, 13),
8. Words of delight. Selected and intended, not to gratify the hearer’s corrupt inclina-
tions and perverted tastes, or minister to that love of novelty and sensation which is
the peculiar characteristic of itching ears (2 Tim. iv. 3), but to set forth the truth in
such a way as to win for it entrance into the hearer’s heart and mind. For this
purpose the preacher’s words should be such as to interest and sway the listener
arresting his attention, exciting his imagination, instructing his understanding, moving
his affections, quickening his conscience, and impelling his will. Dulness, darkness,
dryness, deadness, are inexcusable faults in a preacher.


Vers. 11, 12.—Reading, writing, speaking. I. “READING MAKES A FULL ”
1. Pushed to excess, it becomes hurtful to the body. ‘ Much study isa wieloseen te
the flesh,” and as a consequence, reflexively, injurious to the mind. 2. Pursued én


on. xm, 1—14.] ECOLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. $11
a ee


moderation, it first enlightens the understanding, next quickens the whole spiritual
nature, and finally tends to stimulate the health of the body. “A man’s wisdom
maketh his face to shine ” (ch. viii. 1).

Il, “ WRITING MAKES A CORRECT MAN.” If professional authorship in the Preacher’s
day was a nuisance, much more is it so in ours. Yet in book-writing lie advantages
as well as disadvantages. If,on the one hand, the multiplication of books often signifies
nothing more than an accumulation of literary rubbish, and a terrible infliction to
those who must read them, on the other hand it secures the preservation and distribu-
tion of much valuable knowledge; while if the knowledge is not valuable, the formal
deposition of it in a book, which may be quietly consigned to a library, secures that it
shall not roam at large, to the disquieting of peace-loving minds, But, apart from the
multiplication of volumes, the habit of setting down one’s thoughts in writing is
attended by distinct advantages. It promotes: 1. Clearness of thought. One who
intends to write, more especially for the information of his fellows, must know what
he purposes to say. The effort of putting one’s ideas on paper imparts to them a
definiteness of outline they might not otherwise possess. 2. Order in arrangement.
No writer will, voluntarily, fling his thoughts together into a confused heap, but will
strive to render them as lucid and luminous as possible. If for no other reason than
this, the practice of preparing for public speech by means of writing is to be commended.
8. Brevity in expression. If brevity is the soul of wit, and loquacity the garment of
dulness, then the sure way of attaining to the former, and avoiding the latter, is to
write.

II]. “SpEAKING MAKES A READY MAN.” “The words of the wise are as goads, and as
nails.” Though designed to apply to the wise man’s “ written words,” the clause may
be accepted as correct also with reference to his “spoken words.” Like the former, the
latter are as goads and nails. 1. They stimulate. The words of a practised speaker,
always supposing him to be a wise man, incite the minds and quicken the hearts of
his hearer. The true preacher should be progressive, not only in his own discovery of
truth, but in conducting his hearers into fresh fields of instruction, leading them out
into “regions beyond,” causing them to “forget the things that are behind, and reach
forward unto those things that are before,” persuading them to “leave the first
principles of Christ, and to go on unto perfection.” 2. They abide. They lodge them-
selves in the understanding and affections so firmly that they cannot be removed.
Facility in arousing and fixing conviction can only be attained by diligent and wise
cultivation of the art of speech.


Vers. 13, 14.—“ The conclusion of the whole matter ;” or, “ the whole duty of man.”
[. THE EsseNcE oF IT. 1. The fear of God. Not servile or guilty, but (1) reverential,
such as the Divine greatness and glory are fitted to inspire (Deut. xxviii. 58; Ps.
lxxxix. 7; Matt. x. 28; Heb. xii. 28); (2) filial, such as a child might cherish towards
a parent (Ps. xxxiv. 11; Heb. xii. 9). 2. The service of God. Not that merely of
external worship (Deut. vi. 11; Ps. xcvi. 9; Heb. x. 25), but that of inward devotion
(John iv. 24), which expresses itself in the homage of the heart and life, or in the
keeping of God’s commandments—in particular of the three named by the Preacher,
charity, industry, hilarity (Cox).

II. THe REASON oF IT. The certainty of judgment. 1. By God. He is the Judge
of all the earth (Gen. xviii. 25); the Judge of all (Heb. xii. 23), who will yet judge the
world in righteousness (Acts xvii. 31). 2. Jn the future Not merely here upon the
earth, but also hereafter in the world to come (Dan. vi. 10; Matt. xi. 22; xvi. 27;
1 Cor. iv. 6; 2 Tim, iv. 1). 8. Of works. Not of nations or communities, but of
Individuals aes viii. 88; Rom. ii. 6, 6); not of open actions merely, but of secret
things as well (Luke xii. 2; Rom. ii. 16; 1 Cor. tii. 13; iv.6); mot of good deeds only,
but also of evil (2 Cor. v. 10; 2 Pet. ii. 9).


HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.


Ver. 1.— Youthful religion. The Preacher spoke from a heart taught by long
experience. Himself advanced in years, having enjoyed and suffered much, having


813 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE ?REACHER.  [on. xm 1—14,


long observed the growth of human character under diverse principles and influences,
he was able to offer to the young counsel based upon extensive knowledge and deliberate
reflection.

L THE DESCRIPTION HERE GIVEN OF THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. Amplifying this terse
and impressive language, we may hear the wise man addressing the youthful, and
saying, “ Remember that thou hast a Creator; that thy Creator ever remembers thee ;
that. he not only deserves, but desires, thy remembrance; that his character should be
remembered with reverence, his bounty with gratitude, his Law with obedience and
submission, his love with faith and gladness, his promises with prayerfulness and with
hope.” .

r THE PERIOD HERE RECOMMENDED FOR THE RELIGIOUS LIFE. Religion is indeed
adapted to the whole of our existence; and what applies to every age of life, applies
with especial force to childhood and youth. 1. Youth has peculiar susceptibilities
of feeling, and religion appeals to them. 2, Youth has especially opportunities of
acquiring knowledge and undergoing discipline, and religion helps us to use them.
8. Youth has abounding energy, and religion assists us to employ this energy aright.
4, Youth is a time of great and varied temptations, and religion will enable us to
overcome them. 6. Youth is introductory to manhood and to age; religion helps us
so to live when young that we may be the better fitted for the subsequent stages of
life’s journey. 6. Youth may be all of life appointed for us; in that case, religion can
hallow those few years which constitute the earthly training and probation.

IIL THE sPECIAL REASONS FOR ATTENDING TO THI8 ADMONITION. 1. It is a tendency
of human nature to be so absorbed in what is present to the senses as to overlook
unseen and eternal realities. 2. Our own age is peculiarly tempted to forget God, by
reason of the prevalence of atheism, agnosticism, ard positivism. 3. Youth is especially
in danger of forgetting the Divine Creator, because the opening intelligence is naturally
interested in the world of outward things, which presents so much to excite attention
and to engage inquiry.

IV. THE ADDITIONAL FORCE WHICH CHRISTIANITY IMPARTS TO THIS ADMONITION.
The figure of our blessed Lord himself appears to the imagination, and we seem to
hear his winning but authoritative voice pleading with the young, and employing the
very language of the text. He who said, “Suffer the little children to come unto me,”
he who, beholding the young inquirer, loved him, draws near to every youthful nature,
and commands and beseeches that reverent attention, that willing faith, that affec-
tionate attachment, which shall lead to a life of piety, and to an immortality of
blessedness.—T.


Vers. 2—7.— Old age and death. By a natural transition, a striking antithesis,
youth suggests to the mind of the Preacher the condition and the solemn lessons of
old age. How appropriately does a treatise, dealing so fully with the occupations, the
illusions, the trials, and the moral signiticance of human life, draw to a close by
referring expressly to the earlier and the later periods by which that life is bounded !

I. THE BODILY SYMPTOMS OF AGE. These are, indeed, familiar to every observer, and
are described with a picturesqueness and poetical beauty which must appeal to every
reader of this passage. It is enough to remark that the decay of bodily power, and the
gradual enfeeblement of the several senses, are among the usual accompaniments of
advancing years,

I]. THE MENTAL SYMPTOMS OF AGE. Reference is naturally made especially to the
effect of bodily enfeeblement and infirmity upon the human emotions. 1. The
emotions of desire and aspiration are dulled. 2. The emotions of apprehension, self-
distrust, and fear increase.

Ill, THE NATURAL TERMINATION OF OLD AGE. There is no doubt that there are old
persons of a sanguine temperament who seem unable to realize the fact that they are
approaching the end of their earthly course. Yet it does not admit of doubt that the
several indications of senility described in these verses are reminders of the end, are
premonitions of the dissolution of the body, and of the entering upon a new and
altogether different state of being.

IV. THE OPPORTUNITIES AND SERVICES OF AGE, 1. There is scope for the exercise of
patience under growing infirmities, 2. There is a call to the acquisition and display


oH, x11. 1—14.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 813
-_—


of that wisdom which the experience of long years is particularly fitted to cultivate.
3. The aged are especially bound to offer to the young an example of cheerful
obedience, and to encourage them to a life of piety and usefulness.

V. THE CONSOLATIONS OF AGE. Cicero, in a well-known treatise of great beauty, has
set forth the peculiar advantages and pleasures which belong to the latest stage of
human life. The Christian is at liberty to comfort himself by meditating upon such
natural blessings as “accompany old age,” but he has far fuller and richer sources
of consolation open to him. 1. There is the happy retrospect of a life filled with
instances of God’s compassion, forbearance, and loving-kindness. 2. And there is the
bright anticipation of eternal blessedness. This ie ls peculiar prerogative. As the
outer man perisheth, the inner man is renewed day by day. The earthly tent is
gradually but surely taken down, and this process suggests that he should look forward
with calm confidence and hope to his speedy occupation of the “ house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.” —T.


Vers. 9—11.— The religious thinker and teacher. The author of this book was
himself a profound thinker and an earnest teacher, and it is evident that his great aim
was to use his gifts of observation, meditation, and discourse for the enlightenment
and the spiritual profit of all whom his words might reach. Taught in the quiet of
his heart by the Spirit of the Eternal, he laboured, by the presentation of truth and
the inculcation of piety, to promote the religious life among his fellow-men. His aim
as he himself conceived it, his methods as practised by him in his literary productions,
are deserving of the attentive consideration and the diligent imitation of those who are
called upon to use thought and speech for the spiritual good of their fellow-creatures.
Words are the utterance of the convictions and the desires of the inner nature, and
when spoken deliberately and in public they involve a peculiar responsibility.

I. THE WORDS OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER SHOULD BE THE EXPRESSION OF WISDOM.
They should not be thrown off carelessly, but should be the fruit of deep study and
meditation. For the most part, they showid embody either original thought, or.
thought which the teacher should have assimilated and made part of his own nature,
and tested in his own individual experience. They should be the utterance of know-
ledge rather than of opinion; and they should be set forth in the order which comes
from reflection, and not in an incoherent, desultory, and unconnected form.

II. THE WORDS OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER SHOULD BE WORDS OF UPRIGHTNESS,
In order to this they must be the utterance of sincere conviction; they must
harmonize with moral intuitions; they must be such as consequently appeal to the
same conscience in the hearer or reader, which approves them in the speaker or writer.
Crafty arguments, specious and sophistical appeals, sentimental absurdities, do not
fulfil these conditions, and for them there is no place in the Christian preacher’s
discourses, in the volumes of the Christian author.

Ii]. THE WORDS OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER SHOULD BE WORDS OF PERSUASIVENESS.
The author of Ecclesiastes commends “ proverbs” and “ words of delight.” Harshness,
coldness, contemptuousness, severity, are unbecoming to the expositor of a religion of
compassion and love. A winning manner, a sympathizing spirit, language and
illustrations adapted to the intelligence, the habits, the circumstances of auditors, go
far to open up a way to their hearts. No doubt there is a side of danger to this
requirement; the pleasing word may be the substitute for the truth instead of its
vehicle, and the preacher may simply be as one that playeth upon a very pleasant
instrumeut. But the example of our Lord Jesus, “the great Teacher,” abundantly
shows how winning, gracious, condescending, and touching language is divinely adapted
to reach the hearts of men.

1V. THE WORDS OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER 6HOULD BE CONVINCING AND EFFECTIVE,
The goads that pierce, the nails that penetrate and bind, are images of the language
of him who beateth not the air. Let the aim be kept steadily before the eye, and the
mark will not be missed. Let the blow be delivered strongly and decisively, and the
work will be well done. The understanding has to be convinced, the conscience
awakened, the heart touched, the evil passions stilled, the endeavour and determination
aroused; and the Word is, by the accompanying energy of the Spirit of God, able to
effect all this. “ Who is sufficient for these things ?”


814 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER (ox. xm, 1—14


—oy


V. THE WORDS OF THE RELIGIOUS TEACHER MAY BE fHE MEANS OF EELIGIOUB,
SPIRITUAL, IMPERISHABLE BLESSING. If his word be the Word of God, who commissions
and strengthens every faithful herald and ambassador, then he may comfort himself
with the promise, “My Word shall not return unto me void; it shall accomplish that
which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.”—T.


Ver. 12.—The scholar’s sorrow. In these closing paragraphs of his treatise the
writer reveals his own feelings, and draws upon his own experience. It is interesting
to observe how largely study was pursued and literature cultivated at the remote
period when this book was written; and it is obvious to remark how far more
strikingly these reflections apply to an age like our own, and to a state of society such
as that in which we live. The diffusion of education tends to the multiplication of
books and to the increase of the learned professions; whilst growing civilization
fosters the habit of introspection, and consequently of that melancholy whose earlier
and simpler symptoms are observable in the language of this touching passage.

I. STUDY AND-LITERATURE ARE A NECESSITY OF EDUCATED HUMAN NATURE. AS
soon as men begin to reflect, they begin to embody their reflections in a literary form,
whether of poetry or of prose. A native impulse to verbal expression of thought and
feeling, or the desire of sympathy and applause, or the calculating regard for
maintenance, leads to the devotion of ever-growing bodies of men to the literary life.
Literature is an unmistakable “note” of human culture.

II. Srup¥Y AND LITERATURE ARE, BROADLY SPEAKING, PROMOTIVE OF THE GENERAL
goop. The few toil that the many may profit. Knowledge, thought, art, right
feeling, liberty, and peace, are all indebted to the great thinkers and authors whose
names are held in honour among men. Doubtless there are those who misuse their
gifts, who by their writings pander to vice, incite to crime, and encourage irreligion.
But the bulk of literature, proceeding from the better class of minds, is rather
contributive to the furtherance of goodness and of the best interests of men. Books
are among the greatest of human blessings,

III. Srupy AND LITERATURE HAVE BEEN OONSECRATED TO THE SERVICE OF RELIGION.
We have but to refer to the Hebrew Scriptures themselves in proof of this, There is
nothing more marvellous in history than the production of the Books of Moses, the
Psalms, and the prophetic writings, at the epochs from which they date. lawgivers,
seers, psalmists, and sages live yet in their peerless writings; some of them inimitable
in literary form, all of them instinct with moral power. The New Testament furnishes
a yet more marvellous illustration of the place which literature holds in the religious
life of humanity. Men have sneered at the supposition that a book revelation could
be possible; but their sneers are answered by the facts. Whatever view we take of
inspiration, we are constrained to allow for human gifts of authorship. To make up
the sacred volume there are “many books,” and every one of them is the fruit of
“much study.”

IV. Stupy¥ AND LITERATURE ARE CULTIVATED AT THE EXPENSE OF THE EXHAUSTION
AND SORROW OF THE PRODUCER AND STUDENT. 1. There is weariness of the flesh
arising from the close connection between body and mind. The brain, being the
central physical organ of language, is, in a sense, the instrument of thought; and,
consequently, brain-weariness, nerve-exhaustion, are familiar symptoms among the
ardent students to whom we are all indebted for the discovery, the formulation, and
the communication of truth and knowledge. 2. But there is a mental sorrow and
distress which deeper thinkers cannot always escape, and by which some among them
are oppressed, The vast range of what in itself can be known is such as to strike the
mind with dismay. Science, history, philosophy, etc., have made progress so marvellous,
that no single finite mind can embrace, in the course of a life of study, however
assiduous, more than a minute department, so as to know all of it that may be known;
and a highly educated man is content “to know something of everything, and every-
thing of something.” 3. Then beyond the reaim accessible to human inquiry lies the
vaster realm of what cannot be known—what is altogether outside our ken. 4. It
must be borne in mind, further, that, whilst man’s intellect is limited, his spiritual
yearnings are insatiable; no bounds can be set to his aspirations; his nature is akin
to that of God himself. Thus it is that sorrow often shades ‘ke scholar’s brow, and


oH. x. 1—14.) EOCCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. $15


that to the weariness of the flesh there is added the sadness of the spirit, that finds, in
the memorable language of Pascal, the larger the circle of the known, the vaster is the
circumference of the unknown that stretches beyond.—T.


Vers. 13, 14.—Religion, righteousness, and retribution. After all the questionings
and discussions, the doubts and perplexities, the counsels and precepts, of this treatise,
the author winds up by restating the first, the most elementary, and the most
important, principles of true religion. There are, he felt, in this world many things
which we cannot fathom, many things which we cannot reconcile with our convictions
and hopes; but there are some things concerning which we have no doubts, and these
are the things which most nearly concern us personally and practically. Thougitful
men may weary and distress themselves with pondering the great problems of existence ;
but, after all, they, in common with the plainest and most illiterate, must come back
to the essentials of the religious life.

I. THE GREAT SPRING AND CENTRE OF RELIGION. This is the fear of God, reverence
for the Divine character and attributes, the habit of mind which views everything in
relation to him who is eternally holy, wise, just, and good. This Book of Ecclesiastes
is, upon this point, at one with the whole of the Bible and with all deeply based
religion. We cannot begin with man; we must find an all-sufficient foundation for
the religious life in God himself, his nature, and his Law.

II. THE GREAT EXPRESSION OF RELIGION. This is obedience to the Divine command-
ments. Our convictions and emotions find their scope when directed towards a holy
and merciful God; our will must bend to the moral authority of the eternal Lord.
Feelings and professions are in vain unless they are supported by corresponding actions.
It is true that mere external compliance is valueless; acts must be the manifestation
of spiritual loyalty and love. But, on the other hand, sentiment that evaporates In
words, that does not issue in deeds, is disregarded in the court of heaven. Where
God is honoured, and his will is cheerfully performed, there the whole duty of the
Christian man is fulfilled. It is the work of the mediation of the Divine Saviour,
of the operations of the Divine Spirit, to bring about such a religious and moral
life.

Ill. THE GREAT TEST OF RELIGION. For this we are bidden to look forward to the
future. Many things, which are significant as to the religious state of a man, are now
hidden. They must be brought to light; secret deeds, alike of holiness and of iniquity,
must be made manifest before the throne of judgment. Here, in this world, where
men judge by appearances, the wicked sometimes get credit for goodness which does
not really belong to them, and the good are often maligned and misunderstood. But,
in the general judgment hereafter, the secrets of all hearts shall be revealed, and men
shall be judged, not according to what they seem to be, but according to what they
actually are. With this solemn warning the Preacher closes his book. And there is
no person, in whatsoever state of life, to whom this warning does not apply. Well
will it be for us if this earthly life be passed under the perpetual influence of this
expectation; if the prospect of the future judgment inspire us to watchfulness, to
diligence, and to prayer.—T.


Ver. 1 (with ch. xi. 10, latter part).— The vanity and glory of youth. I. Tae vanity
oF yourH. There is an aspect in which it is true that “childhood and youth are vanity.”
1, Its thoughts are very simple; they are upon the surface, and there is no depth of
truth or wisdom in them. 2. Its judgments are very mixed with error; it has to
unlearn a great deal of what it learns; the young will have to find, later on, that the
men of whom and the things of which they have made up their minds are different
from what they think now; their after-days will bring with them much disillusion, if
not serious disappointment. Much that they see is magnified to their view, and the
colours, as they see them to-day, will look otherwise to-morrow. 3. Itself is constantly
disappearing. Few things are more constantly disturbing, if not distressing, us than
the rapid passage of childhood and youth. Sometimes the young life is taken away
altogether—the flower is nipped in the bud. But where life is spared, the peculiar
beauty of childhood or of youth—its simplicity, its trustfulness, its docility, its
eagerness, its ardour of affection, its unreserved delight—this is perpetually passing


816 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE I tEACHER. {cn. xu. 1—14.


and “fading into the light of common day.” Yet is there—and it is the truer and
deeper thought—

Il. THEGLORY oF YourTH. Whatever may be said of youth in the way of qualification,
there is one thing that may be said for it which greatly exalts it—it may be wise with
a profound and heavenly wisdom, for it may be spent in the fear and in the love of
God (see Prov. i. 7; Job xxviii, 28). To “remember its Creator,” and to order its
life according to that remembrance, is the height and the depth of human wisdom.
Knowledge, learning, cunning, brilliancy, genius itself, is not so desirable nor so
admirable a thing as is this holy and heavenly wisdom. To know God (Jer. ix. 24),
to reverence him in the innermost soul, to love him with all the heart (Mark xii. 33),
to be obedient to his commandments, to be patiently and cheerfully submissive to his
will, to be honouring and serving him continually, to be attaining to his own likeness
in spirit and character,—surely this is the glory of the highest created intelligence of
the noblest rank in heaven, and surely this is the glory of our human nature in all tés
ranks. It is the glory of our manhood, and it is the glory of youth. Far more than
any order of strength (Prov. xx. 29), or than any kind of beauty (2 Sam. xiv. 25), or
than any measure of acquisition, does the abiding and practical remembrance of its

Creator and Saviour glorify our youth. That makes it pure, worthy, admirable,
inherently excellent, full of hope and promise. We may add, for it belongs to the text
as well as to the subject—

III. Tue wispom or youtu. ‘‘ While the evil days come not,” etc. Let the young
live before God while they are young; for: 1. It is a poor and sorry thing to offer to
God, to a Divine Redeemer, the dregs of our days. To him who gave himself for us it
becomes us to give, not our wasted and worn-out, but our best, our freest and freshest,
our purest and stronyest self. 2, To leave the consecration of ourselves to Christ to
the time when faculty has faded, when the power of discernment and appreciation has
declined, when sensitiveness has been dulled with long disuse, when the heavenly voices
fall with less charm and interest on the ear of the soul,—this is a most perilous thing.
Mie eect and to heed, to recognize and to obey, in the days of youth is the one wise
thing.—C.


Vers. 5—7.—Death, its meaning and its moral. Whatever be the true interpretation
of the three preceding verses, there is no doubt at all as to the Preacher’s meaning in
the text ; he has death in his view, and he suggests to us—

I. Irs certainty. Childhood must pass into youth, and youth into prime, and prime
into old age—into the days which are bereaved of pleasure (ver. 1); and old age must
end in death. Of all the tableaux which human life presents to us, the last one is that.
of “the mourners going about the streets.” Other evils may be shunned by sedulous care
and unusual sagacity, but death is the evil which no man may avoid.

Il. Its Meanine. What does death mean when it comes? 1. It means a shock to
those that are leit behind. The mourners in the street express in their way the sadness
which is afflicting the hearts of those who weep within the walls. Here and there a
death occurs which disturbs no peace and troubles no heart. But almost always it
comes with a shock and an inward inexpressible pain to those who are bereaved. Even
in old age the hearts of near kindred and dear friends are troubled with a keen and real
distress. 2. It means separation. Man “ goes to his long home.” They who are left
go to their darkened home, and he who is taken goes to his long home, to dwell apart and
alone, to revisit no more the familiar places, and look no more into the faces of his
friends. They and he henceforth must dwell apart; the grave is always a very long
distance from the old home. 3. It means loss, The loss of the beautiful or the useful,
or of both together. “ Our life may have been like a golden lamp suspended by silver
chains, fit for the palace of a king, and may have shed a welcome and a cheerful licht
on every side ; but even the durable costly chain will be snapt at last, and the beautiful
‘bowl be broken.’ Our life may have been like ‘the bucket’ dropped by village
maidens into the village fountain, or like the ‘wheel’ by which water is drawn from
the village well,—it may have conveyed a vital refreshment to many lips; but the day
must come when the bucket will be shattered on the marble edge of the fountain, and
the timeworn wheel drop into the well ” (Cox). The most beautiful life vanishes from
our sight; the most useful life is taken away. 4. It means dissolution. “The dust


oH. xx. 1—14.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 811i


shall return to the earth as it was.” Our body, however fair and strong it may be,
nowever trained, clothed, adorned, admired, must return to “ dust and ashes,” must be
resolved into the elements from which it was constructed. 5. It means departure.
“The spirit shall return unto God who gave it.” This is by far the most solemn view
of death. At death we “return to God ” (see Pa. xc. 3). Not, indeed, that we are ever
far from him (see Acts xvii. 27; Ps. cxxxix. 3—5). We stand and live in his very near
presence. Yet does there come an hour—the hour of death—when we shall consciously
stand before our Divine Judge, and when we shall learn from him “our high estate”
or our lasting doom (2 Cor. v. 10). Dvath means departure from the sphere of the
visible and tangible tnto the close and conscious presence of the eternal God.

III. Irs Monat. The one great lesson which stands out from this eloquent descrip-
tion is this: Be the servant of God always ; take care to know him and to serve him at
the end, by learning of him at the beginning, and serving him throughout your life.
Remember your Creater in youth, and he will acknowledge you when old age is lost in
death, and death has introduced you to the judgment-scene. Happy is that human
soul that has drawn into itself Divine truth with its earliest intelligence, and that has
ordered its life by the Divine will from first to last; for then shall the end of earth
be full of peace and hope, and the beginning of eternity be full of joy and of
glory.—C.


Vers. 9—12.—The function of the teacher. 1. The wise man, because he is wise
(ver. 9), teaches. There is no better, no other thing that he can do, both for his own
sake and for the sake of his fellow-men. To know and not to speak is a sin and a
cruelty, when men are “ perishing for lack of knowledge.” To know and to speak is
an elevated joy and a sacred duty ; we cannot but speak the things we have learned
of God, the truth as it is in Jesus. 2. The wise man also takis what measures
he can to perpetuate the truth he knows; he wants to preserve it, to hand it down
to another time; he therefore “writes down the words with truth and uprightness ”
(ver. 10); or, if he cannot do this, he labours to put his thought into those parabolic or
proverbial forms which will not only be preserved in the memory of those to whom he
utters them, but can be readily repeated, and will become embedded in the traditions
and, ultimately, into the literature of his country (ver. 9). 3. The wise man restrains
his literary ardour within due bounds (ver. 12). Otherwise he not only causes a drug
in the market, but seriously injures his own health. He knows it is better to do a
little and do that thoroughly, than to do much and do it hastily and imperfectly. But
what is the teacher’s function, his sacred duty, as related to the people of his charge or
his acquaintance ?

I. To SEARCH DILIGENTLY FOR THE TRUTH. It is for him “to ponder and seek out,”
or to “ compose with care and thought ” (Cox’s transl.). Divine truth, in its various aspects
and applications, is manifold and profound; it demands our most patient study, our
most reverent inquiry ; we should gain help from all possible sources, more particularly
should we seek it from the Spirit aud from the Word of God.

II. To INTEREST AND TO ConsoLE. The Preacher sought to find out “acceptable ”
or “ comfortable” words—* words of delight ” (literally). This is not the main duty of the
teacher, but it is one to which he should seriously address himself. 1. A teacher may
be speaking in the highest strain, and may be uttering the deepest wisdom, but if his
words are unintelligible and, therefore, unacceptable, he will make no way and do no
good. We must speak in the language of those whom we address. Our thoughts may
be far higher than theirs, but our language must be on their level—at any rate, on the
level of their understanding. 2. The teacher will do wisely to spend much time and
strength in consoling ; for in this world of trouble and sorrow no words are more often
or more urgently needed than ‘‘comfortable words.” ; :

Il]. To keTaix. “The words of the ‘ masters of assemblies’ are like stakes (nails)
which the shepherds drive into the ground when they pitch their tents ; ” de, they are
instruments of fastening or of securing; they act as things which keep the cords in
their place, and keep the roof over the head of the traveller. It is one function of the
Christian teacher—and a most waluable one—so to speak that men shall retain their
hold on the great verities of the faith, on the true and real Fatherhood of God, on the
atonement of Jesus Christ, on the openness of the kingdom of heaven to every seeking


818 ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. (on. xn. 1—14.


a


soul, on the blessedness of self-forgetful love, on the offer of eternal life to all who
believe, etc.

IV. To mxspire. At other times the Preacher’s words are “as goads ” that urge the
cattle to other fields. To comfort and to secure is much, but it is not all that they
who speak for Christ have to do. They have to illumine and to enlarge men’s
views, to shed fresh light on the sacred page, to invite those that hear them to accom-
pany them to fields of thought hitherto untrodden, to induce them to think and study
for themselves, to unveil the beauties and glories of the wisdom “ that remains to be
revealed,” to inspire them with a yearning desire and with a full purpose of heart to
enter upon works of helpfulness and usefulness ; he has to “ provoke them to love and
to good works.”—C.


Vers. 18, 14.—Divine requirement and human response, What is the conclusion of
this inquiry? what result may be gained from these inconsistencies of thought and
variations of feeling ? Deeper down than anything else is the fact that there are—

I. Two Great DIVINE REQUIREMENTS. God demands of us: 1. Reverence. We are
to “fear God.” That is certain. - But let us not mistake this “ fear” for a very different
thing with which it may be confounded. It is not a servile dread, such as that which
is entertained by ignorant devotees of their deities. Only too often worship rises no
higher than that ; it is an abject dread of the malignant spiritual power. This is Seth
a falsity and an injury. It is founded on a complete misconception of the Divine, and
it reacts most hurtfully upon the mind of the worshipper, demoralizing and degrading.
What God asks of us is a well-grounded, holy reverence; the honour which weakness

ys to power, which he who receives everything pays to him who gives everything,
which intelligence pays to wisdom, which a moral and spiritual nature pays to rectitude,
to goodness, to love, to absolute and unspotted worth. 2. Obedience. We must “ keep
his commandments ;” t.e. not only (1) abstain from those particular transgressions which
he has forbidden, and (2) practise those virtues which he has positively enjoined; but
also (3) carefully study his holy will in regard to all things, and strive earnestly and
patent to doit. This will embrace, not only all outward actions observable by man,

ut all the inward thoughts of the mind, and all the hidden (eelings and purposes of
the soul, It includes the bringing of everything of every kind for which we are per-
sonally responsible “into obedience to the will of Christ.” It requires of us rectitude
in every relation that we sustain to others, as well as in all that we owe to ourselves.
The text suggests—

IJ. THE TWO GREAT REASONS FOR OUR RESPONSE. One is that such reverent obedi-
ence is: 1. Our supreme obligation. “This is the whole duty of man,” or, rather, “ This
it” behoveth all men to do.” ‘This is what all men are in sacred duty bound to do,
There is no other obligation which is not slight and small in comparison with this.
The child owes much to his father, the pupil to his teacher, the beneficiary to his
benefactor, the one who has been rescued to his deliverer; but not one of these obliga-
tions, nor all added together, expresses anything that approaches the indebtedness
under which we rest to God. To him from whom we came, and “in whom we live
and move and have our being,” who is the one ultimate Source of all our blessings and of
all our powers, who has poured out upon us an immeasurable wealth of pure and patient
love; to the gracious Father of our spirit; to the gracious Lord of our life; to the holy
and the benignant One,—to him it does indeed become all men to render a reverent
obedience. The other reason why we should respond is found in: 2. Our supreme
wisdom. “ For God will bring,” etc, God is now bringing all that we are and do under
his own Divine judgment, and is now approving or disapproving. He is also so
governing the world that our thoughts and actions are practically judged, and either
rewarded or punished, before we pass the border-line of death. But while this is
true, and while there is much more of truth in it than is often supposed, yet much is
left to the future in this great matter of judyment. There are “secret things” to be
exposed ; there are undiscovered crimes to be made known; there are iniquities that
have escaped even the eye of the perpetrators, who “knew not what they did,” to be
revealed. There is a great account to be settled. And because it is true that “we
must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every. one of us may receive
the things done in his body,” because “God will judge the secrets of all hearts,”


ox, x. 1—14.) ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 319


because sin in every shape moves toward exposure and penalty, while i ghteonsness.
in all its forms travel- toward its recognition and reward, therefore let the spirit be
reverent in presence of its Maker, let the life be. filled with purity and worth, with
integrity and goodness, let man be the dutiful child of his Father who is in heaven.—C,


Vers. 8—12.— The epilogue. The sentence, “ Vanity of vanities; all is vanity!”
with which the Book of Ecclesiastes opened, is found here at its close. And doubt!ess
to many it will seem disappointing that it should follow so hard upon the expression
of belief in immortality. Surely we might say that the nobler view of life reached
by the Preacher should have precluded his return to the pessimistic opinious and
feelings which we can scarcely avoid associating with the words, “ Vanity of vanities;
all is vanity!” But on second thoughts the words are not contradictory of the
hope for the future which ver. 7 expresses. The fact that Christians can use the
words as descriptive of the worthlessness of things that are seen and temporal, as com-
pared with those that are unseen and eternal, forbids our concluding that they are
necessarily the utterance of a despairing pessimism. A great deal depends upon the
tone in which the words are uttered; and the pious tone of the writer’s mind, as
revealed in the concluding passages of his book, would incline us to believe that the
sentence, “all is vanity,” is equivalent to that in the Gospel, “ What shall it profit a
man, if he gain the whole world, and lose his own soul?” No one can deny that the
‘De Imitatione Christi’ is a noble expression of certain aspects of Christian teaching
with regard to life. And yet in the very first chapter of it we have these words of
Svlomon’s quoted and expanded. “ Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity beside loving
God and serving him alone. . . . It is vanity, therefore, to seek after riches which must
perish, and to trust in them. It is vanity also to lay one’s self out for honours, and to
raise one’s self toa high station. It is vanity to follow the desires of the flesh, and to
covet that for which we must afterwards be grievously punished. It is vanity to wish
for long life, and to take little care of leading a good life. It is vanity to mind only
this present life, and not to look forward to those things which are tocome. It is
vanity to love that which passes with all speed, and not to hasten thither where ever-
lasting joy abides.” In the opinion of many eminent critics the eighth verse contains the
concluding words of the Preacher, and those which follow are an epilogue, consisting of
a “ commendatory attestation” (vers. J—12), and a summary of the teaching of the
book (vers, 13, 14), which justifies its place in the sacred canon. On the whole, this
seems to be the most reasonable explanation of the passage. It seems more likely that
the glowing eulogy upon the author was written by some one else than that it came
from his own pen; and a somewhat analogous postscript is found in another book of
Holy Scripture, the Gospel of St. John (xxi. 24). Those who collected the Jewish
Scriptures into one, and drew the line between canonical and non-canonical literature,
may have considered it advisable to append this paragraph as a testimony in favour of
a book which contained so much that was perplexing, and to give a summary (in vers,
13, 14) of what seemed to them its general teaching. The Preacher, they say, was
gifted with wisdom over and above his fellows, and taught the people knowledge; and
for this pondered and investigated and set in order many proverbs or parables (ver. 9).
Like the scribe, “who had been made a disciple to the kingdom of heaven,” “ he
brought forth out of his treasure things new and old” (Matt. xiii, 52), Knowledge of
the wisdom of the past, ability to recognize in it what was most valuable, and to cast
it into new forms and zeal in the discharze of his sacred office, were all found in him.
He sought to attract men to wisdom by displaying it in its gracious aspect (cf. Luke
iv. 22), and to influence them by the sincerity of his purpose, and by the actual truth
he brought to light (ver. 10). “He aimed to speak at once words that would please
and words which were true—words which would be at once goads to the intellect, and
yet stakes that would uphold and stay the soul of man, both coming alike from one
shepherd” (ver. 11, Bradley). Some of his sayings were calculated to stimulate men into
fresh fields of thought and new paths of duty, others to confirm them in the possession
of truths of eternal value and significance. Like the apostle, he was anxious that his
readers should no longer be like “children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, in craitiness, after the wiles of error”
(Eph. iv.14); but should “ prove all things, and hold fast that which is good” (1 Thess,


$20 ECCLESIASTES ; OR, THE PREACHER (cH. xm. l--14.


vy. 21). How much better to study in the school of such a teacher than to weary and

rplex one’s self with “ science falsely so called;” than to be versed in multitudinous
iterature, which dissipates mental energy, and in which the soul can find no sure resting-
place (ver. 12)! All who set themselves, or who have been called, to be teachers of
men, may find in the example of the Preacher guidance as to the motives and aims
which will alone give them success in their work.—J. W.


Vers. 13, 14.—The last word. In the passage with which the Book of Ecclesiastes
concludes, the clue is found which leads the speaker out of the labyrinth of scepticism
in which for a time ae had gone astray. He at last emerges from the dark forest in
which he had long wandered, and finds himself under the stars of heaven, and sees in
the eastern sky the promise of the coming day. It is true that from time to time
in his earlier meditations he had retained, even if it were with but a falterin
grasp, the truth which he now announces confidently and triumphantly. “It h
mitigated his pessimism and hallowed his eudemonism” (ch, vii. 18; viii. 12; xi. 9).
And it must be taken as cancelling much of what he had said about the vanity of
human life. Over against his sombre thoughts about one fate awaiting both the
righteous and the wicked, the wise and the foolish (ch. ix. 2), and the levelling power
of death, that makes no distinction between man and the brute (ch. iii. 18—22), and
shakes one’s faith in the dignity and worth of our nature, is set his final verdict. God
does distinguish, not only between men and the brutes, but between good men and bad.
The efforts we make to obey him, or the indifference towards the claims of righteous-
ness we may have manifested, are not fruitless; they result in the formation of a
character that merits and will receive his favour, or of one that will draw down his
displeasure. The nearness of God to the individual soul is the great truth upon which
our author rests at last, and in his statement of it we have a positive advance upon
previous revelations, and an anticipation of the fuller light of the New Testament
teaching. God, he would have us believe, does not deal with men as nations or classes,
but as individuals. He treats them, whatever may have been their surroundings or
national connections, as personally accountable for the dispositiun and character they
have cultivated. His judgment of them lies in the future, and all, without distinction
of persons, will be subject to it. In these points, therefore, the writer of the Book of
Ecclesiastes transcends the teaching of the Old Testament, and approximates to that of
Christ and the apostles. The present life, with all its inequalities, the adversity which
often besets the righteous, and the prosperity which the wicked often enjoy, is not the
whole of existence, but there is a world to come in which the righteous will openly
receive the Divine favour, and the wicked the due reward of their deeds. The blessings
which were promised to the nation that was faithful to the Divine Law will be enjoyed
by each individual who has had the fear of God before his eyes. Judgment will go by
character, and not by outward name or profession (Matt. vii. 21—23; Rev. xx. 12).
We have, therefore, here a great exhortation founded on truths which cannot be shaken,
and calculated to guide each one who obeys it to that goal of happiness which all desire
to reach, “ Fear God, and keep his commandments.” Both the inward disposition and
the outward conduct are covered by the exhortation.

I. In the first place, then, THE PRINCIPLE BY WHICH WE SHOULD BE GOVERNED IS THE
“FEAR OF Gop.” This is the root from which the goodly leaves and choice fruit of a
religious life will spring. If the word “fear” had been used in this passage only, and we
had not been at liberty to understand it in any other than its ordinary sense, one would
be forced to admit that such a low motive could not be the mainspring of a vigorous and
healthy religious life. But all through the Scriptures the phrase, “ fear of God,” is used
as synonymous with a genuine, heartfelt service of him, and as rather indicating a
careful observance of the obligations we as creatures owe to him, than a mere dread of
his anger at disobedience. It is not to be denied that fear, in the ordinary sense of the
word, is reasonably a motive by which sin may be restrained, but it is no stimulus to
that kind of service which we owe to God. “1 thank God, and with joy I mention it,”
says Sir Thomas Browne, “I was never afraid of hell, nor ever grew pale at the
description of that place, I have so fixed my contemplations on heaven, that I have
almost forgot the idea of hell; and am afraid rather to lose the joys of one than
- endure the misery of the other. To be deprived of them is a perfect hell, and needs


ou, xu. 1—14.] ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER. 821
aetecn nes si SR ee ieee


methinks no addition to complete our afilictions. That terrible term hath never
detained me from sin, nor do I owe any good action to the name thereof. I fear God
yet am not afraid of him; his mercies make me ashamed of my sins, before his judg-
ments afraid thereof. These are the forced and secondary methods of his wisdom, which
he useth but as the last remedy, and upon provocation—a course rather to deter the
wicked than incite the virtuous to his worship. I can hardly think there was ever any
scared into heaven: they go the fairest way to heaven that would serve God without a hell.
Other mercenaries, thet crouch unto him in fear of hell, theugh they term themselves
the servants, are indeed but the slaves, of the Almighty ” (‘ Rel. Med.,’ i.52). Plainly
therefore, when the fear of God is made equivalent to true religion, it must include
many other feelings than that dread which sinners experience at the thouzht of the
laws they have broken, aud which may consist with hatred of God and of righteousness,
It must be a summary of all the emotions which belong to a religious life—reverence
at the thought of God’s infinite majesty, holiness, and justice, gratitude fur his loving-
kindness and tender mercy, confidence in his wisdom, power, and iaith{ulness, submission
to his will, and delight in communion with him. If fear is to be taken as a prominent
emotion in such a life, we are not to understand by it the terror of a slave, who would
willingly, if he could, break away from his owner, but the loving reverence of a child,
who is anxious to avuid everything that would grieve his father’s heart. The one
kind of fear is the mark of an imperfect obedience (1 John iv. 18); the other is the
proof of a disposition which calls forth God’s favour and blessing (Ps. ciii. 18).

II. In the second ;lace, THE CONDUCT WE SHOULD MANIFEST IS DESCRIBED: “ KEEP
HIS COMMANDMENTS.” This is the outward manilestation of the disposition of the
heart, and supplies a test by which the genuineness of a religious profession may be
tried. These two elements are needed to constitute holiness—a God-learing spirit and
a blameless life. If either be wanting the nature is out of balance, and very grave
defects will soon appear, by which all of positive good that has been attained will be
either overshadowed or nullified. If there be not devotion of the heart to God,
no zeal and fidelity in discharging the ordinary duties of life will make up for the loss.
The reverence due to him as our Creator—gratitude for his bevefits, penitent confession
of sins and shortcomings, and faith in his mercy—cannot be wilfully omitted by us
without a depravation of our whole character. And, on the other side, an acknowledg-
ment of him that does not lead us to “keep his commandments” is equally fatal
(Matt. vii. 21—23; Luke xiii. 25—27).

The Preacher appends two weiglity considerations to induce us to attend to his
exhortation to “ fear Gud, and keep his commandments.” ‘The first is that this is the
suurce of true happiness. Sv would we interpret his words, “ For this is the whole of
man.” The word “duty ” is suggested by our translators to complete the sense, but it is
not comprehensive enough. “'‘l’o fear God aud keep his commandments is not only the
whole duty, but the whole honour and interest and happiness of man” (Wardlaw).
The quest with which the bouk has been largely concerned is that for happiness, for
the summum bonum, in which: alone the soul can find satisfaction, and here it comes to
an end. ‘The discovery is made of that which has been so long and so painfully sought
after. In a pious and holy life and conversation rest is found; ail else is but vanity and
vexation of spirit. The second motive to obedience is the wrtainty of a future judg-
ment (ver. 14). “For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.” Nothing will be omitted or forgotten.
The Judge will be One who is absolutely just and wise, who will be free from all
partiality; and his sentence will be final. If, therefore, we have no such regard
for our own happiness in the present life as would move us to secure it by love and
service of God, we may still find a check upon sellewill and self-indulgence in the
thought that we shall have to give an account of our thoughts, words, and deeds to
One from whose senteuce there is no appeal.—J. W.


ROOLESIASTES, Y


‘one ee cae Sl


ae *


>


—


hice,


HOMILETICAL INDEX


ECCLESIASTES; OR, THE PREACHER,


CHAPTER L
ruENE


Koheleth, the Preacher
“Vanity of Vanities” cox
Concerning Crooked Things
Things Wanting ee
Increase of Knowledge, Increase of
Sorrow
* Allis Vanity”...
The Vanity of Man’s Life...
The Cycles of Nature
The Insatiability of Sense...
Novelty...
The Vanity of Homan Wisdom
Human Life and Human Labour
The Stability of Nature
Weariness and Rest
The Changing and the Abiding
Oblivion and its Consolations
Kvowledge and Sorrow
The Summary of a Life’s Experiense
Speculative Study of the World ...


ooo ore


and


ooo coo


200


ooo


CHAPTER IL


The Vanity of Pleasure—an Experi-
ment in Three Stages

Wisdom and Folly

The Vanity of Toil

The Vanity of Wealth, Pleasure, and
Greatnese

The Comparison nes Wisdom
.and Folly


ooo oo


eee 208 eee


eae
THEME
paces | Concern for Posterity 0 eee


89


42


All Good is from God
Retribution soe
‘The Trial of Pleasure
Sagacity and Stupidity
The Complaint of the Successful
Piety and Impiety; Recompense and
Penalty
An Experiment : FecpeouR Mirth oat
Another Experiment: Refined Volup-
tuousness vee
The Value and the
Wisdom Bae
Riches, though abiained: ity Much
Toil, are Vanity:
The Condition of Pure Baioy mente) eee


Fatiity of


OHAPTER III.


Times and Seasons; or, Heaven's
Order in Man’s Affairs ...
All Things Beautiful; or, God, Man,
and the World.. doi S00
Requiring that which { is Past :
Wickedness in the Place of Judg-
ment; or, the Mystery of Provi-
dence..

Are Mean no Better than eace ?

The Manifold Interests and Occupa-
tions of Life ...

The Mystery and the Meaning of
Life


ooo eee e00 vee


if

THEME

The Purposes of Providence

Man’s Unrighteousness contrasted —


with God’s Righteousness ae
The Common Destiny of Death ...
The Harthly Portion 50
Opportunity ; Opperiaseness ; Ordi-
nation non
“ This Dnintelligible World Hd
The Conclusion of Folly or the Faith


of the Wise? ... ee ose
Divine Constancy and Human Piety
Before and after Christ... aes
Opportuneness ... vee oes
Desiderium Atternitatis ... oon


Another Uondition of Pure Happiness
A Present Use and Enjoyment of the


Gifts of God is Advisable nee
The Darkness of the Grave eee
CHAPTER IV.


Two Pessimistic Fallacies; or, the
Glory of being Born ... tee
Three Sketches from Life
Two Better than One; or,
panionship versus Isolation
The Vicissitudes of Royalty; or, the
Experience of a King vee
The Oppressed and the Oppressor ...


Com-


Pessimism n00 vee vee
Envy ... toe
The Handful with Quieiiess aes


The Pain of Loneliness
The Advantages of Fellowship 5
Folly a Worse Evil than Poverty ...
Pessimism and Christian Life
Practical Wisdom in the Conduct of
Life ... es
Mutual Service ... oS
A Threefold Cord EO
Circumstance and Character
Oppression of Man by his Fellows ...
Ambition and Indolence
Friendship a Gain in Life...
Mortifications of Royalty ...


eee


vee


CHAPTER V.


Vanities in Worship
The Picture of an Ideal State
A Sermon on the Vanity of Riches..


INDEX.


92
93


94


95
97
97
98
99
99
100
101
101


102
102
103
104
104
106
107
109


119
121
122


THEME
The Picture of a Good and Comely”
Life ... toe sea
The Temple and te Worshippers ..
Reverence, Reticence, and Brevity in
Devotion ade tee tee
The Law of the Vow 26 ese
The Oppressor’s Accountability ...
The Earth and Man aa +
The Unsatisfying Nature of ieobea!
The Good Things appointed for Man
by God es oe tee
Acceptable Service cos eee
Vowing and Paying ose tes
Comfort in Confusion see vee
The Difference at Death ... eee
Vanity in Religion: 1. Thoughtless-.
ness ...
Vanity in Religion: 2. Bash Paved
Vanity in Religion: 3. Broken Vows
A Misgoverned State eee
A Well-ordered State wee woe
The Drawbacks upon Wealth eee
CHAPTER VI.
Sore Evils beneath the Sun; or, the
Misfortunes of a Rich Man 4
The Insatiableness of Desire 143,
Four Aspects of Human Life
“Who can tell P” a Sermon on Human
Ignorance va
The Unsatisfactoriness end Trandi:
toriness of Earthly Good
The Gloom of Disappointment .
Satisfaction Better than Desire
Oontending against Power aca
What is Man’s Good ? mes
The Insufficiency of Circumstance ...
Heroism ; Infatuation; Wisdom ...
Life without Enjoyment Valueleas...
Inexorable Destiny vee toe
CHAPTER VII.
A Good Name Better than Precious
Ointment
The Day of Death and the Day of
Birth ..
The bane of Moumates and the
House of Feasting fon
Counsels for Evil Times ...


$$ en =


142
152
144


145


146
147
148
149
149
150
151
151
153


167


168


168
170


The End Better than the Beginning 171, 180


INDEX.


THEME
“The Good Old Times”—a Popular
Delusion :
Wisdom and Wealth

Crooked Things and Straight
Nothing in Excess; or, a Caution
against Extremes see
The Dangers and Defences of a City.
A Great Quest, and its Sorrowful
Result
Reputation a
A Divine Paradox te
The Mischief of Oppression aed
Bribery
The Folly of Pride, Hastiness, and
Anger coe nea ofa
Laudator Temporis Acti ...
The Perplexities of Life
Moderation one eee
Perfection is not on Earth
Bad Women a Curse to Society
The Evil, the Unprofitable, and the
Blessed Thing... ane ase
Patience and Pride na ee
Foolish Comparison and Complaint ...
The Irremediable eae
The Lower and the Higher Staddard
Degradation and Elevation see
The Charm of Goodness ..,
Compensations of Misery ...
Patience under Provocation
Wisdom and Riches 0n8 vee
Resignation to Providence
Righteousness and Wickedness
Wisdom a Protection m8
Woman... toe soe


vee eee


eee


178,


coo
00e vee
eee


CHAPTER VIII.


A Wise Man’s Superiority—in what
does it consist ? tes

“Honour the King”

The Sorrowful Tale of Man’ 8 Misery,
upon the Earth

Before, at, and after Death; or, the
Wicked and the Good—a Contrast

Solemn Thoughts for Serious Moments

A Misunderstood Providence and a
Mistaken Judgment

“The Business that is done upon the
Earth” au sa

The Tokens of Wisdom os. ais

The Ruler and the Subject


PAGE


172
173
173


175
176


177
184
179


179


181
181
182
182
183
183


184
185
186
186
187
187
188
189
192
193
194,
195
196
197


206
207


208


208
209


209
210


210
211


THEME

A Hasty and Foolish Inference...
The Certainty of Retribution
Man’s Busy Life ..

The Tieponotrables Taseratabls Mys-


tery . on vee
Meat —our Power and our Powstloss:


eco


ness ... on x0
Sin in Power See nee
The Perversion of God’s Pationoe oe
“Sweetness and Light” ... tee


Allegiance of Subjects
The Doom of Tyrants
Unequal Lots
Retribution Certain tee
One Way out of Perplexity
Vanity of Philosophizing ...


CHAPTER IX.


All Things alike to All seo
oA BALES Dog Better than a Dead

Lion” vee
The Picture of an deal Life wee
Words to a Worker eae
The Parable of the Little City eee


The Antidote to Despondency ces
Life and Death ... vas vee
The Joy of Human Life .., ove
Diligence vee eee


The Pow snlesedeen of Man


The Praise of Wisdom ... vee
Life is Everything a nn
The Day of Opportunity .., tee


Prosperity—the Rule and the Excep-

tion sac
Wisdom and Btronith act
The Destructiveness of One Evil Life
Inexorable Destiny


eee


Enjoyment of the Present... eee

Time and Chance see vee

An Apologue toe soe ove

CHAPTER X,

The Dispraise of Folly ... sas

Gnomic Wisdom; or, a String of
Double-edged Proverbs... 506

Good Thoughts for Bad Times; or,
Words from the Wise

The Picture of a Happy Land

Folly Self-betrayed vee tee


iv INDEX.
THEME PaGE THEME
Social Paradoxes... coe see 263 | Incentives to Christian Work ten
The Rebound of Evil ees .. 263 | The True Workman rae an
Force and Wisdom see +. 264 | The Shadow of the Tomb... as
The Obtrusiveness and the Condem- Human Joy and Divine Judgment ...
nation of Folly see .. 264 | The Vanity and Glory of Youth _es..
Statesmanship ... ay ». 265 | Provision for the Future ... aoe
The Curse of Sloth nes ve. 265 | Enjoyment of the Present ae
The Dead Fly in the Ointment .. 266 | Youth and Age ... vee ~
Sin Suicidal Bae 50 vee ©6267
The Broken Hedge ws vee 267 CHAPTER XIL
Good Workmanship—Onrselves and
our Tools Nae ... 268 | “Remember thy Creator” Sess
Ruin—its Forms and its paras 269 | The Last Scene of Alls; or, “Man
Dead Flies ae so 269 goeth to his Long Home” aoe
The Wholesome Influence “of Wisdom A Model Preacher mee ate
and the Baneful Effects of Folly... 272 Reading, Writing, Speaking ‘ae
Duties of Rulers and Subjects vee ©6274 | “The Conclusion of the Whole Mat-
ter;” or, “the Whole Duty of
OHAPTER XI. hea “ - -
Youthful Retation ae <os
Bread upon the Waters; or, Rules and Old Age and Death nee oes
Reasons for practising Beneficence 281 | The Religious Thinker and Teacher
Conditions of Success in Business ... 282 | The Scholar’s Sorrow
Carpe Diem: Memento Mori; or, Religion, Righteousness, and Retribu-
Here and Hereafter contrasted ... 283 tion ... wen
Advice to a Young Man or Woman... 283 | The Vanity and Glory of Youth aon
Works of Charity ae .. 284 | Death, its Meaning and its Moral ...
Encouragement to Christian Toilers 285 | The Function of the Teacher Hee
Fulfil Duty and disregard Conse- Divine Requirement and Human Re-
quences Son vee ©6285 sponse nate ey Peet
Light and Darknces e .. 286 | The Epilogue... cae ae
In Joy remember Judgment eos 287 | Tho Last Word w. ees sie


293


% ¥ ¥
i ‘
RMT PRU  AL eli y iat MAS cote


®
3) he


ais
es
OMAR NAG
Sees


ES


Sg un


a
an
Tose


ays


on
herentany
SN


leattie


ABH hop
Eeaon


seh
mit etiah ENON
vi


as


ra


po


“arm Si OOF
EBA ora naeauaan
SSR Nata ee
SS PEN

: PhONa vtitcten S ESR ae
Saas es Ne tte


BH Nt!
ve


os


Raa


yee ayet
at Arai


Se ai Hore wane Ss
one Si} it Fes oe Ee He ny Hae
Sheth ule ones Teo9s Seabee
SSmatos nanan Bueiuie Rea: :


Thapaanne sf ie
Pitsiar eke Lisouyesoodacted


Deas oy Gj cay aaa
Sanaa f : eae Se


i
Gracsats . DER CAEA * PEASE oat
Siete ee re I eN tare eRnate


a


=


tee:
as


SSSI VOR.
ef rays


x


ee “
SES eee Sogo “ ee


: ; cet
2 ponte = St See GSe


eosin od Roane es :
Ss es :
RESUS Se Reurtetecas
SSeS Fe Ss x
