CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY





The original of this book is in
the Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104887



THE

PULPIT COMMENTARY,

EDITED BY THE

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D.,

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER ;

AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY THE



FEN. ARCHDEACON F. W. FARRAR, D.D., F.R.S.— RT. REV. H, COTTERTLL, D.D., F.R.S.E.

VERY REV. PRINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.-KEV. CANON G. RAWLINSON, M.A.

REV. A. PLUMMER, M.A., D.D.



FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New York akd Toronto.



THE



PULPIT COMMENTARY



EDITED BY THE



REV. CANON II. D. M. SPENCE, xM.A.,

VICAR AND RURAL DEAN OF ST. PANCRAS, AND EXAMINING CHAPLAIN TO THK LORD
BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER AND BRISTOL ;



AND BY THE

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, A.M



II. CORINTHIANS.

(•Exposition :
By the VEN. archdeacon PARRAR. D.»,

f^omiletics :
By rev. DAVID THOMAS, D.D

EDITOR OF THE " HOMILIST."

ipomilies bg borions iS^utliors :

REV DONALD FRASER D.D., REV. PROF. J. R. THOMSON, St.*

REV EX-CHANCELLOR LIPSCOMB, LL.D., REV. R. TUCK, B.A.
REV. E. HURNDALL, M.A.



FUISTK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
New York and Toronto.



THE SECOND EPISTLE OF

PAUL TO THE COfilNTHIANS.



INTRODUCTION.



Vert Kttle is needed by way of introduction to the Second Epistle ; for it is,
in fact, a sequel to the First.

The apostle's departure from Ephesus had been precipitated bv the
tumult, in which, as appears from various scattered refeienoes, he had
incurred extreme danger of his life. He went straight to Troas, still eager
to preach the gospel of Christ. He had told Titus to meet him there ; and
it was the first place where he could hope to receive any tidings as to the
reception by the Corinthians of his first letter — a point respecting which he
was painfully anxious. But either St. Paul arrived at Troas earlier than the
time appointed, or the journey of Titus had been delayed. St. Paul was
preaching with success — " a door was opened for him in the Lord ; " but the
anxiety to which he found himself a prey rendered it impossible for him to
continue his mission. Seeking some relief for the intolerable oppression of
his spirit, he hurried to Macedonia, and there, perhaps in Philippi, he first met
Titus. The meeting at once relieved the tension of his feelings, and caused
an outburst of joy. For the tidings which Titus had to tell were good.
He had been cordially received. The First Epistle had caused among the
Corinthians an outburst of salutary grief, of yearning affection, of holy
zeal. They had listened to the apostle's message with fear and trembling.
The offender had been promptly and even severely dealt with. The news
appeared at first to be so encouraging that St. Paul, with deep thankfulness,
determined to send Titus, with " the brother whose praise is in the gospel,"
to finish the good work which he had begun, and to arrange about the
collection for the poor saints at Jerusalem. And as, this time, Titus
was not only ready but anxious to go, St. Paul began to dictate the letter
of which Titus was to be the bearer.

But Uttle by little the apostle learnt — what perhaps Titus, out of kindness
and sympathy, might not have deemed it necessary at once to tell him —
that there was another side to the picture. His change of plan about the

U. OOBINTHIAHS. i



INTRODUCTION TO



double visit had given rise to a charge of levity, and many remarks moBt
injurious to his character had been industriously disseminated, especially,
it woulvl seem, by some Jewish emissary. His opponents hinted at his
cowardice in not coming ; his vacillation and insincerity in changing his
mind ; the conscious inferiority which made him abstain from any claim
to maintenance ; the meanness of his aspect ; the baldness and simplicity of
his speech ; the fact that he had no commendatory letters from Jerusalem ;
his dubious position as regards the Law. They insinuated doubts about his
perfect honesty. They charged him with underhand guile, and fraudulent
or self-interested designs with reference to the collection. They even
ventured to hint their doubt as to his perfect sanity. Such charges would
have been hard to endure at any time. They were so especially at a time
when the apostle was suflfering overwhelming distress — a combination of fears
without and fightings within, whi<jh produced a mental and physical pros-
tration. It became a duty and a necessity, however distasteful, to defiaid
himself. Personally he neither required nor cared for any self-defence.
But before God in Christ he felt bound to clear his character from these
detestable innuendoes, because they were liable, if unnoticed, to hinder his
work both in Corinth and in other Churches ; and his work had on him
a sacred claim. Hence, though nothing was more repellent to his sensitive
humility than any semblance of egotism or boasting, he is driven by the
unscrupulosity of his opponents to adopt such a tone of self-defeme that the
word " boasting " occurs in this Epistle no less than twenty-nine times. He
neither could nor would appeal to any letters of commendation or to any
certificate from his brother apostles, because he had received his own
apobtolate direct from God; and hence he is forced to appoiil, on the one
hand to his visions and revelations, and on the other hand to the seal of
approval which in every way God had set to his unparalleled activity and
devotion.

These circumstances sufficiently mark out the characteristics of the
letter.

1. It entiiely differs from the First Epistle. That is a letter in which ho
dealt with practical and speculative difficulties, answering the inquiries
and correcting the abuses of a most unsatisfactory Church. The Second
Epistle is the impassioned self-defence of a wounded spirit to eriing and
ungrateful children. It is the apostle's Apologia pro vita sua.

2. Hence, as Upe is the key-note of the Epistles to the Thessalonians,
joy of that to the Philippiaiis, /aiU of that to the Komans, heavenly things of
that to the Ephesians, affliction is the one predominant word and thought in
the Second Epistle to the Coiinthians.

3. As Bengel says, " It reminds us of an itinerary, but interwoven with
the noblest precepts." " The very stages of his journey," says Dean Stanley,
"are impressed upon it— the troubles at Ephesiis, the anxiety of Troas, the
consoiation of Macedonia, the prospect of moving to Corinth."

4. It is the least syeitem-^^o »« the First Epistle iathe most systematic, of
all St. Paul's writings.



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. ill

5. It is the most emotional, and therefore in some respects — in ts style,

expressions, and causal connections — the most difficult of St. Paul's Epistles.
The labouring phraseology, the interchange of bitter irony with deep pathos,
the manner in which he is haunted and possessed and mastered by word
after word which seizes his imagination — ^now " tribulation," now " consola-
tion," now " boasting," now " weakness," now " simplicity," now " mani-
festation" — only serve to throw into relief the frequent bursts of rushing
and impassioned eloquence. The sorrow and tenderness displayed are a
measure of the insolence and wrong which called out in the concluding
chapters so stern an indignation.

6. At the end of the ninth chapter there is a sudden, startling, and com-
plete break in the whole manner and tone of the Epistle. The remainder
(ch. X. 1 — xiii. 10) seems to be written in a mood so wholly different from
that of the former, that some have even (though needlessly) suppused that
it really was a separate Epistle. Vehement though suppressed indignation,
scathing irony, strong denunciation, commanding authority, take the place
of the pathetic tenderness and effusive thankfulness which are predominant
in the previous chapters. This phenomenon of a tone suddenly changed is
found in other writings both sacred and seunlar, and may be accounted for
by circumstances under which the apostle wrote.

7. The analysis of the Epistle in minor details will be found in the notes.
The main divisions are : ch. i. — vii., hortatory and personal, with an under-
current of calm apology ; ch. viii., ix., directions and remarks about the
oollection; ch. x. — ^xiii., impassioned defence of himself and his apostolic
position against the calumnies of his enemies.



THE SECOND EPISTLE OF

PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB 1



Address and greeting (Ten, 1, 2).
Thanksgiving for the comfort sent to him
by Grod, wherein, as in his afiBiction which
rendered it necessary, they sympathetically
shared (vers. 3 — 11). He has earned a right
to their sympathy by his sincerity (vers.
12 — 14). His change of purpose with re-
spect to a visit to Corinth, with digression
on the onohangeableneas of the gospel
(vers. 15 — 22). Explanation of his reasons
(ver. 22— oh. 11 4).

Yer. 1. — By the will of God (see 1 Cor. L
1). In the face of Jndaizing opponents, it
was essential that he should vindicate his
independent apostolate (Acts xxvi. 15 — 18).
And Timothy. Timothy had been absent
from St. Panl when he wrote the First
Epistle, and Sosthenes had taken his place,
whether as amanuensis or merely as a sort
of joint authenticator. Cox brother ; lite-
rally, tlie in-other, as in 1 Cor. i. 1. The
brotherhood applies both to St. Paul and to
the Corinthians ; there was a special bond
of brotherhood between all members of
"the household of faith." The saints.
Before the name "Christians" had come
into general use, " saints " (Acts ix. 13) and
"brethren" were common desigiiations of
those who were "faithful in Christ Jesus"
(Eph. L 1). In all Aohaia. In its classical
sense Achaia means only the northern strip
of the Peloponnesus; as a Roman province
the name included both Hellas and the
Peloponnesus. Here St. Paul probably
uses it in its narrower sense. The only
Mtrictly Aohaian Church of which we know
is Oenohrea, but doubtless there were little
Christian communities along the coasts of
the Corinthian gulf. To the Church at
Athens St. Paul never directly alludes.

n. OOBINTHIAlili.



This letter was not la any sense an en-
cyclical letter ; but even if it were not read
in other communities, the Corinthians
would convey to them the apostle's greeting.
Ver. 2.— Grace be to yon and peace. On
this pregnant synthesis of the Greek and
Hebrew greetings, see 1 Cor.i. 3; Bom. i. 7.
Ver. 3. — Blessed be God (Eph. i. 3). This
outburst of thanksgiving was meant to re-
press the relief brought to the overcharged
feelings of the apostle by the arrival of
Titus, with news respecting the mixed, but
on the whole good, effect produced at
Corinth by the severe remarks of his first
letter. It is characteristic of the intense
and impetuous rush of emotion which we
often notice in the letters of St. Paul, that
he does not here state the special grounds
for this impassioned thanksgiving ; he only
touches upon it for a moment in ch. ii. 13,
and does not pause to state it fully until ch.
vii. 5 — 16. It is fmrther remarkable that in
this Epistle almost alone he utters no thanks-
giving for the moral growth and holiness of
the Church to which he is writing. This may
be due to the fact that there was still so
much to blame ; but it more probably arose
from the tumult of feeling which through-
out this letter disturbs the regular flow of
his thoughts. The ordinary " thanks-
giving" for his readers is practically, though
indirectly, involved in the gratitude which
he expresses to God for the sympathy and
communion which exists between himself
and the Church of Corinth. Even the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Greek is the
same as in Eph. i. 3, where, literally ren-
dered, it is, "Blessed be the God and
Father." The same phrase is found also in
1 Pet. i. 3 ; Col. i. 3. The meaning is not,
"Blessed be the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Father of onr Lord Jesus
Christ" (although the expression, "the
God of onr Lord Jesus Christ," occurs in



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. i. 1—2*



Bph. 1. 17; oomp. John xx. 17), but
" Blessed be God, who is also the Father of
our Lord Jesus Clirist," and who Is there-
fore " our Father " by adoption and redemp-
tion, as well as our Hod by creation. The
Father of meroies. This corresponds to a
Hebrew expression, and means that com-
passionatenees is the most characteristic
attribute of God, and emanation from him.
He is the Source of all mercy ; and mercy
"Is an attribute of God himself."

» He is " full of compassion, and gracious,
long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth " (Ps. Ixxxvi. 15). " The Law," says
the Talmud, "begins and ends with an act
of mercy. At its commencement God
clothes the naked; at its close he buries
the dead " (' Sotah,' f. 14, 1). Thus every
chapter bnt one of the Korin is headed, " In
the name of God the Compassionate, the
Merciful ; " and it is an Eastern expression
to say of one that has died that "he is
taken to the mercy of the Merciful,"
Oomp. "Father of glovy," Bph, i. 17;
1 Cor. ii. 8 ("of spirits," Heb. xli. 9; "of
lights," Jas. i. 17). The plural, " compas-
sions," is perhaps a plural of excellence,
• exceeding compassion " (Bom. xii. 1), and
may be influenced by the Hebrew word
rachamim, often literally rendered by St.
Paul " bowels." The article in the Greek
(" the Father of the compassions ") tpecial-
izea the mercy. The Ood of all comfort. So
in oh. xiii. 11 God is called "the God of
love and peace ;'" Eom. xv. 5, " the God of
patience and of comfort ; " ii. 15, " the
God of hope." This word "comfort"
(unfortunately interchanged with " conso-
lation " in the Authorized Version) and the
word "affliction" (varyingly rendered by
" trouble " and " tribulation " in the Autho-
rized Version), are the key-notes of this
passage ; and to some extent of the whole
Epistle. St. Paul is haunted as it were and
possessed by them. " Comfort," as verb or
substantive, occurs ten times in vers. 8 — 7 ;
and " afiiiotion " occurs four times in succes-
sion. It is characteristic of St. Paul's style
to be thus dominated, as it were, by a single
word (comp. notes on ch. iii. 2, 13 ; iv. 2 ;
see note on ch. x. 8). The needless varia-
tions of the Authorized Version were well
intentioned, but arose from a false notion of
style, a deficient sense of the precision of
special words, and an inadequate conception
of the duties of faithful translation, which
requires that we should as exactly as pos-
sible reflect the peculiarities of the original,
and not attempt to improve upon them.

Ver. 4. — Who oomforteth us. The " us "
implies here, not only St. Paul and Timothy,
but also the Corinthians, who are one with
tbem in a bond of Christian unity which



was hitherto undreamed of, and wai » new
phenomenon in the world. St. Paul always
uses the first person in passages where he
is speaking directly of individual feelings
and experiences. In other passages he
likes to lose himself, as it were, in the
Christian community. The delicate play
of emotion is often shown by the rapid
interchanges of singular and plural (see
vers. 13, 15, 17; ch. ii. 1, 11, 14, etc.).
The present, " comforteth," expresses a con-
tinuous experience, with which the Chris-
tians of the first age were most happily
familiar (John xiv. 16—18; 2 Thess. ii.
16, 17). In all our affliction. The collec-
tive experience of affliction is sustained by
the collective experience of comfort. That
we may be able to comfort. Thus .St. Paul
takes " a teleological view of sorrow." It is
partly designed as a school of sympathy.
It is a part of the training of an apostle,
just as suffering is essential to one who is
to be a sympathetic high priest (Heb. v.
1, 2). In any trouble. The original more
forcibly repeats the words, " in all affliction."
Wherewith we ourselves are comforted. By
means of the comfort which God giveb im,
we can, by the aid of blessed experience,
communicate comfort to others.

Ver. 5. — As the sufferings of Christ
abound in us; rather, unto «*. "The
sufferings of Christ" are the sufferings
whicli he endured in the days of his flesli,
and they were not exhausted by him, but
overflow to ns who have to suffer as he
suffered, bearing about with us his dying,
that we may share his life (ch. iv. 10).
The idea is, not that he is suffering in us
and with us (though the truth of his intense
sympathy with his suffering Church may be
shadowed forth in some such terms, Matt.
XXV. 40 — 45 ; Acts ix. 4), but that we have
"a fellowship in his sufferings" (Phil. iii.
17) ; Gal. ii. 20, " I have been crucified with
Christ ; " Heb. xiii. 13, " Bearing his re-
proach." Our sufferings are the sufferings
of Christ because we suffer as he suffered
(1 Pet. iv. 13) and in the same cause.
Aboundeth by Christ. If his sufferings, as
it were, overflow to us, so too is he the Source
of our comfort, in that he sendeth ua the
Comforter (John xiv. 16—18).

Ver. 6. — And ; rather, but The verse ex-
presses the additional thought that the com-
fort (t'.e. encouragement and strengthening)
of the apostle, as well as his affliction, was
notj,only designed for his own spiritual train-
ing, but was the source of direct blessing to
his converts, because it enabled him, both by
example (PhiL i. 14) and by the lessons of
experience, to strengthen others in affliction,
and so to further their salvation by teaching
them how to endure (Rom. v. 34). The
affliction brings encouragement, and so works



CB. I 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



endnrsnce in im, and, by ear example and
teaching, in yoa.

Ver. 7. — And our hope of yon is steadfast;
literally. And our hope is steadfast on your
heiudf. The variations of text and punctu-
ation in the verse do not materially aflfect
the sense. The meaning is " And I have a
sure hope that you will reap the benefits
of our common fellowship with Christ in
his affliction, and of the comfort which he
sends, because I know that you have ex-
perienced tlie sufferings, and am therefore
sure that he will send you the strength and
the endurance. The close connection of
tribulation and Divine encouragement are
found also in Matt. v. 4; 2 Tim. ii. 12;
1 Pet. V. 10. The interchange of the two
between teacher and taught is part of the
true communion of saints (comp. Phil. ii. 26).

Ver. 8. — For we would not, brethren, have
yon ignorant. This is a favourite phrase
with St. Paul (Eom. 1. 13; xi. 25; 1 Cor.
xii 1; 1 Thess. iv. :13). Of our trouble;
rather, about our affliction. He assumes that
they are aware what the trouble was, and
he does not specially mention it. What he
wants them to know is that, by the help of
their prayers and sympathy, God had de-
livered him out of this affliction, crushing
as it was. Which oame to ns in Asia. Most
commentators refer this to the tumult at
Ephesus (Acts xix.); and since St. Paul's
dangers, sicknesses, and troubles are clearly
understated throughout the Acts, it is pos-
sible that the perils and personal maltreat-
ment which were liable to occur during
such a season of excitement may have
brought on some violent illness ; or, again,
he may have sutiered from some plots (1
Cor. xvi. 9, 32; Acts xx. 19) or shipwreck
(eh. xi. 25). In Eom. xvi. 4 he alludes
again to some extreme perU. But St. Paul
seems systematically to have made light of
external dangers and sufferings. All his
strongest expressions (see Eom. ix. 1 — 3, etc.)
are reserved for mental anguish and afflic-
tion. What he felt most keenly was the
pang of lacerated affections. It is, therefore,
possible that he is here alluding to the
overpowering tumult of feelings which had
been aroused by his anxiety as to the
reception likely to be accorded to his first
letter. To this and the accompanying cir-
cumstances he alludes again and again (oh.
ii. 4, 12 ; vii. 5, etc.). The sense of " com-
fort" resulting from the tidings brought by
Titus (oh. vii. 6, 7, 13) is as strong as
that expresed in these verses, and the allu-
sion to this anguish of heart is specially
appropriate here, because he is dwelling on
the sympathetic communion between himself
and his converts, both in their sorrows and
their consolations. That we were pressed
ont of measure, above strength; literally.



OuU IM were weighed down exceedingly he-
yond our power. The trial seemed too heavy
for him to bear. The phrase here rendered
" out of measure " occurs in ch. iv. 17 ; Eom.
vii. 13; 1 Ctor. xii. 31 ; Gal. i 13; but is
only found in this particular group of letters.
Insomuch that we despaired even of life.
This rendering conveys the meaning. Lite-
rally it is, so that we were even in utter per-
plexity (ch. iv. 8) even about life. " I fell
into such agony of mind that I hardly hoped
to survive." Generally, although he was
often in perplexity, he succeeded in resist-
ing despair (ch. iv. 8).

Ver. 9. — But; perhaps rather, yea. The
word strenp;thens the phrase, " were in utter
perplexity." We had the sentence of death
in ourselves. The original is more emphatic,
" Ourselves in our own selves we have had."
Not only did all the outer world look dark to
me, but the answer which my own spirit
returned to the question, " What will be the
end of it all?" was " Death 1" and that
doom still seems to echo in my spirit. The
sentence ; rather, the answer. The word is
unique in the LXX. and the New Testament.
In ourselves. Because I seemed to myself
to be beyond all human possibility of de-
liverance. That we should not trust in
ourselves. There was a divinely intended
meaning in my despair. It was meant to
teach me, not only submission, but absolute
trust in God (see Jer. xvii. 5, 7). Which
raiseth the dead. Being practically dead—
utterly crushed with anguish and despairing
of deliverance — I learnt by my deliverance
to have faith in God as one who can raise
men even from the dead.

Ver. 10. — From so great a death. From a
state of dejection and despair, which seemed
to show death in all its power (see ch. iv.
10 — 12). And doth deliver. Perhaps a
pious marginal gloss which has crept into
the text of some manuscripts. We trust ;
rather, we have set our hope. That. This
word is omitted in some good mannscripts,
as also are the words, " and doth deliver."
He will yet deliver us. This implies either
that the perils alluded to were not yet abso-
lutely at an end, or St. Paul's consciousness
that many a peril of equal intensity lay
before him in the future.

Ver. 11. — ^Ya also helping together by
prayer for us. St. Paul had a deep con-
viction of the efficacy of intercessory prayer
(Eom. IV. 30, 31; Phil, i 19; Philem. 22).
Sy the means of many persons; literally,
from many faces. Probably the word pro-
sopan here has its literal meaning. The
verse, then, means "that from many faces
the gift to us may be thankfully acknow-
ledged by many on our belialf." God, he
implies, will be well pleased when he sees
the gratitude beaming from the many ooun-



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. u 1—2*.



tenances of those who thank him for his
answer to their prayers on his behalf. The
word for "gift" is cfearama, which means
a gift of grace, a gift of the Spirit (1 Cor.

Vers. 12—li.— Vindtcatton of hts right to
their sympathy. _ _ .. ^

Ver. 12. — For our rejoicing; rather, /or
our boasting is this. My expression of con-
fidence in your sympathy with me may
sound like a boast, but my boast merely
accords with the testimony of my conscience
that I have been sincere and honest to all,
and most of all to you. The testimony of
our oonsoience. To this St. Paul frequently
appeals (Acta xxiii. 1 ; xxiv. 16; Bom. ix. 1 ;
1 Cor. iv. 4). In simplicity ; rather, t» holt-
ness. The best reading is ayiSriiTi (tt. A,
B, 0, K), not aTr\6TVTt. " Holiness" seems
to have been altered to "simplicity," both
on dogmatic grounds and because it is a
rare word, only occurring in Heb. xii. 10.
And godly sincerity; literally, sincerity of
God ; i.e. sincerity which is a gift of Divine
giaoe (oomp. "peace of God," Phil. iv.
7; "righteousness of God," Rom. i. 17).
For the word used for " sincerity," see note
on 1 Cor. T. 8. Not with fleshly wisdom
(oomp. ch. ii. 17; 1 Cor. ii. 4), but by the
grace of God. The preposition in both
clauses is " in." The grace of God was the
atmosphere which the apostle breathed, the
sphere in which he worked. We have had
our conversation. We lived and moved.
The word "conversation" originally meant
"mode of life," and is used to translate both
anastrophe and politeuma, which means pro-
perly "citizenship." The exclusive modern
sense of " conversation " is not earlier than
the last century. In the world ; t.e. in my
general life as regards all men. More abun-
dantly to yon-ward. Sincerity, holiness, the
signs of the grace of God, were specially
shown by the apostle towards the Corin-
thians, because they were specially needed
to guide his relations towards a Church
which inspired him with deep affection,
but which required special wisdom to guide
and govern. The fact that, in spite of all
his exceptional care, such bitter taunts could
still be levelled at him, shows that he had not
been mistaken in supposing that no Church
required from him a more anxious watch-
fulness over all his conduct.

Ver. 13. — For we write none other things
unto you, etc. Kemaiks like these obviously
presuppose that the conduct and character of
St. Paul had been misrepresented and calum-
niated. The perpetual recurrence to a strain
of self-defence would have been needless if
some one — probably Titus — had not told St.
Paul that his opponents accused him of tn-
niteerity. Here, therefore, be tells them that
lie in opening out his very heart towards



them. What he had to my to them and of

them was here set forth without any sub-
terfuges or arriires pensies. He had nothing
esoterio which differed from eaoierio teaching.
It is a melancholy thought that even such
a one as Paul was reduced to _ the sad
necessity of defending himself against such
charges as that he intrigued with individual
members of his Churches, wrote private
letters or sent secret messages which diffeied
in tone from those which were read in the
public assembly. Or acknowledge; rather,
or even fully know; i.e. from other sources.
The paronomasia of the original cannot be
preserved in English, but in Latin would be
" Quse legitis aut etiam intelligitis." And
I trust . . . even to the end; rather, but I
hope that, even unto the end, ye vM tuUy
know — even as ye fuUy knew n» in part— that
we are your subject of boast. After telling
them that they have in this letter his
genuine and inmost thoughts, he adds that
" even as some of them (for this seem to be
implied by the 'in part') already knew
well that the mutual relations between him
and them were something wherein to glory,
he hopes that they will appreciate this fact,
even to the end." He knvws that some
honour him ; he hopes that all will do so ;
but he can only express this as a hope, for
he is aware that there are calumnies abroad
respecting him, so that he cannot feel sure
of their unbroken allegiance. Such seems
to be the meaning ; but the state of mind in
which St. Paul wrote has evidently troubled
his style, and his expressions are less lucid
and more difficult to unravel in this Epistle
than in any other. To the end. The ex-
pression is quite general, like our " to the
last." He does not seem definitely to imply
either to the end of his life or to the coming
of Christ, which they regarded as the end of
all things, as in 1 Cor. i. 8 ; xv. 24; Heb. iii. 6.
Ver. 14. — ^In part. Not as a whole
Church. Some only of the Corinthians htid
been faithful to his teaching and to himself.
(For the phrase, see Rom. xi. 25; xv. 15, 24;
1 Cor. xi. 18 ; xii. 27 ; xiii. 9.) Bejoicing ;
rather, ground of boast, as in oh. ix. 3 ; Bom.
iv. 2, " whereof to glory ; " 1 Cor. v. 6. In
ver. 12 the substantive means " the act of
rejoicing." The word is characteristic of this
group of Epistles, in which it occurs forty-six
times. Even as ye also are ours. This clause
takes away all semblance of self-glorification.
In 1 Thess. ii. 19, 20 and Phil. ii. 16 he ex-
presses the natural thought that a teacher's
converts are, and will be in the last day, his
" crown of exultation." Here alone he im-
plies that they may glory in him as he in
them. The thought, however, so far from
being egotistical, merely indicates the in-
tense intercommunion of sympathy which
existed between him and them. He "Jloei



OH. 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIaNS.



but place himself on a level with his converts,
and imply that they mutually gloried in
each other. In the day of the Lord Jesus
(see on 1 Cor. iii. 13).

Vers. 15 — 22. — ffig change of purpose in
not visiting Corinth.

Ver. 15. — In this confidenoe. In reliance
on the mutual respect and affection which
exists between us. I was minded. The
stress is partly on the tense : " my original
desire vias." When speaking of matters
purely personal, St. Paul generally reverts
to the first person. To come unto you before.
I meant to visit you, first on my way to
Macedonia, and again on my return from
Macedonia, as explained in the next verse.
A second benefit; rather, a iecond grace.
There is another reading, x<^P^''t joy. and
the word x<'P<> itself sometimes has this
sense 'as in Tobit vii. 18), but not in the
New Testament. Here, again, there is no
boastfulness. St. Paul, filled as he was
with the power of the Holy Spirit, was able
to impart to his converts some spiritual
gifts (Rom. i. 11), and this was the chief
reason why his visits were so eagerly desired,
and why his change of plan had caused
such bitter disappointment to the Corin-
thians. The Importance of the Church of
Corinth, ita central position, and its un-
settled state made it desirable that he
should give them as much as possible of
his personal supervision.

Ver. 16. — To be brought on my way (see
note on 1 Cor. xri. 6) toward Judaea (1 Cor.
xvi. 4—6).

Ver. 17. — ^When I therefore was thus
minded. Without saying in so many words
that all this plan was now given up, ha
proceeds to defend himself against the
charges which had been evidently brought
against him by his opponents. The Co-
rinthians were aware that he no longer
meant to come to them direct from Epbesus.
They had certainly been informed of this
by Titus, and he had indeed briefly stated
it in 1 Cor. xvi. 5. Their disappointment
had led some of them into angry criticisms
upon the " indecision " of the apostle, the
more so because he had (out of kindness, as
he here shows) spared them the pain of
expressing his reasons. Did I use lightness }
Was this change of plan a sign of "the
levity " with which some of you charge me ?
Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose
according to the flesh, etc. 1 Every phrase in
this clause is of ambiguous meaning. For
instance, the "or" may imply another
(iharge, namely, that his purposes are carnal,
and therefore capricious ; or it may be the
alternative view of his conduct, stated by
way of self-defence — ^namely, "Does my
change of plan imply that I am frivolous?
or, on the contrary, are not my plans of



necessity mere human plans, and therefore
liable to be overruled by God's will ? " Thus
the meaning of the " or " is doubtful, and
also the meaning of " according to the flesh."
Generally this phrase is used in a bad sense,
as in ch. x. 2 and Bom. viii. 1; but it may also
be used to mean " in a human way," as in
ch. T. 16. That with me there should be
yea yea, and nay nay. There is probably
no clause in the New Testament of which
the certain sense must be left so inde-
terminate as this. (1) The Authorized
Version gives one way of taking the clause.
The grammar equally admits of the render-
ing. (2) TJiat with me the yea should be yea,
and the nay nay. Whichever rendering we
adopt, it may be explained in accordance
with the view indicated in the last note.
" I was not showing the levity which my
opponents speak of, but my purposes are
necessarily mere human purposes, and
therefore my 'yes' and 'no' can be only
'yes' and 'no' when I make a plan. My
'yes' or 'no' may be ovei ruled by the
Spirit (Acts xvi. 7) or even hindered by
Satan, and that more than once (I Thess.
ii. 18)." " With me," i.e. as far as I am
concerned, I can only say "yes " or " no;" but
I'homme propose, Dieu dispose. His intended
double visit to them was prevented, not by
any frivolity of his, but, as he afterwards
shows, by their own unfaithfulness and his
desire to spare them. There is yet a third
way of taking it which involves a different
meaning — " In order that with me the ' yea
yea ' may be also ' nay nay.' " Am I incon-
sistent ? or, are my purposes merely carnal
purposes, in order that my " yes yes " may
be, as far as I am concerned, no better than
" no no " — like the mere shifting feebleness
of an aimless man ? A fourth way of taking
the clause, adopted by St. Chrysostom and
many others, is, " Do I plan after the flesh,
i.e. with carnal obstinacy, so that my ' yea '
and ' nay ' must be carried out at all costs ? "
This suggestion can hardly be right ; for St.
Paul was charged, not with obstinacy, but with
indecision. The phrases, " yea " and " nay,"
as mentioned in Matt. v. 37 and Jas. v. 12,
throw no light on the passage, unless indeed
some one had misquoted against St. Paul
our Lord's words as a reason for adhering
inviolably to a plan once formed. Of
these various methods I adopt the first,
because it seems to be, on the whole, most
in accordance with the context. For on that
view of the passage he contents himself
with the remark that it cannot be incon-
sistency or levity on his part to alter plans
which are liable to all the chance and change
of ordinary circumstances; and then tells
them that there was one part of his teach-
ing which has nothing to do with mera
human weakness, but was God's everlasting;



6



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. i. 1— 24i



" yea ; " after which he explains to them the
reason why he decided not to come to them
until he had first visited Macedonia, and
so to give them one visit, not two.

Ver. 18. Bui as God is true ; rather, but

God ig faithful, whatever man' may be (1 Cor.
i. 9 ; X. 13 ; 1 Thess. v. 24 ; 2 ThesB. iii. 3 ; 1
John i. 9). Our word towards yon, etc. The
verse should be rendered. But God is faithful,
because (faithful herein, that) our preaching
to you proved itself to be not yea and nay.
Whatever you may say of my plans and mv
conduct, there was one thing which involved
an indubitable "yea," namely, my preaoliing
to you. In that, at any rate, there was no-
thing capricious, nothing variable, nothing
vacillating. St. Paul, in a manner character-
istic to his moods of deepest emotion, " goes
off at a word." The Corinthians talked of
his " yea " and " nay " as though one was
little better than the other, and neither could
be depended on ; well, at any rate, one thing,
and that the most essential, was as sure as
the faithfulness of God.

Ver. 19. — ^Tor. This is a proof of what he
has just said. His preaching was as firm as
a rook ; for, tried by time, it had proved it-
self a changeless " yea," being a preaching of
Christ, the same yesterday, to-day, and for
ever. By me and Silvanus and Timotheus.
They are mentioned because they had been
his companions in the first visit to Corinth
(Acts xviii. 5), and he wishes to show that
his preaching of Christ had never wavered.
" Silvanus " (1 Thess. 1. 1 ; 2 Thess. i. 1) is
the " Silas " of Acts xv. 22. He disappears
from the New Testament in this verse, unless
he be the " Silvanus " of 1 Pet. v. 12. Was
not yea and nay, but in him was yea. " Became
not (proved not to be) yes and no (in one
breath, as it were, and therefore utterly un-
trustworthy), but in him there has been a
yea." The perfect, " has become," means that
ill him the everlasting " yes " has proved it-
self valid, and still continues to be a change-
less affirmation (Heb. xiii. 8).

Ver. 20. — For all the promises of God in
him are yea ; rather, For so many as be the
promises of God, in him is the yea. All tlie
promises of God find in him their unohange-
able fulfilment. He was " a minister to con-
firm the promises " alike to the Jews and the
Gentiles (Eom. xv. 8, 9) ; and " the promise
of the eternal inheritance " can only be ful-
filled in him (Heb. ix. 15). And in him
Amen. The true reading is, " Wherefore by
liim also is the Amen to God, uttciwi by us
to his glory " (s. A, B, C, P, G, etc.). In
Christ is the "yea" of immutable promise and
absolute fulfilment ; the Church utters the
"Amen " of perfect faith and grateful adora-
tion. Here, as in 1 Cor. xiv. 16, we have a
proof of the ancientness of the custom by
which the congregation utters the "Amen "



at the end of praise and prayer. But as the
« yea " is in Christ, so it is only through him
that we can receive the grace to utter aright
the "Amen " to the glory of God.

Ver. 21. — Now he that stablisheth lu.
They will have seen, then, that steadfastness
not levity, immutability not vacillation, has
been the subject of their teaching. Who is
the Source of that steadfastness ? Ood, whft
anointed us and confirmed us, and you with
us, into unity with his Anointed. With you.
We partake alike of this Christian stead-
fastness ; to impugn mine is to nullify your
own. In Christ ; rather, into Christ, so as to
be one with him. They are already "tn
Christo ;" they would aim more and more to
be established " in Christum." Who anointed
us. Every Christian is a king and priest to
God, and has received an unction from the
Holy One (1 John ii. 20, 27).

Ver. 22.— Who hath also sealed ns. We
cannot be deconsecrated, disanointed. Btill
less can the confirming seal be broken. He
continues to dwell on the conception of the
unohangeableness of God and of the gospel
into which he had been incidentally led by
the charge of " lightness." The earnest of
the Spirit. The promises which we have
received are not mere promises, they are
already so far fulfilled to us and in us as to
guarantee hereafter their plenary fruition.
Just as in money bargains " earnest money,"
"money on account," is given, in pledge
that the whole will be ultimately discharged,
so we have " the earnest of the Spirit" (ch.
T. 5), "the firstfruits of the Spirit" (Bom.
viii. 23), which are to us " the earnest" or
pledge money that we shall hereafter enter
upon the purchased possession (Eph. LIS, 14).
We now see the meaning of the " and." It
involves a climax — the promise is much;
the unction more ; the seal a still further
security (Eph. iv. 30; 2 Tim. ii. 19); but
beyond all this we have already a part
payment in the indwelling of the Present
of God (Eom. v. 5 ; viii. 9 ; Gal. iv. 6). The
word arrabon, rendered " earnest," has an
interesting history. It is very ancient, for
it is found ()'u^p.) in Gen. xxxviii. 17, 18,
and comes from a root meaning " to pledge."
It seems to be » Phoenician word, which
had been introduced into various languages
by the universality of Phoenician commerce.
In classical Latin it is shortened into arrha,
and it still exists in Italian as arra, in
French as arrhes. The equivalent Hebrew
figure is " firstfruits " (Bom. viii. 23).

Ver. 23. — Moreover I call God lor a re-
cord ; rather. But I call God for a witness.
At this point, to ch. ii. 4, he enters for the
first time on the kindly reasons which had
led him to forego his intended earlier visit.
He uses a similar adjuration in oh. xL 31 ;
and although these appeals (comp. 1 Oor. xr,



OH. 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



81 ; Bom. i. 9 ; Gal. i. 20) may be due in

part to the emotional feivour of hia tem-
perament, yet he would hardly have resorted
to them in this self-defence, if the calum-
nies of his enemies had not gained much
credence. The French proverb, Quis'excuse
s'accuse, is often grossly abused. The refu-
tation of lies and slanders is often a duty,
not because they injure us, but because, by
diminishing our usefulness, they may injure
others. XTpon my sonL Not " to take ven-
geance on my soul if I lie," but to confirm
the appeal of its honesty and integrity. By
the use of such "oaths for confirmation," St.
Paul, no less than other apostles, shows that
he understood our Lord's rule, " Let your
communication be. Yea, yea ; Nay, nay," as
applying to the principle of simple and un-
varnished truthfulness of intercourse, which
requires no further confirmation; but not
as a rigid exclusion of the right to appeal
to Ood in solemn cases and for good
reasons. To spare you. This postpone-
ment of the intended visit was a sign of
forbearance, for which they should have been
grateful. After all that he had heard of
them, if he had come at all, it could only
have been " with a rod " (1 Cor. iv. 21). I
oame not as yet. The rendering is erroneous.
It literally means " I no longer came," i.e. I
forbore to come as I had intended.



Ver. 24. — Hot for that we have dominion
over your faith. The expression, " to spare
you," might have been resented as involving
a claim "to lord it over their faith." He
had, indeed, authority (1 Col. iv. 21 ; ch. x.
6 ; xiii. 2, 10), but it was a purely spiritual
authority; it was valid only over those
who recognized in him an apostolic com-
mission. St. Peter, no less than St. Paul,
discourages the spirit of ecclesiastical
tyranny (1 Pet. v. 3). But are helpers of
your joy. We are fellow-helpera of your
Christian joy, and therefore I would not
come to cause your grief. That was bow I
desired to spare you. The object of my
visits is always " for your furtherance and
joy of faith " (Phil. i. 25). For by faith ye
stand. The expression is not a mere general
principle, but explains his disclaimer of any
desire " to lord it over their faith." As far as
their " faith " was concerned, they were not
to blame ; that remaiaed unshaken, and was
independent of any visit or authority of St.
Paul. But while "in respect of faith ye
stand " (Eph. vi. 13), there are other points
in which you are being shaken, and in
dealingwith these I should have been obliged
to take severe measures, which, if I post-
poned my visit, would (I hoped) become
unnecftssaiy.



EOMILETICS.

Vers. 1, 2.— The will of Ood. " Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ," etc. Here are three
subjects of thought.

I. The supreme law. " By the will of God." 1. God has a will. He is, therefore,
personality, free and intelligent. His will explains the origin, sustenance, and
order of the universe. His will is the force of all forces, the law of all laws. 2. God
has a will in relation to individual men. He has a purpose in relation to every man,
every man's existence, mission, and conduct. His will in relation to moral beings is
the standard of all conduct and the rule of all destiny. Love is its primal fount or
mainspring.

II. The apostolic spirit. Judging from what Paul says here, we observe : 1. The
apostolic spirit involves subjection to Christ. " An apostle of Jesus Christ." Christ is
the moral Master ; he the loving, loyal servant. 2. The apostolic spirit is that of special
love for the good. He calls Timothy his " brother," and towards " the Church of God
which is at Corinth, with all the saints which are in all Achaia," he glows with loving
sympathy. Love for souls, deep, tender, overflowing, is the essential qualification for
the gospel apostolate or ministry.

IIL The chief good. 1. Here is the highest good. " Grace and peace." He who
has these has the summum lonum. 2. Here is the highest good from the highest
Source : " From our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ."

Vers. 3 — 5. — The Ood of Christianity. "Blessed be God, even the Father," etc.
The God of nature is revealed in nature as the Almighty and the All- wise. "The
invisible things of the world ire clearly seen, being made visible by the things that are
seen, even his eternal power and Godhead." But God in Christianity appears in three
Aspects.

L As THE Father of the world's Bbdbbmer. " Blessed be God, even the Father



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. i. 1—24,



of onr Lord Jesus Christ." Jesus Christ is the world's Kedeemer, and the world i
Redeemer is the Son of God. " This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

XL As THE SouBCB OF man's MERCIES. " The Father of mercies, and the Qod ot all
comfort," or the merciful Father. Mercy implies something more than mere bene-
volence ; it is a modification of goodness ; it implies sorrow and suffering. God is good
to all, but he is meiciful to the afflicted— he compassionates and comforts them. God
in nature does not appear as the God of mercy and comfort for the fallen and the lost.

III. As THE COMFOBTEB OF AFFLICTED SAINTS. " Who COmforteth US IB »" OJU"

tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble,' etc. The
best of men have their tribulations here. Most, if not all, the men who have entered
heaven have passed through much tribulation. 1. He comforts his afflicted people " in
all their tribulations." Whatever the nature and variety of affliction, he has suitable
and adequate comfort to bestow. Moral remorses, worldly losses, social bereavements, —
he has a healing balm for alL 2. He con fo. ts his afflicted people, that they may bo
able to administer comfort to others. " That we may be able to comfort them which
are in any trouble." Affliction is necessary to qualify us to sympathize wdth and
adnunister comfort to others. "They comfort others who themselves have borne,"
says Sophocles. By affliction Christ qualified himself to comfort others. " We have
not a High Priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities," eto.

Vers. 6 — 11. — Personal sufferings. " And whether we be afflicted, it is for yonr
consolation," etc. The words suggest a few remarks concerning personal sufferings. _

I, ThBT ABE OFTEN EXPEEIENCED IN THE BEST OF ENTEEPEI8KS. What a gloriOUS

enterprise Paul and his fellow-apostles were engaged in I — nothing less than the restoration
of mankind to the knowledge, image, and friendship of the great God. Yet how great
their sufferings,! " We were pressed out of measure, above strength, insomuch that
we despaired even of life." *

II. They abb eveb hecessaey fob the eendebiiio of the highest sebtici: to
MANKIND. " Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and salvation, which is
effectual in the enduring of the same sufl'erings which we also suffer.' The apostle
here teaches that his sufferings and those of his colleagues were vicarioru. He and his
co-labourers incurred them in their endeavours to extend the gospel, and they had the
" consolations " which came to him, qualified him to sympathize with and administer
comfort to all who were in the same trying condition. Paul could say to the sufferers
at Corinth — We were in sufferings and were comforted ; you are in sufferings and may
participate in the same comfort. If you are partakers of the same kind of suffering,
that is, suffering on account of your religion, you shall also be partakers of the same
comfort. Suppose a man who had been restored from a certain disease by a certain
specific were to meet another suffering under a complaint in all respects identical, and
were to say to the man — I can not only sympathize with you, but I can assure you of
that which will cure you, for it has cured me ; — this, perhaps, may serve as an illus-
tration of the apostle's meaning here; and this every true^ Christian man who has
suffered can say to all — I was in your condition, I was restored ; I can sympathize with
you, and I urge the same means of restoration.

III. ThEIB DETAILMENT purely fob the good of 0THEB8 IS JTTSTIFIABLS. Paul

says, " We would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble." There is a
wonderful tendency in men to parade their sufferings and their trials, to spread them
out before men, in order to enlist their sympathy and excite commiseration. This is
selfish, is not justifiable. Christ — perhaps the greatest of all sufferers — never did this :
in this respect, "he opened not his mouth." But to declare sufferings in order to
benefit others, to give them courage and comfort, and to establish between you and
them a holy unity in the Divine cause, this is right, this is what Paul does here. He
does it that they may believe in his sympathy and seek the comfort which he himself
•xpenenced.

IV, ThEIB EXPEBIENCB OFTEN PBOVES A BLESSINO TO THE SUFFBRBB. They Seem tO

have done two things for Paul. 1, To have transferred his trust in himself to trust

in Ood. " We had the sentence of death in ourselves, that we should not trust in

ourselves, but in God." Paul no doubt felt that he was brought near unto death, to th«

' Ben a iketch of Paul's trials, oh. xi. 23, 29.



OH. 1, 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 9

very extreme of suffering, and that led him to look away from self, to put his trust in
God. When affliction does this it is indeed a blessing in disguise. When it detaches
ns from the material and links us to the spiritual, takes us away from self and centres
us on God, then, indeed, it worketh out for us a " far more exceeding and eternal weight
of glory." 2. To have awakened prayers by others on his behalf. " Ye also helping
together by prayer for us, that for the gift bestowed upon us by the means of many
persons thanks may be given by many on our own behalf,"

Ver. 12,— Conscience and the inner life of man. " For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly
wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world, and
more abundantly to you-ward." Three remarks are suggested.

L What is gwing on in the soul conscience observes. This is implied in Its
" testimony." The eye of conscience pierces into the deepest secrets of motives, and is
cognizant of all our hidden impulses, thoughts, and aims. We may appear sincere to
others, but hypocrites to conscience; hypocrites to others, but true to conscience.
Conscience is the best judge.

II. Whateveb is good in the soul conscience appboveb. 1. Paul's conscience
approved of his inner principles — ^his " simplicity " or holiness, and " sincerity." On
these elements it has ever smiled and will ever smile, but not on " fleshly wisdom," carnal
policy, and worldly expediency. 2. Paul's conscience approved of his external demeanour.
" We have had our conversation in the world, and more abundantly to you-ward."
His outward conduct was the effect and expression of his inner life. Conscience smiles
on every holy deed, however mean in the sight of men.

III. Whateveb is jototjs in the souii conscience occasions. " Our rejoicing is
this," or, " our glorying is this." Where there is not an approving conscience there is
no real, moral joy. Its " well done " sets the soul to music ; with its approval we can
stand, not only calm and serene, but even triumphant, under the denunciations of the
whole world. Dr. South says, " Conscience is undoubtedly the grand repository of all
those pleasures which can afford any solid refreshment to the soul ; when this is calm
and serene, then properly a man enjoys all things, and, what is more, himself ; for that
he must do before he can enjoy anything else. It will not drop but pour in oil upon
the wounded heart; it will not whisper but proclaim a jubilee to the mind."

Vers. 15 — 22. — Possessions of a genuine Christian, " And in this confidence," etc.
These verses may be regarded as indicating what every genuine disciple of Christ —
that is, every Christly man — possesses now and here.

1. He possesses moral stability. Paul is here writing on the defensive ; indeed,
the whole tone of his letter is apologetic. Because he did not visit the Corinthians
according to his first promise, they perhaps pronounced him fickle, vacillating, untrue
to his word. Against this he protests. " And in this confidence I was minded to
come unto you before, that ye might have a second benefit ; and to pass by you into
Macedonia, and to come again out of Macedonia unto you, and of you to be brought on
my way toward Judjea." Here he admits his intention and his promise, but in reply
says emphatically, " When I therefore was thus minded, did I use lightness ? " etc.
He claims stability, and the stability which he claims is possessed by all true
Christians. 1. A stability of purpose. " As God is true, our word toward you was
not yea and nay." What we said we meant ; there was no equivocation, no " yea " and
" nay " in the same breath. In defending his veracity : (1) He makes an asseveration.
"As God is true," or as God is faithful, we meant to perform what we promised.
(2) He indicates an incongruity. " For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached
among you by us, even by me and Silvanus and Timotheus, was not yea and nay, but
in him was yea. For all the promises of God in him are yea," etc. He means to say
that the gospel which ht had preached to them necessarily bound him to faithfulness.
Christ, in whom he lived and for whom he laboured, was the grand Eeality, the
"Amen," the Truth. The idea if a man in Christ being unveracious, untruthful, was
preposterous. An untruthful man caiinot be a Christian. This the apostle means and
declares. 2. A stability of character. •■" Now he which stablisheth ns with you in
Ohrai^ and hath anointed us, is God." The stah'Uty he claims for himself he accedes



10 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh, l 1—24;

to all the Christians at Corinth. How blessed to have the heart fixed, their character
" in Christ " established, " rooted and grounded in love " 1

II. He possesses Divine conseckation. He that "hath anointed us is God."
Among the Jews in olden times, kings, priests, and prophets were set apart to their
offices by anointing them with oil ; hence here the word "anointed " means they were
consecrated by God to a Christly life and labour. A truly Christian man is divinely
consecrated, not to a mere ofSce, but to the noblest character and the sublimest mission.
As such he has God's seal on him, " who hath also sealed us."

III. He possesses a pledge op the highest pkogebss. "Given the earnest of
the Spirit in our hearts." " Let us," says b\ W. Eobertson, " distinguish between an
earnest and a pledge. A pledge is something different in kind given in assurance of
something else, as when Judah gave his staff and ring in pledge for a lamb which he
promised should be given afterwards. But an earnest is part of that thing which is
eventually to be given, as when the grapes were brought from Canaan, or as when a
purchase is made and part of the money is paid down at once." There is no finality
in the life of goodness ; it passes on from " strength to strength," from " glory to glory."
In every step, after the first, up the celestial mountains, the scenes widen and brighten,
and the breezes become more balmy and invigorating as we advance. He who has the
Christly life within has already Paradise in germ.

Yen. 23, 24. — A threefold theme. " Moreover I call God for a record," etc. In these
verses we have three things worthy of note.

I. The fdlfilmbnt of a promise adjodknbd. " Moreover I call God for a record
upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as yet tinto Corinth." Paul here, in the
most solemn way, assigns the reason why he had adjourned his promised visit to
Corinth. It was not for his personal convenience, or from a change of purpose, or from
any indifference towards them, but on the contrary, out of tender regard to their
feelings — " to spare you I came not." Knowing the prevalence of the spirit of schism
and disorder which had crept into the Church, he shrank from the exercise of that
discipline which of necessity would inflict great pain. Hence, hoping that the admon-
ishing letter which he had addressed to them would have the effect he desired upon
them, he delayed. Surely a love so generous, so pure, and exquisitely sympathetic,
would justify, if not the breaking of a promise, the postponement of its fulfilment.
Regard for the feelings of others, it has been said, is the grand characteristic of the
" gentleman." Anyhow, it is an essential element in personal Christianity.

n. Authority ovek the faith of others disclaimed. " Not for that we have
dominion over your faith." Had we desired to set up a lordship over you, we might
have hastened to you at once, but we respected your feelings, and sought' your hap-
pmess. _ The authority which Paul here disclaims has been assumed by priestly eccle-
siastics in all times. It is the very spirit of priestism. The minister, whoever he may
be, to whatever Church he belongs, who endeavours to make men believe that his own
personal ministry, or the ministry of his denomination, is the special ministry of heaven,
and essential to the salvation of mankind, has in him the intolerant spirit of the priest
he seeks dominion over the faith of men, he would restrain liberty of thought and
subject the minds of nien to his credenda. These men, whether Papists or Protestants
Churchmen or Nonconformists, outrage the spirit of the mission they have received
and inflict untold mischief on the minds of men. '

III. The true work of a gospel minister. " But are helpers of your joy" He
is a helper, not a lord ; a helper, not a substitute. A true minister is : 1. To help men
to think a.nght. To think aright is to think on the right subject, in the right wav.
2. To help men toff aright. Feel aright in relation to self, mankind, the universe,
and God. 3. To help men to JeZjet-e aright. « By faith ye stand." Spiritually men
fr. **j J J ' ff^.,,^5^ ^^1?' ^I*^ }^^ 7°'^ "^ * *'^8 minister is to help people to
"stand by "faith on the right foundation. When will ministers come to feel that
they are the spiritual "helpers" of the people ; to help them, not by doin<^ their work
for them, but to assist them in working for themselves?



OH. 1, 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 11



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vera. 1, 2. — Salutation. It is a greeting from Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus, and
from " Timothy our brother," instead of Sosthenes, as in the First Epistle. It is to the
Church of God at Corinth, with all the saints in the whole of Achaia, all connected in
the province with the central Church at Corinth. " Beginning at Jerusalem " — the holy
city was to be the starting-point. Antiooh, Csesarea, Thessalonica, Corinth, Bphesus,
Rome, were to be early reached by the gospel. Community-centres were to become
Church-centres, so that the social idea of Christianity should have prompt and imprea
sivo development. As usual with St. Paul, " Grace be to you and peace," opening
and closing with the word so comprehensive, so precious, " grace." — L.

Vers. 3 — 11.— Thanksgiving in the midst of tribulation ; uses of sorrow ; comforting
others ; personal references. The ascription begins with " blessed," the strongest term
the apostle could employ as representing the highest and strongest emotions, the head-
word in the vocabulary of gratitude and praise, found in the Old and New Scriptures,
and common to Jews and Gentile Christians. " Blessed ; " the best in us acknowledging
the God of grace, an anthem in a single utterance, and embodying the whole nature of
man in reverence and adoration. " Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; " not only God, but the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a Father to us in
him. What significance Christ gave to the word " father " we all know. It is the
root-word of the Lord's Prayer, every ascription and every petition being but an offshoot
from " Our Father which art in heaven." ^So of the entire Sermon on the Mount ; it
is the motive to trust Providence, the reason to be like God, the ground of brotherhood,
the inducement to forgive those who offend us, the inspiration of each duty, each
sacrifice, and the joy and strength of each beatitude. So of the last conversations and
discourse — all of the Father and of the Son in him, and the disciples in the Son. So
after the Resurrection, " My Father and your Father." St. Paul rejoiced in the word.
Nor did he hesitate to use on Mars' Hill the quotation," We are also his offspring," and
from this point of view expose the error and sin of idolatry. And wherever he comes
to give it the fulness of its import, as in Rom. viii., his heart overflows with feeling.
Here (ver. 3) he is also the " Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort," and no
matter how the mercies reach us and what their nature and connections, they are from
the Father as the God of all comfort. Physical and spiritual blessings, a visit from
Stephanas, the return of Titus, good news from Corinth, — ^all alike are mercies from the
Father, the God of all comfort. One may lose himself in the omnipresence of Jehovah
and be overwhelmed by its sublimity, but it is a very practical doctrine with the apostle,
a constant reality, and he feels it deeply because he feels it always. " Not far from
every Mie of us." How can he be, when " we live and move and have our being " in
him ? We say these great words, but with what little consciousness of their massive
import 1 Reason tries in vain to comprehend omnipresence ; imagination labours and
sinUs under its images; while the humble and docile heart accepts the grandeur of
God's presence in immensity as the grandeur of his nearness in all the affairs of life.
" God of all comfort" because " Father of mercies ; " the mercies very welcome to him
just then in that sore emergency, and the fatherhood of God in Christ unspeakably dear.
It enlivened the sense of special providence in his soul ; it was the Comforter whom
Christ had promised as more than a compensation for his absence, and while this Com-
forter was never taken from him, yet, as occasion demanded, his Divine manifestations
were augmented. Just as we need human sympathy, assurances of human friendship
and love, more at some times than at others, so need we the Consoler, and to this varying
want he adapts himself in the infinitude of his power and tenderness. No soul is saved,
we may supjiose, on au iinvarying plan; no soiU is cheered and strengthened by a rigid
monotony of spiritual influence. " The wind bloweth where it listeth," a zephyr, a
breeze, a gale, but in all the wind, " So is every one that is born of the Spirit."
" Blessed be God," not only for " mercies " and " comfort," but for them in particular
adaptations to seasons and experiences that doubly endear the gracious offices of the
Paraclete. Now, these words of praise naturally lead us to expect a justification of their
special utterance, and we have it immediately. " Who comforteth us in all our tribula"



12 THE SECOKD EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. i. 1—24

tion," and for what purpose? Titus and Timothy had brought him much cheer and
consolation, and why ? Was it just to revive his drooping spirit ? Just to assuage hif
personal pain, soothe his unquiet nerves, invigorate his tone of mind ? Nay ; consola-
tion was not selfish. Happiness is not exclusively or even mainly for its poKessor
"Doth God take care for oxen?" Yea; for the owner of oxen too in his providence
over the beast. The tribulation had not fallen on St. Paul because of anything peculiai
to him; it was vicarious ; and the comfort had been granted, not in his behalf alone, but
that he might know how to console others. This is his statement : " That we may be
able to comfort them which are in any trouble." If the Holy Ghost is the Comforter,
we are his agents, and, just as the gospel of doctrine reaches you from him through us,
so too the gospel of consolation comes to your hearts through our hearts. Look at what
the apostolic ofSce meant. Far more than preacher, organizer, administrator, leader,
jhampion, was included in its high duties and arduous responsibilities. To console was
une of its greatest tasks. Everywhere the dejected were to be lifted up, the discouraged
animated, the afflicted taught to hope. To be a physician to suffering souls was a cease-
less requisition on St. Paul. Think of what it entailed on such a man as he. Think of
but one aspect of the matter — tension of sensibility. The exhaustion consequent on the
unceasing strain upon sensibility is the hardest of all things to bear. It opens the door
to all manner of temptations. It is the crucial test of manly fortitude. Now, the
quality of emotion has much more to do with the exhaustion of the nervous system than
the quantity. Every preacher knows that a funeral occasion on which be has to offi-
ciate i& a severer tax on his nerves than half a dozen ordinary pulpit services. The
more solemn, and especially the more pathetic, the circumstances, the more rapid and
complete the subsequent exhaustion. Think now of what St. Paul bad to endure in
this kind of apostolic experience, and that too without a respite ; how many thorns
rankled besides " the thorn in the flesh ; " and how many hearts bled in that one bleeding
heart of his. Just now, moreover, he was suffering greatly on account of the Corinthians.
This will appear hereafter. The main point before us is — How was he qualified to be
a consoler ? What his discipline, what his education, for this beautiful and holy service?
Ah, Tarsus and Jerusalem, Gamaliel, all other teachers, pass olit of view in this deepest
and most personal of all culture, and the Holy Ghost and the man are the only parties
to the work. " By the comfort wherewith we ourselves are comforted of God." Talk-
ing &3m the intellect is in such a case of no avail. A man must have been a sufierer,
must have felt Christ in his sufferings, must have abounded in these "sufferings of
Christ," as St. Paul designates his afflictions, before he can be fitted to minister unto
others. Only sorrow can speak to sorrow. Notice the correspondence in the degree j if
the sufferings of Christ abounded, so "our consolation also aboundeth by Christ." "By
the sufferings of Christ abound in us "("unto us," Revised Version), we understand the
apostle to mean his fellowship with Christ in siiGfering the ills and sorrows that came
upon him as an apostle and as a man because of his spiritual union with Christ. Media
tion in all its ofSces, in the peculiar and exclusive work of Christ as the one Beconcilei
and Healer, in the subordinate and imperfect operations of human sympathy, is essen-
tially painful. And allowing for the infinite distinction between the Divine Sufferer and
human sufferers, there is yet a unity in suffering predicable of Christ and the memberii
of his mystical body. For it is the capacity to suffer which is the dignity and glory of
our nature. We are God-like in this quality. It is the basis of all grand excellence,
nor can our innate love of happiness nor any other ideal of our being have its fulfilment
except through that kind of sorrow which Christians undergo in the Man of sorrows.
Ver. 6 emphasizes this fact. If we are afflicted, argues he, it is for your good, that we
may be instrumental in your salvation, and that grace may abound to you because
of what we endure. And, furthermore, it was for their present consolation ; it was
" effectual ; " the example of their distressed apostle operated to strengthen and establish
them, and the consolation wherewith he was sustained availed to animate their souls.
Foi this reason, his hope of them was " steadfast." Corruptions were among these
Cormthians ; God's judgments had overtaken them because of their free-thinking and
laxity of morals; they were punished, they were chastened; but, in the midst of all, St
Paul was encouraged to hope for their stability and growth in grace, seeing that they
were not only sympathizers but participants both in the suffering and in the consola-
don he himielf experienced for their sakes. Two points here come into view : first the



CH. 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. U

apostle was in great distress on their account, and they shared with him this peculiar
burden of grief; and, secondly, the supporting grace which God had given him was not
confined to his soul, but overflowed (abounded) in their souls. What a great truth is
this 1 There are times in our history as believers when, if left without the support of
Church relations, we should be overcome by temptation. In such hours God shows us
the worth of membership in the Church ; grace comes to us through their affections,
and brethren in Christ are our best friends in the flesh. The human, or rather the
Divine in the human, saves us when all else would be ineffectual, aud thus it is that
associates and companions in the faith co-operate with other " ministering spirits sent
forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation." And what a meaning this
imparts to the Holy Communion, wherein we express, not only our remembrance of
Christ's suffering and death, but our fellowship with his sufferings in others 1 Keep in
mind how sorrow ennobles us. Is it the silence and loneliness, the self-examination,
the penitence, the amendment, in which the divinest fruits of chastening appear?
These are not ultimate results. It is not alone what the discipline of pain makes us in
ourselves ; it is not the individual man, but the social man, that is under God's plastic
hand, and who, while learning to " bear his own burden," is also learning a lesson far
more difficult, to hear another's burden and " so fulfil the law of Christ." Who are
they that practise the " so " ? Who are the burden-bearers — those that carry the ignor-
ance, perverseness, folly, misfortune, troubles, of other people on their hearts ? Only
such as have known Christ as he suffered from taking " our infirmities " and bearing
" our sicknesses," and who have been taught by the Holy Spirit that the mediating
life to wiiich we are called as the highest sphere of life is possible only by means of
personal afSiction. Was Bunyan immured in Bedford jail on his own account or for
the world's benefit ? Was Milton blind for his own sake or for England's ? How could
' Pilgrim's Progress ' or ' Paradise Lost ' have been produced except in obedience to the
law — partakers in suffering, partakers in consolation ? St. Paul proceeds to the illus-
tration. Of his general sufferings we have a definite idea. How he was misrepresented
by his enemies, how he was charged with meanness and cowardice, how he was vilified
for his self-denial, how the Judaizers pursued him with merciless zeal, we all know.
We know, too, how his heart was moved by the deplorable state of things at Corinth.
Now, it is quite true that the endurance of trouble prepares us to bear a new trouble ;
but it is true also that trouble increases the sensitiveness to pain, and hence, in a
succession of sorrows, the last, though not in itself the heaviest, is virtually such because
of the sensibility involved. This was St. Paul's condition. At this very conjuncture,
when a phalanx of evils threatened, he had one particular trouble, of which he says,
" We would not, brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which came to us in Asia."
What it specifically was, we know not. He tells us, however, that it was exceptional
even in his sad life ; for he was " pressed [borne down] out of measure," and again,
"above strength" (human resistance inadequate to bear the load), so much so that he
saw no way of escape, life hung in peril, " we despaired even of life." In that dreadful
hour all seemed over. Such hours do come to the best and noblest of God's servants.
Body gives way, heroism is weakened, faith is half shorn of its strength. It is the
eclipse of all light, the hour of darkness and of the Prince of darkness ; the very soul
seems to put off its better attributes, and life to its core appears an unreality. St. Paul
"had the sentence of death" in himself. Was there any "lower deep"? Yet in
this season of terrible experience a Divine lesson was being taught him, and it was
" that we should not trust in ourselves." Had he not learned it long ago ? Tes ; in
part, but not in this precise shape nor in this degree. The capacity to suffer is
peculiar in this, that its development requires a manifold experience. One trouble
is not another trouble ; one grief is not another grief. Affliction that reaches a cer-
tain sentiment or a particular section of our nature may leave other sentiments and
sections altogether untouched. Every quality within must go through this ordeaL The
loss of money is not the loss of position and influence, the loss of friend is not the
loss of a child, the loss of a child is not the loss of a wife. Each affection must
pass through the refiner's fire. Nay, the very instincts must share the purifica-
tion ordained for such as are to be made " perfect through suffering." Every link
must be tested, must be thoroughly known, before the chain can be formed. What
the icsne was in St. Paul's case he informs us, and it was this — all self-reliance was



14 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANa [oh. 1 1—24.

taken away, and, in utter hopelessness, his heart was committed to God with his life,
even the God " which raiseth the dead." Could anything represent his marvellous
deliverance except the resurrection ? " Who delivered us from so great a death ; " it
was an act of omnipotence, and as signal as raising the dead. After this era in hii
career imagine his consciousness of God's power in him. _ There it was — part and
portion of his being, thought of his thought, feeling of his feeling, separable never
from the existence of self. Had the crisis passed ? Yea ; but maligners and intriguers
and foes were still on his track ; the half-Christianized Pharisee nursed the old grudge
against him, and the Judaizer, who believed in no gospel of which the Law of Moses
was not a vital part as a requisite to salvation, was as inveterate as ever in cunning
and in the arts that undermine. Yet what a potency of assurance lies in sorrow !
After this season of trial, St. Paul, who was very apprehensive of mischief from tliis
Judaizing source, and most serious mischief, and who felt his own ministry more
imperilled at this point than at any other, must have had an unwonted degree of
heavenly strength imparted to his spirit. Is it not likely, indeed, that it was a period
of special education for this struggle with the Judaizers ? May it not have been that,
while in Epbesus, Troas, Macedonia, the principal warrior on the side of Christianity
and free grace had his armour refitted and burnished for the dangers newly impending ?
It is on record that he was revived and reinvigorated ; for he speaks of God as one who
had not only " delivered," but " doth deliver," and " in whom we trust that he will
yet deliver us.'' " So great a death " had been escaped ; why might he not hope for
future and triumphant victory ? Would not these Corinthians bis brethren indeed ?
" Ye also helping together by prayer for us ; " the joy of deliverance from his enemies
would not be complete unless they were " partakers ; " not even would he have
triumph at the price of selfishness, but self in them and self in him must be one ; and,
therefore, the reciirring plural, " we " and " us." " By the means," or through the
agency of " many persons," the future deliverance, " the gift bestowed upon us," will
be secured, and what then ? It would be no private and personal thanksgiving on his
part. Instead of that, " thanks may be given by many on our behalf." His joy would
be their joy ; their joy his joy ; and, in their mutual thanksgiving, all would see that
a common sorrow had been overruled for a common glory. — L.

Vers. 12 — ^24. — Defence of Mmself; character of his preaching. "On our behalf
were the closing words of the preceding verse, and St. Paul would now impress upon
the Corinthians that he was worthy of their confidence and affection. And yet, further,
if their regard had been manifested by intercessions in his behalf, he wishud to assure
them that he had in his own mind a blessed witness to the truth and sincerity of his
apostolic work. Conscience was this witness. It testified that, "in simplicity and
godly sincerity " (" godly honesty and singleness," " a plain, single mind "), and with-
out any carnal wisdom that is begotten of selfish intellect, and under the control of
grace determining the matter and manner of his preaching, he had shown his character
and done his work at Corinth. This was his "rejoicing;" it was inward, it was from
God; it applied to his " conduct in the world," and especially to his labours among the
Corinthians. Were they not the witnesses of all this ? How could he be charged with
duplicity ? They read his heart in the letters written to their Church, and acknowledged
his open and frank dealing. Certain persons were sharply censorious, questioning his
integrity, attributing baseness to his motives, but some had testified to his " simplicity
and godly sincerity," and rejoiced in his apostleship. And they and he would be united
in this bond till the end, the day of the Lord Jesus. The day was already anticipated,
and even now the " rejoicing " was a foretaste of its bliss. Such was his pleasure in
them that he had been anxious to visit Corinth and confer " a second benefit," and so
enlarge his usefulness in their community, and bind their hearts and his in a fellow-
ship closer, firmer, tenderer. Two visits had been intended. Circumstances had
changed his purpose. Was he, then, light-minded, fickle, irresolute? The explicit
statement of the reason is delayed, but, while not assigning at the moment the cause of
postponing the visit, he meets the charges of his enemies by speaking the stem, strong
language of that internal authority, the conscience, to which he had just referred. Waa
he playing the part of a trifler and deceiver by raising expectations he never meant to
fulfil* Was he carnally minded, saying, " Yea, yea, and nay, nay," so emphatically ?



OH. 1. 1-^24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8 18



If ho had this shifting and variatle intellect (so said his enemies), what dependence
was to be placed in such an apostle ? Then the solemn protestation breaks forth, " As
God is true, our word toward you was not yea and nay." It was our purpose to come
to you, but it was changed in the spirit of the gospel, and just as certainly as the
preaching of Christ in this gospel was "yea," just so certainly was our conduct in this
matter in the " yea " of the gospel, i.e. truthful and reliable. All God's promises were
made to be kept, and they are " yea " in Christ and we are " yea " in him. The
response of the Church is " Amen," and it glorifies God through our instrumentality.
All is in the Spirit of Christ — our preaching, promising, and living, God has made us
firm and strong in Christ, has given us the unction of his Spirit, so that while Jesus
of Nazareth was by distinction the Anointed, and received the Holy Ghost without
measure, he has taken us, apostles and believers, unto himself, and conferred on ns the
gifts of grace. We are " sealed ; " the mark is evident that we belong to Christ, and
this " earnest " or pledge is " in our hearts." On the broad ground of his apostolic
ministry and fidelity to its obligations, St. Paul makes his first defence as to sincerity
and consistency. The charge of his adversaries, that he was guilty of double-dealing, is
without foundation. His teaching and its results were proofs beyond question that he
was anointed to his work, and these believers were the acknowledgment, the " Amen,"
that certified the fact. Why did he defend himself, at first, in this general way?
Why not come at once to the specific reason for not visiting Corinth as he had promised ?
The reason is obvious. These Judaizers were striking at his apostleship, and the true
issue between him and them turned on this point. What did they care about the
assurance that he was coming to Corinth ? This was a small matter. The main thing
with his opponents, in their fiery zeal, was to overthrow the power of his ministry
among the Gentiles by heaping contempt on his character and conduct. St. Paul saw
this clearly, and hence his line of argument. He appealed to his ministry, to its fruits,
most of all to the fact that the " yea " here was " yea," and the " Amen " of all converted
souls was the endorsement of its success. And having met these slanders precisely in
the form they were designed to affect him, he proceeds to tell the Corinthians why he
had failed at the time to make them a visit. Hoping that his letter would lead them
to see their grievous errors and induce them to repent and amend, he liad deferred the
journey to Corinth. " To spare you I came not as yet unto Corinth." The " rod " of
severity (1 Cor. iv. 21) might not be needed, it would not if they administered the
proper discipline in the case of the incestuous man and rectified the disorders in the
Church. Had he not aSked them to decide whether he should come to them " with a
rod, or in love and in the spirit of meekness " ? In this spirit of tender conciliation
he had waited to see the issue. And now, vindicating his action in this matter, he
solemnly appeals to God to be a witness against his soul if he had not spoken the truth.
" I call God for a record upon my soul." Was not the case very clear ? In what
stronger light could it be put ? There was the testimony of conscience, the seal of God,
the unction and the earnest, the yeastai the Amen; and here, last of all, the calling on
God to testify against him if he had been untruthful. But, writing as he was under the
consciousness that every word would be subjected by his adversaries to a merciless
criticism, he would explain that he claimed no " dominion " over their " faith." In
fact, they were steadfast in the faith, and his only wish was to be a helper of their joy.
Thus ends the first chapter of the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. It is personal in
an uncommon degree, a revelation of the man and the apostle in one of the critical
periods of his career. Yet it is not a new revelation, but rather a fuller disclosure of
what bad been previously seen in part. No man can be known in one attitude and
aspect. To see him in a single light and from a fixed angle of observation is impossible.
Sculptors and painters, in representing men, work under this limitation. They select a
characteristic expression, a dominant appearance, an historic moment. But not so with
the historian, the poet, the dramatist. St. Luke in the Acts gives us St. Paul in
various positions ; but St. Paul is his own biographer, and, in this chapter, admits us to
the privacy of his heart. Througnout the Second Epistle we shall enjoy this inner com-
munion with him, and feel every moment the heart that throbs beneath the words. — L.

Ver. 1. — " An apostle by the will of Ood." Paul claims to be what he is, not by his
PWn choice, not by the favour or nomination of his fellow-men, but by the Divine will.



1« THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS. [oh. i. 1— 24,;



There were special reasons why he should so think of himself; the office to which he
was called was special, for he was a commissioned apostle ; and the manner in which
he was called to that ofBce was marvellous, supernatural, and miraculous. But the
principle contained in this language apjjlies to every Christian; whatever we are,
whatever we do, we are, we do, by the will of God.

I. This is bmphatioally a Chbistian pbinoiplb. Otir Lord Jesus lived a life of
conscious obedience, for he came to do, not his own will, but the will of him who sent
him. And he calls his disciples to a like life of subjection to the Divine will, by his
precious blood redeeming them from self-will and summoning them to recognize the
will of God in their salvation.

II. This pbinoiplb applies to the occupation of eveby Christian. This may not
be easy for the follower of Christ at once to see and believe. He looks back upon the
time when he decided upon his business or profession, and he remembers that he was
guided to a large extent by his own tastes and interests and by the advice of friends.
But reflection will assure him that Providence is discernible in very familiar and
ordinary means. And the appointment of God is to be observed, not only in the life of
the statesman, the reformer, the missionary, but also in the life of the lowliest of Christ's
disciples. It is not the scale upon which actions are performed that associates them
with the Divine will, but the motive, the moral quality, the spiritual tendency. What
is your calling ? Are you a servant, a mechanic, a tradesman, a lawyer, a surgeon, •
magistrate ? In any case, if you are a Christian, and are in the path of duty, you are
what you are, not simply through cireumstances or through choice, but through the
will of God. This principle has an obvious reference to spiritval work, for such
is manifestly assigned by heavenly wisdom. The will of God calls the Christian
labourer to witness, to work, and to endurance.

III. CONSIDBB WHAT THIS PBINOIPLE IMPLIES ON THE PABT OF GoD. It implies that

the great Creator and Lord of all is conscious of all the affairs of all his people. He is
not merely interested in their affairs; he exercises his will with reference to them.
His will is not arbitrary or tyrannical ; it does not override our liberty, for it iji in
harmony with justice and with kindness. Yet it has a supreme moral authority.

IV. Consider what this pbinoiple implies on odb part. 1. The belief that we
are what and where we are by the will of God gives dignity and grandeur to our life.
It exalts the Divine will, yet it places us in a position of honour, as workers together
with God. 2. It requires us daily to ask, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " and
then to bring our actions into harmony with the Divine will. 3. It induces a habit of
cheerfulness and content. If we are not just what and where our will would choose,
be it remembered that our Father has appointed our lot. What joy and strength must
come to him who is convinced that his daily life is assigned and regulated by the will
of the Eternal and Supreme 1 — T.

Vers. 4 — 7. — Comfvrt, Divine and human. The human heart is so sensittTe, and
the human lot is so sorrowful, that it cannot excite surprise when it is found that
religion lays great stress upon the provision for true and lasting comfort which Divine
wisdom furnishes and offers to the pious. And whilst the consolations of friendship
and of philosophy are superficial, those of Christianity go down to the depths of the
nature and extend throughout the whole period of life.

I. The supbemb Author of spiritual comfort. Instead of looking merely to the
earthly streams, the apostle goes straight to the living Fountain. 1. The universal
sufficiency of this Divine consolation. God is the God of aU comfort, and he comforts
us in all our tribulation. For he is omniscient and knows all our sorrows : " He
knoweth our frame ; he remembereth that we are dust." He is infinitely sympathetic :
" In all our affiictions he is afflicted." 2. Divine comfort abounds by Christ. Christ
is all to his people. If, then, we share his sufferings and benefit by them, the minis-
tration of his consolatory grace is enjoyed by us who recognize him as upon the
mediatorial throne.

II. The ministers of Divine comfort to theib fellow-men. The apostle says
of himself here what in a measure may be said of all true pastors. 1. They are quali-
fied for this office by their participation in those sorrows which are the common lot of
humanity. 2. By their experimental participation in the sufferings of the Bedeemer.



m. 1 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINlliiAisS. 17



They know something of that pain which human sin inflicted upon Christ's heart, and
something of that sympathy which showed itself in Christ's tears and sighs. 3. By
their interest and affection cherished towards those for whose spiritual welfare they are
concerned.

III. The becipibnts of bpibituai, comfort. 1. In order to the enjoyment of true
consolation, Christians must suhmit themselves with humility and resignation to the
will of God. 2. If they have committed sin or neglected duty, they must not expect
consolation except through contrition and repentance. 3. By whatever ministrations
consolation may be administered, in order that it may be received aright, it must be
sought from the God of comfort, and it must be sought in the Name and for the sake
of Christ.— T.

Ver. 11. — Intereetsory prayer. The grateful mind of the apostle recognized in the
deliverance which had come to him at Ephesus the answer to the intercessions of the
Corinthians on his behalf. Looking back upon affliction, illness, danger, he sees that a
Divine hand has brought him out of adversity ; yet he acknowledges his debt to those
who had pleaded for him at the throne of grace, " Prayer moves the arm that moves
the universe." Seeking the uontinuance of this intercessory application, he hopes great
things from it in his future life tnd ministry.

I. Fob whom should intercessoby frayek be offebed ? For all men doubtless,
yet especially for certain classes. 1. For those who represent their brethren in devoted
labour in Christ's cause. 2. Especially for all the public ofBcers of the Church, for
bishops and pastors, evangelists and teachers. They need it ; for their responsibility is
great and their difficulties are many, whilst their discouragements and disappointments
are often sore.

II. Who shoitld offeb intercessory prayer? The answer is emphatic and
instructive: "the many," i.e. the whole Church in the person of all its members—
privately, in the family, and in an especial manner in the great public and solemn
assemblies upon the Lord's day and other appointed seasons. The gatherings of
worshippers should be composed of " the many," and everything should be done to
secure the attendance of large numbers at the services of the Church.

III. What blessings should be sought vs intehcbssory prayer? Surely that
the Christian labourers, whose case is remembered, may be made devoted, efficient, and
BUCcessM. That they may be diligent in toil, faithful to their trust ; that they may
be cheered and comforted amidst their difficulties ; and that their labour may not be in
vain in the Lord.

IV. What advantaobs may be expected from kteroessoey prayer? The
expression, " helping together," seems to point to good results widely diffused. 1. To
him who labours, the strength which comes from sympathy and the strength that
comes from the abundant bestowal and outpouring of the Holy Spirit. 2. T« him who
prays, reflected blessings, such as ever abound to those who live, not for themselves,
but for others. There is a reaction, a rebound of spiritual blessing, and they whu
water others themselves are watered. 3. To the world, a hallowed impresrion, as it
sees how its salvation is near to the hearts both of those who labour and of those who
pray for its enlightenment.

v. What ultimate result may be anticipated as certain to follow dtter-
CESBOBY PBAYEB? Thanksgiving on the part of many; thanks^vii^ to God, who
alike prompts the petition, qualifies the labourer, and gives his benediction to make all
effort successful. Thanksgiving, here sincerely though imperfectly on earth, and
hereafter perfectly, eternally in heaven. — T.

Vers. 18 — 20. — Th« promises of Ood. If Paul, in delaying his jntimised visit to
Corinth, had seemed chargeable with levity and fickleness, he was not really thus
guilty. Such qualities were alien from his Christian nature. And not only so ; they
were contrary to the character of the God he worshipped, the Saviour he preached ;
c<nitrary to the promises of the gospel he believed — ^which they had received through
his ministry. Thus the personal reference suggests the statement of a great Christian
doctrine.

I. God is OBAOiova aks eirxs fbomisbs. L Bevelation is one long promise; it
u. oobinthianb. o



18 THE BBOOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANa [oh. l 1—24

conBiits, not menljr of commands and admonitions, but of assurances of favour and of
help. Herein it proves its adaptation to the nature and to the needs of men. There
were promises addressed to our first parents, to Abraham, to Moses. 2. The one
promise distinctive of the old covenant was the promise of the Saviour, the Servant of
the Lord, the Desire of all nations. In promising the Christ, Jehovah did indeed
virtually promise all spiritual blessings to mankind. 3. The one promise of the new
covenant is the promise of the Holy Spirit, in whom is grace and help for all human
want and need. 4. The promises of Grod extend beyond this life into eternity, and
include the vision of our Saviour and the possession of an immortal inheritance and
home.

II. GrOD IB PAirHTUL AND FULFILS HIS PK0MI8ES. 1. Of this his unchangeableuess
and omnipotence are the certain pledge. What his fatherly goodness assures, his
inexhaustible resources will realize. 2. The gifts of his Son and of his Spirit are the
proof of his faithfulness. All his promises relating to these gifts have been already
made good, and none who receives them can doubt his power and willingness to fulfil
what yet remains. 3. The promises of individual guidance, protection, and aid cannot
be falsified. " Ye know ,in all your hearts, that not one thing hath failed of all the
good things which the Lord your God spoke concerning you." 4. Our confidence in
Divine faithfulness may be tried, but cannot be disappointed. The stream sometimes
disappears and flows for a space underground and unseen; but it is there, and soon
emerges in beauty and power. So with the purposes of God ; they may be hidden and
delayed, but they shall all be accomplished. — T.

Vers. 21, 22. — The Spirit in the heart. The signs of an apostle were abundantly
manifested in the case of St. Paul. Some of these signs were outward and visible ; the
wonders which he wroiight and the labours which he fulfilled were evidences to many
of his high calling. There were othpr signs which were rather internal, revealed in his
own spiritual nature and life. These were precious to himself, whether they were
recognized or not by others.

L Thk anointinq of the Smbit. 1. This rite received a significance from its
employment under the old covenant in the designation of the prophet, the priest, and
the king. 2. This significance is enhanced by the application to the Son of Gbd of the
official appellation, the Christ, i.e. the anointed One, the Being consecrated and commis-
sioned by the EternaL 3. The anointing claimed by the apostle is the qualification, by
a supernatural and spiritual power, for holy and responsible office.

II. The sealing of the Spirit. 1. By this sealing the apostle was stamped with
the mark which was the sign of Divine property in him. 2. And he was thus
inwardly and graciously authenticated as the Lord's messenger to men. By the seal
we understand the mark set upon the moral nature, the character, indicating Divine
possession and Divine authority.

III. The earnest or the Spirit. The other operations of the Holy Ghost relate
to this present state ; this refers to the future. 1. The Spirit within the heart is the
earnest of a fuller indwelling ; they who receive the Spirit are assured that they shall
be " filled with the Spirit." 2. The earnest of a clearer revelation. The light shall
brighten until the dawn shall be succeeded by the splendour of noonday. 3. The
earnest of a richer, purer joy. The measure in which gladness is experienced in the
present is a foretaste of the joy which is unspeakable and full of glory. 4. The earnest
of an eternal inheritance. They who are possessed by the Spirit and pervaded by his
gracious influences have within them both an anticipation of heaven and a preparation
for heaven. To whom the Lord gives the pledge, he will give the redemption; to
whom he gives the promise, he will give the glorious fulfilment and the eternal
poeseHion. — ^T.

Ver. 2i.— Helper! of Joy. Even when the immediate effect of the apostle's language
and action was to produce heaviness and grief of spirit, the real and ultimate design
was to awaken and to intensify spiritual joy. A benevolent nature can find no pleasure
In the infliction of suffering; yet it may be that, as was the case with the^
Connthians, the way of sorrow and reijentance is the only path which can leaA to tnw
and lasting gladness.



OH. 1. 1—24/] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COELNTHIANS. 1«

I. The oatjbbb of Christian jot. It is well known what the world calls joy —
pleasure, mirth, exhilaration of spirits, occasioned by festivity and by prosperity. But
the Scriptures represent, what Christian experience supports, that there are purer
sources of nobler joy. 1. The joy of spiritual deliverance, known by those who are
emancipated from the bondao;e of sin, ignorance, and error. 2. The joy occasioned by
Divine favour. The psalmist appreciated this when he exclaimed, "Lord, lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us ; thou hast put gladness in my heart more
than in the time that their corn and their wine increased." 3. The joy of anticipating
the gracious and final approval of God.

II. The manifestations of Cheistian jot. 1. The most natural sign of spiritual
gladness consists in the abundant utterance of thanksgiving and praise. "Is any
merry? Let him sing psalms." 2. Where there is inward joy there is happy and
energetic labour for Christ. " The joy of the Lord is your strength." Whilst a gloomy
disposition cripples the energies of the worker, gladness within expresses itself in
cheerful toiL He works well who " sings at his work."

III. The WATS in which the Christian ministbb mat help his people's jot.
1. By presenting those Divine truths which are the spring and source of joy. 2. By
fortifying their minds against all that would disturb and spoil their joy. 3. By pro-
viding for them outlets, in worship and in work, for the expression of the joy that is in
them. 4. By encouraging all those special exercises which will promote joy. 5. By
exhibiting to them the privilege of rejoicing, as a Christian virtue, and admonishing
them to spiritual gladness as a happy duty : " Rejoice in the Lord alway, and again I
say. Rejoice." — T.

Ver. 1, — " Saints." A beautiful title frequently conferred upon the people of Qod in
Scriptare. They are called believers, since they exercise faith in Christ ; disciples, as
they place themselves under the teaching of Christ ; servants, as they are pledged to do
his bidding ; children, as they are adopted into the family of God ; and saints, since they
are to live holily — " That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without
rebuke [blemish], in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine
as lights in the world " (PliiL ii. 15). Christian saintship lays emphasis upon Chris-
tian holiness. 1. Upon present Christian holiness. It is not that we are to be saints
in heaven only, but sainte on earth. And we can have no well-founded expectation of
being holy there unless we are holy Jtere. It is the easiest thing in the world to be
holy in the future 1 All are saints next year. But who is a saint now t The true
child of God is — must be, or he cannot be a true child of God. 2. Upon universal
Christian holiness. All real believers are real saints. Not so with the Eomish Church,
which canonizes a certain number, some of them very strange ones. Not as in out
New Testament (erroneously continued in the Eevised Version), Saint Matthew, Saint
Mark, etc., as though these were saints because of their eminence in the Church. All
Christians are saints. The idea of a Christian as a heliever and nothing more is pre-
posterous and utterly unsoriptural. If a man believes, we want to know what his belief
has done for him — what effects it produces. If it does nothing, it is nothing. Belief,
says one, unites me to Christ. Very gnod ; but Christ ridiculed the idea of a branch
being united to the true Vine without bringing forth fruit. Btlief, says another, alters
my condition ; being in Christ by faith, I am a " new creature." Excellent ; but if you
ar9 a " new creature," let us see that you are, else we shall be apt to think that you
are the old creature with a new name. " Faith, if it hath not works, is dead" (Jus.
ii. 17). A true belief is ever followed by holiness. This, however, only suggests how
mnch/alse belief there must be. True belief is something like the firing of a loaded
cannon. If there be true firing the shot will be propelled. So, if we truly believe,
we shall be propelled along the course of holiness. It would he but a poor thing if
Christianity made us something very excellent in another world, and left us just as
it found us in this. Holiness is, no doubt, progressive. But love of holiness, desire of
holiness, striving after holiness, and some realization of holiness, are the possession of
every true child of God.

L HoLiNBSS IN hbakt. Not the mere approval of holiness. Many applaud holiness
who do not possess it and who do not want to possess it. It must reign in the centre
of OUT being. A child of the devil has unholiness reigning in his heart, but a child of



20 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTEnANS. [oh. i. 1—24.



God h»s holiness upon the heart-throne. "Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward
parts ; and in the hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. . . . Create in me
a clean heart, O God ; and renew a right spirit within me " (Ps. li. 6—10). Holiness
must begin In the heart ; a holiness tacked on to us goes for very little. Many com-
mence with outward reformation, when what they need is inward. The holiness of
not a few is very indifferent fruit hwng on to the brancJies of a dead tree. It is the
pushing round of the hands of a clock which has no works behind the dial-plate.
Mere external holiness is of nothing worth ; God looks upon the heart. External saint-
ship is the most miserable of shams.

II. Holiness ts thought. Some pass for holy livers who are very unholy thinkers.
Cut if the heart be pure the thoughts are likely to be. Christ attached the same guilt
to evil thinking as to evil doing (Matt. v. 28). It is not what we do, but what we
want to do I Moreover, evil thinking is the father of evil doing. A child of God may
be overtaken by a fault, sudden temptation may carry him away ; but to think evil,
to plan or purpose evil, is against the genius of his life. We should watch carefully
our thoughts.

III. Holiness in word. No man could tame the tongue, so God came to tame it.
The true saint is pure in speech. The true saint speaks holily, not cantingly. When-
ever a man speaks after a sanctimonious, shuffling, canting fashion, he is speaking
under the inspiration of the devil. Some religious talking is peculiarly unholy ; it
sickens and disgusts ; it is enough to turn the stomach of leviathan. But those who
thus talk think they are infinitely pious, imagining probably that God Almighty
measures his people's faces to ascertain how much grace there is in their hearts, and
accounts them holy in proportion to their ability to pour forth unmeaning, impertinent
or pretentious twaddle. We should speak holily, and then we shall be as far removed
as we possibly can be from speaking sanctimoniously. And we should remember the
power of words.

IV. Holiness in seed. Our actions will, as a general rule, show what we are,
especially our unstudied actions. The true child of God is not only holy in profession,
but in practice. The good tree will bring forth good fruit. Men judge us chiefly by
what we do. The saint desiring the honour of God will let his light so shine that
men may see his good works, and thus be led to glorify the Father in heaven. We
shall not persuade either man or God that we are saints unless we act as saints. A
lecret holiness is no holiness. If we alone know that we are holy, we may be quite
«ure that we are unholy.

V. Holiness in the bpibit of the life. The child of God is to have the
fragrance of holiness pervading his life. The general bent of his life will be holy.
To aid in the attainment of holiness we have : 1. A Pattern. Christ. He was " without
fault." We are to seek to be like him. " As he which hath called you is holy, so
be ye holy " (1 Pet. i. 15). 2. A Eelper. The Holy Ghost. To (1) dwell within
as ; (2) sanctify us ; (3) aid us in every emergency. Without holiness our prospect
is dark ; for " without holiness no man shall see the Lord " (Heb. xii. 14). — ^H.

Vers. 3—7. — True comfort. I. Its Sodbce. God. Some seek comfort in reflecting
that their case is no worse than that of others, that things will improve, that " it
can't be helped ; " in attempted forgetfulness ; in exciting and dissipating pleasures ;
in unmeasured complaint and repining. But the child of God goes to his Father.
God is the God of comfort ; he is " the God of all comfort " (ver. 3). All true com-
fort is of him. From God as " the Father of mercies " (ver. 3). All mercies are of
him, and this great mercy of comfort amongst others. Comfort is a m^rcy ; it is of
grace, not of right. Our sin has bred our sorrow, and we might have been left to it.
But through the mercy of God we have abundant solace. As our comfort comes
through mercy, we are not surprised to find that it comes " through Christ " (ver. 5),
the incarnation of the mercy of the Most High. It is of the God who is " the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ " (ver. 3). It is thus associated with our redemption. It is
for those who can say "our Lord Jesus Christ ; " his Father is then their Father. God's
childrei shall be comforted ; for they are the children of the One who is the sole
Source of all true comfort.

IL Its bestowal. It comes to vm when most needed. L Jn affliction. Tht



CH.I.1— 24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOEINTHIANS. 21



world's consolations, such as they are, are offered to us when we least need them.
Affliction finds few friends ; but it finds one Friend. In the dense darkness the Chris<
tian has light in his dwelling, like Israel in Egypt. When the child of God is sick
and troubled, his Father comes to him. 2. In all our affliction. (Ver. 4.) No affliction
is beyond the reach of Divine comfort. God does not desert us in any trouble.
Humaa comfort often aggravates our sorrow. When we are sore stricken we can bear
no other touch but God's. We are sinking, but " underneath are the everlasting arms."
Infinite in power ; infinite also in consolation. 3. In proportion to our affliction.
^Ver. 5.) God weighs all our troubles. He knows our sorrows. "As thy days so
shall thy strength be." He is acquainted with our need, and will he not supply it ?
We may reckon upon suflBoient Divine consolation in all our sorrows ; very especially
so when those sorrows have been directly brought upon us by our steadfastness in the
faith, cur loyalty to Christ, our faithfulness to God. Each martyr had a martyr's
portion of comfort as well as of pain. And so with Paul, whom we may regard as a
long-lived martyr, dying daily, yet living through the death-blows and comforted
under them.

III, Its object. We are comforted for our peace and happiness, but here we learn
that we are comforted for our usefulness also. Like the apostle, we are comforted of
God that we may comfort others. Divine comfort enables us to do this ; for : 1. We
can then speak from experience of the efficacy of Divine comfort. 2. We can direct to
the Source of comfort. 3. We can testify to the Divine faithfulness in bestowing
comfort. 4. The salutary influence of sorrow comforted by God will make us efficient
comforters. Only those who have tasted trouble are fitted to minister to the troubled.
And of these only they who have been divinely comforted can truly comfort. Such
will be just unlike Job's comforters. Christ was perfected as a Comforter by his
sorrows, and by the Divine consolation which kept him from sinking under them.
We are brought down and then lifted up again, that we may be made meet for this
service. And great will be our joy if we see those comforted by us patiently enduring
(ver. 6) their tribulation.

IV. One of its effects. Gratitude, mingled with adoration. " Blessed be the
God," etc. (ver. 3). We shall thank God: 1, That he has comforted us. 2. That
through this we have been enabled to comfort others. No stinted praise should we
offer for such mercies. We shall all regard the first as great, but gracious spirits will
regard the second as greater. — H.

Vers. 8 — 11. — In the depths and out of them. I. The emergencies op the people
OF God. God's children are often afflicted children. Far from escaping trial, it is
frequently multiplied to them. Through much tribulation they enter the kingdom ;
with much tribulation they often abide in it whilst on earth. For them the furnace
seems not seldom to be made " seven times hotter." Children of sorrows follow the
" Man of sorrows." Like the apostle, they are sometimes " pressed out of measure,"
" weighed down exceedingly " (ver. 8), until their own power collapses. It is uncertain
to what special exigency Paul refers, but in such straits was he that even his brave
heart despaired of life. Happy are we if, like him, we do not in such tribulation despair
of God. When our strength fails, his is untouched. As easy is it for him to deliver us
when we are in great peril as when we are in little. God knows nothing of emergency.

II. The lessons of teial and pebil. Very numerous — to teach us our weakness,
to induce the pilgrim spirit, to bend our will to God's, to rouse us from lethargy, etc.
One chief lesson noted here is to lead us to trust in God (ver. 9). He " raiseth the
dead," and can do all things for us. Our perfect helplessness is demonstrated, and then
faith lays hold of God's perfect helpfulness. Creatures become nothing, especially that
very little creature, ourself. The soul cries out for God, and can rest upon nothing but
omnipotence. This is Christian life — liespairing of our own power, confident in God's.
God sometimes keeps us in the fiercely hot furnace until he sees us walking therein by
the side of the Son of God (Dan. iii. 25). Before we felt the fire we thought we could
walk alone. God shakes us until he has shaken all the self-trust out of us. Self-con-
fidence is poison ; trial is intended to destroy that poison. When everything seems to
fail us but God, then we lie at h;j feet.

UI. PROVIDENCE DOES NOT EXCLUDE PBAYEB. (Ver. 11.) In our extremity we can do



22 THE SBOOiTD EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. L 1—24.

one thing — ^we can cry to God. The afflicted lieliever should say, " This one thing I
do." 1. Our own prayer. Christians should not be dumb dogs. The command to pray
is bound up with the command to trust. Prayer is proof of a trustful spirit. _ A con-
fidence in God which makes us too lazy to call upon him is a confidence which wiU
get more blows than blessings. We may be kept in the fires till we find our voice.
2. The prayers of others. The apostle evidently believed in the efficacy of intercessory
prayer (ver. 11). He regarded such prayer as very real " help." Confidence in God's
help which excludes confidence in spiritual help from our fellows is not so pleasing or
honouring to God as some imagine. He has ever honoured "united" prayer. The
prayers of saints are very precious and very prevailing as they ascend from the golden
altar. God was very willing to deliver Peter out of prison, but he gave to the saints at
Jerusalem the great honour of praying him out (Acts xii. 5). The prayers of righteous
men avail much. God loves not only solo praying, but choral praying.

IV. Peaybr answbbbd in peovidence calls fob pbaisb. (Ver. 11.) Oftentimes,
alas ! we are so pleased with our deliverance that we forget to thank God for it. We
say " Thank you" to every one except God. These things ought not so to be. When
God hears us once in supplication, he .should hear us once again in thanksgiving.
Deliverances by God call for "songs of loudest praise." When prayer has been
answered, praise should be exceedingly full and hearty. We do not prevail in prayer
because we did — and were unthankful. When many have prayed and have been
answered many should give thanks. We must have united praise meetings as well as
united prayer meetings. — H.

Ver. 12.-7- 2%e testimony of our conscience. I. Thb FAVonsABLB testimony of con-

SOIBNOB IS A QKEAT BUPPOET IN THE HOUB OP TRIAL AND BtrPBBEINa. Affliction brought

upon us directly by our own folly or sin is as wormwood for bitterness. Suffering is
then greatly intensified by the reproaches of conscience. We feel that we are reaping
only as we have sowiu But when conscience acquits us we gain great moral support.
The pressure of the heaviest burden is relieved ; in the darkest day there is then some
light. We may be " cast down," but we are " not destroyed " (ch. iv. 9). Sometimes
the approval of conscience is enough to turn our sorrow into gladness, and to lead us
to rejoice when otherwise we should have greatly lamented. We may glory in this
without vain-glory. Paul was greatly comforted in his tribulations by a conscience
which witnessed to the integrity of his conduct.

IL The favoubablb testimony of oonscibnce can be sbouebd only by holy
LIVING. 1. Like the apostle, we must live in : (1) Simplicity. Singleness of purpose.
Holiness : refraining from evil ; walking ever before God. Though we shall not, it may
be, be absolutely pure, we may abstain from all wilful transgression. (2) Sincerity.
We must be true, honest, guileless, straightforward. Godly sincerity — Ood-lihe
sincerity — thorough; a sincerity which comes from God. (^) Not in fleshly wisdom.
A wisdom which has selfish aims, which is not particular about the means employed,
a wisdom which ignores God. 2. This must apply to all our life. Our conversation
in the world must be the same as in the Church. Some live double lives. It is no
wonder that they have little peace of mind. Their conduct is ruled by plcux rather
principle. We must be the same amongst the enemies of God as amongst his friends.

III. We can live so as to sectjee the favourable testimony of consoibncb
ONLY BY THE GBACB OF GoD. We may " sear" conscience, dull it, so that its voice may
be scarcely heard ; but if free, unfettered, it will assuredly condemn unless we are in
alliance with the Eternal. We cannot live a life of which the healthy conscience will
approve apart from him. We may lay down excellent plans for life, but we shall have
to lay them down unless we get strength from the Strong One. The apostle had to
say, " By the grace of God I am what I am " (1 Cor. xv. 10). Of ourselves we can
do nothing — except sin Our sufficiency is of him. He causes us to triumph. We
cause ourselves to fail We can walk " in the grace of God " only " 6y the grace oi
God."— H.

Vera. 17 — ^20. — Unehangedbleness. I. The unohangbableness of Cebibt. He is
" the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever " (Heb. xiii. 8). Paul, CGmpeiled by
circnmstances to alter his plans, and charged with fickleness, beaded lest inconstancy



OH. 1. 1—24.] THE SE500ND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa 28

ihonld be associated with his Master or with the doctrines of the gospeL He passes
rapidly from a defence of himself to defend that which is of so much more importance.
Well would it he if we were equally jealous of the honour of Christ, equally anxious that
through us no shadow should fall upon his glory. Christ is unchangeable as (1) a
Saviour, (2) a Teacher, (3) an Example, (4) an Advocate, (5) a Master, (6) a Friend.

II. The unchangbablkness of God. Illustrated by the fulfilment of Divine
promises in Christ (ver. 20). Not one jot or tittle has fallen to the grounds In Christ
is the "yea" — the afBrmation, the accomplishment of Divine promise. True believers
acknowledge this ; " through him is the Amen " (ver. 20, new version) ; they say
" Amen " to the Divine faithfulness which they see so strikingly illustrated in Christ.
This is " to the glory of God." The glory of his character is proclaimed. God is not
inconstant. A promise made by him is, to all intents and purposes, a promise fulfilled.
This unchangeableness applies to all Divine dealing. Threat will as certainly be
fulfilled as promise. Many believe in the semi-unchangeahleness of God. They think
he will fulfil all that they wish to be fulfilled, and kindly dispense with the remainder.
They make their own god, as the heathen do.

III. The unchanqeableness of Chuistian dootbine. Christian doctrine is
certain, definite, abiding. It is not " yea " to-day and " nay " to-morrow (ver. 18).
As there is no change in Christ, there is no room for change in statements respecting
him. The apostle was assured that what he promulgated was the truth about the Truth.
To change from that would have been to embrace error. If we change our utterances
concerning the Saviour, we are justified only in so far as our prior statement was
erroneous. The " old gospel " is the gospel for all new times. In Christianity the truest
progress is to go hack — to go back to what God himself revealed. As we do that,
" more light wiU break from God's Word." But note, it will break /rom OocPa Word,
not from the poor constellations of human wisdom. There, in the Word, we have the
doctrine, which, like him in whom it centres, is " the same yesterday, and to-day, and for
ever." There is no development in Christian doctrine as the ages roll on. There may be
much development in our knowledge of it. The same doctrine is to come from the lips
of all preachers at all times. The doctrine preached by Paul was preached also by
Silvanus and Timothy (ver. 19).

IV. The unchangeableness of the true believes. This is relative, not abso-
lute. But in proportion as we resemble Christ we shall become unchangeable —
unchangeable in principle, in bent of mind, in love of holiness, in life-purpose, etc.
We are not to be fickle, but steadfast. Men are to find us ever the same in loyalty
to Christ, in devotion to his service. Paul was charged with lightness, instability of
purpose (ver. 17) ; but it was a false charge. He altered his movements that he might
not be altered himself. The same principles which led him to form his plans led him
to change them. Change in them was evidence of unchangeableness in him. Incon-
stancy and inconsistency were grieTOus charges in apostolic eyes. — H.

Vers. 21, 22. — Four privileges of the believer. L To be established in Christ,
Brought into ever closer union with him. More and more firmly settled in faith.
Increased in knowledge of him and of his doctrine. Made constant to Christ. Deve-
loped in likeness to him. Perfected increasingly along all the lines of Christian character.
A work continuous ; so Paul uses the present tense. The Christian's course is like that
of the shining light, which shineth more and more unto the perfect day. Not all at
once is he at his best. The seed of the kingdom takes time to develop. The points of
contact at first may be few ; but we are to be established " into " Christ. Believers
should seek closest association with their Lord. True self-interest does not prompt the
question — How far may we safely keep from Christ? but — How near to him may
we draw? " Abide in me ... if a man abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch,
and is withered " (John xv. 4 — 6).

XL To be anointed. The believer is made like his Lord. Christ waa the Anointed ;
so therefore is the believer anointed. Christ was the Anointed of God ; so by God is the
believer also anointed. .Christ was anointed as King and great High Priest ; so as king
and priest is the believer anointed — " a royal priesthood " (1 Pet. ii. 9). Christ was
anointed for a special life and a special work ; so is the believer. It is not for nought
that we receive our anointing from the Holy One (1 John ii. 20). We are consecrated,



24 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOEINTHIANS. to"- ^ 1—^*

set apart, to carry out the Divine purposes. Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost
(Acts X. 38) ; so is the believer. With the anointing comes the power to realize the
purpose of the anointing (1 John ii. 27). Here is great privilege, but at the same time
great responsibility. Are we fulfilling the design of our anointing ?

m. To BE SEALED. Believers are sealed by the reception of the Holy Ghost (Eph.
i. 13 and iv. 80). This is the Divine mark or seal put upon them. This sealing:
1. Indicates proprietorship. Believers have God's seal upon them because they are
God's. He lays claim to them. They are in a most special sense /or Qod. " Ye are
not your own." 2. Authenticates. The genuineness of a believer is guaranteed by
this mark. K he is sealed, then he is of God, though in some things he may seem
eccentric. No spurious goods pass under this brand. Yet imitations of the Divine seal
are many, so that we have need to " try the spirits," to ascertain whether they are
truly of tjie Holy Spirit. The true seal authenticates us to ourselves. " The Spirit him-
self beareth witness with our spirit that we are children of God " (Bom. viii. 16). Our
assurance springs from the Divine sealing. Dreamings, frames and feelings, and fancies,
even opinions of others, are as nought compared with the witness of the Spirit.
3. Invests with authority. That which bears the royal seal has weight and authority
among men ; and those who bear the Divine seal are intended by God to exercise large
influence over their fellows. They have the weight and authority of accredited servants
of God. Not lightly are they to be esteemed ; not contemptuously are their words to
be received. So far as they are true to their sealing, they are of God, and are to be
regarded as his messengers. 4. Preserves. Safety is often ensured by the human seal,
always by the Divine. If God has marked us for his own, none shall pluck us out of
his hand. Though the universe should rise up against a sealed saint, it should iuglo-
riously fail ; for the Divine seal is the pledge that Omnipotence will defend the sealed.
God is not mocked. What he has set apart for himself he will have, and who shall
say him nay ? The saints are safe, for they are sealed of God. 5. Testifies to valiie. We
seal only that which we value. And yet there may be no intrinsic value in that which
is sealed. In itself it may be of no account ; but we seal it because we can use it for
some important purpose. So with the believer. Of himself he is nothing and less
than nothing, and vanity. The sealing is no teacher of pride. He is sealed of God,
not because he is excellent or of himself of any service, but because God in his infinite
grace designs to make him so. The seal praises, not us, but God, who of us can make
that which will redound to his glory and accomplish his purposes.

IV. To BE ENDOWED WITH THE EARNEST OP THE SPIBIT. The DlvinO Spirit with

which believers are sealed is the " earnest money," the pledge of that which has yet to
come. The expression refers to that part of the purchase money which was paid in
advance as a security for the remainder. Of what, then, is the possession of the Divine
Spirit a guarantee ? 1. Of yet fuller possession of the Spirit. 2. Of complete salva-
tion. The "firstfruits" of the Spirit a pledge of the great harvest (Bom. viiL 23;
Eph. i. 13, 14). 3. Of fulfilment of all Divine promises. 4. Of our enjoyment of the
eternal inheritance. The heaven is begun. No great heaven above for those who have
no lesser heaven below. This pledge of the future does not conflict with diligence and
faithfulness in Christian walk. These are the signs of the possession of the Divine
Spirit — a mirror in which alone we may see the reflection of the great privilege we
claim. The holier we are in inner and outer life the more clearly shaJl we see what we
possess. If we walk unholily the mirror wiU reflect only sin and condemnation, lie
perseverance of saints is saints persevering.

V. The Sodeob of these phivilegbs. God. We are debtors for these vast
mercies. In them we are " enriched by him." Knowing the Source, we shall know
where to seek for those things which are " more precious than rubies." — H.

Ver. 5. — Christian suffering. It is correct to say that Christ sufiered in order that
we may not suffer, died that we may never die. " Christ suffered for us." But it is
also correct to say that Christ suffered in order that we may suffer with him, and,
following him in the path of self-denial and patience, may be with him in his kingdom
and glory. The apostles Paul and Peter regarded sufferings for Christ as continuations
of the sufferings of Christ, and always looked, and taught their brethren to look, along a
vista of trial and afBiction toward the happy issue of being glorified together with Christ



OH. 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. 25

at his appearing. At members of the hody of Christ we suffer. As the natural bod;
of Christ suffered in the days of his flesh, so now the mystical hody, the Church, suffers
in these days of the Spirit. It must have its agony and bloody sweat before the end
comes; blows of contempt, scourging, buffeting ; and must have its "bones sore vexed,"
as were those of his body on the cross; sore vexed, but not broken: "A bone of him
shall not be broken." As witnesses for the Name of Christ we suffer. While walking
and witnessing in the acceptance and power of his resurrection, we must be identified
with him as the despised and rejected One. We are in collision with the spirit of the
world, and the more firmly we lift our testimony against it the more the sufferings of
Christ abound in us. In primitive times men suffered as Christians, for no other
offence than the confession of the Saviour's Name. Tlie council of the Jews arrested
the apostles Peter and John, and put the deacon Stephen to death, on this charge. The
cultivated Pliny, when Proconsul of Bithynia, about forty years after the death of
St. Paul, is shown, by his correspondence with the Emperor 'I'rajan, to have regarded
the very fact of being a Christian as a crime worthy of instant punishment. Christian
faith was in his eyes nothing but " an absurd and excessive superstition," and the noble
constancy of the Christians under threats and torture " a contumacious and inflexible
obstinacy." So the witnesses for our Lord suffered in Bithynia under the illustrious
Trajan, as well as in Italy under the infamous Nero, and throughout the empire under
the cruel Domitian and Diocletian. But it sustained them to know that they were
fulfilling the sufferings of Christ. His grace was sufBcient for them. On them rested
the Spirit of glory and of God. Such discipline continues, though without actual
peril of life. Faithful Christians suffer many things, at many points, and from many
quarters. And when they suffer for the Church it is a continuation of our Lord's
unselfish suffering. So St. Paul endured all things for the Lord's sake and the sake of
the elect. He used the expression, " I fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ" (Col. i. 24), in reference to his inward anxiety and "agony" for those at
Colosse and Laodicea, who had not seen his face in the flesh. His anxiety for their
confirmation in the mystery of God was a sort of supplement to the deep struggle of
the Saviour in behalf of multitudes, Paul included, who had not seen and could not
see his face in the flesh. The apostle had no thought of adding to the sufferings of
Christ in respect of their expiatory virtue, but rejoiced that he was permitted to follow
his Master in this same path of affliction and solicitude for the Church. All sowers of
" the incorruptible seed" have to sow with tears. And hearers of the Word are most
profited when they receive it " in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Ghost." Three
views may be taken of those afflictions which are distinctively Christian. 1. They are
for the Lord, incurred and endured for his Name. So were the afflictions of Christ for the
Name and glory of the Father. The world hated both him and his Father. 2. They
are for the good of the Christian sufferer — tribulations that work patience, chastise-
ments for his profit. So were the afflictions of Christ for his own good. " Though he
were a Son, he learned obedience by the things which he suffered." 3. For the sake of
his brethren, or for the good of the Church, which is edified through the self-denial and
godly patience of individual believers in successive generations. So were the afflictions
of Christ for the Church which he redeemed, and in which he now succours them that
are tempted. The present time, then, is one of communion with our Lord in suffering.
Let four advices be given to those who suffer with a good conscience — for well doing
and not for evil doing.

I. Hayb a oahb one pok auotheb. Trouble may make men sullen and self-
engrossed. Correct this tendency by remembering that you are not isolated persons,
but parts of the body of Christ, and so members of one another. If you suffer, bear
yourselves so that others may be confirmed by your faith and patience. If they suffer,
suffer with them, help to bear their burdens, condole in their sorrow, minister to their
necessity. " Weep with them that weep."

II. Lbabn patience tkom " THE Man OF SORROWS." It Ought to cure peevishness
and wilfulness to read the story of our Lord's passion, and consider the meekness of
him " who endured such contradiction of sinners against himself." See how St. Peter
sets before suffering saints the example of their Master (1 Pet. ii. 20 — 23).

III. Look for stbbnqth to the sympathizing Saviour. In the present connection
between Christ and Christians the Scripture marks a distinction. The saints suffer



26 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. l 1—24.

with Cluist ; Christ sympathizes with the saints. The word for the fonner is •vm»«#-
X^iv : the word for the latter is avpataBety. The Head is raised above Buflfering, but
sympathizes with the distressed and bruised members, and loves to supply consolation
and rehef. " Our consolation also aboundeth by Christ." He makes us strong, even in
the hour when our hearts are jaded and our spirits faint. The crook in the lot, the
thorn in the flesh, the buffeting in the world, the disappointment in the Church, — ^he
knows it all, and he can bear us through it alL

IV. Eejoicb in the hopb op his coming. There is a deep wisdom of God in the
long-drawn affliction of Christ and the Church. Glory comes out of the dark womb of
trouble. How long the travail must be God only knows. Jesus Christ suffered till he
was perfected, and then God exalted him. The Church must suffer and struggle till
she is perfected and God exalts her too. And the glory that awaits her is that of her
Beloved. As the Church enters into his sufferings, so is she to enter into his glory.
This is the day for faithful service and saintly patience. The coming day is that of
honour and reward, "that, when hia glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also
with exceeding joy." — F.

Ver. 9. — " 77ie sentence of death in ourselves." St. Paul had just recovered from •
depression of spirit under which his frame, never very robust, bad been bowed down
almost to the grave. He was no Stoic. No spiritual man is. Regenerate life brings
quickened sensibility. The new heart is both deep and rapid in its appreciations,
and feels intensely both joy and sorrow. St. Paul had not lost faith or comfort in his
distress. He trusted in the living and life-giving God. All spiritual men find that
faith thrives when they have to endure hardness. If they occupy places of ease or
walk on sunny heights, they look down into the sorrows of life and call them dark and
dismal. But when their path lies through the valley on which death-shadows fall,
they lift their eyes to the hills whence help comes. The hills are near and strong, and
the sky above reveals its golden stars. It is in houses of comfort that we often find
doubt and discontent ; but Divine serenity floats over the tried saints, and the secret
prayers of God's stricken ones have the sweetest tones of hope. The reason of this is
not obscure. If your chamber is full of light by night, and you look out through the
wiudow, you discern little or nothing — all is dark. But if your chamber be in darkness,
and you look forth, you see the moon and stars ruling the night, the trees standing as
solemn sentinels in the valley, and the mountain casting a broad shadow on the sea.
So, when you have worldly ease and pleasure, heavenly things are very dim to you.
But, when the world is darkened, heaven brightens, and you trust in God who raises
the dead. There is a heathen conception of death which makes all vigorous life shrink
aud recoil. The dead are.thought to go away into a mournful stillness, or move through
the air and haunt lonely places, as pallid shades or ghosts. There is also a Hebrew
conception of death which suflSced in the time of the Old Testament, but falls quite
short of what is now brought to light by the gospel (see Ps. cxv. 17 ; Isa. xxxviii.
18, 19). But Christ has delivered from the fear of death. Every believer in Christ
may enter into the consolation of St. Paul. If he is in sickness and has a sentence ot
death in himself, or sees that sentence written on the wan countenance of one whom he
loves, he is not without a strong solace. It is not the mere philosophical tenet of the
immortality of the soul, which implies an endless being, but by no means attains to the
Christian doctrine of eternal life. It is faith in God who raises the dead. Father
Abraham had this comfort when he strode up the hill, with the knife to slay and the
fire to consume iu sacrifice his dear son, " accounting that God was able to raise him up
even from the dead; from whence also he received him in a figure." We read of
certain Hebrew women who through faith " received their dead brought to life again."
We remember one instance in the ministry of Elijah, and another in that of Elisha.
In those times it was an object to live long in the land which Jehovah God had given
to his people ; and so it was a blessed resurrection to be restored so as to prolong one's
days on the earth. In the beginning of the gospel a few such cases are reported. We
allude to the ruler's daughter, the widow's son, Lazarus, and Tabitha or Dorcas. But
the gospel being fully unfolded, and the hope laid up in heaven made known, there are
no more instances of restoration to mortal life. To depart out of the world and be with
Christ is far better than to remain in it. So the resurrection for which we wait is that



OH. L 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 27



of the juBt at the appearing of Jesus Christ. When we believe in Gk)d who raises
the dead, the first and chief reference is to his having raised up the slain Jesus
(see Horn. iv. 24 ; x. 9 ; 1 Cor. xv. 15). This is in the very heart of the gospel, and
this carries with it the sure and certain hope of the resurrection of " the dead in Christ."
" God hath both raised up the Lord, and wiU also raise up us by his own power." The
sentence of death which St. Paul had felt was not executed till years had passed ; but
it was well to be forearmed. Ere long, warned or iinwarned, we all must endure death,
if the Lord tarry. And before we die we may have to see the sentence carried out in
others whom we love and for whom we must go mourning. There is no help in facing
death but that which comes of faith ; there is no comfort in regard to those who have
endured it but in the belief that they are already with God, " breathers of an ampler day,"
and in the hope that he will raise them up complete and glorious at his coming. — F.

Ver. 19. — Christ is "yea." The apostle defended himself against imputations of levity
and self-contradiction. He did not lightly form or change his plans. He did not bandy
about " yea and nay." The serious theme of his ministry was some security for its
grave and consistent treatment. At the present day one hears a good many complaints
of vagueness and vacillation in the pulpit. Preachers are said to use ambiguous
phrases, propound shifting opinions, and leave their hearers unsettled and perplexed.
They seem to have no certainty in their own minds, and therefore cannot convey a
sure and straightforward gospel to others. Their word is " yea and nay." Now, there
may be reason for hesitancy on some topics of religion. It may be a great deal wiser
than absolute assertion. But as to the main theme of gospel preaching there should
be perfect certainty ; for the very essence of it is the setting forth of Jesus Christ, the
Son of God. He is the True One, and ought to be proclaimed with firmness, consistency,
and "much assurance." The Greeks were fond of speculation. At Athens they
inquired after some new thing. At Corinth they were fickle and disputatious. On
such a people the calm certainty of St. Paul's preaching must have fallen with surprise.
It was testified that Jesus, who had taught in Judaea, but never even visited Greece,
and who had been crucified at Jerusalem, was the Sou of God ; that he had ascended to
heaven, and would judge the world on an appointed day. This was not submitted to
the critical acumen of the Greeks for their examination and approval. It was delivered
as truth, and not as a lie — yea, and not nay. Jesus, the Son of God, was the grand Beality
in a world of delusions, and the grand Essence in a world of shadows. Such had been
the teaching of St. Peter and the other apostles at Jerusalem, of Philip at Samaria, and
of the Cypriote and Oyrenian brethren who first delivered the testimony at Antioch.
No one was more clear or more intent upon this than St. Paul. Though his powerful
mind could easily have dealt with many questions that would have interested the Greeks,
he resolved to adhere to the simple testimony to Jesus, the Son of the living God. It
may be said that, though this was right and needful in the world which St. Paul looked
upon, and is right and needful still among Jews and heathens, it is not necessary in
Christian countries. But alas I it is necessary. Countries called Christian are stiU very
ignorant of Christ; all of them need full, definite, and firm preaching of the Son
of God. There is nothing like it for delivering men from their sins, and drawing
them away alike from the arid sands of unbelief and from the marshy places of super-
stition. But the testimony must be delivered with unfaltering heart and voice ; for it
is the preaching of the Yea, the Faithful and True — a pillar that cannot be shaken, a
foundation that cannot be moved. Heathenism was full of contradiction, incoherence,
and contrast. Its gods conflicted with each other and its oracles were uncertain. It
was and still is a thing of " yea and nay." Buddhism, in some respects an improve-
ment on the heathenism which it supplanted, after all amounts to a mere dreary
nihilism. One who had studied it carefully (Sir J. Emerson Tennant) said of
Buddhism that, " insufficient for time and rejecting eternity, the utmost triumph of
this religion is to live without fear and to die without hope." This is not "yea," not even
" yea and nay," but a perpetual dismal " nay." In Christendom, too, something like it
appears. There is a weary scepticism which a famous writer described m "the
everlasting No." Partly it is a shallow fashion, partly it is a real plague and misery
of the generation to have " nay " only in regard to the unseen. God is not. The Bible
ii not. The devil is not. Heaven is a dream. Hell is a fable. Prayer is useless.



28 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ofc 1. 1—24

Faith is a fond fancjr. So the mist wraps men ia its chilly fold. Against all this w«
place the everlasting Yea. Jesus Christ is God's mighty and loving Tes to the children
of men. And whatever the differences among our religious communities, in this testi-
mony all are at one. The Son of God is he who can give light to the dsirkened mind,
rest to the weary spirit, warmth to the frozen heart. In him desire is satisfied,
apparent contradictions are reconciled, or hope is given of solutions by-and-hy, for which
we can well afford to wait. Some contrast the Christian faith unfavourably with
the physical sciences. They say that it is full of mysticism and loose conjecture,
whereas the sciences proceed by rigorous induction of facts observed, collated, and
scrutinized. In the former we are asked to walk on air ; in the latter, every step we
take is on sure and solid ground. This -we totally deny. There is no fair and proper
test of historical and moral truth to which our holy religion refuses to be subjected.
We have the well-authenticated records spoken and written by those who saw and heard
Jesus Christ. We have the best reasons for trusting their testimony; and in the
words, and works, and character, and suffering of Jesus, in his reappearance after death,
and in the whole influence which he has exerted over millions of men for nearly
nineteen centuries, we have overwhelming proof that, while human, he is superhuman —
he is the Son of God. It is science that has to change its voicg, not religion. It has
to modify its assertioas, correct its conclusions, and reconsider its theories ; but Jesus
Christ is "the same yesterday, and to-day, and for ever;" and the gospel which
proclaims him brings to us the Divine " yes " to which we have only to respond with
the human " yes " of an unwavering faith. The Saviour asks, " Believest thou that
I am able to do this ? " Be ready with the answer, " Yea, Lord." — F.

Ver. 20. — The certainty of Divine promises. I. All the peomises or Gk>D. From
the first (Gen. iii. 15) which points to the Saviour's first coming, to the last (Bev.
xxii. 20) which assures us of his second coming, these are all very good. Their range
is vast, their bounty large, their comfort sweet and strong. They bring balm to our
wounds, help to our infirmities, rest to our weariness, encouragement to our prayers.
They are "exceeding great and precious." Scattered as the promises are over the
Bible, they should be searched out and read with an intelligent regard to the time when
they were given, the persons to whom they were addressed, and the nature of the
dispensation under which they were issued. They are profitable in a general sense as
exhibiting the Divine character and mind, and they convey individual comfort to those
who, in express terms or by fair inference from the express terms, are indicated in par-
ticular promises. These comprehend assurances of (1) temporal welfare ; (2) free pardon ;
(3) a renewed and obedient heart ; (4) the indwelling of the Holy Spirit ; (5) the return of
the Lord and our gathering to him in his glory. These are the keys to open all doors
in the dungeons of Doubting Castle and set captives free. These are the strong withes
that bind the holiest affections of men, or the cords and bands let down from above,
which they hold as they skirt the precipices of moral danger and climb the steep places
of duty. These are the stepping-stones across waters of despondency, on which pilgrims
may pass dry-shod to the happy shore.

II. The secukitt of all those pkomises is in Jesus Christ. No Divine promises
are made to us out of Christ, and no promise in him can fail. This arises from :
1. The constitution of his mediatorial Person, He is very God and very man : God
who is true and cannot lie, in union with a guileless Man who had no deceit in his
mouth. 2. The nature of his mediatorial offices. As he is the Prophet, all the
promises of Divine teaching and enlightenment are secure in him. As he is the Priest,
all the promises of pardon, of acceptance in worship, and of salvation to the uttermost,
are secure in him. As he is the King, all the promises of the subdual of sin and of
deliverance from spiritual adversaries are secure in him. 8. The covenant relatioiis
of Christ to his people. They are so comprehended in him or represented by him that
all the promises made to him are for their help and consolation, and all the promises
made to them are for his glory. So are they assured of pardon through him, eternal
life in him, the Holy Spirit of him and by him, and the new heavens and new earth
with him who is the Amen, faithful and true.

ni. The end in view nt the scbeness of the promises. " For glory to God throi^h
fu." It is glorifying to him that we go to the promises for solace and live on th«



OH. L L— 24.3 THE SBCOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 29



promises by faith. It was when Abraham believed a promise, and was strengthened
in faith, that he gave glory to God. And this way of glorifying our God is open to all
of us. Let US not stagger at his promises, but believe his love and rely on his faith-
fulness. He cannot deny himself. Glory be to the Father, who promises to be a
Father to us, and to take us for his sons and daughters 1 Glory be to the Son, in whom
all things are ours by free grace, and God himself is not ashamed to be called our God
Glory be to the Holy Ghost, for the anointing, the sealing, and the earnest in our
hearts (vers. 21, 22) 1 The promises of God being established in Christ, we too who
believe are established in Christ by the Holy Spirit, and so the promises are ours.
What will you do who have no hold of the promises, no hearty faith in the Divine
Promiser ? For you there is no bright future ; for the inheritance is by promise of free
grace in Christ Jesus. Yet we do not ask you to believe a promise. Strictly speaking,
there is no promise to men who are not in Christ. But Christ himself is set before
you and offered to you. Believe on the Name of the only begotten Son of God, according
to the tenor of the gospel. Then all things will be yours. The promises of grace and
glory are for you ; for they are all yea and amen in Jesus Christ our Lord. — ^F.

Ver. 24. — Tht apostolic ministry. I. Afostolio testimony. Our religion is based
on facts seen and known, abundantly verified and honestly related. Of these facts
apostlt's were the chosen witnesses. When they spoke to their countrymen, the
Jews, they showed how those facts concerning Jesus of Nazareth fulfilled Old Testa-
ment types and prophecies of the Christ. But the real foundation which they laid
everywhere was one of fact. Jesus had died and God had raised him from the dead.
Of these things they were absolutely sure, and on their testimony the Church was built.
On this it is well to lay emphasis. From one side there comes an insidious suggestion
to cease from asserting the miraculous nativity and the actual bodily resurrection
of Jesus Christ as historical facts, and to content ourselves with the elevation of ideas
and sweetness of culture which are associated with his Name. To this we cannot listen,
because we cannot live in a house without foundations, and we do not believe that the
ideas and influences of Christianity can long remain with us if we part with the
historical Christ to whom the apostles bore witness. From the opposite side we
encounter another danger. The facts which were testified by apostles and prophets
are overlaid with masses of theological statement and niceties of controversial distinction.
Not the Redeemer is preached, but the scheme of redemption ; not the death of Christ,
but the doctrine of atonement ; not his resurrection, but the tenets of the schools
regarding the results secured by his " finished work." Now, we do not for a moment
disparage theology, systematic or polemical, or forget that St. Paul put much theology
Into his letters to the Churches ; but it is a thing taught and argued, not witnessed.
We must adhere to our point, that the gospel is a proclamation of facts, and the Church
rests on a foundation of facts, certified by the apostles as competent and chosen wit-
nesses—facts, however, not diy and barren, but significant, suggestive, full of profound
meaning and intense spiritual power. St. Paul was careful to assume no higher place in
regard to the gospel than that of a faithful witness. He delivered it just as he had
received it, " by the revelation of Jesus Christ." He told the Galatians that, if he him-
self should be found at any future time proclaiming any other gospel, or if an angel
from heaven should do so, he was not to be listened to — he was to be accursed. Any
perversion of that gospel which had been delivered from the beginning would be sufScient
to discredit an apostle as a false apostle, an angel as a fallen angel.

II. Afostouo authority. The apostles had authority to " bind and loose," to direct
and administer in the early Church. On fit occasions they exerted such authority, and
none of them more firmly or wisely than Paul. But they forbore as much as possible
to press mere authority even in matters of order and discipline, and they dislaimed any
right of dominion over the faith of their fellow-Christians. The Apostle Paul in par
ticular is never found demanding attention or obedience to his teaching on the ground
of his official dignity. Many signs and special miracles attended his ministry and
confirmed his word ; but he never posed as a worker of wonders in order to awe the
minds and compel the submission of his hearers. His aim was to manifest the truth
to the consciences of men. In founding the Corinthian Church he had " reasoned,'
« persuaded," " testified," and " taught the Word of God " (see Acts xviii.). His own



30 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ok. l 1—24

statement Is, " I declared unto you the testimony of God " (see 1 Cor. IL 1 — 6). Th«
object of St. Paul in thus refraining from any assertion of a right to dictate was to
build the faith of the Church, not on apostles, but on God. He would not say,
" Believe because we bid you, and whatever we tell you." He was one of a band of
witnesses to Jesus Christ the Lord ; but, once those facts were believed with the heart,
the disciples in every Church stood for salvation on the same ground with the apostles
themselves, and had the same confirmation of the truth by the Holy Spirit.

III. Lessons fob tee modern ministbt of the Wobd. For the propagation
of the gospel there must still be witnesses ; for the edification and peace of the Church
there must be teachers, helps, governments, overseers. But none of these have a right
to " lord it over God's heritage ; " least of all may they lord it over the faith of their
brethren. If the apostles of the Lamb disclaimed such dominion, how much more should
they who have ministries to fulfil in the modem Churches of God 1 It is preposterous
to connect apostolic dignity or the glory of apostolic succession with pomp and lordliness
and the assertion of official superiority. It is apostolic to serve diligently and suffer
patiently, to preach the truth in love, and to teach the things which concern the Lord
Jesus (Sirist, but seeking no honour or glory from men. The object of the ministry
in regard to those who are without is to bring them to repent and believe the gospel.
The object in regard to those who are within the household of faith is to promote their
joy and health. 1. " In faith ye stand." This is not submission to a human authority,
but allegiance of heart to Qod. in Christ Jesus. In emotions, opinions, anxieties, con-
jectures, there is no standing. Only by faith is the heart fixed, the mind estabUsbed,
in this world of change and disappointment, solidity imparted to the character, and
calm courage breathed into the soul. Want of faith or decay of faith accounts for
restlessness, weakness, rashness and inconstancy. The heart is "tossed and not
comforted." The will is yielded to selfish desires and uneasy impulses. But " we
have access by faith into the grace wherein we stand." 2. Those who minister to the
faith of Christians increase their joy. The apostles were intent on this (see Bom.
XV. 13 ; Phil. i. 25, 26 ; 1 Pet. i. 8 ; 1 John L 4). And every true minister of Christ
will find, with St. Paul, that his own spiritual life is bound up with the steadfastness
and liveliness of those whom he instructs in the truth. — F.

Ver, 1. — " By the will." In this assertion, " an apostle of Jesus Christ by the will ol
God," St. Paul briefly summarizes the claim to apostleship which he elsewhere argues,
and which he so earnestly vindicates in a later portion of this Epistle. He carries the
question to the final court of appeal, declaring that the primal source whence comes
all call to office in the Christian Church is the " will of Gko." It matters not how that
"will "may be expressed; whether, as to the older disciples, in the call of their Master
to apostleship, or, as to St. Paul, by direct revelation from heaven. The only point of
interest is this — Have sufficient signs of the Divine will concerning us been given to carry
conviction to our minds ? And what is the proper influence wluch the recognition of
the will of Qoi concerning us should have as we hold and fulfil the duties of the office 7
Such a conviction is —

L A man's huuiliatioh. It makes him nothing and God all. It sets him down
among the ministries that God may use as he wills. But it brings to him a holier
humiliation than that. It bows him down under the greatness of the trust he bears,
oppresses him with the honour that is laid upon him, makes him feel his helplessness
and unworthiness, as may be illustrated in the hesitations and humble expressions
of Moses and Jeremiah when they were called of God. The healthiest humility is
that wrought by a great and solemn trust.

n. A lulu's msFiBATioN. It gives him an idea and an object in his life. It moves
him with the power of a great purpose. It calls him to hio;h endeavour. It wakens
into bright activity every faculty and power of his nature. It urges him with the sense
of duty. It delivers him from the weakness that ever attends a conflict of motives. It
holds out before him the reward of the faithful.

III. A man's stbbngth. In the power of the conviction that he is where God would
have him be, and is doing what God would have him do, a man can overcome and dare
all things. St. Paiil's own endurances are inconceivable save as we can feel that he
bad this strength. EspeoiaUy illustrate from his wearying controversy with the Jewish



, 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa 31



party. They said evil things of him, but this was his strength — ^he knew that he was
an apostle 6^ the will of Ood. — 'R. T.

Ver. 4.— •Comforted, and therefore comfortert. It may seem strange that the Bible,
and Christian ministers following its example, should deal so frequently and so largely
with troubles and afflictions. You sometimes half suspect that Christian people must
have a larger share of earthly sorrow than falls to the lot of others. We may admit a
sense in which this is true. The higher susceptibilities of the Christian man, bis
clearer vision of unseen things, and his separateness from the world, do seem to involve
some special kinds of suffering firom which the heedless and the godless are free.
The influences on personal character and on individual life, wrought by God through
the sorrows he sends, are often presented. In the passage now before us the apostle
puts another side of their influence. Our afflictions and our comfortings become a
blessing to others. " That we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble."
Our sorrows have by no means exhausted their stores of blessing when they have dis-
pelled our doubts, delivered us from our dangers, and cultured ov/r characters ; they
have stores of blessing left in them still, with which, through us, to enrich and comfort
others. This may be set before us in two of its aspects.

I. OUB AFFLICTIONS AND COMFOBTINaS ABE THE SOUBCBB WHENCE COMES CUB FITNESS

FOB INFLUENCIKO OTHEBS. It may be a question beyond present solution, what exact
share have the sorrows of our past lives had in the formation and nourishment of our
present abilities for Christian work and influence ? And yet surely no man can reach
middle life or old age, and feel the respect in which he is held, his power to comfort
and help others, and the value that is set upon his judgment and counsel, without
recognizing how much of that fitness for influence has come out of his experience of
sorrow. Precisely what qualities are nourished by particular forms of trouble we may
not be able to decide, but the whole result we can estimate, and there is not one true
Christian who would hesitate to say, " Blessed be God for the afflictions of my life ;
yes, even for those which bruised and almost broke my heart, because, as sanctified by
God, they have fitted me to sympathize with and to comfort others." Experience
brings power. But the Christian's experiences are not of griefs only; they are of
griefs together with Divine comfortings, and these together bring a peculiar kind of
power. This may be illustrated from any of the spheres of Christian influence. 1.
Take the power of a Christian's ordinary conversation. We can discover in the very
tones of the voice the holy subduedness that tells of some great woe that has put into
the words and the voice that humbleness and gentleness. How often this tone of
the stricken ones has had its power upon us 1 2. Take the special efforts which are
made, by conversation, for the conversion and instruction of others. 3. Take any
endeavour to express sympathy with those who may now be suffering under God's
mighty hand. How different are the consolations offered by stricken and by unstricken
ones I The unstricken can find beautiful words, and be truly sincere as they utter
them. But the stricken ones can express unutterable things in silence and look. Send
the long-widowed woman to cheer the newly widowed. Send the mother who has
children in heaven to comfort the mother who sits so still, with broken heart, bending
over the baby's coffln. The plant of healing sympathies grows and blossoms and
fruitens out of our very wounds and tears and deaths. Then it will but be reasonable
to expect that, if God has high places of work for us, and valuable influence for us to
exert, he will need to bring us through great and sore troubles. St. Paul recognizes
this necessity in our text. How his life was filled with anxieties and sorrows we
seldom worthily estimate. Great soul I He did not care to be always talking about
hjfuself ; only once or twice does he lift the veil and show his secret history ; but there
— in much affliction awaiting him everywhere, and the comfortings of God abounding
in all — ^is the explanation of his mighty and gracious influence. He was " comforted
of God that he might be able to comfort them which are in any trouble." The same
truth shines out even more clearly from the life and cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He is able to succour because in all points tempted. Lifted up, " he draws all men
unto him." Gaining his influence by his own sufferings borne in patience and faith.
Winning power to save and help the world by dying an agonizing duath, and knowing,
the uttermost needs of a dying hour, the gracious comfortings of God.



S2 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ran. 1. 1—24.



n. Oxm AFFLIOTIONB AXD OOUFOBTDrOS GAIN FOB US AUi THE POWEB OV A NOBLB

EXAMPLE. In the previous part of the subject our conscious efforts to help and bless
others hare been chiefly considered ; but the good man's influence is by no means to be
limited to them. There is an unconscious influence, less easily calculated, but more
mighty, reaching more widely, blessing as does the bracing air of the hills, or the fresh
blowing of sea-breezes, or the face of a long-lost friend. And this kind of power to
bless belongs peculiarly to those who have come out of God's tribulations and com-
fortings. 1. Estimate the moral influence of those in whom afflictions have been
sanctified upon men who are living with no sense of spiritual and eternal things. 2.
Estimate their influence on doubting and imperfect Christians. 3. Estimate the
influence of such persons on children. Tou may have thought that your afflictions
have set you aside from your work. Nay, they have just lifted you up to the trust of
some of God's highest and best work. Tribulation worketh patience, experience, and
hope. It matures the finer elements of character. But it does more — it fits us for
work, for higher influence on others, enabling us to set before men all the power of a
noble example. Our afflictions and comfortings are really our clothing with the soldier's
dress, our putting on the soldier's armour, our grasping thd soldier's weapons, our
drilling for the soldier's service, that we may be good soldiers of the cross. Each one
of us may become a Barnabas, a son of consolation. Comforted of God, let as learn to
comfort others. — B. T,

Ver. 5. — Ghrisfs sufferings renetved in his disciples. " For as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us." We have expressed here a characteristic and familiar thought of the
apostle's — the one which brought to him the fullest and deepest consolations. It Is
true, but it is too easily apprehended to be all the truth, that St. Paul's sufferings, borne
in fulfilling his ministry, were Christ's sufferings because a part of his service ; but the
apostle evidently reached the unspeakably precious and inspiring view of Christian
suffering which sees it to be Christ's, because it is essentially like his — ^it is vicarious,
it is borne for others. He says, ""Whether we be afflicted, it is for your consolation and
salvation ... or whether we be comforted, it is for your consolation and salvation."
St. Paul would know " the fellowship of Christ's sufferings, being made conformable
unto his death ; " even to that death in its vicariousness, as a sublime self-sacrifice for
the salvation of others. For the thought that in our sufferings, of whatever nature, we
share Christ's sufferings, comp. ch. iv. 10 ; Phil. iii. 13 ; Col. i. 24 ; 1 Pet. iv. 13. All
vicariously borne suffering is Christly ; it is the kind of which he is the Leader «nd the
sublime Example ; it is even necessary, as attendant on all human efforts to bless others.
Every one who would help another must take into account that he may have to suffer
in doing it. Illustrate by the doctor, or the man who tries to save, from water, or fire,
or accident, a fellow-creature. He may even perish in so doing. The Christian may
cherish this supreme comfort — he may become to others, in measure, what Christ is to
him. He may become the inspiration of vicarious service. His Christly example may
act on men as Christ's example acted on him. If it might be so, St. Paul was willing
to suffer. It may be shown and illustrated that such Christ-like enduring has—

I. A TEACHiNa power on others. It brings its revelations of God and brotherhood.
It opens mysteries. It impresses the evil of sin.

II. An ELEVATiNa power on others. It lifts men up to bear their own sufferings
well, when we can show them the Christ-likeness of ours.

in. A coMFOBTmo power, since it shows, not only how Gfld's grace can abound, but
also how God can turn even what we think evil into gracious agency for blessing.
Sufferers still can strengthen, help, and save others. — B. T.

Vers. 8 — 11. — 77ie sanctifying influence of nearness to death. In God's providence he
brings his people sometimes to the " border-land," and, after giving the expectation, and
almost the experience, of death, he leads them back to life and labour and relations
agaitt. Of this Hezekiah is the prominent Bible example. The sufferings through
which the apostle had passed are not here detailed, and there is found much difficulty
in deciding to what experiences he refers. Some think he recalls the tumult in Ephesus
which Dean Stanley shows was a more serious affair than Luke's narrative alone would
suggest. Others think that some time of grievous and imperilling sickness ^ alluded



OH. 1. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 33

to. And the apostle's mind may go further back to the stoning at Lystra, when ha
was left for dead (see Acts xiv. 19). It has been remarked that " the language is
obviously more vividly descriptive of the collapse of illness than of any other peril."
The point to which we now direct attention is that the sufferings imperilled life ani
brought him to the full contemplation of death — brought him to the " border-land ; "
and he gives the Corinthians some account of his feelings and experiences at the time,
and tries to estimate some of the spiritual results then attained. They are these —

I. A FEELING OF BELF-HELPLBSSNBSS. Man never feels that fully until he faces death.
He knows that no resolution, no energy, no sacrifice, can ensure his " discharge from
that war," He can do nothing, and that most humiliating conviction may be a part of
our necessary experience. Somewhere in life we need to be brought up before a great
sea, with mountains around and foes before, much as Israel was when led forth from
Egypt. It is good for us to feel helpless, utterly helpless, and then to hear the voice
saying, " Stand still, and see the salvation of God."

II. Deliverance from self-trust. Some sort of reliance on ourselves is necessary
in order to meet the claims of life aright, and do its duties faithfully. Some measures
of self-reliance blend with the Christian's trust in God all through his life of activity and
service. Seldom, indeed, are full surrender to God, and entire conformity to his will,
and simple reliance on his care, really won ; and the experience of nearness to death
alone breaks away the last bonds binding us to self, and enables us to " trust wholly."
Life, after visiting the " border-land," may be wholly the " life of faith upon the Son
of God."

III. Full confidence in the continuing and abounding of Divine grace. This
follows from so extreme an experience of what " almighty grace can do." Short of the
experience of death, we may doubt whether " grace " can meet us at every point of our
need; whether there really are no complications of circumstances which may over-
master grace. A man may say — Grace can meet many needs, but not just this condition
or this particular frailty. A man brought back from the " border-land " has won an
impression of God's power and mercy that enables him to look forward to life and feel
that God's efiBcient grace can be with him everywhere and in everything. It is St.
Paul, who " had the sentence of death in himself," who was a personally delivered man,
and who spoke of God as being able to make all grace abound towards us, so that we,
having all sufHciency in all things, might abound unto every good word and work
(ch. ix. 8). Death is the climax of all human woes, and he who can deliver from
death can master all our troubles and " make all things work together for good." In
concluding, show that the sanctified influence of his extreme experience may be seen in
the tone and spirit and manner of the Christian thus brought back from the " border-
land ; " but that there is great danger of misusing even such Divine dealings with us,
as Hezekiah seems to have done. A man restored from imperilling sickness may
presume on the very mercy which has been so gloriously manifested in his case. We
should take as our model such an experience as that of the Apostle Paul. — R. T.

Vers. 11, 12. — The gradovs influence of prayerfulness and sympathy on suffering
toiils. The apostle wanted his friends to know of his sufferings so that he might have —

I. Their sympathy in the troubles. Very tenderly beautiful is the way in which
St. Paul, while turning to God for his great consolations, yet yearns for the sympathy
of those among whom he laboured. He liked to have some of them with him. He
was a most brotherly and sympathetic man, and could neither suffer nor rejoice alone.
In this he illustrates what is the great want of <»"■ warm natures ; they yearn for sym-
pathy, and we may render noble service who can give such sympathy in response to
them. It is help and healing for stricken ones that we can " weep with those who
weep."

II. Theib prayers for his pbesebvation. a man in trouble longs for the feeling —
at which men may easily scoff, but which is nevertheless a most real and helpful feeling —
that he is upheld by the prayers of those that love him. None of the difiSculties about
prayer in relation to material changes need meet us when we speak of prayer in relation
to spiritual influences. We ought to pray for the preservation of our friend's life when
he is in peril from disease, but we do this with uncertainty as to what the will of God
is, and so with full submission to whatever the decisions of that will may be. We

II. CORINTHIANS.



34 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. i. 1—24.

pray that our Buffering friends may be inwardly upheld, comforted, and strengthened,
and in Buch pi»yers we know what the will of God must be. Sympathizing prayers
have a really gracious influence on suffering souls, and surely bring down Divine
blessings on them.

III. Theib THAMKsaiYiNGS WHEN HE WAS BESTOBED. The apostle ooold not
rejoice alone. He wanted others to help him sing both of "mercy and judgment."
From this subject arises, as the point of practical impression, the question — How can
we help our suffering brothers and sisters ? Even the Lord Jesus wanted sympathy,
and the «plifting of others' prayers for him, when he was in the agony of Gethsemane ;
and so do his brethren. In what ways can such sympathy and help find expression ?
Neither utterances of sympathy nor earnest prayers can suffice instead of, and as an
excuse for, not rendering practical helpings, but they will be found to inspire such
practical efforts ; for those whom we take on our hearts to pray for we are most likely
to take into our hands to help. — B. T.

Vers. 12 — 14. — The conscience-testimony. " For our rejoicing is this, the testimony
of our conscience." This passage may be thus paraphrased : " It is this which causes
such a perennial flow of joy and consolation into my heart amid all my anxieties and
distresses. I can feel in my conscience that what knits us together in sympathy is
a Divine and not a human bond. On my part there is the inspiration from above,
on yours the verifying faculty which enables you to recognize the truth of what I
deliver to you." Now, no man ever needs publicly to appeal to the testimony of his
conscience unless he is misjudjred, misrepresented, maligned, or slandered by his fellow-
men. He may, however, be placed in such circumstances that he can make no other
appeal than to the consciousness of having acted in sincerity and uprightness. Such a
testimony may not be accepted by others, but the ability to render it brings rest and
peace to a man's own heart. St. Paul was at this time greatly suffering from mis-
representations and slanderings ; and so was David, in the older time, when he turned
with such passionate intensity to God, saying, " Judge me according to mine integrity,
and according to my righteousness which is in me." The worst hurt a true and faithful
man can receive is the misjudging of his sincerity. P. W. Eobertson says, " Met by
these charges from his enemies, and even from his friends, the apostle falls back on his
own conscience. Let us explain what he means by the testimony ol conscience. He
certainly does not mean ' faultlessness,' for he says, ' Of sinners I am chief.' And St.
John, in a similar spirit, declares that none can boast of faultlessness : ' If we say that
we have no sin, we deceive ourselves.' And here St. Paul is not speaking of his own
personal character, but of his ministry ; and again, he is not speaking of the blame-
lessness of his ministry, but of its success. No ; it was not faultlessness St. Paul
meant by the testimony of conscience, but this — integrity, moral earnestness in his
work ; he had been straightforward in his ministry, and his worst enemies could be
refuted if they said that he was insincere." Now, the conscience-testimony may be said
to include self-approval before self, self-approval before man, and self-approval before
Gk>d.

/. SELF-APPBOVAii BEFOEB SELF. Treat couscience as the exercise of a man'K
judgment concerning the right and wrong of his own conduct — a man's self-appraise-
ment. A man may be calm amid all storms of slander or persecution who can feel that
he is consciously sincere, and that he has been true to himself. Carefully distinguish
this from mere self-satisfaction, and from the pride that leads a man to " think of him-
self more highly than he ought to think." A man's moral strength depends upon his
self-approval when conscience makes its searching estimate of conduct and of motives.
A man is only weak when his conscience upholds his accuser.

II. Self-appeoval bbfoeb man. 1. A man is often compelled to take action which
he knows men are likely to misconceive and misrepresent. He can only do bo with
the assurance that he is right. 2. Men are corruptly disposed to put a wrong con-
struction on the actions of their fellows, and every man must take this into account
who occupies prominent or public positions. He dares not waver or change to try and
meet everybody's wishes. He can but fall back upon the testimony of his own
conscience.

III. Sklf-appeotal befobb God. He, being the Searcher of the heart, knows the



OH. n. 1—17,] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 35

very Mcreti of motive and feeling, and it may seem as if there could not be any " self-
approval" in his presence. And yet God's Word teaches us that God looks for sincerity,
expects it, and knows that we can reach it. Perfect we cannot he ; sincere we can he.
" If we would judge ourselves, we should not he judged." David may even speak of
his integrity hefore God. And the height of a man's moral strength is only gained
when he feels consciously sincere in the Divine presence, but is truly humble even in
the consciousness and says, " Search me, God, and know my heart ; try me, and
know my ways." — B. T.

Vers. 21, 22. — The sealing and earnest of the Spirit. The figure used in the passage
is taken from the cu»tom, common to nearly all lands, of af&xing marks to a man's
peculiar property. That mark was frequently a seal, with a cliaracteristic device. The
shepherd has some mark which he places on each of his sheep, so that if any one of
them strays away it may at once be known as his. And so Christ, the good Shepherd,
has a mark by which he knows, and would have all men know, the members of his
flock. That mark is the seal of the Spirit. The meaning of the term is explained by
a passage in Rev. vii. The angel demands a little delay until he shall have " sealed the
servants of God in their foreheads." That is, by a distinctive mark, the sons of God
are to be separated from tbe world, stamped as God's chusen ones. And as that shall
then be done by a glorious name, blazoned on the forehead ; as it was done, in the older
time, to Israel, by a blood-sprinkled lintel ; so now it is done by the gift of the great
Comforter and Friend, the Holy Spirit of promise. The presence of the Spirit pledges
the fact of our veconoiliation to God, and so it seals us. That Spirit may work on
ungodly men and by ungodly men, but he cannot properly be said to work in ungodly
men. His is an influence on them from without ; his dwelling in the heart is the
assurance that the great change has taken place. A man must be "born again" ere he
can be the dwelling-place of the Spirit. " The Spirit witnesseth with our spirit that we
are the children of God." And it is not possible to overstate either the dignity or the
safety that attends such a sealing. God stamps his people by giving thorn his own pre-
sence. It is not enough to affix a mark, not enough to entrust to guardian angels. Satan
may conceivably overcome them, and sin may blot out the mark. God would give his
people no other seal than his own omnipotent presence. Divinest seal! No human
hands can tear that from our soul. It can only be lost by our own self-willed acts.
We can pluck off the seal. We may grieve the Spirit away. None can deny the livery
of the eternal King, with which we are clothed, but we may ouiselves choose another
service and strip off the King's dress. What the sealing and earnest of the Spirit are
may best be illustrated by the experiences of the apostolic company when the Spirit
first came in Pentecostal power and glory. The disciples were waiting at the throne of
grace, waiting for the fulfilment of the as yet mysterious promise of the Lord. It was
the early morning, when a sweeping sound of wind came about the house, and filled the
room where they were sitting. Presently dividing tongues of flame rested on their
heads, and they felt new power thrilling within them. Those were the symbols of the
Spirit's sealing them for their great missionary service. In this new might a surprising
change passed over them. They were ignorant Galileans ; now they could speak so as to
be understood by people of all tongues ; now they were swayed with feelings that raised
timid disciples into moral heroes and noble witnesses and faithful martyrs. That was
the first sealing of the Spirit, and it does but illustrate how still God takes us as his,
give* to us his Spirit, secures us by a Divine indwelling, and inspires us with Divme
motiTW and impulses. — ^R. T.

EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER n.

Continaation of his reasons for not coming
to them direct from Ephesus (vers. 1 — 4).
Their treatment of the incestuous offender
(vers. 5 — 11). His thankfulness at the news



which Titna had brought from Ooriath (vera.
12—17).

Ver. 1. — But I detemilned thia. The
division of chapters is here unfortunate,
since this and the next three verses belong
to tlie paragraph which began at oh. i, 23.



36



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa [oh. n. 1—17.



The verb meaos, literally, " I judged," but
is rightly rendered "determined," as in
1 Cor. ii. 2 ; vii. 37. He is contrasting his
final decision with his original desire, men-
tioned in oh. 1. 15. With myself; rather,
formyielf; as the best course which I could
take. That I would not come again to you
in heaviness. The " again " in the true
reading is not placed immediately before
the verb, but it seems (aa Theodoret says)
to belong to it, so that the meaning is not
" that 1 would not pay you a second sad
visit," but " that my secona tisit to you
should not be a sad one." There have been
interminable discussions, founded on this
expression and on ch. xiii. 1, as to whether
St. Paul had up to the time of writing this
letter visited Corinth twice or only oiice.
There is no question that only one visit is
recorded in the Acts (xviii. 1 — 18) previous
to the one which he paid to this Church after
this Epistle had been sent (Acts xx. 2, 3).
If he paid them a second brief, sad, and un-
recorded visit, it can only have been during
his long stay in Bphesus (Acts xix. 8, 10).
But the possibility of this does not seem to
be recognized in Acts xx. 31, where he speaks
of his work at Ephesus "night and day"
during this period. The assumption of
such a vioit, as we shall see, is not necessi-
tated by ch. xiii. 1, but in any case we know
nothing whatever about the details of the
visit, even if there was one, and the question,
being supremely unimportant, is hardly
worth the time which has been spent upon it.
If he had paid sucli a visit, it would be almost
unaccountable that there should be no refer-
ence to it in the First Epistle, and here in
ch. i. 19 he refers only to one occasion on
which he had preached Christ in Corinth.
Biich fresh review of the circumstances con-
vinces me more strongly that the notion
of three visits to Corinth, of which one is
unrecorded, is a needless and mistaken
inference, due to unimaginative literalism in
interpreting one or two phrases, and en-
cumbered with diflBculties on every side. In
heaviness. The expression applies as much
to the Corinthians as to himself. He did
not wish his second visit to Curiuth to be a
painful one.

Ver. 2. — For if I make yon sorry. The
verse may be rendered, " For if I pain you,
who then is it that gladdens me except he
who is being pained by me?" The "/,"
being expressed in the original, is emphatic,
and the verse has none of the strange selfish
meaning which has been assigned to it,
namely, that St. Paul thought "the grief
which he had caused to be amply compen-
sated for by the pleasure he received from
that grief." It has the much simpler mean-
ing that lie was unwilling to pain those wlio
gladdened him, and therefore would not pay



them a visit which could only be painful on

botli sides, when the normal relation between
them should be one of joy on both sides, as
he has already said (ch. i. 24). The singular,
"be who is being pained by me," does not
refer to the offender, but to the Corinthians
collectively. Who is he then, etc. ? Tlie
"then" in the original is classically and
elegantly expressed by xdl, and (comp. Jaa.
ii. i).

Ver. 3. — And I wrote this same unto you.
And I wrote. He meets the tacit objection.
If you slirink from causing us pain, why
then did you write to us in terms so severe ?
The "I wrote" may be what is called the
epistolary aorist, and will then be equivalent
to our " I write : " " What I write to you
now has the very object of sparing you »
painful visit." If the aorist has its more
ordinary sense, it refers to the First, and
not to the present Epistle ; and this seems
the better view, for the " I wrote " in ver. 9
certainly refers to the First Epistle. This
same thing; namely, exactly what I have
written (whether in this or in the former
Epistle). The words, "this very thing," may
also, in the original, mean "for this very
reason," as in 2 Pet. i. 5, and like the els
TouTo in ver, 9. Unto you. Tliese words
slioulil be omitted, with tt. A, B, C. When I
came, The emphasis lies in these words.
He preferred that his letter, rather than his
personal visit, should cause pain. In you
all. It is true that in the Corinthian Church
St. Paul had bitter and unscrupulous op-
ponents, but he will not believe even that
tliey desired his personal unhappiness. At
any rate, if there were any such, he will not
believe that they exist, since " love believeth
all things, hopeth all things " (1 Cor. xiii. 7).
Ver. 4. — For, He proceeds to assign the
anguish which his First Epistle had caused
him as a proof of his confidence that, as a
boily, they loved him as he loved them. If
they had regarded each other with indiffer-
ence, his letter would not have been written
to them, as it were, in his heart's blood. Out
of much affliction and anguish of heart. The
word for " anguish " means " contraction,"
" pressure," " spasm " (Luke ixi. 25;. The
expression may seem far too strong to be
accounted for by the tone of the first letter.
Hence some have supposed that he is refer-
ring to some other letter now lost; and
others that oh. x.— xiii. of this letter, where
the whole tone of affection and tenderness
suddenly changes into one of impassioned
irony and indignation, really belonged to
this intermediate letter. There is no need,
however, for these hypotheses. In 1 Cor.
V. 1 — vi. 11 he had spoken of the errors of
the Church with strong reprobation, and the
anguish with which he wrote the letter may
huve been all the more deeply felt because.



ca. n. 1—17.] THjii SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



37



in expressing; it, he put on his feelings a
strong restraint. With many tears. I wrote
"out of" anguish, and that anguish showed
itself through the tears which bathed my
cheeks as I wrote. Such tears, says Calvin,
" show weakness, hut a weakness more heroic
than would have been the iron apathy of a
Stoio." It must, however, be remembered
that, in ancient times, and in Southern and
Eastern lands, men yielded to tears more
readily than among Northern nations, who
take pride in suppressing as far as possible
all outward signs of emotion. In Homer the
bravest heroes do not blush to weep in public,
and the nervous, afflicted temperament of St.
Paul seems to have been often overwhelmed
with weeping (Acts xx. 19, 31 ; 2 Tim. i. i).
Kot that ye should be grieved. Tlie "not,"
by a common Hebrew idiom, means "not
only," "not exclusively." His object in
inflicting pain was not the pain itself, but
the results of godly repentance which it
produced (ch. vii. 11). The love. In the
Greek this word is placed very emphatically
at the beginning of the clause. More abun-
dantly. I loved you more than I loved otiier
converts, and the abundance of my love will
give you a measure of the pain I felt. The
Philippians were St. Paul's best-beloved con-
verts ; but next to them he seems to have felt
more personal tenderness for the members of
this inflated, wayward, ening Church than
for any other community, just as a father
sometimes loves best his least-deserving son.
There was something in the brightness and
keenness of the Greek nature which won
over St. Paul, in spite of its many faults.

Vers. 5 — 11. — The results of Ms letter in
their treatment of the incestuous offender.

Ver. 5. — But if any have caused grief.
The word " pain " or " grief " which has
been so prominent in the last verses, natu-
rally reminds St. Paul of the person wliose
misdoings had caused all this trouble. The
" any " is in the singular. He' hath not
grieved me, but in part, etc. Of the various
ways of taking tliis verse, the most tenable
seems to be this : " If any one has caused
pain, he has not pained me but partly (not
to weigh down too heavily) all of you." St.
Paul is denying that the feelings with
which he had written his severe letter were
dae to mere personal sorrow or indignation.
In writing he felt for the wrong done to
them, to the whole Corinthian Church, at
least as much as for the smart of his own
grief and disappointment. The word
" partly " is introduced, as St. Chrysostom
says, to soften the expression, " he has
grieved you all." It will then mean " to a
certain extent." The words, "that I may
not overcharge," or rather, as In the Revised
Version, " that I press not too heavily,"
assign the reason for the modifying clause.



« in part." When St. Paul sayg that this
ma n's conduct had even to any extent grieved
the whole community, his words may seem
to conflict with 1 Cor. v. 2 ; but he is
thinking, not of the immediate condonation
of the offender there alluded to, but of tlie
agony of subsequent repentance which his
letter had awoke in the wliole (or practically
the whole) community (oh. vii. 11). The
phrase, " that I press not too heavily," refers
then to the offender : " I will not say out-
right that he has grieved not me, but all of
you, because I do not wish to bear too hard on
him " (comp. 1 Thess. ii. 9 ; 2 Thess. iii. 8),
" but I will say that he has grieved you and
me alike to some extent." The plirase, " in
part," occurs also in Eom. xi. 25.

Ver. 6. — Sufficient to such a man is this
punishment. What the punishment was we
do not know, but of course the Corinthians
knew that what St. Paul had directed them
to do was to summon the Church together,
and there, by excommunicating the man, "to
hand him over to Satan." But this handing
over to Satan was, as we have leen, designed
solely for a merciful purpose, and to awaken
his repentance, so as to secure his ultimate
salvation (1 Cor. v. 4, 5). Whether the
Corinthians had done exactly as St. Paul
bade them is uncertain ; but whatever they
had done is here acquiesced in by St. Paul,
and even if (as we may suspect) they had
dealt more leniently with the offender than
he originally intended, he here not only
refrains from urging them to use greater
severity, but even exhorts them to a still
more absolute condonation. St. Paul's
object liad not been that they should take a
particular course of action, but that they
should bring about a desired result. The
result had been achieved, and now the
matter might rest. To such a man. St. Paul
mercifully abstains from recording his name
or from thrusting him into unnecessary
prominence before the assembly in which
the letter would be read. The apostle
evidently entered into the Jewish feeling
that there is a criminal cruelty in needlessly
calling a blusli of shame into a brother's
face. This punishment. The word epi-
timia, which occurs here only in the New
Testament, but is also found in Wisd. iii. 10,
means " punishment," as in later Greek, and
is not used in its classical sense of " rebuke "
(Vulgate, objurgatio') ; but the mildness of
the word, perhaps, imphes that the Corin-
thians had not resorted to the severest
measures. Which was indicted of many ;
rather, by the majority. The verb is ex-
pressed in the original, and St. Paul seems
to allude to the steps taken, whatever they
were, with a certain dignified reticence. It
is obvious that there were still some op-
ponents of St. Paul in the Church, who



38



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, tcb. n. 1—17,



retained in this matter their "inflated " een-
timents of spurious independence; and this
mny, perhaps, have driven others into too
rigid an attitude of severity.

Ver. 7. — Contrariwise ; i.e. contrary to the
line taken or to the view expressed by the
snverer portion of the community. Bather.
The word is omitted in A and B. To for-
give him. The word is used of the mutual
attitude of gracious forbearance which
ought to exist among Cliristian8(" Forgiving
COB another," Eph. iv. 32 ; Col. iii. 13), so
that they might be not only Christians, but
as Gentiles ignorantly called them, Chres-
Hans ("kintl-liearted," Eph. iv. 32). And
comfort; i.e. "strengthen," "encourage."
The " him" is omitted in the Greek, with
the same delicate, compassionate reticence
which leads St. Paul to speak of this person
as " a man of such of a kind." In Gal.
vi. 11 St. Paul suddenly breaks off the
course of his remarks to give similar advice
in a tone of peculiar solemnity; and in
2 ThesB. iii. 15 he warns against any excess
in tlie severity which he enjoins in the
previous verse. Such a one, Jjike the
indefinite "one"' in 1 Cor. v. 5. In the
Greek it is compassionately placed last in
the clause. Should be swallowed up. The
same mftaphor, of being swallowed in an
abyss, 'occurs in 1 Cor. xv. .54. In 1 Pet.
v. 8 it is said that Satan is ever striving to
■' swallow up " men. With overmuch sorrow ;
rather, with the, or his, excessive grief.
Despair might drive the man to suicide, or
apostasy, or the wretchlessness of unclean
living.

Ver. 8. — To confirm your love toward him ;
literally, to ratify towards him, love.

Ver. 9. — For to this end also did I write.
This is another reason which he gives for
the severe tone of his First Epistle. It was
written (1) to avoid the necessity for a painful
visit (ver. 3) ; (2) to show his special love
for them (ver. 4); and (3) to test their
obedience. The proof of you. Your proved
faithfulness (ch. viii. 2 ; ix. 13 ; xiii. 3 ;
Rnm. V. 4) ; your capacity to stand a test.

Ver. 10. — To whom ye forgive any thing.
In the original there is a conjunction,
"but." It would, perhaps, he pressing it
too much to imply that their " forgiveness "
showed that they had not accurately stood
the test of perfect obedience ; yet it is
difficult to read the whole passage without
suspecting that St. Paul, while by tempera-
ment he leaned to the side of mercy, is
here showing a spirit of generous self-
suppression in accepting the course which
the Corinthians had followed, although it
had, in some way or other, diverged from
his exact directions. To whom. Obviously,
again, a purposely indefinite reference to
the incestuous person. I forgive also, The



power of " binding " and " loosing," of

" forgiving " and " retaining," had only been
given to the apostles representatively and
collectively, and therefore to the Christian
Church (John xx. 23) In its corporate
capacity. The Corinthian Church had in
this case decided to forgive, and St, Paul
ratifies their decision. For if I forgave
any thing, to whom I forgave it. The
reading here varies between 3, what, and S,
to whom, which in dictation might be easily
confused. The order of the words also
varies. The best reading seems to be ex-
pressed by the version, " For what I also
have pardoned, if I have pardoned any-
thing (I have pardoned it) for your sakes."
This represents the reading of tt. A, B, C,
F, G, etc., and is followed by the Eevised
Version. There seems to be here an inten-
tional vagueness, and reference to circum-
stances of which we are not informed,
which might, perliaps, have given room for
wounded feelings in any one less magnani-
mous than St. Paul. The line he took iu
this matter was taken for their sakes — that
is all he says, he adopted it as the best
relatively, whether it was absolutely the best
or not. In the person of Christ; literally,
in the face of Christ ; which seems to mean
" in tlie presence of Christ," as though he
were looking on at what I did (oomp.
ch. i. 11 ; iii. 7, 13, 18; iv. 6). It may be
doubted whether the word prosopon ever
means " person " in the New Testament,
except in a socoiidary sense.

Ver. 11. — lest Satan should get an
advantage over us ; literally, lest we should
be overreached by Satan, which would have
been the case if our severity had resulted
in the desperation of the offender, and not
in his delivernnce (comp. 1 Cor. v. 5). We
are not ignorant of his devices. So too in
Eph. vi. 11 we are told of the "crafty wiles
of the devil."

Vers. ^2— 17.— Outburst of thanksgiving
for the news brought by Titus.

Ver. 12. — Furthermore, when I came to
Troas. " Furthermore " is too strong for
the " but " of the original. There is an
apparently abrupt transition, but the apostle
is only resuming the narrative which he
broke off at ver. 4 in order that he might
finish the topic of the painful circumstance
in which his First Epistle had originated.
To Troas. Not « the Troas." St, Paul had
to do with the city, not with the district.
The city (now Eski Stamboul), of which the
name liad been changed from Antigonia
Troas to Alexandria Troas, was at this time
a flourishing colony {Colonia Juris Italiei),
highly favoured by the Eomans as repre-
senting ancient Troy, and therefore as being
the mythological cradle of their race. He
visited it on his being driven from Ephcsni



OH. iL 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



39



after the ttunnlt, • little earlier than he
would naturally have left it. He had
visited Troas in his second missionary
journey (Acts xvi. 8 — 11), hut had left it
in consequence of the visioa which called
him to Macedonia. He now stopped there
on his journey through Macedonia to Corinth,
which he had announced in 1 Cor. xvi. 5.
And a door was opened unto me of the
Lord ; literally, and a door had been opened
to me in the Lord ; i.e. and I found there
a marked opportunity (1 Cor. xvi. 9) for
work in Christ. Some commentators, in
that spirit of superfluous disquisition and
idle letter-worship which is the bane of
exegesis, here venture to discuss whether
St. Paul was justified in neglecting this
opportunity or not. Such discussions are
only originated by not observing character-
istic modes of expression. St. Paul merely
means " circumstances would otherwise have
been very favourable for my preaching of
Christ ; but I was in such a state of miser-
able anxiety that I lacked the strength
to avail myself of them." He was no more
responsible for this state of mind, whicli
belonged to his natural temperament, than
he would have been responsible for a serious
illness. To say that he ought to have had
strength of mind enough to get the mastery
over his feelings is only to say that Paul
ought not to have been Paul. The neglect
to use the opportunity was a " hindrance "
which might in one sense be assigned to
God, and in another to Satan. Moreover,
that the opportunity was not wholly lost
appears from the fact that St. Paul found
a flourishing Christian community at Troas
when he visited it on his return from this
very journey (Acts xx. 6, 7), and that he
stayed there at least once again, shortly
before his martyrdom (2 Tim. iv. 13).
Indeed, it was probably at Troas that his
final arrest took place (see my ' Life of
St. Paul,' ii. 569, 576). _ Of the Lord ;
rather, in the Lord ; i.e. in the sphere of
Christian work.

Ver. 13. — I had ; literally, I hare had.
The perfect vividly realizes the scene
through which he had passed. I had no
rest. St. Paul had evidently told Titus to
come from his mission to Corinth and meet
him at Troas. But either St. Paul reached
the town earlier than he intended, or Titus
had been delayed. Now, the apostle was so
intensely eager to know how his rebukes
had been received — the name of " Corinth"
was BO deeply engraven on his heart — he
could so ill endure the thought of being
on angry terms with converts which he so
deeply loved, that the non-appearance of
Titus filled him with devouring anxiety
and rendered him incapable of any other
work. In my spirit ; rather, to my spirit.



It was the loftiest part of St. Paul's nature
— his spirit — which was utterly incaparatated
from effort by the restlessness of his
miserable uncertainty about the Corinthian
Church. The disclosure of sueh feelingi
ought to have had a powerful influence on
the Corinthians. We see from 1 Thess. iii.
5, 9 that St. Paul yearned for tidings of his
converts with an intensity which can hardly
be realized by less fervent and self-devote. I
natures. I found not Titus my brother
Not only " the brother," but " my brother ; "
the man whom in matters of this kind
I most trusted as an affectionate and able
fellow-worker (ch. vii. 6 ; viii. 6 ; xii. 18).
Titus, though not mentioned in the Acts, is
the most prominent person in this Epistle,
and it is evident that St. Paul felt for him
a warm affection and respect (ch. vii. 13, 15 ;
viii. 16, 17 ; 2 Tim. iv. 10). Taking my
leave of them ; i.e. of the Christians in
Troas. The word for "taking leave" is
also found in Mark vi. 46. Into Haoedonia.
As he had intended to do (1 Cor. xvi. 5 ;
Acts XX. 1). He had doubtless told Titus
to look out for him at Philippi, and expected
to meet him there on his way to Troas.

Ver. 14. — Now thanks be unto God. The
whole of this Epistle is the apostle's
Apologia pro vita sua, and is more full of
personal details and emotional expressions
than any other Epistle. But nothing in it
is more characteristic than this sudden out-
burst of thanksgiving into which he breaks
so eagerly that he has quite omitted to say
what it was. for which he so earnestly thanked
God. It is only when we come to ch. vii. 5, 6
that we learn the circumstance which gave
him such intense relief, namely, the arrival
of Titus with good news from Corinth about
the treatment of the offender and the man
ner in which the first letter had been re-
ceived. It is true that this good news
seems to have been dashed by other re
marks of Titus which, perhaps, lie withheld
at first, and which may only have betn
drawn from him, almost against his will,
by subsequent conversations. But, however
checkered, the main and immediate intelli-
gence was good, and the apostle so vividly
recalls his sudden uplifting out of an abyss
of anxiety and trouble (ch. vii. 5) that the
mere remembrance of it awakens a thankful-
ness to God which can only find vent by
immediate utterance. Now thanks be unto
God. The order of the original is more
forcible, " But to God be thanks." The re-
membrance of his own prostration calls into
his mind the power and love of God. Which
always oauseth us to triumph ; rather, whe
leadeth ws in triumph. The verb fhriambeuo
may undoubtedly have this meaning, on the
analogy of clwreuo, I cause to dance, basUeuo,
I cause to reign, etc. ; and other neater verbi



40



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [<». n. 1—11



whicih sometimes have a factitive sense. But
in Col. ii. 15 St. Paul uses this word in the
only sense in which it is actually found, " to
li'ad in triumph;" and this sense seems both
to suit the context better, and to be more in
accordance with the habitual feelings of St.
Paul (Gal. vi. 17 ; Ool. i. 24), and especially
tliose with which these Epistles were written
(1 Cor. iv. 9—13; ch. iv. 10; xi. 23). St.
Paul's feeling is, therefore, the exact opposite
of that of the haughty Cleopatra who said,
Ov BpiafiPevSTKrofiat, " I will not be led in
triumph." He rejoiced to be exhibited by
God as a trophy in the triumphal procession
of Christ. God, indeed, gave him the victory
over the lower part of his nature (Rom.
viii. 37), but this was no public triumph.
The only victory of which he could boast
was to have been utterly vanquished by God
and taken prisoner " in Christ." The savour
of his knowledge. The mental vision of a
Roman triumph summons up various images
before the mind of St. Paul. He thinks of
the streets breathing with the fragrance of
incense offered upon many a wayside altar ;
of the tumult and rejoicing of the people ; of
the fame and glory of the conqueror ; of the
miserable captives led aside from the funeral
procession to die, like Vercingetorix, in the
TuUianum at the foot of the Capitoline hill.
He touches on each of these incidents as
they crowd upon him. The triumph of L.
MummiuB over the conquest of Corinth had
been one of the most splendid which the
Roman world had ever seen, and in a.d. 51,
shortly before this Epistle was written (a.d.
57), Claudius had celebrated his triumph
over the Britons and their king Caractacus,
who had been led in the procession, but
whose life had been spared (Tacitus, ' Ann.,'
xiii. 36). Tlie savour of his krunoledge ; i.e.
the fragrance of the knowledge of Christ.
By us. The details of the metaphor are
commingled, as is often the case in writers
of quick feeling and imagination. Here the
apostles are no longer the vanquished who
are led in procession, but the spectators who
burn and diffuse the iragrance of tlie incense.
In every place. Even at that early period,
not twenty-five years after the Crucifixion,
the gospel had been very widely preached
in Asia and Europe (Rom. xv. 18, 19).

Ver. 15. — We are unto God a sweet savour
of Christ. The undeveloped metaphor in-
volved in these words is that " we and our
preaching diffuse to God's, glory the know-
ledge of Christ which is as a sweet savour."
The apostles are identified with their work ;
they were as the incense, crushed and
burned, but diffusing everywhere a waft of
perfume. St. Paul is still thinking of the
incense burnt in the streets of Borne during
a triumph — ^"Dabimusque Divis Tura be-
nigiiis" (Horace, 'Od.,' iv. 2. 51)— though his



expression recalls the "odour of a sweet
smell," of Lev. i. 9, 13, 17 (comp. Eph. v. 2);
see on this passage the excellent note ol
Bishop Wordsworth. In them that are saved,
and in them that perish ; rather, among those
who are perishing and those who are being
saved (comp. Acts ii. 47). The odour is
fragrant to God, though those who breathi
it may be variously affected by it.

Ver. 16. — The savour of death unto death ;
rather, o savour from death to death. To
those who are perishing, the incense of the
Name of Christ which our work enables
them to breathe, seems to rise from death,
and to lead to death. They (for here again
the outlines of the metaphor shilt) are like
the doomed captives, who, as they breathed
the incense on the day of triumph, knew
where that triumph would lead them before
the victors can climb the Capitol. To them
it would seem to bring with it not " airs from
heaven," but wafts from the abyss. So
Christ was alike for the fall and Ijr the
rising again of many (Luke ii. 34). To
some he was a Stone of stumbling (Acts iv.
11 ; Bom. ix. 33 ; 1 Pet. ii. 8), which grinds
to powder those on whom it falls (Matt,
xxi. 44). This contrast between the intended
effect of the gospel as the power and wisdom
of God, and its accidental effect, through
man's sin and blindness which converts
it into a source of judgment, is often alluded
to in the New Testament (1 Cor. i. 18, 23,
24 ; John iii. 19 ; ix. 39 ; xv. 22, etc.). St.
Paul is fond of intensified expressions, like
" from death unto death," as in Rom. i. 17 ;
" from faith to faith," etc. (comp. iv. 17).
Savour of life unto Ufe; rather, a savour
from life, as before. It came from the
Source of life ; it is issued in the sole reality
of life. Similarly the rabbis spoke of the
Law as " an aroma " alike of death and of
life. "Why are the words of the Law
likened to princes (Prov. viii. 6) ? Because,
like princes, they have the power to kill ond
to give life. Rava said to those that walk
on its right, the Law is a medicine of life;
to those that walk on the left side, a
medicine of death " (' Shabbath,' f. 88, 2 ;
' Yoma,' f. 72, 2). Everything is as a two-
edged sword. All Christian privileges are,
as they are used, either blessings or banes
(Wordsworth). And who is sufficient for these
things? St. Paul always implies that no-
thing but the grace of God could enable him
to discharge the great duty laid upon him
(oh. iii. 5,6; 1 Cor. xv. 10).

Ver. 17. — For we are not as many ; rather,
as the many. This clause is introduced to
show how much courage and effort the
work requires. " The many " might, by
Greek idiom, mean " the majority." The
apparent harshness of the assertion that the
majority of teachers in the apostolio agt



ofi. li. 1— It.] THE SECOift) EtlSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 41



dealt untruly with the Word of God, led to
the substitution of oi \onrol, the rest, in
some manuscripts (D, B, F, G, L). But
" the many " here means " the many anta-
gonists of mine," who preach a different
gospel (Gal. i. 6). It must be remembered
that conceit, Pharisaism, moral laxity, and
factions were all at work in the Corinthian
Church. Which corrupt. The Word means
who are merely " trafficking with," " adul-
terating," " huckstering," the Word of life.
The word occurs in the LXX. of Isa. i. 22 ;
Kcolus. xxvi. 29 ; and Plato applies the same
metaphor to the sophists, who peddle their
wisdom about (' Protag.,' p. 313 d).
The substantive hapelos means " a retail
dealer," and especially a vintner, and the
verb kapeleuo is id ways used in a bad sense,



like the English "to huckster." Such
deceitful dealers with the gospel are de-
scribed in 2 Pet. ii. 3, and in one of the
Igaatian letters they are called Ohriitemporoi,
Christ-traffickers. Such were those wlio
altered the perspective of the gospel,
lowered its standard, and adulterated it
with strange admixtures. Their methods
and their teaching are constantly alluded to
in these Epistles (1 Cor. i. 17, 31 ; ii. 1— 4 ;
and ch. x. 12, 15 ; xi. 13—15, etc.). But
as of sincerity, but as of God. Like ono
who speaks from the sincerity of his heart
(ch. i. 12; iv. 2) and by the inspiration of
God (1 Cor. xiv. 25). Before God speak we
in Christ. The sphere of our teaching as of
our life is Christ; and our work is done

" As ever in oar great Taakmaster'a eye."



HOMILETICS.

Vera. 1~11. — The uniting force of Christian love. "But I determined this wifh
myself," etc. The subject which these words suggest is the uniting force of Christian
love. We see it here uniting all its subjects in a common sympathy, a common punish-
ment, and a common forgiveness. Here is Christian love —

I. Uhitinq all its subjects in a common sympathy. " But I determined this with
myself, that I woulii not come again to you in heaviness. For if I make you sorry,
who is he then that maketh me glad, but the same which is made soiry by me ? " The
language of Paul in the first four verses implies that the " heaviness " of one would be
the heaviness of all, tiie sorrow of one the sorrow of all, the grief of one the grief of all,
tho joy of one the joy of all. And this is what Christian love does in all its subjects,
wherever it exists. Ts whatever Church they belong, it gathers them together in one,
it binds them together as attraction binds the material universe into one magnificent
and harmonious system. What one feels all feel, all affections are drawn to a common
centre, all hearts point to a common home. The pulsations of all throb in harmony
and make music in the ear of God.

II. Uniting all its subjects in a common punishment. " But if any have caused
grief, he hath not grieved me, but in part ; that I may not overcharge you all. Sufficient
to such a man is this punishment, which was inflicted of many." In the whole passage
from -vers. 5 — 10 Paul's reference is to that incestuous person of whom he wrote in
his First Epistle (see 1 Cor. v. 1 — 5), and whose excommunication or " punishment "
he secured. The retribution which that man received was not the work of any one of
them, but all joined in it. They all sympathetically concurred in it, and thus it was
inflicted on many. They all loathed the same wrong and all endured the same punish,
ment. True punishment for wrong is the work of love, not vengeance. Therefore
punishment is not for destruction, but for restoration. The punishment that destroys
the criminal is Satanic, not saintly ; devilish, not Divine. Restoration is the work of
love, the work of God. This is here distinctly stated. " So that contrariwise ye ought
rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up
with overmuch sorrow." It would seem from the language of the apostle that the
punishment they had inflicted on this guilty person had produced a deep penitential
sorrow— lest he " should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow." His punishment had
answered its purpose, therefore restore him and " confirm your love toward him."

III. Uniting all its subjects in a common fob«ivbnes3. " To whom ye forgive
anything, I forgive also." As if Paul had said, " You and I are so united in loving
sympathy that tliose whom you forgive I forgive." Observe here three things. 1. That
forgiveness is the prerogative of Christian love. There is no love that has the true spirit
of forgiveness but Christian. It is the highest form of love; higher than gratitude,
esteem, adoration. It is the " new commandment." 2. That in the exercise of forgive-



42 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oit n. 1—17

ness there is a consciousness of Christ. " For your sakes forgive I it in the person oi
Christ." He who has Christly love in him has the very consciousness of Christ, feela
as he feels, " one in the presence of Christ." How often does Christ urge his genuine
disciples to proclaim forgiveness where there is genuine repentance I " Whatsoever is
loosed on earth shall be loosed in heaven." 3. That the forgiving spirit thwarts tht
purposes of the devU. " Lest Satan should get an advantage of us ; for we are not
ignorant of his devices." Forgiveness is not, then, the prerogative of priests, but the
prerogative of Christian love. A truly Christly man represents Christ — stands, so to
say, in his stead ; and " Christ hath power on earth to forgive sins."

Vers. 12 — 16. — The preaching of the gospel. " Furthermore, when I came to Troas,"
etc. The subject of these verses is the preaching of the gospel. Notice —

I. The DiFFictTLTiES CONNECTED WITH IT. "Furthermore, when I came to Troas to
preach Christ's gospel, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord, I had no rest in my
spirit, because I found not Titus my brother : but taking my leave of them, I went
from thence into Macedonia." Just at the time when the apostle was about opening
his mission at Troas, and the prospect of usefulness seemed most suitable, he encountered
a serious difficulty, and that difficulty was the absence of Titus, whom he fully expected.
The disappointment cost him such great anxiety that he resigned his purpose, retired
from the scene, and wended his way in another direction. Strange that an inspired
man should have met with such a disappointment, and stranger still that a disappoint-
ment should have so disheartened him that he relinquishes for a time the grand message
with which Heaven had especially entrusted him. Antecedently we might have
supposed that a man going forth in a true spirit to preach the gospel would encounter
no difficulties, that Heaven would sweep away all obstructions from his path ; but not so.
Perhaps no class of men encounter more difficulties in their mission than ministers.
Many become so baffled, confounded, and depressed that, like Jeremiah, they exclaim,
" I will speak no more in thy Name."

II. The tbicmphs achieved by it. "Now thanks be unto God, which always
causeth us to triumph in Christ, and maketh manifest the savour of his knowledge by
us in every place." The grandest of all victories is the victory over siu. He who
conquers the moral foes of one soul achieves a far grander triumph than he who lays a
whole army dead upon the battle-plain. There is no grandeur, but infamy, in the latter
conquest. It is here taught that these victories were achieved whenever they preached.
" Always causeth us to triumph." Wherever they preached, " in every place," and
always through Gt)d, " thanks be to God." He is the Author of their victory ; he
constructed the weapon, he instructed the soldiers, he inspired and gave effect to the
strokes.

III. The influences besulting from it. " For we are unto God a sweet savour of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that jierish." Observe : 1. The manward
aspect of gospel preaching. (1) It quickens some. " To the other the savour of life
unto life." (2) It destroys others. " To the one we are the savour of death unto
death." These effects occur wherever the gospel is preached. 2. The Oodward aspect ol
gospel preaching. " We are unto God a sweet savour of Christ." Whatever the results
of preaching, baneful or beneficial, it is acceptable to God if rightly discharged. Ay,
the preaching of the gospel is the cause of immense good and the occasion of great evil.
Like the waters of the sea, the light of the firmament, the breeze of the atmosphere, ii
is the Divine cause of good ; but man, through the perversity of his nature, may make
it the occasion of his ruin.

IV. The solemnity connected with it. Paul felt its solemnity and exclaims,
"Who is sufficient for these things?" Who, of himself, is " sufficient " to expound
the meaning of the gospej, to exemplify the spirit of the gospel, to inwork into human
souls the eternal principles of the gospel ? Paul adds in another place, " Our sufficiency
is of God."

Ver. 17. — The way in which the gospel should beprecKhed. " For we are not as many,
which corrupt the Word of God : but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God
speak we in Christ." The words suggests the way in which the gospel should b«
preached.



oa. H. 1— 17.J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 43



L With oonboioub honebtt. " As of sincerity." This is a state of mind in direct
antagonism to all duplicity. No man who is not true to his convictions and to himself
can preach the gospel. He must be a true man who would preach truth, a loving man
who would inculcate love. To have conscious honesty he must preach his own |)ersojiaZ
convictions of the gospel, not the opinions of others.

II. With conscious DiviNiTr. " As of God, in the sight of God." 1. He mcst be
conscious that God sent him. From God, not from schools, sects, Churches, or ecclesi-
astics, but direct from God himself. 2. He must be conscious that God sees him. " la
the sight of God." This consciousness will make him humble, earnest, fearless, caring
nothing for the frowns or smiles of his audieace.

III. With conscious Christliness. " Speak we in Christ.'' To be " in Christ " is
to be in his character, in his Spirit. " The love of Christ constraineth me," etc. He
who is conscious of the Spirit of Christ within him will be free from all self-seeking, all
sordid motives, all cravings for popularity and fame.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 11. — Further explanations and directions touching matters Just discussed.
The most copious writer in the New Testament is the man whose inward constitution
and life are most fully brought into view. If the fact itself is noteworthy, the art of
its management is even more significant. Didactic treatises would have excluded this
method of blending the abstract and the concrete, and therefore the epistolary form
which St. Paul adopted. What do we mean by this form ? Much more, indeed, than
a facile and graceful way of communicating facts and truths. In the Epistle we have
the personality of the writer interblended with doctrine, duty, experience ; so that in
St. Paul's case we have not merely the gospel as a body of liEicts and truths, but the
gospel in the consciousness of a leading exponent, and, in some respects, the most
prominent representative of certain phases of that gospel. Gentile Christianity, as
distinguished from the earlier Judaic Christianity, could never have been understood
except for this intermingling of Christianity as a system and Christianity as a life in the
history of our apostle. Both the conditions met in him as they met in no other apostle.
The two things must not be confounded. Many in our day fall into this error and
speak of Christianity as if it were only " a life." It is a life, but it is something else
besides and something antecedent to life. Now, the epistolary style, and still more its
method of thought, allow full play to the wholeness of Christianity. Its dogmas are
preserved. Its experimental and practical forces are maintained. Its individuation is
provided for. And thus, while seeing the system, we see also its life in the soul. If
the psalmist; King David, is the signal representative of formal and spiritual Judaism
in the Old Testament, St. Paul is the corresponding figure in the New Testament. At
this point we are able to estimate the very great and specific value of the Second Epistle
to the Corinthians. Beyond any of his writings, this unfolds the author, and does it
with such masterly skill and on so comprehensive a scale as to give a twofold insight
into his system and life. What an extension of the " Acts " ! No St. Luke could have
done this. It was the " Acts " in their secret head-springs in the man, and the man
only could record what they were. The account of his personal feelings is resumed
in this chapter. Not only for their sakes, but for his own, the visit had been post-
poned, since he was unwilling to come in sorrow. The " rod " would have been painful
to him ; they were to exercise discipline under the directions of his letter and thus
forestall an occasion of giief to him. If he had made them sorry, who but they could
give him joy ? This was the reason for his writing, the reason too of deferring his
visit; and thus the two things had been designed to co-operate in one result. A
controversy is like a disease ; the mode of treatment must be varied to suit its stages.
No doubt personal presence, conversations, direct appeals, are best at some times for
adjusting difficulties ; at other times, letters are preferable. The discernment of the
apostle prompted him to write and then to await the effect ; and it was all in the
interest of peace and for his and their consolation. Inspired by this confidence, he had
written them a severe rebuke. It was a most painful duty ; it was a duty, however, of
love ; and because ot this coincidence, conscience and affection being at work in his soul.



*t THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHlANa tm. ii. 1—17

he had suffered most keenly. " Out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrots
unto you with many tears." The great soul was not afraid of words nor of the critics
of words. He had a rare kind of courage. It was the boldness to say how much he
thought and how much he felt, and to send forth his words laden with the meanings
they had for him, that they might convey exactly those meanings to others. The love
was not overstated, for it was a father's love towards the children of his heart: " More
abundantly unto you." Evidently his paramount aim is to assure the Corinthians of
his warm affection for them. Other feelings are held in abeyance ; no mention now of
suspicions, jealousies, backbitings, and other wrongs, by which he had been tortured ;
only the love, the impassioned love, he cherished for those whose sorrow and joy were
his sorrow and joy. How naturally the way is prepared for what follows! "If any
have caused grief [referring to the incestuous person], he hath not grieved me, but in
part, that I may not overcharge you all." The Revised Verson, " If any hath caused
sorrow, he hath caused sorrow, not to me, but in part (that I press not too heavily) to
you all." Conybeare and Howson, " As concerns him who has caused the pain, it is
not me that he has pained, but some of you (some, I say), that I may not press too
harshly upon all." Many commentators read it thus : " If any have caused grief, he
liath grieved not me, but more or less (that I be not too heavy on him) all of you."
What is the point of interest is the light in which St. Paul now regarded the offender
and the punishment inflicted upon him. Punishment had been punishment ; it had
expressed righteous indignation, upheld official order, vindicated the holy authority of
law. It had been effectual in bringing the flagrant sinner to repentance and had proved"
a warning to others. But were the effects to stop here ? A great work had been done
and yet other results were possible — were most desirable. Precisely here the far-
sighted wisdom of St. Paul attracts our admiration. Discipline of a mechanical or of a
military kind is cheap enough. True reformatory and saving discipline is a costly
thing, requiring forethought and afterthought, the looking " before and after," which has
won its place among the aphorisms of statesmanship. Much fruit falls and rots just as
the ripening season approaches. Special care was needed, so the apostle argued, lest
Satan should spoil the wholesome act in the sequel. " Sufficient to such a man is this
punishment, which was inflicted of many." " Sufficient " leads the sentence. And the
" many " has its weight, since in nothing is the power of the mxiny so much felt as in
condemnation.

" There is no creature loves me.
And if I die, no soul shall pity me."

This is Gloster perfected in King Richard. St. Paul urges the forgiveness of this gross
oflender. On the contrary, " Ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him, lest
perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow." Make evident
your love to him ; so he beseeches them. If he is restored to their affection, this
would prove that the Church was " obedient in all things." All through he keeps the
dignity and authority of the Church in commanding view, and, as he had laid a most
solemn duty on its conscience, so now he recognizes its hiiih relationship in the matter
of reconciliation. Would the brethren forgive him ? So would he, and that too in the
most impressive manner — " in the sic;ht of Christ." The reasoning of the apostle at
this point ought to make a most profound and lasting impression on Christian thinkers.
Sincere motives and upright intentions do not always preserve good men from terrible
blunders in administering Church discipline. All unawares, the imagination exag-
gerates, right feeling becomes jealous of itself, motives are looked at askance, a spurious
consistency sets up its tyrannical claims, and, in no long time, law parts company with
authority, and equity is crushed by justice. No attitude in which St. Paul appears
before us is so finely characteristic of high manhood as when he pleads for extreme
thoughtfulness and tender consideration in the use of legitimate power. Who ever
suffered from the numberless forms of injustice as he did ? Who died daily as he did ?
The " beasts " at Ephesus were not merely such as do physical violence, but in their
utter want of all moral sensibility to truth »fld right. Yet this was not the worst.
Ask a man who has had a large experience in public life what has occasioned him the
greatest amount of vexation, and he will tell you that it was the misrepresentation and
carping criticism and wilful littleness of spirit pursaing him continually which had most



OH. n. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 45

embittered his career. St. Paul was subjected to these annoyances through all the middle
period of his apostolic life. And what did he learn from them? To be distrustful of
his own heart, to keep an open and vigilant eye on his infirmities, to be specially
guarded as to the ambitious uses of power, and to foreclose every avenue to his .soul
through which an entrance might be effected of a fanatical temper in rebuke, in the
management of Church troubles, and in the relation sustained to the other apostles.
In the case of the Corinthian offender we see his lofty bearing. Ready to forgive, glad
to forgive, yet he waits till he can say to the Church, " If ye forgive anything, I forgive
also." And hear his reason, " Lest Satan should get an advantage of us : for we are not
ignorant of his devices." Never could he have been St. Paul, apostle of the Gentiles,
without this intense conception intensely realized of Satan as an infernal agent of
prodigious power and unceasing activity. In liis theology, in his way of looking at men
and things, in his calculation of the forces to be met in the great conllict, it would
have been inexplicably strange had he ignored or depreciated this gigantic spirit of
eviL Elsewhere we have his allusions to Satan in other aspects of his character.
Here he is the schemer, the wily plotter, the adroit strategist, observant of every
movement, and on the alert for every opportunity. St. Paul was not afraid to acknow-
ledge that in this matter at Corinth Satan might even yet turn things to his advantage.
Recall the words (1 Cor. v. 5), " To deliver such a one unto Satau, for the destruction ol
the flesh ;" and yet they were to labour and intercede " that the spirit may be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus." And now, this repentant and forgiven man, should
they not save him from the snares of Satan? — save themselves, too, from being over-
reached by the arch-enemy of Christ and all goodness ? — L.

Vers. 12 — 17. — Coming to Troas ; disquietude ; defence of his apostleship. Quite
abruptly St. Paul mentions that he came to Troas. Why he left Ephesus he does not
say, but we infer it was because of his anxiety to see Titus, and hear from him how
his letter to the Corinthians had been received. There was a fine opening at Troas to
preach the gospel, and yet he was greatly disquieted as Titus did not meet him.
" Taking my leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia." Here he met Titus,
though, in the excitement of joy, he fails to state it. The sudden outburst of grati-
tude, " Thanks be unto God," expresses his exultation over the good tidings Titus had
brought from Corinth, so that here, as is frequently the case, we get the outward
history of events from the biooraphy of the apostle's heart. All he had expected,
and eyen more, had been realized, and he breaks forth in thanksgiving.

" Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk
The earth, and stately tread or lowly creep,
Witness if I be silent, morn or ev'n.
To hill or valley, fountain or fresh shade.
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise."

St. Paul was not a silent man in his happine.ss. No depth of emotion satisfied him
unless it could be imparted to others. On this occasion his soul found utterance
in thanking God, " which always causeth us to triumph in Christ." A military
triumph rises before him ; the victorious general is returning to the capital ; the long
procession moves before his eye; and, in the train, the captives brought home are
conspicuous. Such a captive is the apostle following the chariot of his Lord.
" Yet (at the same time, by a characteristic change of metaphor) an incense-bearer,
scattering incense (which was always done on these occasions), as the procession
moves on " (Conybeare and Howson). Christ is the fragrance ; " we are unto God a
sweet savour of Christ." Whether men are saved or lost, Christ is Christ, and the
fragrance cannot perish. There will be a " savour of death unto death " and a " savour
of life unto life ; " but, in either issue, the glory of God's government is maintained.
For, 80 far as we can see into the relations of Christ to man and of man to Christ, the
fundamental fact in each aspect of the subject is human freedom. Of his own free-
will Christ took upon himself our flesh and blood, suffered, and died ; and of our own
free-will, made such by him and acted on as such by the Holy Spirit, we accept his
atonement. If we reject the offered mercy, the act of our rejection testifies to tha
infinitude of the mercy, and the " savour of Christ " is none the less " sweet" in itself.



46 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKDITHIANS. [oh. n. 1—17

" And who is sufficient for these things?" Here is no one-sided gospel, that accommo-
dates conscience to taste, and allows a compromise between duty and inclination. Here
is a gospel that is the " savour of death unto death " and of " life unto life." Who is
competent to maintain its stem truthfulness by preaching both these doctrines'? The
test of a faithful minister lies in the wise and earnest use of each class ot tacts. Is
anything so difficult? Take the natural intellect; take the natural affections; take
language as the vehicle of expression ; and by what power of culture can a preacher
be found who can set forth the gospel in its twofoldness of " death unto death " and
"life unto life"? St. Paul, in the seventeenth verse, answers the question as to
sufficiency. Now, as always, it is not simply the gospel which is the power and wisdom
of God, but his way of preaching it. He declares that " many corrupt the Word of
God ; " not of this number is he. And where does the danger of corruption exist ? In
not holding with a balanced mind the " death " and the " life," so as to shun over-
statements and under-statements in each instance. To preach after St. Paul's manner,
one must have sincerity — ^the truth unmixed with human speculations ; he must preach
what God has revealed as to his Law and its righteousness, no more, no less; and he
must preach it in Christ, himself in Christ, his gospel in Christ, and so preach m to
spirit and temper and manner that the fragrance shall breathe in all his words. — ^L.

Vers. 3, 4. — Sympathy in grief and joy. How far from a formal or mechanical
ministry was that of the apostle I He entered into the circumstances and the feelings
of those for whom he had laboured. Nothing which affected their interests was indif-
ferent to him. Some in his position would have said, " We have done our duty ; it is
no affair of ours how they act; why should we trouble ourselves regarding them?"
Not so St. PauL When the Corinthians acted vmworthily, his sensitive heart was
distressed ; when they repented, that heart bounded vrfth joy. This was not altogether
the effect of natural temperament ; it was the fruit of true fellowship of spirit with his
Lord.

I. The SFQtiT OF sympathy is the spirit of Christ and of Christiamtt. In the
earthly life of our Saviour we behold evidences ot this spirit. He rejoiced in men's
joys ; he wept by the grave of his friend ; he sighed and groaned when he met with
instances of unspirituality and unbelief. It was pity which brought him first to earth
and then to the cross of Calvaiy. Similarly with the precepts of the New Testament.
The lesson is often virtually repeated, " Rejoice with those who do rejoice, and weep with
those who weep."

n. The spirit op sympathy is sometimes the occasion of sorrow. 1. The
spectacle of a professing Christian falling into sin awakens commiseration and distress
in the mind of every true follower of Christ. 2. The spectacle of a Christian con-
niving at sin, or regarding it with comparative unconcern, is painful in the extreme
to one solicitous for Christian purity. 3. Sorrow, from whatever cause, awakens sorrow
in a mind sensitive as was that of Paul.

III. The spirit of sympathy is sometimes the occasion of joy. Even amidst
personal difficulties and opposition encountered in his ministry Paul was not indifferent
to the joys of his converts. And when those whose conduct had pained him came to
a better mind and afforded him satisfaction, he rejoiced with them in their happiness.
If there is joy in the presence of the angels of Gcod over one sinner that repenteth,
surely he most resembles the Father of spirits and his immediate attendants whose
heart is lifted up with exhilaration and delight by anything that manifests the growth
and victory of the Divine kingdom upon earth. — T. ,

Ver. 11. — The devices of Satan. The course of St. Paul with regard to the Christian
Church at Corinth was one of great difficulty. A flagrant case of immorality demanded
his decided interference. Yet he wished to deal, both with the offender and with those
who made too light of his offence, in such a way as not to endanger his personal
influence over the Corinthian Christians generally. If he were too lu or too severe,
in either case he would give his enemies an opportunity to malign him. And he knew
that there were Judaizing teachers who were ready to attribute the immorality to
Paul's doctrines of grace. So that the apostle trod a very difficult path, which Satan
had set with snares on either hand. He needed to be on his guard against the insidiouj



OH. n. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. il

macUnationi ot the enemy, and he gave the Corinthians to understand that such was
his attitude.

I. Satan's devices abb many and vabied. The resouices of an earthly foe ought
not to be under-estimated by a general who would gain the victory ; and if the tactics
vary with circumstances, vigilance and self-possession, courage and care, are all needed.
Satan besets Christians with many temptations ; if he cannot tempt them into couBcious
sin, he will endeavour to entrap them into some error of judgment and conduct which
may give him an advantage over them.

II. Satan's devices are skilfdl and crafty. In the temptation of our Lord this
was abundantly manifest, and the Saviour gave his disciples to understand that the}'
would be called upon to endure the assaults of the same unsleeping foe. Against hia
evei-varying tactics, against his all but inexhaustible resources, it becomes, therefore,
every Christian soldier to be upon his guard.

III. Satan's devices abb the means op snaring hant of the dnwabt. Some
who once ran well have been hindered. Some who have resisted one enemy have fallen
beneath the attack of another. The annals of every Church, however pure, tell of those
against whom the adversary has directed his blows only too successfully. " Let him
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall."

IV. Satan's devices nkbd to be withstood with watchfulness and prater.
It is something not to be ignorant of them. The unwary and unthinking are entrapped
through very ignorance. Yet knowledge is no sufficient protection. A distrust of our
own ability and a reUance upon superior power and wisdom are indispensably necessary
in order to safety and deliverance. Well may the inspired counsel be received with
gratitude and acted upon with diligence, " Put on the whole armour of God, that ye
may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil." — T.

Ver. 12. — An open door. Men are prone to think what doors are open to them to
enter, through which they may pass to their own profit, or advancement, or pleasure.
Paul's was an unselfish and benevolent nature. He was a true follower of Christ, who
came, not to do his own will, and not to be ministered unto, but to ministei. Again
and again, in the course of his life, his heart was gladdened by the spectacle of a door
of holy service set open before him by God's providence, inviting him to enter in
and in the name of the Lord to take possession.

L The open doob leads to opportunities of work fob Christ. To the true
Christian this is more desirable than aught beside. Paul went nowhere but some door
opened bei'ore him. A synagogue was open ; he entered it, and reasoned out of the
Law or the prophets. A market-place througed with citizens afforded him opportunity
for preaching the true God and the eternal life. Even a prison door, when it closed
upon him, did not shut him off from human souls. It is well that Christians should
think, not so much of their own interests, as of the service of their Master.

II. The open door is set open by Divine phovidbnob. " Opened of the Lord " is
the apostle's expression. We may not see the hand, but we should not ignore it. When
Ood himself makes a way, his doing so is a command to his people to adopt and
to follow it. When he opens, " no man can shut."

III. The open doob is a doob of promise to those who will enter in. Why is
the door set open ? Is there no purpose in this ? Surely it is a want of faith to hold
back when the Lord himself so manifestly encourages his servants to "go in and
possess the land."

IV. The open doob will be shut against those whose negligence ob dis-
obedience hindebs them fbom entering it. As the door of salvation will be closed
against those who fail to enter in, so the door of service will be shut to exclude those
who turn aside when the hand of God has opened it and has beckoned them to enter,
but has beckoned them in vain. — T.

Vers. 14 — 16. — The solemnity of the ministry. A Roman triumph, to which the
apostle refers in this passage, was the most magnificent of earthly pageants. The
conqueror, in whose honour it was given, was an illustrious commander, who had
defeated an enemy or gained a province. The route traversed by the triumphal pro-
cession lay through Borne to the Capitol itself. The spectators who feasted their eyes



i8 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. n. 1— IT

upon the sight were the vast population of the city. Before, the victor passed onwards
the captives taken in the campaign, and the spoil which had heen wrested from the foe.
Behind, followed the army, flushed with victory and rejoicing in the insolence and
pride of military might. The conqueror himself, mounted aloft upon his car, was the
centre of ohservation and attraction. Every mark of honour was paid to him. Sacrifices
were offered hy the priests to the gods to whose favour victory was ascrihed. Incense-
hearers marched in the procession, and fragrant clouds ascended, floating in the air and
mingling with the shouts and with the strains of martial music. And in the temples
sacrificial offerings were accompanied by the presentation of the odorous incense.

I. The triumphs op the gospel. The warfare of the Word is agaiost the sins of the
rebels who have defied the authority of the Most High. In apostolic times the progress
of the gospel, though often opposed and often checked, appeared to the view of Paul as
a triumphal progress. God, who had triumphed over the enemies whom he converted
into his friends and companions, made them, as his representatives, triumph in their turn,
and admitted them to share his triumph over the enemies of truth and righteousness.

IL The incbnsb-beaebrs in the triumphal train. There is a prodigality of
wealth in the imagery here employed. Paul and his fellow-ministers were themselves
both captives and also incense-bearers — " unto God a sweet savour of Christ." As the
Son of the Eternal is infinitely acceptable to his Father, so those who share his mission
and purpose, and faithfully publish his gospel, are well-pleasing to him, as the odour of
the fragrant incense to the nostril.

III. The accompaniments and results of the gospel triumph. These are twofold
and opposed. 1. To the perishing the ministry is a sentence of death. Some captives
were taken aside and put to death in cold blood as the procession approached the
Capitoline hill. The incense to such was deadly — an odour premonitoiy of a violent and
miserable death. Thus the proclamation of the gospel, in itself an unspeakable blessing,
is actually the occasion of the condemnation of unbelievers, who reject and despise it.
2. To those in course of salvation the ministry is a message of life. Welcome and
pleasant alike to God and man, the glad tidings of redemption tell of life to these whose
desert is death. A welcome and delightful fragrance to the saved, it promises participa-
tion in the glorious victory and the eternal reign of the Divine Redeemer, — T.

Ver. 14. — The triumph. The emotional and susceptible nature of the Apostle Paul
was quick to recognize either opposition or success. And when it occurred to him, in
the providence of God, to meet with instances in which his message was gratefully wel-
comed and he himself was cordially appreciated, his heart was filled with joy, and he
was eager to utter forth gratitude and praise. When elated with prosperity in his
evangelistic work, he felt that God was always making him to triumph. His spiritual
successes were to him more glorious than the triumph which the victorious general
enjoyed upon his return to Rome, when he ascended the Capitoline hill, with his
fellow-warriors in the procession and his captives in his train. What an inspiration do
these words of the apostle afford to those who are engaged in the service of the Saviour,
and are experiencing the vicissitudes of earthly ministry I

I. If there is warfare, there will be victory. The Christian life is a warfare,
involving efibrt, danger, and resistance. Much more manifestly does this figure apply
to those who preach the gospel, especially as evangelists among the heathen, the
degraded, the unbelieving. Such stand in need both of spiritual courage and of
spiritual weapons. And in the stress of the conflict, in the noise and tumult of warfare,
it is well for them to remember that the issue is not uncertain, that conquest is close at
hand.

II. If there ABE ENEMIES, THEY WILL BECOME EITHER CAPTIVES OB, BETTEB STILL,

ALLIES AND FKLLOW-soLDiEES. When Spiritual opponents are many and daring, and
when their onset is sore and perhaps alarming, the heart of the soldier of Christ may
sometimes sink within him. But he is required to estimate the fortunes of the war, not by
human probabilities, but by Divine predictions. Ot those who oppose themselves none
shall prevail. Some shall be vanquished and put to shame. Others shall confess the
justice and the grace of Christ, shall lay down the arms of rebellion, shall enlist in the
iipiritual host, shall take to them the armour of God.

III. If THEUjS 19 PISAPPOINTMENT, THERE WILL BE RECOMPENSE. Paul kueW ofteU



OH. n. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORIJSITHIANS. 49

enough what it is to be cast down. The higher the hope, the bitterer the sorrow when
that hope is frustrated. It sometimes happens that, where the Christian warrior spends
*11 his strength, and attacks the enemy with courage and perseverance, there he
experiences the most humiliating rebuff. Then let him be assured that different
experience is in store for him. Foes shall yield, whose stubbornness, it seemed to him,
no power could subdue. Victory shall be to the faithful and to the brave.

IV. If there be a bhakikg of Christ's cross, there shall be also a shabing op
UI8 thbonk. Our Lord, the Captain of our salvation, knew by experience the power
of the enemy. And can it be expected that with us all will be prosperous? Shall we
not be followers of him, and know the likeness of his death ? Thus shall it be given to
him that overcometh to sit down with him upon his throne. — T.

Ver. 16. — " Who is sufficient f" Those to whom the ministry of the gospel of Christ
is merely a profession, who regard the o£Sces of religion as a routine, who consider chiefly
such emoluments and advantages as may be connected with it, read these words with
astonishment and without sympathy. But those who think as Paul thought of the
ministry, with a wondering amazement at the grace of God and at the provision made in
Christ for the passage of that grace to man, those who realize the preciousuess of the
soul and the solemnity alike of life and of eternity, cannot but cherish a conviction that,
for a service so high and holy as the ministry of God's Word, no human qualification
can suffice.

I. The inbufficienot of human foweb. To understand this we must regard:
1. The deficiencies of the human agent. No minister has an adequate view of the
Saviour he preaches ; none has a suflBciently keen sympathy with the souls of his fellow-
men ; none has a power of persuasion commensurate with the necessities of the case ;
none has the burning zeal for God which was perfectly displayed by Christ alone. 2.
The peculiar difficulties of the work to be accomplished. The ignorance, the levity, the
prejudices, the wilfulness, the gross sinfulness of men, — all must be taken into account
if we would have a just conception of the magnitude of the great task which is entrusted
oo the Christian minister.

IL Thk bdfficienot of Divine gbaoe. 1. This is revealed to those, and to those
alone, who are sincerely conscious of their own powerlessncss and the inadequacy of all
human aid. 2. God's own commission is an assurance that he will not withhold the
assistance needed. The work is his ; his is the call and his the authority. 3. God,
liy his Spirit, assists all lowly and faithful agents in his service, strengthening the
feeble, so that by their means, however seemingly inadequate, great results are accom-
plish^ 4. By the same invisible but marvellous agency God overcomes the obstacles
encountered in the sinner's heart, and makes the word of man effectual because the
vehicle of the power and grace of Heaven. — T.

Ver. 4. — The pains of rebuking. I. These are vbbt real to gracious natures.
Some delight to castigate ; but they are not gracious or noble^-they are rather fitted to
feel the rod than to wield it. An affectionate parent often suffers more than his chastened
child; a faithful pastor than the rebuked Church member. Paul said that if he came
to Corinth he would not spare ; before he came, he did not spare himself. There was
grief at Corinth, but as much or more in Macedonia. Joy in causing suffering is a mark
of degradation. We condemn pleasure obtained from cruel sports ; pleasure obtained
from wounding minds is even more barbaric and revolting. We may feel compelled
to rebuke, and that sharply. We can never be justified in extracting joy from the
suffering occasioned.

IL When rebuke is painful to the bbbukeb it is more likely to prove
efficacious to the rebuked. 1. 2%«re is evidence of qvaliflcation to rebuke. The
rebuke does not spring from personal feeling. 2. Undue harshness will be avoided.
3. A gracious tenderness is likely to permeate the severest rebuke. 4. 1/ known to the
rebuked, a salutary influence will be exercised. Nothing is more irritating or hardening
than to be rebuked by one who evidently enjoys his office. But if the one who points
out our fault is evidently deeply pained himself, we must be very obdurate if we are
Jnsensible to such an appeal. The wayward child is conquered, not by the rod in his
mother's hand, but by the tears in her eyes

n. OOBINTHIANB. ■



60 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0BINTHIAN8. [oh. n. 1—17.

III, Thb object of bioht rbbukinq is not the paih of thb bebuked. This
should ever be kept in mind. We are not judges to pass sentences of mere punishment.
We may grieve our fellows, but only for their good. We may cause pain, but only as
a means to something else. Castigation is a beginning, not an end. We have effected
nothing except failure if we have merely caused sorrow. It is a thankless task indeed
merely to make men sad. It is a noble one to make them sad that we may make them
holier.

IV. Right ebbukino is bvidbncb of much lovb. Not to suffer sin upon our
neighbour is a great duty ; but the best natures are apt to shrink from reproving. Qreat
love will compel them, as it did Paul. We often cannot show our love more conclusively.
It may not at once be apparent to men, but it will to God — and to men by-and-by.
The strongest evidence of Paul's love for the Corinthian Church was exhibited in the
rod which he held over it. So of Qod himself: those whom he loves he chastens.
(Heb. xii. 6).— H.

Vers. 6— H. — Restoring the lacJcslider. I. Ohuech disoiplinb bhoui.d be adminis-
TBEED BY THE Church. "TMs punishment which was inflicted by the many"
(ver. 6). Not by an individual, be he the pope himself, nor by priests or clergy, but
by the whole body of the individual Church or a majority of its members, A Christian
has a right to be judged by his peers.

IL Chueoh discipline should eveb have in view RBSTOBATioif. Its object is not to
punish the offender so much as to do him good, and at the same time to preserve the
Church's purity. Church discipline should not be regarded as a Jinal act towards the
backslider, but with it should ever be associated prayers and hope that the severance
may be brief. The Church rejects that she may accept ; she casts out that she may
receive back again. So Church discipline should never be of a character to hinder
repentance or to render restoration impossible.

III. ChUBCH DIBOIFLINB should be ADMINISTERED WITH GREAT DISCRETION. 1. On

the one hand, it may be too slight and not produce suitable effects. 2. On the other,
it may be so excessive as to drive the offender to despair. 3. In either case Satan will
gain an advantage (ver. 11), which he is ever seeking and has often found when the
Church or its leaders have attempted the delicate task of discipline. The Church's
discipline of persecution and intolerance has served the devil's purposes admirably in
many a dark century. And the Church's discipline of indifference and false charity
has done similar service in many a century boasting of its light and breadth of thought
and liberty.

IV. PeNITENOE on the part of an offender IS A STRONG ARGUMENT FOR PBOMPT

RESTORATION TO FELLOWSHIP. The duty of restoration is not so fully recognized as it
might be. Often it is the predilection of the powers that be, rather than the condition
of the offender, which determines whether he shall be restored or not. But when the
honour of the Church has been vindicated, and the offender is undoubtedly contrite,
the way of duty is clear. A Church which will not restore then, deserves to be
excommunicated itself.

V. Restoration is not to be to toleration, but to love. The love is to exist
whilst the discipline is being inflicted. It is to manifest itself unreservedly when
discipline is removed. Many are restored to suspicion, coldness, contempt — a restora-
tion which paves the way for a more fatal fall. If Ood forgives some professing Christians
as they forgive others (and this is their frequent prayer), their share of the Divine
forgiveness is likely to be a very slender one. — H.

Vers. 14 — 17.— The constant triumph of the faithfvi minister. I. He tbiumphb
because whebever he GOBS HE MAKES KNOWN GoD AND Christ. This Is a true triumph.
If he succeeds in doing this he has a great success — ^the success of performance of duty
and of fulfilment of the Divine wiU. More.)ver, the kingdom of God is almost certain
to be extended. Apparent failure, when more closely examined and tried by the test of
time, wUl often be found to be success.

IL His triumph is not dependent upon the reception of his mbssaoi. 1, To
some his word is a savow/rom death unto death. The Christ proclaimed is to them a
dmd Christ, and his gospel lifeless and powerless, leading them only to denser spiritual



OH. n. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIAXS. 51

death. This is very disheartening when viewed under one aspect. But Christ ia
preached, the work is acceptable to God, the Divine mercy is vindicated, and the respon-
sibility of the disastrous issue rests solely on the rejecters. The excellence of the truth
is demonstrated by its rejection on the part of the vile and sin-loving. 2. To oOven hit
word is a savour from life unto life. Here the triumph is unquestioned by aU. A
living Christ is recognized, and one who has life-giving power.

III. He TEiTiMPHa ONLY AS HE IS FAITHFUL. Por Only 80 does he honour God and
set forth the truth as it is in Jesus. The faithful minister : 1. Does not corrupt the
Word of God fver. 17). Many do (1) by false interpretation, (2) bias, (3) insinuation,
(4) omission, (5) addition. Prompted by (1) gain, (2) applause, (3) carnal prefer-
ences. 2. But (1) distrusts himself, crying, " Who is sufficient for these things ? " (2)
uses utmost sincerity ; (3) gets his message from God — " of God " (ver. 17) ; (4) speaks
as in the sight of God ; (5) speaks in Oiirist, in communion with him as the Head.

IV. His triumph is of God. He is led in triumph by God (ver. 14). God has
triumphed over him, and now God triumphs through him. His sufBoiency is of God
(oh. iii. 5), He has no power when he only has his own ; he has all power when he
has God's.— H.

Vers. 1 — i. — The sorrow of faithful love. The apostle has still in mind the unfaith-
ful member who had brought so sad a disgrace upon the whole Church. His conduct in
the matter, especially in changing his mind when he was fully expected at Corinth, had
been misrepresented, and made the occasion of accusations against him as a fickle-minded,
self-willed man. He therefore here explains why he did not visit Corinth while it
remained uncertain how the offending member would be treated. He had no thought
but for the truest well-being of the Corinthian Church. He could not leave them to go
on in sin. He could not bear to think that those whom he had instructed in Christ
were indifferent to sin. Love, feeling sorrow for the sinning member and for the
dishonoured Church, cannot be satisfied without earnest warnings about the sin and
efforts to remove it. Such efforts carry and express both the sorrow and the love.
Illustrate by the patient, gracious pleadings of God with sinning and backsliding
Israel, as given in the prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Hosea.

I. Such sorrowing love can personally suffer. Here it led the apostle to act
in a way which brought to him the bitterest form of suffering, even the suspicion and
mistrust of his very iriends. Even that he would bear, if but his desire for the spiritual
welfare of the Corinthian Church could be realized. " Men might think that it had
cost him little to write sharp words Uke those which he has in his mind. He remembers
well what he felt as he dictated them — the intensity of his feelings, pain that such
words should be needed, anxiety as to their issue, the very tears which then, as at other
times, were the outflow of strong emotion. Those who were indignant at his stern
words should remember, or at least learn to believe this, and so to see in them the
strongest proof of his abounding love for them." The heart of St. Paul was in this matter
as the heart of him who said, " As many as I love I rebuke and chasten." Illustrate
what a pressure on personal feehng it is for the parent or teacher to chasten. They
often suffer much more than do those whom they feel called to smite. Even the mis-
understanding, and even the temporary hatred, of those whom we would benefit, must
be borne, in our earnest endeavours to deliver them from the dominion and defilement
of their sins.

II. Such sorkowino love can deal severely with the sinner. It is never
lore to pass by sin. It is no true love that touches the sin too hghtly and gives
inefBcient and unworthy apprehensions of it. St. Paul seemed to be too severe. He
could not bo. The case called for an extreme of severity. It was not merely that the
offence was an open and scandalous one, but, what was even worse, the Church seemed
to be pervaded by a false sentiment concerning it, and manifested no distress in having
the guilty member among them. In some way, St. Paul felt, he must arouse them to
a sense of their shame. Strong language, refusd to give them a personal visit, anything
that would waken a sense of sin, were necessary. It had been the time for sternest
rebuke. And still love needs to use severity. For some forms of sin the gentler per-
suasions are inefficient ; men must be roughly shaken out of their self-confidences, and
their pride must be humbled and broken. The Church of modem days so gravely faili



52 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. n. 1—17,

of her witness uid her duty because she has no " discipline," no severe dealings for hel
grave offenders. She has no love to bum against transgressors.

III. Such sobkowing love can show fine consideration fob the feelings of
OTHEB8. Paul did not wish to make his second visit to Corinth in grief, and if he had
carried out his first plan that would have been the almost inevitable result. _ He would
wait, delaying his visit, so that he might have the chance of seeing them with a smile
on his face, after receiving the tidings of their heeding his warning and putting away
the sin. " The second reason St. Paul alleges for not coming to Corinth is apparently
a selfish one — to spare himself pain. And he distinctly says he had written to pain
them, in order that he might have joy. Very selfish, as at first it sounds ; but if we
look closely into it it only sheds a brighter and fresher light upon the exquisite unsel-
fishness and delicacy of St. Paul's character. He desired to save himself pain because
it gave them pain. He desired joy for himself because his joy was theirs. He will not
separate himself from them for a moment ; he will not be the master and they the
school ; it is not I and you, but we ; ' my joy is your joy, as your grief was my grief.' "
Do we love enough to rebuke and punish those whom we love ? — B. T.

Veri. 6 — 11. — 2%« Church's dealings with unworthy members. " The main defence of
the apostle against the charge of fickleness in the non-fulfilment of his promise was
that he had abstained from going to Corinth in order to spare them the sharp rebuke he
must have administered had he gone thither. A great crime had been committed ; the
Church had been compromised, more especially as some of the Corinthians had defended
the iniquity on the ground of Uberty, and St. Paul had stayed away after giving his
advice, that not he, but they themselves, might do the work of punishment. He gave
sentence that the wicked person should be put away, but he wished them to execute
the sentence. For it was a matter of greater importance to St. Paul that the Corinthians
should feel rightly the necessity of punishment, than merely that the offender should
be punished." We notice —

I. The sinneb within the Chueoh grieves the whole Church. If one member
suffer, all the members suffer with him ; and if one member sin, the whole Church ought
to feel grieved and distressed by the sin. St. Paul argues that, if a Church fails to clear
itself of complicity with the wrong of its members, the guilt of such wrong attaches to
it as well as to him. No man within Christ's Church can be alone in his sin, for we are
" members one of another." The judgment of the Church may be the means of winning
the penitence of the erring member.

II. The sesneb when penitent should find the love and forgiveness op the
whole Church. In relation to him there shoiild be harmonious and united Church
action. Yet, in actual fact, the wrong-doing of individuals too often creates party feeling.
Some take the side of the wrong-doer and prevent the full exercise of Church discipline.

III. SocH forgiveness of the Church may express G-od's forgiveness. It is
only becoming, and only efficient, as following upon God's forgiveness. And it has its
special use in being the earthly assurance of the Divine forgiveness and acceptance.
The Church can give no absolution ; it can only find expression for the absolution which
G-od has alre^idy granted to the penitent, and add its forgiveness of the wrong so far aa
it disturbed Church relations. In the proper expression of Church feeling towards moral
offenders, the Apostle Paul, as a recognized Church leader, herein sets an efficient
example. He is as jealous for the Church's honour and mercifulness as he is for the
restoration of the penitent offender. — R. T.

Ver. 11. — Satanic devices within the Church. The reference here made to Satan
must be regarded as figurative. It should not be used as an argument for the existence
of a supreme evil spirit, however the existence of such a spirit may be assumed. St.
Paul has elsewhere used the figure of " delivering unto Satan " (1 Tim. i. 20). By this
we are to understand a solemn excommunication or expulsion from the Church, possibly
with the infliction also of some bodily disease. The offender was to be left to feel all
the physical and social consequences of his wrong-doing, in the hope that, through
suffering, he might be brought to a sense of his sin. Satan is thought of as the power
which leads men into vice and then torments them when they have followed the
leadings. The apostle conceives of God as overruling the very sin, and consequent



OS. n. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, 63

Buffering, for good, through them bringing the sinner to a hopeful penitence and huinilit.v
of heart. There was, howerer, this danger to be recognized and guarded against. Satan
might, as it were, outwit the Church, in its dealing with erring members, and make the
suffering following on sinproduce remorse rather than repentance. " Penitence works
life, remorse works death. The latter is more destructive even than self-righteous-
ness, for it crushes, paralyzes, and kills the soul." There must consequently be a
judicious limitation of the punishment, and a watchfulness for the first opportunity of
showing mercy and granting restoration. " Not to release the offender from the bondage
when he was truly penitent would be to afford the enemy of souls an opportunity of
which he would not be slow to avail himself. Nothing is so likely to plunge a man
into every kind of crime as despair." For St. Paul's experience of Satanic schemes,
devices, and strategy, comp. ch. xii. 7 ; 1 Thess. ii. 18 ; Bph. vi. 12. We may treat
the subject in its wider and more general applications if we illustrate the following
and other ways in which Satan may be said to get advantage within a Church : —

I. Bt overmastering individual members. Failure does not come to the Church
as a whole, but to individuals in it. All are exposed to temptation and evil. We must
be in the world, and Christian men may yield themselves to the power of the " lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of lite." Some of the gravest of our Church
anxieties arise from the moral failure of individual members. Illustrate cases occurring
in youth-time ; but especially cases in men's middle life, when the passions for wealth,
sensuality, or drink often gain an overmastering energy. Show also the force that may be
gained by the suddenness of the temptation, and by the condition of spiritual unwatch-
fulness in which the man may be found. The forms of failure which we usually find
are dishonesty, immorality, or self-indulgence in meat or drink. But, by the law that
those in the Church are members one of another, the failure of one is the shame, and
should be the distress and grief, of all. Satan disturbs and injures a whole Church ii
he can gain influence over one member ; and to do this is ever " one of his devices."

II. By securing the harsh and unloving treatment op those who fail. Perhaps
it would be true to say that Satan never more certainly gets the advantage over Churches
than when he makes them exaggerate punishment, overpress discipline, and fail to temper
judgment with mercy. The action of a Church must be exactly in harmony with the
action, when he was with us on earth, of the Church's Lord. He was quick and keei.
to discern sin. He was swift and severe to punish sin. But he was watchful for signs
of gracious influence effected by the punishment, and ready at once to restore and for-
give the penitent. He never " breaks the bruised reed or quenches the smoking flax."
Man's punishments are always in danger of running to excess. Man cannot judge
motives or read hearts, and so he too often fails to recognize soon enough when dis-
cipline has accomplished its work. Exiilain the evil influence exerted by unwillingness
to forgive members of a family or of a Church ; and show that a most mischievous
conception of God himself, and wrong relations with him, would follow if we were not
quite sure that he is " ready to forgive."

III. By making a Church indifferent to the morality of its members. Laxity,
carelessness about purity of life, uprightness of relations, and consistency of conduct,
often do creep into Churches, and they are among the most grievous of " Satan's de-
vices." Illustrate from the evil work done by Carnal Security, in the town of Mansoul,
as described in John Bunyan's ' Holy War.' The evil influence is felt, not only by the
erring brethren, who come under no kind of correction, but are left to go on in sin,
until " sin, when it is finished, bringeth forth death ; " but also by the Church, which
is deflled before God by the taint on its good name, and which fails lo be duly sensitive
to the Divine honour. Illustrate by the lesson that was taught in the failure of Israel
at the siege of Ai, when the " accursed thing " was in their camp.

IV. By persuading a Church to make its forgiveness a formality, not a fuio.
restoration. Too often this grave mistake is made : the offender is formally restored
to membership, but he is not really taken back into the love and trust of the brethren,
and he receives no signs of restored confidence and no help back to goodness. He is
a blighted man, and it seems to him that his slip or fall can never really be forgotten,
never really be wiped out, and therefore he must hang down his head among the brethren
to his dying day. The Church's forgiveness and restoration must be like God's, a help
to the erring one towards realizing the glorious completeness of God's forgiviogg, for-



84 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh, n. 1—17

gettings, and restorings. For he casts our sins behind his back, and into the depths ol
the sea. " As the punishment of man is representative of the punishment and wrath
of Ghxi, so the absolution of man is representative of the forgiveness of God." Impress,
in conclusion, the extreme painfulness of the possibility that, in regard to her discipline,
the Christian Church may be out-manoeuvred by Satan, and come really to do his
work.— R. T.

Vers. 12, 13. — Providential doors. Introduce by describing the leading instances ol
jijTovidential deliverance, care, and guidance in the life of the Apostle Paul. Especially
dwell on the cases in which his life was preserved from peril and from the plots_ of his
enemies. The reference made in our text is rather to the gracious way in which his
missionary journeyings and missionary spheres had been opened before him ; and the
illustration may be taken from the singular way in which doors were opened and shut,
when the Divine will was for the apostle to preach the gospel in Europe (see Acts xvi.
6—9). For the figure of a " door " for an " opportunity," see 1 Cor. xvi. 9 ; Rev. iii. 8.
The truth of the Divine providence ordering our lives is not one that is so familiar to
us as it was to our fathers. Possibly our warmer thought of God's fatherly care has
taken the place of the colder conception of an impersonal providence. Still, it may be
well to revive the older notion and make it glow with Christian sentiment and feeling.

I. The okdbbing or pbovidbncb fob everybody. Irrespective of religious state and
relations. Illustrations of this are found in all times of danger, disease, or calamity.
Some are taken and some are left. We constantly read of remarkable providential
escapes.

II. The speciality of pkovidence foe Christians. It may in part be that Chris-
tians more readily recognize the hand of God in their rescuings and guidances, hut we
may also believe that God gives a special protection to his own. Such a belief may be
a great comfort to us, but it must he kept from becoming exaggerated and extravagant.
The Christian cannot always be preserved, because his suffering may be for the good of
the whole.

III. The attitude in which Christians should stand towards the bveb-acttve
PBOVIDBNCB. It may be shown to include (1) earnest watchings ; (2) patient waitings ;
(3) prompt actings ; (4) full and unhesitating obediences ; and (5) thankful rejoicing*.
— R. T.

Vers. 15, 16. — The two/old issues of a preached gospel. Heroes, in the older days of
the apostle, were usually great generals, leaders of mighty armies, conquerors of other
nations — men whose "glory" came from desolated cities, down-trodden races, wasted
harvests, and crushed and bleeding hearts. And such heroes were permitted to have a
" triumph," as it was called. A triumphal procession was arranged in their honour, and
to this event the Roman generals looked as to the very goal of their ambition. Magni-
ficent and thrilling scenes they must have been. The general was received, at the gates
of the imperial city, by all that was noble and grave and venerable among the officials,
and he was led from the gate through the crowded and shouting streets to the Capitol.
First marched the ancient men, the grave senators of the Roman council, headed by
a body of magistrates. Then came the trumpeters, making the air ring again with
their prolonged and joyous blasts. Then followed a long train of carriages and frames
laden with the spoils brought from battle-fields or plundered from conquered cities,
the articles which were most remarkable for their value, or rarity, or beauty being fully
exposed to view. There might be seen models, of the forts or cities which had been
captured ; gold and silver statues, pictures, handsome vases, and embroidered stuffs.
Then came a band of players on the flute, and then white bulls and oxen destined for
sacrifice; and incense-hearers, waving to and fro their censers, and sending forth their
sweet savour. Then were seen caged lions and tigers, or monstrous elephants, or other
strange creatures, brought as specimens from the captive lands. And then the pro-
cession filled with pathos, for there followed the leaders of the conquered foe, and the
long train of inferior captives, all bound and fettered, and altogether a sad and humi-
liating sight. At last came the great conqueror, standing in a splendid chariot, drawn
by four milk-white horses, magnificently adorned, the conqueror bearing a royal sceptre,
and having his brow encircled with a laurel crown. Alter him inarched his great



CH. u. 1—17.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 55

officers, the horse-soldiers, and the vast army of foot-soldiers, each one holding aloft a
spear adorned with »aurel boughs. And so the procession moved on through th«
crowded, shouting streets until it reached the Capitoline hill. There they halted,
dragged some of those poor captives aside to be killed, and then offered their sacrifices
and began their triumphal feast. St. Paul's mind was evidently full of such a scene as
this, and he took his figures from it. He says that God permits us, as apostles and
ministers, always to triumph with Christ. We are, through grace, always conquering
generals. But St. Paul fixed his thoughts chiefly on those miserable, naked, fettered
captives, who were going on to death. He could not help thinking — What was the sound
of the clanging trumpet and the piping flute to them — poor hopeless ones ? What was the
savour of sweet incense in the air to them — poor agitated ones ? Some among them may
indeed have had the promise of life, and to them the savour of the incense would be sweet ;
it would be " life unto life." But so many of them knew what their fate must be ; they
dreaded the worst ; they trembled as they came nearer to the ascent of the hill ; and as
the wind wafted the savour of the incense to them they could but sadly feel that it was
a savour of " death unto death." And the apostle thought of his life-work of preaching
the gospel. It was even thus with the savour of the gospel-triumph. To some it was
death, to others it was life. Not, indeed, at the arbitrary will of some proud general, but
as the necessary issue of the relations in which men stand to a preached gospel ; for " he
that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of God hath not life, but the
wrath of God abideth on him."

I. The proper eesult of a preached oospei. is life. It was God's gracious pur-
pose that men, "dead in trespasses and sins," should have life, and have it more
abundantly. In his Son Jesus Christ life and immortality are brought to light. In
the early days God set before men life and death, and, with all holy persuasions, urged
them to choose life and good. This was the one absorbing purpose and endeavour of
the Lord Jesus. While he was here he was ever doing one thing — quickening life,
restoring life, renewing life : the life of health to those afflicted, of reason to those
possessed with devils, of knowledge to ignorant disciples, and even of the body to those
smitten and dead. And the apostles cairied his gospel forth into all the world as
the light and life of men. Dwell upon the significance and interest of the word " life,"
and explain the new life in Christ Jesus, which the Christian enjoys.

II. The mournful result of a preached gospel often is death. Our Lord used
forcible but painful figures to express the death of the impenitent and unbelieving :
'' auter darkness ; " " wailing and gnashing of teeth ; " " worm that never dies ; " " fire
chat none may quench." We must feel the force of these things, for no man can
worthily explain them. This " death " was the mournful issue of a preached gospel
when the Son of man was himself the Preacher. Foolish Gadarenes besought him to
depart out of their coasts, and leave them to their night and death. Hardened
Capernaum, exalted even to heaven in privilege, must be thrust down to hell. St. Paul
must turn from bigoted and prejudiced Jews, and go to the Gentiles, leaving the very
children of the covenant in a darkness that might be felt. He who came to give life is
practically found to "be a Stone of stumbling and a Eock of offence. Five foolish virgins
put their hands about their flickering lamps as they cry against the closed door ; and
this is the simple, awful ending of their story, " The darkness took them." We do see
men hardened uuder a preached gospel now. Illustrate by the dropping well at Knares-
borough. Water ought to soften and melt, but these waters, falling upon things,
encrust them with stone, and even turn them into stone. Such may have been the
droppings of the " water of life " upon us. There are only these two issues. The gospel
must either take us by the hand and lead us up into the sunlight or it must bid us away
down into the dark. Only two issues, but what issues they are 1 Life 1 As we think
of that word, all joy, light, and heaven come into our view. Death I As we_ speak that
word, all darkness, woe, and hell come into our thoughts. " Who indeed is sufficient
for these things?" — even for the preaching of a gospel which must prove to be a
" savour of life unto life or of death unto death." — R. T.

Ver. 17. — Conscious simplidttf and integrity. " The word for • corrupt,' formed from
a word which signifies ' huckster,' or ' tavern-keeper,' implies an adulteration like that
which such people commonly practised. We, says St. Paul, play no such tricks of trad«



66



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [<*• ™. 1—18.



with what we preach ; we do not meet the tastf 8 of our hearers by prophesying deceits.
The very fact that we know the tremendous issues of our work would hinder that."
God's gospel word, the message of eternal life in Christ Jesus, may be adulterated oi
corrupted in three ways. 1. By mixing up with it foreign, inharmonious, merely
human, teachings. 2. Or by making; the gospel revelation into a stiffened, formal
creed, over the precise terms of which we may wrangle and dispute. 3. Or by dis-
placing the true motive in preaching it, and giving place to low aims, and purposes of
merely selfish ambition, and longing for the praise of men. The appeal of the text has
its special force when we remember of what things the Judaizing party accused the
apostle. St. Paul's enemies forced this appeal from him. Usually it is enough that
the sincere and true man should keep on his faithful way, little heeding the opinions
or accusations of others, trusting the care of his reputation to God. But occasions do
arise when something like public vindication becomes necessary, and a man is called to
assert his conscious integrity. Of this we have two very striking instances recorded
in Scripture. Samuel, when set aside by the mistaken longing for a visible king, felt
deeply hurt, though more for the insult thus offered to Jehovah, the ever-present but
invisible King, than for his own sake. He pleaded thus with the people: "I have
walked before you from my childhood unto this day. Behold, here I am : witness
against me before the Lord, and before his anointed : whose ox have I taken ? or whose
ass have I taken ? or whom have I defrauded ? whom have I oppressed ? or of whose
hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it
you " (1 Sam. xii. 2, 3). And David, mistmderstood and slandered, turns to speak to
God in the hearing of the people, and says, " Judge me . . . according to my righteous-
ness, and according to mine integrity that is in me " (Ps. vii. 8). Consider —

I. The great gospel trust. 1. On the one side, the trust of Divine revelation and
message. Illustrate by the direct communications of the Divine will made to the
ancient prophets. These they were expected to deliver with all simplicity and com-
pleteness, and without making any additions of their own to them. 2. On the other
side, the trust of men's souls. The world was given to the apostles as the sphere in
which their gospel message was to be delivered. Such a trust demanded seriousness,
sincerity, and holy zeal. It should ever call out the best that is in a man.

II. The peril op its dmdet through the guile of the self-seeker. Men will
surely take their impressions of it from the character of the men who preach it. If we
get a soiled idea of the gospel preacher, as an insincere, self-seeking man, it is only too
likely that we shall have a soiled and stained image of the gospel that he preaches in
our minds. Men can make golden glowings or deep shadows rest on the gospel that
they declare, the message which they have in trust.

III. The force of it as preserved when the agent is guilblbss and sincere.
The stream gets no foulness as it iiows through him. Illustrate how men of transparent
character and beautiful piety put honour on religion. The commendation of Christ's
gospel to men is (1) the pure and stainless Christ himself, and then (2) the graciousness
and charm of his servants who are like him. The force behind gospel preaching is the
U/e of the men who preach. The simple-minded, sincere, unoorrupted man may posi-
tively make additions to the practical power of the gospel upon men. Distinguish,
however, between simplicity and moral weakness, and also between guilelessness and
ignorance. The simphcity required is " unity" as opposed to " double-mindedness; " it
is being wholly for Gtod. — R. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER HL



Defence against the charge of aelf-reoom-
mendation, which Si. Paul does not need
(vers. 1 — S). His sufBcienoy oomes from
God (vers. 4 — 6), who has made him minister
of a covenant far more glorious than that



given to Moses (vers. 7—11). This ministry
needs no veil upon the face (vers. 12, 13),
Buoh as to this day darkens the hearts of
the Jews (vers. 14, 15), though it shall one
day be removed (vers. 16 — 18).

Vers. 1—11. — 8t. PauVt ministry U hi*
mffioient letter of commendation.



cfi. m. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COElNTHlAVIS.



51



Ver. 1, — ^So we begin again to commend
oniselTes 1 The last verse of the last chap-
ter might be seized upon by St. Paul's
opponents to renew their charge — that he
was always praising himself. He antici-
pates the malignant and meaning smiles
with which they would henr such words.
The word " again " implies that this charge
had already been brought against him, per-
haps in consequence of such passages as
1 Cor. ii. 16; iii. 10; iv. 11—14; ix. 15—
23; xiv. li, etc. Such passages might be
called self-laudatory and egoti^tical, were
it not that (as St. Paul here explains) they
arose only from a sense of the grandeur of
his office, of which he was the almost in-
voluntary agent, used by God as it seemed
best to him. Hence he says later on (oh.
vii. 18) that self-praise is no commendation,
and that tlie true test of a man is God's
commendation. The verb " I commend,"
technically used in the same sense as our
" commendatory letters," occurs also in Kom.
xvi. 1. Or need we, etc. ? The reading, ?) liii,
thus translated, is better supported than
ei ju)), unless, which would have a somewhat
ironical force. The ia.^ in the reading ?) ,117)
implies, "Can you possibly think that we
need," etc.? Generally, when a stranger
came to some Church to which he was not
personally known, he carried with him
some credentials in the form of letters from
accredited authorities. St. Paul treats it
as absurd to suppose that he or Timothy
should need such letters, either from the
Corinthians or to them. As some. He will
not name them, but he refers to the Judaists,
who vaunted of their credentials in order
to disparage St. Paul, who was too great to
need and too independent to use them.
We can hardly, perhaps, realize the depth
and bitterness of antagonism concealed
nnder that word " some " in 1 Cor. iv. 18 ;
Gal. i. 7 ; ii. 12. It is not meant that there
was anything discreditable in using such
letters (for Apollos had used them, Acts
xviii. 27), but the disgraceful thing was
that St. Paul should be disparaged for not
bringing them. Epistles of commendation.
The phrase, ^mffToAol avixTaTueal — "introduc-
tory letters " — was familiar in later Greek.
In days when there were few public hostels,
and when it was both a duty and a necessity
for small and persecuted communities like
those of the Jews and Christians to practise
hospitality (Kom. xii. 13; Heb. xiii. 2, etc.),
it was customary both for synagogues and
Churches to provide their friends and emis-
saries with authentic testimonials. Other-
wise they might have been deceived by
wandering impostors, as, in fact, the Chris-
tians were deceived by the vagabond quack
Peregrinus. We can easily see how the
onstom of using such letters might be



abused by idle, restless, and intriguing
persons, who have never found it very diffi-
cult to procure them. We find traces of
their honest use by Plioebe, by Silas and
Jude, by Apollos, by Mark, and by Zenas,
in Bom. xvi. 1; Acts xviii. 27; xv. 25;
Col. iv. 10; Titus iii. 13 ; and of their unfair
use by certain Judaists, in Gal. i. 7 and ii. 12.
Nothing can more forcibly illustrate the ne-
cessity for St. Paul's protest against the idle
vaunt of possessing such letters, than the
fact that, more than a century afterwards, we
find malignant innuendoes aimed at St.
Paul in the pseudo-Clementines, under the
name of " the enemy " and " Simon Magus "
and " a deceiver." He is there spoken of
as using letters from the high priest (which,
indeed, St. Paul had done as Saul of Tarsus,
Acts ix. 1,2); and the Churches are warned
never to receive any one who cannot bring
credentials from James; so deep-rooted
among the Judaists was the antagonism to
the independent apostolate and daring
originality of the apostle of the Gentiles I
Dr. Plumptre quotes Sozomen ('H. B.',
V. 16) for the curious fact that the Emperor
Julian tried to introduce the system of
"commendatory letters" into his revived
paganism. Or letters of commendation &om
you. The substitution of " letters " for
" epistles " is an instance of the almost
childish fondness for unnecessary synonyms,
which is one of the defects of the Autho-
rized Version. The true reading probably is
" to you or from you " (N, A, B, C). The word
" commendatory " (sustatilcon') is omitted
in A, B, C. Or frvm you. It was worse
than absurd to suppose that St. Paul should
need those literse formatse to a Church of
which he was the founder ; and nothing but
the boundless "inflation" which charac-
terized the Corinthians could have led them
to imagine that he needed letters /ram tliem
to other Churches, as though, forsooth, they
were the primaiy Church or the only
church (1 Cor. xiv. 36).

Ver. 2. — ^Ye are our epistle. Their very
existence as a Church was the most absolute
"commendatory letter" of St. Paul, both
from them and to them (comp. 1 Cor. ix. 2,
" The seal of mine apostlesliip are ye in the
Lord"). Written in our hearts. The ex-
pression has no connection with the fact
that the high priest bore the names of
Israel graven on the jewelled Urim, which
he wore upon his breast. St. Paul means
that others may bring their " letters of com-
mendation" in their hands. His letter of
commendation is the very name and exist-
ence of the Church of Corinth written on
his heart. Known and read of all men.
The metaphor is subordinated to the fact.
All men may recognize the autograph, and
in it were read the history of the Corinthian



68



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. m. 1—18



coDverts, whioli was written on the apostle's
heart, and whi(^ therefoTe rendered the
notion of any other letter of commendation
to or from them superfluous and even ab-
surd. The play on words (epigignosko and
anagignosko) is similar to that in oh. i. 13.

Ver. 3. — Manifestly declared. The fame
and oentrallty of Corinth gave peculiar
prominence to the fact of their conversion.
The epistle of Christ ministered by ns. The
Corinthians are the epistle ; it is written
on the hearts of St. Paul and his com-
panions ; Christ was its Composer ; they
were its amanuenses and its conveyers. The
development of the metaphor as a meta-
phor would be somewhat clumsy and intri-
cate, but St. Paul only cares to shadow
forth the essential fact which he wishes
them to recognize. Not with ink, but with
the Spirit of the living God; i.e. not with
visible or perishable materials, but spiritual
in its origin and character. The notion of
" the finger of God " naturally recalled the
notion of " the Spirit of God" (oomp. Matt,
xii. 28 with Luke xi. 20). Not in tables of
stone. God's writing by means of the
Spirit on the heart reminds him of another
writing of Ood on the stone tablets of the
Law, which he therefore introduces with no
special regard to the congruity of the me-
taphor about "an epistle." But in fleshy
tables of the heart. The overwhelming
preponderance of manuscript authority sup-
ports the reading " but in fleshen tablets —
hearts." St. Paul is thinking of Jer. xxxi.
33, "I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts ; " and
Ezek. xi. 22, " I will take the stony heart
out of their flesh, and will give them a
heart of flesh." The tablets were not hard
and fragile, but susceptible and receptive.
Our letters of introduction are inward not
outward, spiritual not material, permanent
not perishable, legible to all not only by a
few, written by Christ not by man.

Ver. 4. — Such trust. The confidence,
namely, that we need no other recommenda-
tion to or from you. Through Christ. Who
alone can inspire such confidence in myself
and my mission (1 Cor. xv. 10). To God-
ward ; i.e. in relation to God ; towards
whom the whole Being of Christ is' directed
(John i. 1), and therefore all the work of
his servants (Bom. v. 1).

Ver. 5. — Not that we are sufficient of
ourselves. He here reverts to the question
asked in ch. ii. 16. He cannot bear the
implication that any " confidence " on his
part rests on anything short of the over-
whelming sense that he is but an agent,
ur rather nothing but an instrument, in the
hands of God. To think anything as of
ourselves. He has, indeed, the capacity to
form adequate judgments about his work,



but it does not oome from his own resouroei
(ct(f>' eavrav) or his own independent origi-
nation m eavT&v); comp. 1 Cor. xv. 10.
But our Bnffioienoy. Namely, to form any
true or right judgment, and therefore to
express the oonfidenie which I have ex-
pressed. Is of God. We are but fellow-
workers with him (1 Cor. iii. 19).

Ver. 6.— Who also. Either, " And he it
is who ; " or, " Who besides this power, has
made us adequate ministers." Hath made
us able ministers ; rather, made us suffiaient
ministers. Of the new testament ; rather,
of a fresh covenant (Jer. xxxi. 31). The
" new testament " has not the remotest
connection with what we call "The New
Testament," meaning thereby the book —
which, indeed, had at this time no existence.
The word "testament" means a will, and
in this sense implies neither the Hebrew
herith nor the Greek diatheke, both of whioh
mean "covenant." In one passage only of
the New Testament (Heb. ix. 16, 17) does
diatheke mean a " testament " or " wUl."
For the thought, see Eph. iii. 7 ; Col. i. 25 ;
1 Tim. i. 11, 12. Not of the letter, but of
the spirit. In other words, J' not of the Law,
but of the gospel ; " not of that which is
dead, but of that which is living; not of
that which is deathful, but of that whioh is
life-giving ; not of bondage, but of freedom •
not of mutilation, but of self-control ; not
of the outward, but of the inward ; not of
works, but of grace ; not of menace, but
of promise ; not of curse, but of blessing ;
not of wrath, but of love ; not of Moses, but
of Christ. This is the theme which St.
Paul develops especially in the Epistles to
the Romans and the Galatians (see Bom. ii.
29; iii. 20; vii.6, 10, 11; viii.2; Gal.iaiO;
V. 4r, etc.). Not of the letter. Not, that is,
of the Mosaic Law regarded as a yoke of
externalism ; a hard and unhelpful " thou
shalt" and "thou shalt not;" a system that
possessed no life of its own and inspired no
life into others ; a " categoric imperative,"
majestic, indeed, but unsympathetio and
pitiless. Both the Law and the gospel were
committed to writing ; each covenant had
its own book; but in the case of the Mosaic
Law there was the book and nothing more ;
in the case of the gospel the book was
nothing compared to the spirit, and nothing
without the spirit. Out of the spirit.
That is, of the gospel whioh found its
pledge and consummation in the gift of the
Spirit. The Law, too, was in one sense
" spiritual " (Bom. vii. 14), for it was given
by God, who is a Spirit, and it wag ■> holy
Law ; but though such in itself (in »e) it
was relatively (per occtdens) a cause of sin
and death, because it was addressed to a
fallen nature, and inspired no spirit by
whioh that nature oould be delivered (se*



OH. m. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS.



69



Bom. tU. 7—25). Bnt in the gospel the
Bpirit ig eyerything; the mere letter is as
nothing (John vi. 63). For the letter killeth,
but the spirit giveth life. Tliis is one of
the very numerous " texts " which have
been first misinterpreted and have then
been aiade, for whole centuries, the bases
"^f erroneous systems. On this text more
than any other, Origen, followed by the
exegetes of a thousand years, built his
dogma that the Scripture must be inter-
preted allegorically, not literally, because
" the letter " of the Bible kills. The mis-
interpretation is extravagantly inexcusable,
and, like many others, arose solely from
rending words away from their context
and so reading new senses into them. The
contrast is not between " the outward " and
the inward sense of Scripture at all. " The
letter" refers exclusively to " the Law," and
therefore has so little reference to "the
Bible" that it was written before most of
the New Testament existed, and only
touches on a small portion of the Old
Testament. Killeth. Two questions arise.
(1) What and whom does it Mill and (2)
how does it kill 1 The answers seem to be
that (1) the letter — the Law regarded as an
outward letter — passes the sentence of death
on those who disobey it. It says, " He who
doeth these things shall live in them ; " and
therefore implies, as well as often says, that
he who disobeys them shall be cut off. It
is, therefore, a deathful menace. For none
can obey this Law vrith perfect obedience.
And (2) the sting of death being sin, the
Law kills by directly leading to sin, in that
it stirs into existence the principle of con-
cupiscence (Bom. vii. 7-11; 1 Cor. xv. 56;
Gal. iii. 10, 21). But the spirit giveth life.
This contrast between a dead and a living
covenant is fundamental, and especially in
the writings of St. Paul (Bom. ii. 27—29 ;
vii. 6 ; viu. 11 ; Gal. v. 8 ; 1 Cor. xv. 45).
The Law stones the adulteress ; the gospel
says to her, " Go, and sin no more."

Ver. 7. — The ministration of death. The
ministration, that is, of the Law, of " the
letter which killeth." St. Paul here begins
one of the arguments a minori ad majus
"^hich are the very basis of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. Written and engraven in
stones ; literally, engraved in letters on
times (Exod. xxxi. 18). The reference
shows that, in speaking of "the letter,"
St. Paul was only thinking of the Mosaic
Law,and indeed specifically of theDecalogue.
Was glorious ; literally, oeeurred in glory,
or, proved itself glorious. In itself the Law
was "holy, just, and good" (Rom. vii. 12),
and given " at the disposition of angels "
(Acts vii. 53) ; and its transitory glory was
illustrated by the lustre which the face of
Moses caught by reflection from his inter-



course with God (Exod. xxiv. 16). Could
not steadfastly behold the face of Moses
(Exod. xxxiv. 29, 30). St. Paul has beet
led quite incidentally into this digressior.
in the course of defending himself by de
scribing the nature of his ministry; bul
it bore very definitely on his general pur-
pose, because his chief opponents were
Judaists, whose one aim it was to bind upon
the Church the yoke of Musaism. That
they could not " behold " the face of Moses
is the hagadah, or traditional legend, derived
from Exod. xxxiv. 30, which says that " they
were afraid to draw nigh to him. The
reader may recall the beautiful lines of
Cardinal Newman —

" Lord I grant me this abiding grace —
Thy words and saints to know ;
To pierce the veU on Moses' face,
Although his words be slow."

Because of the glory of his countenance.
This circumstance is so often alluded to as
to have become identified with the con-
ception of Moses. The Hebrew words for
"a ray of light" and "a horn" are iden-
tical ; hence, instead of saying that his face
was " irradiated," the Vulgate says, Cornuta
erat ejus fades ; and even in our version of
Hab. iii. 4 we find " And he had horns [i.e.
' rays of light '] coming out of his hand."
To this is due the mediaeval symbol of
Moses with horns, as in the matchless statue
by Michael Angelo. Which glory was to
be done away. The Greek might be ex-
pressed by "the glory — the evanescing glory
— of his countenance." It was not "to be
doue away," but from the first moment they
saw it it began to vanish. The verb "to
do away," implying annulment, and the
being abrogated as invalid, is a characteristic
word in this group of Epistles, in which it
occurs twenty-two times. This illustrates
the prominence in St. Paul's thoughts of t)ie
fact that the Law was now " antiquated " and
" near its obliteration " (comp. Heb. viii. 13).
But in dwelling on the brief and transient
character of this radiance, St. Paul seizes
on a point which (naturally) is not dwelt
upon in Exod. xxxiv.

Ver. 8. — The ministration of the spirit.
That is, " the apostolate and service of the
gospel." Be rather glorious. A contrast
may be intended between the ministration
of the letter, which " became glorious,"
which had, as it were, a glory lent to it
{ijfvliBr) eV Si^ri), and that of the spirit,
which is, of its own nature, in glory.

Ver. 9. — The ministration of condemnation.
The same antithesis between the Law as
involving " condemnation " and the gospel
as bestowing " righteousness " is found in
Eom.v. 18, 19. The glory; perhaps, rather,
a glory ; a stronger way of describing it a*



60



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [<»• in. 1—18,



" glorion*." Of righteousness. Involving
the further conception of "justification," as
in Horn. v. 21 ; i. 16, 17 ; iv. 25 ; v. 21.

Ver. 10. — For. He proceeds to show
that the latter ministration was far more
superabundant in glory. That which was
made glorious, etc. Many various interpre-
tations have been offered of this text. The
meaning almost undoubtedly ig, " For even
that which has been glorified [namely, the
Mosaic ministry, as typified by the splendour
of his face] has not been glorified in this
respect [i.e. in the respect of its relation to
another ministry], because of the sur-
passing glory [of the latter]." In other
words, the glory of Mosaism is so com-
pletely outdazzled by the splendour of the
gospel, that, relatively speaking, it has no
glory left ; the moon and the stars cease to
shine, they "pale their ineffectual fires"
when the sun is in the zenith. The
phrase, " in this respect," occurs again in
ch. ix. 3 and 1 Pet. iv. 16.

Ver. 11. — For. An explanation of the
" surpassing " glory of the later covenant
founded on its eternity. That which is
done away; rather, that which it evanescing;
"which is being done away," as in ver. 7.
Was glorious ... is glorious. The expres-
sion is varied in the Greek. The brief, the
evanescent covenant was "through glory,"
i.e. it was a transitory gleam; the abiding
covenant is " in glory ; " i.e. it is an eternal
splendour. It is, however, a disputed point
whether St. Paul intended such rigid
meanings to be attached to his varying
prepositions (Eom. iii. 30, £#c iriaTeas . . .
Sia TTJs iriffTetas : V. 10, Sf& tov BavArov . . .
^v ■'■p ("V '• ^*^- ^^' ^^' ^? epywv , . . Sill
iriffTeas : Philem. 5, irpiJs rhv KvpiOV . . . fls
Toiis oiyious). That which remaineth. The
final, eternal, unshakable gospel (Heb.
xii. 27). Is glorious ; literally, is in glory.
Christ is eternally the Light of the world
(John i. 9; ix. 6); and Moses and Elias
derived all their permanence of glory by
reflection from this transfiguring light.

Vers. 12 — 18. — The confidence inspired ty
this ministry, and the veil on the hearts of
those who will not recognize it.

Ver. 12. — Such hope. A hope based upon
the abiding glory of this gospel covenant.
Plainness of speech. The frankness and
unreserved fearlessness of our language is
ustifled by the glory of our ministry. It
wa» impossible for Moses to speak with the
same bold plainness.

Ver. 13.— And not as Moses. We need
not act, as Moses was obliged to do, by
putting any veil upon our faces while we
speak. And here the image of " the veil "
as completely seizes St. Paul's imagination
as the image of the letter does in the first
verses. Put a veil; literally, was putting.



or, used to put, a veil on his face when he
had finished speaiing to the people. That
the children of Israel could not steadfastly
look to the end of that which is abolished ;
rather, that the children of Israel might not
gaze on the end of what was passing away.
The object of the veil, according to St. Paul,
was to prevent the Israelites from gazing on
the last gleam of the covenant. In other
words, he did not wish them to be witnesses
of a fading glory. It is preposterous to
imagine that St. Paul is here casting any
blame on the conduct of Moses, as though
he acted fraudulently or delusively. Moses
was aware, and even told the people, that his
legislation was not final (Deut. xviii. 15 —19),
but it would be quite natural that he should
not wish the people to witness the gradual
dimming of the lustre which, in St. Paul's
view, was typical of that transitoriness. It
seems, however, that St. Paul is here either
(1) following a different reading or rendering
of Exod. xxxiv. 38 ; or (2) is adopting some
Jewish hagadah; or (3) is giving his own
turn to the narrative, as the rabbis habitually
did, by way of midrash, or exposition. For
from the narrative of Exodus we should not
gather that it was the object of Moses to
hide the disappearance of the splendour, but
rather to render the light endurable. In our
Authorized Version the verse runs, " tiU
Moses had done speaking with them he put
a veil on his face ; " but the meaning of the
original may be, " after he had done speaking
with them," as the LXX. takes it and the
Vulgate. The end. To interpret this of
Christ, because of Eom. x. 4, is an instance
of the superstitious and unintelligent jfay
in which systems are made out of a mosaic of
broken texts. The foolish character of the
interpretation is shown when we consider
that it involves the inference that Moses put
a veil on his face in order to prevent the
Israelites from seeing Christ I But this
attempt to illustrate Scripture by catching
at a similar expression applied in a
wholly different way in another part of
Scripture, is one of the normal follies of
scriptural interpretation.

Ver. 14. — ^Their minds. This word is ren-
dered " devices " in ch. ii. 11 ; "minds" inch.
iii. 14 and iv. 4 ; and " thought " in ch. i. 5. It
means that their powers of reason were, so to
speak, petrified. Were blinded ; rather, were
hardened. The verb cannot mean " to blind."
By whom were their minds hardened? It
would be equally correct to say by them-
selves (Heb. iii. 8), or by Satan (ch. iv. 4),
or by God (Eom. xi. 7, 8). The same veU.
Of course the meaning is "a veil of which
the veil of Moses is an exact type." The
veil which prevented them from seeing the
evanescence of the light which shone on the
face of Moses was symbolically identical



OH. m. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS.



61



with that which prevented them also from
Beeing the transitory character of his Law.
It had heen as it were taken from his face
and laid on their hearts (see Acts xiii.
27 — 29; Rom. xi.). Many commentators have
seen in this verse a reference to the Jewish
custom of covering the head with the tallith,
a four-cornered veil, when they were in the
synagogues. But this is doubtful, since the
tallith did not cover the eyes. More pro-
bably his metaphor may have been sug-
gested by Isa. XXV. 7, "And he will destroy in
this mountain the face of the covering cast
over all people, and the veil that is spread over
all nations." Untaken away. There are two
other ways of rendering tliis verse : (1) " For
until this very day at the reading of the old
covenant the same veil remaineth unlifted ;
which veil is done away in Christ," as in
the Revised Version ; or (2) " The same veil
remaineth, it not being revealed that it is
done away va Christ," as it is taken by
Ohrysostom and many others, and in the
margin of the Revised Version. The latter
seems to be the better view. It is not tlie
veil, but the old covenant, which is being
done away in Christ. To the Jews that
truth still remained under a veil. The
present tense, " is in course of annulment,"
might naturally be used until the utter
abrogation of even the possible fuliilment of
the Mosaic Law at the fall of Jerusalem.
In. the reading of the old testament ; rather,
the old covenant. There is no allusion to
the Old Testament as a book, but the phrase
is equivalent to " Moses is read " in the next
verse. (On this obduracy of the Jews, see
Rom. xi. 7, 8, 25.)

Ver. 15. — When Moses is read (Acts xv.
21). The veil; iather,a vet7; a veilof moral
obstinacy, which prevents them from seeing
the disappearance of the old covenant, as
effectually as the veil on the face of Moses
prevented them from seeing (as St. Paul
viewed the matter) the disappearance of
the transitory lustre on the face of Moses.

Ver. 16. — When it shall turn to the lord.
The nominative of the verb is not expressed.
Obviously the most natural word to supply
is the one last alluded to, namely, " the
heart of Israel." The verb may have been
suggested by Bxod. xxxiv. 31. Shall be
taken away ; literally, is in course of re-
moval. The tenses imply that "the moment
the heart of Israel shall have turned to
the Lord, the removal of the veil begins."
Tlicn " tbey shall look on him whom they
pierced " (Zech. xii. 10) ; " He will destroy
in this mountain the face of the coveiiug
east over all people, and the veil that is
spread over all nations " (Isa. xxv. 7).

Ver. 17. — Now the lord is that Spirit.
The " but " (Authorized Version, " now ") in-
troduces an explanation. To whom shall they



turn ? To the Lord. " But the Lord i« the
Spirit." The word " spirit " could not be
introduced thus abruptly and vaguely; it
must refer to something already said, and
therefore to the last mention of the word
" spirit " in ver. 8. The Lord is the Spirit,
who giveth life and freedom, in antithesis
to the spirit of death and legal bondage
(see ver. 6 ; and comp. 1 Cor. xv. 45). The
best comment on the verse is Rom. viii. 2,
" For the law of the spirit of life in Christ
Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin
and death." All life and all religion had
become to St. Paul a vision of all things in
Christ. He has just said that the spirit
giveth life, and, after the digression about
the moral blindness which prevented the Jews
from being emancipated from the bondage
of the letter, it was quite natural for him to
add, " Now the Lord is the Spirit to which
I alluded." The connection in which the
verse stands excludes a host of untenable
meanings which have been attached to it.
There is liberty. The liberty of confidence
(ver. 4), and of frank speech (ver. 12), and of
sonship (Gal. iv. 6, 7), and of freedom from
guilt (John viii. 36) ; so that the Law itself,
obeyed no longer in the mere letter but also
in the spirit, becomes a royal law of liberty,
and not a yoke which gendereth to bondage
(J as. i. 25; ii. 12) — a service, indeed, but
one which is perfect freedom (Rom. v. 1 — 21 ;
1 Pet. u. 16).

Ver. 18. — But we all. An appeal to per-
sonal experience in evidence of the freedom.
With open face ; rather, with unveiled face ;
as Moses himself spoke with God, whereas
the Jews could not see even the reflected
splendour on the face of Moses till he had
shrouded it with a veil. Behohiiug as in a
glass. This is at hast as likely to be the
true meaning as " reflecting as a mirror,"
which the Revised Version (following Chry-
sostom and others) has substituted for it.
No other instance occurs in which the vtrb
in the middle voice has the meaning of " re-
flecting," and the words, "with unveiled
face," imply the image of "beholding."
They are, in fact, a description of " the beatifio
vision." An additional reason for retaining
the translation of our Authorized Version is
that the verb is used in this sense by Philo
(' Leg. Alleg.,' iii. 33). The glory of the
Lord. Namely, him who is " the Eflulgence
of God's glory" (Heb. i. 2), the true She-
chinah, "the Image of the invisible God"
(Col. i. 15). Are changed into the same
image. The present tense implies a gradual
transfiguration, a, mystical and spiritual
change which is produced in us while we
contemplate Christ. Prom glory to glory.
Our spiritual assimilation to Christ comes
from his glory and issuae in a glory like his
(1 Oor. XV. 51 ; comp. " from strength ie



62



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ni. 1— la



strength," PB.lxxxiv. 7). (For the thought,
oomp. 1 John iii. 2.) As by the Spirit of
the lord. This rendering (which is that of
the Vulgate also) can hardly be correct.
The natural meaning of the Greek is "as
hy the [or, from] the Lord the Spirit." Our
change into glory comes from the Lord, who,
as St. Paul has already explained, is the
Spirit of which he has been speaking. No
such abstract theological thought is here in



his mind as that of the "hypostatie union,"
of the Son and the Holy Spirit. He is still
referring to the contrast between the lettei
and the spirit, and his identification of thii
"spirit" in its highest sense with the
quickening life whioli, by the gift of the
Holy Spirit, we receive from Christ, and
which is indeed identical with "the Spirit
of Christ."



HOMILETIOS.

Vers. 1—5. — Souli-literature. " Do we begin again to commend ourselves ?" etc. In
the early Church it was customary for the member who was travelling into another
locality to take with him a letter of commendation from the Church to which he
or she belonged. The apostle says he did hot require such a document from the
Corinthian Church, as some others did, for they themselves were letters written on his
own heart ; and his ministry was a letter written on their hearts also. They were the
living " epistles of Christ, . . . written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living
God ; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart." Our subject is soul-
literature, or Christianity written on the heart ; and I offer five remarks.

I. Christianity written on the soul is Christianity uf the most lboible fobm.
There are some whose caligraphy is difiScult to decipher and whose thoughts are difficult
to understand ; their ideas are misty and their style involved ; but what is written on
the soul is written so clearly that a child can make it out.

IL Christianity written on the soul is Christianity in the most convinoino fobm.
Books have been written on the evidences of Christianity ; not a few by the ablest
men of their times, such as Paley, Larduer, Butler. But one life permeated and
fashioned by the Christian spirit is a far more convincing power than any or all of
their most magnificent productions. He who has been transformed by Christianity
from the selfish, the sensual, and corrupt, into the spiritual, the benevolent, and the
holy, furnishes an argument that baffles all controversy and penetrates the heart.

IIL Christianity written on the soul is Cheibtianity in the most pbksijasivb
FOBM. There are many books " persuasive to piety," and many of them very powerful ;
but the most powerful of them are weak indeed compared to the mighty force of a
Christly life. There is a magnetism in gospel truth embodied, which you seek for in
vain in any written work. When the " Word is made flesh " it becomes " mighty
through God."

IV. Christianity written on the soul is Chbistianity in the most bndubino
FOBM. The tablet is imperishable. You may put truth on paper, but the paper will
moulder ; put it into institutions, but the institutions will dissolve as a cloud ; put it
on marble or brass, but these are corruptible.

V. Christianity written on the soul is Christianity in the divinbst fobm. The
human hand can inscribe it on parchment or engrave it on stone, but God only can
write it on the heart. " The Spirit of the living God." Paul was but the amanuensis,
God is the Author.

Ver. 6. — The ministry of the letter and the ministry of the spirit. " The letter
killeth, but the spirit giveth life." Notice —

I. The twofold ministry. " Ministers . . , not of the letter, but of the spirit." What
does this mean ? Not the two dispensations, the Mosaic and the Christian ; for both
alike had " letter " and " spirit." Nor does it mean a double interpretation of the
Scripture, the literal and the spiritual. It means, I think, the word and the thought,
the sentence and the sentiment. Christianity has both " letter " and " spirit." If it
had no "letter," it would be unrevealed, a thought shut up in the mind of God; if
it had no " spirit," it would be but a hollow sound. The words point to two distinct
methods of teaching Christianity. 1. The technical method. Who are the technical
teachers? (1) The verbalist. There were men in the Corinthian Church who thought



OH. m. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 63



mnch of words. " The words of man's wisdom," high-sounding sentences, oratoric
periods, they scrupulously studied. The spirit of thoufjht is so subtle that it goes off
in the attempt to give it grand verbal costume. (2) The theorist. Those who throw
into a logical system the ideas they have derived from the gospel ; he who exalts his
system of thought or creed and makes it a standard of truth is a minister of the
" letter." The grandest system of theology can no more contain the whole truth than,
a nutshell can the Atlantic. (3) The ritualist. Men must have ritualism of some
kind. What is logic but the ritualism of thought? art but the ritualism of heauty ?
rhetoric but the ritualism of ideas? civilization but the ritualism of the thoughts of
ages ? But those who represent those symbols as supernatural powers and mystic
media of saving grace are ministers of the " letter " rather than of the " spirit." 2.
The spiritual. What is it to be a minister of the "spirit" 1 He is a man more alive
to the grace than the grammar, to the substance than the symbols of revelation. He
is a man who has a comprehensive knowledge of those eternal principles that underlie
all Scriptures, and has a living sympathy with those eternal elements.

II. The twofold results. " The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life." 1. The
result of the technical ministry. It " kiljeth." (1) The verbalist kills. It was said
by Burke "that no man understands less of the majesty of the English constitution
than the nisiprius lawyer, who is always dealing with the technicalities of precedence."
And truly no man understands less of the gospel than he who is constantly dealing
with its verbalities. Words in religion, when taken for realities, " kill," kill inquiry,
freedom, sensibility, moral manhood. (2) The theorist kills. He who preaches his
own little creed instead of the gospel of God kills souls. The Jews formulated a
theory concerning the Messiah from their Scriptures. In their theory he was to appear
in such a form, do such a work, reach such a destiny. He came, hnt did not answer
to their theory, and they rejected him and were damned. Man's theory of the gospel
is not the gospel, any more than pneumatical science is the life-breathing atmo-
sphere. (3) The ritualist kills. He who exalts even the authorized ritualism of the
gospel, such as baptism and the Lord's Supper, to say nothing of the unauthorized
rites, kills souls. The ceremonial Church has ever been a dead Church. The ministry
of the " letter " then " killeth ; " it reduced the Jewish people to the valley of dead
bones, entombed the souls of Europe for many a long century. 2. The result of the
spiritual ministry. " The spirit giveth life." " It is the spirit that quickeneth ; the
flesh profiteth nothing ; the words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are
life." " The spirit giveth life " — life to the intellect, conscience, sympathies, the whole
soul.

Conclusion. How little of this soul-life we have in congregations 1 Creed-life, sect-
life. Church-life, we have in ahundance ; but where is soul-life, the life of holy love,
earnest inquiry, independent action, spiritual freedom in relation to all that is Christ-
like and Divine ?

Vers. 7 — 11. — Divine revelation more glorious in Christ than in Moses. " But if
the ministration," etc. At the outset three facts are noteworthy. 1. The infinite
Father has made a special revelation of himself to his human offspring. 2. This
special revelation of himself has mainly come through two great general sources —
Moses and Christ. 3. The special revelation of himself, as it came through Christ,
far transcends in glory the form it assumed as it came through Moses. The essence of
the revelation is the same, but the forms differ, and the form it assumes in Chris-
tianity are the most glorious. There are two facts here.

L That the special revelation as it came through Moses was glorious. It was so
glorious that " the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses."
Four things impress us with its glory as revealed in Moses. 1. The wonderful display
of divinity attending its manifestation on Mount Sinai. The expression, " the fece
of Moses," refers to this (Exod. xxxiv. 1). What wonderful things Moses saw and
heard during the forty days he was on the mount ! " The Lord rose up and came
from Seir with ten thousand of his saints," etc. 2. The magnificence of its religious
scenes and celebrations. The temple, how splendid 1 the priesthood, how imposing !
the psalmody, how inspiring ! " Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of
Gkxi." 3. The stupendous miracles that stand in connection with it. The wildernew



64 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. in. 1—18

was the theatro of magnificent manifestations — the pillar, the manna, the flowing
rook, the riven sea, etc. 4. The splendid intellects which were employed in connection
loith it. Solomon, Elijah, Daniel, David, EzekieL For these reasons Divine revelation
as it came through Moses was truly glorious.

II. That although this special revelation was glorious as it came in connection with
Moses, it was more glorious as it came io conuection with Christ. " How shall not
the ministration of the spirit be rather glorious?" etc, Confiuing our illustrations on
this point to the passage before us, we observe : 1. 2%e Christian form of revelation it
more likely to give life than the Mosaic. In Moses it was the " ministration of death."
The Jews exalted the " letter " that " killeth " above the " spirit that giveth life,"
and they got buried in forms. In Christ the revelation is the gospel in life. 2. The
Christian form of Divine revelation is more emphatically spiritual than the Mosaic.
It is here called the " ministration of the spirit." In Moses it was associated with
numerous forms and ceremonies ; in Christ there are only two simple rites, and the
spirit throbs in every sentence. 3. The Christian form of Divine revelation i§ more
restorative than the Mosaic. The apostle speaks of the one as the " ministration of
condemnation," of the other as the " ministration of righteousness." Maledictions
thunder in the former, beatitudes in the latter. 4. The Christian form of Divine
revelation is more enduring than the Mosaic. " For if that which is done away [which
passeth away] was glorious, much more that which remaineth is glorious." Judaism
is gone ; Christianity is the " Word of God, which abideth for ever." It is the final
revelation of Heaven to our world.

Such, then, is a brief illustration of the apostle's position ; and the subject, in con-
clusion, serves several important purposes. 1. It serves to expose the absurdity of
making Moses the interpreter of Christ. It has been common with professing Christians
to look at the New Testament through the spectacles of Moses, and thus to Judaize
Christianity. Much in popery, much, alas! in old puritanism, much even in modern
theology, is but Christianity Judaized, a going back to the " beggarly elements." 2. It
serves to show the wrongness of going to Moses to support opinions which you cannot
get from Christ. You can support war, slavery, capital punishment, by going to Moses ;
but you cannot find the shadow of a foundation for these in Chnst. 3. It serves
to reveal the glorious position of a true gospel minister. To show this was the
object of the apostle in the text. The position of Moses, David, Isaiah, and all the
great teachers under the old administration was glorious, but it is scarcely to be com-
pared with the position of him who preaches that Christ of " whom Moses and the
prophets did write."

Vers. 12 — ^18. — The gospel as a transcendent benefactor. " Seeing then that we have
such hope," etc. Amongst the invaluable services which the gospel confers on man,
there are four suggested by the text. It gives him moral courage, spiritual vision, true
liberty, and Christ-like glory. It gives him —

I. Moral couraqe. " Seeing then that we have such hope, we use great plainness
[boldness] of speech : and not as Moses, which put a veil over his face, that the children
of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is abolished," etc. This
means that, seeing the revelation we have of God in Christ is not so terrible as
his revelation in Moses, we have " great boldness." We need have no superstitious
fear or dread. Unlike the Jews, who were afraid to look at the Divine radiance on the
face of Moses, who trembled at the manifestation of God on Sinai, and who lacked the
courage to look at the fact that their system was a temporary one, passing away ; we
have courage to look calmly at the manifestations of God and the facts of destiny.
We use " great boldness." He who has the spirit of Christianity in him has courage
enough to look all questions in the face, and to speak out his convictions with the
dauntless force of true manhood.

II. Spiritual vision. " But their minds were blinded : for until this day remaineth
the same veil untaken away in the reading of the Old Testament ; which veil is done
away in Christ." The "veil" of Moses was on his face, some material used for the
moment and then withdrawn, but the " veil " referred to here was that " veil " of
prejudice and traditional notions which prevented them from seeing when Paul wrote
that the old dispensation has passed away before the brightness of the new. The gouli



OH. ra. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 65

of unrenewed men are so veiled by depravity that they foil to see anything in the great
universe of spiritual realities. The spiritual is no more to them than nature is to men
born blind. Now, the gospel is the only power under God that can take the " veil "
from the soul, and enable us to see things as they are. Its grand mission is to open the
eyes of the blind, etc.

III. Tkde liberty. " Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty," By the
" Spirit of the Lord " here is meant the Spirit of Christ, his moral temper ; and wherever
this is, there is freedom. 1. Freedom from the londage of ceremonialism. 2. Free-
dom from the trammels of legality. 3. Freedom from the dominion of sin. 4. Freedom
from the fewr of death. The Spirit of Christ is at once the guarantee and the inspiration
of that liberty which no despot can take away, no time destroy — the " glorious liberty
of the children of God."

IV. Christ-like oloby. " But we all, with open face, beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord," etc. 1. The glory of Christ was the glory of moral excellence. He
was the " brightness of his Father's glory." 2. The glory of Christ is communicable.
It comes to man through transformation: "changed into the same image." 3. The
glory of Christ which conjes to man is progressive : " from glory to glory." The gospel
alone can make men glorious.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS.

Ve.J. 1 — 6. — No letters of commendation needed ; his converts were epistles. In the
close of the last chapter St. Paul had spoken of men who corrupted the Word of God
(retailed it as a commodity for their own profit), and he had put himself and his ministry
in contrast to them. Likely enough, this would provoke criticism. The quick interro-
gation comes — Was he commending himself, or did he need letters of commendation to
them and from them ? " Ye are our epistle ; " writtea on his heart, known and read
of all men — an epistle coming from Christ, and produced instrumentaUy by him as
Christ's agent ; not written with ink, but by the Spirit ; " not in tables of stone, but in
fleshy tables of the heart." With regard to the figure, it is probable that there was not
another occasion in his life when it would have occurred to his imagination. Circum-
stances conspired with his state of mind to produce it, and one can almost trace the
sequence of associations out of which it came. What solicitude the former Epistle had
given him! What would be the effect? Amid his thanksgiving to God (ch. xi. 14)
it was a matter of joy that he had written this letter, and he could now see God's hand
very clearly in its production. Was not that Epistle a new and additional proof that he
was Christ's apostle? Yet what was that Epistle, written with ink, to this "epistle of
Christ," recorded on the soul, a part of itself, a part of its immortality? It was
" manifestly declared " that they were Christ's epistle, and it was equally clear that this
epistle was due to his ministration. " Ministered by us." Had they not given a new
and striking evidence of the two facts, viz. Christ the Author of the epistle written on
their hearts, and he the apostle, the ministerial agent of the work ? It was a fresh
motive to confidence : " Such trust have we through Christ to God-ward." Are we
boasting of the late success of our Epistle — of our former successes ? Nay ; how can we
be " sufficient of ourselves," or rely on our own wisdom and strength, when we have
just confessed that we wrote to you " out of much affliction and anguish of heart, with
many tears," and while the period of suspense lasted we were unfitted for our work,
and at last, no rest in our spirit, we left Troas for Macedonia so as to see Titus the
sooner? Nay; "our sufiiciency is of God." It is he who also "hath made us able
ministers of the New Testament." And wherein differs this new covenant from the old ?
Already he had spoken of " tables of stone " as contrasted with " fleshy tables of the
heart," and the antithesis is resumed and further elaborated. The covenant is new, it
is of the spirit, it is of the spirit that giveth life. Opposite in these particulars was the
old covenant, the Mosaic Law, its ministers being chiefly engaged in executing a system
of rules and ceremonials, adhering in aU things to the exact language, and concerning
themselves in no wise beyond the outward form. The external man with his interests
and fortunes occupied attention. A nation was to exemplify the system, and therefore,
by necessity, it largely addressad the senses, borrowing its isntives and enforcing ita

n. OOBIKTHIAKS. T



66 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. jn. 1— la

penalties from a consideration of objects near and palpable. If we read Bom. vii. we
see what St. Paul meant by " the letter killeth." On the other hand, the dispensation
of the spirit " giveth life." The antithesis is stated in the strongest possible form —
ileath and life. This, accordingly, was the apostle's " sufficiency," a spiritual wisdom
for enlightenment, a spiritual power for carrying out his apostolic plans, and an attained
spiritual result seen in the recovery of Gentiles from the degradation of idolatry, and in
the freedom of Jews from the bondage of the Mosaic Law. — L.

Vers. 7 — 11. — Ministry of the Old Testament compared with that of the New, and
the superiority of the latter shovm. He speaks now of the " ministration of death," not
of it as the ministry of the letter; and yet it was " glorious." Compared with the reve-
lation made to Enoch, Abraham, Jacob, it was "glorious." Whether witnessing to the
unity of God or to his providence over an elect race, it was an illumination, or splendour,
unequalled in the centuries before Christ. Tribes were organized as a nation, bondmen
transformed into free men ; and, despite their proclivity to heathenish idolatry, they came
finally to hold and defend the doctrine of one God, their Jehovah, their Lord of hosts,
their Benefactor and Friend, as the doctrine underlying all their hopes and aspirations.
The sanctity of human life which the great lawgiver made the foundation of his system,
the rights of persons and property, the obligations of brotherhood among themselves,
duties to the poor and the stranger, duties to their nation, reverence for the sabbath and
its worship, obedience to God in the minutest things, were taught them with a precision
and a force that largely succeeded in producing the only phenomenon of its kind in history
— a nation educated in the sense of God, of his presence in their midst, and of his pro-
vidence as an unceasing and omnipotent agency in their homes and business. What
a "glory" there was in their hterature we all know. No psalmody is given in the
New Testament ; none was wanted ; inspired poetry reached its full measure of
excellence in King David and his poetic successors ; and the Christian heart, whether
in prayer or praise, finds mnch of its deepest and most devout utterance in these
ancient Judsean hymns. Reproduction is the test of enduring greatness. In this
respect the genius and piety of David stand unrivalled. Whenever men worship God,
he is the " chief singer " yet ; nor have we any better standard by which to try the
merit of our religious poetry and music than the similarity of their efi'ect upon us to
that produced by the Psalms of David. Last of all in the order of time, first in
its importance, what a " glory " in him born of the Virgin Mary ! On this system St.
Paul made no war. What he antagonized was the misunderstanding and abuse of
the system in the hands of Pharisees and Sadducees, and, especially in the shape it
assumed among the Judaizers at Corinth and in Galatia. He calls the old covenant
" glorious," a word he never uses but in his exalted moods of thought. True, it was
'• written and engraven in stones," but by whose hand ? Even " the face of Moses "
was more than the Israelites could bear, "for the glory of his countenance." The
splendour irradiating Moses was transient — "which glory was to be done away;" but
it did what it was intended to do by demonstrating where he had been and on what
mission. Yet — the glory acknowledged — it was " the ministration of death." All the
sublimity was that of terror, none that of beauty, when Sinai became the shrouded
pavilion of Jehovah. " Whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death."
This external characterization was a symbol of its condemning power. " When the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died." It was not in the language of the Law
that David prayed, " Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy Holy
Spirit from me ; " nor in sympathy with the Law that Isaiah spoke of the Anointed
One, " The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me ; " but in contemplation of grace
beyond Law, and therefore extra to the ordinary workings of the Mosaic economy. A
provision existed for these spiiitual anticipations, and it was a part of its excellence,
the highest part, that it had on a few minds this prevenient influence. Still, the
distinctive feature stands, "a ministration of death;" and to the hour -.-len Jerusalem
and her temple fell, Sinai was the mount that could not be toucheii -"ithout death.
It had a glory, a derived and subordinate glory, and the glory itself was to die.
Certain qualities of Hebrew mind under the system, methods of thought, poetic modes
of looking at nature, cultivated instincts of providence, yearnings for spirituality, were
io survive and attain their completeness ; but the system was to end by the law of



CH. in. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 67

limitation organic in its structure. Now, on this basis, the glorious economy of which
Moses was the minister, and the transientness of its duration, St. Paul builds an
argument for the superior glory of the gospel. It is the " ministration " of the Holy
Ghost. It is " the ministration of righteousness." Under the economy of grace the
righteousness of God was first secured. That done, the justice of God appeared in the
sinner's justification. And in this justification the converted man realizes that sense of
demerit and guilt which arises in his personal instinct of justice, is met and satisfied ;
while, at the same time, gratitude and love are awakened by the unmerited goodness of
God in Christ. The two stand together. They are inseparable in the constitution of
the universe. They are inseparable by the laws of the human mind. The joy of the
one is vitally blended with the gladness of the other ; so that if the renewed heart feels
its indebtedness to the mercy of God in Christ, it feels also that its salvation rests on
the vindicated righteousness of God in Christ. It is what Christ is to the Father that
makes him precious as the Christ of his faith, hope, and love. Most fitly, then, St.
Paul presents the antithetic emphasis on condemnation and righteousness. Condemna-
tion and righteousness are legal terms. The element of similarity in their common
relation to Law is clearly recognized. Without this common element the antithesis
could have no meaning. The dissimilarity is thus made vivid. " Much more doth the
ministration of righteousness exceed in glory." Each is a " ministiation," each a
" ministration " of " glory, " but the " ministration of righteousness doth exceed in
glory." The idea is explained and strengthened yet further. A favourite thought of
the Jews, and particularly of the Pharisees, was the perpetuity of the Law. After the
Exile, this was the stronghold of patriotism, sentiment, and religion. On no other
ground could Pharisaism have acquired its popular ascendency. This was the battle it
was ever fighting for the nation — ^the dignity of the Law as seen in its permanent utility,
since only thereby could Israel attain her true destiny and far surpass her ancient
renown. Of course the anti-Pauline party at Corinth had much to say on St. Paul's
view of the Law. Here, then, is an opportunity for him to defend his ministry. The
point now is that the Mosaic ministration had no glory " in this respect," that is, in
respect to the succeeding dispensation, which had entirely obscured its lustre. The once
stately figure was not erect, but prostrated ; it was disrobed of its gorgeous vestments ;
it wore no longer the breastplate with its precious stones ; its glory had departed ; and
all this " by reason of the glory that excelleth." If so, then how transcendent the
splendour of the Spirit's dispensation? "If that which is done away was glorious,
much more that which remaineth is glorious." In the former Epistle he had written
of various glories — one of the sun, another of the moon, still another of the stais, the
radiance distributed over immeasurable spaces and among orbs widely different, each
preserving from age to age its own distinctive splendour, every ray of light imaging the
world whence it issued. A firmament was before his eye in its circles of magnifictuce.
But now the glory, on which in other days he had looked with so niuuh pride as a
Pharisee, had passed for ever from his sight. Yet, so far from feeling that there was loss,
he exulted in the infinite gain, because " of the glory that excelleth." — L.

Vers. 12 — 18. — Boldness of speech ; the two ministries ; from " glory to glory."
Dwelling on the superior excellence of the gospel, it was natural for the apostle to speak
of his hopefulness (such hope) and of the effect thereof on his ministry. He had spoken
of his trust (ver. 4), and now he expresses the hope which filled his soul from " the inter-
vening vision of the glory of his work" (Stanley) and its future results. He uses
" great plainness of speech " — unreservedness, vrithout disguise, boldness (the last con-
veying his meaning most fully). The " able ministers of the new covenant " were also
bold, having no reason for concealment, but every reason for openness and candour. Prom
the beginning of the Spirit's dispensation this boldness had characterized apostolic
preaching. St. Peter, who had shown such cowardice in the high priest's palace, evinced
the utmost fearlessness at Pentecost. It was a spectacle of wonder to the Sanhedrim.
" When they saw the boldness of Peter and John . . . they marvelled ; " and what was
the explanation of their courage V " They took knowledge of them that they had been
with Jesus." Immediately thereafter we hear of prayer offered by the Church that
" with all boldness " they may speak God's Word. Boldness, at that time, was a virtue
in request, and not one of the apostles failed to meet its requisitions. At this point tin



08 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. in. 1— la

contrast liatween the Law and the gospel presents a new aspect. Moses had veiled hii
face, " that the children of Israel could not steadfastly look to the end of that which is
aholished," The veil concealed the evanescence of the hrightness and was symholic of
that judicial hlindness which feU upon Israel. " Their minds were blinded," or hardened,
so that their perceptions were not in accordance with facts ; impressibility was lost, feeling
was callous. " Until this day remainefch the same veil untaken away in the reading of
the Old Testament." The punishment continued. What were the old Scriptures but a
sealed book to most of the Jews in the apostle's day ? and now, after eighteen centuries,
how palpable to us the confirmation of his words in the ignorance and the delusions oi
the Jews touching the spiritual import of their sacred books 1 " Until this day " has a
meaning for us it could not have had to St. Paul's contemporaries. Time has done
nothing or next to nothing to remove the darkness enveloping Jewish mind. Shrewd,
intelligent, sagacious, in everything else ; distinguished on nearly every arena of com-
mercial and professional life ; often foremost among men in matters as widely separated
as music and statesmanship ; — they yet present the strangest of contrarieties in adhesion
to prejudices almost two thousand years old, and that too while evincing an adaptiveness
to every form of civilization and to all the modifications going on in the current activities
of the ^e. Find them where you may, they are pliant to circumstances. Not a
national mould can be mentioned in which their external character cannot be cast, and
yet, while this plasticity is such that we have Russian, Italian, German, Spanish, French,
English, American, Jews, and withal the individual nationality apparent, there is the
same religious blindness of which St. Paul wrote long ago. Their land, homes, insti-
tutions, the objects that come before us when we think of Judaea and Galilee, have
passed from their grasp ; but they hold fast to the shreds of their ancient beliefs, nor can
any power relax their hold. Now, surely, this is inexplicable on the ordinary grounds
of human experience. No law of the mind, no law of society, can explain the phe-
nomenon. Such a spectacle as the Jews present of retaining their attachment and
devotion to a skeleton religion, from which the soul has departed, is unique in the
world's history. St. Paul solves the enigma; it is providential, it is punitive ; "until
this day the veil is untaken away." Two statements foUow : (1) the " veil is done
away in Christ ; " (2) but, though done away in Christ, " even unto this day, when Moses
[his writings] is read, the veil is upon their heart." Only in and through Christ have
we the power to see Christ in the Old Testament. Only in Christ risen and glorified,
only in him as sending the Holy Ghost, can we understand the relations of Moses to the
gospel. " Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the Scrip-
tures " — a post-resurrection matter altogether and coincident with the preliminary gift
of the Holy Ghost during the forty days. Tet,|while asserting that Moses has been
unveiled, and that his testimony to Christ, as the end of the Law to every believer, has
been made clear and simple, nevertheless, the veil remains. The idea would seem to be,
" The veil remains not taken away in the reading of the old covenant, it not being
unveiled to them that It (the old covenant) is done away in Christ " (note in Lange's
' Commentary '). But was there not room for hope ? Already, in thousands of cases,
the veil had been removed. A blinder and more rabid Pharisee than St. Paul lived not
in Jerusalem, and he had had the veil taken away. The work was going on. One day
it would bo completed and Israel would know her Messiah. " When it shall turn to the
Lord, the veil shall betaken away." We, in the present day, read this third chapter of
the Second Corinthians in a fuller light than even our immediate ancestors. The events of
the nineteenth century have shown us how near the Jews are to the heart of Providence.
Taken as a body of people, they are advancing in wealth, in culture, in certain elements
of social power, at a rate beyond the average progress of races. Christian thinkers cannot
look at these facts without seeing much more than material prosperity. Providence is
the historic antecedent of the Spirit. The prophets of God in our age are not Elijahs
and Elishas, but events that revolutionize thought and silently change the hearts of
nations. But this turning to the Lord (ver. 16) must be explained as to its Divine
Agent, and the nature, thoroughness, and growing excellence of the work be set forth.
Itt Divine Agent. He is the Holy Ghost. Not only did Christ teach that he depended
on the Holy Spirit for his anointing" as the ;Messiah, and that the unction proceeding
thence was the strength and inspiration of his earthly work (" The Spirit of the Lord is
upon me "); not only did he refer everything to the fulness of the Spirit in him (" I da



OH. in. 1— la] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. ««

nothing of myself) ; not only did he wait for its baptismal descent upon him liefore
entering on his ministry, and' acknowledge his presence in his miracles and teaching
(" If I cast out devils by the Spirit of God," etc. ; " The words 1 speak unto you, I speak
not of myself "); but, in the most solemn hours of his existence, death just at hand, he
taught the disciples to expect the Spirit as his gift, stating what would be his offices aa
Remembrancer, Convincer, Witness, Glorifier, and in all the Comforter. This was to ba
their outfit for discipling all nations, for victory over themselves as to all self-seeking and
self-furthering emotions, for triumph over all opposing forces. This was to be the means
of realizing him as their glorified Lord, so that they should know him no more after
the flesh, but after the Spirit. Now, we must not fail to notice that we are Indebted
to St. Paul for a very full portrayal of the actual work of the Spirit in the Church.
One may call him the historian of the Spirit, the thinker who, under God, discerned his
blessed operations in their variety and compass, the writer who put them on record for
the illumination of the Church in all ages, the man who laid bare his own soul in
extremities of sorrow and in moments of supreme happiness so that we might have his
theology of the Holy Ghost in its experimental results. From him, then, we have not
only the completest doctrinal instruction on this most vital subject, but likewise the
flesh-and-blood view superinduced upon the anatomy of theological truth ; witness this
third chapter : yet this is only one among his many-sided presentations of this topic.
Observe, however, this chapter fills a special place in his system of teaching. Step by
step he had been approaching a point at which he could demonstrate the pre-eminent
excellence of the gospel. Charity had been delineated once aud for ever ; the resurrec-
tion had been argued on a method and in a manner unusual with him; so too the
economy of the Church as a society divinely planned. In this third chapter all his
prominent ideas coalesce in one great master-truth, viz. the dispensation of the gospel as
the ministry of the Spirit. The phrase, " ministry of the Spirit," is itself remarkable. It
includes, in a certain sense, the ministry of Moses, while differentiating the old covenant
from the new. It takes in all ministries, apostolic, ordinary, and the numerous kinds of
the ordinary. If we have lost some of these as they existed in St. Paul's day, how
many have we gained as original to later times and generic to circumstances called into
existence by England and America in the eighteenth century — the century of a constel-
lation of epochs in the firmament of history ? " Now the Lord is that Spirit." Every-
where, in everything, the Lord Jesus Christ is the Dispenser of its manifold influence.
" Being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise
of the Holy Ghost, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear." It is the
doctrine of Pentecost. It is the miracle and grandeur of Pentecost. Yet St. Peter does
little more than state the fact. The doctrinal elaboration waits for St. Paul, and these
two Epistles furnish the opportunity. Nature, thoroughness, and groiving excellence of
-the Spirits work. It is liberty. " Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty."
Liberty from the pedagogy of the Law ; liberty from the tyranny of the carnal intellect ;
liberty from that national domination which in the case of the Jews offered such a solid
resistance to the gospel ; liberty from Gentile idolatry ; liberty from every agency that
wrought evil in the soul of man. " If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be
free indeed." But it was the glorified Son who was to make men firee by communicating
the Holy Ghost. It is a revelation of God in Christ and Christ in the Spirit of the
conaciousness and conscience of men, and therefore thorough. It addresses his conscious-
ness as one who has the capacity to think, feel, judge ; and it addresses his conscience as
to how he should think, feel, judge, as touching his obligations and as enforcing them
by an immortality of reward or punishment. By the truth of the gospel, by the Spirit
accompanying that truth and rendering it effective, consciousness is enlightened, culti-
vated, enlarged. The man sees much in himself he never saw before. And his moral
sense or conscience, that mightiest of the instincts, is instructed and guided so as to
represent the Spirit. It is in the soul a Kemembrancer, a Convincer, a Witness, a Glorifier
of Christ, a Comforter. And under this twofold development which is brought into
unity by the Spirit of truth and love, the work of grace extends to all the man's
faculties. The intellect, the moral sensibilities, the social affections, lift up the physical
man into themselves, and grow together into the spiritual man. Not an appetite, not
a passion, not an attribute, of body or soul is left neglected. The ideal is " body, soul,
and spirit " consecrated to Christ, living, working, suffering, so that " whatsoever ye de



70 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANSL [oh. in. 1—18

in word or deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus." And its growing excdlence ia
seen in thig, that in harmony with its freedom and its development of spiritual con-
sciousness and conscience, it has an unveiled face. The eye is open and unhindered.
Nothing intervenes hetween it and the glory of the Lord. True, it sees only in a mirror ;
it sees by reflection ; it sees the image merely — the image of God in Christ, the imago
of humanity in Christ, the God-Man, the one perfect Man of the human race. We see
him in the New Testament, in the Gospels and Epistles, in the Acts of the Apostles and
i Q the Apocalypse, the acts of Providence future and final. We see him in all his rela-
tions and aspects — the babe of Mary, the boy of Nazareth, the carpenter's son, the public
Man, Teacher, Benefactor, Healer, Helper, Friend. Kvery page of the New Testament is
as a burnished surface whereon he is presented to the eye of faith as a manifestation of
God's righteousness and love, while he exhibits also the guilt and condemnation of man.
" The glory of the Lord " is thus brought to view amidst the scenes and circumstances
that instruct us in daily life. It is on a level with our comprehension. It finds the
same kind of access to our sympathies that human qualities have in ordinary intercourse.
" I beseech thee, show me thy glory," was the prayer of Moses, and the Lord answered
and made all his goodness pass before him. What Christ's glory was in Moses, in the
Psalms and prophecies, in his incarnation and atoning death, in his glorification ; what
it has been, is now, and will be ; — all this we have in the Scriptures of the Spirit and in
bis Divine ofSces to sanctify the Word. If we behold as in a mirror, is the image dis-
torted, confused, inoperative, ineffective ? Nay ; it is with " open face " that we look,
and the result is we " are changed into the same image from glory to glory." Faith is
the organ of vision, and faith is essentially transforming by its power to make what is an
object of thought and feeling the most effectual of subjective influences. It takes the
object from the outer world, separates it from the limitations of sense and intellect, dis-
connects the object from whatever is darkening and enervating, and secures to it fulness
of activity. Faith is the purest, truest, noblest, fonn of belief. It is belief of things
unseen and eternal, revealed to us by God and testified unto by the most honest and
faithful witnessess the human race could furnish. To give us a Peter, a John, a Paul,
as testifiers, the world was under providential training for many centuries and especially
its elect race, whose ancestor, Abraham, inaugurated the career of the nation by an act
of faith the most pathetic, the most sublime, the most illustrious, in the annals of man-
kind. It is not only a belief of things invisible as disclosed by a Eevealer and assured by
witnesses, but likewise a belief created, directed, and sustained in personal consciousness
by the agency of the Holy Ghost. Hence its power to conform us to the Divine image
as displayed in Christ, and hence also its progressive work. Not only are we changed,
but we are changed " from glory to glory." " The righteousness of God is revealed from
faith to faith," so that we realize more and more clearly the consistency of the Divine
righteousness in our justification, end the righteousness formed in our souls by the Spirit,
We know why we are pardoned and by whom renewed, and, as we advance into new
stages of experience, the past work of grace is rendered more and more intelligible.
Current experiences leave much unexplained. Infancy, childhood, youth, in religious
life are not fully comprehended till the interpretative light of manhood is thrown back
upon them. " From glory to glory ; " this is true of every Christian virtue. At first
we are timid in confessing Christ before the world ; the cross is heavy ; self-denial is
often very painful ; the remains of the carnal mind are yet strong enough to resist when
some onerous task is put upon us ; but in time we gain strength, and in time are able to
run and not weary, to walk and not faint. It is " from strength to strength," as the
psalmist sang long ago. Take the virtue of patience ; what years are needed to acquire
it in any large degree 1 St. Peter says, " Add to your faith, virtue," etc. ; keep up the
supply, and exercise all diligence in building up one virtue by means of another. Again,
" Grow in grace ; " if growth stops, grace stops. " From glory to glory." Temptations
that had to be fought against, and sometimes ineffectually, twenty years ago, trouble us
no longer. Infirmities are less infirm. Mysteries that used to perplex have ceased to
disturb. People whose presence was an annoyance can be borne with. Irritations,
recurring daily, have lost their power to ruffle the temper. Many a crooked way has
been made straight, many a rough place smooth, many a darkened spot bright, to our
steps. " IVom glory to glory." Grace has worked its way down into our instincts and
begun their fuller development. Thence comes the white light so grateful to sight and



OH. in. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. Tl

so helpful. It is reflected upon the intellect, the sense-organs, the outward world,
and dissipates the occasional gloom that falls upon us when Satan's " It is written "
obscures our perceptions, or when the logic of the sense-intellect gathers its mists about
our pathway. Blessed hours of illumination are those which attend the later stages of
grace penetrating the depths of instinct. Doubts are over ; for we know whom we have
believed. " From glory to glory." Gradually our hearts are detached from the world,
and, while its beauty and love and tenderness are none the less, they are seen as parts of
a higher life and a remoter sphere. Afflictions, once " grievous," yield " the peaceable
fruit of righteousness ; " for the " afterward " has come, and what an " afterward " / To
be reconciled to the cross of pain ; to glory in the cross of the Divine Sufferer ; to die to
self as we die when the Man of sorrows becomes the Christ of our instincts ; to say, " Thy
will be done " with no half-way utterance, but from the heart, and submit not only
willingly but gladly to whatever it may please Providence to ordain ; — this indeed is
proof that we have advanced "from glory to glory" — L.

Ver. 2. — " Owr epistle.'' Paul did the work of his life partially by his voice, but to
no small extent by his pen. His compositions which have come down to us, and by
which we chiefly know him, are epistolary. His letters were admitted, in his own time,
and even by his enemies and traducers, to be weighty and powerful. But in his own
view the best of all his epistles — those which most unmistakably witnessed to his
apostleship — were the characters, the new lives, of those who by his ministry had
received the gospel of Christ. Whether as amanuenses who had indited these spiritual
epistles, or as tabellarii, or letter-carriers, who had charge of them, and delivered them
to human society, the apostles " ministered " their converts, who attested their skill and
fidelity. At the expense of complicating the figure, Paul observes of the Corinthians
that they were written in the hearts of himself and his colleagues. The lesson of the text
is that Christians are ever authenticating the ministry of faithful preachers of the gospel,

I. Men mat kead in the heaet and life of the convert the Divine com-
mission OP THE minister. There are such proofs of the divinity of the doctrine in
its effects upon the character and conduct of its sincere recipients as point up to the
heavenly authority by which-the agents were appointed and authenticated.

II. And the faithfulness and zeal of the minister. Paul had a good con-
science with regard to the manner in which he had discharged his sacred and benevolent
service to his fellow-men. Especially was this the case with his ministry to the Corin-
thians. In his First Epistle to them he had written, " If I be not an apostle unto others,
yet doubtless I am to you ; for the seal of mine apostleship are ye in the Lord."

III. And the adaptation op the ministry to the needs and the oibcum-
STANCBS op men. Evcuts proved that to Jew and to Gentile, to men of every class
and character, the gospel of Christ was the power of God unto salvation. This Church
at Corinth was as an epistle written in various languages, in various styles, addressed to
all nations and to all conditions of men, and assuring them that the apostles of Christ
were laden with treasure which was able to enrich and to bless the world. — T.

Ver. 3. — " Epistles of Christ." Some teachers had visited the Christiana of Corinth,
who boasted of the letters of introduction they brought with them, authenticating their
commission and their ministry. Paul needed no such epistles ; for the members of the
Church were themselves his epistles ; and better still, they were not only his, they were
Christ's epistles, manifestly and undeniably such. The same may be said of all true
disciples and followers of the Lord Jesus; it is an honourable and an inspiriting
designation.

I. The whiter — Christ. Many great men, especially great thinkers, have per-
petuated their influence and. have served their race by their writings. As poets, philo-
sophers, or moralists, they have made a place for themselves in the mind of humanity.
The greatest of all, the Divine Man, wrote nothing. It is greater to be than to write ;
and the Lord Jesus simply lived and worked, suffered, died, and conquered. He could
not compress and limit his mind within the compass of a treatise or a volume. Ha
left his evangelists and apostles to write of him; his earthly manifestation thus spoke a
umversal language. Tet, in a sense, he has always been writing, and he is writing new.
He is still daily igsning epistles to the world.



72 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. m. 1—18.

IT. The epistle — Cheistianb. Asa friend and counsellor, when on a journey and
at a distance, communicates by letter with those who need his guidance and the assur-
aneo of his interest, so our Lord, though he has ascended on high, is ever sending
epistles to the children of men. Every Christian upon whom he impresses his own
will, character, and purposes, thus becomes Christ's communication to the world,
written by his hand, and authenticated by his autograph. Every individual is a
syllable, every congregation a word, every generation of believers a line, in the ever-
lengthening scroll, which approaches its close as the ages near the end.

III. The tablet — the hbakt. God does not write on stone, as men did in ancient
monumental inscriptions, or as he once did on the tables of the Law. Nor on waxen
tablets, as men wrote of old with the stylus, in notes of ordinary business or friendship.
Nor on parchment or papyrus, as perhaps these Epistles of Paul were written. But
Christ writes on tablets that are hearts of flesh. The expression, adapted from the Old
Testament, is an impressive one. In the Proverbs, Wisdom invites the young man to
write her precepts upon the tablets of his heart. By Jeremiah the Lord promised to
write his Law upon his people's heart. Christ takes the human soul and works upon it,
and engraves there his own characters, sets down there his own signature, and sends the
human nature — so written upon — into the world, to tell of himself, to convey his
thought, his will.

IV. The agbnot — not ink, bxjt the Spirit op Qod. As in the processes of
nature we see the operation of the living God, so in grace we discern spiritual hand-
writing. The Spirit of God most deeply reaches and most blessedly affects the spirit
of man. The Spirit carries truth and love home to the heart with an incomparable
power. He writes upon the soul in deep, legible, sacred, and eternal characters.

V. The handweitino and substance op the epistles. "What difference there
is in the appearance and in the matter of the letters we daily receive ! They vary in
handwriting, in style, in tone, in matter, according to the character of the writer, the
relation of the writer to the reader, the business upon which they treat. But there ia
something characteristic in all — all tell us something of our correspondents, and of their
mind and wiU. So is it with these living epistles described in the text. Every epistle
tells of the Divine Writer, bears witness to the Lord from whom it emanates, is evidently
written in his handwriting, and reveals his mind and heart. Every epistle must be so
authenticated by his signature that it cannot be suspected to be a forgery. Spirituality,
holiness, obedience, meekness, benevolence, — these are the proofs that the epistle is the
composition of the Christ. This is to be manifestly, unmistakably, declared.

VI. The beadees — all men. There is some writing which only a few can read ;
the characters may be ill written and illegible, or they may be in cipher, or the languai^e
may be scientific and technical. There are letters of private business or of personal
friendship, only intended for certain individuals. But there is literature, such as the
Bible or the law of the land, intended for the instruction and benefit of all. So, whilst

there is religious language only fully understood by the initiated, by a select class e.g,

doctrines, meditations, prayers — there is language intended for all mankind. The Chris"
tian character and life can be read with profit by all men. They can comprehend the
virtues which adorn the Christian, and which are the manifest signs of the Lord's
spiritual presence. If we are truly Christ's, then his handwriting will be legible to all
men, and all men who know us may gain some advantage through reading what the
Divine hand has inscribed upon our nature. — T.

Vers. 6 — 11. — 2%e old and the new. The warm and affectionate nature of the
apostle had embraced the religion of Christ with a fervour, an attached devotion, exceed-
ing even that which he had shown in his earlier days towards the dispensation in which
he had been nurtured. Not that he had lost any of the reverence, the affection, he had
cherished towards the covenant which God had estabhshed with his Hebrew ancestors •
but that the new dispensation was so glorious to the view of his soul that it shed its
brightness upon the economy which it replaced. The contrast drawn here seems almost
depreciatory of that Law which was " given by Moses," when that Law was brought
into comparison with the " grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ."

I. The new is bbttbb than the old. If God is a God of order, if progresi
characterizes his works, if development is a law of his procedure, then it ia only



OH. m. 1— la] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 73

reasonable to believe, what we find to be the case, that that which displaces and super
mAbs what was good is itself preferable and more excellent.

II. The spikit is better than the letter. Yet "the letter "was adapted to the
childhood of the race, and was indeed necessary for the communication of the spiritual
lesson to be conveyed from heaven. But Christianity cannot be compressed into any
document; it is itself a spirit, unseen and intangible, but felt to be mighty and
pervasive.

III. Kiqhteousness is better than condemnation. The old covenant abounded
in prohibitions and in threats of punishment. The Law, when broken, as it incessantly
was broken, is a sentence of condemnation to all who are placed under it. But it is the
distinctive honour of Christianity that it brings in a new, a higher, an everlasting
righteousness. It has thus more efBcacy than the most faultless law of rectitude, for it
supplies the motive and the power of true obedience.

IV. Life is better than death. " The soul that sinneth, it shall die " — such is
the import of the old covenant, which thus ministered death to those who were under
it. "The gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord" — such is the
evangel of the new covenant to mankind. Death is the emblem of all that is dark,
dreary, and repulsive ; life is fraught with brightness, beauty, joy, and progress. Well
might the apostle rise to fervid eloquence when depicting the incomparable moral
excellence and beauty of the covenant of Divine grace. And justly might he deem his
office one of highest honour and happiness, as bringing salvation and a blessed immor-
tality to the lost and dying sons of men.

V. PjTernal glory is better than tbansitort and perishable splendour.
There was a glory in the scene and circumstances amid which the Law was given ;
there was a glory in that code of piety and rectitude which was then conferred upon the
chosen nation ; there was a glory in the illumined countenance of the great lawgiver
when he came down from the mount. But this glory was for a season, and indeed it
almost lost its title to be spoken of as glory, by reason of the glory that excelletti.
The ministration of the Spirit, of righteousness, that which remaineth, this is encom-
passed with a halo, an aureole, of spiritual and heavenly splendour which shall brighten
untU it merges in the ineffable glory of eternity. — T.

Vers. 15, 16. — The veil. The historical incident in this passage makes way for the
allegorical representation. When Moses came down from the mount he veiled his face
that the people might not see his features and might not witness the fading of his
celestial glory. And Paul afSxms that a similar veil conceals the countenance of the
great prophet and lawgiver when his writings are publicly read in the hearing of his
countrymen. In many ways the Pentateuch is a witness to the Messiah, even Jesus.
But over the Pentateuch, as read, there rests a veil which hinders the Jews from pene-
trating to the spiritual, the prophetic, meaning of the inspired writer. Moses testified of
Christ ; but to the unenlightened the writings of Moses prevent any perception, any
vision, of the Divine Lord. A wmilar veU keeps many from apprehending the truth
which is so near them.

I. In what dobs the veil consist ? Especially in prejudice and in unbelief. As
the Israelites were so persuaded of the incomparable excellence of the Mosaic Law that
they could not discern the higher revelation to which that Law was designed to lead,
so oftentimes men's minds are so preoccupied with their own notions of religion, of
righteousness, etc., that they are not prepared to give heed to the Divine manifestation
and appeal.

II. What does the veil hide ? The covering referred to in the context hid the
face of the lawgiver ; but the veil of error and of unbelief conceals the countenance of
Christ, the revelation of Divine attributes, purposes, and promises. What it would be
most for our interests to behold we may, by our sin and foUy, obscure from our own
view. See what we may, if we behold not the light of God's glory in the face of Jesus
Christ we forfeit the highest privileges of which we are capable.

TIT . How IS THE VEIL REMOVED ? The answer is very simple, " When it shall turn
to the Lord." That is to say, the obstacle to spiritual vision lies with ourselves and
not with Heaven. Repentance, or the turning of the heart away from sin, is the
condition of true enlightenment. Whilst the mind is occupied Arith itself and its own



74 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. m. 1— la

inclinations and fancies, the spiritual glory of the Saviour is not discernible. It only
needs that, under the guidance of the Spirit of God, the mind should look away from
self to Christ, in order that at once the scales should fall from the eyes of the beholder,
and the veil should drop from the face of the Redeemer, and a true re-velation should
tal^e place.

IV. What does the removal op the veil effect ? 1. The transitory character
of preparatory dispensations is clearly discerned ; the veil being dropped, it is seen that
the glory of the older covenant has gone. 2. The true glory of Christ and of
Christianity is made manifest ; the new covenant appears in all its splendour, unfading
and eternal. — T.

Ver. 17. — The spirit of liberty. If there are two words especially dear to St. Paul,
they are these — the spirit as distinguished from the form and the letter, and liberty as
distinguished from religious bondage.

I. Man's need of liberation. 1. Sin is bondage, however he may confuse between
liberty and licence. There is no slave so crippled and so pitiable as is the bondman of
sin. 2. Man's happiness and well-being depend upon his deliverance from this spiritual
serfdom. 3. No earthly power can effect this great enfranchisement.

II. The Divine Liberator. Many of the designations applied to our Lord Jesua
imply this character and function. He is the Saviour, who saves from the yoke of sin,
the doom of death ; the Redeemer, who ransoms from a spiritual captivity, who pays
the price, and sets the prisoner free. " The Lord is the Spirit ; " i.e. the work of redemp-
tion was wrought by Jesus in the body, and is applied and made actual to the individual
soul by the unseen but mighty and ever-present Spirit, in whose operations the Lord
Christ perpetuates his action and achieves his dominion.

III. The essence op spiritual liberty. It is irrespective of personal condition ;
for the slave can enjoy its sweets, even when his clanking chains remind him of his
earthly bondage. It is emancipation from the curse and penalty of the Law, as this
oppresses every sinner who is at all aware of his real condition. It is freedom from
what St. Paul calls the dominion of sin. It is the glad consecration of all powers to the
service of the Divine Redeemer. It is " the glorious liberty of the children of Grod."

IV. The fruits of freedom. 1. Obedience, strange and paradoxical as the asser-
tion seems, is the consequence of the gracious enfranchisement of the soul. The service
of the heart, which cannot be rendered in bondage, is natural in the state of emancipa-
tion. 2. Joy is natural to the emancipated slave, who realizes the dignity and the
blessedness of freedom. 3. Praise of the Deliverer never ceases, but ascends in uninter-
mitting strains to the Author and Giver of spiritual and everlasting liberty. — T.

Ver. 18. — The glorious transformation. An exulting joy seems to have moved the
Boul of the apostle, when he meditated upon the present immunities and honours, and
upon the prospects of future blessedness and glory which, through Christ, belong to all
true believers and followers of the Lord. A kind .of spiritual exhilaration pervades and
exalts his spirit, and adds eloquence and poetry to his enraptured language,

I. IjNiNTERRnpTED VISION. The figure of the veil continues to haunt the mind of the
inspired writer, even after it has answered the purpose of its first introduction. Asso-
ciating his brethren in the faith with himself, he affirms, concerning Christians, that the
veil was in their case removed, so that for them was actually realized a wonderful
approach to the unseen Saviour. Before their enlightenment by the Spirit of God, the
scales were upon their eyes and the veil was before their countenance. Now, in
Heaven's light they see light. The sin, the prejudice, the unbelief, which hid the
Saviour from their view, have been removed, and nothing comes between the soul and
its Saviour.

II. Spibittjal reflection. Instead of the countenance being concealed by a veil, it
is, in the case of true Christians, converted into a mirror, which receives and then reflects
the rays of light. Thus the glory of the Lord, which is ever manifested in nature, and
which shone in the face of our incarnate Redeemer, is gathered up and given forth by
the renewed and purified character of the Christian. This is a mor^ process. A
spiritual nature alone is capable of attracting and receiving such light, alone is capable
of giving it forth in nncontaminated, though reflected, rays. Thus the disciple mirron



OH. lu. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 75

the Teacher and the Berrant mirrors the Lord. We are living representatives of the
Divine Head.

III. Glokioub transfoemation. Faith in Christ and fellowship with Christ are the
forces which produce assimilation to Christ. The image which is beheld seems to infix
itself upon the mirror-like soul that receives it. The life of faith thus serves to carry
on a gradual process of spiritual assimilation. The progression is denoted by the phrase
" from glory to glory," by which we understand, not earthly splendour, but spiritual
excellence and perfection. And the agency is indicated by the expression here used,
" as by the Lord the Spirit." Because he is the Spirit, the Lord has access to the heart,
and renews, hallows, and glorifies the nature to which he makes himself graciously and
divinely known. And there seems to be no limit to this most blessed process. In fact,
the future state appears to offer the most amazing scope for its continuation : " We shall
be like Christ; for we shall see him as he is." — T.

Ver. 3. — The Christ-letter. The people of God are set forth under various figures in
Scripture. For example — as com ripening for harvest ; as Lebanon's cedars, standing
like rocks under fiercest blasts ; as stars fixed in heavenly places ; as the sun climbing
the heavens, enlightening the world ; as purified gold, fit for the King ; as jewels flashing
forth tints of loveliness, prepared for regal crown ; as vine branches richly laden ; as
pomegranates and figs, sweet and refreshing ; for might, the lion and eagle ; and, great
paradox, for weakness, the defenceless sheep and lamb ; for humility, the lily ; for dignity,
the palm tree ; for usefulness, the salt of the earth. Here, as "the epistle of Christ."
A singular but impressive title. And this sets forth what each individual believer should
be — a Christ-letter. We have been accustomed to regard epistles as certain books of
the Scripture or letters passing between men. The apostle leads us to this thought —
men are epistles. Apart from nature and providence, we have regarded the Bible as
God's only book. Now we are directed to other books of God, volumes of redeemed
humanity. We speak of the Epistles of Scripture as inspired ; men who are the
epistles of Christ are inspired by the same Spirit. Of the former we think as testimonies
for God, for Christ, for religion ; the latter are equally so. And, as though God were
not content with giving to mankind silent and secluded epistles, he has placed in the
midst of the world living epistles, moving amongst men, unobsciired, ever beheld and
perused. We regard the Scriptures with reverence. What a thought that we, if we are
truly of Christ, constitute part of the great Scriptures of God ! The Bible we esteem as
sacred ; if of Christ, we are sacred, appointed to bear a like witness to the verities of the
Christian faith. It would seem as though there could scarcely be a more honourable
designation than this — " the epistle of Christ." If we are to be the epistles of Christ —

I. God must write otjr lives. The epistle, to be worth anything, must be dictated
by God. We say Paul's Epistles, Peter's Epistles, John's Epistles ; but, if this adequately
represents them, they are nothing. If they are anything, they are Ood's Epistles — God's
Epistle to the Corinthians and to the Romans, and so on. So with us. If we aie
epistles of Christ, we miist be"ofGod," "written, not with ink, but with the Spirit of the
living God " (ver. 3) ; and the writing must be, not on " tables of stone "for us, but in
"tables that are hearts of flesh" within us. The work of the Divine Spirit in our
natures and in our lives can alone mak? us epistles of Christ. This is the liighest form
of human life, when it is rnade by God, day by day, hour by hour — the will of God
finding expression in conduct, thoughts, motives, being. Free-will is the glory of man,
received by the fiat of the Eternal ; but the noblest act of free-will is its voluntary
Bubjection to the will of God. We are highest when we are willing to become most
completely the servants of God. Satan tempted our first parents to pass from under the
will of God by the promise, " Ye shall be as gods." There was wonderful deceit here.
The temptation found them as gods, it left them as devils. To live otherwise than
in subjection to the will of God is to go down. The way upward is, " Not my will, but
thine, be done." To consult the Divine wish in all our undertakings, to follow the
Divine instruction in all our deeds, to wait upon the Divine purpose in our whole being
and course, is for Ood to be writing our lives. How different, alas! is our experience!
How often we have taken the pen out of the Divine hand, that we ourselves might write
a little I How often, by our wilfulness, our self-seeking, our sin, we have rendered the
Divine writing blurred, and the manuscript of our lile blotted and defaced 1 How often



76 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. m. 1—18.

have our foolish insertions entirely altered the meaning of what the Divine fingers were
tracing I What chaos, confusion, disaster, have come into the epistle of our life becauss
it has been largely of ourselves and not of God 1 How poor has been the influence of
the life-letter because it has not been inspired of the Holy Ghost 1

n. OuB LIVES WILL THEN TESTIFY OF Chbist. This must be our supreme aim if we
desire to b« epistles of Christ. He is to be the one conspicuous feature in our life and
being. Epistles we are to be, which, when men read, they shall find that they are
raading of Christ. Many professing Christians are anything but epistles of Christ.
Tliere are some very great epistles of doubt, read and known of many men, telling us
that they do not claim apostolical succession, and proving this with conclusiveness by
being anything but fully persuaded in their own minds ; epistles of dismalness, epistles
of idleness, epistles of delay, epistles of change, epistles of frivolity, epistles of self, epistles
of quarrelsomeness, and others who seem to be epistles of nothingness. In contrast to
the true consistent believer — Christ manifested in his actions, Christ breathed forth in
his influence, Christ the utterance of his life. To him " to live is Christ." If we are
the epistles of Christ : 1. We must allow men to read us. We must not be too reserved.
We must not hide our light. 2. We should not le too forward. Much talk of our attain-
ments and graces will convince most men that we have not any. A book is not
instructive which has the most of the printing outside. 3. Men will he willing to read
us when very unwilling to read the Epistles r>f the Scriptures. There are two things
which men are very fond of reading — their newspaper and each other. The true epistle
of Christ is likely to have wide circulation and large usefulness. — H.

Ver. 6. — The new covenant. I. A covenant or the spibit. The old covenant, the
Law which came by Moses, was the " letter " — precepts laid down to be literally obeyed,
fixed and rigid, external and ritual. The new covenant, the gospel, is the covenant of
love, of spiritual obedience. The Jew, under the old covenant, could not be exempted
by any piety of spirit from the letter of the legal ordinance ; but under the new
covenant the spirit of the observance is chief. The old covenant did not supply the
inward power producing obedience — it was something outside of man, imposed upon
him. But the new covenant has for an essential feature the power of God operating
in the heart, leading to newness of life. The old covenant approached man from
without, the new covenant works from within. One is " letter" — external ; the other
is " spirit " — internal.

II. A COVENANT OP LIFE. In the old covenant there was the holy Law and the
command to fully obey it : " The Law is not of faith ; but, The man that doeth them
shall live in them" (Gal. iii. 12). The old covenant demanded perfect obedience:
" Cursed is every one that continueth not in all things which are written in the book
of the Law to do them " (Gal. iii. 10). Thus the old covenant tended to condemnation
and death, because fallen human nature failed to keep the perfect Law of God. The
" letter " of unswerving righteousness convicted man of sin, and then " killed " him.
Not that the Law was evil, but that it showed the evil in man. " The wages of sin is
death." The Law, by discovering sin, showed that the wages were due. The old covenant
thus left man condemned, and, if man was to be justified and restored, there was urgent
need of a new covenant. We find, thus, that the old covenant is ever pointing to the
new, and that the design of the former was to lead to the latter ; " The Law was our
schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ " (Gal. iii. 24). Moreover, the Jew possessed the
new covenant as well as the old, though not so fully unfolded as we have it. Men
condemned by the old covenant lived the life of faith upon the Son of God who was
to come, and thus participated in the life-giving principle of the new covenant. This
new covenant is a covenant of life : 1. Because Christ has perfectly fulfilled the Law of
God on man's behalf, and to man this perfect obedience is imputed. Condemnation is
thus avoided. Life is secured for man by man's Substitute. 2. Man's personal trans-
gressions are atoned for by the sacrifice of Christ. 3. The Holy Ghost is given to
kindle spiritual life in man, to sanctify his nature, to bring him at last into fufi. accord
with the perfect Law of God.

HI. A COVENANT NOT TRANSITORY. The old Covenant has passed away. The new
covenant puts men in a position with relation to God which is an everlasting one.
Death and the next world will not call for the abrogation of this covenant, nor any



CH. HI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS. 77

changes occurring during the residence of the human family in the world. The old
covenant was imperfect; it demanded something beyond itself; it was designed to do
this. There is no such element in the new. It is complete; it calls for nothing
outside of its own provisions.

IV. A COVENANT OF suBPASBiNO GLORY. This arises largely from points already
noticed. 1. Its spiritual character. 2. Its issues in bringing life, not death, to fallen
man. 3. Its enduring character. 4. Its direct initiation and administration by the
Son of Gk)d. "The Law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ " (John i. 17). The inauguration of the old covenant saw the face of Moses
illumined. The new covenant came with the transfiguration of Christ. 5. Its
marvellous revelation of Divine love. The old covenant laid the emphasis upon Divine
righteousness; the new, whilst displaying with untarnished lustre this attribute of
Deity, exhibits pre-eminently the love of God. — H.

Ver. 15. — The veil on the heart. The veil which Moses put on his face (Exod.
ixxiv. 33) obscured its brightness. The apostle seizes upon the event, so familiar to
readers of Jewish history, to illustrate moral blindness, and especially the moral blind-
ness of Jews in his own day. As moral blindness is subjective, he speaks of the veil,
not npon those things which are obscured, as in the case of the face of Moses, but as
upon the heart. Upon the heart, because in spiritual matters the inability does not
spring from the head, but from the heart. This veil upon the heart —

L Obboubes the olobt op the old dispensation. It did so to Jews in Paul's day ;
it does so to Jews now. The true glory of the old covenant lay in its foreshadowing
of the new. It was a covenant of types and shadows. Underlying its legality was a
deep spirituality. The Law condemned, and only condemned, but the " Law " was not
the whole of the old covenant. Associated with the Law was the embryo of the gospel.
And unveiled hearts looked through condemnation and shadow and type to the
delivering Messiah, by whom men could be justified by faith and not by works. But
the veil upon the heart caused the Jew to regard the old covenant as complete in itself,
and to disregard the deeper spiritual meanings of its provisions. Prom him its true
glory was thus hidden. A rigid system became much more rigid. The wings of a
dispensation rising to something higher were clipped. A hard, narrow creed was
substituted for an expansive and noble theology.

IL Hides Chkist. It did so when Christ came. When the Messiah appeared,
veiled hearts faUed to recognize him. The Jews would have welcomed a Messiah who
came to continue Judaism as Judaism was understood by them. But the development
of Judaism into Christianity, the fruition of the old covenant in the new, had no
charms for them ; on the contrary, it was obnoxious to them in the highest degree, as
spirituality is ever to a carnal nature. In the Christ they could not see the Christ.
He was not their Christ, and by facile logic was thus demonstrated to be no Christ at
all, " Their minds were blinded " (ver. 14). Prom many to-day Christ is thus hidden.
To them " a root out of a dry ground " is as beautiful as he. They think the fault is
in him, but it is in themselves. Palse conceptions of the objects, duties, and pleasures
of life possess them, and are the coloured media through which Christ is looked at.
They see a darkened, shorn, maimed Christ ; the true Christ is hidden from them.

III. Causes men to best in SBLF-EiaHTEOusNESs. This was the only way of justifi-
cation which was apparent to the Jew upon whose heart the veil rested. The veil
shut out all, except legalism. So with many now. It is their righteousness, not the
righteousness of Christ, to which they look. They seek to save themselves, not to be
saved by another. Each is a Messiah to himself. But poor rest is secured. The
voices of old sins make themselves heard, and to their clamour no satisfactory response
is forthcoming. Present power to do right is found lacking. This is not to be won-
dered at, seeing that the Source of all true spiritual power has been abandoned. Piety
becomes either a vague dream of the future or a dismal formality of the present.

IV. Keeps men undee condemnation. The Law of God condemns, and if only the
bare Law is seen there is no deliverance. Self-righteousness, if attained to in perfection,
would not cancel past sentences on sin. But self-righteousness practically is ever self-un-
righteousness, and, instead of atoning for sin, continuously increases it. The most moral
man has but the cheerless vision of a broken Law imperiously demanding its penalties



78 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS. [oh. m. 1— 1&

V. The veil is eemoved as wb ttjbn to the Lokd. (Ver. 16.) When the Jew, led
by the Spirit, believed on Christ, the veil, which had obscured his vision of the old
covenant, and which had thus perverted his being and life, was removed. He saw
then the true significance of the old economy, and perceived that Christ, in his own
person and work, constituted the very fulfilment of the Law. Old things passed away,
all things became new. The veil is destroyed for ever as we come to Christ. The
apostle has, no doubt, in his mind the action of Moses : " When Moses went in before
the Lord to speak with him, he took the veil off" (Exod. xxxiv. 34). Our turning to
the Lord is a sign that the veil is rent in twain like the veil of the temple, and as we
reach the Lord and are taught by the Divine Spirit, the veil vanishes, obscurity gives
|)lace to brightness, and we marvel that we ever could have been as we once were.
When Moses came out from the presence of the Lord he again assumed the veil, but
he is not here an example to us ; for we are not to come out again, but to abide with
Christ, to be " for ever with the Lord." — H. ,

Ver. 18. — The great change. I. What this change is. Into the Divine likeness.
Thi.5, which was lost through the Pall, is recovered in the gospel. Believers become like
Christ, who is the Brightness of the Father's glory, and the express Image of his person
(Heb. i. 3). The change is not merely of opinion, or feeling, or even conduct, but a
change of heing. It is not something connected with ourselves, but our very selves
which are changed, and changed so as to be like Christ. 1. A marvellous change.
For before men believe, they are singularly unlike Christ. By nature like Satan ; by
grace like Christ. 2. An all-desirable change. For ennoblement, peace, joy, usefulness.

II. The manner of the change. It follows upon turning to the Lord (ver. 16). As
Moses, standing before God, was singularly changed in countenance, so that his face
reflected the Divine glory, so we are changed as we are turned towards Christ, as we
turn towards him in penitence and faith and in desire to be his. The figure of a mirror
is employed. 1. We may read " reflecting as a mirror," and then the idea conveyed
will be that, as Christ shines upon us, as he acts upon us, we become changed. Or : 2.
If we read " beholding as in a mirror," the thought will be that, as we gaze upon Christ
as he is reflected in the mirror of the gospel, we become like him. Both thoughts are
correct, though it is by the Divine action we are changed, our looking upon Christ being
only the means by which the Divine action reaches us.

III. A SPECIAL peatukb OF THE CHANGE. Progressive — " from glory to glory." The
change is often gradual. There is a great fundamental change at conversion. A con-
dition of " glory " is reached, but there is a glory beyond this. We " grow in grace."
At first we are " babes in Christ," but we develop into the stature of perfect men in
him (Eph. iv. 13). Conversion is but the first stage. Many seem to think that it is
the final one. Justification is enough for them ; sanctification is not in their thoughts.
But this is not the salvation of Christ. We are saved for holiness, for uselulness, for
the service of God, and as continuously we gaze upon Christ in faith, and as his power
falls upon us, we pass into a further " glory."

IV. A condition of the change. Our face unveiled. And here face stands for
heart. The veil occasioned by the old enmity, by prejudice, by misconception, by
ignorance, must be removed. This will be so with all who in sincerity turn to the
Lord. " When it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away" (ver. 16). The
more completely our face is unveiled the more rapidly shall we pass from " glory to
glory." We should strive to remove all that is likely to hinder our development into
the likeness of Christ. Anything that comes between ourselves and him will do this.
Heart-veils are of very various patterns.

V. The striking usefulness of the change. Adopting the reading "reflecting
as a mirror," we see that : 1. Those who turn to the Lord reflect the glory of the Lord.
They show forth Christ. Men take knowledge of them that they have been with
JesuB. They reflect the redemptive glory of Christ. They exemplify the power of his
salvation. They are monuments upon which is inscribed " Christ, and him crucified."
They reflect the love of Christ in Christian activity. Having been saved themselves,
they desire the salvation of all around them. What a thought, that we may refiect
Christ I 2. As they seek to reflect Christ the change progresses. It is when we are
diligent in the Master's bu.siness, when we consecrate ourselves to him, when we strive



OH. m. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 79

to set him forth in daily life, that we become changed into his image. At we strenu-
ously endeavour to be like him we become like him. Our endeavour to reflect him is
responded to by the change in us which enables us to reflect him. Beflecting his glory
as a mirror, we are changed into the same image.

VI. The Wokkee of the change. The Holy Ghost, " the Lord the Spirit." Christ
working by his Spirit, who takes of the things of Christ and reveals them unto us.
"The Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my Name" (John xiv. 26). The
work is Divine ; it calls for Divine power. We cannot work this change, yet we can
" turn to the Lord," that it may be worked, — H.

Vera, 2, 3. — A living letter. Apollos had carried to Corinth written credentials (see
Acts xviii. 27 ; xix. 1). Why had Paul not done so too ? He claims that he needed
them not. The converts in that city were themselves his credentials. His appeal to
the Corinthians on this point proceeds on a principle easily understood and often applied.
The best testimonial a teacher can produce is the proficiency of his pupils. The most
satisfactory evidences of the skill of a physician are the patients who have recovered
health under his care. The convincing proofs of the competency of a gardener are the
prosperity of the plants and the abundance of flowers and fruits which he produces from
the ground. So was the Church at Corinth itself the best diploma or commendation of
the apostle who had founded it and watched over it (see 1 Cor. iv. 14 — 16). A good
teacher needs no letter of commendation to his own pupils, or a father to his own
children. Seizing the idea of a letter, and showing that the Corinthian saints them-
selves formed the only letter he needed to produce, St. Paul used this as an illustration in
two forms. 1. The Christians at Corinth were written on his heart, for they were dear
to him (ch. vii. 3 ; Phil. i. 7). And this was no secret. The tie of affection between
St. Paul and the Corinthian brethren was " known and read of all." 2. Christ had
vwitten upon their hearts what served as a powerful letter of commendation for his
servant Paul. Let us pursue the second use of the metaphor. A Church is «n epistle
of Christ, open for aU men to read.

I. The Authoe of the lettek. This is Christ. Whatever Divine thoughts are
given to human minds, or spiritual impressions are stamped on human hearts, proceed
from Christ. And it is true of Churches in all ages. As Christ is the living One, he
is ever writing new epistles — in harmony with those which were wi'itten at the begin-
ning — and yet new and fresh and suited to the current time.

II. The amanuensis. At Corinth this was Paul. In modern Churches it is the
faithful ministry of the Word. The epistle is not invented or dictated by us, but
" ministered by us." The mind of Christ is thereby conveyed to and impressed on the
company of believers.

IIL The tablets. They are not of stone, but of the heart. The ministration of
death was written and engraven on stone in the form of ten commandments. The
more glorious ministration of the spirit and of righteousness is inscribed on the convic-
tions and affections of living men. The law of Christ is put into the inward parts and
written on the heart. For this end, too, the Lord knows how to sofiju the tablets, to
make the heart tender and warm, and so susceptible of the instruction and impression
of the Word. Oh to have a still heart, not restless, that the writing may be plain, and
to have a lowly heart, not hard, that the engraving may be deep !

IV. The manner op wbiting. "Not with ink." St. Paul's letters were so written,
as were those of other apostles (2 John 12) ; and by ink of the scribe and the printer
have they been preserved and propagated. But for writing on the heart perishable
material is unsuited. Jehovah wrote the Law on the tablets of stone with his own
hand ; and on the tablets of the human heart Jesus Christ writes, using ministry as he
pleases in the process with the finger or power of God — " the Spirit of the living God."
And so, in all times and all Churches of the saints, the application of the truth is by the
living Spirit.

V. The thinq wbitten. It is the mind of Christ. Ye " have learned Christ, and
the truth as it is in Jesus." There is no higher truth to learn, no better message
to carry.

VI. The PUBLICATION of the letter. It is "manifestly declared," and may be known
and read of all men. 'Ihis is said of the Church collective, for such is the temple ol



80 THE SKCOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. m. 1—18.

God and such ia the epistle of Christ — an argument surely for Christian consistency
and for brotherly concord, that the sacred epistle may not he rendered imintelligible.
If each member of a Church abide in his place, and all together dwell in peace and walk
in the truth, there is produced an epistle of Christ which puts the gainsayer to silence.
Thank God that even a faulty Church or blotted epistle has something of a Divina
element, some impression and expression of Christ ! The obliaation which lies on the
Church may be pressed on each member thereof. Would that Christ were more apparent
and more legiWe in Christians ! Let your character be a consistent representation or
epistle of your Lord, and let it be an original, not a copy of some other man's religion,
but a genuine production of Jesus Christ by " the Spirit of the living God." If you go
to the Lord justifying yourself and accusing others, he will only ivrite on the ground ;
but if you with a penitent heart accuse yourself, he will write an you his grace and
truth. Hereafter, when yon have overcome, he will write on you his new Name. — F.

Ver. 6. — The letter and the spirit. The contrast between letter and spirit is in
Scripture peculiar to the pages of St. Paul (see Eom. iL 29 ; vii. 6). The Bubject
specially occupied him, as the chasapion of Christian liberty and a profound thinker on
the relations of the Old and New Testaments.

I, Thb conteastbd terms — LBTTBB AND spiEiT. A more frequent opposition is
between flesh and spirit (see John iii. 6 ; vi. 63 ; Rom. viii. 1 — 13 ; Gal. v. 16 — 25).
The distinction is obvious between a fleshly and a spiritual disposition, and the alterna-
tive is shown to be one of life or death. " To be carnally minded is death ; but to be
spiritually minded is life and peace." But, by letter aod spirit must be intended things
of which it is possible for men to be ministers. St. Paul was a minister, not of the
letter, but of the spirit ; and the context shows that by letter he meant the old covenant,
and by spirit the new. Not that there was nothing but letter in the one and nothing
but spirit in the other. The contrast is between i^redominant characteristics; and
characteristically, though not exclusively, the old covenant was letter and the new
covenant was spirit. Therefore the latter excelled in glory. The old economy, or testa-
ment, is not spoken of with disrespect. It was adapted in the wisdom of God to the
training of the Hebrew people as his chosen nation. It was not a mere dead writing,
but had a meaning in it which was Divine. The very term " letter " implies some
import or significance. And there was enough in the Old Testament to educate the
minds of men in religious ideas, and bring home sacred obligations and hopes to their
hearts. But it is called "the letter" because that which bulked largely in it was
a code of law and a handwriting of ordinances. In its prescription of law it was to
sinful men a ministration of death ; and in its ritual of worship it was inferior to that
holy liberty which we now enjoy in everywhere worshipping the Father in spirit and in
truth. The old covenant had shadows, the new has substance ; the old had rudiments
and elements, the new has perfection ; the old had patterns of heavenly things, the
new has heavenly things themselves ; the old was a dispensation of dimness as of light
seen through a veil, the new is one of unveiled faces and God's marvellous light. The
new economy, or testament, while characteristically one of " spirit," is not altogether
without letter. As every soul must have a body, and every essence a form, in order to
be known among men, so has the spirit of the New Testament embodiment and exact
expression. But here lies the contrast. Pre-Christian religion contained a small pro-
portion of spirit and life in a large bulk of letter and ordinance. Christianity has a
large proportion of spirit and life in a bulk of law and form as small and light as possible.
The teachings of Christianity are facts and principles, not propositions and restrictions ;
its institutions are simple outlines, not precise ceremonies; and its laws are moral
sentiments, not minute mechanical directions.

II. The effects which flesh and spirit severally peoduob. The letter, Toid
of spirit, kills. The spirit, in whatever form or letter conveyed, gives life. We must
still be on our guard against making that absolute which is intended only as a strong
comparative. We must not say or suppose that under the Mosaic economy there wa*
nothing but condemnation, bondage, and death. Beneath and vithin the letter which
had such prominence, there was spirit ; and men who knew how to penetrate the letter
got the spirit, and with it got life. But the more that men made of mere traditional
letter and form, the less they knew of the spirit of liberty and the power of godliness.



OH. III. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 81

Most apparent wag the killing power of the letter in that generation of Hebrews to
which Paul himself belonged. They gloried in circumcision, but had It in the flesh
only, and not in the heart. They sought life by the law of works, and fell under its
condemnation. The more devoted they were to religious peculiarities and ceremonial
restrictions, the more did a shadow of death cover them. They clung to the types and
would not recognize the Antitype. They trusted to a covenant which had exhausted
its use and was passing away. So this letter-worship destroyed spiritual life. Israel
after the flesh fell under a ministration of death. Oa the other hand, in that new d's-
pensation, of which St. Paul was such an earnest minister, and in which spirit predomi-
nates, there is abundance of the grace of life. True that, under this dispensation also,
a formalist or one who is self-righteous may turn the life into death. Externalism and
traditionalism are as powerless as ever to make alive. But, when the letter which in
some manner is indispensable to mortal worshippers is kept in due subordination, the
spirit gives life, and the ministration of righteousness is exceeding glorious. And the
Lord is that Spirit. The Lord is the Life-giver and the Life.

in. Light oast by this statement on sundry questions. 1. On the interpretation
and use of certain precepts and usages mentioned in Scripture. Eeverence for antiquity
is good, is in some degree essential to historical Christianity ; but there is a pedantry
about the forms of things which is unintelligent and unspiritiial. To correct this we
must always distinguish between letter and spirit, and bear in mind that, in the long
course of time and in altered conditions of society, there not only may be but must be
circumstantial changes of form and expression in order to the conservation of spirit and
truth. Apply this to (1) the precept of turning the cheek to the smiter ; (2) that of
washing one another's feet ; (3) the forbiddal of lawsuits between Christians ; (4) the
salutation with a holy kiss. 2. On the corruptions of Christianity. Some harm, no
doubt, has been done by the endeavour to abstract the spirit of the gospel too much
from its letter, and to dispense altogether with definite forms of doctrine and service.
But a greater danger has shown itself on the opposite side. The most formidable corrup-
tions of Christianity have resulted from magnifying letter over spirit, and giving to our
religion an imposing exterior while its heart fainted and all but perished. The great
bane of the Church has been in the direction of exaggerated ceremonial and tyrannical
insistence on outward usage and form. 3. On the propagation of the gospel. The old
dispensation was not intended for world-wide diffusion ; but the new has a gospel for
all nations, and is meant to live in every climate and among all the tribes and races of
mankind. But of its ever reaching its consummation we should despair if it were a
religion of unbending, unelastic literalism, and committed itself to the maintenance of
dry and rigid forms. We take courage when we remember that " the kingdom of Grod
is not in word, but in power ; " that the emphasis in Christianity lies on its active, spiri-
tual, penetrating force ; and that the Lord himself " is that Spirit." We do not set
Christian form against heathen form, but preach Christ Jesus the Lord. The letter and
the ritual will appear quickly enough, and may be expected to vary in a Church of all
nations. What we should be most concerned about is the world-wide proclamation of
him in whom all nations of the earth are to be blessed. — ^P.

Ver. 18. — The Christian transfiguration. When Moses, the minister of the Law,
communed with God, his countenance became irradiated, and, on his return to the
people of Israel in the camp, he was obliged to put a veil over his face. But that
radiance did not last long. It faded from the prophet's countenance ; and this is taken
to illustrate the passing away of the glory of all that legal ministration. The Jews who
rejected that gospel which St. Paul preached were still occupied with the Law. Moses
stood before them still ; and, when Moses was read, they failed to see that the lustre had
faded from his face. Yet it was so. Not that the Law was at fault or obscure ; not
that Moses misled or clouded their minds. The veil was no more on his face, but on
their hearts ; and so they persisted, and the bulk of that nation still persist, in trusting
to Moses and rejecting the more glorious ministration by Jesus Christ. The anti-
Christian Jews are dimly reading the words of their lawgiver instead of rejoicing in the
light of the Lord. But " we all," whether Jews or Sentiles in the flesh, who have
believed the gospel, enjoy a ministration of righteousness and glory.

L The olobt of ^he Lobd. Moses said to Jehovah, " I beseech thee, show me thy

n. OOBINTHIASB. «



82 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0BINTHIAN8. [ch. m. 1—18,

glory." And he had some vision of the Almighty, and heard Jehovah God proclum hit
Name as he passed by ; but the God of Israel said, " Thou canst not see my face."
Now this, wUch was impossible mider the old covenant, and which was thought of by
the faithful as the blessing of a future state (Ps. xvii. 15), is not only possible but
actual under the new covenant. Christ is the Image of the invisible God. We see the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. He who of old surrounded himself with
clouds or dwelt "in the thick darkness" now reveals himself brightly in his Beloved.
The New Testament ii, more fully than the Old, a revelation. God is revealed in a
manner surpassing all the partial disclosures among the Jews, and correcting all the
vain imaginations among the heathen. The holy Child was Immanuel, God with us.
The Man who lived so purely, spoke so wisely, and suffered so patiently, revealed the
unseen God; and God was glorified in him. So the apostle regarded Christianity as
the breaking forth of new light on the human race, and that the very radiance of God
in Jesus Christ his Son. So let us regard it. Truly the light is good — the inner Hght
of the New Testament — the glory of the Lord.

II. Contemplation of that glory. We behold it as one looks upon a mirror on
which an object out of his reach is reflected. Our Lord has ascended to the Father, and
we do not see him face to face in the present life, but we look on the Divine testimony,
and, as we look, we gain " the excellency of the linowledge of Christ." In order to this,
two things are necessary. 1. We must have our faces unveiled. The veil is preju-
dice or unbelief. The ignorance of God, long spread over the earth, is described by a
prophet as " the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all
nations." The removal of that covering or veil results in the turning of nations to the
Lord. Alas I readers of the New Testament may be as blind to its true meaning and
beauty as any Jews were in reading the Law. A vague light, perhaps, comes through
the veil, but there is no clear discernment of that glory of the Lord which gives to the
New Testament its surpassing power and value. St. Paul knew this well, and felt him-
self unable to make all men see what he saw. From some who heard him his gospel
was hid. It was and is the preacher's duty to manifest and proclaim the truth ; but
blinded minds and veiled hearts could, and still can, defeat the testimony. St. Paul
himself had once been very blind. When light shone in the face of the martyr Stephen
as he stood before the council, " as it had been the face of an angel," Saul of Tarsus was
only bewildered and irritated, and he consented to Stephen's death. Soon after, on his
way to Damascus, a strong light from heaven shone round about him, and the voice of
the Lord reached his ear. Some holy light through the veil fell on his countenance, bat
the veil was not yet removed, and the Pharisee was not yet a Christian. Illumination
came to him when, at the word of the disciple Ananias, the eyes of his body, which had
been blinded by the sudden effulgence on the way, were opened, and at the same time
the eyes of the inner man were freed from the scales of unbelief, and Cfod shone into his
heart. 2. We must form a habit of beholding that glory. We do not presume to say
what amount of blessing may be gained through even a rapid or ocoasional glance cast
on the Lord Jesus; but what the apostle intends is an habitual and daily contemplation
of that " brightness of the Father's glory." No study of books, acquaintance with
doctrines, or observance of rites can do for us what is done by the habit of " looking
to Jesus."

III. The teanbfobminq power of such contemplation. " Changed into the same
image." A moral metamorphosis is wrought, not magically as by a spell or charm,
but in the manner proper to a moral nature, by the moulding influence of a new habit of
thought and affection. This proceeds on the well-known principle that, whatever we look
upon with frequency and with congenial feeling, stamps itself on our minds and characters.
He who looks upon evil becomes evil. He who occupies himself with trifles grows trivial.
He who associates with the wise grows wise. He who admires the good himself becomes
good. So likewise he who beholds the pure and gracious image of God in the face of
Jesus Christ is changed insensibly into that image, learns to think the thoughts of God
and to exhibit the mind of Christ. Two important features of this great change are
indicated in the text. 1. It is a progressive one. " Prom glory to glory." No doubt, if
we could abide continually under the radiance of Christ, his glory would transform ui
more rapidly and completely than is the experience of average Christians. And we
must not dwell on the idea of gradualness so as to excuse a low level of Christian



OH. m. 1— la] TH» SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 83



attainment. But the truth lies here, that, as we receive out of Christ's fulness grace for
grace, so are we transformed into his likeness from glory to glory, the light of the Lord
gaining upon us and dispelling all the darkness until we are "light in the Lord."
■2, While this change follows a law of moral influence, it is produced by the active
operation of a Divine power — " as by the Lord the Spirit." The reference is to the Lord
Jesus as "a quickening Spirit," who is here brought into contrast with Moses, the
minister of the killing " letter." At the same time, we know from otiier Scriptures that
the Lord pervades his Church on earth and renews men in his own image by the gracious
presence and work of the Holy Q-host. Without this doctrine of spiritual operation, both
direct and indirect, we fail to apprehend the transforming power of a pure Christianity.
Note in conclusion : 1. The connection letween faith and character. Some raise a cry
that faith leads to mysticism and genders dispute, while notiiing is wanted, nothing is
to be valued, but an exemplary character and a good hfe. But what if such character and
life are best attained by the habit of faith in the Lord Jesus Christ ? It might as well
be said that it is of little consequence whether a man can see or is blind, so long as he
walks and works well. He cannot walk or work well unless he can see. No more can
one walk or act like Christ unless he looks to him in faith. Others raise a different
cry. They are all for faith, and yet show no conformity to Christ. All such boasting
is vain. The effect of beholding the glory of the Lord is to be changed into the same
image. If there is no such change the faith is only in imagination, not in heart.
2. The far reach of the principle of assimilation to what we habitually and willingly
hehold. In this way are Christians conformed to Christ in this present time. But
the principle carries much further. It is thus that the saints will be glorified with
Christ at his appearing. "We know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like
him ; for we shall see him as he is.'' 3. The evil case of those who see in Christ " no
heauty that he should he desired^' They miss both the way of peace and the way of
holiness. Alas I when the gospel is set before them, the veil lies upon their hearts.
They can see something to be admired in the wisdom of sages and the courage of
heroes, and yet see nothing in the Son of God. They may look on nature with admiring
eye, and see " the glory in the grass and splendour in the flower ; " but Jesus Christ is
to them "as a root out of a dry ground." Lord, remove the veil! Shine into these
hearts with power ! — E.

Vers. 1 — 3. — The lest commendation. It was an early custom in the Christian Church
for teachers to carry with them " letters of commendation " when they passed from town
to town. Of this custom we have an indication in Acts xviii. 27, " When Apollos was
disposed to pass into Achaia [Corinth], the brethren [of Ephesus] wrote, exhorting the
disciples to receive him." And the thirteenth canon of the Council of Chalcedon ordained
that " clergymen coming to a city where they were unknown, should not be allowed to
officiate without letters commendatory from their own bishop." It seems to have been
made a charge against the apostle that he never presented any credentials, but assumed
an authority for which he had no warrant. The apostle is here replying to such a charge,
and his plea is that, having so manifestly received the greater commendation of God's
witness with his work, he in no sense can need man's good word. His converts were
the best possible commendation. His letters were those written by God as truth on
human hearts. Prom the Christian standpoint the only satisfactory proof of call to
ministry is the Divine seal set on the work of the ministry. It was the plea of St.
Peter, when accounting for his admitting the Gentiles into the privileges of the Christian
Church, that the " Holy Ghost had fallen upon them, even as upou us at the beginning."
And that was felt to be an all-sufficient attestation of the work which St. Peter had
done. In the same way St. Paul pleads that spiritual results had fdllowed his ministry
among the Corinthians. God had set his seal upon it, and that was his wholly satis-
factory commendation, and the basis of any authority he claimed. Speaking in a
figure he says, " The Corinthians are an epistle." He regards Christ as the Author, and
himself as the amanuensis. The characters of this epistle were preserved by no visible
or perishable medium, but by the invisible operation of the Spirit. We consider —

I. The usefulness of human commendations. Such are found to be necessary in
the intercourse of nations. The ambassador is duly furnished with his credentials ; and
the representative of the business firm carries with him his authority to act in the



84 THE SECOND EJflSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. in. 1— la

name of the firm. So it is found of practical value that clergymen and ministers going
to other districts or countries should have such attestation as will win for them the
confidence of those to whom they may happen to minister. Several questions of interest
arise in connection with this subject. 1. Prom what central bodies, or from what indi-
' viduals, should such letters of commendation come? 2. What should they properly
concern? And can they ever wisely go beyond the attestation of personal character
and ministerial efBciency ? Men must be judged by their works rather than by the
opinion which others may have formed concerning them. Still, in every age. Churches
have needed to be guarded against plausible but unworthy men, who force themselves
into positions of influence unawares. And this has been the special trouble of all
smaller Churches, and those existing apart from Christian organizations. Every
ordinary man should depend for his acceptance upon his letters of recommendation.

II. The limitation of the demand for such lettbks. Sometimes they are merely
vexations. Tlie demand for them is a mere piece of officialism. Some men so stand
before the world that no letters about them can be necessary. And the letters may
only concern (1) character, (2) efBciency. They should not deal with disputable
opinions. A full and fair estimate of character is sufficient to give confidence that a
man's work will be honest and faithful. Commendations of so-called "ortliodoxy " oi
"heterodoxy" can never be anything but mischievous. We muy commend the man;
we had better take care not to commend his opinions. Of these let those to whom he
ministen be the judges,

I II. (JOD'S WAYS OF MAKING SUCH LETTERS ■VTHOLLT UNNECESSARY. From the CaSe of

St. Paul we learn that God may so manifestly show his acceptance of a man and a man's
work that no other credential can possibly be necessary. A man's labours and successes
may sufficiently declare that he is a man of God, a messenger of God. Illustrate by
such cases as Luther, Whitefleld, Brainerd, etc. We must well apprehend that, because
a thing is unusual, it is not therefore untrue. And in every age men have been raised
up whose strongly marked individuality leads them to take fresh lines of thought and
of work. Men may hesitate to give such men their credentials ; it is enough if God
manifestly accepts them. — E. T.

Vers, i — 6. — ITie power, and the agency it uses. The apostle here dwells upon the
confidence he has in the Corinthian Church as the all-sufficient commendation of his
ministry and apostleship. But he will take no honour to himself over his successes at
Corinth. He had but been the agent, and the power and sufficiency were altogether
of God. St. Paul was always before men firm, confident, bold ; but always before God
humble and dependent. The expression, " through Christ to God-ward," probably means
" that our eyes are directed towards God, the Source of our confidence, and that it is
through Jesus Christ alone that we possess the right thus to lean on him." Illustrate,
from Old Testament Scriptures, the Jewish habit of mind which referred all events to
God's direct working, confounding the cause with the agency. For instance, God is
said to harden Pharaoh's heart, and to send a lying spirit among the prophets. Such
direct reference of all things to God is characteristic of the imaginative, uncultured,
superstitions ages ; but, in intelligent form, it is found in Christianity. There is no
confusion of power and agent, but behind agency the " power " is fully and humlbly
recognized. This we further unfold, noting the following points : —

L In Christ ianitt the man still works. God proposes to save the world by man.
He does not use miracle, but deals with men as moral beings, subject to various moral
influences arising from their relations one to another. Every man is a force upon his
fellow-man. Some, by reason of particular positions and endowments, exert great
influence on other men. It is at once true that man must be saved by man, and that
man cannot be saved by man. The paradox is not a difficult one to explain from the
Christian point of view. Christianity asks, therefore, from every man three things. 1.
The consecration of his talents and trusts. 2. The sanctifying of his relationships.
3. And the faithful use of his opportunities. True of man in his ordinary life-spheres,
this is more especially true of man as occupied in the Christian ministry.

II. In Christianity the man is only agent. He has no sort of independent
•uthority. Ho is not fittingly likened to the pJuuiput. ntiary, who has a matter wholly
committed to his judgment and decision. The Christian minister or worker is aaret



OH, m, 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 85

free of his close and intimate relations witli God. His " sufficiency " is never of himself.
1. He works for another, and has no self-seeking ends to gain. 2. He works at the
will of another, holding himself ever in attitudes of dependent and suhmissjve obedi-
ence, saying continually, " Lord, what wilt thou have me to do ? " 3. He works in
the strength of another, leaning upon the " everlasting arms." Taking these as character-
istic features of the Christian ministry, it will be readily shown in what a marked way
they contrast with the spirit of the self-depending and self-seeking worldly man.

III. In Christianity the man is actually endued with Divine poweb. "Our
sufBoienoy is of God." It is this truth that needs such distinct assertion for the sake
of the Christian worker himself, as well as for the sake of those to whom his work is a
witness. The Christian is a man quickened with a new life ; it is that " new life "
which finds expression in his working. The Christian is a man sealed by the Holy
Ghost, who dwells in him, and that Holy Ghost is his secret strength and inspiration.
Two figures may be contrasted. The water flowing in pipes, and the sap flowing in the
branch. The latter is the only figure that efBciently represents the relation of power
and agency in the Christian worker, and it is the figure used by our Lord himself. The
uaion and relation are such that, while the full manhood is retained, and even nourished
into vigour, the vitality, the real force behind the manhood, and the direction of all
details of action, are God's. The Christian conceives of himself as not even able to
think anything as of himself, much less to do anything. He is "strong in the Lord,
and in the power of his might." — R. T.

Ver. 6. — The letter and the spirit. It does not appear that St. Paul had in mind
the different senses in which Scripture can now be read. Such distinctions as the
literal, the allegorical, and the mystical belong to modern times. The apostle is con-
trasting the Old Testament with the New. The older revelation consisted of exact
directions for the guidance of life and conduct. The new revelation consists of principles
and examples by the help and application of which a man may guide his own conduct.
But, while this distinction is carefully noted, it should be observed that, in the older reve-
lation, there was both letter and spirit, and devout souls recognized and lived in the light
of the inner principles, the spiritual truth which precise injunctions did but illustrate.
F. W. Robertson says, " It was the business of Moses to teach maxims, and not prin-
ciples; rules for ceremonial, and not a spirit of life. And these things — rules, cere-
monials, maxims, law — are what the apostle calls here the letter. Thus, for instance,
truth is a principle springing out of the inward life ; but Moses only gave the rule :
' Thou shalt not forswear thyself.' It is impossible not to see how plainly inadequate
this rule is to all that truth requires ; for he who scarcely avoided perjury may have
kept nevertheless to the letter of the Law I Again, love is a principle ; but Moses said
simply, ' Thou shalt not kill, nor steal, nor injure.' Again, meekness and suhduedness
before God, — these are of the Spirit ; but Moses merely commanded fasts. It was in
consequence of the superiority of the teaching of principles over a mere teaching of
maxims that the ministry of the letter was considered as nothing." " The difference
between the old covenant and the new was that the former prescribed, the latter
inspired ; the former gave written precepts, the latter the power to fulfil them ; the
former laid down the rules, the latter brought man's heart into the condition in which
such rules became a part of his nature." In an educational point of view the letter
must come first, the child must have precise direction of his conduct, and only through
this will he be helped to grasp principles, and apply them himself to his conduct and
duties. So that we must not undervalue the letter, but give it a proper place as a
stepping-stone to higher and better things. The distinction between the letter and the
spirit may be illustrated in a variety of spheres.

I. In the early Mosaic records. The imaginative and the historical records of
the first ages. Perplexities and difficulties abound when we force literal meanings. The
first principles of morals and religion come to view when we read the spirit of them.

IL In the Judaic religious system. That does seem to be a round of formal
injunctions, covering all the various family, social, and religious relations of the people,
and yet onr Lord taught us, in his sermon on the mount, to find spiritual principle!
within it. He showed that the spirit of hate underlay the sin of murder, and tb(
spirit of purity assured the maintenance of right marriage relations.



M THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. m. 1— la

III. In the TBACHQiaB OF THE PROPHETS. It was almost the one essential thing in
their work that they were to set free the spirit of the older revelation, which was in
danger of heing overorushed by the letter of commandment and ceremonial rule. It
may even be shown that, in the prophets, there was a tendency to undervalue the kfter,
in the earnestness of their effort to get a right value Bet on the spirit of obedience.

IV. In the life and gospel of the Lord Jesus. Illustrate by our Lord's
parables, and by his teaching as in John vi. 63.

V. In the apostolic ministry. Especially illustrated in St. Paul's teachings
respecting: the relation of the Judaic and Christian systems, and equally illustrated in
St. John's revelation of the inner and mystical meanings of the Christian truth and
requirements. Conclude by showing how this distinction is still appilicable to modern
religious teaching. 1. The " letter " is needed. In some stages of religious experience
and attainment precise directions are the best helps. 2. The mere " letter " may still
be exaggerated, so as to become a mischievous bondage. 3. The true teacher uses the
formal "letter" only to caiTy the " spirit." But the higher teaching of the very spirit
of Christianity demands from the teacher a very marked and cultured spirituality, or
spiritual insight. — K. T.

Vers. 7 — 11. — Z%e old covenant and the new. In some sense it may be said that
teachings respecting the relations between the older revelation in Judaism and the
newer revelation in Christianity were special to the Apostle Paul. On this point he
had direct revelations from Christ, and the liberal form which his teachings took exposed
him to the peril of being misunderstood and misrepresented, and brought persecutions
around him. No man could be found more truly loyal to the older revelation than the
apostle of the Gentiles, but while he honoured it he saw clearly that it had its day and
its mission. That day had now passed; that mission had been fulfilled. The older
covenant had made open and plain the way for the new, and it was loyalty to the old
for Paul to accept fully the new, in which it found its fulfilment, its completion, its
glory; for the ministration of Jesus and the Spirit is but Judaism glorified, the gospel
of the letter passed into the gospel of the spirit. Three contrasts are here dwelt upon.
The old covenant and the new are conceived as —

I. A ministration op death and a ministration op lipb. St. Paul had said
(ver. 6) that the " letter killeth." He meant that it crushed hope and effort, since no
man could reach a perfect obedience. The old covenant condemned all who failed even
in the least thing. It provided no life, no strength in which obedience could become
possible. On the other hand, the new covenant provided a new life for the will and a
new grace unto obedience. The old crushed down heart and hope, and made a man cry
out, " I cannot." The new cheered him, lifted him up, and made him say, " I can,
through him who strengtheneth me."

II. A ministration op condemnation and a ministration of bighteousness.
The old covenant said, " Thou shalt not," and it denounced its penalties on the offenders.
The new covenant says, " Thou shalt," holds before us the model life of obedience lived
by the Lord Jesus, and provides grace unto changing us into his image.

in. A ministration that was passing and a ministration that was pebha-
NENT. (Ver, 11.) The older covenant was of necessity transitory. It had but a
temporary and preparatory mission. The new is abiding, for there can be nothing
higher than or beyond that spiritual righteousness which ia its sublime aim to accom-
plish.— B. T.

Ver. 17. — The libertt/ of the Spirit. "The apostle assumes, almost as an axiom of
the spiritual life, that the presence of the Spirit gives freedom, as contrasted with the
bondage of the letter — freedom from slavish fear, freedom from the guUt and burden of
sin, freedom from the tyranny of the Law." Distinguish carefully between liberty and
licence. Whether a man can have and use liberty depends entirely upon what a man
t». Some men are better in bonds ; they must be in bonds ; their fancied liberty is but
a delusion. The pdnt urged by the apostle is that the man who is renewed in Christ
Jesus can be safely trusted with his full liberty, because he is established in principles,
and upheld by a power which guarantees that he will put his liberty into reasonable
and righteous limitations. We observe some of the reasons why " where the Spirit of
the Lord ii, thm ta liberty."



OH. in. 1-18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 87

I. Bbcausb there is life, a new life, a Divine life. Life can always be allowed
its free and natural expression. It is disease that must be set in limitations and bon-
dages. The forces and expressions of life are evenly and harmoniously balanced ; and
order is preserved when life is permitted to be free. The expressions of the Christian
life, the life of the Spirit, can only be true and beautiful and good.

II. Because thekb is febedom from bonds. That is, from the bonds of formal
rules. The Spirit establishes principles, and so frees us from rules. God's laws are
written by the Spirit in our minds and on our hearts. Illustrate by the passing away
of schoolboy commands and regulations when manhood has come and principles are
established.

III. Beoause there is knowledge of the eight. This the indwelling Spirit
guarantees, because he takes of the things of Christ and reveals them unto us. He is
our inward Monitor, our Teacher as well as our Comforter. Illustrate by the perplexity
of life if we must control it by fashion and custom, deciding what we may eat and
what we may not eat ; what we may enjoy and what we may not enjoy ; what is con-
sistent and what is inconsistent. The Spirit shows the right ; it is liberty to act on its
great principle that we must everywhere be (1) true to God, and (2) helpful to our
brethren.

IV. Because there is desire for the right. He who is without the Spirit may
" know the better but follow the worse." That is saying he is in bondages of self-will
and evil which he cannot break. The indwelling Spirit controls the will and affections
so that we desire what is right, and therefore are free to follow the right of which we
may know.

V. Because there is quick 8ensit[veness to the wrong. So that it is detected
and its slavery resisted. The liberty of the Spirit is such that it cannot be taken at
unawares. From these considerations plead for the importance of keeping our minds
and hearts ever open to the Spirit's love and lead, as the secret of maintaining the only
liberty that is worth calling such. For the liberty that is assured to man by the
gospel, see John viii. 32 ; Ronu yi 18, 22 ; viii. 2 ; Jas. i. 25 ; ii. 12 ; 1 Pet. ii. 16.
— R. T.

Ver. 18. — ITie vision of God in Christianity, This passage contains evident reference
to *n incident occurring in the life of Moses. He had tarried on the mount for forty
days, in some mysterious manner within the immediate radiance of the Divine glory,
holding some very near, yet very secret, fellowship with God. We might expect to
find aa influence from such converse resting on Moses' spirit ever after, and we could
not wonder If some traces of it were left upon his very face. Such was the case.
Unknown to himself, the skin of his face shone, and when the people of Israel saw it
they were afraid to come near him. Partly to shadow the glory from them, and partly,
as St. Paul tells us in this chapter, that they might not see the glory fade and die away,
he covered himself with a veil. This glory on the face of Moses had two great lessons
in it for the Jews and for us. 1. That the vision of God has a transforming power on
human souls. 2. And that this glory of Moses was a symbol of the passing and pre-
paratory character of the Old Testament dispensation. St. Paul's argumentative use of
his reference to Moses may be thus traced. He is exalting his office as a minister of the
new covenant. He argues that if a glory was shed upon the ministration of the Law,
a Law written in letters and graven upon stones, much greater must be the glory which
rests upon the ministration of the Spirit, which ministration is permanent. Being the
minister of this more glorious covenant, St. Paul says he may speak and act with bold-
ness, without disguise. He need not spread a veil over his face, as Moses did, in order
that the sons of Israel might not see the end of that fading brightness. And this
reminds him that, when he wrote, the minds of Israel were still blinded, a veil was on
their hearts, so that they imagine the glory lies still on Moses and his system ; they
cannot see that the older covenant has done its work, that the Law has given place to
love. When their hearts turn to the Lord Jesus, the veil is rent away ; they have the
vision of the Lord the Spirit ; their bondage gives place to freedom. " We all, while
with face unveiled we behold in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are ourselves trans-
formed continually into the same likeness; and the glory which shines upon us is
reflected by us, even as it proceeds from the Lord the Spirit." Two questions invite



88 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa [oh. it. 1—18.

attention. 1. How is the vision of G-od granted to us ? 2. What influence doei the
vision of God exert?

I. How IS THE VISION OF GoD GRANTED TO US ? Man Can never find rest for head
or heart save in God. The deepest longing of every human soul is the vision of God.
Idolatry is the expression of the desire to find and see God, Humanity in all ages is
knit together as one man in this cry for God. Illustrate by references to Enoch, Abra-
ham, Jacob, Moses, David, Job, Isaiah, Stephen, and the Apostle John, who says, " We
know that, when he doth appear, we shaU be like him ; for we shall see him as he is."
These, indeed, are all cases of good men, but the universal efforts to make a religion show
that all men are alike in this, they would behold the glory of God. The vision is given
us : 1. By the inner ministration of the Spirit. This is the meaning of the " open face,
unveiled." St. Paul had just said, " We use great plainness of speech ; " that is, in our
ministry we can speak with freedom and boldness, without any disguise or veil, because
we are ministers in the fower of the Spirit. So, he would say, we all need no veil, we
have openiless, to behold the glory of the Lord in the leadings of the Spirit; for " where
the spirit of the Lord is, there is [this] liberty ; " veils are removed, hindrances are taken
away, we can " behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord." 2. By the outward mirror
of the Christ. " Beholding as in a glass." God's actual glory can be seen by no created
eye ; it must be reflected — it can only be seen as mirrored. We cannot look on the
sun ; we can see its image in a pool, we can find its reflected glory in the tinted flowers,
and in the glorified clouds of the sunset. So our pained, strained, spiritual eyes rest
delightfully upon the " Man Christ Jesus," who is the " Brightness of the Father's
glory, and the express Image of the Father's person." The infinite excellences of the
Divine character are exhibited in Christ in a form comprehensible by men. What the
virtues and moral excellences of God are we could never know, but Christ shows them
to us as if they were the graces and virtues of a man. Illustnte thus God's holiness,
justice, mercy, and love.

II. What iNPHiBifCES does this vision of God exert? "Changed into the
same image." Moses could not see God and be the same man that he was. It changed
his soul somewhat into the Divine likeness, even as his face lost its natural expression
and shone with the glory. The sight of God is ever a transforming sight. It is seen to
be so in the case of the transfiguration. The disciples saw our Lord's very raiment
white and glistering, and glory all overspreading his frame. When a man sees Chxi
there is an inner change, of which that is the symbol. Illustrate by the way in which
a close and trustful friendship makes the friends grow alike. As the Christian man
maintains his daily relations with Christ the mirrored God, as he " dwells in the secret
place of the Most High," he finds a transforming and transfiguring work is being carried
on : the mind of God is coming to be his mind ; the work of God is coming to be his
work ; the very life of God is coming to be his life. And this further result comes.
They who are changing into the likeness of God are gradually reflecting the glory of
God" out upon men. They are becoming themselves, in turn, mirrors of God, glasses in
which men may behold the glory of the Lord. We hardly know which is the more
gracious and surprising — the change that is wrought in us by the constant communion
of God and our souls, or the infinite condescension which permits us, in our earthly
lives, to be light-bearers for God, mirrors to reflect the glory and attraction of his saving
grace, so that men may be won to him. Conclude by showing (1) that the heart must
be a veiled heart which resists the ministration of the Spirit ; (2) that from such k
veiled heart must ever be hidden the glory of the redeeming God. — B. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTBB IV.
The glory of the gospel ministry (vers.
1 — 6), which sustains the hearts of Christ's
ministers among all weaknesses and trials
(vers. 7 — 15), especially by the faith in
things unseen (vera. 16 — 18).



Ver. I. — ^Therefore. Because «t the fre»-
dom and open vision of the gospel. As ws
have received meroy. Gratitude for a meioy
so undeserved (1 Tim. i. 13) makes ns fear-
less and vigorous in a ministry so glorious
(Acts XX. 23, 24). We faint not. The word
implies the maintenance of a holy courage
(1 Cor. xvi. 13) and perseverance (2 Thesnii



OH. IV. 1—18.1 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



iii. 13). It occnis again In yer. 16, and in
Luke xviii. 1 ; Gal. vi. 9; Kph. iii. 13.

Ver. 2. — But have renounced ; rather, hut
we renouneed. We renounced them once and
for ever at our baptism. The hidden things
of dishonesty ; literally, of shame ; meaning,
of course, of all that causes shame. Dis-
graceful as may be calumnies of my Jewish
opponents, I have said farewell for ever to
everything for which a good man would
blush. "Honest" was originally like the
Greek word Ka\hs, a general expression for
moral excellence, as in Pope's line —

" An honest man's the noblest work of God."
Fletcher's —

" Man is his own star, and the soul that can
Be honest is the only perfect man."

In craftiness. The word implies all subtle,
cunning, underhand dealing (ch. xi. 3), and
it is clear from ch. xii. 16 that St. Paul had
been charged with such conduct. The word
is both used and illustrated in Luke xx. 23.
Handling the word of God deceitfully. He
has already repudiated this charge by im-
plication in ch. ii. 17, and he was always
anxious to maintain an attitude of trans-
parent sincerity (ch. i. 12) by uttering the
truth and the whole truth (ch. iL 17 ; Acts
XI. 27), and not adulterating it. He had to
meet such insinuations even in his first
extant letter (1 Thess. ii. 3). By mani-
festation of the truth. The constant recur-
rence to this thought shows the apostle's
anxiety to remove the suspicion, created by
the attacks of his opponents, that he had an
etoterio teaching for some (ch. i. 13), and
kept some of his doctrines in the background.
" The truth " cannot be preached by the aid
of lies. The prominence of the word " mani-
fest" in this Epistle is remairkable. St.
Paul seems to be haunted by it (ch. ii. 16 ;
iii. 3; iv. 10; v. 10, 11; vii. 12; xi. 6).
Commending ourselves. This is the only
form of self-commendation or of " commen-
datory letter" for which I care. There is
evidently a reference to the same verb ased
in ch. iii. 1. Before God (see ch. ii. 17;
vii. 12 ; Gal. i. 20). These solemn appeals
are meant to show that it would be morally
impossible for him to act as he was charged
with acting. If he can assert his own in-
tegrity he will do so only as oonsciously in
the presence of God.

Ver. 3. — But if our gospel bo hid. This
it added to avoid the semblance of a con-
tradiction. He has spoken of "manifestation
of the truth," and yet has spoken of all
Jews as unable to see it because they will
not remove from their hearts the veil which
hides it from them. How can "a veiled
gospel" be a "manifested truth"? The
ftiuiwer is that the gospel is bright, but the



eyes that should gaze on it are wilfully
closed. Similarly in ch. ii. 16, he has com-
pared the gospel to a fragrance of life, yet
to the doomed captives — " to the perishing"
— it comes "like a waft from the charnel-
house." A better rendering would be, Sut
even if our gospel (1 Cor. xv. 1; Kom. ii. 16)
is a veiled one, it is veiled only among the
perishing (comp. 1 Cor. i. 18). Be hid;
rather, has been veiled. To them that are
lost ; rather, to the perishing (see note on
ch. ii. 15).

Ver. 4, — The god of this world; rather,
the god of this age. It is, as Bengel says,
"a great and horrible description of the
devil." He is not, however, here called a
god of the kosmos, but only of the olam
hazzeh, the present dispensation of things as
it exists among those who refuse to enter
that kingdom in which the power of Satan
is brought to nought. The melancholy
attempt to get rid of Manichean arguments
by rendering the verse " in whom God blinded
the thoughts of the unbelievers of this
world " is set aside by the fact that the ter-
rible description of Satan as " another god "
(El acheer) was common among the rabbis.
They knew that his power was indeed a
derivative power, but still that it was per-
mitted to be great (Eph. ii. 2 ; vi. 12). In
John xii. 31 (xiv. 30) our Lord speaks of
him as "the ruler of the kosmos." Hath
blinded ; rather, blinded. The verb here
has no other meaning than "to blind,"
and is quite different from the verb " to
harden," rendered by " to blind " in ch. iii.
14 with the same substantive. They are
blind from lack of faith, and so being " un-
believing " they are " perishing " (Eph. v. 6),
seeing that they " walk in darkness " (John
viii. 12) and are in Satan's power (Acts
xxvi. 18). "Blindness of heart," says St.
Augustine, " is both a sin and a punishment
of sin and a cause of sin." The light of
the glorious gospel of Christ; rather, the
illumination of the gospel of the glory of the
Christ. The word photismos in later eccle-
siastical Greek was used for "baptism."
Who is the image of God (ch. iii. 18; Col
i. 15; Heb. i. 3). Should shine nnto
them ; or, as in the Eevised Version, sliould
dawn upon them. The other rendering,
"that they should not see the illumination,"
gives to the verb augdzo, a rarer sense,
only found in poetry, and not known to the
LXX.

Ver. 5. — For we preach not ourselves.
There is no glory or illumination on our
faces, and we have no personal ends to gain,
nor are we " Icrds " over your faith. This is,
perhaps, meant as an answer to some charge
of egotism. The Lord; rather, as Lord
(Phil. ii. 11 ; 1 Cor. xii. 3). Your servants ;
literally, your slave* (1 Cor. iz, 19). Per



90



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. iv. 1—18.



Jesus' sake. So Chrisfi had himself desired
(Matt. XX. 27).

Ver. 6. — Who commanded the light to
shine ont of daikneES. The argument of the
verse is that God, who created the material
light (Gen. i. 3) and who is the Father of
lights (Jas. i. 1) and sent his Son to be the
Light of the world (John viii. 12), did not
shine in our hearts for our sakes only, or
that we might hide the light under a bushel
for ourselves, but that we might transmit
and reflect it. There is an implied com-
parison between the creation of light and
the dawn of the gospel light, and each of
these was meant for the good of all the world.
The verse should be rendered, if we follow
the best manuscripts, " Because it is God,
who said, Light shall shine out of darkness,
who shone in our hearts for the illumination
of the knowledge of the glory of God." In
the face of Jesus Christ (see oh. ii. 10;
iii. 7). Probably, however, there is a re-
ference to the glory of God, not as reflected
from the face of Christ, but as concentrated
in and beaming from it (Heb. i. 2).

Vers. 7 — 15. — Olory of the ministry in the
midst of its weakness and suffering.

Ver. 7. — In earthen vessels. The glorious
light which we have to show to the world is,
like Gideon's torches, carried in earthen
pitchers. The word shenos, vessel, is used
in Mark xi. 16, and "vessels of earthen-
ware" in Eev. ii. 27. St. Paul, in Acts ix.
15, is called " a vessel of election," whence
Dante calls him lo vas d' elezione. Man
can never be more than an earthen vessel,
being frail and humble, and the metaphor
specially suits an apostle of Christ ■ (see
1 Cor. ii. 3—5 ; 2 Tim. ii. 20). But when
he takes the Word of life from the earthen
pitcher and waves it in the air, it illuminates
all on whom the light shines. No com-
mentator seems to have seen the probable
allusion to Gideon's pitchers. It is the
" light," of which he has been speaking
exclusively in the last verses, which con-
stitutes the " treasure." Those who suppose
that the "treasure" is gold or silver or
something else of value, refer to Jer. xxxii.
14, and Herod., iii. 103; Pers., ' Sat.,' ii. 10.
The excellency; literally, tte excess or
abuiidance. Of God, and not of us; rather,
of God, and not from us.

Ver. 8. — Troubled ; afflicted, as in oh. i. 4.
On every side; in everything. Distressed;
rather, driven to straits. Perplexed, but not
in despair. In the original is a beautiful
paronomasia, which might, perhaps, be re-
presented in English by " pressed, but not
oppressed." Literally the words mean, being
at a loss, but not utterly at a loss. In the
special anguish of trial of which he spoke
in ch. i, 8 (comp. ch. vii. 5), he was indeed
for ft time "utterly at a loss," reduced to



utter despair ; but in the normal conditions
which he here describes he always, as it
were, saw some outlet out of his worst per-
plexities.

Ver. 9. — Not forsaken. St. Paul, like the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, knew
by blessed experience the truth of the pro-
mise, " I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee " (Heb. xiii. 5, 6). Cast down. Flung
to the ground, as in some lost battle ; yet
not doomed, not " perishing." " Though he
fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for
the Lord upholdeth him with his hand"
(Ps. xxxvii. 24).

Ver. 10. — The dying of the lord Jesus;
literally, the putting to death (Vulgate, mor-
tificatio). This is even stronger than ch. i.
5. It is not only " the sufferings," but even
"the dying," of Christ of which his true
followers partake (Bom. viii. 36, " For thy
sake are we killed all the day long "). St.
Paul, who was " in deaths oft " (ch. xi. 23),
was thus being made conformable unto
Christ's death (Phil. iii. 10). Philo, too,
compares life to " the daily carrying about
of a corpse," and the Curfed'Ars used to
speak of his body as " oe cadavre." That the
life also of Jesus, etc. The thought is ex-
actly the same as in 2 Tim. ii. 11, " If we be
dead with him, we shall also live with him."

Ver. 11. — For Jesus' sake. St. Paul, as
Bengal says, constantly thus repeats the
name of Jesus, as one who felt its sweetness.
The verse contains a reassertion and ampli-
fication of what he has just said. In onr
mortal flesh. This is added almost by way
of climax. The life of Jesus is manifested,
not only " in our body," but even by way of
triumph in its lowest and poorest element.
God manifests life in our dying, and death
in oui living (Alford).

Ver. 12.— So then. In accordance with
what he has just said. Death worketh in
us, but life in yon. The life of us apostles
is a constant death (Rom. viii. 36) ; but of
this daily dying you reap the benefits ; our
dying is your living ; our afflictions become
to you a source of consolation and ioy (oh. i
6; Phil. ii. 17).

Ver. 13.-1^6; rather. But we. The same
spirit of faith. The spirit manifested by
the psalmist in the quotation which follows.
It is from Ps. cxvi. 10, a psalm which cor-
responded with St. Paul's mood because it
was written in trouble sustained by faith.
And this faith inspires him with the convic-
tion that, after " the body of this death," and
after this death in life, there should begin
for him also the life in death. St. Paul
says nothing as to the authorship of the
psalm, ■Which probably belongs to a period
far later than that of David. The words
are from the LXX., and seem fairly to
represent the disputed sense of the original



OH. IV. 1— la] IHE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



•1



Vei. 14. — Which raised up the Lord Jesus
(see 1 Cor. vi. 14). Shall raise up us also.
ihe thought is again expressed in Rom. viii.
11. As he is here alluding mainly to the
resurrection from the dead, it is clear that
he contemplated the posg&ility of dying
before Christ's second coming (comp. 1 Thesa.
iv. 15). By Jesus. The reading supported
by nearly all the best manuscripts is " with
Jesus " (N, 'B, 0, D, E, F, 6), which per-
haps appeared unsuitable to tlio copyists.
But Christians are " risen with Christ " here
vCol, ii. 12 ; iii. 1) ; and in another sense
also we rise with him, because the Church
is "the body of Christ" (1 Cur. xv. 23).
Shall present us with you. So St. Jude
speaks of " God our Saviour " as able " to
present us " before the presence of his glory
(Jude 24, 25).

Ver. 15. — All things are for your sakes.
St. Paul has already implied that his life is
not his own (ch. i. 6 ; comp. 1 Cor. iii. 22,
23), and he recurs to the same thought in
Col. i. 24, and repeats once again towards
the close of his life : " I endura all things for
the elect's sakes" (2 Tim. ii. 10). Might
. . . redound. The verb perisseun may mean
either " I abound " or " I make to abound "
as in cli. ix. 8 and Epb. i. 8. Here there is
a similar thought to that expressed in ch. i.
11, and the best rendering is, In order that
the Divine favour, being multiplied through
the greater number (of those who share in it),
may malce the thanksgiving (which it excites)
dbound to the honour of God.

Vers. 16 — 18. — The Christian minister is
upheld by hope.

Ver. 16. — Therefore. Knowing that our
daily death is the pathway to eternal life
(ver. 14). We faint not (see ver. 1).
Though ; rather, even if. Our outward man.
Our life in its human and corporeal condi-
tions. The inward man. Namely, our moral
and spiritual being, that " new man which
is renewed in knowledge after the image of
him that created him" (Col. iii. 10). Is
renewed; literally, is being renewed; i.e. by
faith and hope. Day by day. The Greek
phrase is not classical, but is a reminiscence
of the Hebrew.



Ver. 17. — Tor our light affliction, which is
but for a moment; literally, /or the imme-
diate lightness of our affliction. Worketh for
us. Is bringing about for us, with all the
immeasurable force of a natural and progres-
sive law. A far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory; literally, in excess unto
excesa. For the phrase, " to excess " — cha-
racteristic, like other emotional expressions,
of this group of Epistles — see ch. i. 8 ; Gal.
i. 13. The word "eternal " is in antithesis
to the " for a moment." The " weight " is
suggested by the " lightness," and possibly
also by the fact that in Hebrew the word
for " glory " also means " weight." The
general contrast is found also in Matt. v. 12;
1 Pet. v. 10; Heb. xii. 10; Rom. viii. 18.
The frequent resemblances between this
Epistle and that to the Romans are natural
when we remember that they were written
within a few months of each other.

Ver. 18. — While we look not at the things
which are seen. The Greek suggests more
of a reason, "Since we are not gazing at
things visible" (see ch. v. 7). Things which
are not seen. The negative is the subjective
negative. It expresses not only the fact
that now these things are not seen, but that
it is their nature to be unseen by the bodily
eyes. Temporal. That is, temporary, tran-
sitory, phantasmal, » passing world ; for
which reason we do not fix our gaze or our
aim upon it. But the things which are not
seen are eternal. The clause is important,
as showing that eternity is not a mere ex-
tension of time, but a condition qualitatively
difterent from time. The " things eternal "
exist as much now as they will ever do.
We are as much living in eternity now as
we ever shall be. The only difference will
be that we shall then see him who is now
unseen, and realize the things whioh now
are only visible to the eye of faith. This is
one of the passages of St. Paul which finds
a close parallel in Seneca (' Ep.,' 59). " In-
visibilia non decipiunt" was, as Bishop
Wordsworth tells us, the inscription put at
the end of his garden arcade by Dr. Young,
the poet.



EOMILETIC&

Vers. 1, 2. — The character and work of a true minister of Christ. "Therefore
seeing we have this ministry," etc. These words present to us a true minister of
Christ as he is in himself and in his labours, that is, his character and work.

I. His chabaotbb. It is here suggested that his character is marked by three
things. 1. Its ftrength. " Therefore seeing we have this ministry, as we have
received mercy, we faint not." Having in mercy such a gospel as this to preach, we
are not disheartened. " We faint not ; " on the contrary, (ve are courageous. The
character of every minister of Christ should be marked by strength — strength of con-
viction, strength of principle. 2. Its purity. "But have renounced the hidden thiugi



92 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. iv. 1—18

of dishsnesty," or rather, of " shame.'' Every element and form of sin is a thing ol
" shame," a thing which makes the conscience blush. Falsehood, inchastity, meanness,
selfishness, dishonesty, are all things for shame and disgust. A true minister has
renounced all these things, he is thoroughly cleansed of them. 3, Its straightforward-
ness. "Not walking in craftiness." No attribute of character is more common, at
the same time more morally ignoble and anti-Christiau, than artfulness or stratagem.
MinisteiB of religion are frequently charged with this " craftiness," and the charge is,
alas 1 too often true. The craft of priests is notorious. Now, a true minister is free
from this ; he is a man of frankness, candour, transparent honesty.

II. His wobk. How does he fulfil his mission? The answer is given here: 1.
Negatively. " Not handling the Word of God deceitfully." It is thus handled wlien
it is used to support a system, to advance a sect, to exhibit self, to gain a living and to
win popularity. He is not a true minister who does this. 2. Positively. " By
manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the
sight of God." (1) He appeals to the conscience of humanity. " Every man's con-
science." Elsewhere Paul calls conscience the " inner man ; " it is in truth the man of
the man, his moral self. It is thus he addresses himself, not merely to the passion, or
to the imagination, or to the intellect, but to that which underlies and permeates every
spiritual faculty of man. (2) He appeals to the conscience of humanity through the
truth. " By manifestation of the truth." What is the " truth " ? " The Word of
God." And that word, not as literature, but as life, the life of Christ. He is " the
Truth." It is " truth as it is in Jesus," not in creeds or Churches that he addresses
to the conscience. (3) He appeals to the consciences of humanity, through the truth
under the felt inspection of Almighty Gfod. " In the sight of God." The man who
preaches the truth under a consciousness of the Divine eye will be free from (a) fear,
lb) affectation, and from (c) dulness.

Vers. 3, 4. — The condition of unregenerated men. "But if our gospel be hid," etc.
These words give an appalling view of ungodly men.

I. They are blind to the gospel. " If our gospel be hid [or, ' veiled ']." Men have
different organs of vision. There is the bodily eye : the gospel is not " hid " from that
—they can see the volume that contains it, they can see the print, and perhaps read its
chapters. There is the intellectual eye to discover its sense and discern its meaning.
There is the spiritual eye, the conscience which discerns the moral significance of
things ; this is the eye which alone can see the gospel, its real essence. And this is the
veiled eye, the eye of conscience is closed, so that the gospel is no more discerned than
the bright heavens are observed by the man who is born blind.

II. They are perishing in sin. " It is hid to them that are lost," or veiled from
them that are perishing. Soul-rUin is' a gradual process. Souls are neither ruined nor
saved at once. The wicked are "going into everlasting punishment;" they are not
hurled there at once ; step by step they proceed. With every sin their sensibility of
conscience is perishing, their power of will is perishing, all the better tendencies of
their nature are perishing. It matters not how strong in body, how prosperous in
wealth, how elevated in society, they are perishing. Startlingly solemn this!

IIL They are victimized by Satan. " In whom the god of this world hath blinded
the minds of them which believe not." Observe: 1. Satan is not a principle, but a
personality] 2. Satan has immense dominions. " The god of this world." Satan is a
personality that has access to human souls. He enters men, acts on their springs of
thought and fountains of feeling. 3. Satan is a personality whose action on the soul is
essentially pernicious. " The god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which
believe not. He closes the moral eye of the soul, " lest the light of the glorious gospel
of Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them."

Ver. 5. — Preaching. " For we preach not ourselves," etc. Here i*—

L A SAD possibility in preaching. What is that? To "preach ourselves." To

preach ourselves is to propound our own notions, to exhibit our own talents, genius, and

learning, to parade our own productions. It is to put self, not Christ, in the front. In

these days the egotism of the pulpit has become all but intolerable.

II. A GLOBiouB THEME for preaching "Christ Jesus the Lord." 1. Preach him



CH. IV. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. 93

as the Mediator between God and man. He whose grand mission it is to reconcile man
to his Maker. 2. Preach him as the great Example for man's imitation. He who
embodies the ideal of human perfection and blessedness.

III. The KiQHT SERVICE in preaching. " Ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake."
Tlie true preacher is : 1. The servant of souls. 2. The servant of souls inspired by love
for Christ. " Servants for Jesus' sake."

Ver. 6. — True soul-light. " For God, who commanded the light to shine out of
darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ." There are two lights in the soul. There is the light
of nature. This light consists of those moral intuitions which Heaven implanted
within us at first. These intuitions are good enough for angels, did for Adam before
he fell ; but now, through sin, they are so blunt and dim that the soul is in moral
darkness : " The light that is in thee is darkness." The other light is that of the light
of the gospel. This comes because the light of nature is all but gone out, and comes as
essential to our spiritual well-being. This is the light to which the passage refers, the
new soul-light. The words call attention to three facts concerning it.

I. It emanates from the highest Source. " God, who commanded the light to
shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts." The reference is here to the creation
(Gen. i. 3). It reminds us: 1. Of antecedent darkness. The state of the soul before
this light enters it is analogous to the state of the earth before God kindled the
lights of the firmament. It was cold, chaotic, dead. In what a sad condition is
the unregenerate soul I 2. Of almighty sovereignty. " Let there be light " — "Let light
be, and light was." The luminaries of the firmament were kindled by the free,
uncontrolled, almighty power of QtoA.. So it is with real spiritual light. It comes
because God wills it. Everywhere he " worketh according to the counsel of his own
will."

IL It reveals the grandest subject. Light is a revealer. AU the hues and
forms, beauties and sublimities of the earth would be hid from us without the light.
What does this soul-light reveal? "The light of the knowledge of the glory of God."
Gospel light entering the soul makes God visible as the eternal Heaiity, the Foun-
tain of being, and the Source of all blessedness. Where this gospel light is not, the
soul either ignores or denies him ; or, at most, speculates about him, and at best has
now and then flitting visions. But under the radiance of the gospel, God is the Reality
of all realities, the Fovmtain of all existences, the Root of all the sciences. In this
light they see God, and through him they see and interpret his universe.

HI. It streams through the sublimest Medium. " In the face of Jesus Christ."
There is undoubted allusion here to what is said of Moses (ch. ill. 13) when the Divine
glory was reflected on liis face, and produced such a splendour and magnificence that
the children of Israel could not steadfastly look upon it. The sense here is that, in the
face or the person of Jesus Christ, the glory of God shone clearly, and the Divinity
appeared without a veiL This light coming through Christ, "who is the image of
the invisible God," is : 1. True light. He is the Truth. 2. Softened light. The soul
could not stand the light coming directly from the infinite Source ; it is too dazzling.
Through the medium of Christ it comes so softened as to suit our weakness. 3.
Quickening light. It falls on the soul like the sunbeam on the seed quickening into
life.

Ver. 7. — The true gospel ministry. " But we have this treasure,'' etc. The words
lead us to consider the true gospel ministry in various aspects.

L As containing an inestimable treasure. The gospel is a system of incal-
culable worth. The most valuable things in nature are employed to represent it —
water, light, life, etc. There are four criteria that determine the worth of a thing —
rarity, utility, duration, the appreciation of the highest authorities. All these applied
to the gospel demonstrate its surpassing value.

II. As the service of fragile men. " In earthen vessels." To whom have the
inestimable truths of the gospel been entrusted for exposition, enforcement, and distri-
bution ? Not to angels, but to frail and dying men. 1. They have frail bodies. They
are subject to infirmity, exhaustion, decay, etc. 2. They have frail minds. The most



94 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. iv, 1— la

vigorous in intellect is weak, tlio most lofty in genius is feeble, the most enlightened
is ignorant.

III. As DEVKLOPiNO A DiviNB PUBP08B. " That the excellency of the power may
be of God, and not of us." The grand reason why frail men are employed to preach the
gospel is that the glorious renovating and soul-saving effects may evidently appear as
the work of God, and not of man. When sermons prove effective in converting souls,
it is not because of the originality of their thought, the force of their logic, the splendour
of their rhetoric, or the majesty of their eloquence, but because of the Divine power
that accompanies them. " Not by might, nor by power," etc.

Vers. 8 — 12. — Trials in the cauu of Christ. " We are troubled on every side,*
etc. Three remarks are suggested.

I. That THE TRIALS ENCOUNTBRBD IN THE CAUSE OF ChRIST ARE SOMETIMES VERT

GREAT. Hear what Paul says about his trials : " We are troubled on every side." He
speaks of himself as hemmed in by enemies, pursued by enemies, stricken down by
enemies, and dragging about with him, as it were, a living corpse. It may be laid
down as a principle, that the man who is earnestly engaged in any righteous cause in
this world will have to encounter trials. The old prophets had their trials, some of
them were insulted, some incarcerated, some martyred. So with John the Baptist, and so
with the apostles, so with the confessors, reformers, and genuine revivalists.

II. That, HOWEVER GREAT THE TRIALS ENCOUNTERED, THEY ARE NOT BBTOND BEAR-
ING. The apostle says that although " troubled on every side, yet not distressed," or
straitened; though "perplexed," or bewildered, yet not benighted; though "persecuted,"
or pursued, yet not " forsaken," or abandoned ; though " cast down," or stricken down
with a blow, yet not perishing. The idea is that he had support under his trials ;
they did not entirely crush him. The true labourer in the cause of Christ, however
great his trials, is always supported : 1. By the approbation of his own conscience. 2.
By the encouraging results of his own labours. 3. By the sustaining strength of God.
" As thy days, so thy strength shall be."

III. That THE RIGHT BEARING OF THESE TRIALS SUBSERVES THE GOOD OF SOULS. 1.

In the right bearing of these sufferings the sufferer reveals the life of Christ to others.
" Always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus." Rightly endured
sufferings bring the sufferer so near to the sufferings of Christ that he is in a sense a
sharer of those sufferings, and hence in them the life of Jesus is made manifest. Who
that has witnessed the true Christian languishing on the bed of suffering and death
has not seen the spirit of the life of Christ revealed ? 2. In the right bearing of these
sufferings the sufferer promotes in himself and others the Christian life. " For we
which live are always delivered unto death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus
might be made manifest in our mortal flesh. So then death worketh in us, but life in
you." " God," says Dean Alford, " exhibits death in the living, that he may also
exhibit life in the dying."

Ver. 13. — The speech of true faith. " We having the same spirit of faith,'' etc. The
world is full of speech. Human words load the atmosiihere. All the speeches may
be divided into three classes. 1. Speech without faith. Vapid and volatile talk. 2.
Speech with wrong faith. Wiong faith is of two descriptions. (1) Faith in wrong
subjects. Men believe errors. (2) Improper faith in right subjects. Weak wavering,
etc. 3. Speech with true faith. Take the true faith as faith in Christ. In him, not
in propositions concerning him, propositions either including doctrines or facts. I offer
three remarks concerning the speech of this faith.

I. It is INEVITABLE. The man who truly believes in Christ feels that "necessity is
laid upon him," that he " cannot but speak the things seen and heard." Such is the
influence of faith on man's social sympathies that his emotions become irrepressible.

II. It IS RATIONAL. How much speech there is in connection even with the religion
of Christ that clashes with the dictates of human reason, and is an insult to common
sense ! But he who really has faith in Christ can give reasons for his convictions in
language clear as the day. It is the lack of true faith that makes our sermons hazy.

III. It is strong. True faith ic Christ is the strongest of all convictions, and a
strong conviction will always have a strong utterance. The words will be free and full.



OH. IT. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 95

Vers, 14, 16. — Soul-inspiring facts. "Knowing that lie which raised up the Lord
Jesus," etc. There are four glorious facts here.

I. That Cheist was raised from the dead. "Knowing that he which raised
up the Lord Jesus." " No fact in history," says Dr. Arnold, " is more firmly estab-
lished by argument than this."

II. That the genuine disciples op Christ will also be raised. " Shall raise
up us also by [with] Jesus, and shall present us with you." Raised as he was raised,
and all be presented together.

III. That all things are for good to the good. "All things are for your
sakes." " We know that all things shall work together for good," etc. " All things
are yours."

IV. That all things in life should result in the true worship of God. "That
the abundant grace might through the thanksgiving of many redound to the glory of
God." It is only in worship that the soul can find the free and harmonious develop-
ment of all its spiritual powers. Worship is heaven. It is not the means to an end ;
it is the sublimest end of being.

Ver. 16. — Soul-grovith. " For which cause we faint not," etc. Observe at the
outset : 1. Man has a duality of nature — the outwwrd and the inward ; the latter the
man of the man. 2. The decayableness of one of the natures. " Our outward man
perisheth." This is constantly going on. 3. The constant growth of the inner nature.
"The inward man is renewed day by day." Soul-growth implies three things.

I. SouL-LiFE. Dead plants and dead animals can no more grow than stones. The
inner man unrenewed is morally dead ; its life consists in supreme sympathy with the
supremely good.

II. Soul-nourishment. No life can live upon itself. The appropriation of outward
elements is essential to sustentation and growth. Moral and spiritual truths are the
nutriment of souls,

III. SouL-EXEKClsB. All life seems to require exercise. Even the productions of
the vegetable world cannot grow without it ; though they cannot move themselves,
they are moved by the breezes of heaven. Animal life requires it, and the soul must
have it in order to grow. It must " exercise itself unto godliness." " They that wait
upon the Lord shall renew their strength,"

Vers. 17, 18. — The afflictions of Ohristly men. " For our light afBiction, which is
but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory ;
while we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen :
for the things which are seen are temporal ; but the things which are not seen are
eternal." These words suggest a few thoughts concerning the afflictions of Christly
men.

I. They are comparatively "light" and "momentary." They are "light:" 1.
Compared with what they deserve. 2. Compared with what others have endured. 3.
Compared with the blessedness that is to follow. They are momentary, " but for a
moment." Momentary compared (1) with the enjoyments of this life; compared (2)
with the interminable blessedness of the future.

IL That, though light and momentary, they work out glorious results. They
issue in what ? "A far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." What is the
afBiction to the glory? 1. The one is "light;" the other is weighty. Put all the
afBictions of the whole Church against the everlasting glory of one Christly soul, and
how light I 2. The one is momentary; the other is eternal. " Eternal weight of glory."
But the result is not only an eternal weight of glory, but " far more exceeding." No
expression could be stronger than this. The apostle here seems to struggle after the
strongest language to express his idea of the transcendent blessedness that awaits the
Christly man.

III. That they work out these glorious results by the realization of spiritual
and eternal realities. " While we look not at the things which are seen ... for the
things which are seen are temporal." Observe : 1. That there are things invisible to the
'bodily eye that can be seen by the soul. There are two classes of invisible things : (1)
those that are essentially invisible, such as thoughts, spirits, God ; and (2) those that



•6 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. it. 1—18

are eontkigently invisible, such as those things that are visible in their nature, but,
through minuteness, distance, or some other cause, are at present invisible. It is to
the first of these that the apostle refers — things that are essentially invisible to the
bodily eye. The soul can see thoughts, moral intelligences, and the great God. 2.
That the things that can be seen only by the soul are not temporal, hut eternal. We
talk about the everlasting mountains, eternal sun, etc. ; but there is nothing that is
seen is lasting — all is passing away. Moral trnths are imperishable; spiritual existences
are immortal; God is eternal; these are things belonging to a kingdom that cannot be
moved. 3. That the things that are seen only by the wul are the things that, if
realized, will mahe this mortal life issue in transcendent good.



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1 — 6. — Glory of the apostolic ministry ; how its duties were dischwrged. It
is still "this ministry." The question, "Who is sufficient for these things?" has
been answered in part by a statement of his " sincerity " and " plainness of speech,"
and he now proceeds to speak of bis courage and steady zeal. " We faint not," allowing
no difficulties or dangers to dishearten us. But what was the nature or spirit of this
resolute energy ? Energetic men, brave men, who are bent on their purpose, are not
always choice or chary of the means employed to gain their ends. " Hidden things
of dishonesty," plots, schemes concocted in secret, were renounced, nor did he in any way
adulterate the gospel. Not only did he preach the Word, but he delivered it as received
from the Lord Jesus. The mirror was kept clean and bright, so as to reflect the image.
Of course, he contrasted himself with his opponents, who used intrigues to acquire
influence. If certain men handled the Word of God deceitfully, he was not one of that
number, for his single aim was ; " by manifestation of the truth," to commend himself
" to every man's conscience in the sight of God." Divine truth, such as the gospel
contained, was a manifestation, a showing of its real and intrinsic character, to the only
faculty competent to receive it as a self-evidencing system ; and that faculty was the
conscience. Eeason lies back of all our reasoning, and is greater and truer than our
formal logic. Instinct antedates experience, and is the condition precedent to experience.
And these instincts with their intuitions constitute their own evidence and form the
basis of all knowledge. St. Paul argued that the spiritual doctrines of the gospel, if
faithfully presented to the conscience, would be recognized and accepted by conscience as
the truth of God. History is history ; testimony is testimony ; judgment is judgment ;
conscience is conscience ; and he will not disparage any one of these to exalt another, but
will keep each in its place according to the constitution of our nature. Yet the human
mind, made in God's image, must be master of its impressions, sovereign over its motives,
lord of itself when most obedient to God ; and, accordingly, it must have a conscience
to witness " magisterially," as Bishop Butler puts it, for the authority of God. It was
not to worldly taste and selfish intellect St. Paul appealed in preaching the gospel, nor
to low and mercenary feelings of any kind, but to the conscience as the supreme sense of
right in man. And was this all ? Nay ; they commended themselves, their persons,
their private and public lives, their experience and conduct, to the consciences of others.
Witness what we are, what we do, how we live, as well as what we preach, was St.
Paul's argument. No man enjoyed true appreciation and love more than he ; but, most
of all, he sought the testimony of their conscience that he was their servant for Christ's
sake, and was in no respect crafty and dishonest in his relations to the brethren. Private
character and public character are, alas I too often disjoined, and not seldom are
opposites; but St. Paul thought that gifts and graces should go together. What he
professed as an apostle he would practise as a man, and in each respect he would com-
mend himself to conscience. On no account would he have the confidence and regard of
the Church except so far as he impressed this purest and safest kind of human judgment.
And he did this most solemnly, " in the sight of God." Observe, then, it was not to
their consciousness but conscience, to which his ministry, character, and life appealed.
Nor waa this limited to the Church. It was exhibited before all, believers and unbe-
lievers, a lavour of life, a savour of death. The manifestation of the truth would
commend itself to every man's conscience ; and yet the general verdict of conscience



OH. XT. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 97

would be accepted and acted on by some, while it would be opposed and disobeyed
by many. But who were the rejecters? "If our gospel be hid, it is bid to them that
are lost " (who are now perishing), not finally lost, but at present unsaved, their day of
grace not over, salvation yet possible. The state spoken of is one of mental blindness,
which includes the want of spiritual perceptions and the darkness of the understanding.
Conscience is instructed, but the intellect overpowers conscience. Conscience is on
the side of truth ; intellect on the side of the senses. Conscience entreats, warns,
condemns, in the name of God ; intellect is sophistical and imperious in behalf of
the carnal man. And the intellect is thus alienated from its rational subordination
to a ruling conscience by a usurper who is Satan, "the god of this world." Men
have allowed him to assert sovereignty over them, have made him " a god," and
have yielded to his wicked ageiicy what belongs to the one Grod. They have
robbed God to give him power over their bodies and souls. Without this clear and
vivid recognition of the personality, the activity, the prodigious energy of Satan, the
theology of St. Paul would have no consistency, no logical coherence, no adaptiveness to
the convicting and renewing work with which he associates it. With him, human
depravity is not an abstract thing, an isolated thing, but part and parcel of a vast
system of evil, an immense empire of untruth, deception, fraud, cruelty, of which Satan
is head and front. Is unbelief powerful ? Satan is behind it. Are the lusts and
appetites of the flesh tyrannic ? Satan is the tyrant. Are men blinded to their interest
and well-being ? By him, " god of this world," are they blinded. One who estimates
human depravity solely by what it is in itself will have a very different view of its
actual character in experience and outworking from one who looks at it as an instru-
mentality in such hands as Satan's. In the former case it is the man indulging in
depravity for his own gratification — he personally and individually and directly is
its motive, impulse, and end ; in the latter there is a kingdom and a despotic ruler,
whose objects are furthered by widening his dominion and enhancing his sway. St.
Paul is explicit. Satan is the blinder, and he is the blinder as " the god of this world,"
And he blinds the minds of men, " lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who
is the Image of God, should shine unto them." Turn to the close of the previous chapter
and read of the " open face," of the reflected " glory of the Lord," of the assimilating
power of the "image," of its transforming wonder in changing "from glory to
glory." And now take this awful contrast — a fallen angel, a dethroned principality and
power, the "god" among his hierarchies, the "god" of a world where men are on
probation for an immortality of good or evil, and this " god " of darkness busy every-
where to hide the only light that reveals Christ as the Image of God. Here is this light
in the history of Christ's life, death, resurrection, exaltation. It is glorious. It is
preached as a " glorious gospel ; " it is preached by men who have " renounced the
hidden things of dishonesty," and who themselves, by their candour, integrity, purity,
commend themselves to every man's conscience under the eye of God. But Satan
exerts all his skill and influence, controls myriad agencies, works continually and
works 80 successfully that the minds of many are blinded by unbelief. Destroy belief
and you destroy the soul. And this is the Satanic might of evil, the climax of all his
influence, that the blindness with which he shrouds the soul is the blindness of unbelief.
Can he think of " the glorious gospel of Christ " and not be humbled ? " We preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord ; and ourselves your servants for Jesus' sake."
And now the idea which has occupied so much of his attention — the veiled face of
Moses, the open vision of Christ, the image of the Father in him, the glory that excelleth,
the ministry as a manifestation *of glory, Christian growth as an expansion from one
degree of resplendency to another till it reaches " the perfect day," and the contrasted
blindness of unbelievers who are under Satan's power, — this idea, so suggestive, attains
its final expression in the sixth verse. God had once said, " Let there be light, and
there was light." It was the opening grandeur of creation ; but was this all ? This
was to be the permanent symbol of God, the source and ce::tre of more associations and
suggestions than any other object in the material universe, a creative force to the
imagination of metaphor, image, and i.lug lation that cannot be measured. And, as
such, St. Paul uses it when he says that ** God, who commanded the light to shine out
of darkness, hath shined in our hearts." What fuller embodiment could the thought
take than " the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ" ?

II. CORINTHIANS. S



98 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. iv. 1—18.



" Light," "knowledge," "glory of God," "face of Jesus Christ,"— what a collocation of
suhlime ideas I — L.

V«i«. 7 — 18.— Ministers in their weakness and strength ; present affliction and future
issues. There is the ever-recurring contrast. It is now the ministry as a " treasure,"
and this treasure is " in earthen vessels." We understand the apostle to refer to the
body when speaking of the " clay vessel," the contrasted elements being the glory of
the ministry as a Divine illumination and the fragile human form in which it was con-
tained. It was thus that " the excellency of the power " was seen to be " of Grod, and
not of us." Not only was it the power of God, but of " exceeding greatness " (Kling),
and while the " surpassing might " demonstrated itself in the gracious and widespread
effects of the ministry, it was also obvious in the yihysical support given in the midst of
such unprecedented labours and trials. To illustrate this "surpassing might" (Cony-
beare and Howson), St. Paul adduces his own experience. As it respects the " earthen
vessel : " 1. Troubled on every side. 2. Perplexed. 3. Persecuted. 4. Cast down. 5.
Always dying ; bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus. As it respects
the " excellency of the power : " 1. Not distressed. 2. Not in despair. 3. Not forsaken.
4. Not destroyed. 5. Life of Jesus made manifest in our mortal body. These ideas of
suffering are taken from the body. 1. Pressed or hemmed in on every side. 2. Benighted
on our path. 3. Pursued in a conflict. 4. Thrown down and expecting to be killed.
6. The dying of the Lord Jesus never absent as a bodily impression. This is the second
of those vivid pictures St. Paul has given of his personal life, the first being found in
1 Cor. iv. 9 — 13. There is a marked difference between the two representations, the
former referring to the contrast between himself and the self-sufEcient Corinthians, while
the latter sets forth the contrast between " the glorious gospel " and the weakness of its
ministration by means of men. Here the prominence is given to the similarity of his own
life to that of Christ, " that the life also of Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal
flesh." Had he spoken in the previous Epistle of self-denials and voluntary sufferings
over and above " other apostles," going on a warfare " at his own charges," planting a
vineyard and eating not " of the fruit thereof," a shepherd who " eateth not of the milk
of the flock " ? No such allusions (except in the reference made in the twelfth verse)
are found in this chapter. Before him, in full view, is the career of Jesus of Nazareth,
his resignation of the comforts of earth, the homelessness and other privations he
endured, and he, the apostle of the Gentiles, is conformed in outward or physical aspects
to the sufferings of Christ. Still more, the life of Christ's resurrection and exalted glory
appears in him, and this life, so manifested in " our mortal flesh " and the more signally
exhibited because of infirmities and afflictions, is for their benefit. " Death worketh in
us, but life in you." But is death a shadow, a discouragement, a paralyzing terror?
Nay ; the life imparted to the Corinthians through him returned from them to his own
soul. He believed and spoke ; they heard and believed. Furthermore, he had another
consolation, the hope of a resurrection, when he and they should be presented by Christ
to the Father for final acceptance. Yes ; the fellowship would be immortal as well as
glorious. " All things are for your sakes," whatever had befallen him, and this
" abundant grace," extended to an ever-enlarging number, would swell the volume of
thanksgiving to God, In his mind " the glory of God " is never associated with narrow
bounds, never with a few, always with the " many " — " through the thanksgiving of many
redound to the glory of God." This is his manhood ; largeness in everything ; breadth
of thought and sentiment for this world and the future 1 a manhood that could breathe
in nothing smaller than a universe. How much he is worth to us in this particular!
On this account " we faint not." Nothing had power to dishearten his spirit or depress
his efforts. The burden rallied the strength ; the heavier the weight the more energetic
the resistance. Another contrast — outward man, inward man : man in each. St. Paul,
who is the theologian of the Bible on the subject of the body no less than of the soul,
is here in one of his favourite moods, and, as usual, his philosophy (if we choose so
to regard his discernment) is as profound as his piety. " Though our outward man
perish." It cannot but perish. " Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return."
The body exists for no independent purpose, it is for the soul, and the ideal of the
soul determines the ideal of the body's history. It eats, sleeps, works, for the soul.
It decays for the sake of the souL Now, this decay which the apostle is consider*



CH. 19. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIAJSS. 99

ing, we may look at in the light of modem physiology. St. Paul is no teacher of
physiology or of science in any form, but he mentions facts, which we can interpret
by aid of recent science. What, then, do we know of decay as a bodily law? We
know it is a law co-existent and co-operative with our physical life. It sets in early,
goes on continuously, and ends only when the body dies. It is a succession of decays.
Viewed in this light, decay is a function of activity or a sequel to activity, and, accord-
ingly, a condition of renewal. Exercise the arm like a blacksmith, and it rapidly
wastes matter. Exercise the brain as a student, and certain constituents are constantly
thrown off and expelled from the system. Yet, in all this, there is I'eproduction and
even growth. The decay has an order ; it proceeds from the less serviceable to the more
useful functions. Early in life, animal sensations are in excess. The outer world floods
the young senses, and no image is painted on the brain that is not a copy of something
external. But this abates. It lessens by providential law. The spirits decline in
boisterousness ; per(ieptions are not so vivid ; reflectiveness increases ; and the pulse is
more of a pulse of thought, will, emotion. What we can spare best is the first to
decay. Long before eye and ear show signs of failing other organs begin to adver-
tise their decline. And hence the decay proceeds as to time and method in such a
form OS to answer the ends of the body in its relation to the soul. Seldom are there
violent changes. No great revolutions occur. Little by little the alterations go on, so
that the mind is insensibly accommodated to them. Agreeably to this law, decay con-
tributes tUl late in life to the development of the mind. , Not until decay has accom plished
higher ends -does it tend towards dissolution. Gently, indeed, the hand of the Father
touches the frail tenement, here a nerve and there a muscle, so as to make it less a body
for the earth and more a body for the soul. Physiologically, therefore, there is a basis
for St. Paul's theology of the body. Now, physiologists may say, as some of them have
said, that their science has nothing to do with religion, and, forsooth, this in one sense
may be true. But it is certain that Christianity has a good deal to do with their science.
Nor, indeed, have we to look further than the text for proof of the fact that, while St.
Paul was doing nothing more than unfolding the glory of the gospel, one or mors of the
rays of that splendour shone on facts which science is only just now beginning to under-
stand. But the inner man, what of him ? " Renewed day hy day." We have seen
that Providence uses decay for restoration and even enhancement of power, and moreover,
not until physical development has attained its maximum in respect to mind, does it
happen that decay operates towards dissolution. Outward and inward — both the man,
as we have said — and yet the differencing adjectives are very expressive. Look at the
outside of a tree, the rough bark adapted to the hard usages of wind and weather, and
fitted to enclose and protect the fibre and circulating sap. So of the body. It is a
sheath to the soul, preserving its freedom from being overpowered by the outward world
and guaranteeing self-direction to its activity. More than this, body is a developing
instrumentality of mind, and, in this respect, fulfils the special purpose of Providence.
Nevertheless, the soul has its own prerogatives. It is God's image, and, as such,
witnesses to its own nature as infinitely different from matter. We call it soul because
it is perfectly unlike body. We call it spirit because " God is a Spirit." Such words as
hody, loul, spirit, stand alone and contain the truth of all truths. Now, the apostle
urges this contrast ; body decays and dies, spirit under the influence of the Holy Ghost
is renewed daily. Spirit has a capacity for interminable growth. Day hy day, a clearer
knowledge of itself, a keener penetration of consciou.sness, a deeper sense of sinfulness in
its nature, and, anomalously enough, while gaining a victory more and more over par-
ticular sins, having an acuter conviction of inbred sin. Day hy day, the world falling
away from its senses, and yet, amid the decay of sensuousness, a continual ascension of
delight and gladness as the spirit loses its hold on merely aesthetic beauty and enters
more fully into moral beauty, so that, while the body becomes more and more the
" temple of the Holy Ghost," the earth grows into a sanctuary of God, where the hours
fail not to observe their ritual of worship and the air is never so hushed as not to breathe
praisa to God. Day hy day f Ah ! are there not idle days, apparently useless days, even
days when prayer and holy service seem a burden ? Doubtless ; but we must not con-
clude that these seasons are altogether unprofitable. If we are learning nothing else, we
are learning how weak and impotent we are, and how unreliable are our constitution and
habiU except we have daily renewing grace. God leaves us to ourselves sometimes, that



100 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. iv. 1— 1&

we may find out what company we keep when he is absent. Day "by day, the most
precious of all is a growing nearness to the Lord Jesus Christ. We can recall the time
when he was mainly to our young souls a traditional Christ. We knew him by the
hearing of the ear and by the sight of the eye. Voices there were that spoke of him and
commanded our listening. Faces there were that shone with unearthly light and touched
our eyes to a reverent gaze. They are gone now. Sorrow has done its work, and, if
that be done, all other work is made effective for spiritual progress. How real he
becomes when we suffer as Christians ! In the loneliness that comes with all profound
grief, what a personal Christ is he to our hearts 1 Hearts, we say, for the revelations of
sorrow, the fullest and grandest ever made to the soul, are all revelations of the blessed
Jesus to the affections. Once we could not have thought it possible, but, in later years,
the secret of the Lord is with us, and we commune with him as friend with friend. The
wonder now is, how we could ever live an hour without this sense of sonship possessing
the soul. " Out of the depths " we have learned to say, " Abba, Father," and then we
can rejoice with " joy unspeakable and full of glory." The outward man perishing, the
inward man renewed day by day, how would such a man as St. Paul look upon trial
and adversity ? We know more of the nature, variety, and depth of his sufferings than
of any one among the saints of the New Testament, and yet he calls his affliction light.
It is also " but for a moment." Why he spoke in this way is made clear at once, for the
light and momentary affliction is working for his benefit, fulfilling a purpose, executing
a design, and this is a " far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory." These words
are best left to private meditation. "Glory" in contrast with " afflictioH," " weight "
with " light," " eternal " with " moment," and then the " exceeding," the " more exceed-
ing," the " far more exceeding ; " we honour the sublimity most by thoughtful silence.
And this working, which is now going on by means of Christ's presence in affliction and
derives no merit from him, is so far realized by the apostle that he cannot look upon the
things about him other than as transient. It is not the mere decay of the outward man
nor the evanescence of the world's glory that produces in him this exalted state of mind.
The point of view is altogether different. Prom the height of spiritual life as essentially
eternal life, he glances at the panorama of the world as it passes by, but his look — the
fixed eye, the earnest gazers on the things which are eternal. For him this eternity
has already begun ; and while every new grief and every repetition of an old sorrow
" worketh " a deeper feeling of the spiritual and eternal life within, he is equally well
assured that each one adds something to the accumulated glory of the heaven awaiting
him as an apostle of the Lord Jesus. — L.

Ver. 2. — Truth, and conscience. In these comprehensive words of the apostle is
revealed the true power of the Christian minister. This is represented as consisting' of
three several elements.

I. The instrument which is entrusted to the Chkistian ministbe to wield.
1. In itself it is the truth. All truth is precious and powerful. But the truth, as it is
in Jesus, is supreme in moral, spiritual power. The truth of God's righteousness and
love, as they are united and harmonious in the gospel of Christ, is the greatest moral
force which has entered and wrought in our humanity. It has power to convince the
judgment, to convert the heart, to control the will, to constrain the life. 2. This truth
exercises its power by simple manifestation. It does not need our apologies or defence,
our ornaments or recommendations. It does its work best when it is simply allowed to
shine by its own light, to take its own course.

II. The material upon which the Christian minister has to work ; f.e. " erery
man's conscience." Some religions teachers appeal to men's interests, others to their
fears, some to thi ir superstition, others to their vanity. But the true appeal is to the
conscience. "Why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right?" "I speak as
unto wise men, judge ye what I My," Other principles of action address themselves to
inferior parts of human nature, and produce proportionate results. But Christian truth
aims high, calls forth into action the noblest faculties of the soul. Literally translated,
the phrase is, " to every conscience of men," which seems to suggest that, whether the
conscience be enlightened or crude, sluggish or active, it is evermore, when aroused,
a witness to Go'l's Word. The truth and the conscience are alike of Divine orio-in, and
they are adapted the one to the other. What the truth utierg the conscience^echoes.



OH. IT. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COUINTHIANS. 101

The preacher of righteousness may be assured that to his words there is always a responsA
in human hearts.
III. The spieit in which the Chbistian minister uses the divinely fashioned

IMPLEMENT WHICH OPERATES UPON THE DIVINELY FASHIONED NATURE. It is " In the

sight of God." He who works thus will work honestly, faithfully, earnestly. And his
work will be profitable to men and acceptable to God. — T.

Vers. 3, 4. — The gospel veiled. Those things which are intended for man's welfare
ars often so perverted by sin that they become the occasion of the greatest evils. So
that it is proverbial that the best things, when abused, prove to be the worst. The gospel
of Jesus Christ, when it is received aright, is a power to enlighten, bless, and save. But
to those who reject and despise it the gospel becomes the occasion of condemnation and
destruction.

I. The invisible and spiritual power that veils the oospel from the eyes
OF MEN. The expression used by the apostle is very strong ; he attributes this mis- .
chievous act to " the god of this world," apparently a personal principle of evil working in
human society and in human hearts. Elsewhere we are reminded of the might of the evil
one, who is designated " the ruler of this world," " the prince of the power of the air."

II. Tee means by which the eyes of men are veiled. These are many, and
are craftily adapted to the varying characters and habits of men. 1. Sensuality often
incapacitates for spiritual vision ; for the more it makes a man sensitive to the attrac-
tions of carnal pleasure the more it hinders his spiritual apprehensions and dulls his
spiritual vision. 2. Wmldliness fills the whole horizon of vision with the things of
earth and time, and thus shuts out the shining of the true light which is from heaven.
3. The pride of human reason, which fancies itself to be independent and all-powerful,
obscures in the case of many the rays of Divine truth which often reach the lowliest and
the least esteemed among men.

III. The effects which this blindness produces in the minds op men. 1. The
glad tidings are regarded with indifference. 2. Christ himself, the very " Image of God,"
is contemplated with aversion and repugnance. There is no spiritual sympathy to draw
the soul to the holy and the gracious One ; his very features are regarded through a dis-
torted medium. 3. All spiritual excellences lose their charm, fail to awaken to admira-
tion and emulation. 4. The true condition in which they lie is altogether ignored and
denied by the spiritually blind. 6. For lack of light they perish ; the spiritually and
wilfully blind doom themselves to death. — T.

Ver. 5. — 77ie theme <^ preaching. Christianity was first diffused by the proclamation
ef the living voice, and the same method has always held the most prominent position
in the history of the Church and especially of its missions. Yet the success of this
method has been in proportion to the prominence which preachers give to their theme
in comparison with their own individuality.

I. The theme the apostle disclaims. " We preach not ourselves.'' 1. I.e. not about
ourselves, as is the way with many. Not our own speculations, our own theories, our
own fancies. Not even our own experiences in the religious life. 2. For it was felt by
the modest and the wise that such preaching could only be to offer, in many cases, weak-
ness, folly, and ignorance ; in all cases human imperfection, and infirmity, to men who
know quite enough of all this, and who stand in need of what is superhuman and Divine.

II. The theme in which the apostle glories. 1. Christ as an historical Person.
it was and still is necessary, in the first place, to inform the hearers of the gospel of the
actual facts of our Lord's earthly manifestation — his incarnation, his ministry, his
humiliation and obedience, his sufferings and death, his resurrection and exaltation.
All good, sound doctrine is based upon fact. 2. Christ as a Divine Person ; i.e. the Lord.
He is to be preached as being what he declared himself to be — one with the Father, the
King of angels and of men. It is such an all-sufficient Friend an I Helper that man
needk

" If thou wert less than One Divine,
My soul would be dismayed ;
But through thy human lips God aayi,
"TisI; be not afraid 1 ' "



102 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oli. i*. 1— 1&

3. Christ as a Mediator, complete in all the qualifications needed to discharge the duties
of all the ofBces he sustains. 4. Christ as a living Person — One who has not ceased to
interest himself in men because he is no longer among them in bodily form ; but One
who, as represented in the Apocalypse, is living with and for those whom he died to
»ave.

Application. There is danger lest those who accept this view of the apostle should
be content with the mere reiteration of Christ's name. Be it remembered that Christ
should be preached as to the intelligence and to the heart of men. — T.

Ver. 6. — The light of spiritual hnowledge. Nature is a parable by means of which
the Creator and Lord of all is ever teaching us concerning himself and his will. All the
vast forces and subUme objects of nature have their spiritual analogues. So is it, aa
appears from this passage, with light, which typifies the truth, the gospel of God. We
learn —

I. Whence the light comes. Physical light comes from the «un, and the sun was
kindled by the Creator. He said, " Let there be light, and there was light." So all
intellectual and moral light is from the Father of lights. He is light, and in him is no
darkness. " He clotheth himself with light as with a garment." Our souls find their
full enlightenment and satisfaction in the revelation of his mind, which is as the rising
of the sun upon our benighted nature.

II. What the light is. In the apostle's view this is " the knowledge of the glory
of God." If this be so, God is not the Unknown, the Unknowable. The glory of the
Eternal is not so much in his power and wisdom as in his moral attributes, his holiness,
and love. The revelation of the Divine character is as light to his intelligent creation.
It is welcome, cheering, illuminating, reviving.

III. Where the light shines. "In the face of Jesus Christ." In our Lord's
resurrection this light shone visibly from his face, as it had done on the occasion of
his transfiguration. But really and spiritually it is always streaming forth; for Christ
is himself the " Emanation of his Father's glory." Behold his face when teaching : the
light of Divine knowledge is upon it. When pitying and healing the sufl'erer, the
hght of Divine compassion and love is there. When patiently enduring insult, upon it
rests the lustre of majestic sweetness. When dying on the cross, the light of sacrificial
victory is kindled on the features. When uttering his royal commands from heaven's
throne, " his countenance is as the sun shineth in his strength."

IV. Whither the light penetrates. " Into your hearts," says the apostle. As
the sunbeams only awaken the sensation of light when they fall upon a receptive and
sensitive eye, so the revelation of God's character impHes a receptive and responsive
heart. Though light ever shines from Christ, multitudes have no benefit or enjoyment
from it. When the heart turns like the sunflower to the light, then the day dawns
within, and the whole spiritual nature comes to bask in the light of God.

V. Wht the light shines. In answer to this may be summed up the whole
spirittjal purpose and significance of the Christian revelation. 1. That we maj perceive
it. ft is, alas ! possible to hide from the light at noonday. But those who welcome
the heavenly light rejoice in it, are guided by it, and know its power to inspire hope
eternal. 2. That we may walk in it. " Walk ye in the light of the Lord ; " " Walk in
the light while ye have the light." For God's truth is profitable to all men, having the
fsoully of directing those who will be led by it into paths of wisdom, peace, and life.
3. That we may reflect it. The light of God is not absorbed by the soul that receives

it. It is shed upon those who are around. Christians are " the light of the world " are

" light-bearers," through whose agency the earth is to be filled with the radiance of
spiritual and immortal noon. — T.

Ver. 7. — Spiritual treasure. In this Epistle Paul speaks more frankly and warmly
than in any other of his compositions of the ministry which was the work of his life.
It is observable, however, that, in treating of this ministry, whilst he uses the most
honourable terms in characterizing the ofSce, he displays the utmost humility in what
he says of himself.

I. Priceless treasure. 1. What it la. It is " the light of the knowledge of the
glocT ol God in the face of Jesus Christ." It is the truth which Paul declared tha



OH. IV. 1— 18.j THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 103

gospel which he preacr.8d, the mystery which he unfolded. The promise of free pardon
foT sin, of a new law and power for life, was what the apostles were privileged to convey
to mankind. This is still, as it was then, the true wealth of the world, which enriches
the mind and heart of man, 2. Upon whose authority this " treasure " is so described.
This is the highest authority, that of the Divine Christ, who designates his
gospel the "true riches," "the treasure hid in the field," "the pearl of great price;" who
reminds us of " treasure in heaven ; " who tells us that " where our treasure is, there will
our heart be also ; " who coimsels to buy of him " gold tried in the furnace." 3. What
makes this treasure so valuable? It is unvaryingly satisfying: it is inexhaustible; it
is enduring, and not like the " riches that take to themselves wings ; " it is accessible to
aU, so that the poor in this world, having it, are " rich in faith."

IL Eakthsn vessels. 1. Explain the figure. As Eastern kings stored their gold,
silver, and jewels in earthen jars, so a plain casket may hold a costly jewel, a miry soil
may yield an abundant crop, a battered ship may carry a precious freight, a lamp of
clay may give a brilliant light, a mean book as to appearance may contain noble
thoughts. So it is no objection against the gospel that those who preach it are in many
respects unworthy of an office so dignified. 2. Exhibit its application. Christ was
apparently a peasant, a carpenter's son ; yet he was the Son of God most high. The
apostles were fishermen, toll-takers, tent-makers ; yet they were the heralds of salvation
to mankind. The upper rooms where the early disciples met were not comparable to
heathen temples, but they were scenes of Divine communion. Among those who
frequented the assemblies where Christian ordinances were observed were not many
noble or great, but there were inheritors of the kingdom of God. The apostle was
deeply conscious of defects and weakness, was often distressed by humiliations and
persecutions and contempt. His frail body, his fallible judgment, his imperfect
character, hia lowly and harassed condition, all contrasted with the preciousness of the
gospel which was deposited in his heart and ministered by his labours. If it was so
in the case of St. Paul, how much more manifestly was it so in the case of those
far less gifted and far more burdened with infirmity 1

III. Divine gkeatness. To what purpose was this arrangement which the apostle
here describes? He himself gives the true reason. 1. That all Christian labourers may
feel their littleness and their weakness. 2. That they may recognize the exceeding
greatness of the spiritual power of God. 3. That they may give Heaven the glory,
alike for what they receive and for what they impart. — T.

Vers. 17, 18. — Divine discipline. In this pathetic and sublime passage Paul reveals
to us his own spiritual experience. And the great lesson which he conveys for the
fortifying of Christian faith and endurance, and for the inspiration of Christian hope,
comes home to the heart with tenfold power, because it is so manifestly a lesson which
he himself is learning, through the stress of earthly sorrow and the lapse of laborious



L The eevealbd pubpose op Divinb disoiplinb. Though oftentimes men fail to
recognize the truth, there is in reality a purpose in human life, a purpose wise, bene-
ficent. Divine. 1. The means : affliction. By this is intended here what is endured in
Christ's service j as, for example, by missionaries and evangelists. Yet in the case of
the true Christian affliction of every kind partakes of this charaqter. The apostle says
of affliction that it is " light " in quality, and that it is " momentary " in the time of
its incidence. This is evidently a matter of comparison ; for it is only when compared
with the " weight " and the " eternity " of glory that earthly affliction can be denomi-
nated light and transitory. 2. The end : glory. This is future ; for the present state is
not characterized by this quality, save as a stormy day may be diversified by rays of light
which break through the riven clouds. It is Christ's glory, such as that into which he
entered when he had accomplished his vicarious sufferings. And, being such, it is
weighty and eternal.

II. The conditions upon which the Chbisttan profits bt Divine disoiplinb. In
this passage God's part and ours are interwoven together. We can only receive the
advantage by submitting to and falling in with the intentions of God. It is not a
matter of course that the afflicted should be the better for their painful experience.
1. What is seen, what is known by sense, must be regarded and dealt with as of



104 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. iv. 1— la



inferior importance, as soon to pass away. Men are prone to exaggerate the evente of
this perishing life ; but Christians must see them as they appear to God. 2. The
regards must be steadily fixed upon the unseen ; i.e. upon the Christ who has gone before
us, and who is apprehended in the exercise of faith ; upon the heaven which is to be
rest to the weary, joy to the sad, relief to the burdened ; upon the God who, though
invisible, is " near unto all who call upon him," and is the true Life of all holy souls.
It must be remembered that these realities, in which Christians are deeply, supremely
interested, are eternal. Over them decay, time, and death have no power ; of them the
glorious things of earth can give but the promise and the earnest. 3. Thus shall
strength be experienced to endure what is appointed for us to bear on earth ; and thus
shall an aspiring hope anticipate the gloiy which shall hereafter be revealed. — T.

Vers. 1—6. — Eow men should preach. 1. With faith. Many preach with despair
and prepare the way for failure. We should reflect that the preaching of the gospel is the
divinely appointed way for saving men. We are likely to have success if we lay hold
of God when we seek to lay hold of men. Our own salvation furnishes abundant evi-
dence of the Divine power to save. " God shined in our hearts " (ver. 6) ; " We obtained
mercy " (ver. 1). What God has done for us he can do for others. And we have the
Divine promise that the Word shall not return unto God void. " Light shall shine out
of darkness " (ver. 6). We must seek a faith which will prevent us from fainting
even when the outlook is darkest (ver. 1). If we have not faith, how can we expect onr
hearers to have it ?

II. With conEAGB. We must not faint because of foes. Many an assault upon
strongholds has failed because of half-heartedness and cowardice. Preachers should be
very bold and very brave. We have nothing to be ashamed of in our message. Shall
the devil's work be done more bravely than Christ's ? Shall the highest service on
earth be marked by vacillation and timidity ? " But that with all boldness, as always,
so now also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be by life or by death "
(Phil. i. 20). The Church would be more aggressive if she were more courteous.
Preachers should have stout hearts as well as tender ones.

III. With pekseverancb. We must not faint because of difficulties. Disoourage-
mtnts are many, but persistency will bury them all. The preacher's motto must be,
" On ! on I on 1 " He must speed and be spent in the service. After the manner
ascribed to British soldiers, Christ's soldiers must never know when they are
worsted. " Line upon line, precept upon precept." Many things come to the preacher
who can wait and work.

IV. With great honesty and bincbbitt. " Not walking in craftiness " (ver. 2).
The preacher who wants his hearers to walk in holy ways must not walk in devious
ways himself. He must not be a trickster. Some seem willing to do anything to
please ; but the object of the ministry is not to please. Meat cut with a dirty knife is
likely to become unsavoury, and the gospel administered with knavish arts will lose its
beauty and power.

V. With pure doctbinb. "Not handling the Word of God deceitfully" (ver. 2).
" Manifestation of the truth " (ver. 2). Christ gives us pure doctrine to preach, and
woe unto us if we adulterate it I We must not season it to the tastes of the carnal, or
keep back portions likely to offend influential sinners. 1. We preach in the sight of
God. How, then, darff we tamper with his truth ! 2. We are to commend ourselves to
every man's conscience. Nothing but preaching the truth will do this. We may com-
mend ourselves to men's fancies by preaching our own, and to their predilections by
trimming doctrines according to their demands ; but ouiy by preaching cure doctrine
shall we reach the consciences of men. Theological juggling may please men not a
little ; gospel doctrine will convict them. To our own Master we stand or fall. 'Tis a
poor thing to please men if we displease him. Let Luther's caustic saying, " Counter-
feits of money are burned, but falsifiers of God's Word are canonized," be never so true,
the preacher must adhere to the doctrine delivered to him, though he lose all earthly
things by doing so. In a heterodox world nothing is so likely to be so popular ai
heterodoxy.

VI. With puritt of life. " We have renounced the hidden things of shame "
(vei. 2). If ve preach we should practise. Christianity is often weak because Chri**



ett. IV. 1— 18.J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. lOS

tiaug are inconsistent. Men want to see the gospel as well as hear it. A preacLer must
live as well as talk. A man cannot preach without himself. There is always more in
the pulpit than the sermon — there is the man. We inevitably wonder what the gospel
has done for the gospel preacher when he so earnestly recommends it to us. And life
has a strange power of revealing itself in preaching. It peeps out. If the preacher has
a Judas-life it will betray him sooner or later. But when the man speaks as well as
his sermon, a mighty iufluence is exerted. The light must shine in our own hearts
and lives (ver. 6).

VII. With discernment as to causes of non-success. The apostle teaches that
those who reject the gospel when faithfully proclaimed are those whose minds are
blinded by the god of this world (ver. 4). They have yielded themselves so utterly
to evil influences that the gracious message of God through Christ fails to interest or
arouse them. They are " perishing." Their rejection of the gospel says nought against
the gospel or against the manner of its promulgation. The fault is not in it or in the
preacher, but in themselves. It is well for a preacher to realize the possibility of such
cases, so that undue discouragement may be avoided when they are met with.

VIII. With humility and self-suboedination. 1. Preachers are not to preach
themselves (ver. 5). A man may very easily preach himself even when he takes his text
out of the Bible. There is not a little temptation sometimes to ministers to preach them-
selves. " Let him that thinkoth he standeth take heed lest he fall." 2. Preachers are
to be servants for Jesus' sake (ver. 5) ; servants of those to whom they preach. Not
only servants of Christ, but servants of men — "your serirants" — for Christ's sake.
The preacher who would win souls must sacrifice self. For acoustics it is well for the
pulpit to be above the people, but not otherwise. He who would catch fish must not
be seen.

IX. With lotaltt to Cheist, (Ver. 5.) Preachers must be true in all things to him
from whom they have received their commission. They must believe in him, love him,
follow him, preach him, live him, obey him, and in all things seek to glorify him. — H.

Ver. 7. — "Earthen vessels." I. God has chosen as ministers op hm gospel
"babthen vessels." I. Not angels or other celestial beings. Not heavenly vessels,
but earthly. 2. Men. (1) Frail; (2) imperfect; (3) lowly; (4) weak; (5)
unimposing.

IL These babthbn vessels are held in the Divine hand. 1. They are thtts
preserved. " He had in his right hand seven stars " (Rev. i. 16). Often they seem in
peril. "Pressed on every side . . . perplexed . . . pursued . . . Bmittendown" (vers.
8, 9) ; but the vessel is not allowed to be broken until it has done its work. 2. They
are thus useful. (1) They are in the Divine hand to be filled. (2) They are in the
Divine hand to be poured forth from. (3) They are in the Divine hand sometimes to
be shaken, and the shaking of the vessel often makes the contents more efficacious.

III. A great tbbasueb is committed to the earthen vessels. The treasure is
the tmth as it is in Jesus — the great gospel message. Christ's ministers are vessels to
hold this treasure and to dispense it to those to whom they minister. 1. Ministers
have not to originate what they convey. It is given to them by their Master. The
vessel is filled by a Divine hand from a Divine source. 2. Ministers have iK)t to
convey themselves to their people. The people do not want the vessel, but its contents.
" We preach not ourselves " (ver. 5). An earthen vessel is poor food for folks to live
upon, and poor medicine for a sin-sick soul to be cured with. The " vessel " must be
" the servant " (ver. 5). Even an alabaster box may well be broken that the precious
ointment may be poured forth. 3. The contents are apt to taste of the vessel. This
must be avoided as much as possible. The less of ourselves and the more of Christ
that we convey to men the better. The contents must change the vessel, not the vessel
the contents. The preacher must be Christ's as well as his message. " We also believe,
and therefore speak " (ver. 13).

IV. The contrast between the earthen vessels and their contents. A
treasure ; and what a treasure ! For it how long the world has been waiting I What
marvels it has to work ! What wonders it has wrought ! And committed to " earthen
vessels " I No royal vessels for this royal gift. What honour to the vessels chosen 1 A
minister of Jesus Christ! — how poor all other titles are compared with this]



106 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIA.NS. [oh. iv. 1—18.

V. The object of the Divine choice. 1. The uninterrupted worldng of the Divine
'power. An " earthen vessel " can do notlning but receive and pour forth. What
egregious folly for a minister of Christ to seek to enter into partnership with his Lord
for the production of a theology! The earthen vessel cannot do anything, and should
not attempt to. 2. The glory of the Divine Being. No glory can attach to the mere
earthen vessel. God is "all in all." This should be the desire of every servant of
God. Many, it is to be feared, are robbers of God in this matter. They snatch at the
glory to which they have not the smallest claim.

VI. The futubb op the earthen vessels. They will be raised up (ver. 14).
1. Made glorious. " This mortal must put on immortality." " As we have borne the
image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly" (1 Cor. xv. 49).
The " vile body " will be exchanged for a " glorious body." We shall be made like
Christ. The earthen vessels will be transformed into the likeness of him who filled
them. The change is taking place whilst the earthen vessels are in the earthly service.
" Though our outward man is decaying, yet our inward man is renewed day by day "
(ver. 16). But when we see him as he is we shall be like him. 2. Fitted for higher
service. Heavenly activities. We know not how closely associated the earthly service
is with the heavenly, how much the one may depend upon the other, how much the one
will influence and shape the other. Let us make the earthly service as true and perfect
as we may. — H.

Vers. 16 — 18. — Heavy affliction made light. Paul's troubles were exceedingly
heavy. So the troubles of many believers have been and are. The sufferings of saints
often seem severer than those of sinners. For them the furnace is made seven times
hotter. But Paul with his heavy sorrows speaks of them as light, and speaks of them
as they really seemed to him to be under the conditions to which he refers. No affliction
could well be heavier than his, and yet it was light. So is the believer's —

I. When he considers during how small a portion op his lipe it has to be
BORNE. It is but " for a moment." Not so long as a second contrasted with a thousand
years. Eternity makes time short. Our troubles are like .Pharaoh's horsemen — they
cannot pass the Bed Sea of death. In this flash of our existence wa may weep, but in
the ever-eontinuing life of heaven wa shall rejoice.

• There shall I bathe my weary soul
In seas of heavenly rest.
And not a wave of trouble roll
Across my peaceful breast."

Our cross is Wue but for a moment, our crown for ever.

II. When he contrasts the present brief trouble with the btbrnal wbkjht
OF globt. True thoughts of heaven prevent exaggerated views of earthly sorrows.
When the future is shut out we can easily sit down and lament, but when faith sees the
" inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth not away " (1 Pet. i. 4), our
present griefs dwindle into insignificance. " For I reckon that the sufferings of this
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed"
(Bom. viii. 18). Why should we be disquieted so much by these things when those
are so near ? Shadows hang heavily over us until the sunshine of the coming glory
breaks through the clouds, and then the shadows flee away. Why should we concen-
trate thought upoa the short present when the long future is so fair? If we think much
of the home, the journey homewards will seem short, and the troubles of the way of
little account. Every hour of sorrow brings us an hour nearer the land that is
sorrowless. And what shall we possess there? The apostle strives in vain to find
language sufBoiently strong to describe even what he on earth could perceive of heaven
— " more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory " (ver. 17).

III. When the meaning of present trouble is realized. To the true child of
God : 1. It may mean the destruction of the outward man, but it assuredly means the
renewal and development of the inward. It is not even present injury — it is present
good. It is medicine, not poison. 2. It prepares us for the coming glory. The fira
consumes the dross, the knife outs away the diseased part, the chisel strikes off that
which would impair the beauty of the statue. The apprenticeship of sorrow fits us foi



OH. IT. 1— ISj TflE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. lOf

the long service of glory. Through muoh tribulation we enter the kingdom and are
prepared for its duties. The joys of heaven are dependent on the sorrows of earth;
without the latter we should not be ready for the former. "Tribulation worketh
patience," etc. (Eom. v. 3). 3. Whilst suffering cannot in any way merit salvation,
affliction rightly endured shall not be without reward. If we fight the fighfc of faith,
and endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ, we shall receive a crown of
righteousness which fadeth not away. " If we suffer we shall also reign with him "
(2 Tim. ii. 12).

Practioal. 1. Faint not. Many faint because they see no reason why they should
not faint. Yet all reasons point the Christian to patient endurance. If we lose heart
we lose strength. To despair is to charge our Master with unfaithfulness. Seek to be
a good swimmer in the sea of trouble, and if the waves go over you, still faint not, for
soon you will rise to the surface again, and see that the shore is nearer. 2. Be not
much concerned about the things ^ this life. (Ver. 18.) These are perishing. The
imperishable are our better portion. Look not at the things which are seen ; they are
not worth looking at. " Set your affection on things above " (Col. iii. 2.) 3. Look at
things unseen by the carnal sense, but dear to faith's vision. (Ver. 18.) God, Christ,
holiness, usefulness, spiritual joys, the new Paradise, — these are " eternal." — H.

Ver. 5. — Not self, but the Lord. Two imputations had been cast on St. Paul during
his absence from Corinth, and to each of these this verse contains a reply. It had
been said that he sought commendation ; and he answered that he set forth, not himself,
but his Lord, It had been said that he tried to domineer over the Churches ; and he
answered that he was a servant of the Church for Jesus' sake.

I. The pbominencb given to the Lord. " We preach not ourselves.'' By this
disclaimer is not meant that the apostle excluded all reference to his own faith or
experience, and maintained an altogether impersonal tone while delivering Christian
testimony and instruction to the Churches. Extant specimens of his preaching and
writing indicate the contrary. St. Paul freely spoke of his own experience of the
rilercy of God and sustaining grace of Christ, of his faith and hope, his sorrow and
joy. So have all wise and successful ministers of the Word of life shown their own
hearts to the people as holding the gospel precious. They have said, " What we preach
to you we ourselves know and believe ; what we commend to your acceptance we
have ourselves accepted and proved ; so we come before you, not merely as messengers
by whom tidings are sent, but also as witnesses who can testify that those tidings are
true." The apostle spoke and wrote froely of himself, but did not preach himself, i.e.
did not set himself before the people as the leader or the Saviour. It was the fault ot
those factious teachers at Corinth, who tried to disparage the authority of St. Paul,
that they commended themselves, taught their own speculations, eyed their own
advancement, and drew away disciples after them. This was what the apostle dis-
claimed and abhorred, and what all preachers of the gospel must scrupulously, and
even jealously, avoid. It is positively fatal tu spiritual success to project one's self
before the people instead of setting forth the all-sufficiency of Christ Jesus, the living
Essence of the gospel. Some one complained to the excellent William Romaine of b-s
constantly preaching Christ ; and he answered, " We have nothing else to preach ; "
i.e. we preach nothing separate from him or disconnected with him. All sound doc-
trine converges towards, and all acceptable obedience issues from, the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ. " Preach the Law," the Jews demanded of Paul ; and he preached
Christ, the end of the Law to every believer. " Preach wisdbm," cried the Greeks ■
and he preached Christ as the Wisdom of God. " Preach practical virtues and good
conduct," cry many modern critics and monitors ; and we must preach Christ in order
to make hearts new, and so make lives pure and upright from the roots. It is not
enough to teach the existence of God, his attributes of being and character, his all-
controlling providence, or even his universal fatherhood. We preach Jesus the
Teacher, the Healer, the Saviour, the Son of God. We preach him as Christ' the
Messiah announced in ancient prophecy, who should suffer many things and so enter
into his glory. And we preach Jesus Christ as Lord. He is Lord of all. He is Lord
both of the dead and of the living. He is Lord " to the glory of God the Father." Do
any think this impracticable ? Do they point to the ignorance that has to be remoTed



108 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. it. 1.— 18.

vice to be restrained, selfishness to be corrected, and count it a mere waste of time tc
speak so much of a Personage who lived, and the things which he said and did in
Judaa ever so long ago ? Do they ask, " What good can this do ? " We are bold to
answer — If this will not do good, nothing will. Moral directions and monitions
cannot lift men out of themselves or raise them above low levels of thought and
conduct. There must be some new and near relation to God, some help from heaven ;
and this is gained only through faith in Jesus Christ the Lord. In no other way have
been produced powerful and permanent transmutations of human character. In no
other way are men rescued from evil habits and made good, and kind, and just, and
pure. Therefore we will persist in preaching what Paul preached.

II. The place taken by the apostolic pebacheb. We do not wish to lord it
over the Church. " We are your servants for Jesus' sake." The factious teachers at
Corinth sought their own advancement, and, judging St. Paul by themselves, alleged
that he assumed more authority than he was entitled to, and wished to play dictator to
the Churches. The sensitive and generous heart of the apostle acutely felt the imputa-
tion. He was, indeed, bound to assert his apostolate, but, absorbed as he was with
the thought of his Saviour's authority as Lord, he abhorred the idea of claiming lord-
ship over God's Church, and was careful to describe himself as a servant, and to
associate with himself by name such fellow-servants as Silas and Timothy. Much
more are modern ministers of the Word, while maintaining the reality and dignity ol
their ministry, to beware of anything that savours of lordly assumption. They are
servants of the saints for Jesus' sake. Not for the sake of men, or for any inducement
or remuneration which men can offer. They are not employes of the people, engaged
by them to do their religious work, and responsible to them for their conduct. In fact,
they are servants of the people, and yet the people are not their masters. One is their
Master, even Christ ; and they serve the Church under his orders and for his sake. So
Jesus Christ himself became the Servant of all because he was God's elect Servant.
Among his followers it is always better and nobler to serve than to be served. What
an example Paul showed as a servant for Jesus' sake ! — wearing out his frame in severe
and dangerous travels and voyages, caring for all the Churches, praying for them,
writing to them, visiting and revisiting them, running all risks, enduring all things —
even that which was hardest ot all, the ingratitude and fickleness of those to whom he
had ministered — that he might fulfil the service which had been assigned to him by the
Lord Jesus. Others might spare themselves, but he never did. " 1 will most gladly
spend and be spent for your souls." It is a high standard ; but we do well to keep
lofty models before us, and try to rise to them according to the necessity and oppor-
tunity of our own time, and the ability which is given to us of God. — F.

Ver. 6. — Light of the knowledge of Divine glory. The Christianity of St. Paul was
not a formulated rehgion, but the revelation or unveiling of God in his Son our Saviour

I. The glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. In that face, turned so
graciously on the sons of men, is not merely the glow of human sympathy and pity,
but the ineffable glory of the most high God. Tlsere is no thought here of the com-
parison sometimes made between the Divine glory in creation and that glory in
redemption. The contrast still in the apostle's mind is between the Law and the
gospel. He recalls the glory of God that once shone on the face of Moses as he descended
from the holy mount ; and he sets above it the glory in the face of Jesus Christ. The
lustre on the prophet's countenance was transient, and its effect on the people was
only to agitato them and make them desirous to have it softened by a veil. But
Christ is the permanent and gracious Image of God ; and he reveals it, not to drive mer
away in terror, but to save them and change them into the same image.

II. The knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesub Christ
Without this the salvation in the gospel profits us not. We can determine nothing
about the benefit which niay be derived from or through Christ by those who have had
no opportunity to hear of him or know him. That will be as God sees meet. But to
us who have the gospel, the blessing must come through spiritual knowledge. If
knowledge of law and ordinances could save, Paul would have been saved while ha
was a Pharisee ; but he entered not on a state of salvation till he gave up all for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ. Taught by his own experience, he commended



OH. IV. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 109

this knowledge to others. It was his daily care and effort to spread abroad that know-
ledge. And its propagation in the early ages of Christianity seemed like a fulfilment
of the ancient prophecy that " the knowledge of the glory of the Lord shall cover the
earth as the waters cover the sea."

III. The light of the knowledge of the globt of God m the face of Jesuk
Cheist. God was light. The nations, estranged from him, sat in darkness. In
Judaea there was a lamp for his Name, but it was dim. Pharisaic pride and Sadducean
scepticism threatened to put it out. Then the true Light came into the world. And
now, as Christ becomes known in the Spirit to this man or that, he lights up both mind
and heart. There is to every believer a revelation of the Lord. It is a light above all
other lights — calm, pure, searching, gladdening. And the shedding abroad of the light
of Christ and the love of God is always by the operation of the Holy Ghost. Thus
" the excellency of the knowledge " of God in Christ is imparted by " the excellency of
the power " of the Spirit. — P.

Ver. 7. — The lamp in the pitcher. This verse is often quoted to express human
insufficiency for the ministry of the gospel. It deserves to be quoted, for, if St. Paul
felt so deeply his powerlessness without God, how much more should this feeling
influence ordinary ministers of the Word of life !

I. The treasube. Paul, working in the factory making tents, or passing through
the street undistinguished by dress or retinue, may have been taken for a poor artisan.
But he was conscious of possessing a treasure by the use and distribution of which
he, while poor, made many rich. It was no store of silver or gold. It was not even
the treasure of intellectual eminence, the wealth of a large and lofty mind ; for, though
he had this, he could not impart it to others. It was the ministry of righteousness
and liberty whereby he communicated to his fellow-men " the unsearchable riches of
Christ." There is no need to draw a distinction here between the ministry which is
the topic of the whole context and the light of knowledge which is the immediately
preceding subject. In the apostle's thought these are intimately and necessarily
combined and together constitute the treasure. It was as an illuminated man that he
showed the light to others. And so at this day, only a niau in whom the true light
shines can be a minister of Christ. But who has the light may spread the knowledge
of the glory of God, and has a treasure better than silver and more to be desir-sd than
fine gold.

II. The earthen vessels. It was and is the custom of Orientals to keep valuables
and money in jars which might be hid, and, in case of danger, might be buried under-
ground. A mere earthen jar might thus contain an enormous treasure. Alluding to
this, St. Paul pointed to his own body, hard pressed by labours and afflictions, ilis
bodily presence was weak. He had no external advantages for making an impresbion
on either Jews or Greeks. Yet in such an earthen vessel was contained a treasure
beyond all computation, and not needing to have its worth enhanced by adventitious
surroundings. If we think of the treasure as one of light — the light of the knowledge
of God's glory — there is a story in the Old Testament which njay illustrate the phrase.
The followers of Gideon had their lamps in pitchers, or earthen vessels, when they
stole a march on the invaders from Midian, and, with sound of trumpet and loud war-
shouts, fell upon their camp. So, by the light in earthen vessels, with the trumpet-
notes of their testimony, did the apostles and other early preachers assail and defeat those
opposing powers of the world that would have laughed at their weakness. It is still
the same. Gospel victories are gained, not by a great array of human might, but by the
treasure of light in earthen vessels, and by the shout of faith that makes appeal to
Heaven.

III. The power. " That the excellency," etc. This corresponds to the previous
expression, " excellency of the knowledge," and both illustrate an Hebraic form of the
superlative. The excellency of the power was that surpassing energy which, in St.
Paul's time, attended the ministry of the gospel, and bore down the most formidable
opposition. The contrast between the power of the ministry and the weakness of the
ministers struck the apostle in thinking of his own early labours at Corinth (see
I Cor. ii. 1 — 5). It is a remarkable, and in some respects a mortifying, fact that the
modern Christian ministry, with all its advantages of special training, public respect.



110 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. it. 1—18

and perfect protection by law, shows less of conscience-convincing and heart-compelliDa
power than the primitive ministry did when it was surrounded by difficulty and
threatened with death. When it seemed weak, it was strong ; and now that it seems
strong, it is weak. As some explanation of this, it is only fair to admit that the
modern ministry in Christendom has no longer the charm which lies in novelty. It
has to he exercised where the terms and facta of our religion are already known, and
the Holy Bible is the most widely circulated book. And when it goes to fresh fields,
as India, China, or Japan, it has this disadvantage as compared with the apostolic
ministry, that in those countries there is no such preparation for the gospel as there
was in the countries and cities which were visited by St. Paul. The settlements of
Jews, and the very considerable number of proselytes wlio knew the Old Testament in
the Greek Version, and looked for a Messiah, gave an important facility to the Chris-
tian preacher, who formed out of them an intelligent nucleus round v.bich to gather
his converts from among the heathen ; whereas now preachers must go to heathen
communities that know not their language, and are wedded to religious conceptions
quite different from those in which the missionaries have been trained, and, if there be
Christians living among the heathen, holding office or in pursuit of commerce, too often
they impede rather than promote the success of the gospel. All this may be recog-
nized, and still it is true that the ministry might and should exert much more
spiritual power everywhere than it does. Let prayer be made for this, since the power
belongs to God, and only he can enable the ministers ot his Word to overcome the
dulness of religious routine as well as the hardness of anti-religious prejudice ; to sober
the frivolous ; to abase the proud ; to arrest minds that engross themselves with trifle-s,
and recover those that have debased themselves with fleshly vice or avaricious deceit ;
to wound and to heal ; to warn and to win ; to kill and to make alive. Oh for power
to prevail, to search the breasts of men, to make conscience start and hearts quiver, to
reprove sin, to shatter vain e.xcuses, to kindle new resolves and hopes ! We cannot do
it ; but he who supplied all-sufficiency to St. Paul can supply it to us. "Our sufGciency
is of God."— F.

Ver. 9. — " Cast down, hut not destroyed." In ministering the Word, we need to
play, if we may so speak, on various instruments of music. We take the silver
trumpet when we would utter " the joyful sound." We take the harp when we show
forth God's praise. What shall we take for encouragement and comfcrt to the weary ?
As a great poetess has it —

"Experience, like a pale musician, hold»
A dulcimer of patience in his hand."

Let us play on the dulcimer. A good man struggling with adversity has been the
subject of many moral reflections. We want to go turther than the moralist, and show
how the man of God is preserved in time of trouble. What heroism in the immortal Jew
of Tarsus ! All the sharp ordeal through which he passed — his personal disadvantages,
the disparagement by false apostles jealous of his influence, the coldness of former
friends when he was in bonds at Rome, the hardship and misconstruction under which
his great work had been done, — all served only to bring out more fully the singleneas oi
his aim and fortitude of his spirit —

** And give the world assurance of a man."

" Struck down, but not destroyed." Trouble threw him down, as one wrestler might
throw another in the arena ; but the cast was not mortal. He revived, for Christ lived
in him. Nay ; bis sufferings increased his usefulness. No follower of Christ ever made
such an impression on mankind, or did so much for the gospel, as this troubled, per-
secuted, perplexed, cast-down Paul of Tarsus. Times have changed. Religious liberty
prevails. Gross forms of persecution for confessing Christ are prevented by law and
condemned by public sentiment. But it does not follow that the course of a faithful
Christian is made easy. It is often beset with difficulty, broken, and uneven. Good
men are " cast down ; " and it is painful to have the skin grazed, even when the bones
are not broken. Under such disappointing experiences feeble souls are apt to become
more timid and more querulous, while bolder natures grow selfish and cynical. These



OH. IT. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. Ill

last, if they have been straok down when grappling with something to them imprac-
ticable or forbidden, resolve to knock others down, and, if need be for their own interest,
trample on them. But natures that are sweet and sound learn wisdom, consideration
for others, and knowledge of themselves through hard experience. And hearts that
trust in God have this joy in the worst defeat, that they are not, they cannot be,
destroyed. Life is not wreclied by every trouble or by a score of troubles. A mistake
may be the very making of a man, if he knows how to correct it. If the way is blocked
in one direclion, other paths are open. And if helpers fail and friends forsake, God
still lives. We do not, indeed, conceal from ourselves that some overthrows cannot be
quite remedied in this world ; some losses are irreparable on earth, just as some diseases
are incurable. But no Christian needs to be inconsolable. If he be stripped of ever so
much that he valued, his best treasure remains, and is above the reach of worldly
vicissitude. There is a good part which shall not be taken away. Thus life is always
worth living. For a brave man it cannot be utterly wrecked by misfortune. For a
devout man it cannot be shattered, though once and again struck down to the ground.
The good Shepherd restores the soul. But many are the uses of adversity. Remember
your faults and correct them ; your mistakes, and avoid them ; but do not waste time
in vain regrets or temper in weak complaints. What purpose does it serve to brood
over disappointment and " feed with sighs the passing wind " ? How much better to
gird up your puipose and make the best of what is left to you of time, strength, and
opportunity 1 You may yet stand all the more firmly because of that casting down.
The ill you have suffered may lead to higher good. " Though the outward man perish,
the inward man is renewed day by day." God knows how to give—

" Secret refreshings that repair youx Btrength,
And fainting spirits uphold."

F.

Ver. 16. — Inward renewal and outward decay. The contrast here is not that which
the apostle draws elsewhere between the flesh and the spirit, or the old man and the
new. That is a moral distinction. But this is between the physical and the spiritual
in man, the outward and palpable on the one hand, the inward and impalpable on the
other. These are intimately connected. They have a constant sympathy. An aching
body jades the mind ; an aching mind jades the body. A healthy body invigorates
the mind; a cheerful mind sustains the body. Each affects and is affected by the
other. Yet there is sometimes witnessed a glorious mastery over outward disadvantages
by the force of the inward man. The heroic mind is firm, even when the physical
frame is shattered. And nothing is so productive of this heroism as faith. They who
have " the same spirit of faith " as was in Paul " faint not."

I. Op inwaed renewal. The case in view is that of a regenerate man. It is
assumed that spiritual life has been received. And now it is shown that " the washing
of regeneration " is followed by " the renewing of the Holy Ghost." Good men are liable
to fits of inward fainting, languor, and emotional deadness, when they are in great
danger of being overcome by temptation. Therefore they need to pray often for a
stronger life. " Renew a right spirit within me." 1. Wherein is the inner man
renewed ? " In righteousness and holiness of truth " (Eph. iv. 24). And so in all
spiritual strength — the power of resistance to sin, of self-denial, of patience, and of
generous charitable action. 2. Whereby is the inner man renewed? By the power
of God ; by the energy of the Holy Ghost. It is he who, with the Word of truth,
makes vivid demonstration of righteousness to the conscience, strengthens holy purpose
in the will, and gives fervour to devout affections in the breast. 3. Sow often is the
inner man renewed ? " Day by day." Not that all days are alike. As a nation has
its special dates in history, days by which its future has been moulded, on which its
decisive battles were fought or its independence was won, so may a Christian man have
his dates more or less clearly marked, outstanding and precious days by which his
spiritual history has been determined, on which his fight of faith was well fought, and
his liberty in Christ became established and sure. But while we recognize special
days or eras of spiritual progress, we are disposed to say that in grace, as in nature, the
ordinary is, after all, more expressive of Divine goodness than the extraordinary, and
more essential to our welfare. The daily revival and mainteKficice of spiritual life is •



112 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. iv. 1—18.

better and greater thing than any occasional and exceptional blessing. " He holdeth
our souls in life." The strength, moral as well as physical, which is daily expended
is also daily restored. John Bunyan makes the Christian pilgrim see a man secretly
feeding with oil a fire on which another cast water, and the fire burned " hotter and
hotter." The Interpreter explained it of Christ's secret and constant renewal of the
sacred fire in " the souls of his people."

II. Of the relation which inward renewal mat bear to outward decay. St.
Paul was conscious of two changes — an outward descent to feebleness and earth, and
an inward ascent to firmer strength and higher vitality. 1. The inward defies the
outward. " Though our outward," etc. The constancy of the believing hea't is all
the more triumphant because of the feeble or decaying frame. What might of spirit
has shown itself in tender women under acute suffering ! Wliat force of character and
splendour of patience in men who scarcely had a day witliout bodily pain ! 2. The
inward renewal is often helped forward hy the outward decay. It pleases God to
further the spiritual life of his children in ways that are hard to flesh and blood.
Indeed, we seldom see a keen relish for the things of the Spirit of God, a weaned
spirit, a holy fervour — while the 6utward man is quite at ease and commands every
gratification. There is need of trouble in the outer sphere to exercise and quicken the
inner life. Bengel, near the end of his course, said to a friend, " Illnesses serve to
quicken and enlarge us in spirit after we have been dwindling. When our spiritual
lamp burns dimly, it is often because its wick needs retrenching ; and retrenchments
are made from time to time upon tlie outward man by sickness and affliction." Thus
it is not merely " though," but also sometimes " because," our outward man perishes
that our inward man is renewed. What a sad case is theirs whose outward man decays
while there is no spiritual life in thera ! Time passes, health fails, life ebbs away, and
there is nothing to put against it. The outward man perishes and the inward man
perishes too. But why will ye die ? The Lord wishes not that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance. — P.

Ver. 18. — Seeing the unseen. I. The habit op mind herb described. The apostle
speaks, not of an act or effort, but of a steady mental habit which he had formed — an
intentness of regard in a particular direction. He describes it in a form that sounds
paradoxical, but the thing meant is well known to all experimental Christians. The
things seen and not seen in this passage are not the visible and invisible by mortal
eyes, as in Bom. i. 20. The things not seen in the verse before us are so, not because
they cannot be seen, but because the time has not yet come for their manifestation. The
things seen, from which St. Paul turned away his eyes, were the toils and afflictions
endured by him as a servant of Christ. The things not seen were the rewards of
faithful service at the coming of the Lord — the " weight of glory." And the habit
here indicated is that of looking off from labours and sufferings to the glorious appear-
ing of the Lord, and the bright " recompense of reward." It is the highest form of
looking on the cheerful side of things. As this is a habit, it must be formed by degrees
and by reiterated efforts. By bending the mind as much as we can towards the future
with Christ, we must train it to habitual expectation and desire.

II. The reason assigned for forminu this habit. " For the things which are
seen are," etc. St. Paul reflected that " the sufferings of the present time " were, after
all, of short continuance. The affliction he endured was only for a moment as com-
pared with the eternity before him. So he felt that he would outlive and triumph
over all his trials. They were temporal, and so could not reach into the life beyond
or mar the hope laid up for him in heaven. Was not this the way with the Divine
Master himself ? For the joy set before him, he endured the cross, despising the shame.
And so should all who are his bear the cross and endure patiently, because the time
will not be long and the things not seen are eternal.

III. The benbkits which accompany or flow from this habit when formed.
1. Elevation of the tone of life. Life is as its motives are ; and the motives come from
the convictions, fears, and hopes that are strongest in the mind. A superficial religion
has not power enough to cleanse the heart or ennoble the principles of conduct. But a
formed habit of regarding the things eternal as thvTse to which we hasten must raise
and refine the character. " Every one who has this hov. in him purifies himself, even



CH. IV. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 113

as he is pure." And this is no selfish hope, no egotistical ambition. It is the hope of
being crowned along with all who love his appearing, and of being rewarded along with
all the faithful servants of the King. 2. Consolation in hardship and adversity > Even
when a lamp is not near enough to cast a clear light on our path, it is cheering to see
it in a murky night ; and so are we comforted as we look for the glory with Christ.
We move towards it over ever so rugged a path. We steer towards it over ever so
restless a sea. If we look at the things which are seen, the waves and the threatening
rocks, we lose strength and courage; but with the eye fixed on the light of that
blessed hope, we make straight for the harbour. 3. Preparation for departure hence.
It is appointed to men to die. To take no thought about this appointment, and to
occupy the mind with only the things that are seen, forgetting their transience, is to
play the part of a fool. The wise man is he who, while fulfilling the duties of the
passing time, looks much and steadily into the future, and so, when he departs, goes,
not into regions unl^nown, but to the Saviour, whom he has loved and served, to wait
with him and with all the saints for the resurrection and the glory. — F.

Vers. 1, 2. — Fiill confidence in the power of the truth. " By manifestation of the
truth conmiending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of Grod." The great
work of the Christian ministry is to set forth before men the truth. But we are not to
understand by that term all truth or any truth. Eeference is precisely to that truth
about God, and his relations with men, which had been partially revealed before, and
was fully disclosed in Jesus Christ the Saviour. That special truth had been committed
to the trust of the apostles. They were to proclaim it freely to men, as they had or
could make opportunity. And they were to be sure that God would make that truth
his power unto men's salvation. Eeferring to the work of the modern ministry, it has
been well said that wo have not so much " to tell the truth as to make the truth tell."
The apostle, in these verses, reminds us of some things that are necessary if we would
efficiently set forth the gospel truth.

I. Peksevbkance. " We faint not." There must be no shrinking back in face of
difficulties, no losing heart because things will not go smoothly, no wearying in our
well-doing. St. Paul himself gave the noble example of what he enjoined. He did not
coimt his life dear to him so that he might finish his course with joy. Succeed or fail,
in strength or in weakness, he was " instant in season and out of season."

II. Simplicity. The faithful minister will absolutely refuse all merely sensational
aids to his work. He will wholly separate himself from worldly and guileful schemes
for accomplishing his ends. He will refuse in any way to "do evil that good may
come." It had been made an accusation against the apostle that he had shown crafti-
ness and guile in his dealings with the Churches. This charge he most vigorously
rebutted, and was led to urge that guilelessness is essential to the faithful minister,
whose conduct and motives may be searched through and through. Illustration may
be taken from the ministry of the Lord Jesus. He resorted to no arts, or schemes, or
tricks, either of speech or of conduct. His work was simple. It was the living of a
Ufe, the dulivery of a message, a genuine effort to bless and save men.

IIL Faith. In the witness which the truth ever makes, and the response to it
which is always given by men's consciences. We may preach with this confidence —
conscience will surely acknowledge the claim of God, and the guilt of sin, and the need
of redemption. Men may indeed silence conscience and put away the truth, but we
always have this assurance — the best and deepest in every man responds to our message.

IV. The consciousness of being dndeb God's eye. " In the sight of God." That
Divine presence the minister realizes as the fulfilment of Christ's words, " Lo, I am with
you alway, even unto the end of the world." There is a hardness and coldness about
the idea that we should work " as ever in the great Taskmaster's eye." There is
warmth, tender sympathy, and inspiration in the assurance that the spiritual " Man,
Christ Jesus," is with us everywhere.

In conclusion, such points as these need careful treatment. 1. Is this confidence in
the power of the truth justified by experience ? 2. Does Christ's truth ever really stand
in peril? 3. If so, from what sources or in what directions does the peril come?
Agencies and organizations and human moulds imperil it, and in every age men
are raised up who can set Christ's truth free from our human limitations and bondages.

II. CORINTHIANS, jt



114 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. iv. 1—18.

The true revival is the freeing of the truth to win its own good way. We can have no
ground for glorying comparable to this — " the Word of God is not bound." — R. T.

Ver. 4. — Christ as the Image of Ood. " The glorious gospel of Christ, who is the
Image of God." From 1 Cor. xi. 7 we learn that there is a sense in which man is the
" image and glory of God." In Col. i. 15 the Son of God is spoken of as the " Image
of the invisible God, the Firstborn of every creature." The word used in our text
is exactly equivalent to our word ' likeness." '' An image, or likeness, is a visible repre-
sentation of an object. So Christ, in his humanity, is a visible representation of the
unseen God. No revelation of the wisdom and power of God that man has received
can compare with that made in the life, death, and resurrection of the incarnate Son."
The point to which we ask attention is this — the <;ospel sets fortli the glory of Christ.
But, when it is rightly viewed, this is found to be the setting lorth of the glory of Ood.
For God can only be known in image and symbol ; and this is the peifect and wholly
satisfactory image, precisely adapted to our human faculties and necessities. Jesus
Christ is the " Brightness of the Father's glory, and the express Image of his person."
His sonship is the earthly presentation of the Divine fatherhood. The Son is the very
image of the Father. Philips Brooks well says, " This is the sum of the work of the
Incarnation. A hundred other statements regarding it, regarding him who was
incarnate, are true ; but all statements concerning him hold their truth within this
truth — that Jesus came to restore the fact of God's fatherhood to man's knowledge, and
to its central place of power over man's life. Jesus is mysteriously the Word of God made
flesh. He is the Worker of amazing miracles upon the bodies and the souls of men.
He is the Convincer of sin. He is the Saviour by suffering. But, behind all these, as
the purpose for which he is all these, he is the Redeemer of man into the fatherhood of
God." Christ brings the light of God's fatherly 16ve to shine on prodigal and sinful
sons; that light wakens the old son-spirit in their hearts, and wins them home, in
penitence and faith, to their heavenly Father. And just this is the mission of Christ
and his gospel — to diine God's light into men's souls. — R. T.

Ver. 6. — Light from Ood and light on Ood. The new Revised Version makes an
important alteration in this verse, reading it thus : " Seeing it is God, that said. Light
shall shine out of darkness, who shined in our hearts, to give the light [or, ' illumina-
tion '] of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ."

I. Light fkom God in okbation. (Gen. i. 3.) The following points may bo illus-
trated. 1. All material light, as a warming, life-giving, beautifying agent, ia fi:om
God. 2. All moral light, as the intimation of what is good and right in the relation-
ships of men, is from God. 3. AH revelational light, as the unfolding of the
mysteries belonging to God and his claim and mercy, must come directly from himself.
On spiritual things man can have no knowledge, save as God is pleased freely to give
it ; and, on these higher themes, all light must be tempered to the capacity of those on
whom it shines.

II. Light on God is Ghbist. Calvin says of this verse, " A notable place, whence
we learn that God is not to be investigated in his unsearchable height, for he inhabits
the light unapproachable (1 Tim. vi. 16), but to be known as far as he reveals himself
in Christ. ... It is more useful for us to behold God as he appears in his only
begotten Son than to investigate his secret essence." The face of Christ is said to
reveal the glory of God, as the shining of Moses' face told of the splendour about the
mount where he had been with God. But the glory of God is his redemption-work.
That showed (1) pity, (2) love, (3) wisdom, (4) holy purpose ; and all these we find in
the face of Jesus Christ. Illustrate the power of expression, and the power of revealing
thought and heart, that are in the human face, and then show how the face of the
Lord Jesus reveals to us the " heart of God." Before Christ came God was a half-
known, if not an unknown, God. And the incomplete conceptions of him involved,
too often, imperfect and unworthy conceptions. We now know the " true God and
eternal life " in the face of Jesus, bis manifested Son— or rather, his manifested Selt.
— R.T.

Ver. 7. — Etavenly treasure in earthen vessels. " It was the practice of Eastern kincs



OB. lY. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa 116

who stored up their treasures of gold and silver, to fill jars of earthenware with coin or
hullion " (see Jer. xxxii. 14). To this custom allusion is made. St. Paul says that in
these frail bodies of ours, with their limited faculties and powers, in these "earthen
vessels " we have that priceless treasure, the knowledge of the glory of God as a
Bedeemer. Cecil says, " The meanness of the earthen vessel which conveys to others
the gospel treasure takes nothing from the value of the treasure. A dying hand may
sign a deed of incalculable value ; a shepherd's boy may point out the way to a philo-
sopher ; a beggar may be the bearer of a valuable present." Three points claim attention.

I. The treasure. This may be regarded as (1) a revelation, (2) as a gospel, (3) as
a life. In either respect, the personal Christ being the very Centre and Essence of it,
he is properly the Treasure. Christ himself is our most sacred Trust. We have the one
Saviour for men committed to our care. Then how jealously we should guard the
treasure I and how wisely we should put it to use !

II. The need fob the conveyance op this treasure. For it is not to be stored
up in hiding-places, but somehow made the treasure of all men. It is a spiritual
treasure, and needs some kind of material conveyance. Christ himself must be
ministered to men by his disciples.

III. The vessels found fob the dub conveyance op the treasure. Humbly
spoken of as earthly, or as mere earthenware. Enlarging upon them beyond St. Paul's
immediate thought in the use of the term, we may show (1) their frailty; (2) their
fitness, especially in that they do not take away the honour that is due to the treasure
by directing attention to themselves; (3) their safety, since God, who guards the
treasure, will guard the vessel that holds it ; (4) their usefulness, as the human agency
commends the heavenly truth; and (5) their reward, for God wiE surely commend
those who, in such a trust, are found faithful. — E. T.

Ver. 10. — Suffering showing forth character. It has been said that " affliction " is
the one predominant word in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians. And perhaps no
other Epistle is so charged with wounded personal feeling and reminiscences of varied
suffering. This may be explained by the circumstances under which this letter was
written. Perhaps we do not sufficiently realize how much personal suffering, from
disease and bodily infirmity, the apostle had to endure ; and yet this is evidently the
key to many of his intense expressions. Either from constitutional weakness, or in
consequence of his many exposures, he had upon him some painful and humiliating
form of disease, which was incurable ; and this his enemies made the occasion of scorn
and insult, until they wounded him to the very quick, and drove him to the throne of
grace, seeking, with threefold importunity, to have the " thorn in the flesh " removed.
When we apprehend this, we begin to feel the meaning of our text ; he was " always
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus : " pain, disease, suffering — ^like a
daily dying — brought on him in the fulfilment of his ministry for the Lord Jesus. But
St. Paul never dwelt long on the merely sad side of things, and so he goes on to say —
Even if our life on earth be like the dying of the Lord Jesus, thi's also is true, through
our very suffering and dying, the life of Jesus is made manifest in our mortal flesh and
earthly spheres. "St. Paul felt that every true human soul must repeat Christ's
existence. He could bear to look on his decay ; it was but the passing of the human ;
and, meantime, there was ever going on within him the strengthening of the Divine.
Pain was sacred, since Christ also had suffered. And life became grand when viewed
as a repetition of the life of Christ."

I. St. Paul's conception op cub Lord's life. It had been a daily dying which
nevertheless showed up himself, in the glory of his character and spirit. The dying
manifested to men the life that was in him. St. Paul had, probably, never seen Christ
in the flesh, but it was given to him, by his fellowship of suffering, to understand
better than all the rest what a suffering Saviour Jesus was. It is St. Paul who writes
BO much about the cross of the Lord Jesus. He dwells oftener than any other early
teacher upon our Lord's death, but when you apprehend his meaning, you find that he
looked upon Christ's whole life as a dying. He saw that Jesus was every day dying
to self, dying with shame, pain, exhaustion, conflict, and agony. And you do not read
Christ's life aright unless you can see in it what St. Paul saw, even humiliation,
limitation, suffering, burdening it every day. But that was not a'l St. Paul's conception



116 TEE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. it. 1—18.

of Christ. In that, standing alone, he could have found no rest, no inspiration. Ha
saw also this, that our Lord's sufferings were just the dark background that threw out
so perfectly, with such well-defined lines and graceful forms, his noble spirit, his Divine
character, his sublime sonship, his blessed life. And so he could speak calmly, even
triumphantly, of the suffering Saviour, and glory in the dying of the Lord Jesus,
through which the life of Jesus found its highest and best manifestations. How much
a picture depends upon its background ! Fill the front with the most exquisite figures
or landscape, still all the tone and character and impression of the figure will depend
upon its background. You may so paint as to leave the forms and figures indistinct
and imcertain. You may throw out into prominence the special thought or truth
which you seek to embody in form ; your picture may be calm morning, hot noonday,
flushed evening, tender twilight, or gathering night, according to your background.
St. Paul felt what shadows of suffering and woe lay all behind that life of his Lord ;
but they helped him to see the glory of Christ himself; they seemed to bring out so
clearly the Divine and blessed life that was in him. Illustrate by the language of
Isa. liii. and Phil. ii. 5 — 11. Also from the scenes of Gethsemane and Calvary. The
Captain of our salvation was made perfect, to our view, through suffering.

II. St. Paul's conception op his own life. He could wish nothing better foi
himself than that what was true of Christ might be true of him, and that his sufferings,
too, might show up his character and help to make him a blessing and a power foi
good. St. Paul never could glory in mere suffering. Suffering is grievance and loss.
But if they could be like Christ's sufferings, not merely borne for him, and in the doing
of his work, but actually like his, and ordained by God to be the same to him, and to
others through him, as Jesus' sufferings did ! The apostle felt he could glory in that.
And this is the view of suffering that we also need to gain. Our troubles and sorrows
are as the dying of the Lord Jesus. Once laying hold of this, we find that we have
one thing to be supremely anxious about — it is that our dying shall show up Christ's
life in us, shall make the Christly virtues and graces manifest in our mortal flesh. We
have our sorrows. Does our character shine out clearly on the darkness of them ? Do
men see and feel our " whiteness" by the contrast of them? Are we beautiful with
a Divine patience, and fragrant with a Divine sweetness, in the very darkness ? On
the background of our pain do men see our submission ? In the hour of our disappoint-
ment do we show up to men our trust in God ? When heart and flesh fail does the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ make our very faces glow with the heavenly light ? Is it
true of us that the " Ufe of Jesus is manifested in our mortal flesh " ? — R. T,

Ver. 16. — The outward and the inward man. For the word "perish" in this verse,
the Revised Version reads " is decaying." " Outward man " is the body, " inward
man " is the soul, so far as the terms may be understood by anybody. " Outward
man " is the whole sphere of the senses and the flesh ; " inward man " is the whole
sphere of the moral, the spiritual, the Divine, the eternal, so far as the terms may be
apprehended by the quickened and regenerate of mankind. The " outward man " is
man related to the " seen and temporal ; " the " inward man " is man related to the
" unseen and eternal." And what the apostle so plainly says in our text is this — the
"outward man," the material framework of the body, and the whole circle of purely
human and earthly relations, are yielding to a gradual process of decay, and soon they
must all pass away. But the "inward man," the spiritual life, the very man himself,
is day by day rising, through successive stages of renewal, to yet higher life. And
the very decayings of the body and of the earthly surroundings bear directly upon
the nourishment and growth of the soul's life, and so upon the soul's future. This
is the thought which is set before us for our consideration, and we begin with that
familiar truth on which the statement of the text rests.

I. Body-life and soul-life both depend on nourishment, on food. This is the
law of all created life. Angela live on angels' food. Souls live on appropriate souls'
food. And bodies live by meat and drink and air. Science tells us that bodily life,
health, fatness, and vigour directly depend on the character and quantity and appro-
priateness of the food supplied. Given vitality and freedom from active disease, and
»ny bodily result that is desired can be obtained by giving flesh-forming, or bone-
forming, or brain-making foods. And the health, the vigour, and the work of om



OB. IT. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. HI

soul's life just as directly depend upon the food with which it is nourished. Would
you get more good work out of your souls ? Then you must feed them better. Do
you expose your souls to much peril ? Then you must improve and increase their food.
We may speak of the soul's life as heing faith and love, and as having for its natural
expression worship and work. Then the soul's food which we provide must bear, in
the most direct and efficient way, on these four things. Here is a most practical
problem for each one of us to solve in our daily life — What will nourish into the fullest
iie'alth and strength my soul's faith and my soul's love? What will strengthen the
soul's brain and heart for holy worship, for prayer and praise, and the soul's muscle and
nerve for holy work? As life unlblds there come to us all times of special stress and
strain. Business has its unusual anxieties. Home has its unusual cares. Decisions
of grave importance have to be made, and we too easily forget at such times that we
need better soul-food ; we must be oftener at the secret sources of spiritual nourishment :
we must find out how strong they ran become who eat of the tree of life, who partake
of that Bread of life which satisfies, and that " flesh and bluod " which are " meat
indeed and drink indeed."

II. NotTBlSH THE BODY-LIFE HOW WE MAT, IT IS WBABING DOWN TO DE0A1 AND

DEATH. "The outward man yerishes." " The fashion of this world passeth away." All
the feeding, all the nourishing, all the fresh air, cannot keep the bodily powers working
over-long ; for soon the sight grows dim, and the hearing fails, and the taste palls, and the
hands tremble, and the breath goes hard, and the limbs totter, and then the golden bowl
is broken at the fountain, and man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go about
the streets. There is a fixed limit beyond which the body cannot go. None of us can
with impunity exert ourselves beyond the limits of our physical strength, for gradually,
as the years pass on; our vital force is lowered, our recuperative power Jails, the body is
really decaying and wasting down to helplessness and death. But why should we
trouble because we cannot feed these bodies of ours into a strength that shall resist
disease and old age, and make our years last through all the generations ? They are
not us. They are but the machinery, the agency, the sphere, of our sublime moral
*:rial. They may last no longer than is needed for the perfecting of the trial. I shall
not want this frail body, with its limited senses and relations, nor shall I want this
" ower sin-burdened earth," when God sees that my moral trial is over ; when he has
found out, by this practical experiment, what I really am. I can see them both pass
away, and enter God's spiritual and incorruptible body — the glorified counterpart of
this body I now have — which is fashioned akin to the " new heavens and new earth,
wherein dwelleth righteousness."

III. NotJBisH THE SODL-LIFE, AND IT WILL GEOW ON FOR EVEB. For there are no
forces that can touch the regenerate soul to destroy it. " I give unto them eternal life,"
He said who brought life and immortality to light by His gospel, " and they shall never
perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand." Law, Satan, sin, temp-
tation, worldly atmospheres, death, and hell cannot hurt the soul whose vitality is well
nourished and maintained. Take food for the body, and its service is soon spent.
Take food for the soul, and its service never can be spent ; it becomes a permanent
element of good ; it has gone to the making of character, which death has no power to
touch. There are, indeed, varieties of religious experience, ups and downs of religious
leeling. We inay encrust our lives with worldliness, we may feed our souls with
nothing but the luxuries of human pleasure, and if we do so wo must suffer, and bitterly
suffer. Great diseases and calamities may come to us as cleansing and correcting
processes. But God will not let the soul-growth be permanently hindered. If we will
not make the soul thrive by the food of truth, and duty, and worship, and prayer,
and fellowship, then he will make it thrive by the medicine of pain, and distress, and
humiliation, and bereavement, and loss ; but thrive and grow it shall. " The inward
man [shall be] renewed day by day."

IV. The very wbaeing down, suffering, decaying, and dying op the body-life
ABB HADE AGENTS IK NODEisHiNG THE sotjl's LIFE. St. Paul gocs on from our text to
say, "For our light affliction . . . worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory." How bright and hopeful that bruised, worn, suffering apostle always
was 1 He even found it in his heart to glory in his infirmities, because, the weaker he
was, the more of Christ's power must rest on him and work through him. The outward



118 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. iv. 1—18.

man perishes, but he is not going to he sad or to faint about it, since the inward man
is renewed day hy day. And Paul saj'S that there is such an intimate relation between
these two that, hy the dying of the one, the life of the other is actually furthered. Our
light afflictions and our testing death are even made food for our soul's growth. We
may thrive upon our very woes. Trial, toil, struggle, weariness, frailty, pain, bereave-
ment, all the body can know of sorrow and care, are the soul's food. It lives by
them. It thrives on them. It steps up toward heaven with the help of them. " Out
of the eater it brings forth meat ; out of the strong it brings forth sweetness." — E. T.

Ver. 17. — The Christian estimate of affliction. There is a passionate jntensity, a
kind of extravagance, in these words, which we often notice in the utterances of the
noble but impulsive apostle. High feeling, strained emotion, are often helpful in our
religious experiences. They lift us, as on a great wave, over the bar of difiSculty
They help us in the doing of duty, and they lighten the burden of our sorrow. Om
hymns and sacred poems are often the expression of such high emotions as are only
felt by the best of men in their best of times ; but they are an inspiration and a joy to
us, though they may be beyond our actual attainment. In this way we may get
gracious help through our text. The context refers to ministerial troubles, but troubles
are our common human lot, and if we had to choose what form they should take for
us, we should make sad mistakes. Concerning the blessings wrought by afBiction w*
have remarkable Scripture testimonies. Moses would rather " suffer afBiction with the
people of God than enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season." David says, " Before I was
afflicted I went astray, but now will I keep thy word." Solomon tells us that it is
" better to go into the house of mourning than into the house of feasting." And the
writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews says that " whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth,
and scourgeth every son whom he reoeiveth." Our text suggests what estimate the
child of God may and ought to make cf afflictions, and he may judge them as regards
weight, time, and influence,

L As TO THBiB WEIGHT. He may call them " light afflictions." This is apparently
untrue. Surely Job, and Jacob, and Naomi, and David, and Martha and Mary could
never call theirs " light afflictions." It is truly said that " no affliction for the present
seemeth to be joyous but grievous." It seems impossible to call such a catalogue of
woes as is given us in ch. xi. 23 — 27 " light afflictions." And yet this is the deeper truth,
and we may see that it is if we weigh our troubles in fair balances : (1) in the balances
of our deservings ; (2) in the balances of comparison with the sufferings of others ; and
(3) in the balances of consequences, for out of sorrow comes spiritual health. Both
knowledge and faith may help us to call our affliction " light."

n. As TO THEIK TIME. "But for a moment." This also is apparently untrue.
Joseph cannot call those weary prison years " but a moment." The captives in Babylon,
worn out with hope deferred, hung their harps upon the willows because they could
sing no longer. They could not call their captivity " but for a moment." And we can
never call " short" those dreadful six hours of agony borne by our Lord upon the cross.
And yet this also is the deepest truth. In comparison with life itself it is. Our times
of suffering are few, of joy are many ; they lie together in something of the proportion
of streams and fields. Then, too, it is the actual fact that in our suffering times only
brief moments bring unbearable pain. And it is found that the worst pain is the least
remembered ; it passes, and we cannot even recall it, so as to suffer it over again in
imagination. And earthly suffering is truly but for a moment if it be compared with
the eternity of joy into which it leads us.

III. As TO THBIB INFLUENCB. " Working a . . . weight of glory." It ia as
important that we should be prepared for the gloiy as that the glory should be prepared
for us. St. Paul's idea of glory is what is done by affliction in the Christian himself.
And amongst the things wrought in the Christian character and life we may note
these. 1. Patience — the power to be quiet and wait. 2. Trust — the full committal of
our keeping to God. 3. Holiness — the deliverance from the enslaving power of eviL
4. The sanctifying of human relationships, which nothing makes so tender and so true
as does our sharing in common sorrows. 5. And the renewal of Christian activity ; for
affliction is the time when we may seriously review the past, and make earnest resolvea
for the days to come. — B. T.



OH. T. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



119



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER V.



Continuation of the topic that hope is the
chief support of the preacher of the gospel
(vers. 1 — 10). Their self-sacrifice in preach-
ing the gospel of reconciliation (vers. 11 — 21).

Vers. 1 — 10. — The hope of the future life is
the great support of our efforts.

Ver. 1. — For. A further explanation of
the hope expressed in ch. iv. 17. We know.
This accent of certainty is found only in the
Christian writers. Our earthly house. Not
the "house of clay" (Job iv. 19), but the
house which serves us as the home of our souls
on earth ; as in 1 Cor. xv. 40. Of this taber-
nacle ; literally, the house of the tent ; i.e. the
tent of our mortality, the mortal body. In
2 Pet. 1. 13, 14 it is called skenoma, and the
expression, "the Word became flesh and dwelt
among us," is literally, "he tabernacled amon g
us " — ^he wore " a tent like ours and of the
same material." The figure would be
specially natural to one whose occupation
was that of a tentmaker. Compare —

" Here in the body pent.
Afar from him 1 roam,
But nightly pitch my wandering tent
A day's march nearer home."

Avery similar expression occurs in Wisd. ix.
1.5, " 27ie earthly tabernacle (yeSiSfs itktjvos)
weigheth down the mind." Be dissolved;
ia,thBi,he taken to pieces. A building. Some-
thing more substantial than that moving
tenement. Of God; literally, from God;
namely, not one of the "many mansions"
spoken of in John xiv. 2, but the resurreotion-
body furnished to us by him. We have this
building from God, for it exists now, and
shall be ours at the same time that our tent-
home is done away with. Not made with
hands. Not like those tent-dwellings at
which St. Paul was daily toiling with the
hands which ministered to his own neces-
sities. In the heavens. To be joined with
" we have." Heaven is our general home
and country (Heb. xi. 16), but the present
allusion is to the glorified bodies in which
our souls shall live in heaven (oomp. 1 Cor.
XV. 42—49).

Ver. 2. — In this we groan. Since we have
the firstfruits of the Spirit, who assures us
of that future building from God, we, in this
earthly tent, "groan within ourselves, waiting
for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our
body " (Eom. viii 23). To be clothed upon ;
rather, to further dothe ourselves with. Here
the metaphoM of a tent and a garment — ^the
•• wandering tent " and the '' mortal vesture
of decay " — are interfused in a manner on



which only the greatest writers can ventnre.
The corruptible yearns to clothe itself with
the incorruptible, the mortal with immor-
tality (1 Cor. XV. 53). The glorified body
is compared to an over-garment. House;
rather, habitation (pilceterion).

Ver. 3. — If so be that. The verse may
be rendered, " If, that is, being clothed, we
shall not be found naked." The word
"naked" must then mean "bodiless," and
the reference will be to those whom, at
his coming, Christ shall find clothed in these
mortal bodies, and not separated from them,
i.e. quick and not dead (1 Thess. iv. 17 ;
1 Cor. XV. 51). This seems to be the simplest
and most natural of the multitude of strange
interpretations with which the pages of com-
mentators are filled. It is true that the
aorist endusamenoi, means literally, " having
clothed ourselves," and that, in taking this
meaning, we should have expected the perfect
participle e»^ed!«meno«, having been clothed.
If this be thought an insuperable difficulty,
we must suppose the verse to mean " If, that
is, in reality we shall be found [at Christ's
coming] after having put on some intermedi-
ate body, and therefore not as mere disem-
bodied spirits." But there is no allusion in
Scripture toany intermediate body, nor is any
gleam of light shed on the mode of life among
the dead between death and resurrection,
though the Church rejects the dreamof Psy-
chopannychia, or an interval of unconscious
sleep. The uncertainty of the meaning is in-
creased by two various readings, ei per instead
of ei ge, which latter expresses greater doubt
about the matter ; and ehdusamenoi (D, F,
G), which would mean " if in reality, after
unclothing ourselves [t.e. after ' shufiling oflP
this mortal coil'], we shall not be found
naked." This seems to be the conjecture of
some puzzled copyists, who did not see that
a contrast, and not a coincidence, between the
two expressions is intended. If this reading
were correct, it would mean, as Chrysostom
says, " Even if we would lay aside the body,
we shall not there be presented without a
body, but with the same body which has
then become incorruptible." It ia quite
untenable to make " clothed " mean " clothed
with righteousness," as Olshausen does. In
the Talmud, 'Shabbath' (f. 152, 2), the
righteous are compared to men who keep
from stain the robes given them by a king
(i.e. their bodies), which robes the king
deposits in his treasury and sends the wearers
away (bodiless) in peace; but foolish servants
stain these robes, and the king sends the
robes to the wash, and the wearers to prison.

Ver. 4. — For we that are, etc. ; literally,
for indeed tM who are in the tent; i.e. in tha



126



THE SECOND SIPISTLE tO THE OORlNTfilAiJa [oh. v. 1—21.



transitory mortal body. Do groan. " Oh
wretched man that I am 1 who shall deliver
me from the body of this death ? " (Eom. vii.
24). Being burdened. " The corruptible
body presseth down the soul, and the earthy
tabernacle weigheth down the mind that
museth upon many things" (Wisd. ix. 15).
Not for that we would be unclothed, but
clothed upon ; more literally, since we do not
wish to strip off (pur bodily garment) hut to
put another garment over it. St. Paul here
repudiates the Maniohean notion that the
body is a disgrace, or in itself the source of
evil. He was not like Plotinus, who " blushed
that he had a body;" or like St. Francis
of Assisi, who called his body " my brother
the ass ; " or like the Curfe d'Ars, who (as
we have said) spoke of his body as "ce
cadavre." He does not, therefore, desire to get
rid of his body, but to " clothe it over " with
the garment of immortality. Incidentally
this implies the wish that he may be alive
and not dead when the Lord returns (1 Cor.
XV. 35 — 54). Mortality ; rather, the mortal ;
that which is mortal. Might be swallowed
up of life. As in the case of Enoch (Gen. v.
24) and Elijah (2 Kings ii. 11), who entered
into life otherwise than through " the grave
and gate of death." St. Paul wishes to
enter the "building from God" without
having been first buried in the collapse of the
" soul's dark cottage battered and decayed."
He desires to put on the robe of immortality
without stripping off the rent garbof thebody.

Ver. 5. — Hfc who hath wrought us for the
selfsame thing. God prepared and perfected
us for this very result, namely, to put on
the robe of immortality. The earnest (see
ch. i. 22). The quickening lite imparted by
the Spirit of life is a pledge and part payment
of the incorruptible eternal life. The Spirit
is "the Earnest of our inheritance" (Bph. i.
14; iv. 30).

Ver. 6. — Therefore we are always con-
fident ; literally, being of good courage. The
sentence in the Greek is unfinished (an
anacoluthon), but is resumed after the paren-
thesis by the repetition, " we are of good
courage." Always (ch. iv. 8). We are at
home in the body. The tent is pitched in
the desert, and even the pillar of fire can
only shine through its folds. Yet the tent
may become brighter and brighter as life
goes on.

" To me the thought of death is terrible.
Having such hold on life. To you it is not
More than a step into the open air
Out of a tent already Ixuninous
With light which shines through its trans-
parent folds."

fLongfellow.)

Absent from the lord (John xiv. 2, 3). Christ
is indeed with ua here and always ; but the



nearness of presence and the clearness ol
vision in tliat future life will be so much
closer and brighter, that here, by comparison,
we are absent from him altogether.

Ver. 7. — ^For we walk by faith (oh. iv. 18;
Heb. xi. 1 ; Eom. viii. 25). Not by sight ;
rather, not by appearand ; not by anytJiing
actually seen. We do not yet see " face to
face " (1 Cor. xiii. 12), but are guided by
things which " eye hath not seen."

Ver. 8. — To be absent, etc. ; literally, to be
away from the home of the body, but to be at
home with the Lord. To be present with the
Lord. The hope expressed is exactly the
same as in Phil. i. 23, except that here
(as in ver. 4) he expresses a desire not " to
depart," but to be quit of the body without
the necessity for death.

Ver. 9. — We labour; literally, tee art
emulous. This, says Bengel, is "the sole
legitimate ambition." The same word occurs
in Kom. xv. 20. Whether present or absent ;
literally, whether at home or away from home ;
i.e. whether with Christ or separated &om
him (as in ver. 8) ; or, " whether in the body
or out of the body " (as in ver. 6). The latter
would resemble 1 Thess. v. 10, " That whether
we wake or sleep we may live with him." We
may be accepted of him ; literally, to be weU-
pleasing to him.

Ver. 10. — We must all appear ; rather, /or
it is necessary that we must all be made ma-
nifest; that we must be shown in our real
nature and character. The verb is not the
same as in Bom. xiv. 10, which occurs in oh.
iv. 14. Before the judgment-seat of Christ.
The special final judgment is represented as
taking place before the bemu of Christ, al-
though in Eom. xiv. 10 the best reading is
"of God" (Matt. XXT. 31, 32). St. Paul
might naturally use this Eoman and Greek
idea of the bema, being too familiar with
it in his own experience (comp. Acts xii.
21 ; xviii. 12; xxv. 6; Eom. xiv. 10). The
things done in the body ; literally, the thingi
(done) by the instrumentality of the body.
Another reading (which only differs by" a
single letter from this) is, " the proper
things of the body " (to iSia rod irdifiaTos) ;
i.e. the things which belong to it, which it
hat made its own. St. Paul, always intent
on one subject at a time, does not stop
to co-ordinate this law of natural retribution
and inexorable Nemesis with that of the
"forgiveness of sins" (1 Cor. v. 11; Bom.
iii. 25), or with the apparently universal
hopes which he seems sometimes to express
(Eom. V. 17, 18 ; xi. 32). Omnia exeunt in
mysterium. According to that he hath done ;
rather, with reference to the things he did.
The aorist shows that aU life will be as it
were concentrated to one point. The Pela^
gians raised questions on this verse about
the sinlessness of infants, etc., aU of which



db. y. 1—21.] THE SfiCONi) EPISTLE *iO TfiE COElilTfilANS.



121



may be left on one side, as probably nothing
was more absolutely distant from tbe thoughts
of St. Paul. Observe that each is to receive
the natural issues of what he has done. There
is to be an analogy between the sin and the
retribution. The latter is but the ripe fruit
of the former. We shall be punished by the
action of natural laws, not of arbitrary inflic-
tions. We shall reap what we have sown,
not harvests of other grain (Rom. ii. 5 — 11 ;
Rev. xxii. 12 ; Gal. vi. 7). Whether it be
good or bad. St. Paul, who always confines
himself to one topic at a time, does not here
enter on the question of the cutting off of
the entailed curse by repentance and forgive-
ness. He leaves unsolved the antinomy
between normal inevitable consequence and
free remission.

Vers. 11 — 19. — Self-devotion of the minis-
try of reconciliation.

Ver. 11. — Knowing therefore the terror of
the Lord, we persuade men. Multitudes of
texts have been torn from their context and
grossly abused and misinterpreted, but few
more so than this. It is the text usually
chosen by those who wish to excuse a set-
ting forth of God under the attributes of
Moloch. With any such views it has not
the remotest connection. It simply means,
" Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord,
we persuade men," either " to keep in view
the same fear of the Lord as ourselves," or
(reverting to his last assertion of his own
sincerity and integrity in ver. 9), " that our
sole ambition is to please God." The ren-
dering, "the terror of the Lord," for the
every-day expression, "the fear of the Lord,"
was wantonly intruded into modern versions
by Beza, and has not a single word to be said
in its favour. The phrase means (as always)
not the dread which God inspires, but the
holy fear which mingles wii£ our love of
him. To teach men to regard God with
terror ia to undo the best teaching of all
Scripture, which indeed has too often been
the main end of human systems of theology.
We persuade men. Not in a bad sense (Gal.
i. 10). The attacks and calumnies of enemies
make it necessary to vindicate our integrity
to men; but we have no need to do so to
God, because he already knows us (oomp.
"persuading Blastus," Acts xii. 20). We
are made manifest unto God ; rather, lut to
God we have been (and are') manifested. He
needs no self-defence from us. Are made
manifest in your consciences; but I hope
that I have been, and am now, made manifest
in your consciences. In other words, I trust
that this apology into which you have driven
me bag achieved its ends ; and that, what-
ever may be your prejudices and innuendoes,
before the bar of the individual conscience of
each of you we now stand clear (comp.
«h. iv. 2).



Ver. 12.— ror we commend not onrselvei
again nnto you. Still reverting to the charge
that he was guilty of self-praise, he says
that his object is not this, for it was needless
(ch. iii. 2, 3). But give you occasion to glory
on our behalf. But we speak as we have
done to give you a starting-point for some-
thing to boast of on our behalf. He has
already said (oh. i. 4) that the teachers and
the taught in their mutual affection ought to
have sume ground for "boasting" (i.e. for
speaking with some praise and exultation) of
each other. The Corinthians were being
robbed of this by the interested lies of St.
Paul's opponents, who thought only about
outward appearances. This is why he has
set forth to them the aim and glory of his
ministry. Notliing could be more gentle and
forbearing than such a mode of stating his
object. Yet for those who were sufficiently
finely strung to .understand it, there was an
almost pathetic irony involved in it. Which
glory in appearance, and not in heart ;
literally, in face. The grounds of their
boasting, whatever they were, were super-
ficial and external (ch. x. 7), not deep and
sincere. But those who would judge of Paul
aright must look into his very heart, end not
on his face.

Ver. 13. — ^For whether we be beside our-
selves ; rather, for whether t»« were mad.
Evidently some person or some faction had
said of St. Paul, "He is beside himself," just
as Festus said afterwards, "Paul, thon art
mad," and as the Jews said of Paul's Lord
and Master (John x. 20). Tlie fervour of
the apostle, his absorption in his work, his
visions and ecstasies, his "speaking with
tongues more than they all," his indifference
to externals, his bursts of emotion, might
all have given colour to this charge, which
he here ironically accepts. " Mad or self-
controlled — all was for your sakes." It is
to God ; rather,/or God. My " enthusiasm,"
"exaltation," or, if you will, my "madness,"
was but u phase of my work for him. We
be sober. The word "sober" (sophrin) is
derived from two words which mean " to save
the mind." It indicates wise self-control,
such as was represented also by the many-
sided Latin word frugi. It is the exact
antithesis to madness (Acts xxvi. 25). What
you call my "madness" belongs to the
relation between my own soul and God; my
practical sense and tact are for you. Tor
your sakes ; literally, /or you.

Ver. 14.— The love of Christ. It matters
little whether this be interpreted as a sub-
jective genitive, " Christ's love to man," or
as an obj ective genitive, " our love to Christ ; "
for the two suppose and interfuse each other.
St. Paul's usage, however, favours the former
interpretation (ch. xiii. 14 ; 1 Cor. xvi. 24).
Constraineth. The word means that it com."



122



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. v. 1—21.



presses ue, and therefore keeps us irresistibly
to one object (Luke xii. 50). That if one
died for all, then were all dead. This is an
unfortunate mistranslation and wrong read-
ing for that one died for aU, therefore all died.
What compels Paul to sacrifice himself to
the work of God for his converts is the
conviction, which he formed once for all at
his conversion, that One, even Christ, died on
behalf of all men (Eom. v. 15 — 19) a redeem-
ing death (ver. 21); and that, consequently,
in that deatli, all potentially died with him —
died to their life of sin, and rose to the life
of righteousness. The best comments on
this bold and concentrated phrase are — " I
died t» the Law that I miglit live to Christ ; "
"I have been crucified with Clirist" (Gal. ii.
19, 20) ; and, " Ye died, and your life has been
hidden with Christ in God" (Col. iii. .S).
"When Christ died, all humanity, of vvliioh he
was the federal Head, died potentially with
him to sin and selfisbness, as he fui-ther shows
in tlie next verso.

Ver. 15. — Unto themselvei. Tliat they
should live no longer the psychic, i.e. the
animal, selfish, egotistic life, but to tlieir
risen Saviour (Eom. xiv. 7 — 9 ; 1 Cor. vi. 19).

Ver. 16. — Know no man after the flesh. It
is a consequence of my death with Christ
that I have done with carnal, superficial,
earthly, external judgments according to the
appearance, and not according to the heart.
Yea, though we have known Christ after the
flesh. The word for "know" is different
from the one just used (olSa, scio ; ^yvaKo,
cngnovi), and may be rendered, " though we
have taken note of." The whole phrase,
■which has been interpreted in multitudes of
different ways, and has led to many different
hypotheses, must be understood in accordance
with the context. St. Paul is saying that he
has now renounced all mere earthly and
human judgments ; and he here implies that
the day has been (whether — which is a very
unlikely view — before his conversion, when
he looked on Christ as a " deceiver," or just
after his conversion, when possibly he may
only have known him partially as the Jewish
Messiah) when he knew Christ only in this
fleshly way; but henceforth he will know
him so no more. Probably this "knowing
Christ after the flesh " is a rebuke to those
members of the Christ party at Corinth
who may have boasted that they were
superior to all others because they had per-
sonally seen or known Christ — a spirit which
Christ himself not only discouraged (John
xvi. 7) but even rebuked (Matt. xii. 50). To
St. Paul Christ is now regarded as far above
all local, national, personal, and Jewish
limitations, and as the principle of spiritual
life in the heart of every Christian. In the
view which he took of his Lord St. Paul
henceforth has banished aU Jewish particu-



larism for gospel catholicity. He regardi
Christ, not in the light of earthly relation-
ships and conditions, but as the risen,
glorified, eternal, universal Saviour.

Ver. 17. — Therefore. If even a human,
personal, external knowledge of Christ is
henceforth of no sigiiificance, it follows that
til ere must have been a total change in all
relixtinns towards him. The historic fact of
such a changed relationship is indicated
clearly in John xx. 17. Mary Magdalene
was there lovingly taught that a "recognition
of Christ after the flesh," i.e. as merely a
human friend, was to be a thing of the past.
In Christ ; i.e. a Christian. For perfect faith
attains to mystic union with Christ. A new
creature ; rather, a new creation (GaL vi.
15). The phrase is borrowed from the labbis,
who used it to express the eondition of a
proselyte. But the meaning is not mere
Jewish arrogance and exclusiveness, but the
deep truth of spiritual regeneration and the
new birth (John iii. 3 ; Epli. ii. 10 ; iv. 23,
24; Col. iii. 3, etc.). Old things; literally,
the ancient things, all that belongs to the old
Adam. Behold. The word expresses the
writer's vivid renlization of the truth he is
uttering. All things. The whole sphere of
being, and therewith the whole aim and
character of life. The clause illustrates the
" new creation."

Ver. 18. — And all things are of God;
literally, Ijut all things (in this " new crea-
tion ") are from God. Who hath reconciled
us ; rather, who (by Christ's one offering of
himself) reconciled us to himself. We were
his enemies (Eom. v. 10; xi. 28), but, because
he was still our Friend and Father, he brought
us back to himself by Christ. The ministry
of reconciliation. The ministry which
teaches the reconciliation which he has
effected for us.

Ver. 19. — God was in Christ, reconciling
the world unto himself. This and the many
other passages of Scripture which always
represent the atonement as the work of the
blessed Trinity, and as being the result of
the love, not of the wrath, of God, ought to
have been a sufficient warning against the
hideous extravagance of those forensic
statements of the atonement which have
disgraced almost a thousand years of theo-
logy (Eom. V. 10; 1 John iv. 10). That
God's purpose of mercy embraced all man-
kind, and not an elect few, is again and
again stated in Scripture (see Col. i. 20).
Not imputing their trespasses unto them.
See this developed in Kom. xv. 5 — 8. Hath
entrusted unto us ; literally, who also de-
posited in US, as though it were some sacred
treasure.

Ver. 20. — Wow then. It is, then, on Christ's
behalf that we are ambassadors. This ex-
cludes all secondary aims. St. Paxil uses tba



at. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



123



same expresBion in Epb. yi. 20, adding with
fine contrast that he is " an ambassador in
fetters." As though God did heseech yon by
US ; rather, as if God were exhorting you by
our means. In Christ's stead ; rather, we, on
Christ's behalf, beseech you. Be ye reconciled
to God. This is the sense of the embassy.
The aorist implies an immediate acceptance
of the offer of reconciliation.

Ver. 21. — He hath made him to be sin for
us ; rather, he made ; he speaks with definite
reference to the cross. The expresBion is
closely analogous to that in , Gal. iii. 13,
where it is said that Christ has been " made
a curse for us." He was, as St. Augustine
8ays,"delictorum susceptor, non commissor."
He knew no sin; nay, he was the very
righteousness, holiness itself (Jer. xxiii. 6),
and yet, for our benefit, God made him to be
" sin " for us, in that he " sent him in the
likeness of sinful flesh and for sin " (Kom.
viii. 3). Many have understood the word
" sin " in the sense of sin offtring (Lev. v.
9, LXX,}; but that is a precarious applica-



tion of the word, which is not justified by
any other passage in the New Testament.
We cannot, as Dean Plumptre says, get
beyond the simple statement, which St.
Paul is content to leave in its unexplicable
mystery, " Christ identified with man's sin ;
man identified with Olirist's righteousness."
And thus, in Christ, God becomes Jehovah-
Tsidkenu, " the Lord our Righteousness "
(Jer. xxiii. 6). That we might be made the
righteousness of God in him ; rather, that wt
might become. The best comment on the
pregnant significance of this verse is Bom. i
16, 17, which is developed and explained in
so large a section of that great Bpistle (see
iii. 22—25 ; iv. 5—8 ; v. 19, etc.). In him
In his blood is a means of propitiation by
which the righteousness of God becomes
tlie righteousness of man (1 Cor. i. 30),
so that man is justified. The truth which
St. Paul thus develops and expresses is
stated by St. Peter and St. John in a
simpler and less theological form (1 Pet. ii.
22—24; IJohniii. 5),



HOMILBTICS.

Vers. 1—7. — Christian knowledge concerning the future tody of the good. "For we
know that if our earthly house," etc. Two things are to be noticed at the outset. 1.
Metaphorical representations of the body. The body is here spoken of under the figure
of a " tabernacle " or a tent, and of a vestment or clothing. These two things would
not be so distinct in the mind of the apostle as they are in ours, for both had the same
qualities of movahleness and protection. The " house " to which the apostle refers was
r.ot a building of bricks or stone, a superstructure that would be stationary, but a mere
tent to be carried about. 2. The implied necessity of the body. Paul's language implies
that the body is a clothing or protection. As a clothing, or protection, for the soul it
is necessary, both here and in the other world. The soul must have an organ where-
ever it is. Now what does the Christian know concerning the future body ?

I. He knows it will be better than the pkbsbnt. 1. It will be directly Divine.
" A building of God." The present body is from God, but it comes from him through
secondary instrumentalities. The future body will come direct, it will not be transmitted
from sire to son. 2. It will be fitted for a higher sphere. " In the heavens." The
present body is fitted for the earthly sphere, it is of the " earth, earthy." The future
will be fitted for the more ethereal, and celestial. 3. It will be more enduring.
" Eternal." This body is like the tent, temporary ; it has no firm foundation ; it is
shaken by every gust. We " perish before the moth." The future body will be eternal,
free from the elements of decay. 4. It will be more enjoyable. " For in this we groan,
earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven," etc. In
this body we "groan, being burdened." To what pains and disenses is the present body
subject I By implication the apostle states the future body will be free from all this,
for all that is mortal will be " swallowed up of life." In that body there will be no
groaning, no sighs or sorrows, no burden, no weight to depress the energies or to impede
progress. The future body will be more fitted to receive the high things of God, and
more fitted to communicate them also.

IL He knows he is now being divinely fitted fob the better bodt of thk
FUTUR E. " Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath
given unto us the earnest of the Spirit." Every seed has its own body ; it is the seed
that makes the body ; the organization does not produce the life, but the life the organi-
zation. And this spiritual life in man God is now preparing to pass into a higher body.
Just as the chrysalis is being fitted to struggle into an organization with higher appe-



124 THE SECOND EtlSTLE TO TBE CORINTHIANS, [ch. v. 1— 2L



tencieg, more exquisite in form, and with faculties that shall bear it into mid-heaven
When will you have this body ? When your soul has the life-energy to produce it.

Vers. 8 — 10. — 2%e philosophy of courage. " We are confident, I say," etc. Paul say»
we are courageous, or of "ood courage. Courage is often confounded with recklessness
of life, a brutal insensibility to danger. True courage always implies two things. 1.
The existence of unavoidable dangers. He who rushes into danger is not courageous,
but reckless. Paul had unavoidable dangers : " We are troubled on every side." 2.
True conviciionn of being. Ignorance of existence may make men reckless, but never
courageous. What was Paul's view of life ? (1) He regarded the body as the organ of
himself. He speaks of it as a " house," a " tabernacle," etc. (2) The soul he regards
as the personality of his being. " We that are in this tabernacle," etc. The soul, not
the body, is the " I," or self. (3) He regarded death as a mere change in the mode
of his being. Death changes the house and the garment ; it is not the extinction of
the tenant or the wearer. (4) He regarded heaven as the perfection of his being.
" The house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens." The courage of which the
apostle here speaks seems to have been based on three things.

I. A consciousness that his death would not endanger the intbrbsts of his being.
Notice : 1. His view of the interests of being. It was being " present with the Lord."
2. His view of the bearing of death upon the interests of being. He regarded it as the
flight of the spirit into the presence of the Lord. " Absent from the body, present with
the Lord." A view of death this antagonistic to the ideas of purgatory, annihilation,
soul-sleep. 3. His state of mind under the influence of these thougtits. " Willing
lather to be absent from the body."

II. A couciousneBS that death would not destroy the great purposes of being.
It is the characteristic of a rational being that he has some purpose in life — the pur-
pose is that in which he lives, it makes life valuable to him. To a man who has no
purpose in life or has lost his purpose, life is deemed of little worth. What was Paul's
purpose in life? "Wherefore we labour, that, whether present or absent, we may be
accepted of him." Is not this purpose sublimely reasonable ? If there be a God, doei
not reason teach that to please him should be the supreme purpose of all intelligent
creatures ? Now, Paul felt that death would not destroy this purpose. It destroys
the purpose of the voluptuous, avaricious, etc. ; and hence to them it is terrible. But
it does not destroy the chief pnrpose of the Christian. In all worlds and times his
chief purpose will bo to be " accepted of him."

III. A consciousness that death would not prevent the rewards of being. " We
must all appear [or, ' be made manifest '] before the judgment-seat of Christ." Success,
while it should never be regarded either as a rule of conduct or a test of character,
must ever have an influence on the mind of man in every department of labour. Non-
success discourages. Paul felt that his labour here would appear and be recognized
hereafter. " We must all appear," etc. 1. Every one shall receive the recompense of
labour after death. " Must all appear." None absent. 2. Every one shall receive a
reward for every deed. " That every one may receive the things done in his body."
No lost labour. With this consciousness we may well be courageous amidst all the
dangers here and in view of the great hereafter. Dread of death is a disgrace to the
Christian. " If," says Cicero, " I were now disengaged from my cumbrous body, and on
my way to Elysium ; and some superior being should meet me in my flight and make
me the offer of returning and remaining in my body, I should, without hesitation, reject
the offer ; so much should I prefer going into Elysium to be with Socrates and Plato
and all the ancient worthies, and to spend my time in converse with them." How
much more should the Christian desire to be " absent from the body, and present with
the Lord"!

Vers. 11 — 18. — Man in Christ a new man. " For whether we be beside ourselves,"
etc. To be " in Christ " is to be in his Spirit, in his character, to live in his ideas,
principles, etc. Such a man is " a new creature."

I. The man in Christ has a new imperial impulse. " The love of Christ constraineth
us." Whether the " love of Christ " here means his love to us or our love for him is of
no practical import. The latter implies the former; his love is the flame that



OH. T. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 125

kindles ours. Now, this love was Paul's dominant passion ; it " constrained " him ; it
carried him on lilte a resistless torreut ; it was the regnant impulse. Two thoughts in
relation to this new imperial impulse. 1. It is incomprehensible to those viho possess
it not, " Whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God," etc. Probably Paul appeared as
mad to his contemporaries. They saw him brave the greatest perils, oppose the greatest
powers, make the greatest sacrifices. What was the principle that moved him to all ?
This they could not understand. Had it been ambition or avarice, they could have
understood it. But " the love of Christ " they knew nothing of; it was a new thing in the
world. Only the man who has it can understand it ; love alone can interpret love.
2. It arises from reflection on the death of Christ. It is not an inbred passion, not a blind
impulse, not something divinely transferred into the heart. No ; it comes " because
we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead." Paul assumes as an
undoubted fact that Christ died for all. Because of this fact he concludes : (1) That the
whole world were in a ruined condition : " Then were all dead." (2) That this fact
should inspire all to act with the same sacrificing spirit as Christ. " He died for all,
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him."

II. The man in Christ has a new social standaed. " Henceforth we know no man
after the flesh." The world has numerous standards by which it judges men, birth,
wealth, office, etc. To a man filled and fired with love to Christ these are nothing.
He estimates man by his rectitude, not by his rank ; by his spirit, not by his station ; b/
his principles, not by his property. Paul might have said — I once knew men after the
flesh, Jew or Gentile, rich or poor, learned or ignorant ; but now I know them so no
more ; I see them now in the light of the cross, sinners dead in trespasses and sins ; " Yea,
though we have known Christ after the flesh," etc., I think no more of his body, but of
his mind, not of his station, but of his Spirit. The fact that this is the true standard
serves ; 1. As a test by which to try our own religion. 2. As a guide for us in the pro-
motion of Christianity. 3. As a principle on which to form our friendships with men.
4. As a rule to regulate our social conduct.

III. The man in Christ has a new spiritual histoet. " Therefore if any man be in
Christ, he is a new creature." In what sense can this change be called a creation ?
1. It is the production of a new thing. This passion for Christ is a new thing in the
universe. 2. It is the production of a new thing hy the agency of Qod. Creation is the
work of God. 3. It is the production of a new thing according to a Divine plan. The
almighty Maker works by plan in all.

IV. The man in Christ has a new STANDiNa. " All things are of God, who hath
reconciled us," etc. That is, all things pertaining to this new creation. The great
want of man is reconciliation to God. Man's alienation or apostasy from his Maker
is the sin of all his sins, and the source of all his miseries. His reconciliation is not
the means to his salvation; it is his salvation. Friendship with him is heaven.
On the other hand, alienation is hell. A river cut from the fountain dries up ;
a branch cut from the tree withers and dies ; a planet cut from the sun rushes
into ruiu. Separate a soul from God its Fountain, its Boot, its Centre, and it dies —
dies to all that makes existence tolerable. Such, then, is what Christianity does for us.

Vers. 19, 20. — Qod'a work in Christ. " To wit, that God was in Christ," etc. God
is a great Worker. He is the eternal Fountain of life in unremitting flow. He is
essentially active, the mainspring of all activity in the universe but that of sin. There
are at least four organs through which he works — material laws, animal instincts, moral
mind, and Jesus Christ. By the first he leads on the great revolutions of inanimate
nature in all its departments ; by the second he preserves, guides, and controls all the
sentient tribes that populate the earth, the air, and the sea; by the third, through the
laws of reason and the dictates of conscience, he governs the vast empire of mind ; and
by the fourth, viz. Christ, he works out the redemption of sinners in our world.
There is no more difficulty in regarding him in the one Person, Christ, for a certain
work than there is in regarding him as being in material nature, animal instinct,
or moral mind. The words lead us to make three remarks concerning God's work in
Christ.

L It is a work of ebconcilino humanity to God. " God was in Christ recon-
ciling the world unto himself," The work of reconciling implies two things — enmity



126 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. t. 1—21,

on the side of one of the parties, and a change of mind in one of the i)arties. The enmity
here is not on God's part — he is love ; but on man's. The " carnal mind is enmity with
God." Nor is the change on God's part. He cannot change, he need not change. He
could never become more loving and merciful. The. change needed is on man's part, and
on man's exclusively. Paul speaks of the world being reconciled to God, not of God to
the world. The " world ; " not a section of the race, but all mankind.

II. It is a work involving the bbmission of sins. "Not imputing [reckoning]
their trespasses unto them." The reconciled man is no longer reckoned guilty.
Three facts will throw light on this. The state of enmity towards God is : 1. A
state of sin. There is a virtue in disliking some characters, but it is evermore a
sin to dislike God, for he is the All-good. 2. A state of sin liable to punishment.
Indeed, sin is its own punishment. 3. In reconciliation, the enmity being removed,
the punishment is obviated. What is pardon? A separating of man from bis sins
and their consequences. This God does in Christ.

III. It is a work in which genuinb MnnsTEBB abb engaged. " He hath committed
unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye recon-
ciled to God." Observe: 1. The j)osi<io» of the true minister. He acts on behalf of
Christ, and stands in " Christ's stead." 2. The earnestness of the true minister. " We
pray you."

From the whole we observe concerning this work : 1. That it is a work of
unbounded mercy. Whoever heard the offended party seeking the friendship of the
offender ? 2. It is a work essential to human happiness. In the nature of the case
there is no happiness without this reconciliation. 3. It is a work exclusively of moral
influence. No coercion on the one hand, no angry denunciations on the other, can do it ;
it can only be effected by the logic of love. 4. It is a work that must be gradual.
Mind cannot be forced ; there must be reflection, repentance, resolution,

Ver. 21. — Christ made gin. " For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin ; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him." " Him who knew no
sin he made to be sin on our behalf; that we might become the righteousness of Gtod in
him " (Revised Version). Prom this passage we gather three wonderful truths.

I. That Christ was absolutely sinless. " Who knew no sin." Intellectually, of
course, he knew all the sin in the world ; but he never experienced it, he was absolutely
free from it. 1. He was " without sin," although he lived in a sinful world. Of all
the millions who have been here he alone moved amongst the world and received no
taint of moral contamination. 2. He was " without sin," although he was powerfully
tempted. Had he been untemptable there would have been no virtue in his freedom
from sin, and had there been no tempter there would have been nothing praiseworthy
in his sinlessness. " He was tempted like as we are, yet without sin."

II. That, though sinless, Christ was in some sense made sin by Gtod. " He hath
made him to be sin for us." What meaneth this? 1. It cannot mean that God made
the sinless One a sinner. This would be impossible. No one can create a moral
character for another. 2. It cannot mean that God imputed to him the sin of the
world, and punished him for the world's sin. The idea of literal substitution is
repugnant to reason and unsustained by any honest interpretation of God's Holy Word.
The atonement of Christ consists, not in what he said, did, or suffered, but in what he
was. He himself is the Atonement, the Reconciler. What, then, does it mean ? Two
facts may throw some light. (1) That God sent Christ into a world of sinners to
become closely identified with them. He was related to sinners, mingled with them, ato
and drank with them, and was in the community, counted as one of them. " He was
numbered with the transgressors." (2) That God permitted this woild of sinners to
treat Christ as a sinner. He was calumniated, persecuted, insulted, murdered. God
permitted all this, and what he permits is, in Scripture language, often ascribed to him.

HI. That the sinless One was thus made sin in order that men might participate in.
God's biohteousness. " That we might be made the righteousness of God in him.''
Never did Divine moral excellence or the righteousness of God shine out with such
glory to man as in the sufferings which Christ endured in consequence of this connection
with wnners. As the stars can only show themselves at night, and as aromatic plaati



CH. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS 127

can only emit their precious odour by pressure, so the highest moral virtues can only
come out by suffering and battling with the wrong. "What self-sacrificing love, what
unconquerable attachment to truth, what loyalty to the iniinite Father, what sublime
heroism of love, was here exhibited in the incarnation, the beneficent deeds, and over-
whelming sufferings of Jesus 1

HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORa

Vers. 1 — 10. — Assurance of eternal life } faith and its effects. Death intervenes
between the present state of afSiotion and the glory of heaven, but death is only the
destruction of the body now existing. It is not an end to bodily form and life.
This is no speculation of the apostle's ; it is an assurance, " for we know " that if this
earthly tent be destroyed, it will be followed by an enduring habitation — a mansion, not
a tabernacle. In the earthly body he groans, not because it is a body, but because it is
flesh and blood suffevins under the effects of sin, and hence he longs for the "house
which is from heaven." It is a heaven for body as well as soul that he so ardently
desires. To be bodiless even in glory is repulsive to his nature, since it would be naked-
ness. Death is repugnant. The separation of soul and body, however, is only temporary ;
it is not for unclothing, but for a better clothing, one suited to the capacities of spirit.
If the fourth verse repeats the second verse, it enlarges the idea and qualifies it by
stating the reason why he would be " clothed upon," viz. " that mortality might be
swallowed up of life." And this longing is no mere instinct or natural desire, but a
feeling inspired of God, who " hath wrought us for the selfsame thing." A Divine
preparation was going on in this provisional tabernacle — a training of the spirit for the
vision of Christ and a training of the body for the immortal companionship of the spirit.
An " earnest " or pledge of this was already in possession. The sufferings sanctified by
the Spirit, the longing, the animation of hope, were so many proofs and tokens of await-
ing blessedness. How could he be otherwise than confideut ? Yea; he is " always
confident." Though now confined to the body, yet it is ahome that admits of afiections
and loving fellowships ; and though it necessitates absence from the Lord and the house
of " many mansions," nevertheless it is a home illumined by faith. " For we walk by
faith, not by sight." The home is in the midst of visible objects that exercise our sense
of sight, but our Christian walk, or movement from one world to another, is not directed
by the eye, but by faitb, the sense of the invisible. We know what are the functions of
the eye. If we did not, the antithesis would convey no meaning. The eye receives
impressions from external things, communicates them to the soul, is a main organ in
developing thought and feeling, acts on the imagination and the will, and is continually
adding something to the contents of the inward nature. Faith is like it as a medium
of reception, unlike it in all else. Faith is not conversant with appearances. We do
not see Christ in his glory ; we see him (using the term figuratively) in his Word by
means of the Spirit ; and this seeing is faith. How do we know when we have faith ?
It attests itself in our capacity to see the path leading to eternal glory, and it enables us
to walk therein. The path is from one home to another — from the home on the footstool
to the home by the throne of Christ, and faith has the reality and vigour of a home
sentiment. So strong and assuring is St. Paul's confidence that he prefers to depart and
be with Christ. " At home in the body ; " yes, but it is a sad home at best, and trial
and afBiction had begun to make it dreary to him. To die is to be with the Lord, and
he was " willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be present with the Lord."
Whether absent or present, at home or away from home, we labour that we " may be
accepted of him." To make himself and his life acceptable to Christ was paramount to
every other desire ; to labour was his absorbing thought. Such an energetic soul as his
must have felt that its energies were immorfe,l. There was no selfishness in his hope
of heaven, no longing to be freed from work, no yearning for the luxury of mere rest.
It was to be with Christ, for Christ was his heaven. If this was his confidence, if he
was labouring imtiringly to be acceptable to the Lord Jesiis, was he understood and
appreciated as Christ's apostle and servant among men? The burden of life w&s
not the work he did, but the obstacles thrown in his way — the slanders he had to bear,
the persecutions open and secret that followed him everywhere. He thinks of the
" judgment-seat of Christ." It will be a judicial inquiry into works done and " every



128 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. v. 1 -21



one " shall " receive [receive back] the things done in his body." Measure for measure,
whatsoever has been done here shall return to every one. The individuality of the
judgment, the complete unveiling of personal character, the correspondence between the
reward and the good done on earth and between the retribution and the evil done here,
he brings out distinctly. This was with him a fixed habit of thought. " Whatsoever
a man soweth that shall he also reap." How near the two worlds are — the growing
fi4d here, the harvest in another existence hereafter ! But observe another idea. " We
must all appear," we must be made manifest, every one shown in his true character.
Not only will there be recompense as a judicial procedure, but a revelation " in the day
when God sh.dl judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ." St. Paul had vindicated
himself again and again from the charges made agamst him; but the battle was now
going on, nor was there any sign of its speedy abatement. It was natural that he
should have the idea of manifestation prominent in his mind, since we all think of the
future world very muoli according to some peculiarity in our experience on earth. How
engrossed, heart and soul, in his apostleship is beautifully indicated by the fact that
heaven itself was the heaven of St. Paul as the apostle of Christ. The sufferings of the
man are never mentioned. First and last, we have the autobiography of an apostle,
and hence, looking forward to the glory to be revealed, the supreme felicity is that he
will appear in his true character as the Lord's servant. — L.

Vers. 11 — 21. — Person and ministry of the apostle further considered ; his work <u an
ambassador. How was he conducting this ministry, of which he had spoken so much
and had yet more to say ? It was in full view of accountability to the day of judgment.
" Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men," adding motives to affect
them, and not remaining content with arguments to convince their understandings.
And in this work he now felt Grod's approval ; before he had declared, " we are confi-
dent," and he reafiSrms it in the words, " we are made manifest unto God." Every
hour he stood at the bar of his conscience an acquitted man, and this conscience was a
manifestation of God. Honestly was he striving to please God, as honestly labouring
to save them, and in this spirit he was ever seeising to manifest himself to their con-
sciences. If he were a temporizer, a man-pleaser, he might adopt worldly arts and
captivate them. No ; he would address their consciences ; the best in them should
come to his side or he must lose them. " Savour of life unto life " or " savour of death
unto death ; " no other alternative. But do not misunderstand us. Commendation is
not our object. If we have, as we trust, manifested ourselves to your consciences, then
let your consciences speak in our behalf, and let their voices boast in this — that we are
truthful in the sight of God and man. This is the way to answer our enemies who
"glory in appearance and not in heart." Suffer he would rather than be wrongly
vindicated. IJo it in the highest way or not at all. " Your cause " is the great interest.
No doubt we seem " beside ourselves," or we may appear " sober," but you may boast
of this — " it is for your cause." And in this devotion to your well-being what motive
presses with weight enough to make us endure all things for your sakes? " The love
of Christ constraineth us." And wherein is this love so signally demonstrated as to
embody and set forth all else that he did? It is love in death. Looking at this
Divine death, we form this judgment or reach this conclusion, that he " died for all "
because " all were dead — " dead under the Law of God, dead in trespasses and sing, dead
legally, morally, spiritually. Nothing less than such an atoning death for all men — so
it seems to us the apostle meant — could exert on him this constraining influence. And
how should this influence operate ? " They which live should not henceforth live unto
themselves." The very self had been redeemed by Christ's vicarious death ; body, soul,
and spirit had been bought with a price, and the price was Christ's blood ; and with such
a constraining motive, the most potent that the Holy Ghost could bring to bear on the
human mind, how could men live unto themselves ? If, indeed, the constraining
power had its legitimate effect, only one life could result, a life consecrated to " him
which died for them and rose again." If, therefore, all being dead, one died for all,
that all might live in freedom from selfishness and be the servants of him who had
redeemed them from sin and death, we caj miow henceforth no man after the flesh.
The very purpose of Christ's death was that the fleshly life of sin might pass out of
view (might be covered over and thus disappear from sight), and another life be entered



CH. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS^ 129

on, a life in the redeeming Christ. Admitting that this passage presents the moral
aspects of Christ's death and the obligations consequent thereupon as they act on moral
sentiment, yet the fundamental idea of the apostle is that Christ stood in the stead of
sinners, took their guilt upon himself, and made an offering of his life for their rescue.
To strengthen this doctrine, he says that, though he once knew Christ after the flesh
(as a mere man), he knew him now in a very different way. We are not to suppose
that he had seen him in his earthly life, but merely that he knew of him. St. Paul,
after his conversion, had an experimental knowledge of Christ as his Redeemer through
the sacrificial death of the cross ; nor was there any room in his heart for moral senti-
ment, nor any spiritual force in Christ's teaching and example, nor ground for any trust
or hope, till he as " chief of sinners " had realized the righteousness of God in the
atoning blood of Calvary. Such a change was a creation. He was " a new creature,"
and whoever experienced this power of the Lord's death was a new creature. Old
things had passed away — the old self in taste and habit, the old unbelief rooted in the
fleshly mind, the old worlilliness — and all things had become new. No wonder that
"all things" had become "new;" for "all things" pertaining to this change in its
cause, agency, instrumentalities, "are of God." Strong language this, which sounds
even yet to many as the rhetoric of excited fancy ; but not stronger than the blessed
reality it represents. Nay ; words cannot equal the fact. A man may overstate his
own experience of Divine grace; never can he exaggerate the grace itself. " All things
are of God ; " and how is this fact manifested ? In the method of reconciliation which
is God's act through Christ. " Who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ."
To understand what is implied in reconciliation, we must remember that much more is
involved in it than the moral state of a sinner's mind toward God. The enmity of the
carnal man has to be subdued, and in this sense he is " a new creature," but the possi-
bility of this creation rests upon au antecedent fact, viz. a changed relation to the
violated Law of God. What has been done for him must take precedence, as to time, of
what is done in him. We must know how God as Sovereign stands to us, and by what
means the sovereignty co-operates with the fatherhood of God, before we can accept
the oifered boon of mercy. There must be a reason why God should pardon in advance
of a reason why we .-should seek pardon. A principle of righteousness must be estab-
lished as preliminary and essential to the sentiment of Christianity, since it is impossible
for us by the laws of the mind to appreciate the power of any great sentiment unless
we have previously felt it as connected with a great principle. " Whom God set forth
to be a Propitiation, through laith, by bis bluoil, to show his righteousness, because of
the passing over of the sins done aforetime, in the forbearance of God ; for the showing,
1 say, of his righteousness at this present season : that he might himself be just, and the
Justifier of him that hath faith in Jesus" (Rom. iii. 25, 26, Revised Version). There
is a "ministry of reconciliation" because "God was in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing [reckoning] their trespasses unto them." Forgiveness through
Christ, the Propitiation, is free to all who believe in him. Nor are we left in doubt as to
the substance of our belief. It is faith in Christ, God in Christ, the Reconciler, who pardons
our sins and makes us new creatures in hitn. To make this reconciliation known, to
demonstrate its infinite excellence as the method of grace, to show its Divine results in
the very men who proclaimed the gospel, Christ had instituted the ministry, and its
title was, "ministry of reconciliation." Recall, Corinthians, what I have said in
defence of my apostleship. Recall my sufferings in your behalf. See the reason of it
all. Whom are these factions Judaizers fighting ? Whom did those beasts at Bphesus
try to destroy ? Who is this man, troubled on every side, perplexed, persecuted, cast
down, dying everywhere, dying always? This is the character he sustains, the office
he fills — an " ambassador for Christ." Has he manifested himself to your consciences ?
Does he look forward to the day of judgment as a day of revelation as well as a day of
reward and punishment? Know we not a man, not even Christ, after the flesh!
Behold your minister, your servant, as an " ambassador," commissioned to offer you the
terms of reconciliation. "We pray you in Christ's stead [on behalf of Christ], be ye
reconciled to God." Nothing remains to be done but for you to accept the offered
reconciliation. And he enforces ttiis idea by stating that he who "died for all," since
" all were dead," had been made " sin for us, w ho knew no sin." " Holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from siimers, and made higher than the heavens ; " yet he w<is " made

n. CORINTHIANS. K



130 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOBINTHIANS. [oh. v. 1—21.

to be sin for us," made a substitute or ransom, an oifering, whereby the wrath of God
was turned away. Eeconoiliation is accomplished not by our repentance and confession
of sin, nor by any suffering on our part, nor by any merit of our work, but altogether
by the death of the Lord Jesus Christ in our behalf. God's righteousness is thus set
forth. The plan of salvation changed nothing in the character of Almighty God.
Neither his righteousness nor his love was modifit'd integrally by Christ's atonement.
" God is righteous," " God is love," are no truer facts now than they eternally were.
What the gospel teaches is that the righteousness and the love of God have assumed
special forms of manifestation and operative activity through the Lord Jesus Christ. It
is righteousness, not in the normal relation of Law to the original transgressor, but in an
instituted relation of Law to one who took the place of the transgressor. It is love as
grace, the form of love that provided for the righteousness on which St. Paul lays such
an emphasis. It is not a change in the Law, but in the administration of Law, and the
glory of it lies in the fact that the Divine government presents in this higher form the
resplendent spectacle of that progression from the " natural " to the " spiritual," wliich
St. Paul discusses in his argument on the resurrection. Whatever obstacles existed in
the way of this sublime advance have been removed by Christ. " Mercy and truth "
have their existence as attributes of the Divine nature; they have "met together."
" Righteousness and peace " are not ta be confounded, but they have " kissed each
other" — L.

Ver. 6. — " Absent from, the Lord? To those disciples and apostles who were with the
Lord Jesus during his earthly ministry, the separation which commenced upon his
ascension must have been painful indeed. In the case of Paul, however, the language
employed in this passage scarcely seems so naturaL But we learn from the record of his
sentiments what ought to be to all Christians their first thought, their governing
principle, viz. their relation to Jesus Christ. The earthiy state of all such is a state of
absence from the Lord — a fact not to be grieved over, but to be recognize 1 and felt.

I. This absence is not spiritual, bct BODn-Y. His own word is fulfilled, " A little
while, and ye shall not see me." The exclamation of his people is verified, " Him, not
having seen, we love."

II. This absence is appointed by Divine wisdom and lovb. It cannot be regarded
as a matter of chance or of fate. It is the will of him who most loves us and who
most cares for us, which is apparent in this provision.

III. There is a BBNEncBNT purpose in this absence. Such was the obvious
intention of our Saviour himself. " It is good for you," he said, " that I go away."
His aim was to lead his people into a life of faith, and to excite our confidence in
himself who has gone to prepare a place for us.

IV. There are certain dangers involved in this absence. There is danger lest,
separated from our Lord, we should grow worldly and carnal, lest our love to Jesus
should wax cold, lest we should magnify ourselves, lest we should be ashamed of a
religion whose Head is not visibly among us.

V. Yet there are compensations in this absence. It is intended to fortify and
perfect the truly Christian character. It will make the meeting, when it takes place,
more delightful and welcome.

VI. What exercises are suggested by this absence ? 1. Remembrance of Christ.
2. Faith in Christ. 3. Communion with Christ. 4. Fidelity to Christ in his absence.
5. Anticipation of his speedy return.

VII. The termination of this period of absence is at hand. Those who live
until the Lord's return shall welcome him to his inheritance. Others must be absent
from Christ until they are absent from the body, when they shall be ^^ present " with the
Lord."— T.

Ver. 7. — ITie walk of faith. Life is a pilgrimage which men undertake and accom-
plish upon very different principles and to very different results and ends. In this
parenthesis St. Paul very succinctly and very impressively describes the nature of that
pilgrimage which he had adopted and with which he was satisfied.

I. The walk with which that or the Christian is contrasted. This, which is
that of the unenlightened and unrenewed, is the wa'k by sight ; i.e. by repressing the



OH. T. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 131

^spiritual nature and walking, by the light which earth offers, by the mere guidance ol
the senses, by the influence of society, the approval and esteem of men, by considera-
tions drawn from earth and limited to earth. This is a course of life in which there is
no satisfaction, no safety, and no blessed prospect.

II. The CHARA0TEBISTIC3 OP THE WALK OF FAITH. Faith in itself is neutral ; its
excellence depends upon its object. The Christian regulates his cour.se through this life
of temptation, danger, and discipline by: 1. Faith in the existence of God, the God
who possesses all moral excellences as his attributes. 2. Faith in Providence ; i.e. in
the personal interest and care of him who is called Friend and Father. 3. Faith in
God as a Saviour, which is faith in Christ, the salvation of the Lord revealed to man.
1. Faith in a righteous and authoritative law. 5. Faith in ever-present spiritual aid —
guidance, protection, bounty, etc. 6. Faith in Divine promises, by which the pilgrim is
assured that he shall reach home at last.

III. The encouragements to undertake and to pbrsevbbb in the walk of
FAITH. 1. It is the one principle enjoined throughout revelation, from the day of
Abraham, the father of the faithful, down to the apostolic age. 2. The possibility of
the walk by faith has been proved by the example of the great and the good who have
gone before us (vide Heb. xi.). 3, To those who live by faith life has a meaning and
dignity which otherwise cannot possibly attach to it. 4. Faith can sustain amidst the
tiials and sorrows of earth. 5. And faith is the blossom of which the vision of the
glorified Saviour shall be the heavenly and immortal fruit. — T.

Ver. 14. — The love of Christ. Every quality met in the Lord Jesus which could
adapt him to accomplish the work which he undertook on behalf of our human race.
But if one attribute must be selected as peculiarly and pre-eminently characteristic of
him, if one word rather than another rises to our lips when we speak of him, that
attribute, that word, is love,

I. The objects of Chbist's love. Look at his earthly life and ministry, and the
comprehensive range within which the love of Jesus operates becomes at once and
gloriously obvious. 1. His friends. Of this fact — Christ's love to his friends — we have
abundant proof: " Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends." 2. His enemies. This is more wonderful, yet the truth of what the
apostle says is undeniable : " While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us." And we
cannot forget his prayer offered for his enemies as they nailed him to the cross : " Father,
forgive them." 3. All mankind. During his ministry the Lord Jesus was gracious to
all with whom he came into contact. His aim was by the bands of love to draw all
men unto himself, that they might rest and live in his Divine and mighty heart.

IL The pboofs or Chbist's love. The great tacts of his ministry and mediation are
evidences of his benevolence. 1. His advent.

" Nothing brought him from above-
Nothing but redeeming love."

2. His ministry. He went about doing good, animated by the mighty principle of love
to man. Every sickness he healed, every demon he expelled, every sinner he pardoned,
was a witness to the love of Christ. 3. His death. His was the love " stronger than
death ; " for not only could not death destroy it, death gave it a new life and power in
the world and over men. 4. His prevailing intercession and brotherly care.

III. The oharaotbristics of Chbist's love. 1. It is sympathizing and tender,
"passing the love of women." 2. It is thoughtful and wise, ever providing for the
true welfare of those to whom it is revealed. 3. It is forbearing and patient, otherwise
it might often have been checked and repressed. 4. It is self-sacrificing, counting
nothing too great to be given up in order to secure its ends. 5. It is fai th ful : " Having
loved his own, he loved them even unto the end." 6. It is unquenchable and ever-
lasting : " Who can separate us from the love of Christ ? " — T.

Ver. 14. — 2%« constraint of Christ's love. The apostle represents the Saviour's love,
not merely as something to be admired and enjoyed, but as something which is to act
as a spiritual force. He experienced it as the supreme power over his own life, and he
had confidence in it as the principle which should renew and bless the world.



132 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. t. 1—21,

I. The nature of this consteaint. Men are influenced by many and various
motives, some lower and some higher. Their natural instincts and impulses, their
interests, tlieir reaard for public opinion and their ambition, the laws of the land, — these
are among the admitted and powerful inducements to human conduct. Bat these are not
the highest motives, and are unworthy of the nature and ]iossibilities of man, unless in
conjunction with something better. Even tlie sacred obligation of duty is insufficient.
But Christ's love in his redemptive work, revealed to us in the gospel, is a moral and
spiritual force of vast power. It awakens gratitude, love, devotion, obedience. It is
the universal Christian motive. He who does not feel it, however correct his creed and
conduct, is not in the proper sense of the term a Christian. Happy they who live under
its sweet and constant constraint !

II. The direction of this constraint. Physical power is of two kinds— it is either
energy or resistance ; e.g. the ocean and the dyke, the powder and the cannon, the steam
and the boiler. As with physical, so with moral power. 1. Christ's love acts by way
of restraint. It withholds those who experience it from self-indulgence, from worldliness,
and from other sins to which men are naturally prone, and from which only a Divine
power can deliver. 2. It acts by way of iTOjraZse, ia<luoing to the imitation of Jesus
in character and conduct ; to obedience sucli as he enjuins when he says, " If ye love
me, keep my commandments ; " to consecrfction such as Paul exemplified when he
said, " We live unto the Lord."

III. The bffioact op this constraint. This depends upon a just interpretation of
the passage. Were it our love to Christ which is imputed, this would be a feeble and
vacillating motive ; but it is something far greater and better, viz. Christ's love to us.
The power of this motive may be seen in the life of every faithful friend of Jesus; e.g.
in the apostles, as Paul, Peter, John ; in the confessors and martyrs and reformers ; in
the missionaries and philanthropists, etc. It may be seen in the dangers braved, the
opposition encountered, the persecutions suffered, the efforts undertaken and persevered
in. What of noble and beautiful and beneficent conduct has not this Divine motive
proved able to inspire! Greater deeds and more heroic sufferings than the love of
Christ has accounted for, the annals of mankind do not record. It is to this motive
that we must look for all that in the future shall bless our common humanity. What
nothing inferior can effect the love of Christ will certainly prove powerful to
accomplish. — T.

Ver. 18. — " The ministry of reconciliation." Every good man is a peacemaker.
Both unconsciously by his character and disposition, and consciously and actively by
his efforts, he composes differences and promotes concord and amity among his fellow-
men. The Christian minister, however, goes deeper when he aims at securing harmony
between God and man. And he purposes to effect this reconciliation, not by the use of
ordinary persuasion, but by the presentation of the gospel of Christ.

I. The Christian ministet presumes the need of reconciliation. 1. There is a
moral Ruler and a moral law, righteous and authoritative. 2. Against this Ruler men
have rebelled, they have broken the law, and thus introduced enmity and conflict.
3. Divine displeasure has thus been incurred, and Divine penalties, by which just dis-
pleasure is expressed.

II. The Chbistian ministet is authorized by him who alone can introducb
EBOONOILIATION. God is the greater, and not only so, he is the wronged, offended
party. If any overtures for reconciliation are to be made, they must proceed from him.
He must provide the basis of peace and he must commission the heralds of peace.

III. The Christian ministry proclaims the Mediator of reconciliation. The
Lord Jesus has every qualification which can be desired in an efficient Mediator. He
partakes the nature of God and of man ; he is appointed and accepted by the Divine
Sovereign ; he has effected by his sacrifice a work of atonement or reconciliation ; his
Spirit is a Spirit of peace. And in fact he has " made peace," removing all obstacles on
God's side and providing for the removal of all on man's.

IV. The Christian ministry consists in the offer of reconciliation. It is a
moral and not a sacerdotal ministry; it is experimental, being entrusted to those- who
are themselves reconciled ; it is a ministry accompanied with supernatural power, even
the energy of the Spirit of God ; it is an authoritative ministiv, which men are not at



OH. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 133

liberty to disregard or despise ; it is an effectual ministry, for those who discharge it
faithfully are unto many the " savour of life unto life." — T.

Ver. 20. — " Ambassadors for Christ." Even among the members of the Corinthian
Church there were those who had offended the Lord by their inconsistency and who
needed to be reconciled. How much more was and is this true of mankind at large !
There is no denying the need of a gospel and of a ministry of reconciliation.

I. Who are Christ's ambassadors ? Probably the language is most justly applicable
to the apostles only, inasmuch as their commission and credentials were altogether
special. An ambassador owes his importance, not to himself, but to the power he
represents, the message he bears. The preachers of Christ are all heralds, if they
cannot be designated ambassadors. They may learn hence the dignity of their office
and their personal unworthiness and insufficiency, and they may be admonished as to
the imperative duty of fidelity.

II. By what court are these ambassadors commissioned ? They are the ministers
of the King of heaven, and their authority is that of the King's Son. Thus their
mission is one entrusted by a superior power and authority ; ani! not only so, it is from
an offended and outraged power. This appears when we consider —

III. To WHOM these ambassadors are sent. Properly speaking, an ambassador is
one accredited to a power sovereign and equal to that from whom he comes. But in
this case the resemblance fails in this respect, inasmuch as the ministers of the gospel
address themselves to offenders, to rebels, to those who cannot treat with Heaven upon
equal terms, or any terms of right.

IV. Whose stjbstitdtes are these ambassadors ? They act " on Christ's behalf,"
" in Christ's stead." The Lord himself first came upon an embassage of mercy. He
has entrusted to his apostles, and in a sense to all his ministers, the office and trust of
acting as his representatives, in so far as they publish the declaration and offer of Divine
mercy.

v. What is the commission which these ambassadors are bent to execute ? It
is an office of mercy. Their duty is to publish the tidings of redemption, the offer of
pardon, and themselves to urge and to entreat men that they accept the gospel and
thus enjoy the blessings of reconciliation with God. — T.

Vers. 1 — 9. — 27ie two bodies of the saint. I. The body that now is. 1, Praii. 2.
Perishing. 3. Often a burden. 4. Frequently a temptation. 5. Not helpful to spiritual
life. 6. Subject to many pains. 7. Debased.

II. The body that shall be. 1. Eternal. (Ver. 1.) Having no tendencies towards
decay, no marks of coming death. A body of li/e. Stamped with the eternalness of
God. 2. Heavenly. (Ver. 1.) The first body is of the earth, earthy ; the second body
is spiritual and heavenly in origin and character. Capable of heavenly joys. Pitted for
heavenly service. Pree from earthly weaknesses, pains, and soil. 3. From Ood.
(Ver. 1.) The present body is this in a certain sense, but it has passed through the
hands of the devil. The resurrection-body shall be of God and only of God, his
unmarred workmanship. It shall be like the glorified body united to Deity in the
person of Jesus Christ : " Who shall fashion anew the body of our humiliation, that it
may be conformed to the body of his glory " (Phil. iii. 21).

III. The saint's condition whilst in the earthly body. Frequently a condition
of sorrow. " We that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened " (ver. 4). There
are (1) the ordinary affiictions which befall mankind ; (2) the special chastisements of
God inflicted for the saint's welfare, but still painful; (3) the sense of living in a strange
country, not in his own — uncongenial surrotmdings ; (4) struggles against temptations :
the presence and power of hated sin.

IV. The saint's assurance op the heavenly body. 1. Revelation. 2. Preparation.
"He that wrought us for this very thing "(ver. 5). 3. The Spirit's witness. We have
the " earnest " of the Spirit, which is a pledge of the fulness of the Spirit (ver. 5). In
the next life we shall be dominated by the Spirit ; shall have a spiritual body— one
pervaded by the Spirit. The apostle's confidence is strong ; he says, " We ktunv ; "
(here was no uncertainty about the matter.

V. The saint's longino for the heavenly body. The desire i« verj intense



134 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. t. 1—21,

eapecially when the lot is hard and the nature spiritual. "We groan, longing to l«
clothed upon with onr habitation which is from heaven " (ver. 2). The paramount
attraction is, however, not in the body itself, but in the fact that the union with Christ
will be closer. We shall be present with the Lord — at home with the Lord (ver. 8).
Now we walk by faith ; then we shall see him as he is, and be like him. The gaining
of the heavenly body will be the gain of closer access to our Lord, and will be the enter-
ing into our heavenly home, out of which we .shall go no more for ever.

VI. The saint's desire roa a speedy change fbom one body to the other.
(Ver. 4.) 1. The intermediate state between death and the resurrection will probably not
be so perfect as that which follows. 2. There is a natural shrinking from death. " Not
for that we would be unclothed, but that we would be clothed upon " (ver. 4). The
apostle seems to desire what is expressed in 1 Thesa. iv. 17 — a translation, not death
and tarrying for the resurrection.

VIL The saint's resolution whether in the earthly oe heavenly body. To
please Christ. This the apostle made his " aim " (ver. 9). This was his supreme
ambition. He resolved to live, not to himself, but to Christ and for Christ. Note, that
the life for the heavenly and earthly body is to be the same. We must do now what
we hope to do by-and-by. Heavenly life in the earthly body is the preparation for the
heavenly life in the heavenly body. — H.

Ver. 10. — The Judgment. I. The judgment is certain. 1. It is a matter of most
definite revelation. 2. It is necessary for the vindication of Divine justice.

II. Christ will be the Judge. " The judgment-seat of Christ." 1. A very
solemn fact (1) for those who have rejected his salvation and his rule ; (2) or who have
treated his claims with neglect and indifference ; (3) or who have professed to believe
on him, but in works have denied him. 2. A very joyous fact for those who have
loved, confessed, and served him. 3. A very impressive fact that the One who died for
men will judge men.

III. All will stand before Christ's judgment-seat. Not one will be missing.
How vast an assemblage ! A great multitude, and yet no one lost in the crowd ! We
shall be conscious of the great number which no man can number, and yet be impressed
with our own individuality. " Each one " will receive (ver. 10) — one by one. Every
day we are brought a day nearer to that dread convocation.

IV. At the judgment-seat of Christ there will be a great revelation.
1. 0/ character. 2. Of condition. 3. Of life. We shall be " made manifest." Life-
secrets will cease. Successful deceptions will be successful no longer. All veils and
disguises will be torn off. The world as well as God will see us as we are.

V. At the judgment-seat op Christ we shall receive our doom. This will be
according to the deeds of our life. Will the faithful then be justified by faith ? Yes ;
by faith which produces works. Profession will then go for very little. " Lord, Lord,"
will be but an empty cry. Ability to pray fluently or to preach eloquently will not
come into the account. Nor the ability to look extremely pious. Nor facility of talk
respecting " blessed seasons " enjoyed on earth. What faith has wrought in us will be
the question. What our Christianity has amounted to really and practically. " A
name to live " then will be nothing if we are found " dead." ITpon the branch pro-
fessedly united to the Yine fruit will then be sought. " Faith without works is dead."
At the judgment it will seem very dead indeed. Yet not by the mere outward act
shall we be judged. The motive will be considered as well as the actual deed. " Faith
which worketh by love" (Gal. v. 6) will be diligently sought for. Note : 1. The dis-
tinction between good and evil will be strictly drawn at the judgment. 2. There will
be degrees of reward and punishment. Some " saved as by fire ; " some having an
" abundant entrance ; " some beaten with few stripes, some with many. It wiU be
" according to what he hath done." 3. The dependence of the future upon the present.
We shall receive the things done in the body. A remarkable expression. What we do
now we shall receive then. We are now writing the sentence of the judgment! Time
is sowing. Judgment is reaping. " What manner of persons ought we to be ? " — H.

Ver. 14. — The constraining influence of the love of Christ. I. Consideb the lovb
OF Ohbist. Shown in : 1. Advent. Relinquishment of heavenly glory. The highest



«JH. V. 1—121.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 135

place above exchanged for one of the lowest on earth. 2. AtsumpUon of human nature.
A vast condescension. A most striking proof of love. 3. Life. Miracles, acts oi
kindness, words, spirit. 4. Death. A transcendent proof. (1) Death for enemies.
(2) Death at the hands of those he came to save. (3) Most painful death, (o) physically,
(6) mentally, and (c) spiritually. " My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me? "
(4) A death the object of which was the redemption, purification, exaltation, and
eternal happiness of men. 5. Intercession. " He ever liveth to make intercession "
(Heb. vii. 25).

II. CoNSiDBK THE EFFECT OF THE LOVE OF Cheist. It Constrained the apostle — " com-
pressed with irresistible power all his energies into one channel." " Constraineth " —
its influence was continuous^ Its power was not soon spent ; rather that power
increased as the love of Christ' was increasingly realized. 1. Negatively. Not to live
to himself (ver. 15). There was now a greater power operating upon him than the
mighty power of self 2. Positively. To live to Christ (ver. 15). Tlie love of Christ
overmastered him. He felt that through it he had been purchased with a great price,
and therefore sought to glorify Christ in his body and spirit which were peculiarly his.
(1) By a blameless life. (2) By seeking to show forth Christ in his character, spirit,
acts, etc. (3) By submitting his will to Christ's in all things. (4) By cherishing a
deep love for Christ. (5) By seeking to extend the kingdom and to increase the glory
of Christ. (6) By being wholly devoted to Christ. He was wont to speak of himself
as the " slave of Christ."— H.

Ver. 17. — " A new creature." L How the newness obioinates. 1. The heliever has
died with Christ. (Ver. 14.) Christ is his Substiiute, has borne his sins, has made
complete satisfaction for his guilt. By faith he is so united to Christ that what Christ
has done is imputed to him. He is thus new in relation to God. He was condemned ;
now he is justified. 2. The heliever partakes of the life of Christ. He is " risen with
Christ" (Col. iii. 1). He has received the Spirit of Christ. Having been justified, he
is now being sanctified. The likeness of the Eedeemer is being wrought upon and in
him by the Holy Ghost. There is thus a " new creation." The old life was a Mfe
of sin, but the new life to which he has risen is a life of righteousness. The love of
Christ constrains him (ver. 14) to live, not to himself, but to Christ.

II. How THE KEWNESS IS MANIFESTED. In the believer's (1) spirit ; (2) speech ; (3)
character ; (4) acts ; (5) plans, purposes, desires, etc. " All things are become new "
(ver. 17). There is no part of the believer's life from which the newness should be
absent. Whilst not yet perfect, manifestly a great change has taken place : " Old
things are passed away " (ver. 17).

III. This newness furnishes a test. What have we more than our profession of
Christianity ? Have wo been transformed ; made new creatures ? " Ye must be born
again " (John iii. 7). Can faith save a man — faith which has a name to live, but is
dead; faith which we only know a man possesses because he tells us so ? We are not
in Christ at all unless thereby we have become new creatures. The test is beyond
appeal. The sentence of the judgment will proceed upon the assumption of its infalli-
bility (ver. 10). All men in Christ become new creatures. " If any man," etc. A
decided change takes place in the best as well as in the worst. All men may become
new creatures in Christ. The vilest can be re-created equally with the most moral.
This newness is not to be waited for till we enter another world. It belongs to this
sphere in which we now are. Unless we are new creatures in this world we shall
not be new creatures in another. It is on earth that " new creatures " are specially
needed. — H.

Ver. 20. — "Ambassadors of Christ." I. The DirarES of ambassadors of Christ. 1.
Negative. H.) Not to originate their message. (2) Not to think lightly of their
mission. (3) Not to seek their own glory. (4) Not to aim at their own comfort and
pleasure as a chief object. (5) Not to depart from their instructions. Not to add to
them nor take away. 2. Positive. (1) To go where tney are sent. (2) To communi-
cate the mind of their Lord. (3) To defend his honour. (4) To be influenced by the
welfare of his kingdom. (5) To make their Master's business pre-eminent. (6) To strive
in every way to qualify themselves for their work. (7) To endeavour to do their work



136 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. v. 1—21

in the best possiMe way. (8) To endure loss and suffering rather than the interesta
of their Master's kingdom should be prejudiced.

II. The message of the ambassadoks of Christ. 1. That God loves men. 2.
That he has given Christ for men. A vast proof of love 1 The first step was on God's
side. Whilst we were enemies Christ died for us. 3. That Christ willingly gave
himself for men. The death of Christ was perfectly voluntary. 4. That by the death
of Chiist God has provided the means for the perfect reconciliation of the world to
himself. In the death of Christ God does reconcile ; i.e. he removes every obstacle to
reconciliation. Justification is /«% preparec? for the sinner. Christ was made sin for
us (ver. 21). He bore our sins. Oar sins were imputed to him. God's justice was
satisfied. Christ is made our Substitute, and this so perfectly that what we are is
imputed to him, and what he is is imputed to us. He takes our sins; we take his
righteousness. No hindrance to complete restoration thus remains, except hindrance
wiiich may lie in the human heart itself. 5. That God earnestly invites men to be
reconciled to him. Amazing condescension! The climax of Divine lovel "As
though God were entreating " (ver. 20).

III. How THE MESSAGE IS TO BE CONVEYED. 1. With cowHesy. 2. With intense
earnestness. It is momentous. What issues depend upon its acceptance or rejection !
3. With zealous pleading.

IV. How AMBASSADOBs OF Chkist ARE TO BE EEOABDKD. 1, As Speaking OH behall
of Christ. 2. As declaring the mind of God. — H.

Ver. 1. — The tent and the house. I. The contrast explained. The foundation of
this passage is to be found in ch. iv. 18, where a contrast is drawn between "the
things seen," viz. the toils and afflictions endured in the service of Christ, and " the
things not yet seen," viz. the joys of resting in Christ from present labours and of
receiving from him approval and reward. Pursuing this train of thought, St. Paul
writes, " We are here in a tent upon the earth, surrounded, affected, and limited by the
things which are seen. But this tent will be struck, to be set up no more. The things
which are seen are temporal. The present conditions of our life of toil and suffering
will cease, and we shall enter a house of everlasting habitation." The apostle mixes
together the figures of a dwelling in which we reside and that of a garment with which
we are clothed. It was not an unnatural combination of metaphors ; for the haircloth
tents with which Paul was familiar, and which his own hands had made, suggested
almost equally the idea of a dwelling and that of a vesture. The tent is to be taken
down, the clothing to be removed. The present condition of labour and trial will
come to an end. What then ? Things not yet seen ; a building from God ; a new
condition of life and order of things which will be permanent. Hands of men have
not provided it and cannot destroy it. It is a house where nothing fades, nothing
falls to ruin, nothing decays or dies — a house eternal in the heavens.

II. The Christian pbespbctxvb op the future. It was St. Paul's habit to regard
the state after death and the state after resurrection as from one angle of vision, and
to describe them together. Probably he had no idea of the long interval which was
to extend through all the Christian centuries. In his first letter to the Corinthians he
had said, " We shall not all sleep," as though some of that generation might not see
death. But now the feebleness of iiis body was as " a sentence of death " in himself.
He expected and even wished to die ; and yet his thoughts never paused on death or
even on the rest of the departed, but rushed past death to the coming of Christ and
the glory to be revealed. There is a real and obvious distinction between the post-
decease and the post-resurrection state; but let us not overdo distinctions between
conditions of blessedness which to an apostle's eye were so intimately blended. If
some of the tilings which belong to the ultimate state are supposed by any to belong to
the proximate, no great harm is done. The future is not mapped out with the pre-
cision of a chart. It is not for definite knowledge, but for hope. St. Paul, as we have
said, never paused on death, took no pleasure in the thought of being "unclothed."
At the resurrection he would be clothed with a body of incorruption and immortality.
Nay; before that great day of triumph over death, he knew that he would be well
clothed or guarded. He would be in God's building, " clothed upon " with the house
which is from heaven.



CH, V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 137

III. The hood op jcind that wishes fob death. St. Paul wrote this in dejec-
tion of spirit. To his sickness, which had much enfeebled him, was added at that
time much anxiety about the condition of the Churches in Greece and their feelings
toward himself. So his heart, as tender and sensitive as it was ardent and brave, was
bruised and weary ; and he fell a-thinking of death as welcome. Let the outward
man perish ; let the earthen vessel break ; let the weary spirit escape and be at rest.
A mood this into which, at one time or other, many Christians fall ; but it should not
be elevated into a pattern or rule, as though it were the duty of every Christian to long
and sigh for death. Our holy faith reqaires nothing so unnaturaL They who are in
health and well employed ought to make the most of life — to value and not despise it.
Enough that they do not forget death ; and they need not fear it if they live well.
We must do Paul the justice to acknowledge that there was nothing peevish or
impatient in his mood. So long as there was service for him to render to the Church
on earth, he was willing to abide in the flesh and to endure any toil or suffering in
order to finish his course. But the mood that was on him led him to long for the
finish, when he might leave the little horsehair tent on earth and be at home in God's
building in the heavens. — P.

Vers. 14, 15. — The secret of devoUdness. No one now flings a charge of madness at
the sublime enthusiasm of St. Paul. He is looked on as a paragon of Christians. But,
while he lived, he had no such general appreciation to encourage and sustain him.
What he had above other men were not praises, but labours and reproaches. He
endured all because he had in himself the mainspring of faith and the holy energy of
love. Throughout this Ejiistle he shows his feelings and motives with the utmost
candour, and in this passage tells how he came to be so enthusiastic toward God and
so thoughtful and self-controlled toward his fellow-Christians.

I. The moving principle of Chbistian devotbdness. It is the strong unchang-
ing love of Christ to his people, assured to them by his Spirit and his Word. Paul had
a fear of God, a reverence for the Law, and walked in all good conscience ; but when
the love of Christ was revealed to him and suffused his spirit it made a new man of
him — thrilled, stirred, animated, constrained him to love and serve Cliiist and the
Church. And as the apostle grew old and experienced, this motive lost nothing of its
power. The love of Christ became to him, as it does to all experienced Christians, more
and more wonderful — a Shepherd's love, that led him to die for us, and that now secures
that we " shall not want ; " a Brother's love, and " love beyond a brother's ; " a Bride-
groom's love, who gave himself for the Church and will present the Church to himself.

II. The WAT IN WHICH THE MOTIVE ACTS. It is through no mere gush of feeling,
but through consideration of the purpose and efiScacy of Christ's death and resurrection.
1. He died for all to this intent and with this result, that all of them died. Virtually
and in the estimate of God this crucifixion of the whole Church took place when
Christ was crucified. In the actual realization of it it becomes true to each man as
and when he looks to Christ crucified and is tmited to him by faith. And with effects
both legal and moral. He who was married to the Law dies to the Law, and is freed
from its claims, so as to be married to the risen Christ. He who lived in sin dies to
sin, and may not any longer live therein. He who loved the world is crucified to it,
that he may love and live to God. 2. He rose again ; and all the crucifled ones live
by him. So they have justification, as represented by the accepted One, who has gone
to the Father ; and sanctifioation too, as separated to God in holy livinj; and guidei:
by the indwelling Spirit. The former manner of life is marked by self-regard. Thi
new manner of life exchanges this for the habit of regarding Christ. So his con
straining love induces his followers " to live unto him."

III. Uses op this doctrine. 1. Let it instruct us. Many are very ill informed o
the relation of our Lord's death and resurrection to the Divine will and to humai
salvation ; and for this reason they are much less constrained by his love than they
ought to be. Study these things. Bring thought and consideration as well as emntior
to the theme. The love constrains "because we judge." 2. Let it ktmlieut. Has
'■ton Son of the 1; ving God so loved us, and where is our love to him ?

" Lord, it is my chief complaint
That my luve is cold and faint."



138 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. v. 1— 2L

3. Let it impel us. What we need to overcome our moral indolence and habits of
self-pleasing is the pressure of strong convictions and motives ; and we can best get
tliese in contemplating the love, the death, and tho resurrection of Christ. This, too,
is a great security against departure from the Lord. When we know and feel little of
Christ's love we are easily tempted ; but when this is in our thoughts and affections we
abhor a^d repel whatever might separate us from him. 4. Let it comfort us. We are
delivered from the wrath to come. Christ loves us. Then the Father also loves us.
Duties are pleasant, afflictions are light ; to live is Christ, to die is gain. — F.

Vers. 18 — 21. — Reconciliation. Great truths hang together. When the Lord Jesus
had told Nicoiiemus of regeneration, he immediately proceeded to teach him salvation
through a Redeemer. So when the Apostle Paul has spoken of new creation in Christ
(ver. 17), he instantly follows it with the doctrine of reconciliation through Christ.

L The need op kisconciliation. The world is not in harmony or at peace with God.
Sin has done it. On the one hand, God's displeasure is declared against the workers of
iniquity ; on the other, those workers are afraid of God and alienated from him. A
great gulf yawns between God and man; and the need of reconciliation is the need
of a bridge across that chasm. Or, a great mountain is cast up between God and
man ; and the need of reconciliation is the need of that mountain becoming a plain,
so that God and man may not merely approach, bat unite and be at peace. " What
can be the difficulty," some exclaim, " if God desires it ? Is he not omnipotent,
and can he not accomplish whatever he pleases?" But we speak of a moral obstacle,
not a physical. And, while God can certainly do what he pleases, he cannot please to
do anything but what is perfectly righteous. So there is a difficulty. It is twofold :
there is a sentence of condemnation in heaven against the transgressors of the law of
righteousness ; and there is an enmity to God or a cowering dread of him in the
hearts of those transgressors on earth.

II. The Author of reconciliation. "All things [i.e. all the things of the new
creation] are of God, who has reconciled us to himself." Man, the creature and the
sinner, should have been the first to seek the heahng of the breach, by suing for
pardon and imploring mercy from God. But it has not been so. The initiative has
been taken by God, who is rich in mercy, and, loving the world, has provided for its
reconciliation by Jesus Christ.

III. The method of reconciliation. Messages sent from a distant heaven or
throne of God could not suffice. There was need of an authorized Messenger. So God
sent his only begotten Son. For so great a work was constituted a unique and
wonderful personality. The Son of God became man and yet continued Divine. So,
in the very constitution of his person, he brought the Divine and the human together.
And thus his relation to both parties was such as perfectly fitted him to be the
Reconciler. He loved God, and therefore was faithful to all Divine claims and prero-
gatives ; while at the same time he loved man and was intent on securing his salvation.
1. He dealt with the difficulty on the side of eternal righteousness. He did so by
taking the room and the responsibility of the transgressors and making atonement for
them. And the hand of God was in this. "He hath made him," etc. (ver. 21).
"Made . . .sin," though he never was a sinner, and laden with it as a burden,
enveloped in it as a mantle of shame. " Jehovah laid upon him the iniquity of us all."
The issue is that we " become the righteousness of God in him." And in this is
nothing illusive or fictitious. There was a real laying of our sins on the Lamb of God,
that there may be a real laying or conferring of Divine righteousness on us who
believe in his Name. 2. He deals with the difficulty of alienated feeling. No change
is needed in the mind or disposition of God. He does not need to be persuaded to love
the world. All the salvation in Christ proceeds from his love. But the enmity of
men to God must be removed, and this is effected by the revelation of God as gracious
and propitious to sinners in Christ Jesus. When this is known and believed, the heart
turns to God and actual reconciliation is made.

rV. The word of reconciliation. (Vers. 19, 20.) When St. Paul preached the
gospel it was as though God entreated or exhorted the people through his servant's
lips. He was an ambassador, not a plenipotentiary with powers to discuss and nego-
tiate terms of peace, but a King's messenger sent to proclaim terms of free grace and



OH. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 139

to press the acceptance of t'aem on the enemies of the King. This embassy continues.
Do not meet it with excuses and delays. — F.

Ver. 1. — Our permanent huilding. Taking the apostle's words in a general way, and
not confining them to the precise topic which he has under consideration, we are taught
by them that, regarding all our present things as but shadows and symbols, we need
not trouble ourselves overmuch about their chanring forms, or even about their passing
away. All our heart and all our efforts should go out in the endeavour to bring
nearer, and make clearer and fuller, the sense of our dwelling in, breathing in, working
in, the unseen, the spiritual, the eternal. Our sphere is God. '■ In him we live, and
move, and have our being." The real is the unseen. The stable and lasting is the
eternal. And this view of things alone can put us in right relations with the body,
and set us upon the right use of things seen and temporal. Whenever we are brought
face to face with any passing, dissolving, removing, earthly thing, then God seems to
call us, saying, " Remember the house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."
Take for illustration —

I. The tent and the house. No figure could be more appropriate than this for the
apostle, who gained his living as a tentmaker, and was familiar with its material, its
construction, and its use. We can well imagine how, as he wrought, either at weaving
the rough Cilician cloth, or at sewing together the various lengths, and the holes for
the poles and ropes, he would meditate on the frailty of the tent which he was thus
making, contrasting it with the stable marble and stone mansions found in such cities
as Corinth. In his day tents were chiefly made for travellers ; for those who journeyed
from place to place, either for business or for pleasure, in districts where accommoda-
tion at inns could not be found. They had their settled homes in the great cities, and
they went forth on their travels with quiet hearts, because of the cherished feeling that
they had a home. They used the tent awhile, camping out in the open country ; but if
the wild storm did come, and even lift and carry away the tent ; if the midnight robber
did overthrow it, and seize the spoil, — the traveller might bear the hardship and the
loss, in pleasant confidence that he had a home. If the worst came, it could be but the
shadow of his home passing away ; in yonder city stood his secure dwelling.

II The doctrine and the tkuth. For doctrine is like the frail tent, and truth is
like the granite mansion that outlasts the passing ages. We cannot be too thankful
for the forms in which sacred truth is conveyed to us, unfolded before us, or impressed
upon us. We bless God for all holy and helpful words, full of tender and dear associa-
tions ; words of simple catechism for our childhood's weakness ; words of formal
doctrine fashioned to help us when, in our youth-time, we tried to get personal hold of
mysterious and many-sided truth. Let no man despise the doctrines which, like tents,
have often given us tlieir shelter and their help. And yet they are only like " earthly
houses of this tabernacle." Truth is the " building of God, the house not made with
hands," wherein alone human souls may find quietness from controversy or from fears.
Doctrines are only symbols and shadows, the human representations of the Divine and
eternal thmgs, the unspeakable realities which yet our souls may apprehend. Within,
behind, above, around, the doctrine ever dwells the truth ; and, at first, we are very
dependent oa ihe/orms which it gains for mortal eyes and ears and minds ; but, as the
soul grows, and gains its vision, its hearing, and its touch, we get loosened from our
dependence on the forms, we can calmly see them change and pass. Resting in the
stable house of truth, we calmly look on all transitory forms, even of doctrine, and say,
" We have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens."

III Nature and God. Nature, the world of things seen — the firmament, golden-
glowing, cloud-shaded, and star-sprinkled ; earth, with its vales, and hills, and flowers,
and trees ; the great and wide sea — is in a very serious sense Ood. It is God manifest
to our senses. Behind what is called pantheism there is a deeply poetical and spiritual
truth. Nature is God seen ; Gc i in toned picture for mortal eyes to see ; God, if we
may so say, in photograph. Earth is the plate which has caught all that human
eyes may see of the figure of God. Nature is the tent-symbol of the eternal house.
The Jew called his mountains " the lulls of God," because they brought to him the
sense of the highness and almightiness of God. Ho called the splendid trees " the
cedars of Jehovah," because they brought to him a sense of the stately beauty of God.



140 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. v. 1—21,

Yet nature is not really God himself, only God in expression for our apprehending,
only the veil that he shines through. Therefore we turn from the shadow to tha
substance which throws it ; from the form to the reality which it does but exhibit.
And if all nature passed away, we should lose nothing. It would be but dropping the
veil that we might see the face.

IV. OiTB EARTHLY AND QUE HEAVEKLT BODIES. St. Paul was plainly thinking of his
body, the vehicle by means of which our souls come into contact with the world of
created things. But he cherished the idea of a spiritual body, which could be the
clothing and vehicle of his soul through the long, the eternal ages. Thinking of it he
could say, " What matter if my tent-body be destroyed? I have a building of God,
a house not made with hands." — R. T.

Ver. 5. — " The earnest of the Spirits The apostle has been referring to the great
hope set before us in the gospel, which, as he regards it, is this, that " mortality might
be swallowed up of life." That is the object of the Divine working in the believer,
and of its final realization he has this " earnest," or pledge of assurance, God has given
us already the " earnest of the Spirit,'' who is the power that alone can work out such
a sublime result as our final triumph over the flesh and sin, and meetness to take our
place and part in a spiritual and heavenly state. " It is because the Spirit dwells in us
by faith while we are here that we are to he raised hereafter. The body thus possessing
a principle of life is as a seed planted in the ground to be raised again in God's good
time" (comp. the sentence in ch. i. 22 and Rom. viii. 1 — 11). Observe that th?
Holy Spirit is presented to us under many aspects and figures ; no one representatior
of his Divine mission can exhaust his relations to us. We must see his work on one
side after another, and be willing to learn from all the figures under which it is
presented.

I. What is meant by an " eaknest ":? It is something ofiiered as a pledge and
assurance that what is promised shall surely be given. But it has been well pointed
out that an " earnest " materially differs from a " pledge." A pledge is something
different in kind, given as assurance for something else, as may be illustrated by the
sacraments ; but an earnest is a part of the thing to be given, as when a purchase
is made and a portion of the money is paid down at once. The idea of the " earnest "
may be seen in the " firstfruits," which are a beginning of, and assure the character of,
the coming harvest.

II. What is the Spirit as " earnest " to us now ? St. Paul's one point here is
that it is an assurance of the final victory of the higher life over the lower. We have
indeed that higher life now, in its initial and rudimentary stages, in having the Spirit
dwelling in us.

III. What futubb is plbdsed in our having the Spirit now ? Precisely a future
in which the spiritual life shall be victorious and supreme, and our vehicle of a body
simply within the use of the Spirit. That is full redemption, glory, and heaven. — R. T.

Ver. 7. — Walking hy faith. "We walk by faith, not by sight." " Walking" is a
familiar Scripture term for a man's life on the earth. It seems to have been associated
with the figure of life as a " pilgrimage" in the Old Testament, and as a "racecourse "
iu the New Testament. It is joined to another word sometimes, and our " walk and
conversation " are spoken of, our " going forward " and " turning about."

I. Walk as descriptive op human life. Its suitability will be seen if we notice :

1. That it is a moving on. The days of our life go by as do the scenes in a panorama.

2. It is a slow moving on, steady and regular as the clock ; time moves on, bearing all
its sons away. 3. It is a moving on through ever-changing scenes, as is the path of
the traveller, now up the hillside, now along the dusty highway, and now through the
shaded valleys, with ever-varying sights and sounds around us. 4. It is a moving
on somewhere ; for he who walks has some end before him or some home in yiew. So
our human life has its goal. We pass on into the eternal, where we may find our
home.

II. Walk by bight as descriptive op the wobldly life. " Walk by sight " does
not mean " in the power of our vision," but " under the influence and persuasion of things
seen and temporal." It is the one essential characteristic of the worldly man that hii



CH. ▼, 1—21,] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 141

judgments and decisions are made, his affections are ruled, and his conduct is oidered
by what may be gathered under the term " the fashion of this world." Sense-condi-
tions determine his place. Sense-requirements command his allegiance. Sense-principlea
inspire his doings and decide his relations. He " walks " with a horizon no further
off than yonder ridge of hills, and with no thought really bigger in his soul than
" What shall we eat ? what shall we drink ? and what shall we enjoy ? " Saying this is
the saddest revelation of man's essential wrongness before the God who " made him for
himself."

III. Walk by faith as dbsobiptive of the Chbistian life. We are not yet face
to face with the eternal realities, but faith as the " substance of things hoped for "
gives us a present actual possession of those eternal things, and makes them exert their
power on our " walk." Faith in the unseen and eternal can (1) cheer ; (2) raise the
tone; (3) bring steadfastness into our walk and conversation. The realities are
revealed to faith ; human sight can only see passing shadows of things. — R. T.

Ver. 10. — " The judgment-seat of Christ^ It is needlessly forcing language to regard
this expression as referring to the general judgment of mankind. This letter is
addressed to the saints, the Church at Corinth, and it may be specially instructive
to keep within the limits of St. Paul's thought when he said, " For we " — that is, we
Christians — " must all appear before the judgment^seat of Christ." Such a judgment,
or appraisement, of our conduct is involved in the very idea of our mastership to Christ.
He will be sure one day to take account of his servants, and this Jesus himself taught
us in his parables of the talents and pounds. Christians are as stewards, men entrusted
for a time with their Master's goods. They are even to be thought of as " slaves,"
wholly the Master's possession ; and he has fuU power to estimate their conduct,
reward faithfulness, and punish neglect and disobedience. St. Paul even loves to
think of himself as the bondslave of Jesus. And the apostles long to prove so faithful
in all things that they may not be ashamed, or terrified, or loth to meet their Master at
his coming. " The feeling of accountability may take two forms. In a free and
generous spirit it may be simply a sense of duty ; in a slavish and cowardly spirit it
will be a sense of compulsion." To us it should be a joy and an inspiration that our
own loved Master will appraise our lives ; and that, if he is true to observe our faults,
he will be no less gracious to recognize what he may call our goodnesses and our
obediences. The thought of his judgment can only be a terror to the rebellious, dis-
obedient, and wilful among his servants. We notice three things.

I. Loyalty to Christ is our spirit. " We call him Master and Lord, and we say
well ; for so he is.'' The rule of our life is the will of our glorified and ever-present Lord.
We have voluntarily given ourselves to him. To him we owe our supreme allegiance.
He is to us what his queen and country are to the general who leads forth his army.
We must be ever true to him ; and he, and he alone, is the Lord whose approval or
condemnation of our work we should seek. Because I am loyal to Christ I will care
about nobody's judgment of my life until I know his.

II. Service of Christ in righteousness is our life. This is the very essence of
the matter. Christ is served hy righteousness, and really by nothing else. Our place of
service, our kind of service, our success in service, are quite the secondary things. The
first thing is the Tightness with which we do the service. Was the work good f — this
it is that Christ asks. Herein Christ differs from all other masters. They can only
judge the work ; he judges the character which found expression through the work.
It is that personal righteousness that Christ will search for when he judges his servants.

IIL The appraisement of Christ is cub expectation and our hope. A day of
final judgment is men's expectation, but not their hope. It is too often a terror to them,
a thought put away in fear. Christ's judgment of his saints is our hope ; it is the first
day of our glory. The thought of it may make us serious and watchful, but it never
can make us sad. Christ will test and try our lives. Christ will weigh us in his
balances. Christ will apportion our future place. Christ will chastise if there be found
evil in us, and his chastisements shall be our joy ; for we too want all the evil in us
found out and put away. We even glory in this coming appraisement by our Lord ;
for if, in subtle disguises, evil lurks in any of our secret plioes of heart and life, Jesua
will find it out, and will not leave us until we stand in the likeness of h fe own spotless



142 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. t. 1—21

pvirity. And upon our Lord's judgment of us our future, our eternal location and work,
must depend. Tested in this life, he will know what we can do ; and it may be that
he will give us trust of higher things, " authority over ten cities." — R. T.

Vers. 14, 15. — The power of the Christian motive. The life of an intelligent being
must be under the sway of some chosen and cherished motive. Hish degrees of
intelligence find their expression in the careful selection of the motive. Where the intel-
ligence is low and untrained, we find men blindly obeying motives which the accident
of the hour may have raised up, or to which the bodily passions may excite. We can
look into the face of no fellow-man and say, " That man is living without a motive."
The consideration of the motives that actually rule men's lives give us very sad thoughts
of our humanity. They range all the distance between the animal and the Divine, but
they belong for the most part to the lower levels. The entire aspect and character of a
man's life may be changed by a change of his motives. A new and nobler motive will
soon make a man a better man. No man ever did rise to do noble things while his
motive concerned only self and self-interests. All noble lives have been spent in
service to others. All the best lives in private spheres have been self-denying lives.
All the heroic lives in public spheres have been the lives of patriots, the lives of the
generous, the pitying, and the helpful. St. Paul was in every way a remarkable man,
full of energy, consecration, self-denial, and the " enthusiasm of humanity ;" and in the
passage now before us he tells us what was the supporting motive, the secret strength,
of it all. " The love of Christ constraineth us."

I. The BO0BOB of the Christian motive. " Because we thus judge, that if one
died for all, then all died in him." Apparently that life of the apostle was the life
of an enthusiast. But if you used that word in any bad sense he would indignantly
deny such an accusation. It was indeed a life to which he was constrained, held fast,
impelled, coerced, and that by the intense love of his soul for another — a love passing
the love of women. But St. Paul would most earnestly urge that this love of his was
no mere passion, no mere impulse, no blind force taking sudden mastery of his heart,
and crushing down and silencing thought and judgment and will. He declares it to
be a love based on judgment, and strengthened by maturer judgment. If that love was
first won by the gracious vision granted to him when he was nearing Damascus, it was
more truly a love confirmed and established by the serious meditations and calm
decisions of his time of blindness, and by the Scripture studies of his lonely days in the
desert. That sober consideration took up ; 1. The sadness of man's condition. " Then
were all dead ; " or, as otherwise read, " then all died." 2. St. Paul's judgment decided
that it was quite true about Jesus Christ — he had inteiTened to save men by his own
sufferings and death. " He died for all." Paul — or Saul, as he was then called — was
nearing the fulness of manhood when he heard of the appearance of a new prophet-
teacher in the land of his fathers. But all his prejudices arrayed themselves against
the acceptance of him and against belief in his special commission and authority.
It appeared from the reports that he was a poor man ; that he came from the despised
Galilean Nazareth, about which Old Testament Scriptures prophesied no such great
thing ; that he made himself the " friend of publicans and sinners ; " that he was an
unsparing foe of Paul's own sect, the Pharisees ; but that at last he had been stopped
in his mischievous career, and made a public example of by an ignominious and shame-
ful death. And then one day prejudice was overthrown. Prejudice was made to see
the living glory of him whom it had tried to believe was disgraced and dead. Prejudice
heard the authoritative voice of the supposed impostor speaking out of the heavenly
places. Prejudice was conquered ; the reason, the judgment, and the heart were
enthroned, and set to form a judgment concerning Christ. And what a different
thing the career of the Lord Jesus became when it was soberly, thoughtfully judged !
Poor was he? It was the worthy outer garb of the unspeakable humiliation of the
Divine Lord to the weakness of men. It was the fit outward seeming for " Immanuel,"
God with us. Out of Nazareth did he come ? That was only one of the thousandfold
proofs that he was indeed the Messiah promised to the fathers, now in dimmer and now
in clearer outlines. Friend of publicans and sinners was he? No wonder; for he well
knew that the real want of men is, not the removal of diseases, or the extensions of
ceremonial worship, or even the unfolding of new truths, but the pardon of sin, the



CH. V. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 143

cleansing away of iuiquity, and the assurance, carried home to the very soul, that God
loves and would save the sinner. Despised and rejected of men was he ? Yes ; and it
must have heen so. Sinful humanity could not bear the reproach of the presence of
perfect virtue. The forces of evil would be sure to wrestle hard against him who came
that he might cast them out and destroy them. Die, did he, a mournful, shameful
death ? Judgment says — There, amid the very shame of the cross, thrown up by the
very darkness that lies behind it, shine forth rays of transcendent glory. There, in those
hours of agony, may be seen sublime self-sacrifice, mystery of spiritual suffering, Divine
sin-bearing, and the most persuasive manifestation of God's love to men. There is God
"not sparing his own Son, but delivering him up for us all ;" and there is God's Son
" bearing our sins in his own body on the tree." On that sober judgment the apostle
based his new life-motive. He set the love of that dying Saviour so high in his soul
that it became from henceforth the master motive of all that he did.

IL The way in which the Chbistian motive wobks. " They which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again."
The motive works by establishing a new law for the ruling of our life and conduct. It
is the not-unto-self law. We do not know ourselves as we really are in our carnal
state if we think that is not a new law. Gratification of self is the great unnatural
human la,w. The not-unto-self law is the chosen life-principle of all the good. It is the
law of God, the life-rule of Jesus the Christ ; and, learnt of him, it has made many a
human story since then beautiful and gracious. Could it be established in all hearts,
the golden age would have come, in which the unselfish King can reign for ever and
ever. The only possible deliverance from the sway of the old self-law is found in the
elevating of some new and inspiring love to the throne of the heart. And Jesus makes
himself the Object of just such love. The new motive also works in another way. It
gives an inner spiritual force to sustain us in the endeavour to obey the law. Love
becomes to us what it is to the child. The love of the parent becomes the law of the
child's life; but the love, as it dwells in the heart of the child, makes obedience easy.
So our love to Christ can become the inner force by which our obedience is sustained
day by day.— B. T.

Ver. 19. — God the Reconciler. " God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself." " This is the first occurrence, in the order of time, in St. Paul's Epistles, of this
word ' reconcile ' as describing God's work in Christ. The idea involved is that man
had been at enmity and had now been atoned (at-oned), and brought into concord with
God. It will be noted that the work is described as originating with the Father and
accomplished by the mediation of the Son " (Plumptre).

I. The niSTUBBANCB which calls roB beoonciliation. This may be presented as a
disturbance occurring between (1) a Creator and his creatures ; (2) a King and his
subjects ; or (3) more worthily in this case, a Father and his children. The point of
impression is, that the disturbance is in no sense due to any action or neglect of God
as Creator, King, or Father, but is wholly due to the self-willed and rebellious conduct
of the creatures, subjects, or children. It involved a state of enmity, a withdrawal of
pleasant relations, and acts of judgment on the part of God. All these statements need
illustration and enforcement. Only as the difficulty is duly estimated can the grace of
the remedy be fully understood.

II. The side on which was the baeliest desibe fob beconcilbmbnt. Not man's
side. The offenders did not seek forgiveness and restoration. Show that this is true
(1) historically, (2) experimentally. None of us, now, are lefore Ood in seeking
reconciliation. The offended Creator, King, and Father seeks to make both one, and
break down the middle walls of partition. " God was in Christ, reconciling the world
unto himself." The deep ground of redemption is God's pitying love for us sinners.
We must not think that we claimed the love or that Christ persuaded God to show it.
" God so loved the world as to give his only begotten Son." The enmity of man
to him grieved him, and love found the ways in which to break the enmity, and win,
by a free forgiveness, the very heart of the offenders.

III. The WATS in which God effects the bbconcilement. All are summed up in
Christ. He is the Agent through whom God practically carries out his reconciling
purpose. We may gather all the ways under two heads. 1. God reconciles by



144



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vi. 1—18.



removing the hindrances. 2. God reconciles hy persuading the offenders. For both
Christ is tiie Agency. He takes " the handwriting of ordiminoes that was against us
out of the way, nailing it to his cross." He could say, "I, if I be lifted up, will
draw all men unto me." Plead, in conclusion, that God's reconciling mercies, embodied
in Christ Jesus, ought to be a mighty persuasion on us to yield ourselves to him.
They should say in our hearts, " Be ye reconciled to God." — R. T.

Ver. 21. — The Sinless counted as a sinner. We give but the bare outline of a course
of thought on this subject, because it is so sugsestive of controversial theological topics,
and can be treated from the points of view of several distinct theological schools.

I. Cheist as a sinless Man. What proofs of this have we ? And how does such
sinlessness separate him from man and ensure his acceptance with Gud ?

II. The Sinless can nevee, in fact, be othee than sinless. Neither Q-od nor
man can be deceived into regarding Christ as a sinner. No exigencies of theology may
make us speak of God as regarding Christ as other than he was.

III. The sinless can take, as a bukden on heaet and effort, the sins of
OTHERS. Show fully in what senses this can be done.

IV. With bin thus on him, a sinless man mat submit to be treated as if he

WERE HIMSELF A SINNER.

V. When the sinless man thus takes the sins of others on him he bears the
SIN altogether away. Jesus took up the matter of our sin that it might be a
hindrance and trouble to ua no more for ever. — R. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTEB VI.



The methods and conditions of an apos-
tolic ministry (vers. 1 — 10). Appeal to the
Corinthians to reciprocate his affection and
separate themselves from evil (vera. 11 —
18).

Ver. 1. — ^We then, as fellow-workers.
Continuing the entreaty of ch. v. 20, he
adds, " But as [his] fellow-workers we also
exhort you." The " also " shows that he does
not rest content with merely entreating tliem
(SeSfiiBa), but adds to the entreaty an exhorta-
tion emphasized by a self-sacrificing ministry.
"Fellow-workers with God" (lOor. iii. 9).
Beseech. The word is the same as that ren-
dered " beseech" by the Autliorized Version
in oh. V. 20, and it should be rendered
" exhort : '' " God exhorts you by our means ;
we therefore entreat you to be reconciled to
God; yes, and as Christ's fellow-workers we
exhort you." That ye receive not. The
word means both passively to receive and
actively to accept as a personal boon. The
grace of God. To announce this is the chief
aim of the gospel (Acts xiii. 43 ; xx. 24). In
vain ; that is, " witliout effect." You must
not only accept tlie teaching of God's Word,
but must see that it produces adequate moral
results. It must not, so to speak, fall " into
a vacuum {eh k€v6v)." " He," says Pelagius,
" receives the grace of God in vain who, in
the new covenant, is not himself new." If
you really are in Christ you must show that
you have thereby become " a new creation "
(oh. V. 17). The branches of the true Vine



must bear fruit. (Foi the phrase, " in vain,"
see Gal. ii. 2 ; Phii. ii Ib.j _ What the
grace of God is meant to effect is sketched
in Titus ii. 11, 12.

Ver. 2. — For he saith; that is, "God
saith." The nominative is involved in the
"/eMoio- workers," so that this is hardly to
be classed with those rabbinic methods of ci-
tation found also in Philo, which deliberately
omit the word " God " as the speaker, and
use " He " by preference. I have heard
thee, etc. The quotation is from the LXX.
of Isa. xlix. 8, and is meant to express the
necessity for receiving the grace of God, not
only efiScaciously, but at once. The " thee "
in Isaiah is the Servant of Jehovah," the
type primarily of Christ, and then of all
who are " in Christ." In a time accepted ;
literally, in the Hebrew, in a time of favour.
It is the season of grace, before grace has
been wilfully rejected, and the time for judg-
ment begins (Prov. i. 24 — 28). The accepted
time ; literally, the well-accepted opportunity.
St. Paul in his earnestness strengthens the
force of the adjective. The same word
occurs in ch. viii. 12 ; Kom. xv. 16, 31.

"There is a deep nick in Time's lestless
wheel
For each man's good."

(Chapman.)

Now. No doubt St. Paul meant that, aa long
as life lasts, the door of repentance is never
absolutely closed ; but it is probable that he
had specially in view the nearness of the
advent of Christ. Compare the stress laid
upon the word "to-day" in Heb. iii. 7, 8,



OH. VI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



143



■nd ** at least in this thy day " (Luke xix.
42).

Ver. S. — OiTing no offence in anything.
An under-cvirrent of necessary self-defence
runs through St. Paul's exhortation. The
participle is, like "fellow-workers," a
nominative to " we exhort you " in ver. 1.
Offence. The ■word here is not skandalon,
which is 80 of tan rendered "offence," but
proshope, which occurs here alone in the
New Testament, and is not found in the
LXX. It meanii "a cause of stumbling."
Proskormna, a stumbling-block, is used in
1 Cor. viii. 9. Be not blamed. When any
just blame can be attached to the minister,
the force of the ministry of reconciliation is
&tally weakened (For the word, see ch.
viii. 20.)

Ver. 4. — Approving ourselves; rather,
eommending ourselves. He is again refer-
ring to the insinuation, which had evidently
caused him deep paia, that he was not
anthorized to preach, as his Judaic op-
ponents were, by " letters of commendation "
(oh. iii. 1 — 3) from James or from the
elders at Jerusalem. His credentials came
from God, who h»d enabled him to be so
taithfuL As the ministers of Qod (1 Cor.
iv. 1). The article should be omitted. In
much patience. Christ had forewarned his
apostles that they would have much to
endure, and had strengthened them by the
promise that " he that endureth to the end
shall be saved " (Matt. x. 22). In afflictions.
This word, as we have seen, is one of the
haunting words in ch. i. 4 — 11. In neces-
sities. St. Paul was poor, and was often in
want (Acts xx. 34). In distresses. The
same word which occurs in ch. iv. 8. It
means "extreme pressure" (literally, nar-
rowness of epcux), and is a climax of the
other words.

Ver. 5. — In stripes (comp. ch. xi. 28 —
28). The stripes were of two kinds — from
Jewish whips and Boman rods. But of the
five scourgings with Jewish whips not one
is mentioned in the Acts, and only one of
the three scourgings vrith Boman rods
(Acts xvi. 23). Nothing, therefore, is more
clear than that the Acts only furnishes us
with a fragmentary and incomplete record,
in which, as we gather from the Epistles,
either the agonies of St. Paul's lifelong
martyrdom are for some reason intentionally
minimized, or else (which is, perhaps, more
probable) St. Paul was, as his rule and
habit, so reticent about his own sufferings in
the cause of Christ that St. Luke was only
vaguely, if at all, aware of many scenes of
trial through which he had passed. In im-
prisonments. St. Paul was frequently in
prison, but St. Luke only tells us of one of
these occasions (Acts xvi. 24) — at Philippi ;
the Boman imprisonment and that at
n. OOBXNTHIANB.



Ctesarea were subsequent to this Epistle. In
tumults. These were a normal incident of
St. Paul's life, both up to this time and for
years afterwards (Acts xiii. 50; xiv. 19;
xvi. 22 ; xvii. 4, 5 ; xviii. 12 ; xix. 28, 29 ;
xxi. 27—89; xxii. 22, 28; xxiii. 9, 10;
xxvii, 42, etc.) The word alcatastasiai might
also mean "insecurities," i.e. homelessnesa,
wanderings, uncertainties (comp. 1 Cor. iv.
11); but New Testament usage seems de-
cisive in favour of the foimer meaning (ch.
xii. 20; 1 Cor. xiv. 33; Jas. iii. 15). In
labours (ch. xi. 28 ; 1 Cor. iv. 12 ; xv. 10 .
Acts XX. 84; 1 Thess. ii. 9; 2 These, iii. 8).
In watohings. " Spells of sleeplessness "
were a necessary incident of such a life ;
and an eminently nervous nature like that
of St. Paul is rarely capable of the habitual
relief of sound sleep. Hence he again refers
to this in ch. xi. 27. His " sleeplessness "
was sometimes the necessary result of labours
" night and day " (Acts xx. 81 ; 1 The&s. ii.
9, etc.). In fastings. St. Paul never incul-
cates the practice of voluntary fasting as a
duty (for the reading in 1 Cor. vii. 5 is
more than dubious) ; but it is probable that
he found it personally useful at times (Acts
xiii. 2, 8 ; xiv. 23 ; ix. 9). The nine forms
of suffering hitherto mentioned — ^three
general, three specilio, and three voluntary —
are all physical sufferings borne with " much
endurance."

Ver. 6. — By pureness ; rather, in pureness,
as the preposition is the same. He now
gives six instances of special gifts and
virtues. The " pureness " is not only " chas-
tity," but absolute sincerity (1 John iii. 3 ;
ch. iv. 2; 1 Thess. ii. 10). By knowledge.
The knowledge is the true knowledge of the
gospel in its fulness (Eph. iii. 4). In his
depth of insight into the truth St. Paul was
specially gifted. The word gnosis had not
yet acquired the fatal connotations which
afterwards discredited it. By long-suffering
(2 Tim. iii. 10 ; iv. 2). The patient endur-
ance of insults, of which St. Paul shows a
practical specimen in this Epistle, and still
more in Phil. i. 15 — 18. By londness. " Love
suffereth long, and is kind " (1 Cor. xiii. 4) ;
" Long-suffering, kindness " (Gal. v. 22). By
the Holy Ghost. To the special gift of the
Spirit St. Paul attributed all his success
(1 Thess. 1. 5; Bom. xv. 18, 19). By love
unfeigned ; which is the surest fruit of the
Spirit, and the best of all spiritual gifts
(ch. xii. 15 ; 1 Cor. viii. I ; xiii. ; Bom. xii.
9, etc.).

Ver. 7.— By the word of truth. St. Paul
now passes to the more specific endowments
of the true teacher (comp. ch. ii. 17 ; iv. 2 ;
1 Cor. ii. 4 ; Gal. ii. 5). By the power of
God ; literally, in power of Ood (ch. iv. 7 ;
1 Cor. ii. 4 ; iv. 20). " For the kingdom of
God is not [only] in word, but in power."



146



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. vi. 1—18.



By the armour of righteousness. Here first
the preposition " in " {ei/) ia olmnged for
"through," "by means of" (Si&). Armowr;
rather, arms. On the right hand and on
the left. That is, both by offensive weapons
and a defensive panoply (ch. x. 4 ; Eph. vi.
11—17 ; 1 Thess. v. 8).

Ver. 8. — By honour and dishonour ; rather,
hy glory and dishonour. There is no need
to change heie the meaning of Sih, "by
means of," to "through," i.e. "amid."
The honour and dishonour are alike means
which contribute to the commendation of
the ministry. Of our Lord some said, " He
is a deceiver," while others said, " He is a
good man " (John vii. 12) ; and the dispraise
of some is the highest praise (Matt. v. 11).
Compare with the whole passage 1 Cor. iv.
9 — 13, where we see that " abuse," " in-
sult," and " slander," constituted no small
part of the apostle's daily trial. By evil
report and good report. The beatitude of
malediction (Luke vi. 22 ; 1 Pet. iv. 14). St.
Paul had deliberately abandoned the desire
to win the suffrages of men at the cost of
undesirable concessions (Gal. i. 10). As
deceivers. The Jews called Christ " a
"deceiver " (mesitli, i.e. a deliberate and mis-
leading impostor), Matt, xxvii. 63 ; John vii.
12. This is an illustration of the "evil
report," and in the Clementine homilies, a
century later, St. Paul, under the disgraceful
pseudonym of " Simon Magus," is still de-
famed as a deceiver. And yet true. There
is no " yet " in the original, and its omission
gives more force to these eloquent and im-
passioned contrasts.

Ver. 9. — As unknown ; literally, as being
ignored ; as those whom no one cares to re-
cognize. And yet well known. "And be-
coming fully recognized." "Eecognized"
by God (1 Cor. xiii. 12), and ultimately by
all good men (ch. xi. 6), though they might
be contemptuously ignored by men. A.s
dying (ch. i. 9 ; iv. 10, 11). Behold. The
word calls attention to what seemed like a
daily miracle. The paradox of the Greek
tragedian —

" Who knows if life be death, and death be
Ufe?"

which seemed so supremely amusing to
Aristophanes and the wits of Athens, became
a familiar fact to the early Christians (Eom.
viii. 36; 1 Cor. xv. 31; Eph. ii. 5, 6; Col.
ii. 13, etc). As chastened. The daily Divine
education of suffering (Ps. oxviii. 18).

Ver. 10. — As sorrowful, yet alway re-
joicing. The early Christians always insist
on " joy " as one of the fruits of the Spirit
(corap. Matt. v. 10 — 12), and especially joy
in the midst of grief and anguish (Eom. v.
8; xiv. 17 ; 1 Thess. v. 16, "Rejoice always").
The best proof that this was no mere phraseo-



logy, but an amazing and new dtaritm

granted to the world, may be seen in the
Epistle to the Philippians. It was written
when St. Paul was old, poor, deserted, im-
prisoned, in danger of immediate death,
and apparently in the lowest deeps of for-
saken sorrow ; yet tlie spontaneous key-nnte
of the whole Epistle is, " I rejoice ; rejoice
ye" (Phil. iv. 6, 12). As poor. The word
means even " paupers,'' and describes a very
literal fact. St. Paul, for Christ's sake, had
Buffered "the loss of all things" (Phil. iii.
8). yet making many rich. Not by getting
collections for them (which would be a
most unworthy antithesis, though it is
strangely accepted by Chrysostom and
others) ; but " by imparting to them the
true riches, in the form of spiritual gifts,
and the teaching of the gospel" (comp.
Jas. ii. 5). Possessing aU things; rather,
as having nothing, and fully having all things.
The verb means "possessing all things to
the full." For " all things are ours " (1 Cor.
iii. 21, 22).

Vers. 11 — 18 An appeal to Hie Corin-
thians to reciprocate his love for them, and
separate ijiemselves from evil.

Ver. 11. — Corinthians! A rare and very
personal form of loving appeal, which occurs
nowhere else in these Epistles (comp. Phil,
iv. IS). Our mouth is open to you. St.
Paul has evidently been writing in a mood
of inspired eloquence. The fervour of his
feelings has found vent in an unusual flow
of beautiful and forcible language. He
appeals to the unreserved freedom with
which he has written as a reason why they
should treat him with the same frank love.
Our heart is enlarged. After writing the
foregoing majestic appeal, he felt that he
had disburdened his heart, and as it were
made room in it to receive the Corinthians
unreservedly, in spite of all the wrongs
which some of them had done him (comp.
oh. vii. 3, 27). On the antithesis of the
mouth and the heart, see Matt. xiL 34;
Eom. X. 10.

Ver. 12. — Ye are not straitened in ns.
Any narrowing of the sympathy or straining
of the relations between us does not rise in
any way from me. (For the verb, see oh. iv
8.) Ye are straitened in your own bowels ;
rather, in your own hearts. Any tightening
or pressure of the feelings which should
exist between us rises solely from your own
hearts. Enlarge and open them, as I have
done, and we shall once more love ea«h
otlier aright. The verb has already ocorred
in oh. iv. 8 (" distressed "). Your own
bowels. It is to be regretted that the
Authorized Version adopted the meaningless
and often rather incongruous word "bowels"
for the Greek word atrXiyxva used in iti
Hebraic sense of " feelings," " affections "



OH. YL 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



147



(Cant. T. 4 ; lea. xvi. 11). This literalism
is always out of place, and especially in
Philem. 7, 12, 20.

Yer. 18. — TSow, for a recompense in the
same. He begs them to give him " a reward
in kind; " in other words, he wishes them to
be as frank with him as be has been to
thfm. As unto my children. And therefore,
as a spiritual father, I may surely ask for
sympathy. St. Paul uses the same metaphor
in 1 Cor. iv. 14 ; 1 Thess. ii. 11. Be ye also
enlarged. Treat me as I have treated you
(comp. " Be as I am," Gal. iv. 12).

Ver. 14. — Be ye not unequally yoked to-
g'ftther with unbelievers. Ewald, followed by
Dean Stanley, Holsten, and others, thinks
that here there is a sudden dislocation of the
argument, and some have even supposed
that the section, ch. vi. 14 — vii. 1, is either
an after-thought written by the apostle on
the margin of the Epistle after it was fin-
ished ; or even an interpolation. The latter
view has arisen from the unusual expres-
sions of the section, and the use of the word
" Belial," and the command of Greek shown
by the varied expressions. There is no
adequate ground for these conjectures.
Every writer is conscious of moods in which
words come to him more fluently than at
other times, and all writers of deep feeling,
like St. Paul, abound in sudden transitions
which correspond to the lightning-like
rapidity of their thoughts. It is doubtful
whether the readers would not have seen at
once the sequence of thought, which depends
on circumstances which we can only con-
jecture. Probably the alienation from St.
Paul had its root in some tampering with
unbelievers. Such might at any rate have
been the case among the Gentile members
of the Church, some of whom were even
willing to go to sacrificial feasts in heathen
temples (1 Cor. viii. — x.). " Unequally
yoked " is a metaphor derived from Lev. xix.
19 and Deut. xxii. 10, and is the opposite
of "true yohe-fellow" (Phil. iv. 3). What
fellowship ; literally, participation (Eph. v.
6 — 11). Unrighteousness ; literally, law-
lessness (1 John iii. 4). It was a special
mark of heathen life (Eom. vii. 19). light
with darkness. This antithesis is specially
prominent in Eph. v. 9 — 11 and Col. i. 12, 13,
and in the writings of St. John (John L 5 ;
iii. 19 ; 1 John, passim).

Ver, 15, — Concord; literally, harmony or
(wcord. The word does not occur elsewhere
in the New Testament or in the LXX.
The adjective sumplwnos occurs in 1 Cor.
vii. 5. Christ with Belial (see 1 Cor. x. 21),
Belial. Here used in the form Beliar, as a
proper name, because no Greek word ends
in the letter r. In the Old Testament it
does not stand for a person, but means
"wickedness" or " worthlessness." Thui



in Prov. tL 12 "a naughty person" is admn
belial. " A son of Belial" means " a child
of wickedness" by » common Hebraism
(Deut. xiii. 13 ; Judg. xix. 22). And hence,
since Belial only became a proper name in
later days —

" To him no temples row,
No altars smoked."

Perhaps, as lias been conjectured, this clause,
which contains two such unusual words,
may be a quotation. It is, however, no
ground of objection that Belial does not
occur elsewhere in St. Paul, for until the
pastoral Epistles he only uses didbolos
twice (Eph. iv. 27; vi. 11). What part, etc. ?
This is not, like the other clauses, an illustra-
tion, but the statement of the fact itself which
"has come in amidst the lively, sweeping
flow of the discourse." With an infidel;
i.e. with an unconverted Gentile.

Ver. 16.— What agreement. The word
means " unity of composition." This is the
fifth synonym which St. Paul has used in
this clause — juerox^, Koivtavia, avfi<p^vri(TiSy
fiepU, (rvyKarddiais. The Verb tTvyKardSrifu
occurs in Luke xxiii. 51. St. Paul in this
chapter shows an almost unwonted command
over the Greek language. With idols (Matt,
vi. 2i; 1 John v. 21). Ye. "We" is the
reading of N, B, D, L. Ewald, without
sufficient grouud, makes it one of hie ar-
guments for regarding this section as inter-
polated (comp. ch. V. 21). Are the temple
of the living God, The indwelling of the
Holy Spirit in every Christian heart, which
is the distinguishing result of the new
covenant, was very prominent in the thoughts
of St. Paul (1 Cor. iii. 16 ; vi. 19; Eph. ii.
21, 22; 1 Tim. iii. 15; comp. 1 Pet. ii. 5;
Heb. iii. 6). As God hath said. The quo-
tation is altered slightly from the LXX. of
Lev. xxvi. 12. But in this and the next
verses we have " a mosaic of citations " &om
this passage and Exod. xxix. 45 ; Isa. Iii.
11 ; Ezek. xx. 34 ; 2 Sam. vii. 14 ; comp.
Jer. xxxi. 9 ; Isa. xliii. 6. This mode ■ i
compressing the essence of various qn»-
lations into one passage was common among
the rabbis. In them. In the original
Hebrew this means " among them " (Exod.
xxix. 45 ; Lev. xxvi. 12). since the indwell-
ing of God by his Holy Spirit belongs only
to the new covenant.

Ver. 17. — rrom among them; «.«. from
among the unbelievers. Touch not the un-
clean thing (Lev. xi. 8, etc. ; Isa. Iii. 11).

1 will receive you (comp. Ezek. xx. 34).
These promises to Israel are naturally trans-
ferred to the ideal Israel, the Christian
Church.

Ver. 18. — And will be a Father unto you.
These reminiscences are sufficiently near to

2 Sam. vii. 8 — 14; Isa. xliii. 6 ; Jer. xxxi. 9,



148



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. vi. 1—18



to render needless the supposition that they
come from any apocryphal book (Ewald) or
Jewish hymn (Grrotios). Saith the Lord
Ahnighty. The phrase, not elsewhere used
by St. Paul, b teken from 2 Sam. viL 8



(LXX.). The epithet indicates the certain
fulfilment of the promises. Fantokrator, for
" Almighty," is used in the LXX. for " Lord
of sabaoth," and in the New Testament
only occurs elsewhere in the Apocalypse.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1, 2. — The grace of Qod received in vain. " We then, as workers together,"
etc. There are three topics here for meditation.

I. A SUBLIME MISSION. " Workers together with him." What is the grand work
in which God is engaged and in which we can co-operate ? He is engaged in numerous
works — works of creation, government, conservation, in which we can have no hand.
The work here is evidently the work spoken of in the preceding chapter — the work of
reconciling man to himself, the work which he does in Christ. Now, all genuine
ministers co-operate with him in this ; their grand endeavour is to bring alienated
souls into friendship with him. Blessed partnership this.

IL A SOLEMN POSSiBiLiTT. " Receive not the grace of God in vain." The grace of
God here evidently refers to the offer of this reconciliation. This may be looked upon
objectively or subjectively. Objectively it is the go.spel, which is called the " gospel of
the grace of God;" subjectively it is personal Christianity. It may be received "in
vain " in two forms. Many have the offer of reconciliation and reject it, and to them
the offer has been received " in vain." It is possible for those who have personally
experienced it to lose it. The free agency of man, the exhortations of the Scriptures,
and the facts of apostasy — as in the case of David, Peter, etc. — show the possibility of
losing this. No greater calamity can happen to a man than to receive this " grace in
vain ; " hence the earnestness of the apostle.

III. A 8UPEBMB OPPOKTUNITT. " Por he saith, I have heard thee in a time accepted,
and in the day of salvation have I succoured thee : behold, now is the accepted time ;
behold, now is the day of salvation." To use the words of a modern writer, " There is,
so to speak, a ' now ' running through the ages. For each Church and nation, for each
individual soul, there is a golden present that may never again recur, and in which lie
boundless possibilities for the future. The words of the apostle are, as it were, the
transfigured expression of the generalization of a wide experience, which tells us that
' there is a tide in the affairs of men.' "

Vers. 3 — 8. — The highest office injured hy its officer. " Giving no offence in any
thing," etc. Paul was engaged in the highest office — the office of reconciling men to
Ood ; in this he was a co-worker with the Infinite, and here he refers to—

I. An evil to which ministbeb of the gospel are liable. The evil referred to
is bringing blame upon the ministry. " Giving no offence in anything, that the
ministry be not blamed." So perverse is man that he often degrades some of the
liighest offices he is called to sustain. There are merchants that degrade commerce,
doctors that degrade medicine, judges that degrade justice, statesmen that degrade
legislation, kings that degrade the throne; but, what is worse far, there have been
ministers who have degraded the ministry, and there are such still, ignorant men,
intolerant men, worldly men. unspiritual men, blatant dogmatists. Ah me ! how the
pulpit is often degraded !

n. An evil which must be avoided at ant cost. See what Paul did and suffered
to avoid this stupendous eviL " But in all things approving ourselves as the ministers
V God, in much patience, in afflictions, in necessities, in distresses," etc. Mark : 1.
Sow he suffered in order to maintain the honour of the ministry. "Afflictions,"
" necessities," " distresses," " stripes," " imprisonments," " tumults," " labours," " watch-
ings," " fastings," etc. 2. How he wrought in order to maintain the honour of the
ministry. By "pureness," "knowledge," "long-suffering," "kindness," etc. He
learned to labour and to wait. " Neither count I my life dear unto myself, so that I
might finish my course with joy, and the ministry, which I have received of the Lord
Jesus, to testify the gospel of the grace of God." The ministry in these days is too
often degraded into a trade, a profession, a medium for the gratification of the vanity,



OH. VL 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 149

ambition, and the greed of men. The milliong have come to call churches and chapela
" preaching-shops." One of the greatest trades carried on in this commercial age is,
perhaps, the trade in the gospel.

Vers. 9, 10. — "Things are not what they seem." "As unknown, and yet well known,"
etc. Against misrepresentations and slanders, Paul, in the context, vindicates his
apostolic authority, and proclaims at the same time the unworldly principle which
animated both him and his fellow-workers. These words present to us the two oppo-
site sides of a good man's life — the secular and the spiritual. The side revealed, as seen
by man, and the sWe in the sight of God.

I. To THE BECULAB BYE HE WAS UNKNOWN ; TO THE SPIEITtTAL WELL KNOWN. " As

unknown, and yet well known." The world has never yet rightly interpreted and
understood the real life of a genuine disciple of Christ. To the world, Paul appeared
an ignominious fanatic. John says, " The world knoweth us not." The world does
not understand self-sacrificing love, the animating, shaping, directing principle of a
godly man's life. It understands ambition, greed, revenge, but not this. Hence men
in every age, so far as they have come under the rule of this " new commandment,"
have been regarded as monsters unworthy of life. This explains martyrdom, ay, and
the crucifixion of Christ. But, though thus unknown to men, they are well known
to others. 1. Well known to Christ. "I know my sheep." Christ knows all his
disciples. 2. Well known to heavenly spirits. They are famous in heaven. At
their conversion heaven rejoiced, and over every step of their subsequent history
heaven watches with a loving care.

II. To THE SECULAB BYE HB WAS DYING ; TO THE SPIEITUAL HE WAS LIVING. " As

dying, and, behold, we live." To worldly men Paul appeared as mortal as other men ;
with a frame scourged by persecution, shattered by perils, wasted by labour and want,
he was nothing but a dying man. His contemporaries knew that he would soon run
himself out, and mingle with the dust of all departed men. But spiritually he was
living. " Behold, we live." The soul within that dying body of his was living a
wonderful life — a life of Christly inspiration and aims, a life of communion with
heaven; a life destined to become more sunny, vigorous, and beautiful with every
aspiration and act. Living is not hody-breathing, but spirit-acting, acting according
to the Divine laws of our constitution.

III. To THE BEGULAB EYE HB WAS MUCH TEIED ; TO THE SPIBITUAL HB WAB NOT

DE8TK0TED. "Chastened, and not killed." The word "chastened" here refers, I
think, to his various scourgings, suffered in the synagogues and elsewhere. To worldly
spectators he, with all his wounds, would appear a dead man ; but he was spiritually
alive. The hardships and the strifes did not touch his soul ; his spiritual purposes,
enjoyments, and hopes were not killed. Spiritual life is unkillable ; like certain plants
in the vegetable kingdom, which have their germs or roots so deep down in the soil,
and BO thoroughly mixed up with it, that, though you cut down the trunk, or pull up
the roots from the earth, their life will break out again.

IV. To THE SECULAB EYE HB WAS VBBY SOEKOWFUL ; TO THE SPIEITTTAL HB WAS

ALWAYS EEJOiciNG. " As sorrowful, yet alway rejoicing." As if Paul had said,
" Under our sufferings, we seem to be very cast down and sad ; dreary, degraded, and
wretched does our life seem to the worldly men around us." So it often is with the
life of a Christian man. But, on the spiritual side, a truly godly man is "always
rejoicing," rejoicing in a good conscience, rejoicing in a stream of pure »nd noble
thoughts, rejoicing in a consciousness of Divine favour.

V. To THE BECULAE BYE HE WAS VBEY POOB ; TO THE SPIBITtrAL HB WAS W1UXTH-

GiviNG. " As poor, yet making many rich." Paul and his colleagues were poor ; they
had suffered the loss of all things. Yet spiritually they were not only rich, but made
others rich. 1. The highest work of man is to impart spiritual riches to his brother
man. 2. Worldly poverty does not disqualify a man for the discharge of this Bublime
mission.

VL To THE SECXJLAB BYB HB WAB DESTITUTE ; TO THE SPIEITUAL HB WAS KNOBMOUBLT

BiOH. " Having nothing, and yet possessing all things." Nothing of this world's good,
yet " possessing all things," not legally, but morally. Christliness gives ua an interert
in all things. *' All things are yours."



150 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. vi. 1—18,

Do not estimate life by appearances — things are not what they seem. Christlinesa
with poverty, persecution, and suffering, is infinitely to be preferred to wickedness with
the whole world at its command.

Vers. 11 — If, —Oenuine Christian love. "O ye Corinthians," etc. Notice —

I. Its power. "What does it do ? It enlarges the heart. " Our heart is enlarged."
The heart means the whole spiritual nature, and this spiritual nature is capable of
indefinite expansion and Christian love, and nothing else can effect this. A man's
intellect may be expanded by ideas, but his heart, out of which are " the issues of
life," only by love. What a difference between the heart of a miser or a bigot to the
heart of a Paul, a Howard, or a F&elon 1 Selfishness contracts the soul into a grub,
love expands it into a seraph. Therefore " covet earnestly the best gift," that is, love.

IT. Its ierepebssibility. " Our mouth is open unto you." A large heart is so full
of loving sympathies and aims that speech becomes a necessity. " Out of the abun-
dance of the heart the mouth speaketh." The language of love is the language of
nature, the language of eloquence, the language of inspiration.

HE. Its hunobe. What does it hunger for? "Ye are not straitened in us, but ye
are straitened in your own bowels [' affections,' or ' hearts ']," etc. Paul states that
their hearts towards him were "straitened," or narrow, compared with his to them.
He entreats them to he "enlarged," and thus " recompense " or return his affections.
Love, by a necessity of its nature, hungers for a return of its affections from the object
on which it is bestowed. Paul did not ask them for their money, or their patronage
or praise, but simply for a return of the love which he had for them.

Vers. 14 — 18. — Uneqiudly yoked. " Be ye not unequally yoked," eta Observe here
three things.

I. Thebe is an essential spieittjal diffeeencb between those who aek tbult
CONVERTED TO CHRISTIANITY AND THOSE WHO ABB NOT. The line of demarcation is
broad and conspicuous. The difference is the difference: 1. Between "righteousness
and unrighteousness." 2. Between " light and darkness." 3. Between Christ and
Satan. " What concord hath Christ with Belial?" 4. Between faith and infidelity.
" What part hath he that believeth with an infidel ? " 5. Between the " temple of
God " and the " temple of idols."

II. NoTWrrHSTANDINQ THE 8PIEITUAL DIFFBEENCE, THE CONVERTED ARK IN DANGER

OF BEINQ ASSOCIATED WITH THE UNCONVBETED. Henco the Command, " Be ye not
unequally yoked together with unbelievers." Also the command, "Come out from
among them." Alas 1 we find such association in almost every department of life —
in the matrimonial, the commercial, the political, etc.

III. FeOM SUCH AN ASSOCIATION IT IS THE DUTY OF THE CONVBETED TO EXTRICATE

THEMSELVES. "Wherefore come out from among them," etc. Observe two things.

1. The nature of the separation. " Come out from among them." It must be : (1)
Voluntary. Not to be driven out, but you must break away from all the ties that
bind you. Agonize to enter the "strait gate." (2) Entire. "Touch not the unclean
thing." Sin is an unclean thing — unclean in its essence, its phases, and its infiuences.

2. The encouragement to the separation. "I wiU receive you, and will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters." As a Father, what does God do for his
children? (1) He loves them. Eis love is the fountain of all the love in the
universe. All the love that human parents have for their children is but one drop
from the boundless ocean. (2) He educates them. Who teaches like Gk)d? He
teaches the best lesson, in the best way, for the best end. He educates the whole soul,
not for temporal purposes, but for ends spiritual and everlasting. (3) He guards them.
Human parents can only guard the bodies of their children. This Father guards the
soul — the conscience from guilt, the heart from impurity, the intellect from error, etc.
(4) He provides for them. The best of human parents can only provide for their
children a few supplies for their bodies, and that for a time only. This great Father
provides for the soul, and provides for ever. " He is able to do exceedingly abundantly
•bove aU that we ask oi think."



CH. VI. 1—18.] THiii SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 153



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHOES.

Vers. 1—10. — Appeal growing out of the foregoing argument. The {p"ace of God
had been manifested in the reconciliation of which he had been treating ; and this
reconciliation had its period, or season, special as to its character and advantages.
Everything has relation to time. Life has infancy, childhood, youth — successive eras.
Nature has her seasons. It was now God's receiving-time, a dispensation of mercy,
an acceptable time, a day of salvation. So sensible was St. Paul of this fact that he,
as a co-worker with God, pressed the exhortation on the Corinthians not to neglect the
grace of God freely vouchsafed in this auspicious time. Good influences were con-
spiring in their favour ; " receive not the grace of God in vain." It was a co-working
period. Out of the turmoil, the strife of tongues, the collisions within the Church and
without, doctrines were emerging into clearer view, and, as doctrines were better under-
stood, duties would be more faithfully discharged. Had not these Corinthians been
revived and strengthened of late ? Had they not heeded his affectionate warnings and
purified the Church ? It was a season for continued and enlarging co-working, the
Holy Spirit and the Church combining in an effort, peculiarly desirable then, to extend
Christ's kingdom. And what was he doing to this end ? For his part he was studious
to put no stumbling-block in the way of others, lest the ministry be reproached. That
was the prudence which wards off evil. It has grave duties. It is vigilant, able to
see the approach of danger and measure the extent of the peril. It is prompt to act
in a precautionary manner. Yet this was only one part of a co-worker's duty. On
the other hand, then, he was intent on commending himself to their confidence and
affection, and by what means ? The portraiture of St. Paul as a co-worker is now
presented. Previously to this he had sketched himself (see ch. ii., iii., iv.) in certain
specific relations, such for instance as an " able minister," and as one who carried his
treasure in an " earthen vessel ; " but it was now his purpose to delineate himself and
his experience with reference to a particular end. To be a co-operator, patience is the
first virtue required. He speaks, therefore, at the outset, of " much patience," and
assuredly he did not mistake the basic position of this great quality. He mentions
nine forms of suffering which have been regarded by some commentators as consti-
tuting three classes, viz. : afBiotions or general calamities, necessities, distresses, the
leading idea being pressure, or " narrow straits ; " then stripes, imprisonments, tumults,
referrable to the popular excitement against him as a preacher ; and lastly, labours,
watchings, fastings, as indicative of ministerial experience. In all these things patience
was exercised, keeping him steadfast, enabling him to endure, and preserving his mind
in the peace of Christ. It is a description of one whose body was open on all sides to
the invasions of pain as the infliction of opposition and malice ; and again, of one
whose mind had anxieties and sorrows originating in its own sense of responsibility.
Body wrought upon mind, mind upon body. Under these conditions the co-worker
had to proceed with his task — patience, " much patience," being the cardinal excel-
lence of his character. But, further, the co-worker speaks of purity, knowledge, long-
suffering, kindness, endowments of the Spirit, sincere love ; and again, he speaks of
the word of truth, how he worked with God's power, and fought also with an armour
of righteousness, right hand and left hand engaged in the conflict. Just here the
mind of St. Paul reacts from its subjective state, the enumeration of his moral
virtues is suspended, and the idea of conflict brings back the " afSictions " alluded to
(ver. 4). Nearly all his transitions occur in one of two ways, either as the immediate
product of a physical sensation or as the result of some exciting thought, having its
source in his train of reflection. At the instant when the image of battle comes before
him, the co-worker has the doctrine and morality of the gospel to defend against fierce,
vindictive, mighty assailants. The honour of his position and the glory of Christ as
the Captain of his salvation are at stake. Sword and shield are in hand, and for what
is he fighting and how ? " Armour of righteousness " is very expressive. The great
truth was present in his mind, foremost as a restraint as well as an impulse, the truth
80 ably argued in the previous chapter that we are " made the righteousness of God in
him." Give the ethical philosopher all the credit he deserves ; honour the morali«t
who strives to protect society from immorality; and yet it is very obvious that a man



152 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ti. 1—18.

who feels himself set for the defence of the " righteousness of God " as manifested in
Christ stands on ground infinitely higher than the mere philosopher and moralist.
This cannot be denied ; such a man has a spirit, a motive, an end, far remote from
the others, and peculiar to the sphere he fills. What the apostle fights for is righteous-
ness. And how is he fighting ? It is important that we should see his temper, his
tactics, his whole method of conducting the campaign. Men who ostensibly fight for
righteousness are not always righteous fighters. "I will not trust in my bow, neither
shall my sword save me," said one of the psalmists. " Make haste to help me, Lord
my salvation," was David's prayer. "Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of,"
were the words of Jesus when the " sons of thunder " wished to call down fire from
lieaven on the Samaritan village. Michael the archangel, in contention with the
'levil, "durst not bring against him a railing accusation." A bad spirit is not allowable
even towards Satan, nor can an archangel go beyond " The Lord rebuke thee." Now.
the apostle speaks of himself as fully armed for offensive and defensive warfare. And
the fight goes on amid honour and dishonour, praise and cheer from friends, hostility
and contempt from enemies ; by evil report and good report ; vilified as a deceiver, but
yet a true man ; as unknown (" obscure nobodies ") to men, but known to God ; as
dying, and behold, out of perils, life springs renewed and enlarged ; chastened as a
diacipiine needed for a spiritual warrior who was meantime in everything a co-worker
with Christ ; a sorrowful man in the estimation of many, but in reality always
rejoicing ; poor, working with our own hands for a living, but making many rich in
spiritual blessings ; and, finally, having nothing, and yet — glorious paradox — possessing
in Christ all things. — L.

Vers. 11 — 18. — Sis warmth of affertion ; anxiety of the apostle lest the grace of God
he received in vain. The ruling thought of the chapter is twofold. St. Paul, the
ambassador, is a fellow-worker with God in Christ, and as such he is deeply concerned
that the Church at Corinth should not fail to use its means and opportunity for
salvation then within reach. A critical period had come in its history, and he saw it
very clearly. What so sagacious as love? what love so abounding as his? " ye
Corinthians," out of the depths of my heart, the heart just described — out of its purity,
knowledge, long-suffering; "O ye Corinthians," by my kindness, by the Spirit of God
in me, by love unfeigned ; " ye Corinthians," amid my chastenings from God and
my afflictions from men ; — whom I have besought not to receive the grace of God in
vain, once more I pray you hearken. " Our mouth is open unto you, our heait is
enlarged." Only a very large and roomy nature could have entertained the thoughts
and feelings, could have suffered, could have passed through the experiences which
had just beei described ; but various and multiplied as were that heart's burdens
and tribulations, it had ample space for his brethren at Corinth. " Ye are not
straitened in us [no narrow place you occupy in our affection], but ye are straitened
i n your own bowels [narrowness in your love for us]," the word " bowels "
being used to expres.s the seat of the feelings. " For a recompense [return of love]
... be ye also enlarged," and he asks this as a father seeking affection from his
children. A sudden break occurs in the movement of thought. Did the use of the
word " children " quicken a feeling akin to parental solicitude ? Or did the sorrows
he was undergoing in behalf of this Church at Corinth, a moment before so vividly
pictured, give him a new insight into the dangers surrounding its members? Or was
he recalling the supreme truth in his theology, the atoning death of Christ, and the
righteousness that came to us and became a part of us ? One in whose mind associa-
tions gathered so very rapidly and suggestions arose with such spontaneous vigour
would probably feel the sudden return of the ideas and images on which he had been
dwelling. A peculiarity with hitn is this partial development of a thought on its
first appearance in his intellect. A similar law is traceable in his emotional nature.
There is a second production, and this " aftermath " is very valuable. The subject
under consideration (vers. 14 — 18) had engaged attention in the First Epistle, and he
now reverts to it under the apprehension that these Corinthians, who were particularly
exposed to the " evil communications " that " corrupt good manners," might receive
the grace of God in vain. If there had been a strong reaction against the Judaizing
party in the Corinthian Church, that may have introduced unusual hazards as to



OH. iL 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 153

Gentilism. Reactions, no matter how wise and truthful in themselves, always involve
more or less danger. Facts are distorted, truths are mixed with prejudices, and the
victory is our victory. Generally, indeed, only when time has befriended our infirmi-
ties and given us an opportunity to recover from reactions are we put in an attitude to
see and judge with entire fairness. But, whatever the impulse at the moment on
St. Paul's mind, his words are surcharged with energy. Question hastens after ques-
tion. " Unequally yoked together with unbelievers " is the trumpet-note of alarm.
What the union was he does not specify. It may have been promiscuous intercourse
with heathens, or participation in idol festivals, or mixed marriages. Whichever it
was, it was unequal yoking, a very ill-devised union ; and under how many aspects
did it deserve condemnation ? The heart of the evil is exposed ; could righteousness
have fellowship with unrighteousness, light commune with darkness, Christ have con-
cord with Satan, believers have part with infidels, the temple of God agree with idols ?
Metaphors multiply, as they commonly do with him when excited. By their profession
of Christ they were pledged to depart from all iniquity, especially all associations that
might revive their former Gentile tastes and habits, most especially those social
usages which identified them with idolatry. Quoting twice from the Old Testament
(Leviticus and Isaiah), he shows what the true religion demanded of its subjects in its
earlier stage under Moses and its later under the prophets, in both cases separation
from a world given over to heathenism. Only by means of this line of demarcation
between them and the corruptions of society would God acknowledge them as his
people, walk in their midst, and be a Father unto them. " Touch not the unclean
thing." It was the language of Judaism from her tabernacle in the wilderness, from
her temple in Jerusalem, and now reaffirmed and emphasized anew and with most
solemn intensity by Christianity. St. Paul saw that history repeats itself. Not
otherwise were it history. The peril of the gospel was precisely that which had
wrecked Judaism. From this point of view it is profitable to re-read this earuest
chapter. Chrysostom and others have spoken of its lofty eloquence. Stanley, Robert-
son, Webster, and Wilkinson have taught us to appreciate the breadth of its ideas and
the classical force of its diction. It is a chapter of warning from the memorials of the
past, as that past demonstrates most signally the jealousy of God's rule over men. On
the one hand, we have the terrible fascinations of that spirit of idolatry which in some
form or other is the besetting sin of the human race, the innate disposition to supplant
Jehovah, the fatal surrender to " the god of this world," never so blinding as when he
makes men as gods unto themselves. On the other hand, we have the visible symbols
of God's presence among his people in the temple and its institutions, and further, the
proof of the Spirit's power in their hearts, his actual indwelling and sanctifying agency.
Yet this grace may be received in vain. The higher the gift, the more freedom in its
use. No sooner has the apostle set forth the fact that God was in Christ recovering the
world unto himself than the magnitude of the risk presses on his attention. The risk
was altogether in man. It was a risk, moreover, in the Christian man who had received
grace and might lose its influence. Law had been violated, but Christ, as the eternal
Son of God, had expiated the guilt, and by faith we accepted him as the Divine Recon-
ciler. Man's responsibility had utterly failed under Law; would it fail under grace?
If it did, there was an end of hope, since there remaineth no other sacrifice for sin,
St. Paul was aware of the local circumstances that enhanced the dangers of the Corin-
thians. The style of the appeal recognizes this fact. Let it not be forgotten, however,
that, while men as men have these local surroundings, Christianity deals with man as
man, and, accordingly, the warning is addressed to us not to receive the grace of God
in vain. Our probation goes on in the midst of contingencies ; temptation and trial are
things most completely shut out from ordinary modes of calculation, and no prophetic
eye reads our future. Yet this very sense of uncertainty is the most merciful of all
providential arrangements. It is a source of great power. Except for its keen sensi-
tiveness, our liability to evil would be far greater. Apprehension acts in two ways —
it constantly reduces the amount of evil existing ; and again, it fortifies us to resist the
evil that remains. Now, Christianity operates in both these modes! With the latter
only have we now to do. The problem for every individual Christian is the efficiency
of grace in his resistance to Satanic influence. So far as the Scriptures teach us on
this subject, Jesus Christ had no temntations save those which Satan offered ; 9nd.



154 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [-"H. vi. 1—18

while we have no warrant to say this of believers, we may safely afBrm that it is the
reconciled man in Christ, " made the righteousness of God in him," who is the object
of Satan's sharpest assaults. To destroy the power of grace in the child of God is his
unceasing elfort. Now, this grace is received through two great channels — the con-
science and the affections. St. Paul is referring continually to these organs of spiritual
activity, and hence, we infer, that he would have his converts most earnest at these
points. Conscience must be enlightened by the gospel and directed by the Spirit. _ It
must be a conscience of that righteousness we have in Christ and through Christ,
external to us as the ground of justification, internal to us as the regenerating and
sanctifying work of the Holy Ghost. " For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus
hath made me free from the law of sin and death." But this sense of righteousness in
the conscience must act likewise in the affections, or it cannot be " the law of the Spirit of
life." If, then, St. Paul commended the gospel " to every man's conscience in the sight
of God," was he content to rest here ? " ye Corinthians, . . . our heart is enlarged."
Open your hearts, open them freely, open them as mine is opened unto you. If they
would thus realize the righteousness of Christ, they could not receive the grace of God
in vain. It is here, while speaking of the enlarged heart, that he appeals to them aa
his children. " Be ye also enlarged." Here we see how grace is lost ; the heart, instead
of expanding, is narrowed and cramped. Ministers must preach the gospel of love ;
and, to do this, they must be lovelj' in spirit and conduct. Christians must accept the
grace of the gospel in hearts that enlarge, so that growth in loveliness may develop
strength of character in its most enduring form. Just at this point backsliding sets
in. No man's conscience begins to be blinded till his heart begins to be narrowed.
Sympathy is checked; openness of feeling arrested ; giving to charitable objects abated;
cordiality of intercourse with ministers and members of the Church supplanted by
fault-fiinding, prejudice, and censoriousness ; and then conscience becomes careless, then
inert, then callous, and grace dies in the soul. The enlarging heart is the secret of
growth. Nor is there any growth so beautiful as this in itself and so inspiriting as an
example to others. Its fellowship is with souls that are its kindred in Christ ; its
communion with that wisdom and purity symbolized by light ; its concord with him
who took upon himself our nature that we might bear his image; its part or share is
in the possession of holiness ; and its capacity is a temple, or habitation, of which " God
hath said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them." — L.

Ver. 1. — " Workers together." One who is sent upoo a mission, who fills the ofBce
of an ambassador, is evidently one who, however he works, does not work alone. He
is the representative of the court from which he is sent, by which he is accredited.
When the apostle thought of his life-mission, especially when he thought of its difii-
culties, it was natural that he should recall to his own mind the fact that God, who
had commissioned him, was working with him and giving efiicacy to his labours.
And, in writing to others, it was appropriate that he should remind them that they
had to deal, not merely with a fellow-man, but with a fellow-man who was supported
and authorized by Divine wisdom and grace.

I. God woeks. He not only wrought the earth and the heavens, which are " the
svork of his fingers : " he follows his work of creation by the unceasing work of provi-
dential care, government, and oversight. The laws of nature are the ways in which
&od works. And the spiritual realm is his highest and noblest sphere of operation, in
7,'hich he is carrying out his holy purposes.

II. Men, when they woek successpullt, woek with God. Take two illustrations.
The husbandman toils through all the changing seasons of the year, and in his plough-
Lng, sowing, and reaping depends upon the processes of nature, *.e. works along with
God. The physician studies the human frame, and, when it is diseased, seeks its
•ecovery to health through co-operation with the laws of the various organs and tissues
af the body, and succeeds only by working with God. So is it in the spiritual sphere.
The preacher of Christianity makes use of God's truth and relies upon God's Spirit ;
«.iy other method must involve failure and discouragement.

III. Human laboueees work in subjection to the Divine Lohd. There is no
equality in this fellowship. God can dispense with any man's services, however great,
wise, and good he may be. No man can dispense with the counsel and the aid oi



OH. -w. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORHSTTIIIANS. 155

Heaven. 1. In the recognition of this lies the labourer's strength. 2. And the dignity
attaching to his position and office, which is not personal, but ministerial. 3. And tha
responsibility of all for whose welfare the Christian labourer toils. Such are bound to
consider, not the human minister merely, but the Divine Lord, whose servant and
messenger he is. — T.

Ver. 2. — The acceptable time. As an ambassndor for Christ, Paul used both authority
aud persuasion in urging his readers and hearers to take advantage of the opportunity
afforded them of reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ. And he very naturally
and justly pressed upon them an immediate attention to the summons, the invitation
of Divine grace. There are reasons why delay should be avoided, why acceptance
should be unhesitating.

I. The BLESSiNa. This is set before us in two lights. 1. On the Divine side, we
observe that God is ready both to hear and to succour. To hear the cry of those in
danger, the petition of those in want. To succour those who are in present distress
and who are unable to deliver themselves from their afBictions. 2. On the human
side, we observe that men may be accepted and reconciled, that they may be delivered
and saved. The salvation here proffered is spiritual and eternal.

II. The oppobtunitt. It is not for us to speculate as to God's reasons, so to speak,
for limiting the day of grace and of visitation. We have to deal with the fact that
there is a period during which the blessings of salvation may be sought and secured.
The first advent of our Saviour may be fixed as the terminus a quo of this period, the
second advent as the terminus ad quern. During the Christian era, the dispensation of
the Holy Spirit, the gospel is preached to all men, and the invitation is freely offered
to those who need to apply, with the assurance that their request shall not be refused.

III. The appeal. The blessing is great and adapted to the case of the sinner ; the
opportunity is precious and not to be despised without guilt and folly. What, then,
follows? Surely the appeal is powerful and timely; it deserves the immediate atten-
tion of all to whom the gospel comes. 1. The conditions are such that they may be
at once fulfilled. The call is to obey God, to believe in Christ, to repent of sin, to live
anew. 2. Nothing can be advanced to justify delay. Delay is unreasonable, dangerous,
and foolish. To neglect the appeal would be to defy and displease God. 3. Those of
every age and condition are alike placed in this position of privilege and of respon-
sibility.— T.

Ver. 4. — "Ministers of God." Man is not meant to be a law or an end unto
himself. He finds the true secret of his being, who lives, not unto himself, but unto
his Lord. To take employment under a wise and holy Master, to engage in a spiritual
service, to look up dady for direction and for blessing, to aim at the glory of the
Eternal, — this is the true vocation and the true happiness of man. Paul found his
strength for labour and his consolation in suffering, not in anything personal, but in
losing and merging himself in his Lord and King.

L The Master. Our Lord has bidden us call no man master, by which he directs
our attention to the fact that we receive our instructions for duty and our revelations
of truth, not from human, but from Divine authority. God is, to those who accept
service under him, a wise, just, forbearing, considerate, and liberal Master. In him we
find one free from all imperfections of knowledge, and all flaws of character, such as
must be expected in all human governors.

II. The seeviob. In its outward aspects this varies in different cases, so that the
life-work of no two men is quite the same.

" How many serve ! how many more

May to the service come 1 —
To tend the vines, the grapes to store,

Thou dost appoint for some ;
Thou hast thy young men at the war.

Thy little ones at home."

in. The obligations of spmiTCAL servants. 1. Obedience. This Is indispensable.
The TOW which Christians take is that they will be the Lord's servants to obey hini.



156 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKmTHIANS. loB. vi. 1—18.

2. Fidelity. The allegiance due to the Divine Lord must, upon no consideration, be
transferred to another; his cause must not he betrayed. 3. Readiness to suffer in the
path of devotion. The context shows us that this was an element in Paul'a conception
of true ministry.

IV. The ekcompbnse. 1., This is entirely of grace ; the purest and the best have
no claim to it. 2. Success in ministry is the true servant's best reward. 3. With this
is conjoined approval on the Master's part. 4. And the recompense is imperishablfl
and immortal. — ^T.

Ver. 7. — " The armour of righteousness." There was something soldierly both in
the nature and in the life-course of the Apostle Paul. His resolution, courage, forti-
tude, capacity for endurance, fidelity to his spiritual Commander, were all high military
qualities. We do not wonder that he made in his writings use so frequent and so
effective of the warrior's life. The Christian's career, and much more emphatically the
apostolic career, appeared to him one large campaign. Hence his reliance upon " the
armour of righteousness on the right hand and on the left."

L The Christian's need op spiritual armoub. 1. His foes are many, active,
vigilant, formidable, untiring. 2. The warfare to which he is called is accordingly
perilous and serious. 3. His own natural resources are utterly inadequate for his
defence.

IL The nature of the Chbistian'b spibitual abmoub. 1. It is not physical, or
carnal, but moral. 2. It is described in one word as " the armour of righteousness,"
as opposed to fraud and cunning and iniquity of every kind. 3. It is adapted to the
several necessities of the welfare. Vide Eph. vi., where the several weapons are
enumerated and described.

III. The purposes which the Christian's aemoue eppbots. 1. The right hand of
the warrior wields the sword ; and this is the emblem of the weapon of attack which
the Christian grasps — even "the sword of the Spirit," which is the Word of God. 2.
The left hand of the warrior holds the shield, which is the symbol of that mighty
principle of faith, which is the defensive weapon used by every soldier in the spiritual
warfare, with which he quenches the fiery darts of the evil one.

IV. The results or the wabpabe waged bt the Christian theouoh thb vbk
OF HIS spiritual ARMOUB. 1. To himself, security and honour. He is delivered from
his foes, and he fights the good fight of faith. 2. To his cause, victory. Righteous-
ness is destined to conquer ; there is no uncertainty as to the issues of the holy war.

3. To his Commander, great and growing renown, as his foes are vanquished and his
kingdom is consolidated and extended. — T.

Ver. 16. — A temple of God. The temple at Jerusalem, built for the glory of
Jehovah, and honoured by him as his dwelling-place and shrine, was as edifice quite
unique. No material structure can with justice be said to have replaced it ; for, when
the old dispensation passed away, all local and material sanctity vanished, and a
spiritual dispensation surpassed as well as abolished the glory that had been. The
body of Christ was the temple of God, and when that had been taken down, the only
temple which remained was the spiritual edifice, built of living stones and inhabited by
the Holy Spirit of God.

I. The eebpects in which the Christian Chuech is the temple of the ltvino
God. 1. Christians are separated from the world around. As the temple as Jerusalem
was different from all other edifices, so the spiritual society designated the Church is
distinct from the common and secular associations which men form for their own con-
venience, advantage, or pleasure. 2. In this spiritual temple the living God makes
his chosen dwelling-place. The Lord loved the gates of Zion ; he revealed his glory
in the Shechinah-cloud ; he was sought and found in his sanctuary. In like manner
the Eternal chooses the hearts of his people for his congenial abode, where he makes
himself known, and especially reveals his holiness and his grace. 3. The Church is
the scene of worship; there praise, prayer, and sacrifices of obedience are offered to
God and accepted by him.

IL Thk peculiae ohabacteristios of the Christian Church ab thb temple ot
Gk>D. 1. It is holy. 2. It is universal, extending throughout the world, and including



ox. -n. 1— 13.J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 157



within it men of every race and of every condition. 3. It is enduring. For, wliilst
the individual members disappear from sight, those who quit the Church militant do so
only to join the Church triumphant. And whilst human societies, organizations, and
states pass away, this Divine society loses nothing of its glory, but lives firom age to
ago. 4. It is growing. Every several stone built into it adds to its majestic propor-
tions, and prepares for its final completeness ; it " groweth an holy temple unto the
Lord."
III. The practical oblioations laid upon all the members of the Chuboh in

BESPECT OF THEIK INCORPORATION IN THE SPntlTUAL TEMPLE. 1. 'i'hey are called UpOa

to uphold the dignity of their calling and position. 2. And to maintain that purity
which is their distinctive quality — to be "separate, and to touch no unclean thing."
3. And to seek the consolidation and uniry of the spiritual edifice. 4. And at the same
time to strive after its enlargement aud uitiniate completeness. — T.

Ver. 18. — Father and children. No human relation is close enough and no human
language is strong enough to set forth the union which subsists between Grod and his
people. They are the temple, he is the Deity inhabiting, inspiring, and glorifying the
sacred and spiritual edifice. Nay, he is the Father, and they the sons and daughters
whom he has adopted and whom he loves.

I. The NATURAL BASIS OF THIS RELATION BETWEEN GOD AND HIS PEOPLE. ThiS haS

ever been recognized by the thoughtful and pious. Even heathen philosophers and
poets could say of themselves and their fellow-men, " We also are his offspring."
Created by his power, sustained by his bounty, cared for by his wisdom and goodness,
the children of men are also the children of God.

n The redemptive elevation of this relationship. The old covenant contained
intimations of the Divine fatherhood, as is apparent from the language of the text.
But it was in the gospel of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ that this truth was fully
realized. " Ye are all the children of God through faith in Jesus Ciirist." The Spirit
of adoption makes and seals the true believers in Christ as members of the Diviie
family. It is to his fellow-Christians that the Apostle John exclaims, " Beloved, now
are we the children of God." It is in the case of those who are born anew of water and
of the Spirit that the relation in question is made unmistaljably evident ; the spiritual
features of the Father are, so to speak, reproduced, and the subjection and obedience of
the children evinces their sacred kindred.

III. The INN0MBRABLB PROOFS OF God's FATHERHOOD. God is uot Satisfied simply
to be called our Father ; he feels and acts like a Father. He provides for his children
all that is necessary for their spiritual well-being and happiness, supplies their wants,
directs their steps, defends them from danger, comforts them in sorrow. And, above
all, he assures them an abode in his own — in the Father's — house, where they shall for
ever enjoy the blessedness, the fellowship, the glory of a sacred, secure, and everlasting
home. Thus both in this world and in the world to come the gracious Pareat justifies
his Name and fulfils his promises.

IV. The EXPECTED response or filial love and obedience. Alas I how often is
this withheld, or very partially and inadequately rendered I Yet in the hearts of God's
true children there resides a principle which impels to childlike love and service. God
has a right to his children's reverence and service, gratitude and love, devotion and
consecration. "If I be a Father," he asks, "where is my honour?" Nothing that
we can do can ever sufBoiently express the sense we ought to cherish of the infinite
love and pity, forbearance and generosity, of our heavenly Father. It is for his
children to witness to his faithfulness, to hallow his Name, to cherish his reveiatioc, <ir«i
to do his will— T.

Ver. 2. — "Now . . now." L God has provided a salvation foe hen. This
salvation (1) is in Christ ; (2) is to be obtained by repentance and faith ; (3) embraoe»
justification and sanctification ; (4) results in present joy, holy and useful life ; and (^
In these in far higher degree, and eternally, in heaven.

II. The opportunity for securing this salvation is limited to the peesekt.
1, The present age. 2. In an individual to his brief life on earth. No unsaved on*
(•n afford to waste any time ; no saved one will want to. Salvation is so great a matt*^



158 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vi 1—18

that it should be sought instantly. To miss it is to miss everything. If we get nought
but this, we should see to it that we get this. " Seek ye first the kingdom of God and
his righteousness " (Matt. vi. 33).

III. Tendencies to pboceastinatb abb often steono. Such pleas as the following
have power with not a few : (I) there is time enough ; (2) after temporal matters are
arranged we can attend to spiritual ; (3) pleasure must be tasted, after that seriousness ;
(4) it will be easier to repent and believe " to-morrow." This reflects the human view,
and the Satanic (for Satan is a great advocate of delay). The Divine is otherwise ;
" Now is the acceptable time ; behold, now is the day of salvation."

IV. The pebilb of delay. 1. Life may be cut short speedily and suddenly.
2. Painful sickness prior to death may render attention to spiritual concerns practically
impossible. 3. Desire for salvation may pass away. 4. The heart may be fatally
hardened. 5. The Spirit may cease to strive. " God is not mocked."

v. The sinfulness of delay. 1. What an insult to God I 2. What a return for
the love and sacrifice of Christ 1 3. What a pernicious example ! 4. What an injustice
to ourselves !

VI. The Divine xniOENOT. When Paul is intensely earnest in this matter it is
because God makes him so. It is the Divine mind declared by a servant. And so of
all faithful ministers ; their voices are echoes of the voice of God. Clirist on earth
cried, " Eepent." " Wherefore even as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts" (Heb. iii. 7, 8). The Divine message of salvation
is pressed upon the instant attention of those to whom it is delivered. We cannot
wonder at the urgency of God, for: 1. God knows the tendencies of our nature.
2. God knows what loss of salvation involves. — H.

Vers. 3 — 10. — Not hindering the c/ospel. I. Paul's gbeat anxiety not to hindeb
THE gospel. He preached the gospel faithfully and with utmost earnestness, but:

1. He guarded anxiously against lessening the effect of his preaching by his conduct.

2. He realized that life speaks as well as verbal utterance. 3. That what is built up
by the lip is often pulled down by the life.

II. Paul's effoets to avoid in life and conduct that which might hindeb
THE GOSPEL. He sought not to give offence in anything (ver. 3). He dreaded proving
a stumbling-block to his hearers. So in every way he endeavoured to commend
himself as a true minister of God, and thus to advance the cause which he had at
heart. Illustrated: 1. In his endurance of tried and suffering. Here he exhibited
amazing patience and fortitude. (1) In those of a general kind. AfBiotions, necessi-
ties, distresses. Of these he had a large share. Ministers, especially very active and
devoted ones, must be prepared for a like experience. (2) In those inflicted hy enemies.
Stripes, imprisonments, tumults. These were largely occasioned by his faithfulness to
the gospel. He was so faithful to the gospel that he wouLi bear these in such a spirit
as to further advance that gospel among men. That which his enemies intended as a
check he would transform into a help. (3) In those of voluntary origin. Labours ;
working vpith own hands for support, and toiling in the ministry. Watchings ; sleepless
nights in travel, peril, and sickness occasioned by exposure or excessive effort. Fast-
ings ; " foodlessness " — he was often hungry when, if less devoted, he might have had
abundance. 'Z. In the conduct of his ministry and life. {V) Pweness. Chaste living.
Disinterestedness. Singleness of motive. (2) Knowledge. Knowledge of guspel truth,
and this sincerely conveyed to hearers. A minister is often a hinderer through ignorance,
especially through spiritual ignorance. But Paul sought to be thoroughly furnished, .so
that he might not retard but help forward the truth. To teach others he felt that he
himself must be taught, and he was as diligent a learner as a teacher. Paul was well
acquainted in every way with the gospel which he preached. (3) Long-sufferini;
Patient submission to wrongs. Not quick to retaliate. The pulpit may be irritable
as well as the pew. (4) Kindness. Gentleness. Courtesy. Benevolence. A kindness
which ever meant usefulness. (5) In the Holy Ghost. Showing in all utterance and
conduct that he was under the influence of the Divine Spirit. (6) Love unfeigned. A
ministry of true love is a ministry of real power. To call our hearers, as some are very
fond of doing, " beloved," is one thing ; to have them truly in our hearts is another.
(7) The Word of truth. Bvef preaching the truth as it is in Jesus. Not proclaiming



OH. TL 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 15!

human theories, but Divine revelations. Holding to the " one thing," and not carried
about by every wind of doctrine. The weathercock preacher may be amusing, but he
will do little to advance the gospel. (8) The power of Ood. Upon this Paul relied.
To this he submitted himself. He humbled himself into nothingness, tfcat God might
work through him and be all in all. He gave the praise of everything accomplished
to the great Worker. And God specially honoured him by manifesting his power in
and through him. Some ministers are too strong and great to accomplish anything.
They can do without the power of God; they do without it, and then they do nothing
except hinder the gospel. (9) The armour of righteousness on the right hand and on
the left. He was clad in the whole armour of God (Bph. vi. 13). Offensive and
defensive. Himself justified and accepted and living in holiness ; and weapons in his
hand by which he smote evil wherever he saw it. 3. In the maintenance of consistency
and integrity under specially trying circumstances. Whether he was held in honour
or dishonour, whether subject to ^ood report or evil, he strove to be ever the same, to
preach the same gospel, to manifest the same spirit, to live the same life. His life
and ministry were not dependent upon surroundings. 4. By not succumibing to adverse
circumstances. (1) Though branded as a deceiver, he convinced the candid that he
was true and sincere. (2) Though unknown in true character by many, his faithful
persistent ministry and life made him weU known to multitudes, and won their
high regard. (3) Though chastised by enemies and dying daily, his heroic spirit
continued its hold upon God, and he was not overborne. (4) Thouali sorrowful as
to outward lot, his inward condition enabled him ever to rejoice, and his joy found
constant expression and was a powerful tribute to the gospel. (5) Though poor and
outcast, he laboured so zealously in the gospel that many were made rich. (6)
Though seeming to have lost aU possessions, he could and did lay claim to every-
thing. In the spirit of his own words to the Corinthians, " All things are yours "
(1 Cor. iii. 21). Such conduct, spirit, life, bore the most powerful testimony to the
gospel. Paul himself was a great sermon which, under God, shook the world. What
Paul wa» is to-day one of the mightiest witnesses for Christianity. — H.

Vers. 14 — 18. — Unequal yoking. Intimate associations ought not to be formed by the
people of God with the ungodly. The reference is, no doubt, to Deut. xxii. 10.

I. How THH MAT BE DOKB. 1, In rtHigious fellowship. The apostle had occasion to
warn the Corinthians against fellowship with idolaters. We may be attracted by
a religious community in which the truth is not found or in which it is greatly
obscured or distorted. 2. In marriage. With believers the religious question should
be a prime question. Alas ! it is often no question at all. Religious inequality is
most frequently esteemed as the dust of the balance, and less than that. Consent is
asked of the earthly father, but the heavenly Father is too commonly forgotten
altogether. Marriages too often are not made in heaven, and that is why they have so
little heaven about them. The ill-assorted union does not lead so much to Paradise as
to misery and the divorce court. 3. In friendships. There is often much unequal
yoking here. A wise man chooses his friends with care, but a fool takes them haphazard
or on mere " liking." The power of a friendship is great, for good or for evil. Believers
should choose friends who will help, not hinder, and friends who will be friends for
ever, and not severed at the grave. 4. In business. Partnership in commerce is a yoke
which brings men very close together. They must have very much in common ; their
lives must run in very much the same channel ; their actions must lar^'cly agree. Or,
if not, their union will be disunion, and the issue, quarrels first, and perhaps bank-
ruptcy or worse next. How often a child of God has lived to rue the day when he
entered into partnership with a child of the devil !

II. Why this should not be done. 1. Unreasonable in itself. Consider what
believers and unbelievers are. (1) The one, " righteousness " (ver. 14) — lovers of holiness,
striving for its fuller possession. The other, "iniquity" — the heart alienated from God,
loving sin and walking in it, though possibly exterior gloss may obscure inward defile-
ment. (2) The one, " light " (ver. 14)— illumined by the Holy Ghost, shone upon by the
" Light of the world " — possessing a knowledge of the truth, children of the day. The
other, " darkness " — the true light rejected or ignored, subjects of error, preparing tliem-
lelves for " the outer darkness." (3) The one, in Christ (ver. 15)— members of his



160 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. vi, 1—18.

body, his disciples, his ransomed people. The other, followers of Belial, the children of
the wicked one, serving him daily. (4) The one, the temple of God (ver. 16), con-
Beorated to God, God dwelling in them. The other, the temple of idols — of the idols of
sin, made into gods. God in the one, the devil in the other. How can such opposites
as these be united ? Why should righteousness seek alliance with iniquity ? Can light
and darkness walk together ? Can Christ and Belial be on terms of concord ? How can
temples of God and temples of vilest idols be brought to agreement? 2. Extremely
perilous. How many have found this ! In marriage, for example. What misery, loss
of peace, loss of holiness, loss of everything most prized once, have followed upon an
unequal alliance 1 The life has been utterly ruioed and lost. Some marry in order to
convert; but we should always convert people before we marry them. The peril
applies to all cases of unequal yoking. The evil generally triumphs because the good
has robbed itselt of power by taking a false step. 3. Expressly forbidden hy Ood. The
Divine Word is emphatic : " Come ye out from among them, and be ye separate, saith
the Lord, and touch no unclean thing " (ver. 17). This is a Divine comwanrf which we
dare not set aside. This is Divine wisdom ; our wisdom may not accord with it, but if
so, our wisdom is assuredly folly. This is Divine love, purposing to save us from misery
and loss. 4. A most gracious promise fur the obedient. The resolve not to be unequally
yoked may sometimes seem to entail large sacrifice. If we lose something, this is what
we gain. God says : (1) " I will receive you " (ver. 17). We shall be with God. We
shall have God. Though we may lose the creature, we shall gain the Creator. God
will be gracious to us if others are ungracious. If the stream fail, we may resort to the
Fountain. Here is the warrant for doing so. (2) " And will be to you a Father ",
(ver. 18). We may lose the earthly father, who may have singular views respecting
our " prospects ; " we shall have a Father above. If we are obedient, God will reveal
himself in the tenderest and most loving guise. If God be our Father it must be well
with us whatever betide. (3) " And ye shall be to me sons and daughters " (ver. 18).
Note, " daughters " are specially mentioned. These have frequently to endure much
when " unequal yoking " is resisted. We shall be " children of God." Then we shall
be " heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ." Sweet, indeed, are the fruits of obedience.
We may lose much ; let us never imperil this. — H.

Ver. 2. — " Now." Before Christ came, religious privileges were with Israel. The
Gentiles walked in darkness through "times of ignorance." But with Christ came
tidings of great joy to all people. And when the Holy Spirit fell on Gentiles as well
as on Jews who heard the gospel, it was evident that a new age had come. This is
the " acceptable year of the Lord," and is the dispensation of grace intended to con
tinue till the second coming of Christ. It is the world's great opportunity. So it is on
the large scale ; but when we take groups of men and individuals, the scale of time is
proportionally reduced. Nations miss opportunities which may never return. Con-
gregations have a bright season, a time of visitation, which may come to a lamentable
end. The Lord may withdraw his favour ; may even fight against an unfaithful
Church with the sword of his mouth. Shorter still is the day of salvation for the
individual.

I. Thb value op oppoetunitt. In affairs of this life it is fully recognized. It is
the dictate of worldly wisdom to wait for and to seize the fit occasion. Does a specu-
lator watch for a rising market ? or a capitalist look out for a good investment ? or a
poUtician aspire to office ? Such men keenly watch their opportunities and must not
let them slip.

" There is a tide in the affairs of men

Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune;

Omitted, all the voyage of their life

Is bound in shallows and in miseries ;

And we must take the current when it Berret

Or lose our ventures."

AH this Is quite as true of spiritual advantage. There is an opportunity to be seized,
a tide to be taken at the flood. There is a day which must become the birthday of
th« so«l, the peace-day of the conscience, or loss will be suffered — eternal loss. There



on. VI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 161

is an emergency on which all the future secretly depends, and which, if one let slip, he
may wring his hands and curse his folly, but will never find a romefiy.

II. Indications of oppoetunitt. The favourable day for spiritual life is not so
easily recognized as that of worldly advantage. In external aspect it is as other days.
A preacher may speak to you whom you have often heard and not heeded. The view
of truth which is to carry you captive may be one which has often been pressed on you
to little purpose. But somehow you are moved ; you catch the urgency of now ; and
you listen and believe as you never listened or believed before. So that common day
becomes a beginning of days and a spiritual epoch to you. There are, however, indica-
tions or hints of a critical time which watchful spirits may perceive. Often it is
preceded by sickness, sorrow, or disappointment, making one more thoughtful and
more wistful about the things unseen. Or there springs up, one hardly knows how, a
sense of inward weariness and want. Conscience is uneasy, and the heart cannot rest.
Then some word in season falls on the ear, or looks out of a book or a friend's
letter. These things indicate opportunity. Miss it not. Embrace the gospel at once.
Receive not the grace of God in vain.

III. Penalty of missing opportunity. The wasted day can never be recalled.
Lost property may be recovered ; lost friendships regained ; but the lost year never
comes back. It was a sign of wisdom in the young Roman emperor that he grieved
when a day had been wasted. Perdidi diem ! But such tasks as he had in hand
might still be accomplished by redoubled diligence on the morrow. Not so with him
who wastes the day of salvation. Perdidi vitaml The day of grace neglected ie
followed by the night of doom.

IV. The appeal fob immediate compliance with the gospel. 1 . Let gratitude
move you. The God of grace calls you to him; not exacting his rights and dues from
you as his creature and his subject, but with open banc's extending pardon and countless
benefits for time and eternity, ireely. "Now then," exclaimed an old English preacher,
" what is more suitable to ingenuous gratitude than to embrace the season of Goii's
bestowing so free a favour ? Surely the least we can do is to accept of that God that
accepteth of us ; of him who is full of beauty and rewards, while we have nothing to
bring to him but deformity and beggary." 2. Let a proper self-regard move you.
Why should you lose your own soul ? Why will ye die ? It is more pleasant for the
preacher to speak as from the gate of heaven ; but it is necessary to cry aloud some-
times as from the mouth of hell. Turn ye I Get you back 1 Seek the Lord, and do
it now I— P.

Ver. 10. — Sorrow and joy. The apostle's experience is in some degree known to
many Christians. The apparent paradox of simultaneous grief and joy is to them a
fact of sober consciousness.

I. Sorrowful. Not querulous, but bruised and sad. The course of the world rushes
past us, and we sit down with our pain or grief. We are chastened. And not without
reason. 1. We must take our share of the troubles common to mankind. Spiritual
life carries with it no exemption from the usual cares and losses of the present state.
To bring about such exemption would require a multiplication of miracles without any
sufficient reason. If famine come upon a land, or war, or pestilence ; if a railway train
or a passenger steamship be wrecked, — there can be no discrimination between the good
and the bad in the common catastrophe. Indeed, it is questionable whether a special
immunity from pain and grief accorded to spiritual men might not do serious harm to
religion, by giving strong temporal inducements to worldly men to cover themselves
over with a thin coating of godliness. And there are sorrows which no personal
qualities can ward off. Some troubles are inherited ; others come from the mishap or
misconduct of a relative or of a partner in business. And the sickness and death of
those who are dear to us must bring us grief. Man is bom to trouble. 2. We find in
the discipline of sorrow some of the best lessons and impulses of the Christian life.

" Night brings out stars ;
Bo sorrow shows us truths,'*

And conformity to Christ is gained in suffering witi him, working out a deeper
patience and keener moral sensibility

n. C0BINTHIAN8 1|



162 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vl 1— 1&



n. Yet always rejoicino. The Man of bcttows had joy in his Father's lore ;
though it is his affliction that is made prominent in the account of hia state of
humiliation. There was also a joy set before him, and in this he now sits at
the right hand of God. As his followers, we too have joy now amidst sorrow, and
fulness of joy set before us. Always. Not sorrowing always, but always rejoicing.
It cannot mean any ecstatic emotion, for that cannot be habitual; the excessive
strain would break the springs of feeling. But we may be always glad and satisfied
and triumphant in our Lord. Not only is this passible to the sorrowful; it seems to
be fullest and strongest in them. Remember Paul and Silas singing in the dark
dungeon with their stripes unwashed. Samuel Rutherford in prison at Aberdeen, and
Ma(fi.me Guyon in prison at Vincennes, tasted the same gladness. The latter said,
" My heart was full of that joy which thou givest to them that love thee in the midst
of the greatest crosses." This can be understood only by those who have some real
acquaintance of heart with the Lord Jesus, and know what treasures his people have
in him — unsearchable riches, unerring wisdom, precious atonement, prevailing inter-
cession, helpful sympathy, victorious strength, and everlasting love. Genius often
shows the combination of a pensive vein, a tenderness, a pathos, with a healthy elastic
hopefulness, nay, with a joyfulness robust as in a man, yet simple and playful ai in a
child. But we speak of what is better than even genius— the grace of G-od. This can
make even very ordinary people both gentle and brave, tender and strong, patient in
sorrow, and constant in joy. " The meek shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the
poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel." — F.

Ver. 13. — " Be ye enlarged." The apostle had specially in view the increase of joy.
But we may use the exhortation to commend the enlargement of Christian people as
respects head and heart and hand.

L Be enlarged in yode thoughts. No doubt there is a dangerous breadth or
laxity ; but there is also mischief in the opposite direction, in narrowness. Good
people are apt to become the slaves of their own phraseology, and to insist on their own
traditions of expression and definition as exclusively safe and orthodox. Christian
truth appears to be with them quite a narrow ledge of stone shaped to their liking,
whereas it is a broad firm rock that does not submit itself to men's measuring-lines.
Never follow a narrow-minded religious teacher. He is sure to be opinionative and
monotonous. And even when he lodges a truth in the mind, he gives it the effect of a
prejudice. Be enlarged in the comprehensive and manifold wisdom of the Bible. Dare
to give yourself room in the far-reaching thoughts and words of God. Especially seek
to be enlarged in your estimate of Jesus Christ. Only by degrees was any sufficient
knowledge of him attained by those who " companied with him " on earth. They
loved him from the first and often wondered. They tried by questions to peer into
his mind, but could not make him out. They were surprisingly slow in their appre-
hensions, till he opened the Scriptures to them after his resurrection, and the Holy
Spirit fell on them after his ascension. And now, though the Holy Spirit is with us,
his teaching is not received all at once by disciples, and they need more and more
enlargement. It is the mark of a growing Christian that in his view Christ increases ;
the mark of a great Christian that to him Christ is very great. Augustine, Bernard,
Leighton, Rutherford, Owen, Martyn, — were these great Christians ? And what had
they in common ? Large and admiring thoughts of Christ.

II. Bb enlarged in youe sympathies. Narrow hearts are even more mischievous
and unchristian than narrow heads. It is confessedly difficult for one who may have
received little mental culture, or has been early imbued with strong prejudices, to gain
breadth of view ; but there is no excuse for any one who, while naming the name of
Jesus, and professing to know the love of God, retains a paevish and contracted heart.
We have said " professes to know the love of God," because, when this love is really
" shed abroad by the Holy Spirit," it must tend to expand the affections and sym-
pathies. Argument will not do it. Admonition cannot produce the effect. Love only
kindles love, and so imparts a larger kindness and more delicate sensibility. Love
cries shame on harshness and envy, s[)reads brotnerly kindness, disposes to forgiveness
of wrong and a kindly construction of motives, covers a multitude of sins. Have
sympathy witl; all good objects, though you cannot actually help all. Take the part of



OH. VI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE 10 THE CORINTHIANS. 163

right-hearted men. A great Christian ig one to whom the Lord has given " largeness "
of heart. Paul, Chrysostom, Bengal, Baxter, Whitefield, Chalmers, — were these great
Christians ? And what had they in common ? Great hearts, large generosity of soul,
the capacity of loving much, and of enlisting the love and sympathy of others for
worthy objects.

" The truly generous ii the truly wise.
And he who loves not others lives unblest."

III. Be enlarged in labours and gifts. A grudging hand and indolent temper
in the Church go with a narrow spirit; but where mind and heart are enlarged in
Christ, the hands will be found ready to every good enterprise and open in giving up
to the measure of ability. — F.

Vers. 14 — 18. — Separation. St. Paul wished to see the Corinthian brethren enlarged,
enlivened, and encouraged. But this was not to be by the easy and unprinciplecl
method of ignoring all distinctions and binding together incongruous materials and
moral opposites. The exhortation, "Be ye enlarged," must be taken with this, "Be
ye separate ; " and charity must go hand in hand with purity. The contrasts expressed
in this passage were very apparent in ancient Corinth, where the Christians, as saints,
were openly separated from the heathen worship and heathen vices around them. A
similar state of things may be seen now at mission stations in populous heathen cities.
The Christians turn away from the temples, disown the priests and soothsayers,
disregard the festivals, and have nothing any more to do with idols. They may still
maintain family and social intercourse with the heathen, because conversion, as St. Paul
explains, does not break family ties, or change the station in which one is when
" called," or drive Christ's followers " out of the world." But they may not be unequally
yoked with non-Christians or profane persons in Church fellowship. The distinction
cannot be made so palpable where all society has accepted the Christian name as when
and where the Church is in sharp contrast with a powerful heathenism. Yet in prin-
ciple the distinction insisted on by St. Paul must be maintained, else the strength of
the Church as a spiritual institution is sapped, and a compromising spirit enters which
destroys the glory of Christ. To carry out the principle in actual Church discipline is
confessedly difficult ; but the Church has a right to expect that her overseers will
prevent the admission of scandalous persons ; and individual professors of the Christian
faith should not claim Church fellowship without examining themselves as to the
side on which they stand with reference to the five points of contrast indicated in this
text. 1. Between righteousness and iniquity. This takes us at once into the region
of conscience and moral conduct. The Christian should be a righteous man. He may
not lie, or cheat, or overreach, or take unfair advantage of another, because to do so
would not be right or righteous. The rogue and the worker of iniquity are as heathen
men, and not fit for Christian fellowship. 2. Between light and darkness. This points
to the mental and moral environment as affecting thought, feeling, and action. It is
a mode of expression common with St. Paul, as may be seen in other Epistles. The
Christian is a child of the light and of the day. Darkness, on the contrary, is the
. covering of the heathen world ; and its works are unfruitful and shameful. 3.
Between Christ and Belial. Abstractions are left, and the leaders of two conflicting
hosts are set in opposition. A Christian is " of Christ," as the Lord whom he obeys
and the pattern which he follows. On the other side is a man of Belial, or the follower
of a worthless and profligate spirit. So this contrast has reference to disposition, and
excludes every false and wicked person from Christian fellowship. 4. Between the
believer and the unheliever. This takes us to the question of religious persuasion and
conviction. A Christian is a believer on the Son of God. In this lies the secret of his
life, strength, holiness, and patience. A man without faith is no more fit for fellow-
ship in the Church than a heathen. To him the trials and triumphs of the life of
faith are alike unknown. 5. Between the temple of God and idols. The Church is the
living temple of the living God, the holy temple of the holy God. The individual
Christians are stones in that temple, and must be in harmony with its sacred character
and use. What agreement has it with idols ? If the Jew would have thought it a
horrible profanation to set up a graven image in the temple at Jerusalem, much more
should Christian minds abhor the setting up of idols of selfishness, covetcusness, or



164 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. tl 1— la

Bensnality in that better temple which is now the habitation of God in the Spirit. So
much of incompatibilities and contrasts. Then the apostle, who did not address him-
self to the heathen, bidding them stand off, but wrote to the Christians, urging them to
avoid entanglement with the heathen, gave them a charge from the Lord, and enforced
it by a gracious promise. (1) The charge. " Wherefore come out from among them."
The Christians were not to leave Corinth, but to hold their positions and preserve their
callings in that city, while scrupulously avoiding the contamination of idolatry and
vice. So should we continue in the world, yet not be conformed to it or love it ; should
do our part in our generation, yet separate ourselves from all that is unjust or unholy.
" Touch not the unclean," under which category comes, not mere licentiousness, but all
that is unhallowed, and so out of harmony with the purity of God. (2) The promise.
" I will receive you," etc. (vers. 17, 18). Such was the promise made to King David in
regard to his posterity (2 Sam. vii. 14) ; and it is extended to all the household of
faith. From the sure belief of this promise we may derive strength and resolution
to keep the rule of separation. Are we to be openly acknowledged as the sons and
daughters of the Lord God Almighty ? What, then, have we to do with iniquity,
with darkness, with Belial, with unbelief, with idols ? The best-known Christians are
not always the best. They may have some striking quality or rare endowment, or
may have reached by favour some conspicuous post. But the best are those men and
women who most fully and consistently obey the holy calling. How sweet is fellow-
ship with such Christians, and how stimulating ! It is good to be yoked together with
them under Christ's yoke which is easy, and his burden which is light. It is good to
be builded together with them in the temple of the living God. It is good to be joined
as brothers and sisters in the same family, and call the Lord Almighty our Father.
The friendship of the world, the alliance of the sons of Belial, the communion of the
unclean, — what are these to the dignity of the people of God and the family affection of
his children ?— P.

Ver. 2. — " The accepted time.'' This text immediately follows upon the full declara-
tion of the truth in Jesus, the free offers of Divine mercy, and the earnest pleadings of
ch. v. St. Paul understood well that there was this sad and strange tendency in men —
they are ever disposed to shift into the future the most serious duties of life. In the
time of disease they will not send for the doctor until they absolutely must. They put
off making their wills until the very power to make them is gone. How is the tendency
to be explained ? It is one of the forms in which man's hopefulness expresses itself.
The future always seems to be richer and better than the present ; though, when that
future is reached, it very seldom realizes our hope. It is, however, a mischievous form
of hopefulness if it lifts us off from the performance of present duty. Then it becomes
procrastination, " the thief of time."

I. The incompabable advantagjss op time present. The " now" By this term
is properly meant that moment in which any duty stands right before us. Observe :
1. Its security. We have it ; it is here ; it is ours. The only thing in all the world
that is or over can be ours. The only sphere for the activity of our will. We "act
in the living present." Nothing really belongs to us except that which we have at
this moment. Tlie past is gone. The future may never come. When we put off
duty to the future, we deal with something that is not our own. We have no future
until God gives it to us and makes it present. We have only the now, and on it may
hang eternity. 2. Its peculiar suitability for action. Because the whole nature is
aroused, awakened, interested, prepared, and action can be taken so easily and so
heartily, now. You can never again lie sure of the same interest, and, if neglected
duties do ever get done, they must push into the place of some other duty, and push it
aside. Now we have the assistance of all aiding impulses.. We are helped by an
awakened conscience, by deep emotions, and by the urgings of the Divine Spirit. Now
is the time of our opportunity. Hlustrate by the boats waiting for a wave to help
them ashore. How the men watch, and at last say, " Now, now I " as they bend to
the oar ! The times when the claims of Christ come home to us are just such times ;
then why not now be flooded over all hindrances and difficulties unto the harbour of
salvation ?

II. The serious peril involved in THis neglect of time present. Kotice : 1. The



OH. VI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISILE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 165



insecurity of the return of such another opportunity. Others we may have, hut thi»
precise one will never come again. There is only one round of seasons in each life.
Spring-time never comes but once, with its encouraging assurance, "Thoy that seek
me early shall find me." Summer-time and autumn-time come but once, and by-and-
by we may have to wail, and to say, " The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and
we are not saved." 2. The burdening of life with the sense of unfulfilled duty. That
may indeed be made an impulse to higher activity, but usually it presses as a hopeless
hindrance. 3. The injury done to our moral nature by resisted spiritual influences.
There is a disease whose special feature is the ossification of the heart, the turning ol
its flexible walls into hardness and bone. It is the disease which they suffer from —
in its spiritual form — who neglect the golden opportunities offered them in the time
present. Illustrate by the man on the Royal Charter, who was on the stern half when
the vessel broke in t«vo, and had but a moment in which to leap for dear life. Yet
how men resist the claims of OtoA to their immediate attention! Some wilfully put off
the matter, deliberately finding excuses for delay. Surely no other jiroof of human
depravity is needed than this. Men will hang their immortality on the thread of life,
and even dally with the offered mercy of their God. But some honest hearts may be
in real difficulty as to the claims of Christ upon them now. They think they are too
young, or that they have not been anxious long enough ; or tbey are waiting for a
deeper sense of sin, or, it may be, for more faith. But all these are subtle ways in which
we show our desire to manage our own salvation. If we were really willing that
Christ should save us, we would be quite willing that he should save us now. — R. T.

Vers. 3 — 10. — The holy power of character. The subject occupying the attention of
the apostle is the " ministry of reconciliation ; " the preaching of the gospel of the
grace of God unto the forgiveness of sins and restoration of man to the Divine favour.
This ministry has been entrusted to him. He had, indeed, no " letters of commenda-
tion " to rely on, as had some other teachers, but he could appeal to the character of
his ministry, to the sufferings he had endured in fulfilling it, and to the Divine bene-
dictions which had rested upon it. He does, in a sense, commend himself; but how?
He looks back on his life of labours and sufferings, and challenges comparison. Can
others, with their letters of commendation, point to anything like this? Dean Stanley
divides the means by which the apostle commended himself into four classes : (1) from
"patience" (or endurance) to "fastings," referring to the bodily sufferings of the
apostle; (2) from "pureness" to "love unfeigned," referring to the virtues, that is,
the manifestations of the Divine presence in St. Paul ; (3) from " by the word of
truth " to " by evil report and good report," referring to the means whereby he was
enabled to prove himself to be a true minister of God; and (4) the remainder, relating
to the acceptation in which the apostles were held, and its contrast, with the reality.
St. Paul's personal appeal presents for our consideration the importance of securing for
the gospel a favourable hearing through the consistency and gracious beauty of the
character of those who proclaim it. Its spiritual eSiciency directly depends on the
character of its ambassadors. The three following subjects need careful treatment : —

I. The pbbachbb op the gospel must show its power on his own character and
LIFE. Illustrate by a man offering an infallible remedy for a skin-disease, from which
everybody could see he was still suffering. The gospel is life for dead souls, and he
who preaches it must be himself " alive unto God." The gospel is healing for sin-sick
souls, and he who proclaims it must be able to tell his own experiences of the Balm of
Gilead. The gospel provides a regeneration of character, and what it can do for men
we expect to see in the men who commend it to us. As a fact, thp men who show
the power of the gospel in themselves are the men who alone can wield the power of
the gospel on others. The preacher must be an ensample of them that believe.

II. Ab examples op the Christian spirit, ministers mat expect unusual
TESTINGS. These come in several ways : (1) in the bodily strain which a Christian
ministry involves ; (2) in the more anxious and careful self-oultvire which the ministry
demands ; (3) in the fatigues and perils which come in carrying out the ministry ; and
(4) in the difficulties found in deaUng pleasantly with all kinds of men. To these
should be added those direct dealings of God with his servants, by means of which he
prepares them for service, sharpens and furbishes their swords for his war. Even " fi«ry



166 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE UOEINTHIaNS. [ca. VL 1—18.

trial " is not strange for those who have to stand in the chief places of influence. They
must have a large experience, if, in measure like their Lord, tiiey are to be fully
" touched with the feeling of men's inflrmiliep."

III. ThBIB experiences will give the TEUB power to THBIK PtTBLIO PLEADINGS.

Illustrate in the case of the Apostle Paul, who could not have written such letters If he
had not passed through such trials. Experience is the secret of power. It gives the
tone of tenderness and sympathy to a minister's work. It c;ives confidence in speaking
of the comforting and sustaining power of Divine grace. It is the true power on our
fellow-men to he enabled to speak to them of " that which we have heard, which we
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, oi
the Word of life." But if all this be, in high degrees, true of the recognized ministry,
it is true of all who seek to influence others for God and goodness. The world which
we long and strive to save very properly asks of us this most searching question,
" What has this gospel done /or you ? " — R. T.

Ver. 12. — Where are men straitened? The apostle, in an intense outburst of feeling,
had just said, "0 ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged."
He was referring to that opening of his ministry, and disclosure of his love for them,
which filled the previous part of the chapter. And so he is led to ask from them a
worthy response. He would have his love quicken love. He wanted it to break down
the barriers and enmities and prejudices which were so sadly limiting the confidence
of the Corinthians in St. Paul. So he pleads with them, " Ye are not straitened in
us ; " there is nfi limit of our love to you ; " but ye are straitened in your own bowels,"
your own affections, which are sadlv kept in bondage by your passions and prejudices
and antipathies; by misrepresentations of me and my doings, and the influence of
unworthy teachers. Then he urges them to break the bonds, to be enlarged, and to
let their hearts express the love they feel. What they needed in their spiritual life
was breadth and expansiveness of affection. There is suggested by the apostle's words
a series of contrasts between —

I. The limited ideas and afpections of men. Who are straitened by ignorance,
imperfect character, prejudice, false sentiments, readiness to misjudge and to impute
bad motive, etc.

II. The beoad ideas and affections of apostles. Who see in men souls to be
redeemed unto God, and, labouring for men's spiritual and eternal well-being, can rise
above the smaller occasions of difference and separation.

III. The subijme ideas and affections of God in Christ. Who would have all
men saved ; who loved the world ; whose love found expression in self-sacrifice ; and
whose invitations now are sent to whosoever will. No man is straitened in God.
" When my father and mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up." In his heart
and home there "yet is room." Men are straitened, limited, in themselves, not in
God, not in the gospel, not in Christian teachers. They forge, and fix on, their own
bondages. — E. T.

Ver. 14. — Christian friendships. The Bible would not be a complete book, ade-
quately representing all phases of human life and experience and associations, if it
contained no instance of close, personal, sacrificing friendship. But we have the very
beautiful illustrative case of David and Jonathan. Christianity would not meet us at
every point of our need if it had not something to say about the choices, the changes,
and the claims of friendship.

I. On the choices of friendship. Our friendships are not always gained by choice ;
they are sometimes determined by outward circumstances; sometimes by felt afBnities ;
and sometimes they are started by some impressive or generous deed. But friendship
ought always to be put to the decision of our will, seeing that it bears so directly on
our character and on our life. It sounds chilling to the freshness and warmth of our
love to say that we must decide who is to be our friend, and put into careful considera-
tion the qualities and habits and probable influence upon us of the person towards
whom we are drawn. Yet, surely, as we would not trust our property to a man whom
we did not know, or our child to an education that we had not carefully selected for
him, so we would not give our hearts to onu whom we were not sure that we might



CM. VI. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 161

fiilly trust. Moreover, as Christians, we guard against tlie approach of evil in every
form, and nothing will more directly affect our Christian spirit than the influence of an
unworthy friend. He may be a scoffer. He may be one whose sneer at all we love and
seek may hurt and wound us far more than the scoffer's open speech. He may be an
indulgent pleasure-seeker, whose disposition will be sure to nourish the worldliness and
self-loving of our spirit. And, on the other hand, few things will help us more than
a well-chosen Christian friendship. Many a doubt is scattered by the contact of a
friend's faith, and many a sliding step is steadied by the influence of a friend's firmness.
Two things lie at the basis of a worthy and lasting friendship, viz. a certain felt
sympathy and a certain recognized equality.

II. On the changes of feiendship. Sometimes friendships are broken through
changeableness of disposition. Others are broken by the wrong-doing or unfaithfulness
of one of the friends. And at other times friendships are broken by the rude, rough
hand of death.

III. On the olaixb of friendship. All associations of men together bring claims
and responsibilities. If we have the privilege of a loving friendship, it claims from us
two things. 1. Unfailing confidence in our friend. And this involves openness one
with the other. Close natures, that can keep secrets, seldom know the full joy of
friendship. 2. Mutual self-sacrifice, readiness to spend our best for our friend, and to
put forth our best efforts in his behalf. Poote well says, " Be thankful if Grod has
given you a sympathizing fiiend, one who can share with you your deepest griefs, who
is one with you in all your interests for time and for eternity, whose heart answers to
your heart. This is one of God's best gifts ; be thankful for it and use it right, for he
may deprive you of it, and leave you grieving, — Would I had prized it more I It is a
most sweet, and blessed fellowship ; use it — use it for the high ends of mutual, spiritual
good, and the Divine glory." — R, T.

Ver. 17. — Christian relationt with the world. This verse is a partial quotation from
Isa. Hi. 11, which reads, "Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no
unclean thing ; go ye out of the midst of her ; be ye clean, that bear the vessels of the
Lord." The first reference of these words is to the captives in Babylon, who were thus
counselled to prepare for their return to Canaan, and to see to it that tliey carried back
with them none of the evils of the idolatrous land in which they had so long sojourned.
" The local and historical meaning has for the apostle passed away, and the ' unclean
thing ' is identified with the whole system of heathenism." Since we are counselled
to be separate from the world, it will be well for us to understand what is properly
meant by " the world." Some have thought that they were called to separate from
the world of creation, and compel themselves to find no interest in field, or flower, or
song, or the thousandfold charms of nature. Others have thought that " the world "
must mean the mass of humanity, and so a true religious life could only be lived in
convent or hermit-cell. Others, again, think that " the world " must mean the
common scenes and pleasures of life, and that we can only live for God by resisting
every pleasure and severing ourselves from every form of personal enjoyment. But
" the world," in the New Testament sense, is not a thing or a set of things, but a
spirit and disposition — it is worldliness. It is none of these things, but it may be in
them all. It is all these if we persist in having them without God. This green earth,
with its vales and hills, apart from God, is just " the world." But with God, seen as
God's, it is no longer " the world ; " it is the footstool of the eternal throne, the dwell-
ing-place of the Divine majesty, the garment of the all-glorious King. The mass of
humanity, without God, is just " the world ; " but in the light of God's relation, it is
the Father's family, the Father's school. The common cares and pleasures of life are
filled with an infinite meaning and importance when they become the testing-scenes
out of which God purposes to bring his children, " faultless in the presence of his
glory." Whether a thing is worldly or not depends simply on this — Can you see God
in it? To the Christian man God is in everything, and if he finds anything Into
which he cannot bring the thought of God, then he calls that worldly and shrinks from
it. The " world " is that act, that scene, with which we feel the cherished thought of
God does not harmonize. It is heaven where God is ; it is earth where he is not j it
U bell where he will not come.



168 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [««. tl 1—18



L The Christian must be in the world. He cannot, he may not, get free from
outward and physical relations. His present sphere of life and duty is earthly; and
his Master did not pray that his disciples should be taken ■' out of the world."

II. The Christian need not be of the world. In the sense of adopting its
principles or its raaxims, yielding to its fashions or seeking its ends.

III. The Christian may be above the world. In the sense of having a Divine
life, which masters worldly principles, resists worldly influences, and even makes him
a quickening and healing power on the world, as Christ himself was. This is expressed
in plain terms by the apostle, in Rom. xii. 2, " Be not conformed to this world : but be
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind." The separation from the world is not
to be effected by any mere watching of our acts and habits. Let us realize the higher
transformation in the renewal of our minds, and we shall find it easy to reach a true
nonconformity to the world. He who glorifies God in the spirit will be sure to glorify
him in the body too. He who is daily more renewed in mind will most readily
discovi r, in practical details, what is the "good, and acceptable, and perfect will of
God."— R. T.

Ver. 18. — Proving sonsMp hy obedience. Then — if ye fulfil my commands in sepa-
rating yourselves from the unclean thing, then I " will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." The thought to which we
now direct attention is that a merely abstract relationship is of very little value apart
from the fulfilment of those duties which are involved in the relationship. It is a very
little thing for a man to stand in the abstract relation of a citizen to this great country.
It is a very great thing for a man to fulfil, nobly and cheerfully, the duties of citizen-
ship. It is a very little thing to stand in the mere relation of a husband, a father, and
a master. It is a great thing indeed that we are earnestly striving to meet the respon-
sibilities and fulfil the duties that belong to those relationships. So the name of a
" son of God" will save and bless no man apart from the spirit of a son manifested
and proved in an obedient, humble, devoted, and faithful life. Only the obedient sons
can have the comforting sense of the Divine fatherhood.

I. This was true of Christ, the firstborn Son. God said of him and to him,
" This is my beloved Son, in whom," evidently meaning, in whose obedience, " I am
well pleased." Each of the relations in which men stand to each other has some one
thing which is its essential characteristic. The essential of kingship is the spirit of
judgment. Of fatherhood, is loving authority. Of motherhood, is self-denying affection
and service. Of sonship, is obedience. Whatever other expressions childhood may
find, all are worthless if there be no obedience. I have no right to the name of a son,
save as I obey. I show, I prove, my sonship in this — that I obey. We take, then, the
life of the Lord Jesus Christ, and seek it for the signs of what we know to be the very
essence of sonship, and we receive surprising impressions of the completeness of his
obedience. Jesus when a boy gained and settled the princi pie of life : " Wist ye not that
I must be about my Father's business ? " Painting and poetry gain truest insight of
his spirit when they represent him dutifully working at the carpenter's bench. When
weary at the well of Sychar, he was beyond the interest of earthly food; "his meat and
his drink were to do the will of his Father." And when the sorrows of an awful
conflict and agony were gathering thickly over him, he could utter the perfect devotion
of a Son, saying, " I have glorified thee on the earth : I have finished the work which
thou gavest me to do." Watching that life of cheerful, hearty, loving obedience, who
of us is not prepared to say — We know now what it is to be a son or a daughter of the
Lord Almighty ? Let us not, however, fail to observe that the obedience of his sonship
was not a mere geries of acts ; it was that series of acts instinct with the cherished
spirit of obedience, done in the freeness of the will, under the impulse of holy affections
and resolves. A life full of obedient acts will no more make a real sonship than a
wealth of apples, tied on, will make a fruitful tree. They must be the genuine utter-
ances of the soul's life of obedience.

II. This is true op us, the younger sons. " Now are we the sons of God." " Y*
shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty." What is the value of a
right without fitness ; of a title without preparation to fulfil its claims ; of the name
fif a son without the spirit and obedience of the son? " If any man have not the Spirit



OH. Til. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBtNTHlANS.



lea



of Christ "—that is. the sonlike spirit of Christ—" he is none of his." " If ye be sons,
God hath sent forth the Spiiit of his Son into your hearts." How, then, are we
proving our son ship? Are we breaking free from the old worldly bondages? Are
we separating ourselves from all unclean things ? Are we perfecting holiness in the
fear of Grod? Can God meet our daily practical obediences of his will by saying, "I
will be a Father unto you " ?— E. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER VIL



Conclusion of his appeal (ver. 1). The
apostle's feelings towards them (vers. 2 — 4).
Explanation of the objects of his last letter,
and expression of his joy at the good results
it had brought about (vers. 2 — 16).

Ver. 1. — Having then these promises. The
promises of God's indwelling and fatherly
love (eh. vi. 16— 18). Dearly beloved. Per-
haps the word is added to soften the stern-
ness of the preceding admonition. Let us
cleanse ourselves. Every Christian, even
the best, has need of daily cleansing from
his daily assoilment (John xiii. 10), and this
cleansing depends on the purifying activity
of moral effort maintained by the help of
God's grace. Similarly St. John (1 John
iii. 1 — 3), after speaking of God's father-
hood and the hopes which it inspires, adds,
" And every man that hath this hope in Mm
purifieth himself even as he is pure " (oomp.
Jas. iv. 8). From all filthiness; rather,
from all defilement. Sin leaves on the soul
the moral stain of guilt, which was typified
by the ceremonial defilements of the
Levitioal Law (comp. Ezek. xxxvi. 25, 26).
The word used for "filth" in 1 Pet. iii. 21
is different. Of the flesh and spirit. From
everything which outwardly pollutes the
body and inwardly the soul ; the two being
closely connected together, bo that what
defiles the flesh inevitably also defiles the
soul, and what defiles the spirit degrades also
the body. Uucleanness, for instance, a sin
of the flesh, is almost invariably connected
with pride and hate and cruelty, which
degrade the soul. Perfecting holiness. Tbis
is the goal and aim of the Christian, though
in this life it cannot be finally attained
(, ?ail. iii. 12). In the fear of God. There
is, indeed, one kind of fear, a base and servile
fear, which is cast out by perfect love ; but
the fear of reverential awe always remains
in the true and wisely instructed Christian,
who will never be guilty of the profane fami-
liarity adopted by some ignorant sectarians,
or speak of God " as though he were
some one in the next street " (Heb. xii. 28 ;
1 Pet. iii. 15).

Ver. 2. — Receive ns ; rather, crpen your
hearts to us; make room for us (oomp.
Mark ii 2; John ii. 6). It is an



to them to get rid of the narrowness of heart,
the constricted affections, of which he has
complained in ch. vi. 12. We have wronged
. . , corrupted . . . defrauded no man. 'Phe
" no man " in the original is placed first,
and this emphatic position, together with its
triple repetition, marks St. Paul's insistence
on the fact that, whatever his enemies
might insinuate, there was no single member
of their Church who could complain of
injury, moral harm, or unfair treatment from
him. Clearly he is again thinking of defi-
nite slanders against iiimself. His sternness
to the offender may have been denounced
as a wrong ; his generous sanction of broad
views about clean and unclean meats, idol-
offerings, etc., may have been represented
as corrupting others by false teaching (ch. ii.
17) or bad example (ch. iv. 2; 1 Thess.
iv. 6) ; his urgency about the collection for
the saints (ch. xii. 16; Acts xx. 33), or
his assertion of legitimate authority, may
have been specified as greed for power. The
verb pleonektein is often used in connection
with other verbs, implying sensuality. It is
difficult for us even to imagine that St. Paul
had ever been charged with gross immo-
rality ; but it may have been so, for in a
corrupt atmosphere everything is corrupt
Men like Nero and Heliogabalus, being
themselves the vilest of men, openly de-
clared their belief that no man was pure,
and many in the heathen world may have
been inclined to similar suspicions. Of
WMtefield, the poet says —

" His sins were such as Sodom never knew,
And calumny stood up to swear all true."

We know too that the Christians were
universally charged with Thyestean ban-
quets add promiscuous licentiousness. It
is, however, more natural to take pleoneldein
in its general sense, in which it means " to
overreach," " to claim or seize aaore than
one's just rights " (see ch. ii. 11). In 1 Cor
ix. 1 — 6 he is defending himself agaiait
similar charges, as also in this Epistle (v.
12; vi. 3; x. 7 — 11; xi.; xii., possfm). For
similar strains of defence, see those of Hoses
and of Samuel.

Ver. 3. — I speak not this to condemn yon.
" Not by way of condemnation am I speak-
ing." My object is to maintain the old leva
between us ; what I say, therefore, is mprely



1?0



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vn. 1—16.



to defend myself, not to complain of you
(oomp. 1 Cor. iv. 14). I have said before.
He has not sairl it in so many words, but has
implied it in ch. iii. 2, 3; vi. 11 — 14. Ye
are in our hearts. So he says to his beloved
Philippians, " I have you in my lieart "
(Phil. i. 7). To die and live with you.
Similarly he tells the Thessalonians that
he was ready to give them even hia own
life (1 Thess. ii. 8). This is no mere con-
ventional expression of deep affection, like
Horace's, " Tecum vivere amem, tecum
obeam libens ; " nor is it the description of
some compact for life and death like that
of the Theban Band. It has the deeper
meaning which was involved by the words
■'life" and "death" on the lips of a Christian
(ch. iv. 11.; vi. 9). And one whose life was,
for Christ's sake, a daily death, naturally
mentions death first.

Ver. 4. — Boldness of speech. St. Paul
feels that he may address them witl) per-
fect frankness and openness (ch. iii. 12).
My glorying of you. " My boasting on your
account " (ch. i. 14 ; v. 12 ; viii. 14 ; comp.
1 Cor. L 4—7). I am filled with comfort.
' I have been filled with the consolation."
' Consolation " is the word which occurs so
frequently in ch. i. 3, 4. I am exceeding joy-
ful. " I superabound in my joy" (oh. ii. 2 —
14). In all our tribulation. The clause
jelongs to both the preceding clauses. Joy
n the very midst of affliction was an essen-
tially Christian blessing (Phil. ii. 17).

"Thou shalt have joy in sadness soon;
The pure calm hope be thine
Which brightens the Eastern moon.
When day's wild lights decline."

(See ch. vi. 10; Gal. v. 22; Rom. xiv. 17;
John XV. 11.)

Ver. 5. — For, when we were come into
Macedonia. "For even when we came."
The word " affliction " reminds St. Paul to
resume the thread of the narrative which
makes this letter almost like an itinerary.
He has spoken of his trials in Ephesus
(oh. i. 8) and in the Troad (ch. ii. 12, 13),
and now he tells them that even in Mace-
donia he was no less troubled and agitated.
Our flesh had no lest. External troubles
assailed him as well as inward anxiety.
" Had " seems here to be the best reading
(B, F, G, K); not " has had," which may be
borrowed from oh. ii. 13. Best ; rather,
''emissionf respite. But we were troubled on
every side ; literally, but in everything being
afflicted. The style, in its picturesque irre-
gularity, almost seems as though it were
broken by sobs. Without were fightings,
within were fears. " From without battles,
from within fears." No light is thrown on
these "biittles." The Acts of the Apostles
tas no details to give us of this brief stay



In Macedonia. The " fears'' were doubtless
still oonnerted with anxiety as to the re-
ception of Titus, and of his First Epistle
(ch. xii. 20).

Ver. 6. — Who oomforteth those that are
oast down. " The Comforter of the humble
comforted us, even God." The word
"humble" has in classical Greek the sense
of " mean," " abject." Pride, not humility,
was the virtue even of Stoic morality. Christ
was the first to reveal the beatitude of lowli-
ness (Matt. xi. 29 ; Luke i. 52). Doubtless
the word still retained some of its old as-
sociations, and had been used of St. Paul
in a disparai^ing sense (ch. x. 1). But he
whom his opponents accused of so much
egotism, ambition, and arrogance, meekly
accepts the term and applies it to himself.
God (ch. i. 4). " The God ... of consola-
tion " (Rom. XV. 5). By the coming of Titus.
This was the cause of that outburst of joy in
ch. ii. 13, 14, which passage here finds its
explanation. The absence of Titus from
the Acts is another proof of the fragmentari-
ness of that book. It is evident that he was
an ardent, able, active fellow-worker, and
most beloved friend of the apostle (Gal. ii.
1, 3; 2 Tim. iv. 10; Titus i. 4; iii. 12).
We learn most about him from this Epistle.

Ver. 7. — And not by his coming only. The
mere fact of Titus's arrival cheered St. Paul,
because Titus seems to have been of a
strong and cheery temperament. St. Paul,
partly because of his infirmities, was pecu-
liarly dependent on the support of human
sympathy (1 Thess. iii. 1—8 ; Phil. ii. 20 ;
2 Tim. iv. 4 ; Acts xvii. 15 ; xxviii. 15). It
was not, however, the mere arrival of Titug
which cheered him, but still more the good
news which he brought, and which partially
lightened his anxieties. In all probability
this letter was written almost immediately
after the arrival of Titus, and while the joy
caused by his presence was still glowing in
the apostle's heart. It is characteristio of
the seclusion of an austere life that St.
Jerome supposes the cause of the apostle's
distress to have been that Titus was his
interpreter, and that in his absence he could
not preach I Your earnest desire. Your
yearning to see me once more. Mourning ;
rather, lamentation (see ch. ii. 12). They
were aroused to lament their past "inflation"
(1 Cor. V. 2) and remissness. Your fervent
mind toward me. This rendering well ex-
presses the kindling affection implied by
the word zelos. So that I rejoiced the more.
More than he had even anticipated could be
possible ; or, as the next verse may imply,
all the more because of hia past anguish
(ch. ii. 4).

Ver. 8.— With a letter; rather, wifk mj
Epistle. Probably the First Epistle, though
some suppose that the allusion is to a losi



jfl. vfl. 1-16.] 1HE SECOND EHSTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



171



mtermediate letter. I do not repent, though I
did recent ; better, I do not regret it. Every
Dne has experienced the anxiety ■which
has followed the despatch of eome painful
letter. K it does good, well ; but perhaps
it may do liarm. The severity was called
for; it seemed a duty to write severely.
But how will the. rebuke be received ? Might
le not have done better if we had used
language less uncompromisingly stern?
As St. Paul thought with intense anxiety
that perhaps in his zeal for truth he may
have irrevocably alienated the feelings of
♦he Corinthians, whom, with all their grave
faults, he loved, a moment came when he
actually regetted what he had written. He
himself assures us that he had this feeling.
Those who try all kinds of fantastic hypo-
theses and tortuous exegesis to explain away
this phrase as though it were inconsistent
with St. Paul's inspiration, go to Scripture
to find there their own a priori dogmas, not
to seek what Scripture really says. The
doctrine of inspiration is not the fetish into
which it has been degraded by formal
systems of scholastic theology. Inspiration
was not a mechanical dictation of words,
out the influence of the Holy Gthost in the
hearts of men who retained all their own
natural emotions. For I perceive, etc.
There are various ways of taking this clause.
Notliing, however, is simpler than to regard
it as a parenthetic remark (for I see that
tliat Epistle, though it were but for a time,
saddened you). Though it were but for a
season. (For the phrase, see Philem. 15 ;
Gal. ii. 5.') He means to say that their
grief will at any rate cease when they
i-eoeive this letter, and he can bear the
rhought of having pained them when he
remembers the brevity of their grief and the
good effects which resulted from it.

Ver. 9. — Not that ye were made sorry,
rhey might have drawn this mistaken oon-
5lusion from his remark that he " rejoiced "
when he heard of their "lamentation"
(ver. 7). After a godly sort; literally,
according to God ; i.e. in a way which he
would approve (Kom. viii. 27). In nothing.
Not even when we rebuked you, and caused
you pain.

Ver. 10. — For godly sorrow, etc "For
the sorrow which is according to God
worketh out a repentance unto salvation
which bringeth no regret." Sin causes
regret, remorse, that sort of repentance
{metamdeia') which is merely an unavailing
rebellion against the inevitable consequences
of misdoing ; but the sorrow of self-reproach
which follows true repentance (metanoia,
change of mind) is never followed by regret.
Some take " not to be regretted " with
"salvation," but it is a very unsuitable
kdjeotive to that substantive. The sorrow



of the world. Here sorrow for the loss,
or disappointment, or sliame, or ruin, or
sickness caused by sin; such as the false
repentance of Cain, Saul, Ahithophel, Judas,
etc. Death. Moral and spiritual detith
always, and sometimes physical death, and
always — unless it is followed by true repent-
ance—eternal death, which is the opposite
of salvation (Rom. v. 21).

Ver. 11. — For behold, etc. The effects
produced by their repentance showed that
it was " according to God ; " for it brought
forth in them " the fruits of good living to
the honour and glory of God." Carefulness ;
rather, earnestness, active endeavour. Yea
what. There is an untranslatable energy
about the original Greek. The same use
of aAAh (Latin, immo vero) in a climax is
found in 1 Cor. vi. 11. Clearing of your-
selves ; literally, apology, self-defence, ad-
dressed to me through Titus. Indignation,
Against themselves for their neglect. Fear.
Of the measures which I might take, if I
came to you " with a rod " (1 Cor. iv. 21).
Vehement desire. Longing that I should
return to you (see ver. 7). Zeal. To make
up for past remissness. Eevenge. Judicial
punishment of the iucestiious offender. The
" apology " and " indignation " referred to
themselves ; the " fear " and " yearning " to
the apostle ; the " zeal " and " judicial retri-
bution " to the offender. In aU things. His
summing up is, "In every respect ye ap-
proved yourselves to be pure in the matter."
Whatever may have been your previous
carelessness and connivance, the steps you
took on receiving my letter vindicated your
character. In this matter ; rather, in the
matter. It is quite in accordance with St.
Paul's usual manner that "he speaks in-
definitely of what was odious" (1 Thess.
iv. 6).

Ver. 12. — Wherefore, though I wrote unto
you. " So then, even if I did write you,"
namely, about that matter. For his cause
that had done the wrong, etc. My object in
writing was not to mix myself up with the
personal quarrel. I had in view neither the
wronger nor the wronged, directly and pri-
marily, but wrote for the sake of the whole
Church (1 Cor. v. 1, 2 ; vi. 7). Wor for his
cause that suffered wrong. Apparantly the
father of the offender (1 Cor. v. 1). Our
care for you, ata. Among the diversity of
leadings in this clause, which seem to be still
further confused by mere mistakes of copyists,
the best supported reading is " your care for
us " (B, 0,E, K,L, and various versions, etc.).
The Sinaitio manuscript has " your care for
yourselves." The variations have partly
risen from the apparent strangeness of the
remark that his letter had been vrritten in
order that their care for him might be mani-
fested to themselves ; in other words, that



172



The second epistle to the cownthians. [<«■ '^n- 1^^^



they might learn from their own coniJuot
the reality of their earnest feelings for him.
He has already spoken of this "earnest
care " of theirs (ver. 11), but not in quite
the same sense. Certainly, however, the
reading followed by our Authorized Version,
even if it be a correction, furnishes a more
natural meaning (oomp. ch. ii. 4), and the
other may have arisen from a clerical erior.

Ver. 13. — Therefore we were comforted,
etc. Since my Epistle secured the result
of manifesting your true feelings towards me,
" we have been comforted." The Revised
Version and many editions put the stop here,
and continue (reading 5e after ettI), and in
addition to our consolation, abundantly the
more did we rejoice at the joy of Titus, be-
cause his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
Exceedingly the more. In the Greek this is
expressed by double comparatives (comp.
oh. xii. 9; Phil. i. 23). Was refreshed;
rather, has been {and is) refreshed. The
same verb is used in 1 Cor. xvi. 18 ; Phil em.
7,20.

Ver. 14. — I am not ashamed. The due
rendering of the tenses brings out the sense
much more accurately. " Because if I have
boasted anything to him on your behalf, I
was not put to the blush ; " in other words,
" One reason of ray exceeding gladness was
that you fully justified that very favourable



picture of you which I had drawn for Titus
when I was urging him to be the bearer oi
my letter." Is found a truth; literally,
proved itself to be a truth. Here again there
is a most delicate reference to the charge of
levity and unveracity which bad been
brought against him (ch. i. 17). I always
spoke the truth to you; but 1 might well
have feared that, in speaking of you to
Titus, my affection for you had led me to
overstep tlie limits of perfect accuracy.
But you yourselves, by proving yourselves
worthy of all I said of you, have established
my perfect truthfulness, even in the only
point where I might have thought it
doubtful. Notliing could exceed the tact
and refinement, the subtle delicacy and
beauty, of tliis gentle remark.

Ver. 15. — His inward affection. The
same word whicli is so needlessly rendered
" bowels " in ch. vi. 12. More abundant.
His love for you has been increased by his
recent visit. With fear and trembling.
On this Pauline phrase, see 1 Oor. ii. 3.

Ver. 16. — I rejoice therefore. The "there-
fore " concludes the whole paragraph, but is
omitted in many manuscripts. I have con-
fidence in you ; literally, I am bold in you ;
i.e. I feel courage about you. The phrase
in 2 Thess. iii. 4 expresses a calmer and less
hazardous trust.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1—4. — A minister's address to his people. " Having therefore these promises,"
etc. In these verses the apostle exhorts the Corinthians to two things.

I. To THE PURSUIT OF SPIRITUAL PUEiTY. " Having therefore these promises, dearly
beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God." He seems to regard the attainment of spiritual purity as
consisting in two things. 1. Getting rid of the wrong. " Let us cleanse ourselves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit." Perhaps the reference to " filthiness" here
referred especially to the idolatry and unchastity which was so prevalent in the Corin-
thian Church. All sin is " filthiness," and cleansable ; it is not nature, it is a stain on
nature ; it is not something inwrought into the very texture of our being, otherwise it
could not be cleansed away. It is no more ourselves than the soU on the white robe
is the robe. It can, it should, it must, be washed out, that we may appear " without
spot or wrinkle." 2. Attaining the right. " Perfecting holiness in the fear of God."
Holiness implies the consecration of our entire nature, flesh and spirit, body and soul,
to the Divine will, and this requires habitual, solemn effort in " the fear of God." Now,
the grand end of Christ's mission to the world is to produce this purity in man.
" Having therefore these promises " (viz. the promises in the last verse of the pre-
ceding chapter, which are in substance the promises of the gospel), this spiritual purity
should be struggled for. " The grace of God hath appeared to all men, teaching them
that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts," etc. The supreme desire of every true
minister of the gospel is that his people shall become pure.

II. To REGARD HIM WITH AFFECTION. " Eeccive US [open your hearts to us]," etc.
He grounds his claim on their aifeotion : 1. On the fact that he had done harm to
none. " We have wronged no man, we have corrupted no man, we have defrauded no
man." This is said, no doubt, in answer to some of the charges which his enemies
had brought against him — said in self-vindication. He had " wronged no man," done



OH. viL 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINl HIANS. 173

injustice to none; he had "corrupted no man" in doctrines or morals; he had
"defrauded no man," he had availed himself of no circumstance in order to extort
from them money or power. A grand thing this for a minister to he ahle to say to hia
people without any fear of contradiction, and in the sight of God. 2. On the fact that
he loved them. " I speak not this to condemn you : for I have said before, that ye are
in our hearts to live and to die with you." Although I might " condemn " you, I still
love you; you are so strong in my affections that I will not only visit you, but would
live and die with you, if my mission would allow. 3. On the fact that he rejoiced in
the good that was in them. " Great is my boldness of speech toward you, great is
my glorying of you • I am filled with comfort," etc. Thus he commends himself to
their affection. It is self-commeudation, it is true; but who else could commend
him? There were none greater than he living. There is no egotism in his self-com-
mendation.

Vers. 5 — 7. — The good tried and comforted. " For when we were come into Mace-
donia," etc. Here we have —

I. A GOOD MAN GREATLY TRIED. " Por wheu we were come into Macedonia, our
flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side; without were fightings, within
were fears." In ch. ii. 13 he refers to one circumstance that troubled him on his way
to Macedonia. " I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother."
He had come from Troas full of excitement and agitation, fully expecting to meet with
Titus, who would convey to him some information concerning the Church at Corinth,
which would allay his intense anxieties. But he was disappointed. What the other
particular troubles were that he refers to here, the " fightings without " and " fears
within," we know not; but well we know that everywhere in the prosecution of his
apostolic mission he met with trials — great, varied, and most distressing. The best of
men in this life are frequently " cast down." There are many things that " cast
down " the spirits of good men. 1. The prosperity of the wicked. Asaph felt this.
" My feet had almost gone, my steps were well-nigh slipped," etc. 2. The triumphs
of wrong. Fraud in trade, corruption in politics, errors in science, moral filth in
popular literature, blasphemies, sectarianism and cant in religion. What noble souls
are depressed here in England with these things! 3. The non-success of Christly
lahowr. How many preachers of spiritual thought, disinterested love, inflexible loyalty
to truth, are subject to depressing moods on account of the little success apparently
resulting from their arduous and self-denying toils ! Often, like Elijah, they feel
inclined to retire into the caves of solitude ; like Jeremiah, who resolved " to speak no
more " in his Name, and like One greater than either or all, who wailed out the words,
" I have iaboured in vain, and spent my strength for nouuiht."

II. A GOOD MAN DiviNELT COMFORTED. " Nevertheless God, that comforteth those
that are cast down, comforted us by the coming of Titus." God is a Comforter. No one
requires higher qualifications than a true comforter. He must have a thorough know-
ledge of the sufferer, know his constitution, and the causes of the complaint; his
diagnosis must be perfect. He must possess the necessary remedial elements ; he must
have the antidote at command. He must also have the tenderest sympathy ; an
unsympathetic nature can never administer comfort, whatever the extent of his know-
ledge or the suitableness of his means. God has all these qualifications in an infinite
degree. Hence he is the Comforter. God comforted Paul by sending him Titus. 1.
The appearance of Titus was comforting. The advent of his young friend was as the
rising of the morning sun in the dark heavens of his spirit. God comforts man by
man. Moses was comforted in the wilderness by the unexpected visit of his father-in-
law Jethro fExod. xviii. 7). Hannah was cheered in spirit by the talk of old Eli
(1 Sam. i. 18). David, dejected in the wood, had his heart strengthened by Jonathan
(1 Sam. xxiii. 16). 2. The communication of Titus was comforting. " And not by
his coining only, but by the consolation wherewith he was comforted in you, when he
told us your earnest desire, your mourning, your fervent mind toward me ; so that I
rejoiced the more."

Conclusion. Learn : 1. That Christianity in its highest fornt does not exempt
from the trials of life, ^ more Christly man than Paul perhaps never lived. Yet
how great his trials ! 2. That the vicarious sufferings of love ara amongst the most



174 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COIIINTHIANS. [ch. to. 1—16

ilepressincr. The more love a man has in him in this world of afBiotion and sorrow,
the more, hy the law of sympathy, will he endure. Paul now suffered for the Corin-
thians. 3. A genuine disciple of Christ carries comfort into the house of his distressed
fi-iend. Young Titus carried comfort into the saddened home of the Apostle Paul.

" He who hath most of lieart
Knows most of sorrow ; nor a thing he said
Nor did but was to him at times a woe.
At times indifferent, at times a joy.
Folly and sin and memory make a curse
Wherewith the future fires may vie in vain.
The sorrows of the soul are graver still."

(Festus.)

Vers. 8 — 11. — Godly sorrow. " For though I made you sorry," etc. Three remarks
here concerning the godly sorrow that was wrought on the minds of the members of
the Corinthian Church.

I. It was produced by a faithful reproof of wrono. There were, as we have
seen, certain evils more or less prevalent in the Church at Corinth, such as schism,
idolatry, unchastity, and abuse of the Lord's Supper. These so affected the mind of
the apostle that his letter abounded with strong reproof. Concerning the reproofs he
administered to them, two facts are noteworthy. 1. They caused him much pain. " For
though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent, though I did repent." Men,
more or less malign in their nature, take pleasure in dealing out reproaches and reproofs,
but to those whose natures are of the genial and the generous type, few things are more
painful than the administration of reproofs. Paul no doubt felt it so ; still it had to be
done. Loyalty to his conscience and his mission demanded it. A loving nature recoils
at the idea of giving pain to any one. 2. They were administered with the tenderest
affection. In almost every reproving sentence contained in his letter there beats the
pulse of affection, and it is evermore this love that invests reproof with a heart pene-
trating and melting power. With the tenderest love ministers should always reprove,
admonish, and exhort.

II. It was essbntiallt different to the sorrow of the world. " Now I
rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repentance," etc. Great
is the difference between godly sorrow and worldly sorrow. 1. The one is selfish, the
other is generous. In the former the man regrets having done the wrong thing simply
on account of inconvenience to himself; in the latter the anguish is in the wrong
Itself. 2. The one results in future regret, the other in future joy. All the sorrow
that an ungodly man has felt will lead to some deeper, darker, more terrible distress.
3. The one leads to ruin, the other to salvation. See the results of worldly sorrow in
Cain (Gen. iv. 12) ; in Saul (1 Sam. xxxi. 3 — 6) ; in Ahithophel (2 Sam. xvii. 23) ; in
Judas (Matt, xxviii. 3 — 25). See godly sorrow in the prodigal son (Luke xy.) ; in
Peter (Matt, xxvi.) ; in the converts on the day of Pentecost (Acts ii. 44 — 47).

III. It wrought great results in the soul. It wrought : 1. Solicitude, " What
carefulness it wrought in you I " Careful to resist the wrong and pursue the right. 2.
Deprecation. " What clearing of yourselves 1 " How anxious to show your disapproval
of the evil of which you have been guilty ! 3. Anger. " What indignation 1 " Indigna-
tion, not against the sinner, but against the sin. This is a holy anger. 4. Dread.
" What fear 1 " Dread, not of suffering, but of sin ; not of God, but of the devil. This
fear is, indeed, the highest courage. He who shrinks from the morally wrong is the
truest hero. 5. Longing, " What vehement desire ! " What longing after a better life 1
All these expressions mean intense earnestness, and earnestness, not about temporal
matters, which is common and worthless, but about spiritual matters, which is rare
and praiseworthy. Genuine repentance is antagonistic to indifference; it generates
earnestness in the soul, it leads to the most strenuous efforts, to the most vehement
cries to Heaven. " Sorrow in itself," says F. W. Robertson, "is a thing neither good
nor bad ; its value depends on the spirit of the person on whom it falls. Fire will
inflame straw, soften iron, or harden clay ; its effects are determined by the object with
which it comes in contact. Warmth develops the energies of life or helps the progress
of decay. It is a great power in the hothouse, a great power also in the coffin : it



OH. TO. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 175

expands the leaf, matures the fruit, adds precocious vigour to vegetable life; and
warmth, too, develops with tenfold rapidity the weltering process of dissolution. So,
too, with sorrow. There are spirits in which it develops the seminal principle of life ;
there are others in which it prematurely hastens the consummation of irreparable
decay,"

Vers. 12 — 16. — Churdi diseipline. " Wherefore, though I wrote unto you," etc.
The subject of these words may he regarded as that of Church discipUne, and two
general remarks are suggested.

I. Chuboh discipline should be exercised fob the good of the whole Church.
" Wherefore, though I wrote unto you, I did it not for his cause that had done the
wrong, nor for his cause that suffered wrong, but that our care for you in the sight of
God might appear unto you." The particular individual referred to here, on whom
Paul ctjis discipline to be exercised, was the incestuous person (1 Cor. v. 1). The
apostle here states that this was done, not merely for the offender's sake, nor indeed for
the sake of the person whom the offender had injured (viz. his father, whose wife he had
taken as his own). His object in writing was, not merely to chastise the one and to
obtain justice and redress for the other, but that " our care for you in the sight of God
might appear unto you." He had a larger aim ; it was to prove to them how much he
cared for their spiritual purity and reputation. Punishment should not only be for
the reformation of the wrong-doer, but as an example to others. The unhealthy
branch should be cut off for the sake of the tree's health and growth. All true
chastisement for wrong aims, not only at the good of the offender, but at the good of
the community at large.

II. When the good of the Chubob is manifested thebebt it ib a just
MATTEB FOB BEjoioiNO. " Therefore we were comforted in your comfort : yea, and
exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because his spirit was refreshed by
you all." The Church was improved by Paul's disciplinary letter. Of this Titus had
assured him, for they had " refreshed " his " spirit " during his visit among them.
Their improvement, too, justified the high testimony which he had' given Titus con-
cerning them. "For if I have boasted anything to him of you, I am not ashamed,"
etc. The love of Titus for them was increased by the discovery of it. " His inward
affection is more abundant toward you." Thus the godly sorrow which they mani-
fested on account of that which was wrong amongst them, was in every way satis-
factory to him ; it gave him comfort, it greatly refreshed the spirit of Titus, increased
his affection for them, and inspired the apostle himself with confidence and with joy.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORa

Ver. \.—An exhortation to perfection, " Having therefore these promises," which
the apostle had just mentioned (ch. vi. 16 — 18), what were the Corinthians expected to
be? "Sons and daughters" of the Father, God in Christ. But the condition was,
" Be ye separate, touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you." There was a
character involved (" sons and daughters"); there was something to be done (" come out
from among them, and be ye separate"); then "I will receive you." St. Paul is specific
in his appeal : " Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness [defilement] of the flesh
and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God." The enlarged heart, of which he
had been speaking and would soon speak again, has a tender voice, addressing them as
"dearly beloved." Nothing magisterial appears; he is one of them — "Let us cleanse
ourselves ; " nor has he any doubt of their ability to do this thing. Separation from
old associations, changes in customs and habits, call for firm resolution and self-denial ;
but he is well assured that God makes no promise without givmg ample strength for
the accepting party to comply with the terms offered. If the promises embraci d every
good connected with their relation to God as a Father, then they must be like God in
Christ ; they were to entertain no views of God, except as God in Christ, but were to
reverence, love, serve him in this one single and complete relationship. The ground,
motive, impulse of action, were to spring from this consideration — God in Christ as a
Father. If so, the ri};bt.nnnaness of Christ was not only to be the reason of their



176 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. to. 1—16



justification before the law of rectitude, but they were also to have that righteousnesi
as a property of personal character. By nature they were far gone from righteousness ;
they were defiled, bom in sin ; grace had already been communicated to renew their
evil character; he had written to them as "washed, sanctified, justified," in the
" name " of Christ, and by " the Spirit of our God." As yet the work was only begun.
Much was to be done. Sinful tendencies were in them which had never come under
the eye of consciousness. Enemies lurked within and without, of whom they were
unaware. Imperfect as they and he were, they must go on to perfection. Strength
consisted in putting forth strength, to be stronger. First of all, this perfection was to
be sought by purifying themselves from evil. What an amount of corruption still
remained was seen in the fact of the filthiness in the flesh and spirit. Each part of our
complex nature was vitiated, and each combined with the other in opposing the progress
necessary to attain holiness. There were vices of the animal man. There were vices
of the moral man. And there were vices resulting from the union of the two, so that
a thorough and complete cleansing was required. " All filthiness ; " no matter of what
class or kind, hereditary or acquired, local as respected the wickedness of Corinth, or
general as belonging to the human family, the wrong-doing among you from the
Judaizers, from the free-thinkers, from all your ambitious partisanships, — "cleanse"
yourselves from " all filthiness," whether of the " flesh " or the " spirit." This was the
negative side of a great and imperative duty, not all, but much, and very much, since,
until this were done, they could take no direct steps towards perfection. Observe now
that gross bodily sins were net the only lusts. Tempers and dispositions were just as
urgent as passions and appetites in seeking unlawful enjoyments. Reflect on this point.
" The spirit in us lusteth to envy." Inordinate affections led to transgression. Nay,
they often excited the body to wicked indulgences. Physical organs are frequently
torpid; they are aroused by images in the intellect, and stimulated by an impure
imagination ; and, furthermore, after these organs, because of age or over-gratification,
have little or no originating force, and are well-nigh worn out, the recollections of past
pleasures kindle the expiring embers into a flame. Thus, indeed, depravity assumes
its most licentious forms. For it is not the animal man that is the chief or the most
dangerous factor in this sort of iniquity. The intellectual and moral man descends into
corporeal abuses, and then it is these temptations are strongest. In many of these sins
there is an element of sentiment supplied by an unholy imagination, which makes
them far more tyrannical and debauching than they would be otherwise. And hence
it is not the beastly possibility in man that is the greatest danger, but the Satanic
agency brought to bear on the body by means of the spirit. It is the devil of the
spirit that is the devil of the body. A terrible conjunction this, and yet it is not a
common spectacle. Ordinarily the incipient stage of vice is a bodily evil merely. It
is a matter of blood and nerves. Not such does it remain long. Satan knows his
citadel, and hastens to its occupancy. While it does continue, a man may be reasoned
with ; he is open to shame, conscience may be reached, and concurrent motives made
operative on his feelings, but when physical vice allies itself with spirit, men " glory in
their shame," and are " taken captive by Satan at his will." In the final outcome
there is but one will, and it is Satan's will. Much more than this cleansing from the
" filthiness of the flesh and spirit " is necessary, if " these promises " are to be fully
realized. Theretbre he adds, " perfecting holiness in the fear of God." Here we have
the positive side of that experience which is demanded of those who are the " sons and
daughters " of God in Christ. It is inward holiness. Under the Law, beasts were
clean and unclean ; things, vessels, places, were externally holy ; emblems and symbols
of purity abounded ; manners, customs, domestic and national usages, were so ordered
as to impress on the senses the difference between good and evil. Under the gospel,
spiritual holiness is demanded. The circumcision is of the heart, not of the flesh;
the sanitary idea of the human body, so frequently set forth in the Old Testament, is
changed into that of the body as the temple of the Holy Ghost ; and hence, no sooner
does the Lord Jesus begin to unfold the constitution of the new kingdom in the sermon
on the mount, than he speaks directly to the heart. Righteousness must exceed the
righteousness of scribes and Pharisees. Impure thoughts are forbidden. Passions
that have no outward voice utter their sinfulness in the ear of God ; and feelings that
escape eot into visible acts are realities in thp li:;bt of eternity. Inasmuch as th«



OH. ■vn. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 177

cleansing was a purification of body and spirit, St. Paul argues that the sanctification,
begun in regeneration, was to continue, body and spirit sharing together the Spirit'*
influence. Neither the one nor the other was to be lost sight of; neither part of the
work was to be carried on in a way detrimental to perfect unity ; neither was to he
exaggerated at the expense of the other. But as body and spirit had been redeemed
by Christ's blood, so were both to be hallowed by the indwelling of the Holy Ghost.
Throughout St. Paul's Epistles there run these two leading ideas — the sanctification of
body and of spirit ; and if, at times, the idea of the former is prominent, and then, at
other times, the idea of the latter, we must recollect that this variation was necessary
to the full presentation of his subject. Great truths are not to be vividly seen except
in great moods, and great moods are not habitual, but occasional. Now, this mode of
displaying his subject by a rotation of its aspects exposes the apostle to misconception.
The ascetic takes him in one mood of thought, dominant at the moment, because of the
nature of his argument. The mystic takes him in another. And they both do him
injustice, the ascetic by laying an undue stress on bodily mortifications, the mystic by
extravagance in spiritual abstractions. St. Paul is always true to his theology. He
never loses his balance, never exalts spirit at the expense of body, never forgets that
body ia mated with spirit under an economy of permanent neutrality. Hence the
argument for inward holiness, that cleansing of spirit and flesh which proceeds from
the Holy Ghost in the conscience and heart, and works from the centre and seat of
vitality through all the organs of life. It is growing holiness. Growth is the law of
existence. The body grows until it attains its physical development, say from twenty-
one to twenty-flve years of age in men, and then another and much higher growth sets
in, that of intellectual and moral adaptiveness to the mind, whereby the nerves, the
ganglia, the brains, are brought into closer union with thought, volition, sensibility.
But it is in religious life that growth is most perceptible — a growth in the fear of God,
a fllial and tender fear, that is jealous of its sense of sonship, and ever watchful lest
it grieve the witnessing Spirit. There is an increasing delight in the discharge of duty,
in taking up the daily cross, in practising self-denial, and especially in a clearer view
of the ground and reason of self-denial. How the Scriptures grow upon us, the
exercises of the closet, the Holy Communion, the fellowship of Christians ! And, as
we advance, we feel more and more the evil of sin as it is in itself. " Against thee,
thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight." This psalm, the most
profoundly heart-searching and personal of the psalms, is nevertheless most represen-
tative of that sense of sin which forgets all else in the thought of an offended God. In
that bitterest hour of David's life, his home, other homes, a nation's homes, involved
in his terrible transgression, there is the one overwhelming reflection, " Against thee I "
The growing Christian sees the innate quality of sin, its deep-seated hold, its presence
in the life-blood of his old nature, and learns from thence to perfect holiness, by
realizing, as far as may be, the holiness of God. " By studying the character of Christ
and imitating his example, this Divine holiness defines itself to his mind and engages
his affections. " Looking unto Jesus " is the secret of his growth. He looks to him
as the " Author '' of his faith ; how long ago it was 1 Sow feeble then ! What
gracious forbearance ! The bruised reed not broken, the smoking flax not quenched !
And the "Author " is the " Finisher ; " for he is " the same yesterday, and to-day, and
for ever." Law changes into love, and love advances from one degree of strength and
beauty to another, from one relation of life to another, from one victory to a victory
still greater, the holy ideal rising before him and assuming new glory, and yet, as it
retreats to a loftier height, drawing him towards itself with a stronger charm. " Blessed
are the pure in heart." It is far on in the Beatitudes ; but it is there, thanks to God,
it is there as an attainment. The pathway to it is very clearly marked out, the
successive steps, the preparatory agencies, the gradual advances, the blessedness of
poverty of spirit, of mourning, of meekness, of hungering and thirsting after righteous-
ness, of mercifuhiess. One may know what progress he is making towards it, and this
is the great thing to be known. Milestones along the road record the onward tread
and assure the pilgrim of the certain goal. " Blessed are the pure in heart : for they
shall see God."— L.

Vers. 2 — 7. — Appeal for affectionate relations between himsdf and the Corinthians

a. CORINTHIANS. K



178 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vii. 1—16.



sorrow and eoiuolation. The rendering of ver. 2, Revised Version, is full of vigour.
" Open your hearts to us : we wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we took advan-
tage of no man." Boom in their hearts for whom ? Boom for him who had violated
no rights, led no one astray, acted fraudulently in nothing towards any person, so that
ho challenges their confidence to the full. But had he not done this before, and that
very earnestly ? Had he not done it again and again ? Yes ; hut his enemies had
their head-quarters at Corinth ; they were untiring, ever inventing new scandals, ever
increasing in zealotry, for his overthrow. Now, it is a matter of interest to understand
St. Paul's motive in this frequent and vehement defence of himself. Prom the outset
his position had been singular. Not one of the original twelve who had " companied"
with the Lord Jesus, a converted persecutor and blasphemer, an apostle called to an
exceptional apostleship, and placed in the forefront of that battle which was to liberate
Christianity from Jewish thraldom, and preserve it from Gentile corruptions. It was
inevitable that the man and the apostle should be subjected to a most critical and
severe inquisition. Yet how wonderfully was this overruled! Only think of the
spiritual biography that has grown out of this painful necessity of his attitude before
the Church. Somewhat of this kind of writing we have in the Old Testament, par-
ticularly in the Book of Job, in the Psalms, and in Ecclesiastes, but nothing as to
depth, variety, profundity, compass of experience, such as we have in St. Paul's Epistles.
In the latter we see the Christian consciousness in its early realizations, and that too
in all its important aspects. For what is there in the struggles of the "new creature"
with the " old Adam " ? What is there in outward conflict we have not here in
exactness of detail? No finer illustration of this could be given than the Second
Epistle to the Corinthians. Was he simply giving his spiritual history ? Nay, indeed,
but writing a typical biography of the human heart under the training of the Holy
Ghost. This is its distinctive merit — the portraiture of the human soul forming and
shaping in the image of Christ for eternal glory. Such a mirror was needed. Of what
avail a standard of doctrine without a standard of experience? Of what utility a
knowledge of duties, and yet entire ignorance of the legitimate results of precepts
carried into practice ? From his pen we have Christianity as a system of truths ; from
the same pen, Christianity in personal consciousness; and the two are so wrought
together and interblended, that we are no more at a loss to understand what Christianity
is as an inspiration of life than a revelation of Divine wisdom. Follow the man in this
chapter. Do you admire manly boldness ? There it is in that second verse. Are you
touched by delicacy and tenderness ? You have them in the third verse : " I say it
not to condemn you : for I have said before, that ye are in our hearts to die together
and live together." Is this commonplace sentiment ? Is this the language, the air,
the spirit of a persecuted hero of the world ? Match it if you can. " To die together
and live together " — this would be poetry, if it were not that rarer thing, the most
impassioned and exalted prose. " In our hearts ; " there they abide to die and live
together. If he had written to them, it was not to condemn, but to save them.
Inclined to find fault and harshly criminate? Far from him a censorious temper.
" Great is my boldness of speech towards you ; " and why bold ? "Great is my glorying
on your behalf;" and why glory ? The glad spirit, free once more from its oppressive
burden, cannot repress its exultation. "My boldness," "my glorying;" just before
" we " and " ua " and " our," the personal intensity bursting forth. " I am filled with
comfort, I overflow with joy in all our affliction." Such a heart authenticates itself
instantly to our confidence and love. To doubt its truthfulness would be treachery to
our own instincts. We all love a fervent lover. However cold and constrained our
temperament, there is something divinely contagious in a spirit like St. Paul's ; and,
for the sake of humanity, "great" is our "glorying" on his "behalf." If, then, we
find him in the next verses (5 — 7) referring to his individual solicitudes, we may be
sure that this has its place in the development of Christian doctrine, going on in the
history of the Church. Instead of being an insight into the private heart of the
apostle only, it is likewise a most trustworthy record of religious experience, to which
we may come for instruction and help when burdened by cares and anxieties. Unable
to remain in Troas, because of his deep concern to hear from Corinth, he passed into
Macedonia ; but there was no relief from the pressure. " We were troubled on every
side." His whole nature shared the suffering of the mind, his " flesh had no rest," and



OH. vn. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 179

the swrow reached such an extent that he sums it up in the condensed expressions,
"without were fightings, within were fears." Things had put on their darkest look.
Yet in that very hour consolation was near hy. Titus came with good tidings from
Corinth, and, in his opportune arrival, St. Paul sees the good hand of God. The state-
ment is given in an emphatic form. At first it is he " who comforteth the lowly ; " and
then even Qod " comforteth us hy the coming of Titus; " and how happy Titus himself
was ! The visit to the Corinthians had heen a hlessing to his young friend, and this
added much to his joy, for he participated in " the consolation wherewith he was com-
forted in you." Grace to others is often grace, and the richest grace, to our own souls.
And in this instance we can easily understand how a man with St. Paul's quick
sympathies entered into the experience of Titus. A delicate task had heen assigned
to his youthful companion, and it had heen managed with success. Added to his
intense pleasure growing out of the favourahle change at Corinth was the gratification
from the skill and efficiency of Titus's mission. One pictures the scene of the meeting,
the narration, the questions asked and answered, the frequent interruptions of the
story by the sudden outbreaks of the listener's emotion, the happy exclamations, and
the surprise increasing as the detail of incidents progressed to the completion of the
history. Had not St. Paul a valuable helper now? Was not God giving him a
co-worker precious to his heart ? Could he not see the future Titus, the same who
was afterwards to he associated so closely with him, and to whom he would write a
pastoral letter? Those were gracious hours, and he might well say, "I rejoiced the
more," since he was not only greatly cheered by the " earnest desire," the " mourning,"
the " fervent mind " of the Corinthian brethren towards him, but was confirmed in the
impression that Titus was to be a valuable auxiliary in the work now enlarging on his
hands, and daily getting to be more complicated. — L.

Vers. 8 — 16. — True repentance and its effects; ministry of Titus. There are
reactions from our highest moods. There are reactions from our wisest deeds. Nor
can it be otherwise under the present constitution of our nature. That St. Paul should
have had these reactions was perfectly natural, the more so as his temperament made
him liable, in an unusual degree, to their occurrence. If they did not appear in his
writings we should be surprised, nor could their absence be explained but on the
supposition that he was an exception in this respect to the ordinary laws of mind, and
particularly to those laws as seen in men of his class. Some persons think it very
strange that he should say, " Though I made you sorry with a letter, I do not repent,
though I did repent." "What was his inspiration, they ask, if he could " repent" of
writing his former Epistle to the Corinthians ? Whatever he meant by " repent," he
did not mean morail self-reproach, nor indeed any permanent state of mind, but
simply a transient emotional condition, due probably to excess of nervous sensibility.
His inspiration from the Holy Ghost was the inspiration of a man. It did not set
aside his temperament. It was in perfect harmony with the characteristics of his
intellect, and quite likely intensified those characteristics as related to his physical
peculiarities. Who has not had these seasons of experience in which things that were
very clear a few days before have been suddenly darkened ? Judgments were then
formed, committals made, promises given, that now seem unwise or even rash ; and
how gladly would we undo what was done ! — and that too in matters which were
entered on after long and earnest deliberation, and which proved in the sequel to be
eminently fortunate. Are the arguments that led us to certain conclusions less valid
now than then? No; the arguments are the same, but nerves and brain are not in
the same state, not in the same vigorous tension, and, consequently, we do not see the
truth and the grounds of the truth as we did when we were in fuller possession of
ourselves. The logic of nerves and brain is a very wayward and fitful thing, and a
very different thing from the logic of the intellect. Pascal says, in the ' Pensees,' " To
have a series of proofs incessantly before the mind is beyond our power." Now, in the
instance under review, St. Paul would have been more or less than man not to have
undergone precisely this temporary reaction. Ill health, an unusual combination of
exciting circumstances, dangers of an extraordinary sort threatening the Church, a new
and most promising sphere of labour and by far the greatest that had opened in his
ministry overcast with sudden gloom, Titus still absent, suspense wearing upon s



180 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. to. 1—16

fortitude taxed already to the uttermost ; what a lack of the human and of the genuine
manliness of the human, if he had felt no uneasiness, no misgivings, no rebound ! It
was not weakness, but weakness struggling into strength, that led him to say, " I did
repent." Let us take comfort from the apostle's human nature and the grace mani-
fested in its infirmities. Companionship in weakness aspiring to get the victory is very
precious to honest souls. Men are never wanting to teach us the irleals of life. What
is needed far more is to have traced in a distinct manner the progress of the soul
towards perfection. Who in this respect can compare with the Apostle Paul ? Who
has delineated the Christian consciousness in all its various moods, in all its alterna-
tions, in its baffled endeavours, in its victorious strength, and done it in such a natural
way that the lowliest heart feels at home in his fellowship and finds no language of
its own so much its own as the words in which he tells how he sorrowed and how he
rejoiced? Lest they should misunderstand his joy by supposing that he had any
pleasure in their pain, he explains (ver. 9) why he was happy. They had " sorrowed
to repentance." Instructed by the doctrinal truths he had unfolded in the First Epistle,
moved by his entreaties, made conscious of their delinquencies, made ashamed of their
gross inattention to discipline, tliey had repented of their backslidings arid reformed
their evil doings. A " godly sorrow "had they shown, and could anything "godly"
be deplored? Least of all, could a " godly sorrow " over envy and jealousy, over strife
and schismatic partisanships, over vices tolerated in the bosom of the Church — could
such a sorrow be regretted 'i It was " godly," indeed, for it had wrought out its true
nature and was known by its fruits. Of course he gave it a doctrinal form, and, for
all time, thus reads one of the most vital and solemn of all Christian verities : " Godly
sorrow worketh repentance to salvation not to be repented of." Well might he claim
that they had received " damage in nothing." It was all gain, infinite gain. Notice
the development of the thought. A true repentance is from God. Christ said that
the Holy Spirit should come to rebuke " the world of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment." It is not our idea of sin, but God's idea, that enables us to realize what
sin is, and this proceeds from the Spirit. Think of it as we may, study its conse-
quences, feel its enormity as far as we can, look at the paradise it blighted, read its
records on the earth, picture the hell it has created ; this is not that sense of the guilt
of sin which leads to repentance. Not what sin is in our sight, but what it is in God's
sight, determines the estimate of the penitent. And just in the degree that this
initial process is from the illumination and under the guidance of the Holy Spirit, in
that same degree is the work genuine and profound. Large allowance must be made
for individuality of character. Modes of thinking, habits of feeling, education and
circumstances, must be taken into consideration, since men are very thoroughly per-
sonal when God comes to deal with their suuls. Nevertheless, the truth cannot be
stated too strongly, that repentance is a " godly sorrow " only so far as the Holy Ghost
is concerned in the work. And, further, it is salutary. It works no " damage."
Now, at this point, the apostle confesses that he had been anxious, and certainly there
was ground for anxiety. To rebuke men for their sins is the most difficult and the
most hazardous of all the functions devolved on a minister of the gospel. Happy
the minister who can say that he has not done "damage," some time in his career, in
this particular. But in the present case all had turned out well. The censure, the
exhortation, the personal lovingness, he had put into his letter, had blended in one
gracious influence, so that conscience had witnessed to conscience, heart to heart,
energy on their part to decision and resoluteness on his part, and a result most blessed
to him, to Titus, to the Church, had been effected. It was not the sorrow of the
world that " worketh death." Instead of that, it had wrought life, a renewed and
most hopeful life, a change so glorious that it would never be repented of. But he
would particularize. If the repentance had been " godly," and therefore without
" damage," he would show them the full meaning of these words. " Behold this self-
same thing." He would arouse their attention and concentrate thought on this
manifestation of God's mercy. To see it they must look within. What a transfor-
mation! Lately «o careless, so insensible, so puffed up, even the Holy Communion
shockingly abused ; what save a " godly sorrow " could bring about a radical change?
It was a sorrow to humble them, not to " damage " them. It was not the sorrow of
the world, mortifying to pride and vanity, intensifying to »elfishnesg, driving tc



OB. TIL 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 181

desperation, and arming the soul in deadlier hostility to goodness. The proof of alS
this was at hand. Carefulness ; activity and diligence in ferreting out evils and
extirpating them. Clearing of themselves ; anxiety to get rid of the stain on their
Church character, and stand fair with the apostle. Indignation ; not only against the
incestuous man, but that feeling of self-vexation which arises when we see the folly
and evil of our conduct. Fear; lest a heavier punishment should come from God
than that already experienced. Longing; fervent desire to do better. Zeal; indus-
trious effort in discharging their duties,' and especially such duties as concerned Church
discipline. Avenging the wrong done by punishment so as to evince their sincerity of
amendment. Tea; repeated in every item, specified that each element of the sentence
might maintain its proper degree of force. Finally, his hearty commendation ; in
every respect, approving themselves to he right-minded in this matter. A word of
justification for himself follows. Not for the sake of him who had done the wrong,
nor for his sake who had suffered the wrong, had he written, but that their earnest
care in his behalf might be manifested and his apostleship honoured. In the name of
God he had called them to repentance, and they had promptly hearkened to the Divine
message. Once more the power of the gospel had been vindicated, and " therefore we
have been comforted." Throughout the affair he had been intensely personal, but had
he been actuated by selfishness, or had any element of selfishness mixed with his
motives, this personal intensity could not have assumed the form presented in his
conduct. Yet in that hour of gladness there was an uppermost joy. A beautiful
toach of nature it is when he says that he "joyed the more exceedingly " on account
of his young associate Titus, " because his spirit was refreshed by you all." The long-
continued trouble seems over now. The unrest, the fightings without and the fears
within, Ephesus and Troas and Macedonia, pass out of presence, and the only spectacle
left in the horizon of vision is Paul the apostle standing firmly on the historic soil he
has won for Christ, with Titus at his side, in whose blooming spring-time his eye reads
the harvest not far off. " ye Corinthians, our heart is enlarged." Can he express
his gratification too often, too freely? Once again, "I lejoice therefore that I have
confidence in you in all things." — L.

Ver. 1. — Holiness. It is too customary for religions of human origin and authority
to lay stress upon merely external and ceremonial purity.' Many such religions pay
not the slightest attention to the higher claims of morality. Now, Judaism used all
its ceremonial oleansings as means for developing the idea of true morality. And
Christianity is emphatically a religion of holiness. This appears from considering the
unique and sinless character of Christ, the spirituality of his teaching ; and further,
from the atonement he has made for sin, and the provision for true purity made in the
dispensation of the Holy Spirit.

I. The neoative view or holikess. The text assumes that man's state is naturally
impure, that his heart is defiled and polluted by sin, that his life is stained and dyed
with its moral blackness. Hence the admonition to cleanse : 1. From all filthiness of
the flesh. There was a special reason why this should be made prominent in address-
ing the Corinthians, inasmuch as not only was their city celebrated for its licentious-
ness, but the Church itself had tolerated a flagrant case of immorality. The sins of
the flesh are indeed the especial fault of those who have lately been rescued from the
corruptions of paganism ; yet we shall mislead ourselves if we suppose that, in any
state of civilization or Christian privilege, men are free from temptations to offences of
this kind. 2. Prom all filthiness of the spirit. Our Lord himself has been careful
and faithful to warn against these ; the heart may sin as well as the body. In fact,
it is the heart that needs to be the first and chief seat of purification.

n. The posittve view of holiness. The expression is noticeable, "perfecting
holiness." Such language implies : 1. That there are degrees of moral purity, and
that it is expected of the Christian that he should go forward, from one stage to
another, conquering sin, achieving new degrees of virtue, and leaving infirmities behind.
2. It is implied also that this is to be the result of effort. No sanction can be found
here for that quietism which represents holiness as acquired without effort, struggle, and
conquest. 3. Yet it is to be understood that in this process we stand in need of the
gracioua influences of the Holy Spirit, whose distinctive work is a work of sanctiflcation.



182 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. th. 1— 1&

IIL The Christian motives to holdjesb. They are represented here as two. 1.
The fear of God, by which we understand a reverence for his holy character, respect
for his holy Law, and a proper dread lest we should by disobedience incur his displeasure
and indignation. 2. The promises of God. The promises here adduced are indeed
sufficient to animate us to the most ardent efforts. The favour and indwelling of the
Eternal, his most tender representations of his fatherhood, and his assured considera-
tion and treatment of us as his beloved children, — these surely are promises which
should and will exercise a mighty influence over the heart and urge to a cheerful and
consecrated obedience. — T,

Ver. 3. — " In our hearts." The strong personal feeling which breathes throughout
this Epistle is at its strongest here. Paul claims to occupy a very close and tender
relation to these Corinthians ; however they may feel towards him — and he acknow-
ledges that they have shown respect to his authority and have caused him joy— he holds
them very dear. " Not merely are you," he seems to say, " on our lips, not merely
are your names upon our pen, not merely do we keep you in memory ; ' ye are in our
hearts to die together and live together.' "

I. How TO ACCOUNT FOR THIS AFFECTIONATE INTEREST. The feeling here described
is appropriate in the case of all Christian ministers in relation to those placed in their
spiritual charge. 1. The general reason : Christ's friendship towards his people is the
model and the motive of the friendship which obtains among them mutually. There
is something distinctively Christian in sentiments and relations of this kind. Not
kindred, not interest, but fellowship in Christ, constitutes the bond of union. 2. The
special reason : labour and suffering deepen interest and strengthen and hallow love.
The apostle had toiled for these Corinthians, had exposed himself to danger on their
behalf, had suffered anguish of spirit through their unspirituality and folly. Hence
the tender interest, resembling maternal affection, which he cherished towards them.
3. The personal reason. Many of the members of this congregation had come to love
their evangelist, to regard him as the minister of God to their souls ; and he had found
in their devotion a rich reward for all he had done for their good. Those who would
benefit their fellow-men spiritually and lastingly must have them "in their hearts."
This will give a zest, a vigour, to all efforts for their good.

II. In WHAT RESPECT TO TRACE THE RESULTS OF THIS AFFECTIONATE INTEREST. If the

heart be the very spring of action, the true explanation of conduct, it may be expected
that the minister who has his people in his heart will be by that fact powerfully
affected in his ministerial life. 1. Such a minister will leave no labour unaccomplished
which may tend to the good of his people. Much occurs to deject the zealous servant
of God ; and, as a mere matter of duty, it will often be hard for him to persevere in his
endeavours. But, prompted by love, he will not grow weary or hopeless, but will
persevere in his faithful efforts and sacrifices. 2. Such a spiritual labourer will be
either distressed or cheered by the treatment with which he may meet from those to
whom he ministers. We may be indifferent as to the conduct of some of our acquain-
tances ; but those who are in our hearts must needs give us either satisfaction and com-
fort or anxiety and grief. Let all hearers of the gospel, all members of the Church,
consider how deeply their action must affect the hearts of God's servants. 3. The
true minister hopes to enjoy the society of his people in the heavenly state. So closely
are pastor and fiock united, that in heart, in feeling, they may be said to " die together "
as well as to " live together." The saved are to those who have been helpful in their
salvation their joy and crown of rejoicing in the world of glory. — T.

Ver. 5. — Fighting and /earn. The course of the apostle was one remarkably varied ;
sometimes prosperous, sometimes adverse. At the time when he wrote this Epistle
he looked back upon a period of trouble, contention, and opposition, and upon experiences
of suffering and disappointment. His nature was not one to pass through life unmoved ;
he was sensitive to all influences. And at E|ihesus, at Troas, and in that Macedonia
from which he was now writing, Paul had endured much which was fitted to harass
and depress his mind. Never was afBiction more comprehensively summed up than in
the language he here employs — " without, fightings ; within, fears."

I, The TEOUBiiBS which assail the Christian worker from without. 1. Oppo*



CH. -vni. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 183

sition to his doctrine. Tliis Paul experienced, and tliis every servant of Christ mnst
expect, hoth from open enemies of Christianity and from false brethren who corrupt
the truth. 2. Persecution. That the apostle was exposed to this, the record of his Ufa
abundantly proves ; and, in the first age, as at many subsequent periods, such experience
was common. Thus the Master suffered, and thus his servants must expect to suffer
like him.

II. The troubles which assail the Christian worker from withik. What
were the " fears " to which St. Paul refers ? We can but conjecture. 1. Pear lest
there had been a want of wisdom, or devotion, in the services undertaken. 2. Pear
lest the work ot the Lord should have suffered through any insuflBoiency on the part
of the worker. 3. Pear lest at last the labourer should fail of acceptance and approval.

III. The support and consolation provided for the Christian worker to sustain
HIM UNDBB THESE TROUBLES. 1. The testimony of a good conscience, that, however
imperfectly and inadequately the service has been rendered, it has yet been rendered
in sincerity. 2. The assurance that an overruling Providence has remarked and has
permitted all that has taken place, even to the temporary discouragement of the toiler
for Christ. 3. The conviction that in such trouble the servant has had fellowship with
his Lord. 4. The hope and expectation that light affliction will work out an exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. — T.

Ver. 6. — The Comforter of tJie lowly. We are accustomed to think of the apostle as
the soldier of the cross, the hero of the spiritual war. And this is just. Nevertheless, we
should not forget that he had a human heart, with human susceptibilities and cravings ;
that he knew what it was to be weary, disappointed, and sorrowful, and what it was
to be consoled, encouraged and elated. This Epistle represents him as bitterly dis-
tressed by the conduct of the Corinthian Christians, and yet as truly comforted by the
tidings brought by Titus and by the brotherly fellowship and sympathy of his youthful
colleague.

L The need of comfobt. This is owing to the fact that Christian people and
Christian workers are sometimes among the downcast, the lowly, the depressed. It
is a permitted experience of human life, and there are reasons, some of them obvious
enough, why the faithful and zealous servant of Christ should not be exempt from such
feelings. It may be necessary, in order to keep him humble, to preserve him from self-
confidence, to cherish within him a spirit of dependence upon Divine assistance.

IL The Author of comfort. This view which the apostle here takes of God may
to some seem derogatory to his dignity. But it should rather be regarded as setting
God's character in an admirable and attractive light. If God has made the human
heart such as it is, if he has appointed its varied experiences, it cannot be beneath him
to minister to that nature which is his own handiwork, to overrule to highest ends those
circumstances which his wisdom has created. He has delighted to reveal himself to
his people as a God of consolation, especially when their hearts have been most sore
and their cry most piercing.

III. The means of Divinb comfobt. These means accord with the nature with
which the Creator has endowed us, and are none the less honouring to his wisdom
because they are often of the simplest kind. The case of Paul illustrates this. 1. The
presence and brotherly kindness of a friend is consolatory to the afSicted ; e.g. the coming
of Titus. 2. The good tidings that reach the downcast cheer the soul ; e.g. good news
concerning the Corinthian Church. 3. The assurance of affection and sympathy on the
part of those whose welfare is sought (vide vers. 7 — ^9). — T.

Ver. 10. — Sorrow amd repentance. There is only one way to avoid sorrow, and fliat
is to avoid sin. Even then sympathy will awaken sorrow on account of the sin of
others. But so long as there is evil in this world, so long will it be a world of anguish
and of tears. It is not the sorrjw which is to be regretted, but the sin which is its
cause. " They that lack time to mourn lack time to mend."

I. The bobbow of the wobld. The ungodly may sorrow because they have sinned.
But observe : 1. What are the eharacteristic$ of this sorrow. When the irreligious are
rebuked and chastened for their wrong-doing, their vanity is wounded, their anger is
excited, their resentment is aroused, they are vexed because they lose the favour of th^



184 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [oO. vtt 1—16.

neighbours or suffer in reputation. 2. The issue of this sorrow is death ; instead ol
being profitable, it is deleterious, drawing the thoughts away from the moral heinous-
ness of sin, and confirming the sinner in courses whose only end is spiritual death.

II. The sobeow which is godly. 1. This is occasioned by the recognition of tha
sin as an offence against the Divine Law. " Against thee, thee only, have I sinned."

2. And by the feeling that sin is a grief to the Divine heart. As a tender child grieves
to hurt his father's spirit, so a truly sensitive nature is pained in the very pain of Christ.

3. And by the knowledge that human sin brought the holy Saviour to the cross. 4.
And is heightened by the knowledge that privileges have been abused and grace defied.

III. The repentance to which oodly sorrow leads. It is a change of mind and
purpose ; a turning away from the error, the folly, the unbelief of the past, a turning
away from temptation and from the society of the sinful, a turning to God as he has
revealed in Christ his infinite mercy and loving-kindness. Especially is this repentance
that " which bringeth no regret." He who comes out of bondage into liberty can never
rue his choice.

IV. TnB ULTIMATE ISSUE OF TRUE REPENTANCE. This is salvation, which con-
trasts with that death to which worldly sorrow leads. Such is the appointment of
Infinite Wisdom. And he who studies this process must acknowledge that, to a true
and eternal salvation, there can be no other path than the path of repentance and of
faith.— T.

Ver. 13. — Me/reshment of spirit. The very decidedly personal character of this

Epistle is the occasion of its bringing before the reader some topics to which otherwise
his attention might not be directed. The writer, his friends and colleagues, Timothy
»nd Titus, the several persons in the Corinthian Church alluded to, the community
which was called upon to take action, — all seem to live before us. Human feelings
appear in the light of Christian truth, privilege, and duty. The experiences of the
heart are represented as hallowed and elevated by the principles of spiritual religion.
Titus is depicted as visiting Corinth, as received with respect, and as obeyed with
alacrity, and consequently as cherishing a deepened affection for the Corinthian Chris-
tians, as rejoicing because of their attitude of spirit and their united action, and, in fact,
as refreshed in spirit by his visit to them.

I. The spirit's need or refreshment. This may arise from : 1. Weariness in labour.
One may become weary in the work when not weary of it. 2, Disappointment in
efforts made for the good of others. When energy and self-denial have done their best,
and no results have followed, or at all events none have become apparent, the spirit is
sometimes saddened and dejected. 3. Opposition, whether from the world without or
from professed brethren, produces a most disheartening effect upon the sensitive nature.

II. The power of tbce Christian fellowship to refresh the spirit. It does
this in many ways. 1. It brings home the conviction that the Christian labourer is
not alone. He may be disposed to lament, as Elijah did, that he is left alone in the
world ; but it is not so, and there are occasions upon which he realizes this. 2. It some-
times takes the form of appreciation of services rendered on behalf of the brotherhood.
The pastor finds that his visits have been valued; the preacher that his word has
been a living seed in hearts of which he had thought there was but little that was
good ; the admonition awakens confessions, acknowledgments, resolutions, which were
but little expected. 3. United exercises of praise and prayer react upon the weary
soul ; listlessness, discouragement, disappear ; the whole nature is braced by Heaven-
bom energy for new and happier service. — T.

Ver. 1. — The promises of God an incentive to holy living. 1. Consideb the Divinb
PBOMisES. 1. Sow numerous they are. Some are specified in preceding verses. Divine
promise is, however, found in all parts of the Scripture. The crown of revelation is
thiddy studded with the pearls of promise. God encourages his people by multiplying
projaises to them. 2. How varied. There are promises suited to every condition — for
joy, Bonow, sickness, health, penury, prosperity, weakness, strength. We change
greaAly in experience, but in every new condition we find a promise appropriate to it.
The maHsa of promise covers the path of pilgrimage. 3. How needful to us. For our
«up>»rt, guidance, comfort, encouragement, happiness, advance. God's promises am



oa. vn. 1— 16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 185

our rods and stafis. Were it not for such upholdings, we should soon sink in the mire.
4. How precious. What promises are like unto these ? How can we compute the
value of that which is invaluable ? Divine promises are things by themselves. Nothing
could compensate for their loss. Of such vaUie are they that only a God is rich enough
to bestow them. 5. How faithful. What reliance may be placed upon them ! They are
all " yea " and " amen " in Christ (oh. i. 20). Promises, indeed, are easily obtained from
men, but what men fail in is fulfilment. But the word of Jehovah cannot be broken.
His promises are precious, but they are not more precious than sure. 6. Divine promise
culminates in such special promises as those given in preceding verses (ch. vi. 16 — 18) :
God's engagement to dwell within us ; God's continuous adoption of us, whereby we
are ever his sons and daughters. If these things be ours, then all things are ours.

II. Consider the life to which these promises shottld lead. 1. Sins of ths
flesh should he discarded. If we are God's, our body is the temple of God (ch. vi. 16).
Such a temple must be kept pure. Such sins as intemperance, gluttony, lust, etc.,
must be renounced by the child of God. We are to glorify God in our bodies (1 Cor.
vi. 20). Many forget how truly they may do so. Sins of the flesh are defilements of
the flesh. If we defile the temple of God, God will not bless us, but curse us (1 Cor.
iii. 17). It is not enough to be pure within, we must be pure without also. Our whole
being must be consecrated to God and ruled by his laws. 2. Sins of the spirit must
he renounced. Such sins as pride, malice, wrath, envying, falsehood, idolatry, impure
conceptions, etc. Many cleanse the exterior only ; they whiten the sepulchre, but
trouble not about the dead bones within. Many are quite satisfied with external piety ;
God is not.- Note : Sins of the spirit lead to sins of the flesh, and vice versa. 3. We
aire to seek complete holiness. We are to cleanse ourselves from " all " defilement. We
are to " perfect holiness." We are not to be easily satisfied with ourselves. 'Tis not
enough to do a little and then rest. The statue must be finished ; it is begun that it
may be completed. The ideal set before us is a high one. Like the painter, the poet,
the orator, we must strive to realize this ideal. We are not to rest until all things
have become new. 4. All should he done in the fear of Ood. Our duty to God must
influence us more than our own happiness or the welfare of others. True life is a life
which \sfull of Ood. " The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom," and the fear of
the Lord runs throughout the truly wise life. Much righteousness is society-satisfying
righteousness ; social sanction takes the place of Divine ; our fellows become our god.
In our righteousness we must seek to please and satisfy God. Fear of God's disappro-
bation will spur us to sterner efforts. 5. Earnest effort on our part is necessary. The
apostle says, " Let us cleanse ourselves." Many wait for God when God is waiting for
them. Our salvation is ascribed to God ; nevertheless, we are enjoined to work it out ;
and our efforts to work out our salvation are the evidence that God is working in us.
All cleansing of our life is voluntary on our side ; and there is no high spiritual life
without striving,

III. Consider why God's promises should lead to such a life. 1. Gratitude.
This is a life well pleasing to God. He in his promises has done how much for us !
What is our " reasonable service"? 2. T/ie fulfilment of the Divine promises is um-
ditional upon our seeking to live the new life. Newness of living is the evidence of
newness of condition. God's promises are made to God's people, or to those who
sincerely desire to be his people ; but if we do not walk in righteousness we have
evidently believed in vain. We are then only of the nominal, not the real, Israel ; and
the promises are for the latter, not the former. The nominal Jews lost their privileges
because they possessed only nominal piety. All God's promises are conditional. If
we are not fruit-bearing trees, we must expect not to be cared for, but to be cut down.
The promises of God are not for any save those who walk in his fear and love. — H,

Vers. 2 — L — Christian affection. I. Hinders WRONQ-DoiNa. Paul had many reasons
for not in any way injuring the Corinthians, but his love for them was certainly one.
He loved them too well to wilfully do them any evil. As true love to God leads to
obedience to Divine commands and abstention from injuring the Divine kingdom, so
love to men leads us to consult their interests. We should love men too well to harm
them. This check of love is very beautiful as well as very powerful. It is love, aftei
all, that rules the world ; only, alas ! it is largely love of self and love of wa.



186 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vii. 1—16.

II. Leads to faithful utterance. The apostle was very outspoken to the Corio-
tliians because of his great love for them. His love rendered silence impossible. If
we love our brother much we shall not suifer sin upon him. Blindness and dumbness
towards the sins of our brethren are cruelty, not kindness. If we find it practically
impossible to admonish the erring, it is not because we love them so much, but because
we love them so little. Ministers and teachers should have great boldness of speech.
A house-dog is no good unless he barks. A surgeon who never uses the knife deserves
few patients. Faithful speech is a true child of the chief of the graces.

III. Should be very intense towards believers, especially towards our
SPIRITUAL children. The only manacles of the children of God are golden ones.
Believers can be truly knit together by love alone. The cement joiniD^ together the
living stones of God's house is love. Churches without love are scandalous spectacles
to the world, dens of misery in themselves, and hateful in the sight of God. But love
can make a happy family out of otherwise incongruous elements, and a holy family out
of elements still marked by imperfections. A particular a flection should be cherished
towards those whom we have led to Christ. Paul's affection for his spiritual children
was remarkable ; yet not greater than ours ought to be. If we love such greatly, we
can do much lor them ; our love to them and special relation will give us power over
them. They wiU need guidance, counsel, possibly admonition. A great love for
them will prompt to great efforts on their behalf. Paul's love made him cleave to his
converts ; they were in his heart "to die together and live together" (ver. 3).

IV. Should be strong enough to bear a great strain. It is very likely to
be subjected to this. So easy is it to love when we are loved, deferred to, obeyed,
courteously treated ; so difficult otherwise. But apostolic love could bear this test
(see ch. xii. 15). We are apt to love ideal persons, or to suppose that the real
persons of our affection have ideal excellences. Love is tested when we discover the
many Imperfections in the objects of our affection ; but love ought to bear the test.
Profitably may we remember that, if we see faults in others, they probably see not a
few in us.

V. WnL OFTEN TRIUMPH OVER OPPOSITION. If you Want to couquer men, love
them. Persist in loving the unlovely. Some hearts may not yield even to love, but
nothing Is likely to bring them so near to yielding. There is mighty power in love.
But it must be real, solid, test-bearing, abiding. Paul's great power was love-power.

VI. Brings much joy to those exercising it. It has its pains, but these are
chastened. It is the unloving heart which is the unrejoicing heart. Especially is the
joy great when this love is reciprocated or begins to triumph. Paul's cup ran over
when the Corinthians yielded to his love. He could say, " I overflow with joy in all
our affliction " (ver. 4). God is love, and God lives in unsullied bliss. If we were
more like God in love we should be more like God in joy. The atmosphere of heaven
is love ; if we breathe this atmosphere on earth we experience heavenly delight.

VII. Errs us fob usefulness. A less loving apostle than Paul could never have
done Paul's work. The greatest teacher the world has ever seen was the One who had
most love. Love drives us to usefulness and qualifies us for it at the same time. If
we would be more educated for Christian service, let us labour to take a higher degree
in the university of love. The world wants Christian workers whose hearts are full of
apostolic, yea, of Christ-like, love. — H.

Vers. 6 — 7. — Ministerial sorrows and their alleviation. I. Much sosbow is often
THE PORTION OF MINISTERS OF Christ. Arising from various causes, such as: 1.
Bodily weakness. Some seem to forget that ministers have bodies at all. Certainly
many expect them at all times to be ready for their duties. Ministerial work is very
trying to bodily strength. And ministerial work is exceedingly painful in bodily
sickness and infirmity. Here many ministers bring much sorrow upon themselves by
carelessness as to the body. In some Churches it might be a good thing to appoint a
deacon whose special function should be to see that the pastor took sufficient open-air
exercise. 2. Mental weariness. The mind soon tires. The Lord's servant has often
to do his work with a flagging brain. Great sorrow is felt when the need of work is
seen and the capacity not possessed through exhaustion. 3. Mental depression. "Fears
within." Sometimes experienced in the very midst of success. When under adrers*



OH. vn. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 187



circumstances, it becomes indeed a Marah of bitterness. 4. Church troubles. A Church,
carefully planted with prayers and tears and toil, threatened with ruin or with severe
injury. Factious opposition — " fightings without." Misrepresentation ; ingratitude ;
division. 5. The inconsistencies of believers. The true pastor deeply loves his spiritual
children, and can say, " I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in
truth " (3 John 4). But when they go astray, when they dishonour the cause to
which they belong, his anxiety becomes intense and his grief profound ; when they
grow careless, idle, worldly ; when the prayer-meetings and more spiritual gatheringf
are neglected ; when no spirit of zeal burns in their hearts or is manifested in theii
lives. 6. The callousness of the impenitent. When the wave of his own earnestness
beats upon the rock of carnality, and is dashed back, leaving the rook as hard and cold
as ever. When the very heart of a man is nearly preached out of him, and yet no sign
follows. 7. The opposition of men of the world. The sneer of the sceptic, and his
insidious efforts. The open or covert endeavour of ungodly men to hinder the progress of
the truth. 8. Personal difficulties, doubts, and temptations. The minister has his owrj
spiritual life to care for, and whilst it might easily be concluded that his special work
is pre-eminently favourable to that life, the fact is that ministerial labours involve v< ry
special temptations, and that much grace is needed to preserve a spiritual tone. Tlie
minister, too, is the favourite target of Satan and of the followers of Satan. These
troubles are cumulative. Many, and sometimes all, press at the same time ; and yet
the all-responsible work of the ministry has to be carried on under such conditions.
Well may one cry, " Who is sufBcient for these things ? "

II. Note some allbviations op ministbbial sokeow. 1. Conviction of the Divine
approval. The faithful minister often has this joy, and may always have it if he will.
This is enough to make any man brave in peril, and to cheer any man in heaviest
sorrow. This was one of Paul's sheet-anchors. 2. A good conscience. If conscience
does not condemn, we may pluck up our courage. Still, a man must not conclude too
easily that he is faultless. There are some over-contented, non-successlul ministers
who are a bane to the Church. 3. Realization of the grandeur of the work. The
soul sinks when this is lost sight of or obscured. The soul rises when the service of
Christ ,is seen in a clear, true light. 4. Evidences that labour is not in vain.
God sends some Titus with good news. Conversions, causing joy in the presence of the
angels of God, cause joy ^so in the pastor's heart of hearts. Here is infinite com-
pensation for all toil, anxiety, and suffering. 5. Suitahle response of those under charge
when appealed to. Paul's joy was largely caused by the Corinthian response to the
First Epistle. When the inconsistent give up much of their inconsistency under
pastoral admonition; when the worldly become more spiritual; when the indifierent
become earnest ; — then the under-shepherd is made glad indeed. 6. The anticipation of
the Master's commendation at last. Paul ever had legard to " the crown of righteous-
ness." If we can but please our Master, everything else must be a matter of com-
parative indifference.

Applies to some extent to all Christian workers. All such are " ministen," and in
their degree share in ministerial joys and sorrows. — H.

Vers. 8 — 15. — Marks of true penitence. I. Tbub kbpentancb is in contbast with
THE SOEEOW OP THE woELD. It IS the fruit of " godly sorrow " (ver. 10). It is
sorrow "after a godly sort" (ver. 9), or " according to God." It makes us see sin as
against Ood. It is coming to the mind of Qod as to sin. It leads to salvation — to
eternal life. It is never the subject of rep:ret, but of thankfulness. The sorrow of the
world is not because of sin, but because of its penal consequences. It issues in death
because it still holds to the sin. It is a regret that sin in any stage should be so
painful. It would reform hell by banishing its pains, not its mchedness.

II. It involves deep solicitude. (Ver. 11.) Opposed to prior indifference. The
Corinthians had regarded their sin as of little importance, but now they feel far other-
wise towards it. So unrepentant men boast that they have sinned so little. Job said,
" I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes." When true penitence is begotten in
the heart, the time for carelessness in respect of sin has gone, and the time of carefulness
has come. Sin is no longer a light matter, but one most momentous and urgent.

IIL Bbnunoiation of the £VIL. Thus the Corinthians sought to clear themselvea



188 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [oH. vil. 1—16,

(ver. 11). Before, they had connived ; now, they repudiated. True repentance involve*
a desire to be separate from the sin. The evil thing is renounced. To hold to the evil,
whilst we profess to repent of it, is to demonstrate that we do not repent at all.

IV. Detestation of the evil. (Ver. 11.) We may renounce what we still love,
hut in true penitence the mind is enlightened, the true nature of sin is perceived, and
the soul ceases to love and begins to loathe it. Sin is detested, and self is detested
because self has sinned. The soul is roused against sin ; there is " indignation."

V. Fear. (Ver. 11.) 1. Of the Divine wrath. 2. Of again sinning.

VI. Dksieb fob bestobation. (Ver. 11.) 1. To the approval of righteoiu men.
2. To peace with conscience. 3. Above all, to the favour of Grod.

VII. Zeal. (Ver. 11.) 1. In immediately taking a right course. 2. In seeking to
remedy the effects of sin. 3. For God's honour.

VIII. Conviction that sin desebves punishment. (Ver. 11.) A sense of justice
is aroused. It does not seem wrong for the sinner to be punished then, but right.
Hearts unstirred by true penitence carp at and question sin-penalties. But " godly
sorrow " gives to sin a tongue crying loudly for wrath. When sin is rightly appre-
hended it becomes an evil for sin not to be punished. This applies to ourselves ; we
condemn ourselves. This applies to others ; we feel that they ought to be condemned.
" Tea, what avenging ! "

IX. A HUMBLE, TEACHABLE BPIBIT. (Ver. 15.) Godly sorrow breaks down pride.
The Corinthians before had found fault with the teaching of Paul himself. Now they
are willing to be taught by one of his disciples. — H.

Vers. 9 — 11. — Ttvo kinds of sorrow. Reproof works well when it induces sorrow

toward God and issues in repentance. But of sorrow there are two kinds.

I. The soeeow of the wobld. 1. Its nature. It is regret for worldly loss, or, if
for faults and sins, it is for them as bringing worldly discredit. It is vexation, not for
wrong done, so much as for damage incurred, credit spoilt, advantage missed, pride
wounded. 2. Its issues. It works death. It wears the mind, sours the temper, fills
the breast with discontent, takes away all zest of exertion, chokes the heart with
resentment and chagrin. It actually kills ; a rankling annoyance or shame tends both
to embitter and to shorten life. There are more than is commonly believed dying of
vexation ; as Spenser has it —

" Dying each day with inward wounds of Doloni'i dart"

n. SoBEOW ACCOEDiNG TO GoD. 1. Its nature. It springs from a sense of sin in
the light of God, and in relation to his Name, Law, and glory. It is the grief of a mind
that has learnt to honour, observe, and follow the Lord, and therefore mourns for sin
as committed against heaven and in his sight. See the sorrow of the world in King
Saul, who, when he was reproved by the prophet, admitted, " I have sinned ; " but
immediately added this request to Samuel, " Yet honour me now." See the sorrow
according to God in King David, who, when he was reproved by a prophet, said, " I
have sinned against Jehovah," and then prayed the fifty-first psalm, saying, " Hide
thy face from my sins." 2. Its result. It works " repentance to salvation," otherwise
described as " repentance toward God " and " repentance unto life." The sorrow does
not exhaust itself in emotion, but induces a change of mind, a turning from sin to God,
and so from death to life. And such repentance will never be regretted. St. Paul had
regretted his first letter, but now did not regret it, since he learned the good effect it
had produced. A minister of Christ may have to speak sharply to men about their sins.
He may have to regret that he evaded such duty or spoke smooth things, but not that
he brought trouble to the consciences of sinners or godly sorrow to their hearts. And
many a hearer of the Word may have to grieve that he was deaf to reproof, but none
that he listened to it and mourned for his sin. No one will ever regret that he
repented toward God. 3. Its further issues and evidences. The moral earnestness
which was connected with sorrow according to and repentance toward God showed
itself thus at Corinth. "What carefulness it wrought in you!" What diligence 1
Blessed is the reproof, healthy is the sorrow, which puts a stop to trifling, and makes
us- face the reality and feel the seriousness of living in God's sight. We must not
then excuse our faults or count them unavoidable, but set about th« correction of them



CH. vn. 1—16.] IHE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS, 189

with all diligence. *• Yea, what a clearing of yourselves ! " What solicitude to be
right with God 1 " Yea, what indignation ! " "What lively abhorrence of evil I " Yea,
what fear 1 yea, what longing desire ! " What anxiety to satisfy the apostle, or any
servant of God who has brought our sins home to our conscience, that we are and
mean to be what he would approve! Thus the effect of godly sorrow is to make the
heart tender and affectionate as well as pure. " Yea, what zeal " in reformation !
" Yea, what revenge I " What holy severity against sin ! When a sinner, charged
with his offences against God, stands on his defence, he is fertile in excuses. The sin
was a little one ; or the motive was not bad ; or the provocation or temptation was
great ; or the circumstances almost compelled him ; or he did it without thought ; or
he did as others do. But when hu is convinced of the Holy Ghost and moved with
godly sorrow, he has no plea, and does not wish to have any excuse pleaded for him.
He wants rather to have revenge upon his sin, and abhors himself on account of it,
repenting in dust and ashes. There is no peace for his conscience but in the sin-
purging blood of Jesus Christ. When the believer (and this rather than the other is
the case which this text suggests) is reproved for grave inconsistency, moral earnestness
is roused within him. Not that he is bound to accept the stiiotures and rebukes of ill-
natured and censorious persons who call it faithfulness to find fault freely with their
neighbours. But let a righteous man smite him, and he takes it as an excellent oil.
As his fault is shown to his conscience, he scorns to excuse it. He breaks off the sin
by righteousness, and that with a sort of sacred indignation, not against the reprover,
but against the thing reproved. Indeed, a sorrow God-ward for one fault works a
repentance for all sin. As Gurnal says, " One spot occasions the whole garment to be
washed. A careful man, when he flndeth it rain in at one place, sends forth the work-
men to look over all the roof. So should the discovery of one fault lead to a general
renewal of self-examination and repentance ; and sorrow for one sin should rend the
heart for all sins." — F.

Ver. 1. — I7l« practical power of the promises. The Apostle John gives a very
similar counsel. In 1 John iii. 3 he says, " And every man that hath this hope in
him purifieth himself, even as he is pure." Our hope is based upon the promises ; and
the promises which the apostle has been recalling to mind are (1) the indwelling of
God ; (2) his free reception of us ; and (3) his fatherhood and our sonship, with all the
love and care and keeping which these involve (oh. vi. 16 — 18). St. Paul argues in
this way — Because you are saved, because you have entered into such a state of
privilege, because you are covered by such " exceeding great and precious promises,"
therefore be in earnest to cleanse yourselves from all evil, watch over all the various
forms of conduct, and seek to tone and purify every expression of the life. The expres-
sion, " filthiness of the flesh and spirit," needs explanation. St. Paul evidently had in
mind the immoralities which are associated with idolatry, and which the Corinthian
Church had treated too lightly when brought into their midst by the incestuous
member. Writing of the apostle's association with Corinth, Archdeacon Farrar says,
" There was one characteristic of heathen life which would come home to him with
overwhelming force, and fill his pure soul with infinite pain. It was the gross
immorality of a city conspicuous for its depravity even amid the depraved cities of a
dying heathenism. Its very name had become a synonym for reckless debauchery. . . .
So far from acting as a check upon this headlong immorality, religion had there taken
under its immediate protection the very pollutions which it was its highest function
to suppress. It was to the converts of this city that he addressed most frequently,
and with most solemn warning and burning indignation, his stern prohibition of
sensual crime. It was to converts drawn from the reeking haunts of its slaves and
artisans that he writes that they too had once been sunk in the lowest depths of sin
and shame. It is of this city that we hear the sorrowful admission that in the world
of heathendom a pure life and an honest life was a thing well-nigh unknown." Dis-
tinguishing between the flesh and the spirit, though these are so subtly related, we
may say, " The outward defilement is caused by sins of the flesh, or bodily part of
man ; the inward by those of the spirit, such as pride, unbelief, or the like." Dealing
comprehensively with the topic suggested by the passage, we may show —

I. The vabiett O? i'SE Pisoiiisjis. They are found scattered throughout the sacred



190 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. vn. 1—1*



Word, and taking every variety of form. They are sometimes : 1. Involved in the
Divine dealings with individuals. 2. At other times they are emhodied in doctrinal
truths, and found as soon as we try to give those truths practicahle applications. 3.
And at other times they are words which come to us with the seal of the experience of
good men through all the ages. In all God's gracious dealings, as well as in all God's
gracious words, lie hid precious and inspiring promises for all who can read aright.

II. The adaptation op the promts ks. As life advances it comes to us with a
great and hlessed surprise, that we never pass into circumstances and conditions for
which precise promises have not been provided. They are manifestly suited just /or
us, and for just the conditions in which we, at any given time, are placed. It seems aa
if they were fashioned and sent for us and to us.

IIL The esspncb of all the pbomisbs. This is given in the promises which
St. Paul has been impressing on the Corinibians. It is Goi' a fatherliness. All promises
are the assurance of our acceptance with God, our sonsbip with God, and the expres-
sion of the love and the faithfulness with which he fulfils his fatherhood. At the
heart of every promise lies this declaration, " I will be a Father unto you."

IV. The moral infldenob of the promises. They set us upon seeking to be
what God would have us be. Assuring strength they set us upon endeavour. Or, to
put the matter in relation to the previous division of the subject, realizing the father-
liness of our God, we are set upon seeking to be true and faithful " sons and daughters "
— pure sons of the holy Father, obedient sons of the King-Father, loving sons of the
loving Father, very sensitive to the things that are imworthy of him, and very
earnest in the endeavour to put them wholly away from us.

V. The coMFOBTiNa power of the promises. This may be added to complete
the treatment of the subject, though it is not the point set forth prominently by the
apostle, and is a familiar topic. The true comforting, however, of God's promises
only can come to those who carry out the Christian duties, walk worthily of the Lord,
and need grace and upholding and cheer in their Christian conflict. — B. T.

Ver. 1. — Our great U/e-work. " Perfecting holiness in the fear of God." The former

clause of the verse indicates one side of Christian duty— the putting away of sin ; this
presents the other side — the putting on of holiness. We must " put off the old man,
which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts." We must " put on the new man,
which, after God, is created in righteousness and true holiness." Melvill says, "At
present the believer is like the marble in the hands of the sculptor ; but though day by
day he may give fresh touches and work the marble into greater emulation of the
original, the resemblance will be far from complete until death. Bach fresh degree of
likeness is a fresh advance toward perfection. It must then be that when every feature
is moulded into similitude, when all traces of feebleness and depravity are swept away
for ever, the statue breathes, and the picture bums with Deity,— it must be that then
we ' shall be filled.' We shall look on the descending Mediator, and as though the
ardent gaze drew down celestial fire, we shall seem instantly to pass through the
refiner's furnace, and, leaving behind all the dishonour of the grave, and all the dross
of corruptible humanity, spring upwards an ethereal, rapid, glowing thing — Christ's
image, extracted by Christ's lustre." The apostle had been speaking of the temple,
and of Christians as Divine temples, and so his idea of "holiness" was chiefly "con-
secration," "separation unto God," "entire devotemeut to God." Treating the perfecting
of holiness as a continuous work, to which the whole of the Christian life and effort
must be given, we considei' —

I. The initial stage. The toinning of holiness. There is some danger of con-
fusing justification with sanctification. The distinction between the two may be
simply expressed if we say that a man must be set right before he can go right.
Regeneration is the setting of our will right with God. Justification is the setting us
in the right standing with God. These stand at the very threshold of the holy life,
and there is no entrance to it by any other way. Rigarded from another point of
view, the act of solemn personal decision for God and consecration to his service ia
the winning of holiness, the beginning of the godly life.

II. The continuous stage. The beginning is a frail and feeble thing. Good so
far as it goes, and full of hopefulness ; but needing growth, culture, perfecting. In



OH. TO. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0E1NTHIAN8. 191

New Testament Scriptures the word "perfect" stands for "whole," "entire," in
opposition to " one-sided," to imperfect developments of parts, to monstrosities ; and so
it is suggestive of the many-sided forms in which the peifecting of holiness must be
carried on. The Christian has to win holiness in thought, expression of thought in
word, in conduct, in relations. He is even to keep before him this unattainable idea),
" Be ye holy, even as I am holy," saith the Lord. And the perlect holiness is no
merely cleaned surface, whitened free of all old stains of sin and self ; it is that whitened
surface painted all over with the infinite grace and purity and goodness of the Lord
Christ. It is being free of the old image, but it is also being changed into his image.
Whether the " perfect holiness " has ever been attained by any man while he dwelt
among the shadows of the earthly can never be known, for the best of men will say
to their dying days as did David, " My goodness extendeth not to thee, only to the
saints that are in the earth." Enough for us to know that it is a lilelong pursuit, the
cry of the soul as long as the soul can cry, the endeavour of the life so long as the lile
endures. Only when passed through shall we know that we are holy ; and then " he
that is holy may be holy still."

III. The inspiration of the endbavoue after holiness. " In the fear of God."
With the ever-present thought of him who is revealed as the " consuming fire." The
fear of offendina; God, and the desire to please God, are necessary elements in the
process of sanctification. F. W. Robertson says, "We cannot do without awe; there
is no depth of character without it. Tender motives are not enough to restrain
from Mn."— E. T.

Yer. 4. — A minister's Joy in tribulation. The intensity of the apostle's language
is explained by the intensity of his feelings in relation to the Corinthians. He loved
them greatly, and was ready to make any sacrifices for them. And he was propor-
tionately grieved when the news came, through Titus, of the way in which evil men
were trying to destroy his character and his influence. The tribulation he here refers
to is chiefly this mental distress and the bodily suffering which it involved. His great
relief in circumstances of so much distress was that the Corinthian Church, as a whole,
had received his first letter in a right spirit. He could be joyful in this, even amidst
his tribulation. Two points may receive illustration.

I. The tbibulation comes from anxibtt concernino spiritual well-being.
Precisely this is the minister's sphere. His interest is in the moral and spiritual
condition of those who are set in his charge. But this is the most serious and over-
whelming of all burdens that can be laid upon a man's heart and effort. If we estimate
what the due maintenance and culture of our own spiritual life mvolves, we may under-
stand how great is the anxiety of Christian ministers who watch over souls as well as
watch for souls. Illustrate by Samuel Eutherford's intense expression of feeling,
" God is my witness that your salvation would be two salvations to me, and your
heaven two heavens to me." Show what a strain upon nervous constitutions the
pressure of the ministry becomes in these our days.

II. The jot comes from dub response made to efforts fob spiritual wbll-
BBiNO. Compare other expressions by apostles ; e.g. " I have no greater joy than to hear
that my children walk in truth ; " " What is our joy or crown of rejoicing ? Are not
even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus at his coming? For ye are our glory and
our joy." The minister has, in the culture of spiritual life, to use truth, warnings,
threatenings, as well as comfortings and inspirings ; and his joy is ever this — his people
are open-hearted to receive, are humble enough to regard what he may say, and
earnest enough to obey. No earthly joy is like that which they know who help their
brethren to truth and purity and God. — E. T.

Vers. 9, 10. — Godlp sorrow ; or, the sorrow that is after the will of Ood. Reference
is to the distress which the more spiritual members of the Corinthian Church felt on
the receipt of St. Paul's first letter. He had written severely, and, after sending his
letter, almost regretted that he had expressed himself so strongly ; but he now felt
tbankful to hear that they had so well responded to his appeals, and sorrowed unto
repentance and putting away of the evil in a manner that would be so certainly
approved by Gtod. " The series of emotional words in ver. 11 represent the apostle's.



192 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. til 1—16.

estimate of what he had heard from Titus. There was (1) earnestness where there
had been imlifferenoe to evil, and even approval of it (1 Cor. v. 2) ; and this was shown
(2) in the vindication of their conduct which they had sent through Titus ; and (3) in
their stem ' indignation ' against the offender ; (4) in thuir fear, partly of the super-
natural chastisement which St. Paul had threatened, partly of the judgment of Qtod.
which was against such things; (5) in the longing to have him once more among
them, which mingled with their fear ; (6) in their new zeal for the law of purity; (7) in
their actual vengeance, i.e. their sentence of condemnation passed upon the offender."
" The apostle rejoiced, not that the Corinthians sorrowed, but that they sorrowed unto
repentance. Sorrow has two results — it may end in spiritual life or in spiritual death ,
and in themselves one of these is as natural as the other. Sorrow may produce two
kinds of reformation : a transient or a permanent one ; an alteration in habits, which,
originating in emotion, will last so long as that emotion continues, and then, after a
few fruitless efforts, be given up ; a repentance which will be repented of; or again,
a permanent change which will be reversed by no after-thought — a repentance not to
be repented of." Beza says, " The ' sorrow of the world ' is the certain way to des-
peration, unless God prevent it, as appears from the horrid examples of Cain, Saul,
Ahithophel, and Judas ; but the written tears of David give the clearest example of
the other kind of sorrow."

I. The distinction between ebmoksb and repentance. The word " remorse "
has in it the figure of " biting back," and it means going over our sins in thought, with
a keen gnawing regret at having done them, but without any softened feelings such as
belong to the penitent. Eemorse is exactly that " sorrow of the world " which worketh
death. Repentance is that humble, regretful spirit which sets a man ready to receive
and to value the Divine forgiveness.

IL The tests of genuine eepentanob in the individual They are : 1. Mental
distress. 2. Humility and self-abasement. 3. Confession without attempt at excuses.
4. Earnest seeking of Divine forgiveness. 5. Resolute putting away of the evil. 6.
Keen watchfulness over the circumstances that involve temptation to the sin. 7. And
an attitude of simple and unquestioning obedience to the will of God, and submission
to whatever judgments on the sin it may please him to appoint. " Sorrow has done its
work when it deters from eviL In the sorrow of the world the obliquity of the heart
towards evil is not cured ; it seems as if nothing cured it ; heart-ache and trials come
in vain ; the history of life at last is what it was at first. Sorrow avails only when the
past is converted into experience, and from failure lessons are learned which never are
to be forgotten."

III. The tests of genuine ebpentancb in a Church. These more especially
are dealt with in the passage before us. Bengel says that the six results mentioned by
the apostle fall into pairs. The first two relate to their feelings towards themselves,
the next to their feelings towards the apostle, the last to their feelings towards the
offender and his offence. The tests we notice are (1) clearings, earnest efforts to put
away the wrong, and to show that they had no complicity in it, and would make no
excuses for it ; (2) anxiety for each other, that the membership may be quite purified,
and no brother cherish even a secret sympathy with the wrong ; (3) discipline on the
wrong-doer, by at least a temporary removal of him from the Church fellowship. The
penitence of a Church will also find expression in united acts of confession and humilia-
tion, and in prayer for Divine forgiveness and restoration. Perhaps much too little in
made in these days of the united acts of the corporate Church life. There is a befitting
Church penitence, a proper godly sorrow of a community, when, by any evil of its
members, such a community has become defiled. — E, T,

Ver. 12. — Apostolic cares. " Our care of you in the sight of God might appear nnto
you." The apostle always used the persuasion of his affection, whenever it was
possible, rather than the force of his apostolic authority. Elsewhere he pleads thus :
" Kot that we have dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy." And he
speaks of " that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the Churches." We
may compare the care of a wise and faithful mother for the well-being of her children
and the burden of thought and interest which they are to her every day. The apostle't
care concerned three things.



OH. -ra. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANa 193

I. PnBiTT. Of this he was supremely zealous. Christians must be seen to differ
essentially from pagan idolaters. Immorality and uiioleanness were directly associated
with heathenism, and were even consecrated by idolatrous religions ; but there must
be no possibility of questioning that the Christian Church was " called unto holiness."
" Every member must know how to possess his vessel in sanctiflcation and honour.''
There must be no " touching of the unclean thing."

' II. Edification. Security for the Christian lies in continuous growth. This,
indeed, is the law of all life. When a thing ceases to grow it begins to die. The
growth or upbuilding of the plant is St. Paul's supreme anxiety ; and he evidently
feared that the Corinthians must have been neglecting their spiritual culture, seeing
they could suffer such evils to come in amongst them. Pungus-growths only attack
trees in which the vitality is lowered.

III. Witness. St. Paul expects the Churches to make positive and active testimony
to all around them. That witness can only be a fitting one and a powerful one as
the Church is kept pure. So St. Paul is moved with so much anxiety for the clearing
of the Corinthians. He wants the light that shines from them on all the heathen
world around to be a pure light, clear, white, in no way dimmed, and therefore he can
rejoice that they have so fully responded to his supreme care on their behalf. — E. T.

Ver. 16. — Apostolic confidence ; or the fulness of the restoration man may make to
follow on his forgiveness of his fellow-men. " I rejoice, therefore, that I have con-
fidence in you in all things." F. W. Robertson says, " We learn from this the value
of explanations. Had St. Paul left the matter unsettled, or only half settled, there
never could have been a hearty understanding between him and the Corinthians.
Whenever there is a misunderstanding between man and man, the true remedy is a
direct and open request for explanation." This sentence closes the apostle's reference
to a very painful subject ; he wishes it now to be put quite away, out of thought, and
BO he assures the Corinthians that no relic of suspicion or fear is left in his mind ; he
restores them fully to his affection and esteem; he has "confidence in them in all things."
Now, in this complete restoration of the Corinthians to favour we see that man may be
the shadow of Qoi, and his forgiveness and full reconciliation may help his fellow-men
to realize the fulness of the restoration which God gives to the penitent. He puts our
sins behind his back. He casts them into the depths of the sea. He separates them
from us as far as the east is from the west. He remembers them no more against us
for ever. He blots out our transgressions as a cloud, and oar iniquities as a thick
cloud. The figure of our God is the father in the parable of the prodigal son, who
brings the penitent and forgiven son into the old place at the family table, dresses him
in the son's robes, and gives him such a welcome as will show the sad past to be all
forgiven and forgotten. It should be a serious thought to us that men may take their
ideas of God's dealing with them from the manner of our dealing with them. If they
find that we cannot forgive and forget, and wholly restore confidence, it will be very
hard for them to believe that God can. Three points of man's dealing with man,
especially of the Christian man's dealing with his fellow-Christian, may be taken as
representing God's dealings with us. In these we may be ourselves examples of Qoi.

I. Man withdrawing confidbnoe because or cherished sin. God never passes
by sin, and we must not. Every Church member should be quickly sensitive to the
inconsistencies and sins of his fellow-members. If the sin is kept and cherished there
ought to be withdrawal of confidence, for whenever his people cherish sin there is a
cloud passes before God and hides his face from them.

II. Man endeavouring to influence for the putting away of sin. Falling
into transgression ought to set our brothers upon our Christian love and effort. Erring
brothers must not be left to go in their evil ways. Illustrate from St. Paul's efforts to
bring the incestuous man to repentance. Too often Churches are more eager to exercise
discipline than to attempt recovery, and labour to secure repentance. " Ye that are
spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness."

III. Man bestohino to confidence when the sin is put away. This we have
illustrated in the hearty words of the apostle. Speaking of Newman's sentence, " A
true penitent never forgives himself," P. W. Eobertson says, " A false estimate of the
gospel of Christ and of the heart of man ! A proud remorse does not forgive itself the

II. CORINTHIANS.



194



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. vm. 1—24.



forfeiture of its own dignity ; but it is the very beauty of the penitence which is
acoordinc; to God that at last the sinner, realizing God's forgiveness, does learn to
forgive himself." And help to this " self-forgiving " we can render if we show to the
sincere penitent the heartiness of our forgiveness and restoration. — E. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER vm.



Liberality shown by the Macedonian
Churches (vers. 1 — 5). He is sending Titus
to receive their contribution for the Church
of Jerusalem, and he invites them to give
according to their power (vers. 6 — 15).
Eecommendiition of Titus and the other
delegates (vers. 16 — 21).

These two chapters (viii. and ix.) form
an independent section of the Epislle. The
plural alone (" we ") is used throughout ;
participial and unfinished constructions
abound ; the style is a little embarrassed ;
and various words, such as " grace," " bless-
ing," "righteousness," "simplicity," occur
in somewhat unusual shades of meauing.
All this arises : 1. From St. Paul's natural
delicacy in alluding to pecuniary subjects.
2. From a desire to conciliate the Corinthians,
while at the same time he cannot conceal
from them a little apprehension that tliey
were rather more forward and zealous in
words than in deeds. Their large promises
had led him to speak of them in a way
which seemed unlikely to bo justified by
the fulfilment. He was thus more or less
under the influence of conflicting emotions.
Out of patriotism (Kom. ix. 3) and compas-
sion, and an effort to fulfil an old pledge
(Gal. ii. 10), and a desire to conciliate and,
if possible, win over the affection of the
Jewish Church — which had been much
alienated from him by differences of opinion
and by assiduous calumnies — and from a
wish to show that his Gentile converts were
faithful and loving brethren (Kom. xv. 31),
he was intensely anxious that the contribu-
tion should be a large one. This feeling is
apparent, not only throughout every line of
this appeal, with the solemn topics which it
introduces, but also in all his other allusions
to the subject (Bom. xv. 26; 1 Cor. xvi.;
Acts XX. 22 ; xxi. 4, etc.). On the other
hand, he was careful lest he should seem to
have oven the most distant personal aims, and
lest he should lay on his Gentile converts a
wholly unfamiliar burden.



Ver. 1. — We do you to wit; rather, «>«
make known to you. The phrase is like the
modern "I wish to inform you." In this
and the next chapter St. Paul, having fully
spoken of the joy which had been caused to
him by their reception of his first letter, and
having said as much as he then intended to
say in answer to the charges insinuated
against him, proceeds to give directions about
thecollection for the poorsaints at Jerusalem.
He had already spoken of it (1 Cor. xvi.
1 — 4), but feared that they were behind-
hand, and now sends Titus to stimulate
their zeal. The style throughout is brief
and allusive, because he had already, in
various ways, brought this matter fully
before them. Throughout this section he
shows in a remarkable degree the tact, cour-
tesy, high sense of honour, and practical
wisdom which were among his many gifts.
The "but" with which the chapter begins
in the original is St. Paul's ordinary formula
of transition, as in 1 Cor. vii 1 ; xii. 1 ;
xiii. 1, etc. (For the phrase, " we inform
you," see 1 Cor. xii. 3 ; xv. 1.) It is one of
numberless incidental proofs of the genuine-
ness of this group of Epistles — the Epistles
of the second great missionary journey —
that the same words, phrases, and thoughts
constantly recur in them. The grace of God
(see next note). Bestowed on the Chniches of
Macedonia ; rather, which is being bestowed
in the Churches. St. Paul wants to tell the
Corinthians how extremely liberal the Ma-
cedonians have been, since it was his custom
to stir up one Church by the example of
another (oh. ix. 2) ; but he begins by speak-
ing of their generosity as a proof of the
grace which they are receiving from the
Holy Spirit. The Churches of Macedonia.
The only Macedonian Churches of which
we have any details in the New Testament
are those of Philippi, Thessalonioa, and
Beroea. They seem to have been peculiarly
dear to St. Paul, who was attracted by their
cheerfulness in afSiction and their generosity
in the midst of want.

Ver. 2. — In. a great trial of affliction;
rather, in much testing of affliction ; i.e. in
an affliction which put to the proof their
Christian character. " They were not simply
aftiioted," says St. Chrysostom, "butin such
a way as also to become approved by their
endurance." (For the word rendered "trial,"
see Kom. v. 4, and in this Epistle, ch. ii. 9 ;
ix. 13 ; xiii. 3.) " Affliction " seems to havb
befallen the Churches of Macedonia ver;



OH. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



195



heavily (1 Thess. i. 6 ; ii. 14), chiefly through
ihe jealousy of the Jews, who excited the
hatred of tlie Gentiles (Acts xvi. 20; xvii.
5, 13). The abundance of their joy. An-
other reference to joy in sadness (see on ch.
Tii. 4). There is not the least necessity to
under»tand the verb " is " or " was " after this
clause. " The abundance . . . abounded "
is indeed a pleonasm, but is not at all unlilce
the style of St. Paul. He means to say that
their joy overflowed their affliction, and their
liberality overflowed their poverty (Mark
xii. 44). Their deep poverty ; literally, their
pauperism to the depth ; their abysmal pen-
ury. Though they were fiaeiivTa>x°'> t^^y
showed themselves in geterosity to be $a8{i-
tAoutoi. Stanley refers to Arnold's ' Eoman
Commonwealth,' where he mentions that
the provinces of Macedonia and Achaia,
which had suffered greatly In the three civil
wars, appealed successfully to Tiberius for
a diminution of their burdens. The gift
of the Macedonians was like the widow's
mite (Luke xxi. 3, 4, where similar words
occur — periasetio, husterema). Of their liber-
ality ; rather, of their eingleness of purpose
or simplicity (Eph. vi. 5). The " grace "
and single-heartedness to which he alludes
showed themselves in liberality.

Ver. 3. — They were wiUing of themselves.
" Of their own accord," as in ver. 17. The
verb in the original is energetically omitted,
with the "they gave" of ver. 5. St. Paul
does not mean that the notion of making tlie
collection originated with them (oh. ix. 2),
but only tliat they displayed a voluntary
energy in carrying it out.

Ver. 4. — Praying ns. The entreaties came
from them, not from me. That we would
receive. These words are almost certainly an
explanatory gloss. The translation then is,
" begging us for the grace of participation
in this ministration to the suints." They
were so willing in the matter that they en-
treated me, as a favour (xdp's), to allow them
to have a share in this contribution, because
it was to be given to the saints, that is, the
suffering poor in the Church of Jerusalem.
This Church suffered from chronic poverty.
Even the Jewish population were liable to
famines, in one of which they had only been
kept alive by the royal munificence of a
proselyte. Queen Helena, of Adiabene. The
Christians would, of course, suffer even more
deeply, because they were drawn from the
humblest classes and had fewer friends.
This was one of the reasons why, as an act
of common humanity, it was incumbent on
the Gentile Christians to help them (Acts xi.
29; Eom. xv. 25, 26). St. Paul had already
brought the subject to the notice of the
Corinthians (1 Cor. xvi. 1—4).

Ver. 5. — Not as we hoped ; rather, not as
we expteted. They were so poor that it waf



impossible to expect much from them, but

they surpassed my expectations in every way
The Church of Philippi, perhaps under the
influence of Lydia, was remaricable for gene-
rosity, and was the only Church from which
St. Paul would accept any personal help
(Phil. u. 25; iv. 15—18). First. "They
gave themselves to the Lord, which is the best
of all, and they gave themselves as helpers
to us also — by the will of God." (For a
similar use of " and " to imply a matter of
less importance, see Acts xv. 28.) The
phrase, "by the will of God," implies a
thanksgiving to God for the grace which
enabled them to give themselves to him,
and their goods to his saints. Being "a
peculiar people," they naturally showed
themselves " zealous of good works " (Titus
ii. 14). First (Bom. i. la ; ii. 9, 10).

Ver. 6. — Insomuch that. Their liberality
encouraged me so greatly that I exhorted
Titus to return to Corinth once more, and
see whether he could not receive some proof
that you were equally liberal. The remarks
that follow are full of delicate reserve, but
under their exquisite tact and urbanity we
can perceive that the Corinthians had tallted
■<ieiy loudly about their contributions, and
had promised with great zeal, but had shown
themselves somewhat slack in redeeming
their promises. We exhorted Titus. It is
curious that this word is constantly used of
the missions of Titus (ver. 17 ; ch. xii. 18 ;
1 Cor. xvi. 12). Ashe had begun. "That as
he inaugurated (this collection), so he would
also complete towards you this gracious work
also." Among other works of grace which
Titus might complete by returning to them
from Macedonia was the kindly collection
which he had begun to set on foot in his
previous visit (ch. xii. 18).

Ver. 7. — Therefore ; rather, hut. In the
following verses to ver. 15 lie tells them his
wishes about this collection. He desires
them to show generosity among their other
graces (ver. 7), not by way of command, but
that they may emulate others and show their
love (ver. 8) by following the example of
Christ (ver. 9). And by acting thus they
would prove the sincerity of their former
promises (vers. 10, 11), especially as he did
not wish them to give more than they couJd
justly spare by way of reciprocity (vers.
12 — 1.5). As ye abound in every thing, in
faith, etc. Perhaps " by faith," etc., " St
Paul," says Grotius, "knew the art of the
orators to move by praising." This method
of conciliating attention is toohiiioally called
proparaitesis. The praise was, of course,
sincere, though, no doubt, it was expressed
with the generosity of love (see 1 Cor. i. 5).
And in your love to us. The Greek is more
emphatic, " and by the love from you in us ; "
i.e. by the love which streams from you, and



196 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. Tin. 1—24



which I feel in myself. In this grace also ;
namely, the grace of Ohristian liberality.

Ver. 8. — Not by commandmeut. St. Paid
felt an honourabls sensibility which pre-
vented him from straining his autljoiity by
urging the Corinthians to give of their
substance. Among Gentiles such contribu-
tions towards the needs of others — the
result of unselfisli compassion — were all but
unknown. The forwardness ; i.e. the ready
zeal. The sincerity; more literally, the
genuineneia.

Ver. 9. — The grace of our lord Jesus
Christ. The word "grace," as in vers. 4,
6, 7, here means "gracious beneficence."
Though he was rich (John xvi. 15 ; Bph.
iii. 8). Became poor. The aorist implies
the concentration of his self-sacrifice in a
single act. By his poverty, The word " his "
in the Greek implies the greatness of Christ.
The word for " poverty " would, in classical
Greek, mean "pauperism" or "mendicancy."
Dean Stanley (n feiring to Milman's ' Latin
Christianity,' v. bk. xii. o. 6) points out
how large a place this verse occupied in the
medisBval controversies between the mode-
rate and the extreme members of the mendi-
cant orders. William of Ockham and others,
taking the word " poverty " in its extremest
sense, maintained that thePrancisoans ought
to possess nothing ; but Pope John XXII.,
with the Dominicans, took a more rational
view of the sense and of the historic facts.

Yer. 10. — And herein I give my advice ;
and in this matter I offer an opinion (only).
For ihis is expedient for you. It is more to
your advantage that I should merely suggest
and advise you about the matter than com-
mand you. Who have begun ; rather, seeing
that you formerly began. The verb is the
same as in ver. 6. Not only to do, but also
to be forward ; rather, not only to do, but also
to be willing. The " to do " is in the aorist,
the "to be willing" in the present. We
should naturally have expected a reversed
order, " not only to be willing, but also to
put in action." There must be a strong
touch of irony in the words, unless we in-
terpret it to mean "not only to make the
collection, but to be willing to add yet more
to it." Perhaps in the " to be willing " lies
the notion of "the cheerful giver," "the
willing mind " (ch. ix. 7 : 1 Tim. vi. 17—11)).
A year ago ; rather, since the prrviniis yeiir ;
i.e. laatyear(ch. ix. 2). They Liul prnljably
bfgun to collect in the previous Knstcjr, and
it was now soon after Tisri, or September,
tlip beginning of the Jewish civil year.

Ver. 11. — Now therefore perform the doing
nf it, etc. ; " but now complete also the actual
work, in order that, as was the readiness of
Ih" willing, so may be also the completion
leenrding to your means." Out of that
which ye have. This, and not " out of your



ability," is probably the right reading, aa
we see from the next verse.

Ver. 12. — For if there be first a willing
mind, etc. " For if the readiness is forth-
coming, it is acceptable," etc. In other
words, God considers not quantum, but ex
quanta ; not the magnitude of the gift, but
the proportion which it bears to the means
of the giver.

Ver. 1.3. — And ye be burdened ; liter»ily,
for not that there may be relief to others, hut
to you affliction. In other words, I have no
wish that you should distress yourselves to
set others at ease. You must not suspect
me of Jewisli proclivities which would lead
me to impoverish you to provide luxuries
for the Christians at Jerusalem. Others
refer it to the Macedonians : " I do not wish
to burden you, but the Macedonians, who
are poor, have contributed, and if you join
them in this good work now, they may help
you hereafter." But there is no hint of
this anywhere.

Ver. 14. — But by an equality, etc. The
verse, like so many in this chapter, is ex-
pressed very elliptically:"Butbya reciprocal
fairness in the present case, your super-
abundance to their lack, that also their
superabundance may be in proportion to your
lack, that there may come to be reciprocal
fairness." St. Paul may possibly be thinking
of the reciprocity of spiritual and temporal
benefits, as in Kom xv. '17 ; but if so he
leaves the thought unexpressed. The ap-
plication of the text to " works of super-
erogation " (Art. XIV.), as forming a fund
at tlie disposal of the hierarchy in the way
of indulgences, pardons, etc., is a singular
perversion, The passage has been pointed
out by Dean Stanley as one which indicates
a possible acquaintance with the writings
of Aristotle.

Ver. 15. — As it is written (Exod. xvi.
17, 18, LXX.). The reference is to the
gathering of manna.

Ver. 16. — Which put ; rather, which giveth.
The zeal is continuous. The same earnest
care. The same in the heart of Titus as in
my own.

Ver. 17. — The exhortation. My request
that he would undertake this task. Being
more forward. Because he was more ear-
nestly zealous than 1 had ever ventured to
hope, he went spontaneously. (On the word
authairetos, see ver. 3.)

Ver. 18. — The brother, whose praise is in
the gospel The phrase means, "whose
worth is praised wherever t)ie glad tidings
are preacheil." There can be no reference
to any of the four written Gospels, for they
were not in the hands of Christians till a later
date; nor did the word "gospel" acquire this
significance till afterwards. Prom Acts xx.
f}. it is somewhat precariously inferred that



OH. TOL 1—24] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS.



197



Bt. Luke U meant. Others have oonjeotnred
Barnabas, Silas (who are out of the question),
Erastus, Mark, a brother of Titus, eto. St.
Luke is not unlikely to have been selected
as a delegate by the Church of Philippi ;
but further than tliis we can say nothing.
St. Zjuke was not a Macedonian by birth,
and any Maoedoniau (e.g. Aristarohus,
Sopater, Secundus, Epapliroditus) seems
to be excluded by ch. ix. 4. Paley notes it
as curious that the object of St. Paul's
journey to Jerusalem, which is so prominent
in this group of Epistles, is only mentioned
indirectly and incidentally by St. Luke
(Acts xxiv. 17) in the Acts of the Apostles.

Ver. 19. — Chosen. The word (literally,
chosen hy ehou) of hands) implies a popular
vote (comp. 1 Cor. xvi. 3, 4). This brother
was not only widely known and valued, but
also specially selected for this task. To
travel with us. " As our fellow-traveller."
The word occurs in Acts xix. 29. With this
grace. The better reading is " in : " " in this
matter of kindness." To the glory of the
same lord. The word " same " should be
omitted. And declaration of your ready
mind. The best reading is " our," and the
clause should be rendered, to further the
glory of the Lord and our readiness.

Ver. 20. — Avoiding this. The object in
sending Titus and the brother was to cut
away the possibility of blame and suspicion.
The word " avoiding " (gtellomenoi) literally
means "furling sail," and then "taking
precautions." It may, however, mean " mak-
ing this arrangement " (see 2 These, ill. 6).
Too much stress has been laid on St. Paul's
" use of nautical terms " (Acts xx. 20 ; Gal.
ii. 12, etc.). They belon g, in fact, to the very
phraseology of the Greek language. That
no man should blame us (see ch. vi. 3). St.
Paul here sets a valuable and necessary
example to all Christians who are entrusted
with the management of charitable funds.
It is their duty to take every step which
may place them above the possibility of
of suspicion. Their management of the
sums entrusted to them should be obviously
and transparently business-like and honour-
able. St. Paul taught this behaviour both
by example and by precept (Bom. xii. 17 ;
PhiL IT. 8). There ia such a thing as a



foolish and reprehensible indifference tc
public opinion (1 Pet. ii. 12). Yet with all
his noble carefulness, St. Paul did not
escape this very shmder (oh. xii. 18). In
this abundance. The word, which occurs
here only, means literally " succulence," but
in the LXX. the adjective means " rich "
(1 Kings i. 9). It here implies that the
sum which bad been collected by St. Paul's
exertion was a large one.

Ver. 21. — Honest things. The word
"honest "means " honourable "(Eom. xii. 17;
Prov. iii. 4, LXX.). Not only in the sight
of the Lord. Such precautions would be
unnecessary if others were not concerned,
for God knows our honesty (ch. v. 11). But
also before men. Although the text "avoid
all appearance of evil " should be rendered
" avoid every species of evil," the mistrans-
lation conveys a wise lesson. " In a field of
melons," says the Chinese proverb. " do not
stoop to tie your shoe;" for that will look aa
if you wanted to steal one of the melons.

Ver. 22. — Our brother. It is imjiossible
to conjecture with any certainty who was the
brother thus warmly eulogized. Clement,
Epsenetns, Apollos, Luke, Zenas, Sosthenes,
Trophimus, and Tychicus have all been
suggested. Stanley conjectures that the two
who accompanied Titus were the Ephesians
Tychicus and Trophimus (Acts xx. 4 ; xxi.
9; 2 Tim. iv. 12; Eph.vi. 21; Titus iii. 12;
Col. iv. 7).

Ver. 23. — ^Whether any do inquire of
Titus ; literally, whether about Titus, or, as
to Titus; i.e. " if I speak about Titus." (For
the phrase, comp. ch. i. 6, 8 ; 2 Thess. ii. 1.)
Titus, long afterwards, was delegated on a
similar mission to Crete (Titus i. 1 — 5 ; ii.
15). My partner and fellow-helper conoem-
ing you ; rather, my associate (Philem. 17)
arid, as regards you, my feUow-worker. Mes-
sengers ; literally, apostles. The word is used
in its original and untechnical sense of
delegates (Phil. ii. 25 ; Bom. xvi. 7). The
glory of Christ. Men whose work and
worth redound to Christ's honour (Gal. i. 24).

Ver. 24. —Of your love. Not only of your
love " to me," but of your brotherly love in
general. And of oui boasting. Show to
the Church that my boasting of yon was
justifiable.



HOMILETICS.

Yen. 1—9.— Genuine lenejuxnce (1). " Moreover, brethren, :^e do you to vit of the
grace of God," eta The subject of these words is genuine Itneficence, and they suggest
certain general truths concerning it.

L That all gencinb beneficence in man is feom God. " Moreover, brethren, wa
do you to wit of [we make known to you] the grace of God." All that is loving and
generous in all moral beings is from one Source, and that is God. He is the primal
Font whence all flows. Wherever you see love, in young or old, rich or poor, cultured



198 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vni. 1—24.

or rude, you see an emanation from and a reflection of the Eternal. As yon may set
the ocean in a dewdrop, you may see God in every throb of affection in human souls.

II. That in some men it is moeb stronglt developed than in others. Accoiding
to St. Paul, the "Churches of Macedonia" displayed it in a remarkable degree. It
would seem from what Paul says concerning the beneficence of the Macedonian Churches
that it was : 1. Self-sacrificing. " How that in a great trial of afBiction the abundance
of their joy and their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their liberality." It
would seem from this that they could ill afibrd — as the phrase is — to render any help
in the way of property to others, and yet their contfibutions " abounded unto the
riches of their liberality." 2. Spontaneous. "They were willing of themselves."
They were not pressed into it by outward appeals. The only pressure was from love
within. 3. Earnest. "Praying us with much entreaty that we would receive the
gift." Instead of giving because they were besought by others to do so, they them-
selves besought the reception of their gifts. They might have presented plausible
reasons for withholding their contributions to this charity. They might have pleaded
distance, and said, " Jerusalem is a long way off, and charity begins at home." They
might have pleaded lack of personal knowledge, and have said, " We are utterly unac-
q uainted with any of these saints at Jerusalem ; " or they might have pleaded their own
affliction or poverty. But instead of that, they earnestly seized the opportunity to
render what help they could. 4. Religious. " And this they did, not as we hoped,
but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of God." " This
means," says a modern expositor, " of course, that they had done what was far beyond
his hopes. And here the point lies in the fact that they gave, not their money only,
but themselves, their time, thought, energy, primarily to Christ as their Lord, and then
to the apostle as his minister. And this they had done because they allowed the will
of God to work upon their will." Consecration of self to God is at once the cause and
virtue of all our gifts to men. Unless we give ourselves to God, all our gifts to men
are morally worthless.

III. That those in whom it is most strongly developed might be iteged as an
example to others. Paul here holds up the beneficence of the Macedonians as an
example to stimulate the charity of the Corinthians. It would seem that the Church at
Corinth had, through the influence of Titus, commenced a subscription for the poor at
Jerusalem, and that Titus was about to return in order to obtain larger contributions.
The charity of the Macedonian Churches Paul quotes as an example in order to help
forward ttie work. His argument seems to be this — You have the advantages of the
Churches at MacedoniB in many things ; you " abound in everything," you are wealthy,
they are poor ; your endowments are greater than theirs, your " faith, and utterance, and
knowledge," and " in your love to us ; " this being so, " See that ye abound in this grace
also ; " see that you excel in your contributions to this charity. It is wise and well to
hold up the good example of others to stimulate men to a holy emulation. The good deeds
of other men are amongst the Divine forces to purify and ennoble our own characters.

IV. That the highest example of it we have in the life of Jesus i^HRisT.
" For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ," etc. Christ is the supreme Model
of philanthropy. 1. Eis philanthropy was self-sacrificing. " Though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor." Observe : (1) He was rich in material wealth before
he came into the world. It is of material wealth that the apostle is speaking. (2) His
existence on earth was that of material poverty. " The foxes have holes," etc. (3) He
passed voluntarily from one stage to another. " For your sakes he became poor." Of
all the myriads of men that have appeared on this earth, and that will appear, he alone
had the choosing of his circumstances, and he chose poverty. 2. His philanthropy aimed
supremely at the promotion of spiritual wealth. "That ye through his poverty might
be rich." Rich spiritually. Great is the difference between spiritual wealth and material.
(1) Tlie one is absolutely valuable, the other is not. (2) The one is essential to ht^
piness, the other is not. (3) The one is within the reach of all, the other is not.

Vers. 10 — 15. — Genuine heneficence (2). " And herein I give my advice," etc In
these verses there is a continuation of the subject presented in the preceding passage, viz,
genuine beneficence. And there are three further remarks suggested concerning thi"
all-important subject.



OH. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 199

L It is the embodying op the benrficent destre in coxTrjnuxinxs for the go.od
OF OTHERS. "Herein I give my advice [judgment] : for this is expedient for you, vrho
have begun before [who were the iirst to make a beginning], not only to do, but also to
be forvfard a year ago. Now therefore perform [complete] the doing of it ; that as
there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance [completion] also out of
that which ye have." They had shown the will to contribute, for tliey had "a year
ago " commenced their subscriptions. Now Paul exhorts them to go on and complete
the work. " As there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance." The
mere generous will is good in itself, but is not enough ; it requires to be embodied in
deeds. Every good desire requires embodiment : 1. For our ovm sake. It is only as
our best desires are translated into deeds that they give solidity and strength to our
character. In words and sighs they die away ; they are like the morning dew. A good
desire in itself is like the raindrop on the leaf of the tree ; it may excite ailmiration as
it glistens like a diamond in the sun, but it is soon exhaled, and probably does no
good to the tree. But when embodied in a generous deed it is like the raindrop that
penetrates the roots and contributes some portion of strength to all the fibres. A
charity-sermon delivered with the eloquence of a Chalmers may excite in the congri'-
gation the beneficent idea, almost to a passion, but, unless that passion takes the form
of a self-denying act, it evaporates and leaves the congregation in a worse state than
the preacher found it. 2. For the sake of others. It is generous deeds that bless the
world. They go where ideas cannot penetrate, into the hearts and consciences of men ;
they work silently and salutarily as the sunbeam.

II. The contributions op beneficence are onlt vietuous as thet spring from a
GENEROUS desire. " Por if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to
that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not." The doctrine is this, that
the disposition of the heart, not the doings of the hand, constitute the essence of moral
character. This is the Divine method of estimating human conduct. "The Lord
judgeth not as man judgeth," etc. The motive is the soul of the deed. " Though I
bestow all my goods to feed the poor, ... and have not charity, it profitpth me nothing."
Do not judge the desire by the effort, but judge the effort put forth by tlie desire. The
poor widow would have made munificent contributions, but she could only give a
"mite;" but in that mite there was more value than in all the amount in the temple
exchequer. Some have the means to do good and not the heart, and some have the
heart but not the means. The former are grubs in the universe, the latter are angels.
There are deeds done m the body, seen of God, infinitely more numerous and essentially
more valuable in most cases than deeds done by the body.

III. The contribution of others cannot supersede the obligation of ours,
but mat supplement their deficiencies. 1. It is not a suhstitute. " For I meao
not that other men be eased, and ye burdened." It behoves every man to contribute ta
the extent of his riches, to the good of others. If one man gives a thousand it does
not relieve me from my obligation to contribute what I can. 2. It is a supplement.
" But by an equality, that now at this time your abtmdance may be a supply for their
want." It is the duty of all to contribute. Some have the ability to contribute a
hundred times the amount of others; let their large sums go to supplement the defi-
ciencies of their poorer brethren, so that there may be " an equality." Thus the old
Scripture will be illustrated, that "he that had gathered much had nothing over; and
he that had gathered little had no lack,"

Vers. 16 — 24. — Stimulating men to beneficent actions. "But thanks be to God,"
3tc. The verses under notice present to us the subject of stimulating men to efforts oj
heneficence, and three remarks are suggested concei'ning this occupation.

I. It is a work that requires the highest order of Christian men. We find
here that not only Paul employs himself in it with all his loving earnestness and
logical power, but he engages Titus also, and a " brother " with him of such distinction
that his "praise is in the gospel throughout all the Churches." To excite men to
beneficent enterprises is pre-eminently a Christian work. Christianity is the mother of
all philanthropic labours and institutions. Christian piety is a fountain whence all the
myriad streams of human beneficence that circulate through all the districts of human
life proceed. To stimulate this beneficence in men is the highest ministry on earth.



LOO THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vm. 1— 2t.



and for it men of the most distinguished character and faculty are required. No maa
ia toe greai for it, and but few men are equal to its successful discharge.

n. It IS A WORK DESERViyo THE GBATiTUPE OF ALL. Paul refers to : 1. The grati-
tnde'of those who had been excited to beneficent efforts. " But thanks be to God,
whiwx put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you." It is implied that
Titus conferred on them an immense favour in stimulating them to generous deeds.
No man can render us a greater service than by taking us out of ourselves and inspiring
us with a genuine concern for the interests of others. It is not he who gives me a
good thing, hut who stimulates me to do a good thing, that is my greatest benefactor ;
for it is " more blessed to give than to receive." In giving we become Sod-like, and
therefore we ought to thank the man most devoutly who evokes vyithin us the spirit
of true charity. Instead of endeavouring to avoid appeals to our benevolence, we
should hail them and thank our Maker for them. 2. The gratitude of those who have
effected the excitement. Paul says, " Thanks be to God, which put the same earnest
care into the heart of Titus for you." (1) There is no office higher in itself than this.
This is the work for which Christ came into the world, the work for which he estab-
lished the Christian ministry. The aim and tendency of the gospel are to drown the
selfish ego in the suimy tide of universal charity. The love of Christ constrained men
to feel that they should not henceforth live to themselves. (2) Tiiere is no office more
useful than this. Success in this means ruiu in all that is ruinous to souls in human
history, ruin to selfishness and all its fiendish brood. Well, therefore, may those
who are engaged in such a work thank God for the distinguishing honour to which
they have been called. Paul says nothing here about the gratitude of those on whom
the excited beneficence has bestowed its favours — the beneficiaries. He seems to take
it for granted that they ought and would be thankful ; that they ought to be admits of
no doubt, but that they always are cannot be asserted. Ingratitude, alas ! is one of the
reigning sins in human life.

III. It is a woek exposed to the suspicions op worldly men. The apostle seems
to have been afraid that the contributions that would flow from stimulating the benefi-
cence of the Corinthian Church would occasion the allegation that they were par-
ticipating in them, and so obtaining some personal advantage. Hence, to guard against
the possibility, he gets the Churches to choose from amongst them some men of the
best reputation, whom he calls " messenger^ of the Churches," and Titus, and perhaps
Luke, in the administration of the charity, and thus " providing for honest things, not
only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men." Dishonest men have
existed in all ages, and the more dishonest men are, the more suspicious. Paul here
guards himself against all scandalous imputations. He had great respect for his own
reputation, so much so, that one at times, in reading these Epistles, is well-nigh
astonished that a man so great in nature and sublime in character should think su
much about the opinions of others.



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — ^.—Christian liberality in the Macedonian Ohwches. Grace prepares the
way for grace. Denial of self in one direction leads to cross-bearing in other forms.
Duty is a spirit, not a mechanical thing ; a life, and not a mere performance. If the
Corinthians had shown such a " godly sorrow," they would now be easer to demon-
Htrate their renewed Christian strength by a more faithful regard to all obligations.
Carefulness, zeal, vehement desire, had characterized their repentance, and these would
not expire with the occasion that had called them into exercise. Deep feeling is quiet
feeling, and therefore permanent, and deep feeling is always the mark of true peni-
tence. St. Paul had confidence in his Corinthian brethren, and it was a large-hearted
trust ; " confidence in you in all things." The " all things " is the »ea;u8,between the
seventh and eighth chapters. So then he proceeds to speak of the liberality of the
Macedonian Churches preparatory to urging on them the duty of benevolence. Observe
his manner. If he states a doctrine, he illustrates it. If he teaches a duty, he gives
an example. Never so abstract as to neglect the practical side of life, never so intent
on action as to lose sight of the determinative principle, he reminds out of Lord



OH. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOllINTHIANS. 201

Bacon's remark, that the highest order of mind is that combining most fully the abstraui
and the practical. The example of these Macedonian Churches was well worthy ol
imitation. Macedonia had been overrun by armies, and we all know how armies
devastated countries in those days and stripped the inhabitants of their wealth.
St. Paul speaks of their " great trial of afSiction," the losses and persecutions they
were eiiduring, and yet they had " abundant jov," that could only be represented by
iis filling trie depth of their poverty and overflowing in " the riches of. their liberality."
No coEjmon poverty was theirs — " deep poverty ; " and no ordinary love was theirs,
but a very profound and tender love. "This sentence is completely shattered in
passing through the apostle's miud " (Stanley). How much more is unsaid than said
in the marvellous words, "Their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their
liberality"! Two things are taught us. 1. The inspiration of a joyous influence.
Duty, motive, impulse, all exalted into Christian happiness. "Rejoice evermore."
Such joy is a glorious power. Let us not make a mistake here. Fine feelings,
exuberant emotions, loud hallelujahs, the thrill and shout and ecstasy, may deceive us.
If they exhaust themselves in sensational excitement, they do deceive ua, and that
most awfully. Joy as a fruit of the Spirit is a giving joy, a sacrificing joy, a joy in
the cross by which we are crucified to the world and the world unto us. 2. And we
learn that even " deep poverty " is no obstruction to helping others. It often hinders
us from doing what we would ; but in the estimate of the Lord Jesus, the heart of this
matter is in the " could," not in the would. " She hath done what she could."
Capacity is always a mystery. It surprises us ever, and more and more, and in
nothing is it so surprising as in the charitable heart with small means at its command.
The glory of giving is in the quality of love, and it never fails to find something to
bestow. " She of her penury hath cast in all the living that she had." If this poor
widow could spare "two mites," who can plead depth of poverty? Notice that
St. Paul emphasizes the depth of poverty in the Macedonian Church. If it had been
simply a case of poverty, the example would not have been so instructive, and, accord-
ingly, we find the apostle citing; his cases from such as had to make sacrifices of
personal comfort in order to aid those poorer than themselves. So that while in the
Acts of the Apostles we hear of " possessors of lands or houses " selling them and
laying the prices at the feet of the apostles, this fades from view in the tragic deaths
of Ananias and Sapphira. But the image of the poor widow returns to us in the
Epistles, with many suggestions as to the class of persons who do the most of the steady
Christian giving. What is further noteworthy is the apostle's description of the
self-moved generosity of these Macedonians. " Willing of themselves." Liberality is
not a common virtue, and self-induced liberality is its rarest form. Men wait to be
urged, begged, entreated; special occasions set are for special efforts ; fine speakers are
engaged; and the whole system of giving, or very much of it, proceeds on the
habitual reluctance of giving for the support of the gospel. As to spontaneousness in
this matter, who thinks of it, who trusts it? Wow, we do not suppose that all
religious people in the apostolic age were like these Macedonians. We know they
were not. Yet, consider this fact, viz. they were the persons held up as shining
examples of what liberality ought to be in the Church of Christ. And this accords
precisely with the incidents mentioned concerning Mary of Bethany, and the poor
widow and her mites, and the disciples after Pentecost who disposed of their property
to help the poor. It was cordial and voluntary action, no external agency operating to
give inducements. Without pressing this point too far, we must say that whatever
utility belongs to the machinery of collecting funds for Church uses (and this seems to
be necessary), it is nevertheless clear enough that spontaneous liberality is the truest,
noblest, surest, mode of cultivating this grace in our hearts. So, unquestionably, the
apostle thought. With what a glow he writes ! "According to their power ; " nay, it
was more than this, for they went " beyond tiieir power [beyond their means] ; " and
BO earnest was their purpose that they prayed the apostle to receive their gifts and let
them share the grace and fellowship of ministering to the saints. No doubt many of
these men found life a hard struggle, and for them, in more senses than one, " without
were fightings, within were fears." Yet they deemed it a privilege to give ; they
coveted earnestly the best gift, which was the gift of giving ; they prayed " with much
entreaty " that they might participate in a work which was most blessed. To let such



202 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa [oh. vm. 1—24

an opportunity slip was more than they could bear. And this conduct exceeded his

expectations ; for they had given themselves first to the Lord Jesu<, and then, anxious
to show their affection for the apostle, had given themselves in this s^iecial matter to
him. Heart and property ; what a consecration! What a page in spiritual biography I
Out of " deep poverty ; " what chorus of voices ever rose like this, pleading that these
Macedonians might be permitted to share the grace of ministration ! " The short and
simple annals of the poor" have added much to our English literature, nor is it
extragavant to claim that this is one of the most praiseworthy marks of that dis-
tinctive genius which has signalized its excellence in so many departments of poetry
anil fiction. But do we realize our indebtedness to the Bible for this beautiful and
humanizing element in English literature ? Here, in this single chapter from the
Apostle Paul, what a touching picture of Christian poverty, surrendering means it could
ill afford to spare, and doing it "with a self-dedication which involved a complete
renunciation of all personal interests " (Kling) ! — L.

Vers. 7 — 15. — Appeal to the Corinthians. A wise use had been made by the apostle
of the example of the Macedonians. He had not appealed to pride, vanity, or any
selfish feeling, but had simply presented a remarkable case of Christian philanthropy.
Eobertson very properly remarks, " Had the apostle said, ' Be not beaten by those
Macedonians ;' had he called natural prejudices into play — a Corinthian to yield to a
Macedonian ! — then all the evil passions of our nature had been stinnulated." Emula-
tion is a true principle, and may be a religious principle. The danger lies, not in the
thing itself, but in its abuses, and particularly in the encouragement which it may
afford to false rivalry and jealousy. In a large measure, the spirit and conduct of
others make the social atmosphere we breathe, nor can we live in the world without
contact with it. Goodness assumes its most attractive forms in noble examples, and,
except for these, our own ideals, if they exifted at all, would be very imperfect. Con-
sistently, then, with his purpose of stimulating the Corinthians to seek a high degree
of Ch ristian excellence, the apostle sets before them in most vivid colours the liberality
of the Macedonian Churches. Titus had begun, and he would have him " finish in
them the same grace also." Men are channels of Divine influence to our souls, and, as
such, should be acknowledged in their work. St. Paul saw God's blessing on the
labours of his young friend, and he would not deprive him of the honour of completing
the task. He stood out of his way, encouraged his efforts, and lent him a fatherly
hand in furtherance of his undertaking. This sympathy with young men is one of his
characteristic qualities, and it is worthy of warm admiration. Many an elderly officer
in the Church might heed it to great advantage. Titus should have all the credit.
Let the brethren at Corinth heartily second his exertions in behalf of the poor saints at
Jerusalem. If they abounded " in everything, in faith, and utterance, and knowledge,
and in all diligence," and in their love for the apostle, let them " abound in this grace
also." The quality being pure, quantity was a favourite idea which he never lost an
opportunity to urge. " Abound " and " abundant " flow freely from his pen. " Not
by commandment" was this written. Free hearts, joyous impulses, could alone be
recognized in this enterprise of humanity. This was the value of example, it was a
sympathetic influence ; and hence his reference to " the forwardness of others," which
would test the " sincerity of their love." What a great truth is taught here, and that
too so incidentally as to escape the attention of all save those who make the cultiva-
tion of discernment a constant duty! Noble examples are Divine tests; they prove,
as we have said, the depth and activity of our sympathies, and in this respect supply
the means of a discipline otherwise lacking. "Forwardness of others;" study its
meaning. God commissions the leaders. Vast enterprises are never born of masses,
but of individuals ; apostles first, and then Churches ; Bunyan, and two centuries of
literature for the poor and illiterate ; Watts and the sacred poets following ; Kaikes and
Wesley; Martyn and Judson; successors multiplied because of their "forwardness."
Having dwelt on the example of the Macedonians, the transition is easy to the Divine
Exemplar. A single verse reminds them of " the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ," the
surrender of his eternal glory, the riches of his Godhead's state, the extent of the
abnegation, the earthly poverty assumed, and all for their sakes, that " through his
poverty " they " might be rich." The supreme consideration must be kept in full



CH. vni.1-24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 203

view. Of the Macedonians he had spoken; of the "great trial of affliction,'' of theii
" deep poverty," and how it abounded " unto the riches of their liberality." Whence
came this power? A new heart had been given to poverty, so that now, though its
means were meagre, its social position unhonoured, its claims to influence set at
nought, yet it had achieved wonders such as had never been thought possible. Mace-
donia had stretched out her arms of blessing to distant Jerusalem, and Gentiles and
Jews long alienated were now one in the holiest of brotherhoods. It was due to the
grace of Christ. It was his Spirit reproducing itself in the lives of believers. And
therefore he had cited their conduct; but most of all let them remember the one great
sacrifice of the incarnate Christ. Years subsequently we have in another Epistle
(Phil, ii.) a similar train of thought. Age was upon him then, and life was
drawing to a tragical close at Eome. Yet then, as now, then and now as throughout
his ministry, the grace of the Lord Jesus was the one thought that inspired all other
thoughts. It is still " advice." " Advice " is better than " commandment." They
had begun the work of the collection, complete the task ; they had a " readiness to
will," let the effort be consummated. And, again, an important principle is brought
to their notice. Was not "advice" sufficient? Would not an opinion be strong
enough without a command? Yea, indeed, for a year ago the Corinthians had made a
start in this matter. A willing mind is the first thing ; grace begins here, and if this
willing mind gives all it can, it is accepted of God, according to what " a man hath,
and not according to that he hath not." Mark the solicitude of the apostle as to the
education of this sentiment of giving. He cannot think of it as a thing to which they
must be constrained, and, accordingly, he acknowledges the largest freedom, only it
must be Christian freedom. Motive must have free play. Conscience must advance
into affection, or conscience is stunted. Sensibility must be self-impelled. Nor must
any conclude that he wished to oppress them that others might be relieved, " but only
to establish between Jewish and Gentile Churches a reciprocity of aid in time of need "
(Dr, Farrar). To establish an " equality " was his object. Do not mistake his
meaning. Political, social, natural equality was utterly foreign to his thought and
purpose. No revolutionist, no anarchist, no leveller, was he in any sense, in any
degree, but simply the advocate of such an equality as should be produced by the
sentiment of Christian liberality in the distribution of gifts. That equalizing influence
was not to proceed from an arbitrary law nor from force-work of any sort. It was to
be spontaneous, each man a judge for himself, and the superabundance in one place
was to supply the deficiency at another place, so as to secure an abundance for all.
Reference is made to the manna in the wilderness. If one gathered more manna than
the allotted supply, it was sent to those who had not collected enough, so that the
necessities of all were met. This was the law of Judaism as between Hebrew and
Hebrew, and the spirit of this law, fifteen centuries alterwards, reappears in a letter
to the Corinthians. History in one portion of the world and among one people becomes
prophecy in another portion and among another people. Prophecy, in turn, becomes a
new history. And to-day, a.d. 1884, thousands in Europe and America are acting on
this equalizing sentiment in the use of their property. — L.

Vers. 16 — 24. — Prudential management ; care to avoid hlame. St. Paul has given
us many sketches of himself, especially much insight into his varying moods ; and in
these chapters (vii. and viii.) he interests us in the character of Titus. The section
opens with thanksgiving to God, who has inclined the heart of his young friend towards
the Corinthians and awakened his zeal in behalf of their welfare. No doubt it had
occurred to Titus to undertake the project of collecting for the Jerusalem Church, but
he had not broached the subject to the apostle. It lay quiet in his heart, doing the
Spirit's work, expanding and strengthening his purpose, yet nursed in silence, "While
I was musing, the fire burned." St. Paul had presented the matter to him and found
him willino' ready, and zealous to enter on the task. " More forward [more earnest],
of his own^aocord he went unto you." Two brethren of reputation had been chosen by
the Churches to accompany Titus, and the three travellers, having this loving embassy
in hand would manifest " this grace," so that they and he as co-workers in the minis-
tration would glorify God. Not enough for the apostle to honour Christ in the gifts
alone but he would enhance the glory by the manner of doing the work. The way of



204 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vin. 1—24



performing it should be exceptional, impressive, and great-hearted, and thus the very
mode of the act should prove a blessing as well as the thing done. For this course
another reason existed. Appearances should always be consulted. No one can afford
to put himself above them, to neglect, and still less to despise, them. Circumstances
have their laws, and they must be obeyed. The contribution was " abundant," and he
would take all pnssible precaution in the administration, lest the enemies of his
apostleship should invent and propagate sonie new slander about him. The inspired
man, the ambassador, the pioneer of a new Europe, was not ashamed to practise the
lowly code of common sense and put a very strong emphasis on prudence. Hence his
extreme caution. Blameless in the sight of God, he would be blameless in the eyes
of men. And now a commendation of our brother, and a special word in behalf of
Titus, " my partner and fellow-helper," not forgetting to say " partner and fellow-
helper concerning you," and to exhort the Corinthians to make good his boasting to
the Macedonian Churches on their behalf. So ends this admirable chapter. Is it not
a beautiful pendant to that lamp which, for eighteen hundred years, in the thirteenth
chapter of First Corinthians, has hung out its blaze of splendour before the world? — ^L.

Ver. 5, — Dedication. If it seems strange to us that a large portion of an inspired
Epistle should be occupied with directions as to a charitable collection which was going
forward at the time, it should be remembered that Christianity introduced into human
society new and more powerful principles of benevolence, and further, that the new
and Divine revelation was one which laid the foundation for this as for all human
duties in the character and action of God himself.

I. The pbimaby and all-impobtant dedication is that of the whole peesonal
NATUBE UNTO THE LoBD. 1. This appears when it is recollected that the Lord has
first given himself for us. His sacrifice thus becomes the ground of our consecration.
2. Our very constitution, taken in connection with our natural relation to our Lord,
points to such a dedication. "No man liveth imto himself." Our "chief end is to
glorify God." 3. This spiritual consecration is pre-eminently acceptable to God. His
demand is, " Give me thine heart." Every gift which does not flow firom this is vain
and worthless in his sight.

II. The dedication of self to the Lord should be followed by the dedication
OF SELF to the Loed's PEOPLE. Paul looked for the brotherhood, the confidence, the
co-operation of his converts, and indeed of all Christian people whom Divine providence
might bring into contact with him. The Corinthians apparently wished to be per-
sonally associated with him in the ministration to the Judsan Christians who were in
poverty, and their wish was a source of satisfaction and joy to him.

III. True Christian consecbation involves the gift of property to the Lobd's
CAUSE. It is sometimes objected against calls for liberality that God cannot be enriched
by our giving. This is true, yet God's people may receive advantage, and Christ has
shown us that what is done for his people is done for himself. As most people value
their possessions, their generosity is a proof of the sincerity of their Ioto and the
reality of their consecration.

" How can I, Lord, withhold
Life's brightest hour
From thee ; or gathered gold.
Or any power ?
Why should I keep one precious thing from thee,
When thou hast given thine own dearself for mef*

T.

Ver. 8.— Sincere love. In giving liberally towards the collection made for the poor
Christians of Judsea, the Corinthians showed their love to the objects of their charity,
to the apostle to whose appeal they responded, and also to the unseen Lord and Saviour
by whose desire and for whose sake they befriended the least of his brethren.

I. LovB TO Christ is the mightiest of all spiEiTfAL pbmcipleb. Human life
abounds with evidence of the might of love ; every family, every society, has some
exemplifications of the power of love to overcome difficulties, to prompt to exertion, to
sustain under self-deniaL And all Christendom in every age hag shown that lore to



oil. vni. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 205

Christ is an unrivalled motive to holiness, to patience, to benevolence. The hymns of
the Church's literature, and the gifts and labours recorded in the Church's annals, are
alike proof of the vitality and efficacy of Christian love.

II. The profession op love to Christ is not always accompanied by the ebality.
The early disciples were admonished to " love unfeigned," were warned, " Let love be
without dissimulation." Doubtless in all ages there have been those who have deceived
themselves, and have imagined that they loved Christ, because they have felt some glow
of admiration towards him, but who in time of trial have made it manifest that they
had no depth of love. Weighed in the balance, they aire found wanting. The soul is
brought face to face with its own weakness and worthlessness, inconsistency and
treachery.

IIL Thb Lord Jbstts tests in many ways the sincehity of his people's pro-
fession OF LOVK. 1. By his bodily absence from them, which shows whether they
have an attachment to their professed Lord which can abide even though not fostered
by sight and constant personal intercourse. 2. By permitting rival powers and persons
to invite the supreme affection of the heart. These, though they cannot satisfy, may
please, and the Lord of all suffers their attractiveness ; for the love which cannot abide
amid rival attractions is poor indeed. 3. By his demand that we should surrender
what is dear to us, if to retain it conflicts with our supreme attachment to Christ. The
young ruler was subjected to this test. In some form it comes to many. Feigned love
will then go away, even though it go away grieved. 4. By our necessary and pro-
bationary contact with an unloving world. In the presence of the un spiritual and
unsympathizing, the sincerity of the Christian's love is often sorely tested. 5. The
trials and sufferings of life not only exercise the faith, they test the love, of the pro-
fessed follower of Jesus. The storm proves whether the vessel is seaworthy or not. 6.
By enjoining upon his people obedience to commandments which are contrary to our
natural inclinations. Love can vanquish even the attachment to a " darling sin." 7.
Love is tested when it is invited to direct itself towards others also, for Jesus' sake.
Who can love Christ, and yet hate his brother, for whom Christ died ? — T.

Ver. 9. — The condescension of Christ. According to the teaching of the New Testa-
ment, human kindness should be based upon Divine benevolence. Such is the import
of this wonderful parenthesis — a jewel which the inspired writer drops by the way and
passes on.

I. Christ's native riches contrasted with his voluntary poverty. 1. His
proper rightful wealth is apparent, not only from his nature as the Son of God, but
from his evident command, during his earthly ministry, of all the resources of nature.
Bread, wine, money, he could multiply or create ; the earth and the sea obeyed his
will ; diseases and demons fled at his bidding. 2. His poverty was not compulsory ;
it was a "grace." We see it in his incarnation, in which he emptied himself of his
glory; in his ministry, passed in a lowly and all but destitute condition of life; in his
refusal to use his power for selfish ends ; in his cheerful submission to a shameful death.
Compare the glory which he claimed to have had with the Father before the world
was, with the homelessness and poverty of his life and the desertion and ignominy of
his death, and his " grace " appeals to every just mind, to every sensitive heart.

II. OuB native spiritual poverty contrasted with our acquired spiritual
wealth. 1. Our natural destitution is undeniable ; by sin we have lost our pos-
sessions, our inheritance, our powers of acquisition, and are left resourceless and friend-
less. Apart from the interposition of Christ, and where Christianity is unknown, such is
still the state of man. 2. Christ's humiliation was for the sake of man's spiritual enrich-
ment. Only by condescension, compassion, and sacrifice could man be reached. Thus
he drew near to us, and imparted to us of his own true and Divine riches, of knowledge,
of righteousness, of favour, and of glory. 3. By Christ's mediation all things are ours.
God, giving Christ, gives with him all good things. " I have all things and abound,"
is the testimony of every right-minded and appreciative disciple of Christ. The
history of the Church is the history of the enrichment of the race ; and this in turn is
the pledge and promise of the inestimable and inexhaustible riches of eternity. — T.

Ver. 12. — The rule of acceptance. Justice is distinctive of all the demands and of



206 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vm. 1—24



all the proceedings of the providence of God. Often, as in the case before us, tli«
righteousness of the principles of the Divine government is so apparent that no question
can possibly be raised concerning it.

I. The general peinciple heee pkopounded. It is that the requirements of God
correspond to the possessions of man. 1. What men have, they have received from
the undeserved bounty of their Creator. This holds good with regard to property and
to talents and opportunities. 2. An account is expected from every man by him who is
the Judge and sovereign Lord of all. We are to some extent and in some matters
accountable to our fellow-men, but for everything to him in whom " we live, and move,
and have our being." 3. The rule according to which the supreme Governor will judge
mankind is one of absolute rectitude — " according to that a man hath." The feeble
man will not be expected to have done the work of the strong ; the dull man the work
of the genius ; the peasant the work of the prince; nor the beggar to have given with
the generosity of the millionaire. But each must answer for that which has been
entrusted to himself. In all things the disposition, the spirit, the endeavour, will be
taken into account ; " if there be first the ready mind " — " if the forward zeal be at
hand." Such is the universal condition ot Divine acceptance and approval.

II. The special application of the pkikciple here deduced. 1. In the matter of
gifts there is scope for moral culture and watchfulness. Unless liberality be shown
upon definite principle, it will most likely not be shown at all. There is need of
watching against selfishness and avarice. 2. It is well for every Christian to anticipate
and apply beforehand the Divine principle — to judge himself, that he may not be judged
by God ; to put to himself the qaestion, " How much owest thou unto thy Lord ? " 3.
Especially should the inspired rule of liberality be observed by those who are pros-
pering in the world. As means increase, let gifts be enlarged. The Judge cannot
accept from the wealthy the gifts which were approved when offered by the poor. — ^T.

Ver. 21. — Things hontmrahle. It might have been supposed that the apostle wonld
have considered himself superior to the considerations here adduced. His life was so
completely unselfish, so obviously governed by higher than interested principles, that
it seems as if he might have taken it for granted that no suspicion could attach to his
personal administration of the alms to be forwarded to Judaea. Probably others thought
thus ; few, if any, could have suspected Paul of fraud and misappropriation. But he
judged himself by a standard which was applicable to all Christian agents, a standard
which every wise man, experienced in the ways of the world, will do well to adopt as
his own.

I. The rule of conduct here proposed. 1. Things honourable are things actually
good, admirable, beautiful, in themselves. The word in the original denotes primarily
this. What things are morally excellent and praiseworthy, let these things be done.
2. Things honourable are things reputable and approved. It is especially prudent to
be very careful and scrupulous, and very open, in the administration of public money,
and so to act that there may be no opening for slander or misrepresentation. And the
same wile applies to other departments of conduct. It should not be a prominent
motive with us to secure men's approval, yet our conduct should be such as to secure
that approval, and even to command it. 3. Things honourable may best be provided
by endeavouring to realize the inquisitive inspection of men and the all-searching gaze
of the omniscient God.

II. The motives uegino to the praotioal adoption of this rule. 1. It will
tend to the satisfaction and peace of our own conscience. 2. It will tend to the honour
of the religion we profess, when it is seen to be, not a cloak for covetousness, but an
impalie to disinterestedness and a principle of integrity. 3. It will be for the glory of
God. Actions done in his sight and at his command, from the motive of his love, and
with the hope of his approbation, are the actions which the Christian should aim
consistently and constantly to perform, in all positions and in all relations of life. — T.

Ver. 23. — The appreciation of fellow-labourers. Anxious as Paul was that a gene-
rous contribution should be sent to Judaja for the relief and assistance of the poor
Christians in that province, he was equally anxious that the mode in which this con-
Iributiou was tran.smitted should be open and above all suspicion of carelessness oi



OB. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 207

misappropTiation. Hence he secured that Titus and two others should be appointed as
trustees, so to speak, of the fund, to take charge of it and to carry it to the destined
quarter. Of these three Christian men Paul speaks in terms of notable commendation
He terms them —

I. His own associates. The expressions used with this intent are three in number.
1. They are partners, engaged in the same work, under the same Master, and with
the expectation of a similar reward, with himself. 2. They sxe fellow-workers, each
having his own faculty, his own implement, for labour, but all co-operating to the one
end. 3. They are brethren ; i.e. bound together by a personal tie, a spiritual kindred, in
the Christian family and household of faith. These expressions involve a deep and
lasting attachment, such as should unite those who are engaged in one and the same
service rendered to the one great Master.

II. Messengers of the Chdeches. The expression in the original is very strong.
They are apostles ; i.e. sent forth by the congregation as their representatives and
plenipotentiaries. This gives a special dignity to the ofSoe and work of accredited
servants of the body of Christ, and therefore of Christ himself.

III. The glort of Christ. There is something mystical, something difficult to
expound, in this epithet. It certainly implies that these faithful men were exalted to
a position of very high honour, and were looked upon as related very closely to the
Lord himself. Certainly it was to the glory of the Redeemer that a new principle of
benevolence was introduced into human society, impelling the Grentile of Europe to
display a practical interest in the welfare of the Jew of Palestine. Here was exhibited
a moral glory radiating from Christ himself, before which the world might well bow
down in wonder, admiration, and reverence. — T.

Vers. 1 — 7. — A pattern of charity. The charity commended is that of the Mace-
donian Churches.

I. They gave uiniBB vebt cufavourablb ontcuMSTANCBS. 1. They were in much
affliction. (Ver. 2.) This might have suggested special care of themselves rather
than of others. Suffering often produces selfishness. Our pain often pi'events us from
realizing the pains of others. 2. They were in deep poverty. (Ver. 2.) How could
they give ? Charity must begin at home, and does not " deep poverty " demonstrate
that it must end there ? How inconsiderate, and indeed absurd, to ask them to give !
Was it not their duty to be provident? to hold some reserve in store against possibly
worse times ? No people talk more of duty than those who intend to violate it. The
Macedonians saw the high duty of charity, and nobly performed that duty.

II. Though afflicted and poor, thet gave largely. (Ver. 3.) Their danger
was not that they might give too little, but that they might give too much. " Beyond
their power." Affliction and poverty combined could not cramp their large-heartedness.
Many ask how little they can give ; the Macedonian Christians asked how much. A
modern curse of the Church is small giving. There are too many threepenny-bit
Ohristians.

III. They gave voluntarily. (Ver. 3.) Compulsory kindness is of little worth.
And there are other compulsions than physical. " Voluntary offerings " are often any-
thing but voluntary.

IV. They gave without urgent appeal. They gave "of their own accord."
They did not require the importunities of a "collection sermon." They required only
to know of the need ; the charity was spontaneous.

V. They beqoed for the privilege of givinq. (Ver. 4.) They longed to help,
and supplicated for a share of the good work. Giving, to them, was a privilege — a gain,
not a loss. Giving was not a thing to be avoided, but a thing to be sought. Perhaps
they remembered the words of the Lord, " It is more blessed to give than to receive."
Had they given in an assembly it would not have been necessary to have the collectii >n
in the middle of the meeting to avoid a stampede and empty plates at the close. Much
giving of to-day is not an illustration of charity, but a burlesque of it.

VI. They gave with much joy. (Ver. 2.) They reaped the firstfruits of charity
at the time of the seed-sowing 1 Such are the wonders of spiritual agriculture. The
grudging giver defrauds no one so much as himself. To miss the joy of giving is to
miss how much! Theje a,f? few luxuries so sweet as the luxury of charity.



208 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vm. 1—24.

VII. ThET gave themselves AB well as THBIB MONETAET OOKTEIBtmON.

(Ver. 5.) 1. To the Lord. They solemnly dedicated themselves and their belongings
to the Most High. 'Twas easy for them to surrender a part when they had surrendered
the whole. We give haltingly because we do not believe the Scripture which saith,
" Ye are not your own." Our gifts cannot be acceptable to God if we withhold our-
selves or parts of ourselves. 2. To the apostle. As to a servant of their Lord. For
service. When they surrendered themselves to God they did not surrender themselves
to idleness, but to activity. Many present to God a mass of indolence. Some conse-
crated people seem consecrated to do nothing. The Macedonian conduct exceeded the
apostolic expectation, not the Divine. This was what God expected, and what he expects
from us. It was " by the will of God " (ver. 5).

Pbactical. 1. Here is an example for us. Though we abound in faith, utterance,
knowledge, earnestness (ver. 7), yet if we have not this practical love we are no better
than " sounding brass " (1 Cor. xiii. 1). 2. We can attain to this only as the Mace-
donian Christians attained to it, by " the grace of God " (ver. 1). We do not want
more money in our pocliets, but more grace in our hearts. God can work this work in
us. Let us commit ourselves into his hands, that this miracle may be wrought in us
also. — ^H.

Ver. 9. — The great Example of ienevolence. Consider —

I. How EicH THE Son of God was. 1. In possessions. All things were made by
him. All things were his. Not this world only, but all worlds. Not one race of
creatures, but all races and orders. 2. In power. Omnipotence untrammelled and
unrepressed. 3. In homage. (1) The adoration of the heavenly hosts ; and (2) their
perfect obedience to every command and wish. 4. In the love and fellowship of the
Father. 5. In purest happiness.

II. How POOB HE BECAME. 1. In Condition. (1) The Godhead veiled in humanity.
(2) The Divine power restricted. (3) The God of joy transformed into the Man of
sorrows. 2. In circumstances. (1) At his birth. His cradle a manger. An outcast ;
no room for him in the inn ; a foreshadowing of the whole earthly life. (2) At
N.azareth an artisan, earning bread by the sweat of his brow, standing thus so closely
to fallen Adam. (3) As a preacher, dependent upon casual charity. (4) As a traveller,
journeying in penury. (5) For his triumphal entry, dependent upon strangers. (6)
As a prisoner, stripped of the little he possessed. " They parted my garments." (7)
His dying bed, a cross ; his last resting-place, a boirowed tomb. 3. In surroundings.

(1) Instead of homage, mockery and insult. (2) Few friends. One of these a traitor
and the remnant faithless at the supreme moment. (3) Heaven darkened to him.
"My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"

HI. This marvellous transformation and its cattbe. 1. It was purely volun-
tary/. He gave himself. " No man taketh it from me ... I lay down my life " (John
X. 18, 15). 2. It was prompted hy love. " Ye know the grace" the spontaneous,
unmerited love. The compulsion was the compulsion of compassion and affection.
3. It had for its object the enrichment of men. (1) Men were poor, (a) Always
dependent. (6) Through sin, had forfeited all title to things bestowed by God, all
title to the Divine favour, all title to brighter prospects, (c) Thus were poor deservedly.

(2) Through Christ's poverty men are made rich. Those who are redeemed by Christ
lose the poverty which is inseparable from sin, and : (a) Gain holiness. (6) Become
partakers of the Divine nature, (c) Eeceive the adoption of cliildren and become heirs
of God. (d) Become inheritors of the heavenly kingdom, (e) Obtain present and
future joy. (/) Become sharers in the glory which Christ for a while set aside. "The
glory which thou hast given me I have given unto them " (John xvii. 22).

IV. (;hkist is heue O0B Example. 1. If Christ did this for us, how ready we
sliuuld be to do what lies in our power for others 1 In doing it to them, we show our
love to him. 2. How small our sacrifice must be compared to his 1 3. Self-sacrifice
makes us like Christ. He not only said, " It is more blessed to give than to receive ; "
he himself tasted this blessedness. And he gave what ? He gave himself for us, — H.

Vers. 10 — 15. — Things that belong to charity. I. To will. 1. Charity must It
voluntary. No one can make us wiU. We can be made to give, but such giving is



CH. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 209

morally worthless. God loveth a cheerful giver, because a cheerful giver is in all
certainty a voluntary giver. The "voluntary system " is not one form of charity ; it is
the only form. Unless we willingly give, the less said about our charity the better ;
for we have none I 2. Z%e " willing " must be rightly prompted. True charity means
heart-love. The coin is base unless it bears this stamp. Though it may pass current
amongst men, God will arrest and condemn it. Motives in giving should be carefully
studied ; not others' motives, but ours I

n. To DO. Some are charitable in intention, not in action. Fruit trees are some-
times destitute of fruit, but to those thus symbolized there is but little encouragement
in the fate of that barren tree which confronted Christ as he walked from Bethany to
Jerusalem. Charity must be spiritual, but it must be practical also. Our love will
never feed the hungry nor clothe the naked ; and if our love does not prompt us to do,
it is of less value than a mote in the sunbeam. Faith without works is dead, and
charity without works is dead, buried, and rotting in its grave.

III. To GIVE ACCORDING TO OUR ABILITY. (Ver. 12.) Not according to what
others ^ve. We are apt to give according to the ability of somebody else. Perhaps
when we judge of our own ability we had better ask God to help us. There are two
occasions when a man's possessions are apt to dwindle — the one when he makes out his
income-tax return, and the other when he is asked for a subscription. We need much
grace rightly to estimate our own resources. Charitable appeals are apt to derange the
laws of arithmetic and to lead to astonishing results.

IV. To GIVE JUDICIOUSLY. 1. The needs of any case should he carefully considered.
Not to make them less than they are, but to know them as they are. To give to
undeserving cases is not only to waste our substance, but to do a vast amount of
mischief. 2. We are not required to impoverish ourselves that others may be /-nriched.
(Ver. 13.) Though, if we had tendencies in this direction, perhaps we should not be
travelling away from our Master's example (ver. 9). Our danger probably lies in
being content with the impoverished condition of others. But the object of charity is
not that the poor should be made rich and the rich poor. 3. An equality is to be
aimed at. (Ver. 14.) As to believers especially we should remember that they are
members of the same faith, and should seek to make their condition equally healthy
with our own. But our charily should not he restricted by the limits of " the house-
hold of faith." One has well said, " Our luxuries should yield to our neighbour's
comforts, and our comforts to his necessities." This seems Paul's conception, who
explains what he means by " equality " in the expression following : " Your abundance
being a supply at this present time for their want, that their abundance also may
become a supply for your want " (ver. 14) ; and he illustrates it by reference to the
manna given to Israel in the wilderness (Exod. xvi. 18). How far from approach to
thia equality is the giving of many 1 4. We must not so give as to check the exertions
of tJtose whom we help. Paul does not apprehend that so undesirable a result will
follow the .charity which he recommends ; he anticipates that the poor may become so
rich as to help those now heliiing them. Unwise charity hinders, not helps, the
recipient. Pauperism is a poor harvest to reap. Still we must see that this argument
is not unduly pressed. It is to be a protector, it is not to be a murderer, of charity. — H.

Ver. 18. — An enviable reputation. I. A great character is better than a great
NAME. The brother referred to here is unnamed ; a better mark than a name is put
upon him. A great name may he inherited ; may be won by a merely fortunate con-
junction of circumstances ; may be unmerited ; may have no moral excellence associated
with it. A great character must be earned. A great name blesses one's self ; a great
character, others.

II. The approbation of holy men is vert precious. The applause of a lallei.
world may be reckoned at a cheap rate. Mere popularity is quite in contrast with the
praise of all the Churches. That men who love Christ, and who thus have corrected
tastes, can see in us what is lovely should cause us to be deeply thankful to God, who
has wrought this good thing in us. When the approval is widespread and general
among such, it becomes correspondingly precious. 'The praise of God, indeed, is what
we should strive after ; but this may be expressed by the lips of his children.

III. Reputation "in the gospel" is most to ?e desired. This was the repu-

XX. CORINTHIANS, J?



210 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vm. 1—24

tation of the brother alluded to by Paul. It was in the sphere of the gospel that he
had obtained his renown. And this is the very highest sphere. How can we make
known the gospel ? How can we exalt it in the estimation of men ? How can we
show forth its excellences in our lives ? These should be supreme questions with us.
Reputation in arms, art, science, — what are these compared with reputation in the
gospel ? What can arms do for men, or art, or science, compared with the gospel ?
The gospel presents the most magnificent arena for human life and achievement.

IV. Opinion ib tested by trust. Here is a test of men's words. Will those who
praise us put confidence in us ? It was so with the brother in question (ver. 19). The
friends who praised him trusted him with money, and this is an extreme form of trust
with most men. They praised him for a piety which extended to the secularities of
lite. His gospel ruled the money-bag. We want more pouuds-shillings-and-pence
religion. If our piety does not make us uncorrupt in practical life, we had better cast
it to the dogs, for it is only fit for them. — H.

Vers. 20, 21. — Ministerial carefulness in money matters. L Steictbst honesty is,
OF COURSE, essential. How Can a man preach this common Christian virtue if he
lacks it himself? How can his ministry in spiritual things be blessed if he is tainted
with the slightest dishonesty in things carnal? What peace of conscience can he
possess if he knows that herein he is faulty ; and without peace in his own conscience
how can he minister in the gospel of all peace? Those who bear the vessels of the
Lord must be clean. What a fearful condemnation will be theirs who, whilst expatiating
upon the preciousness of heavenly treasure, are all the while dishonestly grasping the
treasure which perishes !

II. Strictest honesty is not bufpicibnt. A servant of God may be perfectly
innocent, and yet by carelessness may give occasion to some to denounce him as guilty.
It is not only needful to do right, it is needful to appear to do right as well. Whilst
no man should be content with satisfying men apart from God, a wise man will not
rest content with satisfying God and his own conscience, but will recognize the impor-
tance of not giving a handle for reproach to those amongst whom he lives. Prudent,
indeed, was the apostle when he resolved to "take thought for things honourable, not
only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men" (ver. 21). Through lack
of such wisdom on the part of ministers: 1. Many a ministerial reputation has been
wrecked. The lie has been believed, and has been believed because it has been
corroborated by unwise conduct. A lie thus strengthened is very attractive to many
mmds. Lies need no help on our part. It is often easier to make a man believe the
barest lie than to make him believe the barest truth. It has been quaintly said, " A
lie will travel round the world before truth has finished putting on its boots." 2.
Powerful m,inisters have been rendered impotent. 3. Churches have been greatly
injured. The shadow falling upon the minister has spread its darkness over the Church.
4. Many have become prejudiced against the gospel. 5. Much dishonour has fallen
upon the Name of Christ. Christians dare not be careless; they carry with them the
honour of their Master. It is not a question about being careless of our own name ;
the matter affects his Name. No man can afford to despise popular opinion in such a
matter as this. If a false accusation has been brought without occasion given, that
accusation will have the elements of weakness in it, and may generally be successfully
repelled ; but if occasion has been given, the honest man furnishes evidence of his own
dishonesty, he forges the chain wherewith he is bound, he signs his own condemna-
tion. Public men have many enemies. Ministers are the targets of the devil, and
often of the devil's children. Great wisdom do they need to walk so that they shall
not unwittingly furnish their adversaries with a weapon aj!ainst themselves and their
cause. This applies, of course, not only to money matters, but to all matters. 'Tis the
utmost folly to present our own sword to the foe. If we fall, let it be by our enemy's
weapon, not by our own, — H.

Ver. 23. — What true Christian workers are. I. Thet are the glory of Ghbist.
1. They are the monuments of the triumph of Christ. They are " saved " to some
purpose. Many assert that they are " saved," but they cannot discover, neither can
any one else, unto what ttiev ora saved. Thev seem to be saved unto nothingMi$,



Ch. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS. 211

and in this sense to have experienced a singularly complete redemption. But the
active, devoted Christian proves the reality of his faith by worljs following. Christ has
not only triumphed over the juiigment and heart, but over all powers, which are now
willingly dedicated to his service. 2. They resemble Ghrist. Christ was pre-eminently
a worker. He "went about doing good;" they seek to do so. He practised self-
denial and endured suffering that others might be benefited; they strive to imitate
him. 3. They exalt Christ. They desire that his kingdom may be extended over the
earth. Whilst they labour for others, they do this out of their love for him. He is
first, all else second. The exaltation of Christ is their supreme wish. Their mission
is to speak well of his Name wherever they go. 4. Ghrist delights in them. They are
the fruitful trees which he loves. He cursed the barren tree, but these he blesses.
They are the faithful servants of the absent Lord. He loves not idlers who filch the
name of " servant ; " but those who are servants indeed his soul rejoices in. He glories
in these, for they show forth his praise.

II. Thet should seek fully to bealizb their high callino. 1. The dignity
of Christian work is not always perceived as fully as it should be. It is infinitely
superior to all other work. 2. Nor its privilege. Were this adequately realized, what
alacrity there would be in entering upon Christian service ! As it is, alas ! almost
force has to be employed in some cases. 3. Nor its responsibility, 4. Nor how much
the work done is affected by the life lived.

III. They should be highly esteemed. They are the instruments through
which God v/orks. They are the means employed by him for the building up of the
kingdom of Christ. They are the special representatives of Christ upon earth. They
should be (1) encouraged, (2) helped, (3) honoured. — H.

Ver. 6. — Praiseworthy Churches. Praise from St. Paul was worth having. He was
a serious man, who could not pay empty compliments, and having a high sense of the
Christian calling, he would never think of praising a Church merely to please the
people or ingratiate himself with them, if he had not judged it worthy of commendation.
Here are two marks of a Church on which the grace of God has been bestowed.

I. CoNSEOKATioN OP ITS MEMBERS TO THE LoRD Jesus Cheist. Before they made
their contribution to the relief of the poor saints elsewhere, the Macedonian Christians
" gave their own selves to the Lord." Though poor and afflicted, happy were they and
generous, because their conversion was thorough, and their devotion to Christ hearty
and unfeigned. By profession all Christians give themselves to the Lord ; but alas !
in some cases it is a mere profession. Not every one so believes and lives as to entitle
him to say, " I am my Lord's, and he is mine." This, however, is the true ideal.
"Thy people shall be freewill offerings in thy day of power." And without this
spirit in its members no Church is strong or pleasing to Christ, no matter how venerable
its history, how admirable its constitution, or how well conducted its services.

II. Subjection to apostolic guidance by the will of God. Some of the Mace-
donian Christians gave themselves to St. Paul as his companions and assistants in
missionary labour. Such were Sopater, Secundus, Arislarchus, and Epaphroditus ; of
whom the first was a Beroean, the second and third were Thcssalonians, and the fourth
was a Philippian. But these choice men were only favourable specimens of the Churches
to which they belonged, and which were pervaded by reverence for the apostle and
gratitude for his labours. Every true Church of Christ must be apostolic. It must
stand on the apostolic testimony and doctrine, follow apostolic direction and practice,
and both inhale and exhale the spirit of apostolic devotion to Christ. Of the history
and writings of the apostles enough is extant to guide and comfort every Church that
is, like those of Macedonia, ready to learn of an apostle by the will of God. We are
" built on the foundation of apostles and prophets." On the twelve foundations of the
wall of the holy city are inscribed the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.

Exhortation. Follow those of Macedonia. Give yourselves to the Lord, and then
to the apostolic word and fellowship. Present yourselves a living sacrifice. — F.

Ver. 9. — Amazing love. The insertion of this compact statement of our Saviour's
love and self-devotion for our sakes into an exhortation to love and liberality in the
Church, illustrates the habit of St. Paul's mind to revert often to central truths, and



212 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. vm. 1—24,

take his motives and arguments directly from Christ and the cross. " Ye know the
grace of our Lord." But consider what you know, that it may influence your dis-
position and conduct ; for nothing is more common than to hold known truth so loosely
and carelessly in the mind that it is as though it had never been known or were quitt
forgotten.

I. The Savioub's wealth. Of the riches of his pre-existent glory who can
adequately speak? Who can tell the wealth of Divine power and dignity and love in
the Word which was with God and was God — all the angels of God his servants, all
the works of God full of his praise? But this is not a subject on which to dilate.
It is above the reach of our comments and illustrations. Bead John i. ; Col. i. ; Heb. i.

II. The Savioor's impoverishment. (Comp. Phil. ii. 5 — 11.) Our Lord's partici-
pation of the Divine essence was not, could not, be surrendered. But the form of God
could be and was laid aside. The form cannot be without the being and nature ; but
the being and nature may dispense with the form. So the Son of God in his grace
toward us assumed the form of a man, and that in low estate — the form of a servant.
He accepted a lowly human rank, with no attendants on his person but such as
followed him in love, and no house of his own wherein to lay his head at night. In
wisdom^ indeed, and all that constitutes moral wealth and dignity, Jesus of Nazareth
was rich ; but in earthly station and treasure he was poor, and poor by choice. See
him in youth in the carpenter's house, eating the bread of the working man with
cheerfulness. In the little town there must have been many a piece of furniture, and
on the farms and vineyards around many a tool, which had been under the human
hands of the Son of God. See him on foot on the rough roads of Palestine, while
others rode past on horses and mules. See him in the days of his ministry dependent
on any who pleased to minister to his necessities ; at last deserted by his friends and
insulted by his foes — despised and rejected of men. Truly he became poor.

m. The Savioub's gbaob. " For your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be enriched." In this short statement the whole work of substitution
and redemption is implied. You are enriched through his poverty, blessed because of
his suffering, accepted by reason of his rejection, reconciled through his death. It is
evident that the riches thus secured to those that believe are not treasures of this world,
but of the same order with the riches which the Saviour laid aside for a season. They
receive the privilege of sonship with God, and therefore also the heirship of all things
with Christ Jesus. The Son of God became man, and a poor man, that they, being,
men, and poor men, might be owned as sons of God. Dwell upon the riches in
redemption, regeneration, forgiveness, justification, adoption, sanctifioation, comfort,
patience, the earnest of the inheritance now, and the inheritance itself at his coming.
And all because he became poor for your sakes. You get sweetness out of sorrow,
glory out of shame, strength from weakness, wealth through poverty, and life through
death.

IV. The practical infltjbnob of considerino the Saviour's grace. 1. Not to
raise a foolish admiration of poverty for its own sake. At one time this text was cited
in support of lazy beggary. The mendicant friars quoted it, insisting that the Lord
himself was a mendicant, and that this must be the most holy and Christ-like state.
Great schoolmen debated this, and papal bulls dealt with this notion. Such questions
we can no longer discuss with seriousness. Property is not to be abandoned by Chris-
tians, but wisely administered. The rich and the poor are to continue together in the
Church, each condition having its own duties and its own attendant temptations. 2. To
.set our hearts on the true riches — faith and good works, a calm conscience, and affections
set on things above. He is rich who has a patient spirit, a pure heart, a heavenly
mind, and a hope of glory. 3. To live and give that others may be blessed. Be
generous in service and gifts to the Church and the poor. Be willing to communicate,
ready to distribute. Otherwise do not allege that you have the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ. You have not felt the constraint of his love or the beauty of hia
example. — F.

Ver. 12. — Eeadinets accepted. It is characteristic of St. Paul that, when dealing
with specific iiuestions of duty, he liiid duwn princi|jles of much wider application.
Thus, while the immediate topic was a collection for the relief of poor saints, and he



OH. vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHLA.N8. 213

acknowledges the liberality of the Corinthians, the apostle takes occasion to explain
the yalue of " readiness," i.e. a disposition stretching forward to serve God and the
Church, and not needing to be dragged forward by importunity. This is acceptable to
God, the supreme Lover and spontaneous Giver of every good and perfect gift. What
he regards is not the amount of the gift laid on his altar, but the disposition which
gives promptly and gladly according to the resources at its command. Now, this prin-
ciple is of wide application. It will prove all kinds of service. God is pleased with
those servants of his who have a ready mind. An apt but mislfading phrase is some-
times heard — " taking the will for the deed." Too often it is used as an excuse for
shirking duty or withholding gifts. Two things must be kept in' mind —

I. God does not accept intention ob good will instead op the deed when it is
WITHIN one's powbb TO PBBFOBM. And God looks behind the excuses that a covetous
or indolent heart puts forward, ami knows the absolute fact regarding what each man
has or has not, can or cannot do. In giving to the poor or for the propagation of the
gospel, one may obtain praise of men by bestowing a large sum in answer to an
urgent appeal ; but he has uo praise from God if his contribution has been reluctant,
or if it does not bear a fair pioportion to the resources at his disposaL Sometimes one
cannot give as much as formerly or as much as his neighbours, and therefore prays to
be excused from giving anything, expressing a hope that the will may be taken for the
deed. But it will not be so taken. He is required to give according to what he has,
not what he has not. And the willing offering is just as acceptable to God as
a gift a thousand times as large from a man a thousand times as rich. So also
in regard to personal service. How many who call Jesus " Lord," when any definite
piece of Christian work is proposed to them, put it aside, alleging that they have no
turn for it or no time for it ! So they stand all the day idle. Because they cannot
serve with great ability or in a conspicuous station, they do nothing, and simply wish
well to the cause of God and of righteousness. But emjity good wishes are cheap
and little worth, and God will not in such cases take the will for the deed. He who
employs two talents with a willing mind will be commended in exactly the same terms
as his fellow-servant who has had five. And let him who has only one beware of
hiding it in the earth. Men are very apt to take gifts from Christ, but not the gift of
his "yoke." They are also not unwilling to own their faults, but do not mend them —
merely raise a sort of foolish protest against their own weakness. In like manner they
hear with much satisfaction of the efforts made to purify and reform society, but per-
sonally they take no tiouble about it, devote no time or pains to such endeavours.
The hard work of philanthropy they complacently leave to others. Many act in the
same way in regard to the expense incurred in a good cause. They are quite proud of
the large sums raised in their church, and of the free-handedness of their country.
But they do not give. They blandly wave their best wishes over the gifts of others.
But where there is power to do something for the good cause, God will not accept a
wish for the deed. Where there is power to give, he will not accept a smile for a gift.

II. Where good will shows itself in deeds ob gifts, God looks not so much on

THE AKOHNT OF THE OFFEKING AS ON THE HEART OF THE DOES OB GIVEE. It is the

prothumia, the readiness of disposition, which pleases him. He loves the earnest
worker and the cheerful giver. He approves that doer of the Word who does not need
to be coaxed and pressed to undertake some part of Christian service, and that giver
who, instead of waiting to be solicited, seeks out the objects most worthy of help, and
makes his offering with a simplicity and a spontaneousness which greatly enhance the
gift. In fact, while God does not accept the will for the deed from those who are able
to do, he always accepts the will in the deed, and is pleased with the evidence of a
ready mind. King David was not permitted to build a temple to Jehovah ; but it was
well that it was in his heart to do so (1 Kings viii. 18), and the preparations which he
made for the work are recorded with honour (1 Chron. xxix.). The women who prepared
spices and ointments for the dead body of Jesus Christ were not allowed to carry out
their purpose, for before they reached the sepulchre he had risen ; but their readiness of
mind was pleasing to the Lord, and they got something better to do than anoint a
corpse. They were made the first preachers of his resurrection (Luke xxiv. 10).
The men who had followed Jesus were more slow of heart. They brooded over th«
disappointment of their hopes about the Messiah's kingdom, and the dark storm ot



214 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. vm. 1—24

odium which had broken on their Master and on his cause. So they had no thought of
an early visit to the sepulchre. But the women thought less of the cause and more
of the Master. And so with their ready mind they got the highest honour. Learn
that the secret of happiness and usefulness lies in having the same ready mind, fas-
tened, not so much on this piece of work or that, as on the Lord himself, for or to
whom all Christian work is to be done. You may not get outlet for your readiness in
the way that you planned or expected, but you will get outlet and employment for it ;
and God will accept it according to what it is, not according to its apparent snccess.
Man looks ou the outward appearance, but the Lord looks upon the heart. — F.

Ver. 1. — The model Churches of Macedonia. By these we are to understand the
Churches at Thessalonica, Philippi, and Beroea. There is a sense in which we speak of
the Church of Christ as one, and also a sense in which we speak of it as many. It is
correct to say, " the Church," and it is also correct to say, " the Churches." All who
love the Lord Jesus Christ, and have surrendered their will and life to his ruling, and
have made open profession of their devotion to him, make together the one catholic
and apostolic Church, and may properly be thought of as a whole, as the members of
the one body of Christ ; but as these are located in various places, as they unite for
purposes of fellowship and worship in different spheres and different buildings, they
may be spoken of as Churches. The answering terms, which help to explain those on
which we are dwelling, were used by our Lord, who spoke of his many folds and his
one flock. St. Paul might with equal truthfulness have spoken of the Church in
Macedonia, but he probably desired to direct attention to the special circumstances of
each individual community, in order to bring out forcibly the remarkable character
of their generosity and self-denial. He sets before us for our consideration this fact,
that, just as a Christian man's conduct and character may make him a model to others,
and a gracious power upon them, touching and quickening into power that spirit of
emulation which dwells in various strength in us all, so an individual Church, or a set
of Churches, may act with a nobility, a generosity, and self-denial that should make
tiiem an inspiring model to other Churches., We consider in what ways the Mace-
donians became a model to the Corinthians.

I. A MODEL AS THE OBJECTS OF DiviNB GRACE. " We do you to wit of the grace
of God bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia." By " grace " here we are to under-
stand the special /awoMr of God, and the precise "gifts" with which they wore endowed.
The disposition and the power to give is to be regarded as a divinely bestowed talent
or trust, and as a special sign of the Divine favour. The gift of benevolence, charity,
generosity, is as truly a Divine trust or bestowment as the gift of healing, of preaching,
or of tongues. And, like all other Divine gifts, it is dependent on recipiency, pre-
paredness to use such gifts aright. Divine bestowments on Churches are never made
at hap-hazard, upon any kind of favouritism, or in the exercise of any so-called
sovereignty. Neither Churches nor individuals can get free from the responsibility of
being ready to receive. The loving and thoughtful spirit of the Philippians, and the
studious openness of the Beroeaus, and the suffering experiences of the Thessalonians,
prepared them to receive this special grace of God unto generosity and brotherly charity.
Illustrate and impress this point, that nowadays Churches lack " grace " because ihey
are not in attitudes and moods fitting them for its reception. We are not straitened in
God, in God's provisions, or in God's willingness, but we are sadly straitened in our-
selves, in our unreadiness and unfitness to receive. Of God it is said, " He giveth more
grace ; " but of us it must be said, " Ye have not because ye ask not, or because ye ask
amiss." Illustrating how God delays his bestowments until there is the fitting attitude
for their reception, the Prophet Hosea (ii. 21, 22) represents God as saying, " It shall
come to pass in that day, I will hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the heavens, and they
shall hear the earth ; and the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil; and
they shall hear Jezreel." When all unite to cry lor the refreshing rains, then, and
only then, shall the windows be opened, and grace in copious showers descend.

II. A MODEL AS RESPONDING TO DiviNE GRACE. For the grace may come, and be
neglected or misused. Compiire the expression St. Paul uses concerning himself (1 Cor.
XV. 10) : " By the grace of Gud I am what I am : and his grace which was bestowed
upon me was not in vain ; but 1 laboured more abundantly than they all : yet not I,



OH, vm. 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 21S

but the grace of God which was ■mth me." It is a great and ever- working law that all
Divine gifts that are unused or undervalued will be taken away or lost. The one
condition of the renewal and enlargement of grace is that we have faithfully responded
to the grace we have had. We retain the gift of preaching only by preaching, and the
gift of charity only by the exercise of generosity and self-denial. The remarkable
thing about the Macedonian Churches, the thing which made them a model to other
Churches, was that they so nobly responded to the grace that rested upon them, and
acted in so earnest and self-sacrificing a manner. So often Churches have more grace
than they follow out, and so they lose the grace. The grace abounds, but the response
to the grace is set under unworthy limitations.

IIL A UODEL AS SELF-DENYING. The apostle notices two things which might
reasonably have excused the Macedonians from sharing in the contribution. 1. Their
persecution, and the anxieties and distresses which it had brought them. 2. Their
poverty, for the Church was not gathered from the rich ; the poor of this world were
made " rich in faith." So their large and generous gifts were a delightful surprise, and
a testimony to the power of Christian principle upon them. Christian motive mastered
worldly considerations; and their gifts became peculiarly accepiable to God, because
upon them rested the Christly stamp of self-sacrifice. St. Paul commends, in these
Macedonians, just what our Lord commended when he directed attention to the poor
widow who cast two mites into the treasury — " all her living."

IV. A MODEL AS THOKOUGHLY EARNEST IN QENEBOUS SCHEMES. St. Paul dwclls, in

a very delighted way, upon their willingness and their earnestness. It was not merely
that they gave, but that they gave in such a hearty way, so cheerfully, under the
sway of such high motives, and with such evident warmth of affection for himself. If
it is true that " what is worth doing is worth doing well," it is especially true of the
Christian duty of brotherly kindness as finding expression in self-denying gifts. The
great blessing of a gift is the spirit in which it is made. The value is taken away
when It is given grudgingly. God loveth — and so do men— the cheerful, willing
giver.— R. T.

Ver. 5. — The religion of association must le made personal. One of the words in
this passage is evidently used in an unfamiliar sense. " Hoped " means " expected,"
"anticipated." The verse is connected with the collection for the saints at Jerusalem,
and is part of the apostle's endeavour to inspire the Churches of Achaia to nobler
endeavour by the example of the Churches of Macedonia. The text expresses the
deeply religious character of the Macedonian gift. As St. Paul saw it, it was no mere
gift, it was the expression of consecrated and devoted hearts. They gave themselves,
and then their gifts. They gave themselves in their gifts. We dwell now, not on the
charity, but on the expression, " gave their own selves to the Lord," which suggests
for consideration the personal character of saving religion.

I. All of us are, in oub measure, religious. There may still be godless audi-
ences, such as Whitefield gathered at the fairs, or Wesley and Hill at the mouths of
colliery pits. But in the ordinary assemblies in our Churches there is not a man,
woman, or child who is not, in some degree, religious. They are religious (1) as
belonging to a Christian country ; (2) as baptized into mystical relations with the
Church of Christ ; (3) as by acts of formal worship making Christian profession ; or
(4) as variously related to Christian families. But the question comes again and again
before us — Is our kind and degree of religion satisfactory ?

II. In too many cases our religion is wholly matter of association. 1. We are
members of a Christian home, and share in the religion of the home. And this is, for
the children, an every way beautiful and hopeful beginning of religious life. 2. We
are affected by the tone of the spheres we occupy. Illustrate by young people in
situations, where they join m family worship and in attendance at the house of God ;
also by the influence of Christian friendships. 3. We are swayed by our near relation-
ship with those who are godly, as in the case of the husband and wife. But the
question comes — Is this all our religion? Is it enough? Is it saving? Can any
reliance be placed upon it ? Will it stand in the coming testing-day ? It is so far
good. It is a favourable breeze catching the sails, but it is not safety in the harbour.
It is the angel's voice in our ear crying, " Flee for thy life ; " It is even the angel'i



216 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHlANa [oh. vm. 1—24

hand on our arm, as on the arm of Lot ; but it is not safety in Zoar. There ia a
familiar old saying that " Hell is paved with good intentions ; " it might have been
with " good associations." Such associations are good if they are used as helps, but not
if they are relied on as sufficient. They are only evil if they are allowed to hinder
personal anxiety. Eeligion is personal or it is nothing.

III. God, by his pkovidenob and by his Woed, is eybb vsaisa xn to kakii
EELIGION PEKsoNAii. Providence breaks up our associations. A time comes when the
child passes into manhood or womanhood, and must learn to go alone. Then changes
and testing-times come, which show what the religion of association has been worth.
Illustrate by the child going to boarding school ; the youth to business ; the assistant
changing his situation ; the man or woman going through times of sorrow. In each
G-od is wanting to lead the soul to personal religion. God's preached Word, with its
various persuasions, is ever hearing on the same point. It is a singling out of the
individual ; a two-edged sword to the individual ; a pressure of the personal claims of
God on the individual. Its voice is, "Thou art the man;" "To you is the word of
this salvation sent." It labours to secure a personal decision for Christ, a giving
of " our own selves to the Lord." Is, then, your religion yet no more than the religion
of your home and associations? And is your manhood come, your womanhood come ?
Eemember that you are not saved, only associated with salvation. This is the question
which should set you upon anxious self-seaichiugs, " Dost thou believe on the Son of
God ? " It is not enough to be close by salvation, to be even on its doorstep. Enter in.
Strive to enter in. Strive to enter in now. — B. T.

Ver. 9. — The poverty that made others rich. The question is often asked — ^Which
gives most jjleasure to us — the faculty of memory, which vivifies the past, or anticipa-
tion, which brightens the future? The answers we make at once depend upon, and
become revelations of, character. The apostle in this passage is using the faculty of
memory; he is recalling what is known respecting the Lord Jesus Christ. He is
treating of the grace of self-sacrificing liberality and generosity ; and of this Christ
is the most illustrious and glorious example. We hold the memory of a twofold
exchange on the part of the Lord Jesus — (1) from riches to poverty ; (2) from poverty
to riches ; but here the apostle contrasts Christ's exchange from riches to poverty
with our exchange, through Christ, from poverty to riches, and this is the double
exchange on which we propose to dwell.

I. The FmsT exchange. Christ — from riches to poverty. Christ's riches may be
treated uuder the headings (1) rank; (2) wealth; (3) pleasure. Or we may say that
he was rich (1) in his Divine nature ; (2) in the infinite love and acceptance of the
Father ; (3) in the adoration of all holy beings ; (4) in possession of all the wealth and
joy of heaven. Christ's poverty, which was a comparative thing, may be brought out
by presenting such contrasts as (1) God — man ; (2) son — servant ; (3) at home — home-
less ; (4) rich — empty ; (5) happy — suffering. He became poor by (1) giving up the
wealth of heaven ; (2) in his birth as a poor man's child ; (3) in his lowly station as
one of the common people ; (4) in his death-time of sorest humiliation. Such a con-
descension in incarnation had never before been conceived. It surpasses thought. It
is the exceeding great mystery which the eternal ages will not fathom. It is " so
great love ; " it is " what manner of love."

II. The second exchange. We — from poverty to riches. By our poverty we need
not understand our earthly conditions, seeing that poverty is but a relative thing, and
depends upon the degree in which a man matches his circumstances. The man who
has little and wants little is not poor ; the man who has little and wants much is the
man who can alone he called " poor." Our real poverties are the conditions to which we
have reduced ourselves by our sins. See how much we have thus lost, so that we are
become poor indeed. (1) Lost harmony with the world ; (2) lost peace within ; (3)
lost brotherhood with men ; (4) lost fellowship with God. Then what are the riches
■we attain through Christ Jesus ? They are riches for the souls, which are our real
selves ; they are not any mere riches of circumstances. They consist in (1) the smile
»nd favour of God ; (2) the love of a living and Divine Friend ; (3) the prospect of an
eternal glory. Or we may say that we become rich (1) in the hope that Jesas brought;
(2) in the words that Jesus spoke ; (3) in the love to us that Jesus showed ; (4) and



OH. TOt 1—24.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 21'

in the salration that Jeans secured. But no human words can exhaust our riches in
Christ Jesus.

III. The connection between these two bxohanqes. " Fm yov/r saJcea." The
one exchange was made in order to accomplish the other. To bless us Christ must
condescend to become one of us. Illustrate by the missionary making himself a China-
man, and living all alone among the people that he might reach them with the gospel
Dipsaage. Or by the Moravian missionary, giving up friendship, love, and hope, to
inter the lazar-house and try to teach and save the lepers. And what did Christ do
fur us when he had thus bumbled himself to talce our nature on him ? It is said that
"he went about doing good," and that was his way of mailing everybody rich with (1)
blessings ; (2) truth ; and (3) salvation. And St. Paul appeals to the Corinthians and
to us, saying, " Ye know the grace." But do we know f Have we felt the persuasion
and attraction that are in such " love Divine, all love excelling "? — P.. T.

Ver. 12. — Willing minds putting value on gifts. " First a willing mind." The
apostle has been calling to mind the resolve which the Corinthian Church had made a
year previously. They had determined to join in the collection that was being made
for the poor and suffering saints at Jerusalem. It seems that the disturbed state of
the Church and the delay of St. Paul's visit had led to the forgetfulness of this
resolve, and little or nothing had been done in relation to it. The apostle now brings
the matter again before them, reminds them that there was at one time the vdlling
mind, and he seems delicately to suggest to them that it would be a beautiful way of
testifying to the restored relations between himself and them, if they would revive
this collection, carry the matter through, and give him the joy of carrying their gifts
to the poor Jerusalem saints, in whom he was so deeply interested. He was thus led
to dwell upon the importance, before God, of the spirit in which gifts are made. They
ought to carry our hearts to him, just as the old Mosaic sacrifices carried the hearts of
the worshippers. Gifts have voices which God can hear, and he reads our hearts by
the help of them. Two points are here suggested.

I. Man estimates gifts by thbib money value. A fair enough standard in view
of the institutions that have to be sustained and the work which has to be done. The
Church needs large gifts, and is compelled to ask for quantity. She needs the devote-
ments of the rich, and is not wholly wrong in trying to raise ever higher the standard
of Christian gifts for Christian uses. But the money estimate of gifts needs to be set
under most careful limitations. It fails to take account of the relative circumstances of
the givers. A pound is a pound, whoever may give it ; but the rich man passes it over,
and knows that it will not involve his going without any one thing that he wishes to
have. The poor man hands it over, and knows it means wearing the threadbare coat
a few months longer, or going without some personal gratification. In really worthy
scales that poor man's pound weighs heavy, for there is added to it that self-denial
which is, in God's sight, of great price. Man cannot discern or rightly appraise
motives. The business principle too often wholly sways men in their Christian and
Church relations, and men are accepted by the largeness of their contributions rather
than by the largeness of the love with which they contribute.

II. God estimates gifts by their will value. " If there be first the willing
mind, there is acceptance." God seeth not as man seeth. Man looketh on the coun-
tenance ; God looketh on the heart. Man appraises the value of the thing ; God reads
the state of the will and the purpose of the heart. Illustration may be talsen from the
large gift of Barnabas to the early Church. God accepted it because it was the expres-
sion of a willing mind. The gifts of Ananias and Sapphira were smaller ; they were
not, however, refused on this ground, but only because the will was wrong and the
motive mixed and bad. The " amount'' of a gift is quite as important in the sight of
God as in the sight of man, because a great gift alone can express the willing mind of
a man with great means. God judges proportions. He only desires to see Christian
love triumphing over disabilities, and making the rich, who cling to riches, splendidly
generous, and the poor making the " poverty which had consumed them'even to
the very bottom'' (ver. 2) yield noble and self-denying contributions. With God
the question is- — How much did your heart give? It is a second thing, with him,
to ask — How much did your baud give? But he does expect the heart and tht



218



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. n. 1— 1&



hand to honourably act together, the hand honestly expressing what the heart
feels.— R. T.

Ver. 21. — Honest he/ore Ood and man. Comp. Prov. iii. 4, which, in the Greek
Version reads, " Write them upon the table of thine heart, and thou shalt find favour.
Provide things honest in the sight of God and man." This may be treated as a general
precept, applicable to all Christian people; or it may he regarded as a reminder of the
care which the apostle had taken that, in the administration of money affairs, he should
not be misunderstood or blamed. Consider —

I. The counsel as applied to the apostle himself. As a fact he had been
jealously providing for honest things, and doing everything possible in order to secure
the due checking of the gifts and safety of the stored money. Calvin says, " He was
not so satisfied with himself as to think it unworthy of his dignity to avoid calumny."
Dean Plumptre says, " In this case, had the apostle had only the judgment of God to
consider, he could with a pure conscience have taken up the money to Jerusalem by
himself. But he had to consider that men were judging him, and might suspect him,
and therefore he insisted on having his accounts audited." P. W. Robertson says,
" In this is to be observed St. Paul's wisdom, not only as a man of the world, but as a
man of God. He knew that he lived in a censorious age, that he was as a city set on
a hill, that the world would scan his every act and his every word, and attribute all
conceivable and even inconceivable evil to what he did in all honour. It was just
because of St. Paul's honour and innocence that he was likely to have omitted this
prudence." Archdeacon Parrar indicates the kind of things that were said about the
apostle by his Corinthian enemies, which made such an earnest self-vindication abso-
lutely necessary. He represents them as saying that St. Paul was " half demented,
and yet there was some method in his madness which showed itself partly in self-
importance and partly in avarice, both of which were very injurious to the interests of
his followers. What, for instance, could he more guileful and crafty than his entire
conduct about this collection which he was so suspiciously eager to set on foot ? He
had ordered them to get up a subscription in his first letter, had, in answer to their
inquiries, directed that it should be gathered, as in the Galatian Churches, by a weekly
offertory, and had, since this, sent Titus to stimulate zeal in the matter. They dared
to insinuate that all this was only a cunning device to hide his real intentions, and
give him a securer grasp of their money." Give in detail the arrangements made by
the apostle to secure the due safety and auditing of the collection ; and urge that all
who have responsible positions in relation to Christian monies should show a similar
anxiety to " provide things honest."

II. The couksel as applied to Christian giving. Those who give must give
only that which is honourably their own. The man who is in debt must pay his debts
before he gives. The man who has family claims is bound to make adequate provision
for them before he gives. To use the familiar proverb, " A man must be just before he
is generous." When this rule is neglected, a man's gifts can neither be acceptable to
God nor right in the sight of his fellow-men. — R. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER IX.

Encouragement to the Corinthians to ful-
fil their promises by giving speedily (vers.
1 — 5), amply (ver. 6), cheerfully (ver. 7),
and thereby earn God's blessing (vera.
8 — 11) in a cause fruitful of blessed conse-
quence (vers. 12—14). He concludes the
subject with a heartfelt thanksgiving (ver.
15).

Ver. 1.— For, This word shows that he



is continuing the same subject, and there-
fore excludes the supposition that this
chapter is a separate letter or fipagment.
No doubt, however, the express mention of
the collection after he has been practically
writing about it through tlie whole of the
last chapter looks as if he had been inter-
rupted, or had left off dictating at the end
of the last verse. Such breaks must often
and necessarily have occurred in the dicta-
tion of the Epistles, and doubtless help to
account for some of their phenomena. Per-
haps, on reperusing the last paragraph*



CH. IX. 1— 15.J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



219



before resuming the subject he observed
that, after all, he had not directly mentioned
the contribution, and therefore explains that
he thought it superfluous to do so. To the
saints. The poor Christians of Jerusalem
(ch. viii. 4). Superfluous. Because the
subject had been already fully brought to
their notice by himself and by Titus.

Ver. 2. — I boast of youj literally, I am
hoasting. The tense shows that he is writing
from Macedonia, probably from Philippi
(ch. viii. 24). Achaia (see ch. i. 1). Was
ready a year ago ; Itas been prepared since
last year. Your zeal hath provoked very
many ; literally, zeal from you hath stimu-
lated the majority. " Zeal from you " means
zeal which emanated from the Corinthians
and aroused emulation iu others.

Ver. 3. — But. Though it is needless to
write to you about this oolleetion, I sent the
brethren to make sure that all I had said
about you might be justified by reality. In
this behalf; i.e. about this matter (comp.
oh. iii. 10), or, as we might express it, " in
this direction." He seems to have felt more
uncertainty about their liberality than about
other matters (ch. vii. 4).

Ver. 4. — They of Macedonia; rather,
Maeedonians; i.e. any friends from Macedonia
(Acts XX. 4). Shall Achaians liave to blush
before Macedonians 1 We, that we say not
ye. Kothing can exceed the delicacy of
this touch. St. Paul asks them to be ready
with their contributions for hie sake, not
for their own; that he may not have to
blush for his^ generous words respecting
them, whereas really the discredit would be
simply theirs. Confident boasting; ratlier,
confidence. The reading "of boasting" is
not genuine here. For tlie word hypostasis
in the sense of " confidence," see oh. xl. 17 ;
Heb. iii. 4. The use of the word to repre-
sent the "Persona" of the Blessed Trinity
is later. The other sense of the word,
"substance" (or underlying base of attri-
butes), is found in Heb. i. 3.

Ver. 5. — That they would go before unto
you. The triple repetition of the word
"before" shows hnw earnest St. Paul is in
the matter. The Corinthians had promised
largely ; it was evident that there had
been, or that there was ground for fearing
that there might be, some slackness of per-
formance. St. Paul was so unwilling to
have seemed innccurate in what he had said
about them in Macedonia that he wished to
give them ample notice before the Mace-
donian delegates arrived. Your bounty,
whereof ye had notice before ; your previously
promised Ulessing-hounty ; literally, blessing.
The mere word should have acted as an
inducement to generosity. See the use of
the word to express a generous gift in Gen.
xsxlii. 11; Judg. i. 15, etc. (LXX.); Eph.



1. 3. In this sense it resembles the Hebrew
berachah (Josh. xv. 19, etc.). As a matter
of bounty, and not as of covetousness ; as a
blessing, and not as an extortion; i.e. as a
free gift of your own, and not as something
which I had wrung fiom you, or " got out of
you " (oh. vii. 2 ; xii. 17, 18). It is less
likely that the wovd pleonexia refers to the
"parsimony" of the Corinthians, as though
the smallness of their gift would show their
greed for large gains.

Ver. 6.— But this I say. The Greek only
has " But this." The ellipse can har<lly be
" I say." It is an accusative used absolutely
^" as to their. " Compare " But one thing "
(Phil. iii. 14). Shall reap also sparingly. In
the Greek the more emphatic order is "spar-
ingly also shall reap." The metaphor of the
harvest implies tliat the more generous the
gift the richer will be the return ; and that
" withholding more than is meet " will only
tend to poverty (Prov. xi. 24, 25 ; xix. 17 ;
xxii. 9). (For " sowing " and " reaping " in
this connection, comp. 1 Cor. ix. 11.) Bounti-
fully ; literally, with blessings ; Vulgate, in
benedictionibus (comp. Gal. vi. 7, 8).
Bountifulnesa blesses both him that gives
and him that takes.

Ver. 7. — In his heart. The heart must
not only go with but anticipate the hand.
Grudgingly; literally, from grief (Exod.
XXV. 2 ; Eom. xii. 8). A cheerful giver.
The phrase is from the addition to Prov. xxii.
8, which is found in the LXX. ; except
that " loveth " is substituted for " blesseth."
Compare "He that showeth mercy, with
cheerfulness" (Eom. xii. 8). The rabbis said
that cheerful kindness, even if nothing was
given, was better than a morose gift.

Ver. 8, — To make all grace abound toward
you. God can give you such abundant gifts
that you will not feel the loss of a generous
contribution to his service. Sufficiency.
The word autarJceia (1 Tim. vi. 6) in the
Stoic philosophy was used for the perfect
independence wiiich enabled a man to stand
alone. The term is here softened and
Christianized to express the contentment
which arises from the full supply of all our
needs by God. The aflSnnations of the
original are as emphatic as language can
make them. They express that the man
who places all his trust upon God will be
" perfect and entire, lacking nothing " (Phil,
iv. 11,19),

Ver. 9. — As it is written. The quotation
is from the LXX. in Ps. cxii. 9. He hath
dispersed abroad. He has been a large and
generous giver. The poor. The word here
used is penes, which does not occur else-
where iu the New Testament. It meana
moderate and honourable poverty, whereas
in classical Greek ptooheia implies disrepu-
table pauperism and mendicancy (comp. ck



220



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ix. 1— 1&



viii. 9). His rigliteoiisiieBS. Meaning here
liis good deeds The word is often rendered
" pity " by the LXX. (eUemosune, from
'vhich wr^rd comes onr "alma"), and this word
occurs us a synonymous rearling in Matt,
vi. 1. Esmaineth for ever. Because —

" Good deeds never die.
They with the sun and moon renew their

light,
For ever blessing him that looks on them.*'

Ver. 10. — He that ministereth. The verb
used is epichoregein, to furnish abundantly.
At Athens a choragus was one who furnished
a chorus, and as this was a leitourgia (or
" public service "), involving great exptnse,
and often discharged with extreme munifi-
cence, the verb came to imply "provide
abundantly." St. Paul may (so to speak)
have "picked up the word" at Athens.
Seed to the sower (Isa. Iv. 10). Both minis-
ter. The true reading almost certainly is
" will both supply bread for food, and will
multiply your seed for sowinp;, and will
increase the fruits of your righteouiness "
(see Isa. Iv. 10, LXX.). The fruits of your
righteousness (Hos. x. 12, LXX.). In
" righteousness," as in all things else, it is
God only who " gives the increase " (1 Cor,
iii. 10).

Ver. 11. — To all bonntifulnesB ; rather, to
all simplicity, or " singleness of heart " (ch,
viii. 2). Through us. We are the agents in
collecting and distributing your gifts (ch.
viii. 19, 20). Thanksgiving to God. From
the recipients of youi single-hearted gene-
rosity,

Ver, 12. — For the administration of this
service. The word " liturgy," here rendered
" service," is used in the same connection in
Eom XV, 27. Generally it means " religious
service" (Acts xiii. 6; Phil. ii. 17; Heb. x,
11). Here it more resembles its classic
sense of " a public office discharged for the
good of the state," such as undertaking the
office of a choragus (see ver. 10). Not onlj,
St. Paul is anxious to emphasize the religious
side of the contribution fully as much as
its philanthropic object. Is abundant. It
(iverfiows as it were in the form of thanks-
givings to God,

Ver. 13, — By the experiment of this minis-
tration; rather, by the test (of your love)



furnished hy Ms ministration (oh. tUL 8).
For your professed subjection; liteislly, /or
the submission of your confession to the gospel
of Christ. And for your liberal distribution
unto them ; rather, and for the simplicity of
your fellnwfhip towards them. A large con-
tribution would prove two things ; namely,
(1) that the Corinthians showed due sub-
jection to the truths and duties which they
theoretically accepted as resulting from the
gospel ; and (2) that they were united to
their Jewish- Christian brethren and to all
others in single-hearted fellowship. It is
very doubtful whether haplotes ever means
"liberality," and koinonia is here better
understood of " communion " than of " com-
munication," Unto all men. For if the
Corinthians behaved with such brotherly
kindness to the once-despised Jews, who
were now their Christian brethren, they
would be not likely to refuse fellowship with
any others,

Ver. 14. — And by their prayer for you.
These words are joined by Our Authorized
Version with " glorifying God." The saints
at Jerusalem would, in consequence of the
proved sincerity of the Corinthians, glorify
God with thanksgiving for their faithfulness
and kindness, by prayer for them. The
Kevisers take the clause with the following
participle, "while they themselves also,
with supplication on your behalf, long
after you by reason of the exceeding grace
of God in you," This is the only right view
of the construction. Long after you for the
exceeding graoe of God in yon; literally,
yearn for you because of the grace of Ood
which overabounds to you.

Ver, 15, — Thanks be unto God, Nothing
ever seems so much to disburden the full
heart of St, Paul after deep emotion as an
utterance of thanksgiving (Rom, vii, 25;
ix. 5; xi. 33; 1 Cor, xv, 57; Gal. i. 5;
1 Tim. i, 17). The thanksgiving here is like
a great sigh of relief. The subject of it is
perfectly general. It is not a mere "Amen "
uttered, as it were, by St. Paul at the end of
the thanksgivings of the saints at Jerusalem
which he has been presupposing; but an
offering of thanks to God for the issues of
grace in general, all summed up in one act
of " inestimable love " (John iii, 16 ; Bom.
vi. 23; xi. 33; Eph. iiL 19).



HOMILETICS.

Vera. I — 5. — Paul's directions for collecting the contributions of the Corinthian
Church. " For as touching the ministering to the saints," etc. The work of collecting
was entrusted to Titus and a brother whose praise was " throughout all the Churches,"
and probably to other Christians more or less distinguished. Concerning the collecting
of their subscriptions, three things are observable in Paul's own conduct.

L Hic BECOONIZED THEIB MERITS, " For as touching the ministering to the saints, it
is superfluous for me to write to you : for I know the forwardness of your mind, foi



OH, n. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 221

-which I boast of you to them of Macedonia that Achaia was ready a year ago ; and
your zeal hath provoked very many." He gives them full credit for -what they had
already done. They had so much cheered him some months before with the readiness
with which they had entered into his beneficent enterprise, that he had boasted of
them to those of Macedonia and Achaia, and he assures them that their zeal had
Btimnlated, or " provoked very many." We may be assured that Paul not only credits
them for what they had done, merely as a matter of policy or politeness, but as a
matter of justice. It is right that goodness in others should be recognized wherever
found, and that we should with a hearty frankness praise them that do well. This is
a duty sadly neglected.

II. He respected THEin'REPUTAXioN. " Lest haply if they of Macedonia come with
me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not, ye) should he ashamed in this same
confident boasting." The apostle knew human life and the circumstances that
influence it, and he apprehended that, had the members of the Corinthian Church been
called upon suddenly, without any previous advice, to xiomplete the beneficent work
into which they hart entered so readily some twelve months before, they mi;:ht iint
be able on a sudden either to do justice to their own reputation^or to justify the
high praise he had given them. The reputation of Christiau men should always be
sacredly respected. Reputation is social power ; deprive a man of this, and he is
powerless in society ; deprive a Church of this, and you leave it as infirm as a mer-
chant without credit. Respect for the reputation of good men is the duty of alL Ko
man can deprive me of my character, but he may of my reputation, and without my
reputation my sociikl influence is nil.

<* The purest treasure mortal times afford
Is spotless reputation ; that away,
Men ore but gilded loam or painted clay."

(Shakespeare.)

HL Hk studied thbib convenienob. " Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort
the brethren, that they would go before unto you, and make up beforehand your
bounty," etc. " Every one knows," says Robertson, " how different is the feeling with
which we give when charity is beforehand, from that which we give when charitable
collections come side by side with debts and taxes. The charity which finds us unpre-
pared is a call as hateful as that of auy creditor whom it is hard to pay. Paul knew
this well ; he knew that if the Corinthians were taken unawares their feelings would bw
exasperated towards him with sliame, and also towards the saints at Jerusalem, to
whom they were constrained to give. Therefore he gave timely notice." Special
duties have times and seasons. There are moods of mind, and passing circumstances
so unfavourable as to render their discharge almost impossible, hence men's con-
veniences have to be studied. The apostle, in recognizing merits, respecting reputa-
tions, and studying conveniences, should be taken as an example by all Christian
ministers in dealing with their people.

"Vers. 6 — 16. — The way and worth of genuine leneficence. "But this I say. He
which soweth," etc. Our subject is — The way and worth of genuine leneficence.

I. The WAT OF genuine beneficence. What is the method of its operations?
How does it develop itself? 1. Bountifully. " But this I say. He which soweth
sparingly shall reap also sparingly ; and he which soweth bountifully shall reap also
bountifully." The apostle does not intimate, still less dictate, the amount of contri-
bution he required, but what he requires is bountifulness. Nothing niggardly or from
restraint, but with a full, open, generous heart. A man may give bountifully who
only subscribes a mite, and niggardly who subscribes his ten thousand pounds. In the
fifth verse Paul says, " The same might be ready, as a matter of bounty, and not as of
covetousness." 2. Deliberately. " Every man according as he purposeth in his heart, so
let him give." A spurious charity gives from impulse or pressure. There is a species
of eloquence which extorts money, which the giver regrets as soon as he has parted with
it. Genuine charity acts not thus ; it forms a generous purpose, and from that purpose
it acts, as love always acts, on the universe. 3. Cheerfully. " Not grudgingly, or of
necessity." There are those who part with their contributions as if they parted with



222 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. et. 1—15.

their life-blood. They have been wrung from them, and they groan when they are
gone. Genuine charity acts not thus ; its greatest happiness is in giving. In sooth, he
who gives reluctantly never truly gives at all. " God loveth a cheerful giver." His
own happiness is in giving; he rejoices in the happiness of the creation, and to be
happy there must be giving.

II. The wobth op genuine beneficence. The most valuable thing in the univers*
is genuine, jwactical love, or charity. 1. It is a most valuable thing in its issiies. (1)
It confers happiness on the man who practises it. Every act of it is to him a seed of
life, a seed which in his own soul, as in a garden, will germinate and grow, and will
produce fruits, delectable to the moral tastes, and strengthening to the moral powers
of the soul, imperishable fruit. The more of these deed-germs he sows, the more
abundant the harvest. " He which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly, and he
which soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully." He will be " blessed in his
deed ; " in truth, there only is blessedness to be found. (2) It ensures the blessing of the
Almighty, (a) He sees that the man of charity shall lose nothing by his contributions.
" God is able to make all grace abound toward you ; that ye, always having all suflS-
ciency in all things, may abound to every good work." The God of goodness sees that
no man shall be really injured by his goodness. " In all thy gifts show a cheerful
countenance, and dedicate thy tithes with gladness. Give unto the Most High according
as he hath enriched thee ; and as thou hast gotten, give thee with a cheerful eye. For
the Lord reoompenseth, and will give thee seven times as much " (Ecclus. xxxv. 9 — 11).
(6) He sees that his beneficent deeds shall be blessed for ever. " His righteousness
remaineth for ever." A good deed is a seed that will go on multiplying for ever.
Beneficence, after all, is righteousness. (3) It alleviates the distress of mankind.
" For the sidministration of this service not only supplieth the want of the saints, but
is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God." What hushes the sorrows of the
distressed, heals the wounds of the afflicted, relieves the poverty of the indigent, dispels
the darkness of the ignorant, etc. ? Practical beneficence. It is, indeed, through this
that God helps the world to rise from its fallen condition of guilt and misery. (4) It
is promotive of universal worship. " Whiles by the experiment of this ministration
they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the gospel of Christ." And " which
causeth through us thanksgiving to God." The tendency of practical beneficence is to
turn the world to the universal worship of the one God, the Source of all good. 2. It
is a most valuable thing in itself. " Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift."
What is the "gift" here ? Undoubtedly charity, or practical love. Has Paul here a
special reference to Christ ? Be it so. The value of that gift was the love which it
expressed, incarnated, and diffused. The gift of love is the highest gift. The greatest
thing in the imi verse is mind, the greatest thing in mind is love, and the greatest
element in love is practical philanthropy.

HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — 5. — Eeference to his former mrgument ; its completeness ; why he resumes
the subject. Reviewing the reasoning on the duty of Christian beneficence, the apostle
concluded that he had expounded the subject in a manner so clear and explicit as to
make any addition " superfluous " on the score either of logic or of appeal. Recall the
argument for a moment, and see if he was not justified in this opinion. The appeal
was for the poor of the Church at Jerusalem. Macedonia was depressed and sorely
troubled, Achaia was internally agitated by Judaizers and free-thinkers ; and between
this upper and nether millstone the young Churches were well-nigh ground to powder.
St. Paul himself was greatly afflicted. But he had strong faith in Christ and in human
nature under the influence of Christ's grace, and having this confidence he was hopeful,
resolute, and courageous. Macedonia had done nobly. Corinth would not fall below
the standard he had set for their generosity. Full of heart, he presses the claim of the
occasion, but his zeal and anxiety never betray him into using a false motive or into
pushing a true motive too far. The " rod " is not threatened. All through, the appeal
is to the best elements of our nature, for he recognizes, as " the saored writers coa«tantly
recognize, the fact that the freest and rhost spontaneous acts of men, their iaward



OH. IX. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 223

states and the outward manifestations of those states where good, are due to a secret
influence of the Spirit of God which eludes our consciousness. The believer is most
truly self-determined when determined by the grace of God " (Hodge). We have seen
tliat the apostle never loses sight for a moment of the one inspiring motive — the love
of Christ towards us and his Divine sacrifice in our behalf. Equal with God and
infinitely blessed, he left his glory, assumed our flesh, took its infirmities, bore its
sins, endured its shame and humiliation, and expiated its guilt. The abnegation was
so complete that he depended on the Holy Ghost for wisdom, fortitude, and strength.
A man of prayer, he sought the Spirit's aid on every occasion, and was so dependent as
to say, " I do nothing of myself." Every adventitious help was set aside ; loneliness
and sorrow were his self-chosen lot ; and he made himself the poorest of men, that he
might show how supiemely he rested upon the Father in his mediatorial work. But
poverty and sorrow were not thus borne for their own sake, nor, indeed, was it the
circumstances of his lot, but the lot itself, that marked the greatness of his condescen-
sion. The argument of St. Paul is directed to one point, viz. what Christ was and
what he became, so that the contrast between his earthly position and that of other
men is not so much as hinted at, but the whole force is thrown upon the contrast as
to his being " rich " and becoming " poor," that we " through his poverty might be
rich." On this basis Christian beneficence was founded. Christian "equality" was a
natural sequel. For this was, in the order of Providence, the one specific and pre-
eminent sphere in which Christian conscience and affection and humane impulses
would most fully and freely combine to glorily God in Christ. On no other ground
could a Church be a spiritual human community, and hence the stress laid on human
virtues sanctified by the grace of Christ. There is emulation ; how he exalts it !
There is imitation ; how he emphasizes it 1 There is prudence ; what an excellence it
is to protect our good from being spoken of as evill After such a presentation of
gospel truth and its effective enforcement, he might well say that it was " super-
fluous *' to write concerning " the ministering to the saints." One bright spot had all
along lingered on that murky horizon ; " Achaia was ready a year ago; and your zeal
hath provoked very many." Men who are backsliding in religion do not lose their
hold all at once on the Christian virtues. Happily for us, some of these virtues are
stronger than others, and these act as a breakwater against the incoming surges of
temptation. One or more qualities exist in us that are more receptive of grace than
other qualities, and they are specially resistant of decay. As in physical disease life
would often succumb were it not that some organs have so much more functional
vitality than others, so in religious life, a single vigorous principle or sentiment may
save US from spiritual death. So it was with the Corinthians. Despite of their cor-
ruptions, they had one redeeming excellence, viz. the " forwardness " of their " mind "
in this benevolent enterprise of helping the poor saints in Jerusalem. God honoured
this trait of their character. . Many a virtue had gone down under the pressure of
worldliness and carnality. This survived, and it was capable of being evoked into
healthy and energetic action. St. Paul knew his opportunity. He saw the good in
these erring brethren. If he had not, he could never have seen the evil. And seeing
the good so clearly, he recognized it and laboured for its immediate development in a
very earnest form. The true growth would choke out the weeds, and to this he
directed his wise husbandry. Every way the prospect was encouraging. Yet he would
make assurance doubly sure. He had boasted of the Corinthians. If they should not
be ready in time with the collection, " we [too delicate to say, ' ye '] should" be ashamed
in this same confident boasting." On this account he sent Titus and the deputies to
" make up beforehand " their bounty. It must be " bounty," not a matter of " cove-
tousness." Postponing the work might open the way for selfishness to suggest reasons
for less giving. Love of money might have a sudden quickening. Risks were
numerous when men believed that the heart of to-day would be the heart of to-morrow.
Satan was mightier at some times than at others, and Christian men were not always
quite themselves. " Make up beforehand." The right thing was ennobled by doing ix
at the right time, and the right time was now. " Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thino hand to do it." Debts of love mature
when the heart is first warmed bv the Spirit. Putting off invites Bovetou«esa.
" Beforehand" is the watchword of the bountiful souL — L.



224 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. es. 1—15

Vera. 6 — 9. — Correspondence between Christian sotving and reaping. There was
nothing of chance or luck in the operations of heneficence. It was a transaction with
God, who had instituted certain laws for its government. 1. As to the law of pro-
portion. If they sowed sparingly, they reaped sparingly ; if bountifully, they reaped
bountifully. This was natural law. It was also spiritual law. If the law met them
everywhere, addressed the senses and the soul, and enforced itself both in providence
and grace, surely they could not but give very profound heed to a principle which was
so amply illustrated. 2. As to the spirit of giving. The law was spontaneity of
sentiment — " according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give ; " and again, it
was cheerfulness of feeling — not " grudgingly, or of necessity ; for God loveth a cheerful
giver." On this aspect of giving, the apostle had delivered his mind without reser-
vation. Freedom here was scrupulously insisted on. To be Christ-like it must be
wholly self-directed. It must be born directly of the Spirit. Vast and indeed sacred as
human agency is, there are seasons when the Spirit bids it retire, and he takes the soul
into his solitary communion. 3. The element of recompense is stated. " God is able
to make all grace abound toward you." Blessings used rightly would bring other and
larger blessings. Benevolent contributions were disciplinary. The act was educative.
If a man gave because of his love to Christ, if he gave willingly and cordially, if he
gave freely, then he was being trained as a giver, and of course was, in this particular,
a growing man. Any sort of arrested development in goodness is bad enough, but this
oliecking of progress in charity is peculiarly harmful. Worldliness rushes back with
an overwhelming current. Avarice, denied its food for a time, has a voracious appetite.
And, therefore, the very urgent need of growth in this sentiment, which the apostle
argues in a manner uncommonly forcible. Spiritual blessings are assured. " All grace
abound toward you." Temporal blessings are promised. " Always having all sufiB-
ciency in all things, may abound to every good work." There was to be an " all
sufficiency" an overflowing measure on God's part, so as to furnish the means or
resources for continued and enlarged benevolence, or otherwise the growth would stop.
" Every good work " has a very broad signification. We take it to mean a very wide
and generous activity in kind deeds, an " enthusiasm," not for " humanity," but for
Christ in humanity, and a desire and a purpose expanding in the ratio of new blessings,
spiritual and temporal, tc pour forth its heart in ministration to others. " God is able."
Yet we must not forget that he never resigns his Divine sovereignty in a promise or
to a promise, but is infinitely wise and considerately tender in the administration of
providential blessings. To elucidate his meaning, St. Paul quotes from Ps. cxii. 9,
" He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor, his righteousness endureth for ever."
The rule is that God gives us what we have in order that he may give us more. There
is a future in everything, a future in every seed, a future in every dollar honestly made,
a future in every blessing God bestows. But it is for him alone to order this future,
so as to " make all grace abound " in us, and to enable us to " abound to every good
work." — ^L.

Vers. 10 — 15. — Unity in nature and grace ; manifold results of heneficenee ; thanks-
giving, St. Paul had spoken in the sixth verse of the law of the spiritual harvest —
proportion of reward in reference to quantity, so much sowing followed by so much
reaping. But there is another law — a grain of com or wheat produces many grains. In
some instances hundreds of seeds come from one seed. Seeds multiply seeds, and the
harvest of a county may sow a large territory. Nothing in the vegetable kingdom is
on a stinted scale. Omnipotence touches a clod of earth, and in a few months it is
transformed into bread ; but this is not all the wonder, for that clod has yielded far more
than it received. Thus it is that, in the physical world, labour becomes accumulative,
producing over and above its own wants a vast surplus, which goes to feed those who
are unable to work. Not abundance but superabundance is the lesson nature teaches.
We make enough to supply necessities, comforts, and luxuries; enough to meet arti-
ficial wants ; enough to compensate for impotence, idleness, and dissipation ; enough to
allow for a waste that can scarcely be computed. So it is in spiritual things. The
productive power is immensely rewarded. This striking correspondence was in his view
when St. Paul said, "He that supplieth seed to the sower and bread for food, shall
supply and multiply your seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of your righteousness "



OH. a. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 225

(Revised Version). The fact is always grander than the figure, and hence we may believe
that the fruits of righteousness will infinitely surpass the work done. Observe now
that this was a present thing as well as a future thing. Just then a gracious influence
was spreading through the Churches and uniting them in closer fellowship by reason of
a common interest in behalf of Jerusalem. And, furthermore, they should be " enriched
in everything to all bountifulness," no lack of seed for sowing, fruits of righteousness
abounding, and especially their liberality should cause thanksgiving to God. This
idea of thanksgiviug fills a large space in his mind. It becomes in the twelfth verse
" many thanksgivings." What joy would it bring to Jerusalem ! How far would the
glad tidings spread I Not only for the pecuniary aid afforded, but for this new and
cheering evidence of their obedience unto the gospel of Christ, what praise would
ascend to God! If we could transfer ourselves into the position of these early Chris-
tians and enter into their feelings, especially those of the Jerusalem Church, we should
realize the apostle's meaning where he lays such a stress on the results of this Gentile
beneficence. But we can hardly approximate this state of mind. The loneliness of
the saints at Jerusalem, the large sacrifice of property after Pentecost, the loss o(
employment because of professing faith in Christ, the destitution and suffering that
had befallen them, the growing disturbances witi Rome, the increase of bitter strife
among the Jews, the darkness with its prophetic woes descending on the doomed city,
parties becoming more and more virulent in their antagonisms to one another, and
amid it all, the " poor saints " subjected to all sorts of insult and grievance, give us but
a general idea of the misery and wretchedness they were enduring. It was all very
real to St. Paul. No such earthly reality as Jerusalem occupied his intellect and heart.
Was he looking forward to the day (as Stanley suggests) when he should stand in the
holy city and witness the gratitude of the Church for this great benefaction ? Likely
enough ; but whether so or not, it is certain that his soul overflowed with joy. It was
a grand proof of brotherhood between Jewish and Gentile Christians. It was the
perfecting link in the chain that was to bind them together. It was a blessed testimony
to the divineness of the gospel. Contemplating the gifts, he rises in a moment to the
Divine Gift, and exclaims, " Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable Gift ! " — L.

Ver. 2. — The contagion of zeal. The interest which Christians living in distant lands
learned, under apostolic guidance and by the spiritual tuition of the indwelling love of
Christ, to take in one another's welfare, was an evidence of the introduction into
humanity of a new moral power, a principle of universal love and brotherhood. It is
very instructive to see the congregations of Macedonia and of Corinth rivalling one
another in the benevolent enterprise of relieving the wants of the mother Church at
Jerusalem. Paul evidently encourages this beneficial emulation.

I. Zeal in Chbistian benevolence is in itself good. The langsid and unemo-
tional, the cold and calculating, however they may pride themselves upon their justice
and reasonableness, are not the people who do the good, the benevolent work of the
world. It is good to be zealously affected in a good cause.

II. The contaoiousnbss of zeal is founded upon the social nature op man.
We are members one of another, and it is not desirable, it is not possible, for any
person, for any community, to be indifferent to the welfare of others. And the conduct
of each has some influence upon the conduct of others. It is not easy to be zealous
when all around are unconcerned and inactive, whilst, on the other hand, the spectacle
of zealous devotion and self-denial is stimulating and encouraging.

III. This emulation may be carbied to a prejudicial extent. It cannot but be
acknowledged that emulation may lead to ostentation. Who can question that the
motive of some givers to charitable and religious institutions is impure ? One wishes
to excel another, for the pleasure of triumphing over him, or of cutting a more impor-
tant figure in the eyes of his fellow-men. And thus the true motive is lost sight of,
and a moral injury is wrought.

IV. Yet it is well to feel the force op a good example as a pkactioal motive
TO zealous 8EBVICE. We may learn from the case of others what may be done where
there is consecration, self-denial, and prayerful effort. Our apathy may be rebuked, our
fiagg^g benevolence revived. It is when the coals are not only kindled, but put
together, that the fire burns clear and bright, and gives forth its genial warmth. — T.

n. C0BIKTBUN8 Q



226 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ix. 1— 1&

Ver. 6. — Sowing and reaping. This is one of those natural analogies which are
common to all languages and to all ages. There is sowing and reaping in the history
of the individual ; the moral bias of his youth may determine the direction of hia
after life. There is sowing and reaping in the experience of a Christian community ;
its founders may impart to it an impulse the consequences of which shall be discernible
m distant generations. And in this passage the aposile reminds his readers that giving
is a kind of sowing, and that, as the huslandman reaps as he has sovra, so shall it be
in the experience of all benefactors. The liberal shall reap abundantly ; the grudging
and sparing shall gather a slender crop.

I. The law of coreespondence between sowiNa and eeapino is a just iaw. It
is an appointment of a God of righteousness. It is in harmony with the principles of hia
government. Its maintenance is evidently productive of the welfare of Christian society.

II. This law is one the operations or which we can in some measdbe trace.
1. It may be observed that illiberality stunts the spiritual stature of the giver, whilst
generosity promotes his growth. There is noticeable in large-hearted and generous
natures an expansion which is its own reward ; a happy disposition, a constant satis-
faction in the result of gifts and efforts ; a width of view which removes such from the
petty and miserable emotions of envy, jealousy, and suspicion. 2. In connection with
this it may be remarked that the treatment of the generous by others is in itself a
rich reward. The liberal man is honoured, appreciated, loved. Small services, slight
tokens of respect, are ofJered him which are evidences of deep feeling, and which cannot
be received without gratification. It may be left to observation whether the reverse of
this picture is not equally just — whether the mean, selfish, and niggardly do not suffer
personal deterioration, and whether they do not receive from their neighbours a merited
contempt.

III. There are operations op this law which it is beyond cub power to trace.
If we believe that the results of earthly labour extend into the future eternity, what a
solemnity does this conviction impart to the principles upon which we are accustomed
to act I The labours of the evangelist, the teachings of the pastor, the gifts of the
supporters of religion, all bear fruit in the world to come. The nature and the measure
of the harvest are largely determined by the way in which the field is tilled and sown
in time. A motive this to that diligence and devotedness which is commended in the
text by the inspired apostle. Only sow liberally, and by all waters, and, even if you
sow in tears, it is promised that you shall reap in joy. — T.

Ver. 7. — " A cheerfvl giver .' Paul here supports his appeal for liberality by a quo-
tation from Old Testament Scripture. The words are almost literally those of the
Septuagint Version of the Book of Proverbs. If the most powerful and practical
motive to benevolence and especially to almsgiving is that which comes from the
incarnation and from the cross of Christ, still all revelation enjoins and commends a
virtue which is always beneficial to the giver, even when the advantage to the recipient
is questionable.

I. God himself ib a oheerfuIi Gitxk, There is no grudging in his benevolence.
If he shows mercy, he delights in mercy. If he gives, he gives with open hand and
smiling face.

II. Chberfulnebs in the oiveb bnhasoes to the recipient the value of thb
«IFT. " One may give with his hand and pull it back with his looks." Some benevo-
lent characters give with such a grace that those who receive at their hands think
more of the giver than of the gift. Even a trifle in such case is more welcome than a
handsome donation from an unsympathizing and uninterested donor. A foreign scholar
waited upon a theological professor in London, who was a man well known for his
exquisite grace and suavity of manner, to lay before him his position as one of peculiar
destitution. That he was assisted, and assisted generously, is certain ; but as he left
the house he was heard to break forth into the exclamation, " Oh, the modus, the
modut, the modus I " i.e. the manner of the giver in the bestowal of his hberality.

in. Cheerfulness in the giver reacts upon his own spiritual nature. He wno
pves coldly, ungraciously, and grudgingly, is none the better for the act. But the ready,
liberal, and cheerful giver is a happier and a more truly Christian man, because of the
ipirit in which he has discharged a duty and rendered a service.



OH. n. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 221

rV. There is a special becompense assured to the ohberful oiveb. " The Lord
loveth him." The Lord sees his own character reflected in that of his servant ; he
witnesses in the generous and unselfish spirit the fruit of the redemption wrought by
his Son, and of the fertilizing operation of his own gracious, free, and beneficent
Spirit.— T.

Ver. 8. — Abounding grace and abounding service. Christianity does not come tc
men, saying, "This is pleasant," or "This is expedient," or "This is what society
expects from you, and therefore do it." It comes saying, " This is what God does,
and what God requires you to do." It lays the basis for human duty in Divine acts.
So with liberality, as in this passage.

I. The abundant eesoukces God puts at the disposal of the Cheistian. 1.
Men are at their best estate altogether dependent, havinj? in themselves nothing but
want, weakness, and sin. 2. All grace is in God ; he has both the power and the
disposition to supply every want. It is his nature to bestow ; he is the God of grace.
3. His grace not only gives, it abounds to us. The gift of his Son is the proof uf
inexhaustible love. So with the gift of his Spirit. In fact, in the gospel there is a
generosity of bestowment; no withholding and no grudging. 4. Christians, as his
people, are thus partakers of Divine sufficiency. " All things are yours ; ' such is the
deed of gift in which the heavenly Father places at the disposal of his family all the
resources of his nature and liberality. 5. The liberality of God extends through every
stage of individual life, and through every period of the Church's history. His bounties
and favours are as the leaves of the forest, the waves of the sea, the stars of the sky —
unnumbered and innumerable.

II. The coeebsponding ebquirembnts and expectations of God feom his people.
Religion consists of tv?o parts — what God does for us, and what God demands from us.
1. It is taken for granted that the Christian life consists in " good works ; " that the
disciple of Christ is naturally a worker, whose energies and possessions are to be
consecrated to God in his Son. Gifts, services, sympathy, speech, aid, — such are the
manifestations of the spiritual life which the Lord of all desires and beholds. 2. Here
is implied a relation between' God's works and those of his people. His abounding
gifts are to be regarded as (1) the example of ours ; (2) the means of ours, for we
can only give others what he has given us ; (3) the measure of ours, as liberal and
generous ; and (4) the motive to ours, inasmuch aa we are constrained by the love of
God and by the cross of Christ. — T.

Ver. 11. — True enrichment. The encouragement which the apostle here addresses
to the Corinthian Christians, in order to stimulate their liberality, is appropriate to all
professed followers of the Lord Jesus. Paul urges that the liberal helper of others is
in every respect the wealthier and happier for his generosity. It is not the highest
motive, but it is sound and powerful and efi'ective.

I. The human need of such enrichment. Impoverishment ia the lot of multi-
tudes ; but whilst many are deeply sensible of their temporal needs, it is too often the
case that, with regard to spiritual possessions, they boast that they are rich and increased
with goods, and know not that they are poor. In fact, we have nothing which we have
not received from the free bounty of him who is the Giver of all.

II. The Divine Author of such enrichment. The God of nature supplies the
need and relieves the poverty distinctive of our bodily and physical state. The God of
grace provides liberally for the wants of the soul, saying to his child, " Son, thou art
ever with me, and all that I have is thine."

III. The variety and plenitude of this enrichment. "In everything," says
the apostle. He appears to teach that, as a general rule, it is the ordinance of Pro-
vidence that the way of liberality should be the way of prosperity. All have known
fortunate and wealthy niggards ; and all have known generous men who have come to
poverty j but such cases are the exception. And if generosity is the way to temporal
abundance, a liberal spirit is sure to acquire virtues and excellences. Faith, hope,
and love,— all are cultivated in the exercise of liberality ; progressive enrichment ia the
recompense of a large heart and open hands.

lY. Thb human and eabthlt besult of this enbiohment. Thia ia increase of



228 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. el 1—15.

liberality ; the more the generous man receives from God, the more he helps his

tellow-men.

v. The ultimate result of this eneichmknt. Thanksgiving will be rendered
io God, both by the liberal who are enriched, by the grateful recipients of their
abundant bounty, and by all who witness the fruit of the Spirit and the evidences of
»he power of the Saviour's love. — T.

Ver. 15. — The unspeakable gift. The gifts of the Corinthians to their poor brethren
In Judaea were welonmed, acknowledged, approved. But every Christian duty and
service led the mind of the apostle up to Christ himself. Earthly gifts suggested to
his mind that Gift which is heavenly and supreme.

I. GrOD's Gift to man. 1. The Lord Christ is eraphatioilly the Gift of God. He
was sent by the Father, and his mission was a proof of the Father's interest and love.
A.11 gifts beside are pale and poor, by reason of the splendour and the beauty of this.
2. The Lord Christ is tlie unspeakable Gift of God ; i.e. so rich and wonderfid as not
to be capable of a full description. Observe : (1) Its intrinsic value. Could God
himself give a more precious treasure than the Son of his love ? He is " the Pearl
of great price." (2) Its adaptation to the needs of those to whom it is given. Christ
is the Gift of bread to the hungry, of water to the thirsty, of freedom to the slave.
Spiritual good was what man needed ; and it was what came to man by Christ. (3)
Its infinite train of blessing. We are told that " all things " are placed at the disposal
of those from whom God has not withheld his Son. And this doctrine is one which
experience supports. The innumerable blessings which have come into the world with
the gospel are a proof that the language of Scripture is not exaggerated.

II. Man's ghatitude to God. 1. It is often wickedly withheld. Our Lord was
despised and rejected of men when he was upon earth ; and there are still multitudes
who are insensible to his preciousness, and who take no part in the grateful praises of
his Church. 2. It is offered by appreciative hearts. They who have gratefully
accepted the boon, who have tasted and seen that the Lord is good, — -they are forward
to acknowledge the liberality and the loving-kindness of the great Givei- above. 3. It
is openly and joyfully expressed by those who feel it. Hymns of grateful praise ; a
loving witness to the world of the Uiviiie pity and kindness ; gifts to his cause, which
are accepted as offered to himself; deeds of cheerful and holy obedience ; — such are the
means by which the redeemed and spiritually enriched may show forth their gratitude
for the Gift which is unspeakable. — T.

Ver. 2. — The contagion of charity. L An indisputable fact. Man is imitative,
even in generosity. Example is often potent when appeal falls flat. Many do not see
that they can afford to give until others in similar circumstances demonstrate the
possibility. Men do not like to be outdone in good works ; a friend's beneficence is a
spur to our own.

II. A SUGGESTIVE FACT. When we give we often think only of the direct good
which our contribution will effect, but much other good may follow. Our charity may
be stimulative. Should lead us : 1. To give promptly. Delayed gift may be in time
for the special object, but may be too late to induce others to give in time. Our charity
must have time to work ; some people take hints slowly. Bis dat, qui cite dat, is
true in more ways than one. 2. To give liberally. We may curtail the charity of
others. On the other hand, a liberal gift may draw forth liberal responses. 3. To give
joyfuUy. If we give with evident gladness, others may desire to share our happiness.
Joyful giving is more contagious than any other, since all men naturally crave for joy.
4. To give to suitable objects only. We may misdirect the charity of others. There is
not a little responsibility attaching to benevolence. Some seem to think that, if they
give, it is little matter how or to what they give.

III. A COMFORTING FACT. The truly liberal are often distressed because they can
give so little. But small gifts may have large issues. The small rudder directs the
great ship. The little weight often turns the scale. Our gift, of little value, may call
forth large help from those wealthier than ourselves. This is likely if men see that
though we |;ive little, we give as much as we can.

IV. A USEFUL FACT. To be made use of according to the uxample set by PauL A



OH. IX. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COfilNTHIANa 22S

legitimate instrument for moving sluggish natures. Whilst we may he silent respect-
ing our own charity, we may often profitably speak of the charity of others. — H.

Ver. 7. — The cheerful giver. I. How the chebrfdl gives gives. \. Bountifully.
His cheerfulness ensures liberality. It is the grudging giver who gives but little.
But he who gives with gladness will desire much of that gladness. And he who sows
bountifully reaps bountifully, and that without waiting, for he has at once a great
harvest of joy. 2. Willingly. No compulsion is nee<leil. He runs eagerly in the
flowery and fruitful path of charity. He is not driven by the stings of conscience or
by a desire to stand well with his fellows. His heart is enlisted, and the service he
renders is hearty. 3. Joyfully. It is not a pain to him to give, but a pleasure.
Some give their money to the needy as they give their teeth to the dentist ; and often
the disposition to give totally disappears on the threshold ! But the cheerful giver
enjoys giving. It is a delight to him. How giving is transformed in character when
this is so! The same thing, how different to different natures I When we have learnt
to love giving, what a pure joy we experience! Before, it was but the carcase of
Samson's dead lion, but now we gather most luscious honey by handfuls. We miss a
most heavenly joy if we miss the gladness of giving.

II. God's eegaed fob the ohbeeful giver. What God thinks of us is the all-
important question. Now, the cheerful giver appi'oves himself to the Most High. And
not with cold approbation does God behold him. " God loveth a cheerful giver." God
loves this kind of giving, and he loves the one who thus gives. A grudging giver is
peculiarly offensive to God. It is so monstrous that, when God has lent us so many
things, we should hesitate to return to him the few for which he asks. But when we
have as much joy in returning as we had in receiving, he is well pleased. And when
we rise still higher and believe truly that " it is more blessed to give than to receive,"
we please him the more. The cheerful giver resembles God, for God is a cheerful
Giver ; — how bountifully and how willingly he has endowed us ! Here are incentives to
cheerful giving — that we please God, secure the love of God, and become like God.

III. God's promise to the chberful giver. A promise of great prosperity (vers.
6, 8 — 10). The short-sighted always judge that giving means losing, and that saving
means gaining ; but " There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth ; and there is that
withholdeth more than is meet, but it tendeth to poverty " (Prov. xi. 24). And our
Master said, " Give, and it shall be given unto you " (Luke vi. 38 ; see also Mark x,
29, 30). If we want to get little we must give little. The niggardly farmer gets a
scanty crop. In God's providence those who are benevolent are commonly largely
blessed in earthly things. Approving themselves to God, they are the subjects of his
special care ; " And God is able to make all grace abound " unto them (ver. 8). If
those who give money do not always get more money, they always get much of what
is far better than money. The distinct promise of God is that they shall be blessed
and prospered. What form the blessing and prosperity shall take will be gladly left
to God by the devout spirit. Often an increase of the means of charity results. God
gives us more that we may give more. Having wisely used our talent, he entrusts us
with further riches (see vers. 8, 10, 11).

IV. The influenoe of the cheerful giyeb. 1. He convinces men of the reality
of religion. (Ver. 13.) Men appreciate such a test of piety as this. W^ords they are
apt to reckon at a cheap rate, but spontaneous and joyful liberality staggers them.
Cheerful giving is to be ranked amongst the evidences of Christianity. 2. Se causa
men to thank and to glorify God. (Vers. 11 — 13.) What is the origin of Christian
benevolence ? is a question suggested to the minds of those blessed by it. And this
inquiry terminates in God. As he has implanted charity in his people's hearts, he is
clearly entitled to the praise. Aided believers naturally bless God that he has inclined
his stewards to minister to their needs, and magnify his grace which has produced such
fruitfulness in human hearts. The cheerful giver has a wider and more powerful
influence than sometimes he suspects.

V. The gifts of men to the cheerful givbb. 1. Their jprayers. (Ver. 14.)
What is the price of prayer ! What ' a valuable return for the expenditure of mere
gold 1 If we secure the earnest, loving, believing prayers of those to whom we minister,
we shall be greatly enriched. The "prayer of a righteous man availeth much"



230 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ix. 1— 1&

(Jas. v. 16). Men are willing to give much if their friend will but speak for them
to the sovereign ; but the cheerful giver is often spoken for to the King of kings. 2.
TKeir love. (Ver. 14.) Love is not to be lightly estimated ; it is spiritual gold, much
more precious than material. A man is rich if his treasury is well stored with the love
of his fellows. The love of good men especially ia a large recompense. Here we have
the love of man and the love of God promised to those who delight in mercy and in
helpfulness to the children of want. — H.

Ver. 16.— The Gift of gifts. Undoubtedly the gift of the Lord Jesus Christ. Paul
has been speaking of the lesser gifts of saints. Now he rises to God's supreme Gift.
Consider —

L The Giveb. GoA, Who could give Christ but God ? We must not forget that
God gave Christ. Many do, and form the erroneous notion that, whilst Christ is their
friend, God is their enemy. Redemption is of the whole Deity. "God so loved the
world," etc. Note: the Giver was a God (1) unworshipped, (2) unserved, (3) unloved,
(4) grievously sinned against, (5) defied in the very act of giving. It was whilst
we were yet sinners that Christ came to redeem us. " Herein is love, not that we
loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins "
(1 John iv. 10).

II. The Gift. 1. A gift. (1) A free gift. Nothing was given in exchange. Men
had nothing to give. (2) A voluntary gift. Prompted by Divine compassion and
love. (3) An undeserved gift. Men deserved condemnation, not Christ. (4) A con-
tiunous gift. Christ is not ours merely for a time. He is ours /or ever and ever. He
is the snint's everlasting inheritance. 2. An unspeakable gift. (1) In value. The most
costly of gifts. The pearl of great price. The treasure discovered in the fields of
heaven. Who can estimate the value of such a gift as this ? If God had given a
thousand worlds or all the angelic hosts, he would have given less. (2) In splendour.
Consider the graces, powers, and infinite excellences of Christ. His presence made
heaven glorious. (3) In efficacy. This gift fully met our need. How fully we yet
know not, for now we are looking through a darkened glass. All our known wants
are supplied by the Redeemer, and the vast catalogue of wants as yet unknown to
us. Through him we are pardoned, cleansed, sanctified, adopted, and through him
we shall at last be brought into the great home above.

III. The becipientb op the Gift. 1. Human icings. Christ was given to the
human race, not to the angelic, nor to the merely animal. How greatly honoured
is mankind I If Christ was given to men, what a future must be before those who
receive this gift ! 2. Fallen human icings. Man, " made a little lower than the
angels," soon fell much lower, and then the gift came. A marvellous return for man's
apostasy I When the cry of humanity was for sternest punishment. Heaven's response
was " Jesus of Nazareth." Well may we exclaim, " Oh the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and the knowledge of God I how unsearchable are his judgments, and his
ways past tracing out ! " (Rom. xi. 83).

IV. Appbopriatb GBATiTtTDB. Paul cries, " Thanks be to God ; " and well he may.
How can we thank God enough for such a gift as this? What would be our state
if this gift had not been bestowed ?

" Love 80 amazing, bo Divine,
Demands my soul, my life, my aU."

Throughout eternity we shall praise God for the gift unspeakable. Now let us praise
him with : 1. Lip. Tell out our gratitude. Suppressed praise is indecent. We
should desire all the world to know how thankful we are. 2. Heart. The toi^ue
ia this matter must be moved by the spirit, or it will not make sweet music in the ear
of God. The gift came from the heart of God : let our thanksgiving come from the
heart also. 3. Active service. What are we willing to do to show our gratitude ?
Paul was so subdued by the " unspeakable gift " that he loved to call himself " the
ilave of Jesus Christ ; " and he counted no toil too severe to show his thankfulness.
4. Life. Our whole being and existence should constitute a psalm. This is the true
" psalm of life." Every power should be pressed into the service. As thb gift i» ever
the fupreme blessing in our life, we should ever be pniung God for it.



OH. Et. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHUNa 231

Terrible thought! The unspeakable Gift may be rejected I What unspeakable
folly, what unspeakable guilt, what unspeakable condemnation, must follow ! — H.

Ver. 8. — " Always." Let us not take our standard of Christian life and experience
from our own hearts, or from the customary piety which shows itself around us. The
Lord requires and expects of us constancy — a life regulated by the steady action
of principle, and animated daily by faith, hope, and love. Alasl how many are
unsteady in his service I How their light flickers 1 how their faith wavers 1 how their
convictions and affections fluctuate! Tbis is so common that it seems to be regarded
as inevitable. Vacillation and inconstancy are supposed to be not so much sins as
very pardonable infirmities. But is constancy, while theoretically right, practically
impossible ? When called to maintain a steady tenor of Christian lile and conduct,
may we say, Non possumus f What says Season ? And what says Holy Writ ?

L Wb ask the question op Reason, as a faib JtroGB of the nature of things.
Physical life is maintained in us by certain natural processes which never cease from
the moment of birth to the moment of death. The lungs play always, and the heart
beats always. We call these automatic movements, as being not dependent on our
volition. They continue when we are fast asleep. But moral and spiritual life rises
above mere automatism, and requires for its continuance and growth a succession of
moral volitions, a steady and well-directed purpose. Now, is this state of the will
possible ? Reason will answer that it is the proper habit of a healthy and vigorous
mind. Weak minds are obstinate or fickle ; dull minds are stolid and monotonous ;
but those that are strong arid intelligent have a steady moral pulse, a wise tenacity of
purpose, and a careful balance of temper and will. It is the most rational, healthy,
and happy condition of man to believe firmly what he believes, and to maintain an
even tenor of conduct in harmony with his belief. George Herbert is right to praise
the man of constancy, who

" Doth still, and strongly, good pursue ;
To God, his neighbours, and himself most true."

XL Wk abk the question of Holt Sceiptueb. Does it admit excuses for incon-
stancy? or does it assume and require that men who believe in God should live to
him always ? David said, " I have set the Lord aljvays before me." No doubt this
is absolutely true only of the great Son of David, of whom the Spirit of prophecy
spake in the sixteenth psalm, as St. Peter taught on the day of Pentecost. But of all
that was most worthy in the career of the poet-king of Israel this was the sustaining
principle ; and of his character this formed the sacred charm, that he constantly kept
his eyes upon God. In great deeps of sorrow, in dens and caves of the earth, in exile,
in peril by the sword, among temptations of ambition, tumults of war, cares of
government ; in the obscurity of his youth, in the sudden promotion and the stirring
adventures of his early manhood ; in all the publicity of his later years, in " that fierce
light which beats upon a throne;'' — always and everywhere the son of Jesse looked to
God, and sought to walk in the light of his countenance. Alas ! he looked off, and
sinned grievously. We find no perfect example but that of the Man Christ Jesus, the
Son of David, who maintained a constant obedience to, and therefore a constant com-
munion with, God (see John viii. 29 ; xi. 42). In the midst of incessant occupations
and in the face of frequent "contradiction of sinners against himself," he found it
possible to look always to the Father in heaven, and do always the Father's will. Su
he knew that the Father heard him always. Now, every one admits that the life
of Christ is, in its principles and motives, the supreme model for the life of Christians.
But the force of the admission is sadly weakened for any practical purpose by the pre-
vailing impression that actual conformity to so perfect a Pattern is not to be expected-
of any one. Let us take the example of a servant of Christ. It will not be disputed
that we may and should emulate the attainments and experience of St. PauL Now,
he had extraordinary vicissitudes in the course of his ministry, and does not conceal
from us the changing moods of his mind — now depressed and sorrowful, now bold and
enthusiastic. But as respects the main current of his life and service, Paul was ever
after his conversion, gloriously consistent. In love to God, in zeal for Jesus, in
fidelity to the gospel, in care for the Churches, in abhorrence of sin, in esteem ol



232 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ix. 1—16.



holiness, in vigilant resistance to the devil, and in tender affection for the saints, he
was always the same, and wavered not. Accordingly we find the word " always "
often used in regard to his own spiritual experience and missionary life (see
Acts xxiv. 16 on couscienoe ; ch. ii. 14 on the career of a missionary ; ch. iv. 10 and
v. 6 on Bufferings and joyful hope). What a living sacrifice to God was this apostolic
man 1 What singleness of purpose he had, what integrity of heart, what constancy,
in serving the Lord always 1 Why may not similar constancy be shown by us? God
is able to make all grace abound toward us. And all the injunctions for Christian life
given in the Holy Book assume that we are to be always and wholly the Lord's. Our
speech should be "always with grace, seasoned with salt." Our prayers should be
offered up alway ; and in active service we should be " always abounding in the work
of the Lord." The proper season for piety is always. Labour sometimes, study
sometimes, recreation sometimes, sleep sometimes; but the fear of the Lord always,
and the life of faith always. No day of the week, no hour of the day, without the
Lord. This is not bondage : it is the best liberty. This is not being " righteous
overmuch." It is simply to order our character and conduct habitually by the highest
aims and models set before us. It is the aspiration of the meek and lowly, not of
the proud. It is the path of the just, which shines more and more until the perfect
day.— P.

Ver. 2. — Forwa/rdneis in good worJes. Very remarkable is the tenderness, consi-
deration, and delicacy of feeling with which St. Paul addresses the better, the more spiri-
tual, part of the Church at Corinth. He was very anxious that they should stand well in
the matter of the collection, and therefore he had sent messengers to collect their gifts ;
but he gives them notice of their coming, and heartily expresses his confidence in the
ready and willing mind of these Corinthian saints. In such expressions " there was no
subtle policy ; there was no attempt to get at their purses by their weak side. St.
Paul was above such means. It was natural, instinctive, real delicacy; and yet it was
the surest way of obtaining what he wished, and that which the deepest knowledge of
the human heart would have counselled. For thereby he appealed, not to their selfish,
but to their most unselfish, feelings. This is a great principle — one of the deepest you
can have for life and action. Appeal to the highest motives ; appeal, whether they be
there or no, for you make them where you cannot find them. Let men say what they
will of human nature's evil, a generous, real, tmafected confidence never fails to elicit
the Divine spark." Consider —

I. St. Paul's oonfidbnce in their gogd-hbartedness. " I know the forwardness
of your mind." 1. So far as tidings had reached him, and so far as he knew their
Christian disposition and character, he felt sure that they were thinking rightly about
the matter, cherishing proper sentiments concerning Christian brotherhood and charity,
and the duty of the strong to bear the infirmities of the weak. This would be the
matter of first importance to the apostle, for mere gifts are of no more acceptableness
to G-od nowadays than mere sacrifices were in older days. God reads hearts and
motives, and accepts the spirit of generosity and brotherly kindness which may find
expression through gilts. So God could send this gracious message to David, " Thou
didst well that it was in thy heart." 2. The Corinthians also planned to meet the
apostle's wishes. There had been consideration and consultation and united endeavour
to form good schemes for the regular devotement of gifts, for the storing and the
ingathering of the moneys. In such signs of thought and care and wise arrangement
St. Paul could but unfeignedly rejoice. 3. It seems that the Corinthians had actually
made a good and hopeful beginning. They had been " forward " in advance of other
Churches ; to use a familiar figure, they had " taken time by the forelock." This the
apostle could not fail to regard as a most encouraging and hopeful sign of earnestness,
as well as of the preparedness to act upon principle rather than upon mere impulse and
excitement.

II. St. Paul's use of them for the inspiration op others. " For which I boast
of you to them of Macedonia." Probably St. Paul had been setting their example
before the Churches of Macedonia previous to his receiving news of the trouble at
Corinth over the incestuous member, and the disturbance of the Church by St, Paul's
personal enemies and traducers. Show that whenever a Church of Christ, or a Chris<



OB. DL 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 233

tian individual, affords prominent illustration of any grace or duty, they properly
become, in such matters, models and examples for the inspiration of others. All who
attain above an average level in Christian living ought to be used for the permanent
raising of the average. It is a somewhat difficult question, how far lesser motives,^ such
as emulation and rivalry and ambition to he topmost, may be appealed to in Christian
life and work. Certainly it must be admitted that they can only be secondary motives,
buttresses of a building that is well founded on the one great motive of loyalty and
love to Christ.

III. St. Paul's feakb lest they should comb short op his hope. " His boasting
of them might be in vain in this behalf." He was very properly anxious " lest haply
if they of Macedonia come with me, and find you unprepared, we (that we say not,
ye) should be ashamed in this same confident boasting." The ground of fear was the
influence which the troubles and conflicts through which the Corinthian Church had
been passing would have upon such a matter of external interest. Churches whose
peace is disturbed are seldom found zealous in good works. The energy of the Church
which is turned into dissension and strife is taken from its proper spheres of growth,
witness, and charity. But St. Paul had further cause for his fears. Enemies at Corinth
were so earnestly endeavouring to undermine his authority and destroy his influence
that it seemed likely the Church would throw up this collection for the Jerusalem
saints as a merely Pauline affair, with which they had better have nothing to do.
The apostle opposes this malign influence by his delicate pleading, and by sending
messengers who would testify that the collection was a matter of public concern, not
one of personal interest to the apostle, and not one which was left in his hands. It
was the united contribution of the Gentile Churches to the mother Church in her
distress, and the matter was wholly under the regulation of those Churches. Impress
how important is manifest clean-handedness for all who have to do with Church
moneys. No man must blame us concerning the gifts which we administer.

IV. St. Paul's anxjeti to sbcubb the pbactioal results of right peelino. He
had been made glad by the report which he had received concerning the more spiri-
tually minded Corinthians. They had received his reproofs and counsels with right
feeling. They had cleared themselves of all complicity with the doings of the unworthy
member ; and the apostle felt that now all that was needed, as a sign of their right-
heartedness, was the resumption of this collecting scheme. If they would earnestly
take that up and carry it through, in a generous and self-denying way, it would be
the all-sufficient and outward proof that they had come well through the stormy and
troubled periods of their Church history. — R. T.

Ver. 5. — Oovetousness. " As a matter of bounty, and not as of covetousness." Dean
Plumptre translates, " as a work of your bounty, and not of my claims upon your
purses." The Kevised Version renders, " and not of extortion," but putting the word
" covetousness " in the margin. The Greek of the word " covetous," signifies " to have
more," and it signifies (1) one who has more than enough ; (2) one who desires more
than enough of whatever kind ; and (3) one greedy after money. But these do not pre-
cisely express the thought which is in the word as employed in Scripture. Covetous-
ness is that exaggerated consideration for self which makes it possible, not only to
neglect the interests of others, but even to injure others to secure a man's own ends.
It is the desire to get and to hold for self, which shuts up a man's hand and heart so
that he cannot give to others. We suggest for treatment —

I. The covetous spirit. Distinguish between covetous acts, and the covetous spirit
which may be cherished in such a way as to utterly spoil acts which men may call acts
of liberality. It is " covetousness," the self-seeking spirit, concerning which St. Paul is
anxious, and this is a form of spiritual evil to which we are all more exposed than we
think. The most painful exemplification of it is found in Judas Iscariot. Its subtle
and mischievous workings in him can be clearly traced. The examples of Achan,
Demas, etc., may also be given. " It is not necessary to describe at any length the sin
which the Word of God brands under the name of ' covetousness,' and always asso-
ciates with whatever is most offensive and most vile, * the root of all evil,' by bad
pre-eminence, ' idolatry.' We assume its existence. It will not be denied. Its spell
is upon alL It is the abuse and perversion of a great law of man's nature — the law



234 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. rs. 1—15.



which teaches him to aspire heavenward and Grodward ; or of a law not less primary—
the law of self-preservation. It is the ruling passion of nearly all men, of all tastes
and times. ' Take heed, and beware of covetousness,' said the All- wise ; and though
his Word teems with such warnings against the sin, men have not been warned. At
one time men call it ' the great queen-regent of the world ; ' at another, ' the all-con-
suming cancer ' of the Oiiurch ; at another, her ' deadly upas ; ' at a fourth, ' a fatal
opiate ; ' while others assure us that, at the best, man is only the heir of a vault or
the lord of a grave. Yet vain are all such exposures. Though it creeps stealthily
upon man like grey hairs or dropsy, the conquests of covetousness continue far wider
than those of Alexander. The monarch and the menial are alike its slaves. The
phlegmatic are covetous because this freezing sin specially suits their nature ; the
earnest, because it stimulates; the licentious, because it can pamper; the ambitious,
because it can exalt ; the stupid, because it com pensates for dulness. Prosperity fans
it, and adversity cannot quench it ; men willin-jly bow down before it, as the tyrant
summoned them of old to bow before another idol " ( W. K. Tweedie, D.D.).

II. Its relation to the Christian character. It is always and necessarily
injurious, and, wherever willingly cherished, not only imperilling the finer and more
delicate features of character, but even destructive of it root and branch. For the
very essence of Christian character is the love of Christ, which takes us out of our-
selves, and absorbs us with concern for him ; anri the love of others, for Christ's sake,
which sets us upon making their interests superior to our own. Covetousness may
linger in the holes and caves of Mansoul while Immanuel is its King, but where
covetousness reigns Christ cannot ; or, to put it in other words, it is absolutely impos-
sible to raise a Christian character upon a foundation of covetousness, and this spirit
will but exert itself to daub and spoil the whole picture of the Christian graces.

III. Its hindranob to Christian giving. 1. By preventing the reception of a due
impression of cases of need. Covetousness hardens, deafens, and blinds. 2. By com-
pelling its victim to form a false estimate of his ability. 3. By deceiving a man
through the presentation of unworthy excuses. — K. T.

Ver. 7. — Cheerful givers. Those to whom giving is no forced service, no painful
duty, no grudgingly yielding to command, but the joy of their life, the thing which
brings them their keenest and purest pleasure. We need only suggest the sources
whence such cheerfulness will come. Dean Plumptre points out that in this sentence
we have a distinct echo of Prov. xxii. 8, as it stands in the Greek Version : " He
that soweth wicked things shall reap evils, and shall complete the penalty of hia deed.
God blesseth a cheerful man and a giver, and shall complete [in a good sense] the incom-
pleteness of his works." " Cheerfulness in visits of sympathy, in the daily offices of
kindness, in the life of home, in giving instruction or advice, — all come under the head
of that which God approves and loves. So the greatest of Greek ethical teachers
(Aristotle) had refused the title of ' liberal ' to the man who gave without pleasure in
the act of giving. The pain he feels proves that, if he could, he would rather have the
money than do the noble action."

I. Cheerfulness through the motive op giving. Which is that thankfulness and
love to him who was God's great saving Gift to us, which kindles in our hearts the joy
unspeakable.

II. Cheerfulness through the pleasure of giving. For our Lord read human
hearts aright when he said, " It is more blessed to give than to receive."

J II. Cheerfulness through the hope of blessing by giving. Our giving meets
and supplies needs ; it tends to lift off burdens and to soothe sorrows. It is glad work
to find ourselves, in a sinful and a sorrow-stricken world, healers, comforters, and
saviours. No joy is like the joy of wakening joy in others.

IV. Cheerfulness through the sense of Divine approval on giving. "God
loveth the cheerful giver," and when he loves, there is for us his uplifted countenance,
his acceptance, and his smile. — E. T.

Ver. 8. — Qod's ability and man's. Even in the early Church, the first Church of
the apostles, there was need of money. In the first Council it was resolved to send a
general direction to the Churches that they should " remember the poor." The ApostU



OH. n. 1—16.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 235

Paul was deeply interested in a collection, which he set on foot throughout the Churches
he had founded, on hehalf of the poor saints at Jerusalem, and his last journey to the
holy city was occasioned by his earnest desire to present these "alms and offerings of
the Gentiles " with his own hands to the apostles and elders. This text is directly
connected with the matter of money, of Christian giving for Christian ust s, which we
properly regard as still one of the first duties, as it is certainly one of the highest
privileges, of the Christian Church. St. Paul had been boasting in other places ot the
willingness, the heartiness, and the liberality of the Church at (Jorinth ; but in conse-
quence, perhaps, of the interruption of his relations with them, he feared that they
would hardly come up to the account which, in his trustfulness, he had given of them.
He therefore sent on before him collectors, who were to gather their stored gifts together,
and he reminds them again of those considerations by which he had already urged
them to a noble liberality. "Give," he says, "according to the generous purposings
of the heart that is made tender and thankful by the sense of God's saving love.
Kemember, ' he that soweth bountifully shall reap also bountifully.' Let your giving
be a ' matter of bounty, not as of covetousness.' ' God loveth a cheerful giver.' And
God is able to give all temporal good to you, so that, having sufficiency for all your
own needs, you yet may be able to distribute generously. And did not the Lord Jesus
lay down for all his people this most comprehensive principle, ' It is more blessed to
give than to receive'? And did he not illustrate, in his own uttermost self-sacrifice,
the glory of his own great principle ? Verily the beatitude of God rests on those who
give I " This is the first connection of the passage before us, but it broadens its reach
beyond the money and the giving. It covers and hallows all the features and expres-
sions of our religious life. Wheresoever we may be, whatsoever we may have to do,
whensoever needs arise, the sound of this assurance comes to us, quieting all fears, and
stilling the heart to peace and rest. There is a gracious power in the word " all," |
repeated as it is again and again in the verse. The word seems designed to drive away
every lingering doubt. " All grace," " all sufficiency," " all good." I

I. God's ability, and its condition. Nothing that is not an absurdity in the
statement is beyond God's power. Much has been made of the contention that God
cannot put two things into the same place at the same time, or that he cannot make
the addition of two and two make five, or make two parallel lines ever meet. But, in
view of .the essential conditions of human thought and human language, these things
are absurdities, and not impossibilities ; and it is no limitation of the Divine omnipo-
tence to say that God cannot do what is absurd in the very statement. " He is able."
We feel the truth of this in the world of nature. Sky and earth and sea proclaim that
he is " able." Who can listen to the wild storm, hear the mighty winds bowing the
great trees, and the thunder-echoes rolling from hill to hill, and the breakers plunging
against the guardian cliffs, and not reverently say, " He is able " ? Who can feel how
the gentle spring sunshine warms the wintry air and the chilled ground, tenderly
touching every life-germ in bud and seed and plant, and wakening life and hope and
beauty aU around, and not lovingly say, " Verily thou art able " ?

" O spirit of the strong things and the gentle, thou art able."

But nature is outside us. We may watch the omnipotent workings, but we want to
ask this : " Do we come within the all-powerful grasp ? " Admit all we nay about our
" free-will," nevertheless, of ourselves, of body, soul, circumstances, can we say, " He
is able " ? Yes ; in him we " live, and move, and have our being." Our circumstances
»re his overruling. Our souls are his inbreathing. He in whom we trust can do all
things. We are continually crushed by being compelled to say, " I cannot ;" but the
feeble limited creature steadies its tremblings by leaning on One who can. " Then Job
answered the Lord, and said, I know that thou canst do everything, and that no
thought can he withholden from thee." But we long to know this — ^What can the
almighty God really be to us ? Can he come right into the spheres of our life and
work ? and is he able to make all grace abound to us there ? Can he " supply all our
need out of his riches in glory by Christ Jesus " ? Into the shadow of his fatherhood
may we run, since our " heavenly Father knoweth what things we have need of before
we ask him"? That is the ability of God concerning which we need to gain such deep
and satisfying impressions. As a redeemed son of his, is he able to find all the grace



S36 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ix. 1—15

I need ; able to meet me at every point ; able to give the grace according to the day ;
able to aiiapt himself to all the changes and fluctuations of my moods and circum-
stances ? The little child brings all her broken dolls and damaged toys to her father ;
she is perfectly sure that, however dreadful the damage may be, " father can mend it."
And the sweet confidence dries up the tears. But the little thing never stops to con-
sider how strong the father-arms are or how skilful his fingers ; she only reads his
power by the light of his love ; and she is quite sure that he will try, and her trust
says thnt he will succeed. What can God do for us, his blood-bought children ? He
can breathe on us the spirit of a holy contentment. He can inspire us with zeal unto
all good works. He can strengthen us for all noble enterprise. He can make the
mountains of difficulty before us lie level as a plain. He can so prosper and bless us
that very thankfulness shall urge us to generous and noble deeds. " I cannot indeed,
but God can : " let us learn to say that, and then this will be our glorying — " Here,
there, yonder, in this and in that, in the light and in the dark, I can, through him who
strengtheneth me." There is a condition upon which the ability of God alone can come
to us. We must gain and keep the receptive mood, which includes the humble, obedient,
and trustful spirit.

II. Man's ability and its expbebsion. For we also are "able to abound unto
every good work." Sometimes we are deeply impressed with the feebleness, the imper-
fection, of the best that we can do. But when we estimate that work of grace which
God, the AU-merciful, is carrying on in the world — so silent, yet so mighty ; so long,
and yet so surely triumphant at last ; so rich in long-suffering patience ; so quick to take
up and use a thousand trilling influences, sanctifying even a passing word and a gentle
look to its gracious ends, — then it seems wonderful that, in so great a matter, we
should be " co-workers with God," and that the rich streams of Divine grace should
even flow t» others through us. With the grace of God we can do all things. In the
renewed man there is ability. God makes him mighty, and uses him to " pull down
the strongholds." God shows him what great things he can suffer, and what great
things he can do, for his Name's sake. In full harmony with the Christian humility
md dependence we may gain this sense of Christian ability. We want the inspiration
of the conviction settled deeply into our souls — " I can." We need the cheer that
comes to every man when God says to him, " Thou canst." We are weak, depressed,
hesitating ; we touch things with a trembling hand ; we faint before the first difficulty,
so long as we say to ourselves, "I cannot." With the "all sufficiency" we can
abound to every good work. — E. T.

Ver. 10. — Ood's rewards for liberal »ouh. This verso may be read in a sentence':
" The liberal soul shall be made fat." F. W. Robertson's passage in reference to this
is so characteristic of him, and so wise and suggestive, that it cannot be withheld.
He says, " In the particular instance now before us, what are the rewards of liberality
which St. Paul promises to the Corinthians? They are (1) the love of God (ver. 7);
(2) a spirit abounding to every good work (ver. 8) ; (3) thanksgiving on their behalf
(vers. 11, 12, 13). A noble harvest, but all spiritual. Comprehend the meaning of it
well. Give, and you will not get back again. Do not expect your money to be
returned, like that of Joseph's brethren in their sacks' mouths. When you give to
God, sacrifice, and know that what you give is sacrificed, and is not to be got again,
even in this world ; for if you give, expecting it back again, there is no sacrifice :
charity is no speculation in the spiritual funds, no wise investment, to be repaid with
interest either in time or eternity 1 No, the rewards are these : Do right, and God's
recompense to you will be the power of doing more right. Give, and God's reward to
you will be the spirit of giving more ; a blessed Spirit, for it is the Spirit of God
himself, whose life is the blessedness of giving. Love and God will pay you with, the
capacity of more love, for love is heaven, love is God within you." Setting out the
various forms in which Divine rewards come to liberal souls, we notice —

I. Tempobal pbospbbity. However true it is that this was associated with goodness
only under the Old Testament economy, it is still found that the liberal soul makes
friends, wins love, and so secures actual temporal advantages.

II. Human love. It is our best earthly treasure, and it comes in response to onr
power to give. The dearest relationships of human life are the rewards of them that



en. IX. 1—15.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 23')

can give. And Job reminds us how the good man, the gracious man, gets bis reward
in the love of the poor whom he seeks to bless (Job xxix. 11 — 17).

III. SooL-cuLTUEB. Por it is a steadfast law of soul-lile, that it cannot grow by
keeping ; it can only grow by giving, expending. The law of receiving more grace ia
this — we must use up, in good generous deeds, the grace that we have.

IV. Power to do more good. See the extract from F, W. Eobertson given in the
introduction to this homily.

V. Divine tavour. Which must include those rewards of the heavenly world
which now escape our apprehension, because they can only be presented to us in material
forms and figures. T. Binney says, " Beneficent acts, right in spirit and principle,
though they may be forgotten by the doer — who may not let his ' left hnnd know what
his right hand doeth' — are not forgotten by him to whose will they have an ultimate
respect, and by whom they are received as a sacrifice. They have a relaiiun to God,
and are regarded by him long after they have been accomplished and have passed away
from the memory of man. They do not terminate with their being finished and done
with here, or, so to speak, with the immediate pleasurable impression on the Divine
mind. That impression is retained and prolonged. He to whom they rise up as
incense gives to them, as it were, a substantial embodiment in the upper world — lays
them up there as valuable treasure belonging to his children, and thinks of and surveys
them with satisfaction and complacency." — ^E. T.

Ver. 15. — The unspeakahle Gift. This can refer to none other than the Lord Jesus
Christ, who himself said, in such a striking way to the woman of Samaria, " If thou
knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink ; thou
wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water " (John iv. 10).
In Jesus Christ " dwells all the fulness of the Godhead boriily." And " God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son" (comp. Eom. v. 15 ; vi. 23 ; Heb. vi. 4).

I. Christ is a Gift. This is but reminding us that salvation is altogether of grace.
We in no sense can be said to have purchased Christ. Nor did any merit of ours
attract him. Nor by any power of ours did we win him. God pitied us in our lost
estate, and gave his Son. A priceless Gift indeed, seeing that it includes : 1. Pardon.
2. Peace. 3. Eternal life.

II. Christ is God's Gift. This reminds us that salvation is a Divine work. We
read of the " grace of God " and the " gift by grace." And " when there was no eye to
pity and no arm to save, his own arm brought salvation." Salvation is said to be of
God to show us : 1. It is not some human scheme. This is the essential difference
between Christ's salvation and all other salvations. They are human devices — philo-
sophies or religions ; this is Divine intervention, arrangement, and revelation ; God's
power directly working in God's way. It is indeed God himself saving men. To trust
in any merely human redemption schemes is like hoping to'save a drowning man with a
rope that is too short. 2. To give us right views of God. Man's usual thought of
God is that of an offended King or stern Judge. But the unspeakable Gift reveals the
higher truth that God is love, and the gift being that of a Son unfolds the sublime fact
that God is Father. So we know God through his gift.

III. Christ is an unspeakably precious Gift. This reminds us that salvation is
priceless. It is beyond all possibility that we could speak worthily (1) all the glory of
Christ himself; (2) all the sorrow Christ went through; (3) all the needs which
Jesus can meet; or (4) all the love that Jesus feels. "The apostle felt overwhelmed
with the thought of it, and spoke of the " love of Christ, which passeth knowledge."

IV. Christ is a Gift offered for our acceptance. It suffices no man to know
that this Gift has come ; nor to know that others have received it to the joy and
rejoicing of their hearts. No man can offer worthy heart-thanksgiving for this Gift
until he has personally accepted it, sufficiently proved it, and can speak for himself of
the pricelessness of it. The law is this : " He that hath the Son hath life." And he
can " thank God for bis unspeakable Gift."— B. T.



238



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x. 1— i&



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER X.



With this chapter begins the last great
section of the Epistle (ver. 1 — oh. xiii. 10),
which contains an impassioned vindication
of the apostle's position as compared with
that of his opponents. It is so much more
vehement and severe than the former part
of the Epistle, and the whole style and tone
of the Epistle at this point change so com-
pletely, that many have supposed that this
is in reality another letter, and some have
even identified it with the letter alluded to
in ch. vii. 8 — 12. There is no trace of ex-
ternal evidence in favour of this view. It
is much more probable that St. Paul would
here have ended his letter but for fresh in-
formation given him by Titus, or the arrival
of some new messenger from Corinth, from
whom he learnt the bitter way in which his
enemies spoke of him. The most flagrant
oifender seems to have been one teacher
from Jerusalem (vers. 7, 10, 11, 12, 18 ; ch. xi.
4). This man and his abettors and other
party opponents spoke of St. Paul as mean
in aspect (vers. 1, 10), untutored in speech
(oh. xi. 6), bold at a distance and cowardly
when present, a man of mere human
motives (ver. 2), and not quite sound in
intellect (ch. xi. 16, 17, 19). They had
been introducing new teaching (ch. xL 4),
and had shown themselves boastful (ver.
7), insolent, rapacious, violent (ch. xi. 20,
21), intrusive (ver. 15), and generally
dangerous in their influence (ch. xi. 3),
which had succeeded in alienating from
St. Paul the minds of many (ver. 18; oh.
xi. 8, 20; xii. 13, 14). Such accusations
and such conduct now roused the deep
indignation of St. Paul, and his Apologia
pro vitA tad U mainly given in tliese
chapters.

Plunging at once into his subject, with a
solemn appeal, be declares bis apostolio
power (vers. 1 — 8), and that he will exercise
it in person as well as by letters, in answer
to the taunt of his opponents (vers. 9 — 11).
He then shows that his estimate of himself
is formed on very different methods from
those of his adversaries (vers. 12 — 16),



and that he referred all grounds of boast-
ing solely to the judgment of God (veis.

17, 18).

Ver. 1. — Now I Paul myself. The word*,
as Theodoret says, express the emphasis of
apostolic dignity. He is going to speak of
himself and for himself. " I, the very Paul,
with whose name you make so free." The
conjecture may not even be impossible that
this portion of the letter may have been
written with his own hand. Perhaps he
began without any intention of writing more
than a few concluding words, but he was
carried away by his feelings, and the sub-
ject grew under his hands (comp. Gal. v. 2 ;
Eph. iii. 1 ; Philem. 19). Beseech ; rather,
exhml. By the meekness and gentleness of
Christ. The conduct which he is obliged
to threaten might seem incompatible with
this meekness and gentleness (Matt. xi. 29,
30). It was not really so, because even
Christ had been compelled at times "to
burst into plain thunderings and lightnings."
Still, severity and indignation were not in
themselves after the inmost heart and will
of Christ, though human perversity might
compel love itself to assume such tones.
He entreats them, however, not to force him
to stern measures. Gentleneia. The word
epieilceia means " fairness, forbearance, sym-
pathetic consideration for others," or, as Mr.
Matthew Arnold prefers to render it, " sweet
reasonableness" (see Acts xxiv. 4; Phil,
iv. 5 ; Jas. iii. 17 ; 1 Pet. ii. 18). Who in
presence, etc. Here, and in many similar
passages of this section, he is evidently
adopting or quoting tlie actual taunts of
his adversaries. In modem times the words
would be enclosed in inverted commas.
Base ; rather, humble (see note on eh. vii.
6; xii. 7). Being absent am bold. The
charge, if true, would have been the mark
of a coward ; and it naturally awakens an
indignant echo in the language of St
Paul.

Ver. 2. — I beseech yon. The " beseech "
is here right {deomai). The " you " is not in
the Greek, but is rightly supplied. It rests
with them to avert the necessity of personal
severity, and he entreats them to do go
(comp. ch. xiii. 2, 10 ; 1 Cor. iv. 21). Against
some. He leaves these undefined tUl the
vehement outburst of ch. xi. 13, 14. As if
we walked according to the flesh (see note
on ch. V. 16). To say this of St. Paul was
to charge him with being inaincere and not
disinterested.

Ver. 3.— We walk in the flesh. St. Paul
does not disclaim the possession of human
infirmities, but maintains that such triali



cm. T. 1—18.1 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



239



and temptations were not the guiding force
of Mb life. We do not war after the flesh,
His aampaigna (Luke iii. 14) were fouglit
with spiritual weapons. The metaphor is a
constant one with St. Paul (ch. ii. 14 — 16 ;
1 Cor. ix. 26 ; Eph. vi. 10—17, etc.).

Ver. 4. — Weapons (see oh. vi. 7 ; Bom. vi.
13). Kot oamal. He did not rely on the
mere " arm of flesh," or on earthly sword or
panoply. Mighty through Sod; literally,
powerful for God ; i.e. either (1) powerful for
the cause of God, or (2) powerful in hU
estimate. ' To the pulling down of strong-
holds. The word for "pulling down,"
which implies the entire clearance of an
obstacle, is only found in the New Testament
in this Epistle (vers. 4, 8 ; oh. xiii. 10). The
word for " strongholds " is found here alone.
These "fortresses" were the opposition
aroused by &ctious and hostile partisans,
and he hoped to subdue them by the strong
exercise of apostolic authority (1 Cor. iv. 21 ;
▼. 1 — 5). Dean Stanley suggests a remi-
niscence of the hundred and twenty Cilician
fortresses pulled down by Pompey; but I
think that these general allusions are often
pressed too far.

Ver. S. — Casting down. This agrees with
" we " understood, not with " weapons." Im-
aginations; rather, diapviationt, or reason-
ingt. Every high thing that ezalteth itself;
rather, eeery hMght that is exalted. Against
the knowledge of God (see 1 Cor. xv. 34).
There, however, we have passive ignorance,
here active opposition. Bringing into cap-
tivity. When the fortresses are razed, their
defenders will be taken prisoners, but for a
beneficent end. Every thought. Even in-
tellectual result The word (noema) is not
common in the New Testament. It occurs
five times in this Epistle (ch. ii. 11 ; iii. 14 ;
iv. 4; X. 5; zL 3), but elsewhere only in
PhiL iv. 7.

Yer. 6. — ^Being in • readiness ; <.e. bein^;
quite prepared. My sternness of purpose is
ready, but my hope is that it may not be
called into action. To revenge ; rather, to do
justice upon. In any case, in this infliction
of justice, whatever form it might take, he
would only be an tigent of God (Bom. xii.
19). When your obedienoe is fulfilled. St.
Paul is confldent that he will overcome the
mazes of those opposed to him, and win them
to Christ's obedience; but if there were any
who should obstinately refuse to submit,
they must be reduced to submission by
action, not by words.

Ver. 7. — ^Do ye look on things after the out-
ward appearance 1 Like many clauses in
this section, the words are capable of dif-
ferent interpretations. They might mean,
(1) as in the Authorized Version, " Do you
judge by mere externals ? " or, (2) " You
judge by thing? which merely lie on the



surface I" or, (8) "Consider the personal
aspect of the question." The Authorized
Version is probably right (comp. John vii.
24). If any man. Perhaps alluding to
some party ringleader. That he is Chnst's.
If a man holds this in an exclusive and
partisan sense (1 Cor. i. 12). Some manu-
scripts (D, E, E, G) read, "a slave of
Christ." Of himself. The true reading is
probably 4<t>', not a(p', but in either case the
meaning is, " by his own fair judgment."
Even so are we Christ's. In a true and real
sense, not by external knowledge and con-
nection (which he has already disclaimed),
but by inward union. This he proceeds to
prove by the fact that he was the founder of
their Chuieh (vers. 13 — 18); that he had
always acted with absolute disinterested-
ness (oh. xi. 1 — 15); that he had lived a
life of toil and suffering (ch. xi. 21 — 33),
and that he had received special revelations
from God (ch. iii. 1 — 6).

Vers. 8 — 11. — Assertion of his intentions.

Ver. 8. — Should boast. In this section
St. Paul is thoroughly haunted by this word.
The fact that a word could thus possess and
dominate over his style and imagination
shows how deeply he was moved. The
Corinthian Church, with its inflated fac-
tions and their fuglemen, reeked with boast-
ing, and St. Paul is driven, with utter
distaste, to adopt in self-defence language
which, to the uncaudid and indiscrimiiiat-
ing, might seem to wear the same aspect.
The word, which is unfrequent in other
Epistles, occurs eighteen times in these
chapters alone. Other haunting words are
"tolerate," "bear with"(ch. xi. 1, 4, 19,
20), and " senseless," " fool " (oh. xi 16, 19 ;
xii. 6, 11) ; see note on ch. i. 3. Somewhat
more; something more abundantly. For
edification, and not for your destruction;
for building you up, not pulling you doum.
The word kathairesin is from the same root
as the verb in ver. 5. I should not be
ashamed; rather, / shall not be ashamed.
No shame shall ever accrue to me from
my "boast" being proved false.

Ver. 9. — By letters ; rather, by the letters.
He had certainly addressed two letters to
them (1 Cor. v. 9).

Ver. 10. — Say they; literally, gays he.
The phrase may, indeed, imply " it is said "
(on dit) ; but it may refer to one main critic
and opponent (comp. vers. 7, 11). Perhaps
it would have been wiser and kinder if
no one had reported to St. Paul all these
subterranean calumnies and innuendoes.
Weighty and strong. This could not be
denied, considering the immense effect which
had been produced by his first letter (ch.
vii 7). His bodily presence is weak. This
is usually taken to mean that St. Paul's
personal appearance was onprepossessing



2i0



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. t. 1— la



(Gal. iv. 1). This, indeed, we should infer
from many other passages (1 Cor. ii. 34 ;
Gal. iv. 13, 14), and as a natural result of
his " stake in the flesh." It is, too, the con-
sistent though late tradition respecting him
(see my 'Life of St. Paul,' li. 628). Here,
however, the words may mean no more than
that " he adds nothing to his cause by being
present in person, since he shows vacilla-
tion and want of energy." Contemptible;
rather, despised (see 1 Cor. ii. 3, 4).

Ver. 11. — Such a one. A formula used
to avoid mentioning a special name (see
note on ch. ii. 7). Such will we be ; rather,
such are we. The verb is not expressed, but
it would have been if the future tense had
been intended. In this verse St. Paul is
not saying what he would do hereafter, but
is rebutting with calmness and dignity the
false charge that he was in any way dif-
ferent whea absent from what he was when
present.

Ver. 12. — ^We dare not. They are in this
respect of self-praise much bolder than I.
Hake ourselves of the number, or oom-
v«re ourselves ; literally, judge ourselvet
among or judge minelvea with. There is a
play on the words, like the Latin, inferre
or conferre, or the German, zurechnen oder
gleichrechnen. That commend themselves.
The verb rendered " conmiend " is that
from which is derived "the commendatory
letters" (oh. iii. 1) at the arrogant and
intrusive use of which he had glanced
already. St. Paul is once more rebutting
the charge of self-commendation (oh. iv. 2 ;
V. 12; vi. 11). But they measuring them-
selves . . . are not wise. The clause is
difiBcult ; for (1) to compare ourselves with
others in order to learn what we can and
cannot do is usually accounted wise; (2)
some manuscripts and editions, omitting
oil avviovaiv riiieTs 5e, render, " But we our-
selves (auTol), measuring ourselves by
ourselves, and comparing ourselves with
ourselves, will not boast above measure;" (3)
some, for awiovcnv (they are not wise) read
avviovaiv (with ourselves, who are not wise).
The reading, however, of the Authorized
Version is undoubtedly right, and most
probably the rendering also. The meaning
is that the little cliques of factious re-
ligionists, never looking outside their own
narrow circles, became inflated with a sense
of importance which would have been an-
nihilated if they had looked at higher
standards. Hence they thought themselves
at liberty to intrude and lay down the law
and usurp a claim to infallibility which
there was nothing to juatif/. Such conduct



is the reverse of wise. It is a miztnie of

selfishness, Pharisaism, and conceit, and
there have been abundant examples of it
among religious parties in all ages. St.
Paul, on the other hand, keeps within hia
own measure, because he has learnt to adopt
larger and loftier standards.

Ver. 13. — ^Will not boast of things with-
out our measure. This might be rendered,
" will not indulge in these immeasurable
boastings ; " but ver. 15 points to the sense,
" we will not glory beyond our measure."
Of the rule; i.e. of the measuring-line. I
will keep to the province and limit which
God has assigned to me in my proper mea-
sure. St. Paul declines the favourite office
of being "other people's bishop (iXKorpio-
eirtuKOTros) " (1 Pet. iv. 15). Hath distri-
buted ; rather, apportioned.

Ver. 14. — ^As though we reached not unto
you. In including you within the reach of
our measuring-line, we are guilty neither of
presumption nor of intrusion. Your Church
is a part of our legitimate province and
range of work (Acts xviii. 1, 4). We are
come as far as to you; rather, we antici-
pated others in coming to you ; " we were the
first to come as far as unto you." To St.
Paul belonged the undisputed glory of
having first introduced the gospel into the
regions of Macedonia and Achaia.

Ver. 15. — That is, of other men's labours.
Not to thrust himself obtrusively into
spheres of labour which legitimately be-
longed to others was a part of St. Paul's
scrupulously chivalrous rule (ch. iiL 10;
Gal. ii. 9 ; Bom. xv. 20). It contrasted with
the usurping arrogauce of these Jerusalem
emissaries. When your faith is increased;
rather, increases or grows. He delicately
implies that their lack of faith prevents the
extension of his labours. He could not
leave in his rear an unstormed fortress of
opposition to the gospel. The spread of the
gospel depends on them. We shall be en-
larged by you according to our rule abun-
dantly. The Eevised Version renders it
more clearly, "We shall be magnified in
you according to oui province unto further
abundance."

Ver. 16. — ^In the regions beyond you.
Even to Borne and Spain (Eom. xv. 19. 24.
28).

Ver. 17.— But he that gloiieth, etc. ; lite-
rally, he that boasteth, etc. (see note on 1
Cor. i. 31 ; Jer. ix. 24).

Ver. 18. — But whom the lord oommendetb
(comp. 1 Cor. iu. 13, 14, ir. 6; Frov.
zxvii. 2>



OH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. ^41



H0MILETIC8.

Vers. 1, 2. — Belf-vindieation. " Now I Paul myself tieseech you," etc. Paul, as
we have frequently intimated, had detractors in the Corinthian Church, men who
nought to gain power by calumniating him. We are not in possession of all tiie
calumnies. Paul knew them all. Throughout these two Epistles we find him coi]-
stantly en the defensive; here again we find him standing up for himself. In hi-
defence be manifests —

I. A 8TK0NO DESIRE TO DEAL WITH THEM IN THK SPIEIT OF ChRIST. " NoW 1

Paul myself beseech [entreat] you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ." lit
seems to shrink from the idea of so defending himself as to act contrary to the milil
and gentle spirit of Christ. Whatever I say in my defence, I would say in the spirit
of him " who, when he was reviled, reviled not again." Thus we should always act,
even in reproving others and defending ourselves ; in all we should be actuated and
controlled by the spirit of Jesus Christ. No reproof will go so thoroughly home to the
heart of the offender as that which breathes and echoes his spirit.

IL A KNOWLEDGE OF THE CONTEMPTUOUBNESS WITH WHICH HIS DETRACTORS BEOAKDBD

Hm. " Who in presence am base [lowly] among you, but being absent am bold [of
good courage] toward you." This does not seem to be the estimate he forms of himself,
but the character which his slanderers had given him. In ver. 10 it is so stated :
" For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful ; but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech contemptible." It would seem that they spoke somewhat thus — How
bold and courageous this man is in his " letters ; " but how mean and contemptible in
his appearance and conduct I He here intimates that when he comes amongst them
he would be " bold " and courageous. They shall know that I am no coward, and with
indomitable fearlessness I shall administer the necessary rebuke.

III. A DREAD OF EXERCismo SEVEKITT TOWARDS THEM. " But I beseech you, that
I may not be bold when I am present with that confidence, wherewith I think to be
iytld against some; which think of us as if we walked according to the flesh." It is
the characteristic of a great soul, especially of a great soul inspired with the spirit of
CLriit, to shrink from inflicting pain on any heart. Yet when duty calls it must be
done.

Vera. 3 — 6. — The true Boldiership. " For though," etc. The passage leads us to
notice the weapons and victories of a true soldiership.

I. The weapons of true soldiership. The apostle states two things concern-
ing these weapons. 1. They are not carnal. The word " carnal " here may be
regarded as standing in contradiction to three things. (1) To miiaculous agency.
Miracles, though employed at first, are not the regular weapons by which Christianity
fights her battles. (2) To all coercive instrumentality. The civil magistrate now for
fifteen centuries has sought by exactions and penalties to force Christianity upon the
consciences of men. Such weapons disgrace and misrepresent it. (3) To all oralty
inventions. In nothing, perhaps, has the craftiness of men appeared more than iu
connection with the profession of extending Christianity. What are the tricks of
rhetoric, the assumptions of priests, and the clap-trap of sects but craft ? 2. Though
*ot carnal, they are mighty. " Mighty through God." (1) They are mighty through
God because they are his productions. Gospel truths, the weapons of which the
apostle speaks, are God's ideas, and those ideas are mighty — mighty with truth and
love. (2) They are mighty through God because they are his instruments. God goes
with his ideas and works by them.

n. The viotories of true soldiership. What are the victories? 1. They are
mental. Paul is speaking about imaginations and things pertaining to mind. They
are not over body. There is not any glory in destroying tlie bodily life of man. The
lion, the bear, a poisonous gust of air, will excel man in this. The victories of a true
soldiership are over mind. And indeed you do not conquer the man unless you
conquer his mind. If there be a future world, then the men you slay upon the battle-
field may hate you in the great eternity with a profounder hatred than ever. 2. TJiey
n. oobinthians. ■



242 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x. 1— la

are corrective. These victories do not involve the destruction of the mind nor any
of its native faculties, but certain evils that pertain to it. What are they? (1) The
evil fortifications of the mind. " The pulling down of strongholds." What are they ?
Prejudices, worldly maxims, associations, passions, habits ; behind these " strongholds "
the mind entrenches itself against God. (2) The corrupt thinking of the mind.
" Casting down imaginations." The word " thinking " comprehends this, for the faculty
which we call imagination thinks as well as the intellect. It is against evil thinkings,
therefore. (3) The antitheistic impulses of the mind. " And every high thing that
exalteth itself against the knowledge of God." Every feeling and passion that rises
against God. These are the victories of true soldiership. 3. Thei/ are Christian.
They "bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." Thought is
everything to man. Now, the work of a true soldier is to bring this fontal force into
entire subjection to Chiist.

Ver. 7. — PauTs special power. " Do ye look on things after the ontward appear-
ance 1 " These words point to two evils.

I. JuDBiNO FBOM APPEARANCE. " Do ye look OH things after the outward appear-
ance ? " or that " are before your face." The teachers at Corinth who were opposed
to the apostle prided themselves on their external advantages, and regarded themselves
as superior in appearance, rank, and manners to Paul. They judged from appearance.
This judgment led them to regard Paul as their inferior. But was he inferior ? Was
he not, in all that is intrinsically excellent, in mental capacity, in spiritual knowledge,
in Christly enthusiasm, and supernatural power, their superior, the very prince of the
apostles? Men judged Christ by the "outward appearance," and how false, wicked,
and pernicious their judgment turned out to be! The only true test is the fruit.
" By their fruits ye shall know them ; " fruits, not actions — which often misrepresent
the character of the soul — but productions that are the natural, complete, and spon-
taneous outgrowth and expression of the leading moral principles of man's life.
Because men judge from " the outward appearance," wolves in society pass for sheep,
paupers for princes, devils for saints, churls for philanthropists, etc.

II. Abeogatino supekior Cheistliness. " If any man trust to himself that he is
Christ's, let him of himself think this again, that, as he is Christ's, even so are we
Christ's." Whilst there were those in the Corinthian Church who said some of them
were of Paul, of Apollos, of Cephas, there were some who said they were of Christ.
They wished to be regarded as superior to all, as knowing more of Christ, being more
intimate with him, having a stronger claim upon him. It might be that some of the
members of this party had (not like Paul) been with Christ while on earth, had talked
with him, walked with him, feasted with him, and of this they would boast. But
thousands could boast of this who had no vital fellowship with Christ. There always
have been men in Churches who have arrogated superior piety. I have known not
a few, not distinguished by any spiritual nobleness, who were accustomed to speak
of him as " my Christ," " my Saviour," " my Eedeemer," implying that he was more
to them than to others.

Vers. 8 — 10. — Ood'a gift of special power to man. " For though I should boast,"
etc. These verses present to our attention Ood's gift of special power to man. The
" authority " of which the apostle here speaks was, in all probability, a supernatural
endowment. Such an endowment be both claimed and manifested (see Acts xiii.
8— H ; xiv. 8—10 ; xv. 9—12). Having this power he was superior even to the ablest
of his censors in Corinth, and he felt that should he " boast somewhat " of this there
was no reason for him to be ashamed. The words suggest three remarks concerning
such special gift of power to man.

I. It is under man's control. Paul's language seems to imply that he might
or might not use his " authority " or power ; it did not coerce him ; it did not make
him amere instrument ; it did not overbear his will or infringe in any way his freedom
of action. God has given exceptional power to some men — to Moses, Elijah, Elisha,
Peter, etc. ; but in all cases it seemed to leave them free — free to use it or not, to use
it in this direction or in that. The Maker and Manager of the universe respects
evermore the free agency with which he has endowed his rational and moral offspring.



OH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, 243

We may enslave ourselves, but he will not. He will always treat us as responsible for
all we do.

II, Its great design is usefulness. "The Lord hath given us for edification,
*nd not for your destruction." He gives power to men, not to pull down, but to build
up. Ussfulness is the grand end of our existence. We are formed, not to injure, but
to bless our fellow-creatures. Wliatever endowments we have, be they ordinary or
transcendent, all are given by our Maker to promote truth and virtue and human
happiness thrf^ugh the world. Alas ! how extensively men pervert these high gifts
of Heaven 1

III. It IB yo PROTECTION FROM MALICE. Though Paul was thus so distinguished
by signal endowments, he was nevertheless the subject of bitter envy and cruel slander.
" For his letters, say they, are weighty and powerful ; but his bodily presence is weak,
and his speech contemptible." Did the supernatural power with which some of the
old Hebrew prophets were endowed shield men from the malice of men ? How were
Moses, Blisha, and Elijah treated? The fact is, the higher gifts a man has the more
he is exposed to the malice of others ; the more distinguished a man is in gifts and
graces, the more he will arouse among his contemporaries the spirit of detraction
and hate. It was so with Christ himself.

Vers, 11 — 13. — The false and true method of estimating men. " Let such a one
think this, that, such as we are in word by letters when we are absent, such will we be
also in deed when we are present. For we dare not make ourselves of the number, or
compare ourselves with some that commend themselves : but they measuring them-
selves by themselves, and comparing themselves among themselves, are not wise. But
we will not boast of things without our measure, but according to the measure of the
rule which God hath distributed to us, a measure to reach even unto you." In these
verses we have two subjects worthy of notice.

I. The false and true mkthod of estimating the character of others.
" Let such a one think this, that, such as we are in word by letters," etc. 1. To judge
by public report is a wrong method. It would almost seem that there was a general
impression in Corinth that not only was Paul's " bodily presence " somewhat con-
temptible, but that his letters were not a fair representation of himself, that they
displayed an elevation and a heroism of which the writer was destitute, and from this
general impression he was judged and considered to be something of a boaster and
charlatan. How common it is for people to judge those they have never seen by
general report! But a miserably false standard of judgment is this. Not unfrequently
have I received impressions concerning a person whom I have never seen, which a
subsequent personal acquaintance has completely dispelled. As a rule, the public
estimate of men, both in Church and state, is most fallacious and unjust. 2. To
judge by personah knowledge is the true method. " Let such a one think [reckon] this,
that, such as we are in word by letters . . . such will we be also in deed when we are
present." The meaning of this seems to be — Wait until I come amongst you, and you
will find that I am true to the character of my letters, that I will act out their spirit.
A man's own letters, even when rightly interpreted, will not give a free and a complete
idea of the author. The author is greater than his book, the man greater than his
productions. One hour with an author will give me a better idea of him than I could
obtain from all the productions of his pen, however voluminous.

n. The palsb and true method of estimating our own characters. 1. The
false method i^ comparing our own character with the character of others. " Measuring
themselves by themselves." This the Corinthians seem to have done, and this, perhaps,
is the general tendency of mankind. We judge ourselves by the characters of others.
When we are awused we are prone to say we are not worse than So-and-so. A false
standard this, because : (1) The mass of mankind are corrupt. (2) The best of men
are more or less imperfect. (3) There is only One perfect character— Jesus Christ.
In these words Paul indicates : (a) That it is a terrible thing thus to judge ourselves.
" We dare not [are not bold enough to] make ourselves of the number." Truly it ig
a terKble thing, for it leads to fearful issues. (6) That it is an unwise thing thus to
judg* ourselves. Those who compare themselves with others " are not wise," or are
" without anderstanding." 2. The true method is judging oursdves by tht wili ^ Oed.



244 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh, x. 1—18.

" According to the measure of the rule which God hath distributed to us." Thongh
the apostle by the expression, " rule which God hath distributed," primarily refen
to the Divine limits of his apostolic work, as will appear again, the " rule " applies also
to his personal character. God's will is the standard or canon by which all characters
are to be determined.

Conclusion. " Search me, God, and know my heart : try me, and know my
thoughts : and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
cverUsting."

Vers. 14 — ^18. — The true sphere of human usefulness and the source of human
glory. " For we stretch not ourselves beyond our measure, as though we reached not
unto you : for we are come as far as to you also in preaching the gospel of Christ :
not boasting of things without our measure, that is, of other men's labours ; but
having hope, when your faith is increased, that we shall be enlarged by you according
to our rule abundantly. To preach the gospel in the regions beyond you, and not to
boast in another man's line of things made ready to our hand. But he that glorieth,
let him glory in the Lord. For not he that commendeth himself is approved, but
whom the Lord commendeth." Here are two subjects for meditation.

I. Thk tkub sphere oe human usefulness. 1. It is a sphere in which we are
placed by Divine appointment. Paul teaches that his sphere of labour in Corinth was
according to the Divine will. " We stretch not ourselves beyond our measure [over-
much], as though we reached not unto you." As if he had said, "I am not come to
Corinth merely by my own inclinations, or as a matter of impulse or caprice, or as an
intruder. I am come here by the will of God. I am licensed by him to this sphere."
2. The consciousness that we are in this sphere is &just reason for exultation. " Not
boasting of things without our measure." As if Paul had said, " My boasting, or my
exultation, is not that I have entered into the sphere of other men's labours, but that
I am in the sphere to which I have been divinely commissioned." The opponents
of Paul, in Corinth, boasted of the influence they had gained in the Church which he
himself had founded by his self-sacrificing labours, and whose members owed, either
directly or indirectly, their conversion to him ; whereas his rejoicing was that he was
doing the work of God in the sphere to which he had been sent. 3. It is a sphere which
widens with our usefulness. Altliough Paul felt that Corinth was the sphere to which
he had been sent, he knew that tiie field would be widened according to his spiritual
success. " Having hope, when your faith is increased [that as your faith groweth], thai
we shall be enlarged [magnified] by you according to our rule [province] abundantly."
The increase of their faith would lead to an enlargement of his sphere of labour.
The true method of extending the sphere of labour to which we have been sent ia by tlie
multiplication of our converts. Bach soul which a minister brings to Christ enlarges
the field of his usefulness, enables him to break up new ground still further on.

II. The true source of human exultation. In what did Paul exult or
" boast " ? 1. Not in crediting himself with the labours of other nien. He did not
" boast in another man's line [province] of things made ready to our hand." How
common it ia for men to credit themselves with the labours of others ! We find this
in every department of labour. In literature there are plagiarists, in scientific dis-
coveries and artistic inventions there are unjust claimants, and even in religion one
minister is often found to claim the good that others have accomplished. Paul was
above this. The genius of Christianity condemns this mean and uiiserable dishonesty.
2. Not in self-commendation. " For not he that commendetli himself is approved."
That conscience approves of our conduct, though at all times a source of pleasure,
is not a true source of exultation ; for conscience is not infallible. Conscience some-
times deceives. What, then, was his true source of exultation ? " He that glodeth, let
him gloiy in the Lord." " God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS,

Vers. 1 — 7. — Change in the Epistle ; spirit of his defetice. No one can toil to notice
the change in the tone of the Epistle which appears in this chapter. Every thought-



OH. X 1—18,] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 245

fill reader of St. Paul knows how abrupt his transitions frequently are, and how
rapidly he digresses from his main point to something incidental to his topic. Hie
mental associations are governed by two distinct laws — first, by ideas exciting feelings
which lead him to diverge from his main line ; and next, by emotions arising from soma
occult source that vary his action of intellect. In this instance there may have bten
a pause in writing after he had finished the subject of the collection. Naturally
a reaction would set in. One of his excitable temperament could not have been
relieved of oppressive solicitude, as he had been by the return of Titus, nor given such
vn expression to his joy as we have in ch. viii. and ix. without subsequent exhaustion
of nervous energy. If, meantime, news came to him of the renewal of Judaizing zeal
at Corinth, and of some sudden accession of strength to the party so inflamed against
him, we can readily see why his indignation should be aroused. To have his hopes
dashed in this way, in such a conjuncture and by such unscrupulous opponents, would
put a terrible strain on a nature organized as sensitively as his, all the more so since
a new era seemed about dawning in the history of the gospel. Europe and Asia
appeared ready to join hands most heartily in the work of evangelizing the world, and,
just at this most auspicious period, to witness a fresh outbreak of discord was the
severest of trials that could have befallen him. Whatever the cause, it was a sad
thing for this noble spirit to be sorely chafed in an hour when it was rallying from an
unusual depression and girding itself for special endeavours to cement the Asiatic and
European Churches closer together. Here, in the very heart of Achaia, were agents
from the Judaizing party at Jerusalem, who appear to have become more jealous than
ever of his growing influence, and were heated to fiercer hostility against the apostle
because of the recent triumph of his authority. While he was exerting every nerve
to help the Church in Jerusalem, men from that very community were working in
Corinth to disparage his ministry and undermine his personal character. It was
shocking ingratitude. In itself it was rankling jealousy ; in its connections, base
partisanship. At that moment the interests of Christianity hung on the precise work
he was doing. The liberal gospel he was preaching, the gospel of free grace and
of equal honour and privilege to Jew and Gentile, was attesting its Divine excellence
in the " exceeding grace of God " manifested by means of the abounding charity of
Macedonia and Achaia. And yet all the promise and hope of this inspiring movement
were thrown into the utmost peril by these fanatical zealots. Had he not felt this
wrong keenly and resisted it courageously, he would have shown a want of manliness ;
for no character can have force that lacks indignation when its own integrity and
a great cause identified with that integrity are ruthlessly assailed. It is under such
circumstances that the true man appears in the way his sense of injustice operates.
Quite as plainly the wise leader will display himself in the perception of what the
emergency requires and in the decision with which his measures are executed. Now,
the apostle is before us again as a study in this particular aspect of his character and
ministry. Much as we have learned of him, something remains to be seen, and we
may feel assured that the additional insight will amply reward us. The first utterance
of his soul enkindles our admiration. Wronged, vilified, St. Paul appeals to the
Corinthians " by the meekness and gentleness of Christ." It is not " we," but " 1
Paul," for he was the person singled out for these malicious attacks and he would reply
from his own heart. It is not that sort of " meekness and gentleness " which craft and
conventionality often assume to hide their art and malignity. It is the spirit of Christ,
the meekness which acts by turning inwardly upon the mind and soothing its faculties,
and the gentleness that exhibits itself in outward tranquillity. St. Paul cannot speak
of these except as Christ's virtues. They are his ; they have his life ; they take their
power and beauty from him. "I Paul myself" — ^his individuality emphasized in an
unusual manner — " beseech you," at the instant when the lion was more likely to show
itself in human nature than the lamb, that it may not be necessary for me to exercise
my authority over these offenders. If, as my enemies say, I am base in presence
among you and bold only when absent, I pray you not to let this matter go to such an
extremity that I shall have to use " the rod." When one's courage has been challenged
and his heroism derided, it is extremely hard for a brave man like St. Paul to forbear.
But had he not said, " Love suffereth long and is kind " ? Words were things to him
and here was the proof of love, side by side with the irony that was not to b«



246 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x. 1—18.



concealed. Would he announce an inflexible determination to punish ? No ; further
discipline might be needful for him, further forbearance might be desirable in the caie
of his assailants ; and all he ventured to affirm jvas, " I think to be bold against some."
Who were the "some"? Evidently those who impeached his motives and openly
reviled his ministry. How does he describe them ? By the thoughts they entertained
of him as an apostle. " They think of us as if we walked according to the flesh,"
referring to a course of conduct "determined by the fear of men or the desire ot
pleasing men, and hence a personal bearing disgraced by cowardice or servility. The
human nature referred to was therefore one enfeebled, not merely from the want
of Divine support, but from sin " (Lange's ' Commentary '). Such an opinion respecting
the apostle indicates clearly enough the evil source whence it sprang. It happens
often that the judgments we pronounce on others are most true in application to
ourselves, and, unawares, we have disclosed what our own hearts are in estimating
outside parties. A politician who is always charging other politicians with being
demagogues is generally a demagogue himself, and the man who Sever hesitates to
apply the epithet of a Uar to others is quite sure to be a liar himself. But how does
St. Paul meet the charge of being carnally minded in his high office? "Though we
walk in the flesh [live a corporeal life], we do not war after the flesh," or " according
to the flesh," the contrast being in the words "in" and "according." And forthwith
he proceeds to show the difference between walking in the flesh and warring according
to the flesh. A warrior he is, an open and avowed warrior — ^a warrior who was to cast
down imaginations and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge
of God, and bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ ; a warrior
too who would punish these Judaizers if they continued their disorganizing work; but
ft prudent and considerate warrior, deferring the avenging blow till "I am assured
of your submission" (Stanley) "that I may not confound the innocent with the guilty,
the dupes with the deceivers." What kind of Sk preacher he was he had shown long
before ; what kind of an apostle he was among apostles as to independence, self-
support, and resignation of official rights in earthly matters, he had also shown;
further yet, what kind of a sufferer and martyr he was had been portrayed. Step by
step he had gone on with this faithful unfolding of himself, giving the most unique
spiritual biography in the world of literature, and that too on no preconceived plan.
How many aspects of his character had been sketched! The man as ambassador,
representing the majesty of a glorified King, and labouring to reconcile a world to his
Divine sceptre ; the man as co-worker with all the blessed ministries of earth and
heaven ; the man as philanthropist sharing the poverty of his countrymen in a far-ofif
city ; and now the man as warrior, leading on his hosts to battle against alien spirits;
— what a wide activity, how minute, how full, how varied, how comprehensive I At no
point does this personal narrative draw its interest from self alone. Self is always
subordinate. The biography interweaves with a history that infinitely transcends all
private fortunes and all earthly affairs, and is nothing less than the history of providence
in the development of Christian doctrine coincident with the work of the Holy Ghost
m glorifying the ascended Christ of the Father. " Casting down imaginations." The
reference is to reasonings or disputings of the natural man in the pride of his intellectual
power. Yet they are imaginations, the products of the imaging faculty, the fond
conceits of creative ingenuity. All these were religious beliefs or connected in some
way with them, so that what the apostle said at Athens was true elsewhere : " I per-
ceive that in all things ye are too superstitious." Men who held these beHefs were
earnest supporters of them and were always ready to defend their tenets. No matter
in what province or city he preached the gospel, these disputants appeared. It was
a battle on all occasions, and hence a battle figure, " casting down," or the destruction
of bulwarks. Philosophy, art, manufactures, traile, husbandry, seamanship, military
life, domestic life, statesmanship, were aU intimately associated with these religious
beliefs. Paganism occupied the ground. Or, if Judaism had found lodgment over the
empire at every prominent centre of industry, it was the Judaism that had crucified
Jesus of Nazareth. So then there was battle everywhere. The "wisdom of the
world" and of "the princes of the world," backed by social influence and ciVil
authority, was arrayed against the gospel. In the land of its birth, Christianity had
BOthing to show but a few Galilean fishermen, with a community of poor disciples, and



CH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 247

behind these a malefactor's cross. In the lands to which it came on its mission of grace,
it summoned men to repent of sin, to practise self-denial, to become new creatures, to
abandon idolatries that were in league with lust and cruelty, and, in lieu thereof, accept
a faith which demanded a pure heart and a holy morality. It could only make its way
by ' ' casting down imaginations, " by telling men that they were deluded by sophistries,
and further by destroying " every high thing" that exalted itself against the know-
ledge of God communicated to man by the revelation of the gospel. No compromise
could be allowed ; every thought was to be brought into " captivity " to the " obedience
of Christ." What captivity meant they fully understood. It was a military word,
and he uses such terms that they might have clear and vivid ideas of Christianity
as a war, and nothing less than an exterminating wai', on whatever stood opposed " to
the obedience of Christ." The " weapons " he used were not " carnal." All the world
knew his weapons. He made no disguise of them. Boldly, constantly, in every place,
he procltumed Christ, the Power of God and the Wisdom of God, nor had a mob
occurred, nor had perils gathered about him, nor had Roman officers interfered for his
protection, except on the single issue of preaching Christ crucified. No heathen would
charge hbn with using carnal weapons. Philosophers of Athens, inhabitants of
Lycaonia, Demetrius and his worktuen at Ephesus, would make no such accusation
against his ministry. Only the Judaizers had done this thing. Let them understand
'hat these weapons were " mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds."
Neither a false Judaism nor a colossal idolatry could offer any effective resistance to the
gospel. Let these Judaizers know that his weapons were "mighty through God,"
and that in due time he would show " a readiness to revenge all disoberlience." And
let the Corinthian Church look deeper than the " outward appearance." To construe his
manner of "meekness and gentleness" into imbecility and cowardice was not truth,
but falsehood. And whence came this evil way of judging ? Not from themselves,
but from some wrong teacher who professed to have external advantages in favour
of his teaching. Let that conceited man know that, if he is Christ's, so also am L— L.

Vers. 8 — 11. — Continuation of his defence. What he had just claimed wag no mora
than other apostles claimed. If he were to boast in stronger terms of the authority
the Lord had conferred upon him, there would be no risk of personal shame by his
overstating the matter. Power had been given, not for their destruction, but for their
edification. It is his favourite figure once more — edification, building up, and that
power should be used for this object. To terrify them by letters was not his aim ;
edification, not destruction, led him to write. By the admission of his enemies, the
letters from him were " weighty and powerful." On the other hand, his " bodily
presence" was " weak," and his "speech contemptible." This is the only notice we
have in the New Testament of an apostle's personal appearance. Had it occurred in
the case of St. Peter or St. John, we should have been surprised, but it falls in naturally
with the order of events and the play of circumstances connected with St. Paul's
apostleship. His call, position, and career were singular ; the individuality gives a
colouring to the minutest details of his life ; and accordingly, as he was subjected to
an exceptional kind and degree of criticism, even his bodily infirmities came under
inspection and were made matters of public notoriety. By itself, this reference to his
appearance would not attract more than a passing notice. Yet it has a broader meaning,
since it serves to illustrate the fact that nothing about him escaped the closest scrutiny.
Enemies in the Church, enemies out of the Church, officials, centurions, proconsuls,
procurators, find something in the man to study, and their opinions of him come into
the public thought of the day. The plan of Providence, we may infer, was that St.
Paul should be well known, thoroughly well known, and that we should hear from
both sides — friends and f des — all that could be known of him, even to his ' ' presence "
and ' ' speech. " He thought the matter of sufficient importance to recognize it so far as
to say that, what he was in his letters, he would be in his deeds. Beyond this he has
no concern about it. — L.

Vers. 13—18. — Limits and labours. Was the apostle a great letter-writer only ? So
his enemies had declared ; but he would not put himself among those who had no higher
standard of what they ought to be than what they were, nor would he compare himself



248 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x. 1—18

with such men. Instead of measuring themselves by a Divine rule, these personi
thought it enough to measure themselves by themselves or by others ; and this mode
of judgment, originating in self and ending with self, was without understanding. Yet
there was a measure, and he acknowledged it whenever he thought or spolse of himself.
If he referred to his labours, if he enumerated his Baorifices, if he cited his sufferings,
it was not with any human standard in view, but in the sight of God and with respect
solely to the sphere of activity to which G-od had appointed him as an apostle. Had
he come to Corinth ? Corinth had been given him of God as a field of apostolic effort.
" The surveyor's chain " had laid off the territory, and he had traversed Macedonia and
Achaia only because Providence had assigned the ground to him, and the Holy Spirit
had inspired him to undertake the task. " As far as to you ; " so far in the warfare of
the West the campaign had extended, so far had he gone in the great fight of pidling
down strongholds, and in demonstrating that the weapons were not carnal, but mighty
through Ood. If he had reached Corinth as a place within the boundaries of his
province, would he pause there ? Was this the outer line of the vast battle-field ? He
hoped not. There he was only waiting till another territory had been marked out, and
he should hear the si^^nal to arise and possess the land. Was he looking across the sea
of Adria and wondering when he should visit Eome ? And when would that glad
opportunity come ? But one thing was clear to him just then, and this was that, if the
faith of the Corinthians were increased, he would have his own heart enlarged, and be
further endowed and qualified for apostolic labour. One moment, a glance at the
Judaizers and their presumptuous occupancy of fields delegated of God to him (ver, 15),
" not boasting of things without measure, that is, of other men's labours ; " the next
moment, a thought of new work so soon as the Church at Corinth should recover from
its troubles and he should find it safe to leave them. Already his heart was burning to
preach the gospel in the regions beyond Corinth, and " not to glory in another's province
in regard to things ready to our hand." Observe how often this last idea recurs:
ver. 13, "We will not boast of things without our measure ;" ver. 14, "We stretch not
ourselves beyond our measure ; " ver. 15, " Not boasting of things without our measure ; "
ver. 16, " Not to boast in another man's line of things [see Kevised Version, above]
made ready to our hand." Two things here are noteworthy. 1. The apostle is willing
and ready to wage the holy war in new territories. He is not tired of fighting the
Lord's battles. Nor is he afraid of greater and more numerous enemies. Probably his
eye was on Bome. If God will, he shall go further West. His weapons have been
tried and proved. He himself has been tested. Grace has been sufiicient. Cast down,
he has not been destroyed. Dying, he has lived. The promises of God have been Yea
and Amen to his soul, nor could any experience happen that would not bring the
strength and consolation of Christ to his heart. How much he had lived and how
rapidly ! What years had been compressed into each year I Before the dilating eye
of intellect, what vistas bad spread afar in the light that brightened towards the perfect
day I And then the blessed realizations, ability increasing perpetually, and capacity
growing even faster so as to supply fully the expanding spheres of ability, consciousness
of self enlarging as self in Christ, deep opening into deep, wonder springing afresh from
wonder, and, with every victory gained by the weapons of his warfare, a larger assurance
that, if he had been " mighty through God " at Ephesus and Corinth, he should be
mightier still " in the regions beyond." Here is a most useful lesson to teach us what
we are slow to learn, namely, that no natural endowments, no amount of culture, no
inspiration of knowledge, no miracles wrought in his behalf, can set aside the necessity
of Christian experience, a personal work of grace in the soul, a profound sense of that
work as from the Holy Spirit, in the case of one called to the highest oflice of minis-
tration. 2. We see how we are, as Christians, " members one of another." Although
St. Paul was so highly endowed and so remarkably successful in the apostleship, yet he
depends on the Church at Corinth for his enlargement to the work opening before him
in Europe. " We shall be enlarged by you." This was conditioned on their conduct.
If their divisions were healed, their false teachers silenced, their energies set free frona
exhausting strife and concentrated on building up Christ's kingdom, would Corinth and
Achaia be the only gainers ? Nay ; he himself would be liberated from restraints that
clogged his feet. A fresh impulse would be given his apostleship. A new current ot
life would flow from their hearts into his heart, for it was not his working nor any



OH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 249

other apostle's working, but the co-working, the hearty noioa of Church and apostles,
the co-operation of the " diversities of gifts," the oneness of the mystical body of
Christ, by which the world was to be evangelized. The schism that had been threatened
between the Asiatic and European Churches was in a fair way to be arrested. Jewish
and Gentile believers were getting reconciled to the peculiarities of each other ; the
collection for the mother Church at Jerusalem was doing much to effect this most
important unity. Yet this is not before him now. Nor does he allude to the singular
advantages of Corinth as to geographical location and commercial opportunities.
Situated on a narrow strip of land between northern and southern Greece, and con-
nected with two seas by its harbours of Lech^um and Cenchrese, it was a great
emporium of trade for the East and West, and hence offered extraorrtiuary facilities for
the diffusion of Christianity. No doubt St. Paul felt that it was a centre of com-
manding influence. But he was extremely cautious as to using local motives, and in
the present case he made no allusion to them. What occupied his whole thought was
the increase of grace among them as a Christian community, and to this he looked for
a happy furtherance in his contemplated missionary tour. If they were revived and con-
secrated anew to Christ, he knew well that, when obstacles were thrown in his future
pathway, when persecutions even fiercer than those already undergone came upon him,
they would afford him sympathy and assistance while getting foothold in " the regions
beyond." Obviously a prevailing idea in his mind was that Christianity must have a
central home in every great section of country, and thence draw its human supplies
during its conquests of outlying territory. And he longed for the Corinthian brethren
to attain a richer experience of grace, so that they might magnify his office. Instead
of being independent of their fraternal support, the stronger he felt himself the more
he leaned on their sympathies. Heaven never gets so close to a man that earth does not
get closer also. How the blessed Jesus leaned on his friends in the Passion week !
How he needed the chosen among them to watch with him in the garden for one hour I
The weary days of the apostle had not yet come, and his soul was having glorious
visions of apostolic work, but amid it all, the pressure of uncertainty was upon his
hope, and he would gladly hasten away from the present scene of anxiety just as soon
as Providence permitted. We can enter into his solicitudes. We can imagine how
Kirke White felt when he wrote the closing lines of the ' Ohristiad * : —

" O then who visitest the sons of men.
Thou who dost listen when the humble piay.
One little space prolong my mournful day I
One little lapse suspend thy last decree 1 "

And we can realize Dr. Arnold's emotions when he made the last entry in his diary :
" Still there are works which, with God's permission, I would do before the night
cometh ; especially that great work, if I might be permitted to take part in it." So
too we can form some conception of St. Paul's anxiety to widen the field of his minis-
trations. But he could not go alone ; the heart of the Corinthian Church must go
with him; and he must wait till they were sufficiently " increased " in " faith " to enter
on the future enterprises of his universal apostleship. How humble in his greatness 1
Not what St. Paul accomplished, but what God accomplished in him, was his boast and
commendation. This was his strength and glory, and therefore, " He that glorieth, let
him glory in the Lord." — L.

Ver. 4. — Spiritual weapons. The Apostle Paul was naturally of a combative,
soldier-like disposition. Before his conversion this temperament displayed itself in
opposition to the cause of truth, to the Church of Christ. After his conversion his
warfare was directed against the error, sin, and evil that afflicted and cursed mankind.
As a soldier of Christ he fought a good fight and gained an honourable reputation.
In the text we have, upon his own authority, the acknowledgment and explanation of
his victories.

I. The natubk 07 thb weapons Christianity employs and sanotiohs. It is
wident from this and other passages that Paul did not place his main reliance upon
the miraculous and supernatural powers which he possessed, and sometimes wielded.
1. Okmal weapons are disclaimed ; e.g. the appeal to force of arms or of law ; th«



250 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x. 1—18.



appeal to the superstitious fears of men ; the address to interest and selfishness, in the
use of worldly policy and craft. 2. Spiritual weapons are relied upon. The truth of
God, the gospel of Christ, — this was the arm in which inspired apostles were wont to trust.
3. These weapons are mighty. In fact, there are no means of combating error and sin,
of promoting the cause of truth and righteousness, so powerful as those which are
taken from the armoury of the New Testament. They are " mighty through God,"
i.e. their power is of Divine origin, the Holy Spirit accompanying them to the souls
of men.

II. Th£ eppioact op the weapons which Chrtstianitt employs and sanctions.
1. They are mighty to demolish. As in warfare fortresses and cities are taken by a
victorious army, and are then demolished, razed to the ground, so when the religion of
Jesus went forth, conquering and to conquer, it attacked and brought low every
high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God. Thus sin, ignorance,
error, superstition, vice, crime, bigotry, malice, were again and again vanquished by the
victorious energy of the gospel. 2. They are 'mighty to subjugate. Captivity was
the common lot of the conquered foe. And as thoughts are the motive power of life,
the gospel attacked these ; and rebellious, disobedient, indifferent, ungrateful thoughts
were captured, and, by the gentle but mighty force of Divine truth, were brought into
subjection to Christ, whom to obey is liberty, peace, and joy. — T.

Ver. 5. — TOe captivity of the thoughts. Spiritual warfare is represented as leading to
spiritual victory, and this as involving spiritual captivity. As the Eoman general,
having vanquished his foe and taken multitudes of prisoners, reserved his captives to
grace his triumph, so the apostle, commissioned by Christ, regards himself as contending
with all lawless and rebellious forces, and as resolved with Divine help to bring all such
forces into subjection to his great Commander and Lord.

I. The forces which are bbought into captivity. Christianity does not contend
with physical powers, does not aim at the mere regulation of outward and bodily acts.
It strikes at antagonists far more powerful than any which are dealt with by the powers
of this world. Thoughts, i.e. the desires and purposes of the souls of men, — these are
the foes with which the spiritual religion of the Lord Jesus contends. Disobedient
thoughts, selfish thoughts, worldly thoughts, murmuring thoughts, — these it is that the
religion of the Lord Jesus assails. These are the source and spring of all the outward
evils that afflict and curse mankind. If these can be mastered, society may be
regenerated and the world may be saved.

II. The subjection and submission into which these forces are to be brought.

1. It is to the obedience of Christ, the rightful Lord of thoughts and of hearts, that
the spiritual forces of humanity are to be rendered subject. A grand future is in this
view opened up before humanity. The Son of man is King of man ; and he will then
ascend Ms royal throne when men's hearts bow loyally before Mm, acknowledge his
uniqie spiritual authority, and offer to him their grateful and cheerful allegiance.

2. ft is a willing captivity into which human thoughts will be led. In this it is utterly
unlike the subjection from which the metaphor is taken. Not brute force, but the
convincing authority of reason, the sweet constraint of love, the admired majesty of
moral excellence, secure the submission of man's nature to the control of the Divine
Lord. 3. It is a lasting captivity, not temporary and brief. Whom Christ governs he
governs for evermore. Time and earth cannot limit his empire. His kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom. — T,

Ver. 8. — Apostolic authority. Paul had to contend with difficulties, not only from
without, but also from within, the Churches. There were rivals to his authority and
claims. It happened that sometimes these rivals met with a certain measure of success.
And this drove the apostle into the assertion of his rightful position and demands.

I. The source or apostolic power and authority. 1. It was not in himself, in
any personal gifts and qualifications, that this power lay. Paul was indeed by nature
a highly gifted man ; but he laid no stress upon his abilities. He was by education a
man of learning and culture ; but he did not rely upon his knowledge for his influence.
2. It was not in any human commission that Paul confided. A king commissions an
ambassador ; a university confers a degree and right to teach ; a Church licensee and



OH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 261

authorizes a ministry. But the apostles were forward to declare that they had not
received their commission from man. 3. It was by the Lord Jesus himself that the
apostles were empowered and appointed to fulfil their high office. If Paul waS the latest
thug to be commissioned, none the less did he receive his authorization from the Divine
Lord himself.

II. The scope and purpose of apostolic power and authority. 1. As negatively
described, it was not for casting down, for destru(!tion. The power of the warrior is
too often employed for this end. And even religious leaders and rulers — popes,
defenders of the faith, and others— have too often bent their energies rather to destroy
than to save. The apostle l^d occasion sometimes to threaten that he would put forth
his power to silence iiiid crush the rebellious. But he had no delight in "casting
down," neither did he regard this as the ultimate end of his ministry. 2. As positively
described, it was for edification. We must understand by this the rearing of the
structure of Christian doctrine, and at the same time the building up of Church life.
And as doctrine is intended to produce results in character, and as every true Church is
built up of renewed natures and holy lives, obviously edification is a moral and personal
process.

Application. Apostolic power and authority give an assured basis for the faith of
a Christian believer and for the teaching of a Christian minister. For the foundation
is laid, not by human ignorance, but by Divine wisdom. — T.

Ver. 10. — Letters, weighty and strong. In this passage St. Paul records the impression
which, according to his adversaries, was made by his personal presence and by his
epistolary writings. Although the reference is to the feeling at Corinth as a result of
Ms First Epistle to the Church in that city, the language applies to the apostle generally
as a minister discharging his ministry by the pen. There was nothing commanding in
Paul's appearance, and there were in his delivery some drawbacks to the impressiveness
of his speech ; but with regard to his letters, there was no room for difference of opinion.
They were masterpieces, and their effectiveness was undeniable. In what doea this
effectiveness consist ?

I. St. Paul's Epistles abound nsr vigobous reasoning. It is sufiBoient to refer to
tke First Epistle to the Corinthians in order to establish this assertion. On a doctrinal
question such as the resurrection of the dead, on a practical question such as that
connected with the sacrificial feasts, he proved himself a master of argument. As
Christianity is a religion appealing to the intelligence, it has been wisely ordered that in
its authoritative documents there should be muoh reasoning which commends itself to
the wisest understanding and the soundest judgment.

IL St. Paul's Epistles abound in manifestations or the finest feelino. Far
from sentimental, the apostle was yet a man of tender affections, of emotional suscepti-
bilities. Take, for example, the panegyric of charity in his First Epistle to these
Corinthians. Take the personal references to his friends and feUow-labourers, to be
found in most of his letters. Many readers or hearers, who were not capable of appre-
ciating his argumentative power, would feel deeply the appeals to their best and purest
sentiments. If we feel thus now, at this distance of time, and when imagination is
necessary in order to throw ourselves into the circumstances in which these letters were
written and read, how much more must this have been the^case when all was fresh
and recent !

III. Paul's Epistles have proved their power by the practical results they
HAVE PRODUCED. They were not written to be approved and admired, but to convince,
to persuade, to induce to prompt and cheerful action in compliance with their counsels.
And this result followed these documents when first perused. And every age attests
their moral authority, and proves that their weight and power are still undiminished. — ^T.

Ver. 17. — Olorying in the Lord. Boasting is universally denounced as a petty and
a vulgar fault. Yet it is a fault not uncommon. It imposes upon the unthinking and
the unwary, but it awakens the suspicion and the distrust of those who have a larger
experience of life. But in the region of spiritual service, boastfulness is a serious
offence, not only against society, but against God himself. The apostle protests against
it, and in this verse exhibits the true remedy.



252 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. x 1—18.

I. Men ABE TEMPTED TO OLOBT IN THEMSELVES. What men have they are in danger
of over-estimating, and thus taking credit to themselves when no credit is due. Some
glory in natural endowments, strength of body, or mental ability. Some in the accidenti
of birth or of fortune. Some in their position in society, etc.

II. From this temptation to boastpulness spiritual laboubebs abb not vree.
Some religious teachers, preachers, writers, oiBcials, pride themselves upon their " gifts,"
and the esttem in which they are held ; boast of their credentials, their learning, their
acceptance. If the persons to whom the apostle referred were the first, they were
certainly not the last, of this order of men.

III. The only admissible globtino is gloktino in the Lord. 1. Christians may
glory in the Divine grace to which they owe their spiritual position. This they do
when they ask — What have we that we did not receive ? Who hath made us to differ?
2. Christian ministers may glory in opportunity of service and in the Divine bestowal
of ability for its fulfilment. The apostle felt that the Head of the Church had put
honour upon him in commissioning him as the messenger of life to the Gentiles, and in
qualifying him for a mission so sacred and glorious. Every bishop, pastor, and evangelist
may well acknowledge the condescension of the Eternal in counting him faithful and
putting him into the ministry. 3. All true labourers may glory in their success by
attributing it to the Divine Author. Paul had abundant reason of this kind for glorying.
He needed no letters of commendation ; his own converts were epistles witnessing to his
faithfulness and zeal, known and read of all men. Joy and thanksgiving, glorying and
congratulation, may justly follow when Heaven has smiled upon the labourer's toil, and
has suffered him not only to sow, but also to reap. — T.

Ver. 18. — Commendation, human and Divine. A good man's difficulties do not
always come from avowed adversaries. It sometimes happens that those who are
professedly upon his side trouble and harass him. So the Apostle Paul found it, for he
had to complain of perils among false brethren, and he frequently had to contend with
the vmdermining influence of those who disparaged his ability and authority, and asserted
and praised themselves.

I. The vakitv of bble-commendation on the pabt op Christian labourers.
1. Such a habit is a flaw in personal character. True dignity and self-respect dictate
modesty in estimating one's self and reticence in speaking of one's self. 2. It has an
injurious effect upon the ministry. They who commend themselves in words are not
likely to commend themselves in deeds. The estimation in which others hold them is
probably in inverse ratio to that in which they hold themselves. 3. It is displeasing
to the Lord and Judge of all, who regards the lowly and meek and raises them up in
due time.

II. The LoBD himself commends and will commend his FAITHFrn. BEBTAim.

He is not unjust ; he is not ungenerous ; he is not unmmdful.

"AH works are good, and each is best

As most it pleases thee ;
Each worker pleases when the rest

He serves in charity ;
And neither man nor work unblest

Wilt thou permit to be."

1. Thli commendation is bestowed here and now. In the success of the labourer ii
evidence of the approbation of the Master. 2. Hereafter shall be a public and pronounced
commendation. In the day of account those who have done their Lord's will shall be
accepted. " Then shall every man have praise of God."

III. It is NOT THE BELF-COMMBNDBD, BUT THE COMMENDED OP THE LoBD, WHO
ENDURE THE TEST AND COME OUT FROM IT APPBOVED. Work is pUt tO the prOof ; and

not only the work, but the workman, is thus submitted to a decisive trial. If it be
asked — Who stand the test, and are brought out with honour and acceptance ? the
answer is — Not the boastful, the self-confident, those who are loud in their own praise ;
hut those who, by patient continuance in well-doing, by diligent devotion to the service
of the Lord, secure his commendation. Such shall abide in the judgment, and shall
receive the recompense of reward. — T.



rat X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANa 253



Vor. 1. — " 2%e meehneas and gentleness of Christ." How different was Christ to (1)
the anticipations of the chosen people ! (2) the heathen conceptions of deity !

I. The meekness of Christ. Illustrated in : 1. Eis lowly birth. The manger pre-
figured the whole life. 2. Bis humble station. Highest in heaven, lowliest on earth.
3. Sis obedience to Joseph and Mary. Ohedience was new to him. He was the Buler,
and yet he submitted to be ruled. 4. Eis manual toil. The Jews looked for a
conqueror and saw a carpenter. 5. Eis endurance of scorn and insult. Scorn and
insult were much more to him than they ever can be to us. Remember he was the
adored of heaven ! 6. Eis earthly poverty. He possessed all things, and yet had
nothing — not even a place where to lay his head. 7. Eis bearing before the Sanhedrim,
Pilate, Eerod, the soldiers, etc. How little and mean they must have seemed to him !
and yet he did not crush them. 8. Eis suhmissim, on the cross. The infinitude of
meekness 1 Nothing could transcend this. This was the culmination of a meekness
which ahone throughout the marvellous earthly life.

*• Ride on, ride on in majesty ;
In lowly pomp ride on to die ;
Bow ttiy meek head to mortal pain ;
Then take, O Christ, thy power and leign."

9. EtB hurUl. He went, not only to death, but to the grave. He lay in a borrowed

sepulchre.

II. The gentleness op Christ. Exhibited in : 1. Eis treatment of children. How
immortal have those words become ! how typical they are of the Christ-heart, " Suffer
the little children, and forbid them not, to come unto me " (Matt. xix. 14) ! 2. Eis
conduct towards the poor, the sick, the bereaved, the penitent. What compassion and
tenderness I " A bruised reed shall he not break " (Isa. xlii. 3). 3. Eis words. " He
shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street" (Isa. xlii. 2).
Well might they marvel at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. 4.
Eis forbearance towards his disciples. Pew things illustrate his gentleness more
strikingly than this. How much had he to bear from those nearest to him ! How
gentle he was to the impulsive, blundering, often almost insolent, Peter ! How gentle
even to Judas ! 5. Eis dealing with sinners. Except to the hopelessly hardened, upon
whom gentleness would have been thrown away, and to whom it would have been an
evil rather than a good. His general attitude towards the sinful is expressed by those
memorable words, " Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me ; for I am meek and
lowly in heart : and ye shall find rest unto your souls " (Matt. xi. 29). 6. Eis care of
his mother. History has no more touching incident than that at the cross, " Woman,
behold thy son ! " (John xix. 26).

III. TnouaH so meek and gentle, Christ was pull op power and majesty. No
student of his life can question this ; enemies and friends alike confess it. Force and
noise are not synonymous. Silent forces are often mighty. To be meek is not to be
weak. Simplicity, tenderness, humility, are marks of the truly great. These flowers
grow upon the top of the mountain. A man who is ever anxious to "assert himself"
usually shows how very little he has to assert.

IV. Those who bear Christ's name should partake of Christ's nature. It is
for us to be meek and lowly followers of the meek and lowly Jesus. When the apostle
would be most forceful to the Corinthians, he claimed for himself these attributes of his
Master. We are strongest when we are most like Christ. We shall be better, livt
better, worship better, work better, if we possess the " meeknesi and gentleness of
Christ."— H.

Ver. 4.—" Our weapons." I. They abb for use in the greatest of all conflicts.
1. Not a physical conSict. These are poor, of comparative unimportance, often very
contemptible, can effect little. 2. Not for the destruction of men. What labour,
thought, skill, genius, are expended by man for man's destruction 1 3. Not a mere
mental conflict. Intellectual battles are not chief. 4. A spiritual conflict. 5. A
conflict in which the honour and glory of the Eternal are contended for. 6. A[conflict
in which man's highest interests are sought. 7. A conflict against evil in every form.

IL Thsy abb HEBE DESCRIBED. 1. Negatively. They are not carnaL (1) They are



254 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. [or. x. 1— la

not physicaL Physical weapons have often been used in the cause of religion, buj
always by mistake. Peter's blunder in cutting off the ear of Malchus has had many
repetitions. (2) They are not carnal, for they are not of man. The apostle did not
carry on his conflict by using (a) cunning and trickery in order to secure converts.
Some unwisely think that, if converts be obtained, it is no matter how. But Paul
desired to " strive lawfully " (2 Tim. ii. 5). (5) Nor did he rely upon human eloquence.
He came not with " wisdom of words " (1 Cor. i. 17). (c) Nor upon human reason.
Philosophical subtleties he discarded. He had a revelation, and, whilst willing to
demonstrate to human intelligence that this was a Divine revelation, he then employed
it, and hoped for victory only as the Divine Spirit blessed his efforts. The apostle
preached the gospel by his words, by his deeds, by his spirit, by his life ; and using these
weapons he relied pre-eminently upon that supreme weapon, Divine power, to secure
the victory. 2. Positively. Carnal weapons seem strong. 'They impress men. Paul's
weapons, which are ours, are apt to excite ridicule on the part of fleshly men, who judge
by outward appearance. But the apostle contends that these weapons are mighty.
They have done what all others have failed to do. (1) They cast down strongholds.
By these Satan is hurled from his seats, from his fastnesses in the hearts of men. (2)
They triumph over sceptical human philosophies and false religions (ver. 5). This is
the conflict between truth and error. Truth has won. Truth vnll win. Though these
are high things exalted against the knowledge of God (ver. 5), they find something
higher and mightier in the gospel and in the accompanying power of God. They are
but Dagons ; before the ark they must fall. (3) They make captive human thought
(ver. 5). Illustrated in a true conversion. Thought is then dominated by Christ — no
more a boastful foe, but a servant, a captive. The wise man becomes a fool that he
may be truly wise (1 Cor. iii. 18). Pride, boastful and arrogant in the realm of human
thought, is smitten — smitten to the death. (4) They are mighty before God. Through
God, but also before God, i.e. in his judgment. They come from his armoury. They
are specially fashioned by him for this strife.

HI. We should eely only upon these weapons in the gbbat conflict. Our
strength is here. There are many temptations to use others. The devil loves to
furnish us with weapons wherewith to attack his kingdom 1 With what strange
weapons has the Church fought ! No wonder the strife has so often gone against her.
With what weapons are we fighting ?

IV. We should seek skill in thbib dbb. 'Tis not enough to have good
weapons, we must know how to employ them. The best weapons are the worst in
unwise hands. We must enter the military school of Christ. — H. '

Ver. 7. — Judging from appearances. I. A very easy way of judging. A sound
judgment often involves hard labour. Many jump to conclusions because the jump is
so easy and so soon over. But a judgment lightly got may generally be lightly valued.
Few things are more difficult than terming accurate judgments. The importance of
correct judgment is, however, so all-important that we should spare no pains to secure it.

II. A VEBY COMMON WAY OP JUDGING. Surfacc-judgments are popular. Many people
are fatally prejudiced by appearance, whether good or bad ; of the former they will hear
no blame, of the latter no praise. We need remember this when we estimate human
judgments generally.

HI. A VERY PERILOUS WAT OF JUDOiNO. It leads to constant errors and evils. Note
one or two. 1. Gentleness is mistaken for weakness. This was the case with the
apostle. That which was kindest and best in him was esteemed a fault. 2. The physical
and external are over-estimated. The voice, manner, appearance, language of a preacher
are unduly regarded. The " outward appearance " often goes for much more than the
inward grace and power. 3. The flashy and dazzling are more esteemed than the solid
and weighty. Sensational religion triumphs in the realm of shallow judgment. 4. 2%e
religious life suffers in comparison with the worldly. The deep, quiet, permanent joys
of the former are unconsidered. The pleasures of the latter are thought to be as great
at they teem: a fatal blimder. 5. Qod^s dealings with Os are misunderstood. Ha is
often kindest when he seems most unkind. God's " No" is often a far greater good than
God'i " Yes " could be ; but a hasty superficial judgment does not perceive this. We
often complain most when we have most cause to bless. 6. The more striking form* <^



CH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 25a

OhrisUan worship and work eclipse other and more important. The shallow judgmenti
of Corinth were all for speaking with tongues. " Prophecy " was little accounted of,
" Giving money " is often attractive when true charity is not. The grand choral service
is more popular than quiet consistent living. To be a " great preacher " is the object of
ambition rather than to be a real teacher of men. 7. Christ was rejected and is to-day
Jyy those who judge according to the outward appearance. He is "a root out of a dry
ground " to such ; they have no spiritual insight. The Gospels which speak of him are
full of inconsistencies to those who will not examine them. Tea, the Bible itself, which
is one revelation of him, must be rejected by these weak surface-judges. But what
said he? "Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment"
(John viL 24).— H.

Vers. 12 — 18. — Boasting, vn-ong and right. I. Weono boastino. 1. That we
excel some others. We are very apt, like some at Corinth, to compare ourselves with
certain around us. This is measuring by a false standard, and measuring by a false
standard is likely to lead to enormously erroneous results. The question is not whether
we excel others, but whether we have attained to the measure for which God created
and endowed us. The true measuring-rod is not found in the stature, physical, mental,
or moral, of our fellows ; the true measuring-rod is held in the hands of the Almighty.
If a man were to judge of himself by comparing himself with a mouse or a molehill, we
should say he was a fool ; and the apostle says, " They themselves, measuring themselves
by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are without understanding "
(ver. 12). It has been said, " The one-eyed is easily king among the blind." 2. That we
possess what we are destitute of, and that we have done what we have not done. Wrong
boasting is the twin brother of downright lying. The false teachers at Corinth boasted
of gifts which they did not possess, and took to themselves the credit of other men's
labours. It is astonishing what powers of appropriation the boastful spirit possesses.
When a man once gets addicted to vain-glory it is useless to attempt to predict to what
excesses he will be led. He clears the barriers of truth as though they were straws.
What he is, is what he can persuade people to think him ; what he has done is what
he can by any means induce them to credit. The braggart knows no restraint. His
parish is the world — the worlds of fact and fiction rolled into one, and he is as much at
home in the one as in the other. His domain has only one boundary — the credulity of
his listeners. 3. That the praise of our good actions is to he ascribed to us. This strikes
at the root of wrong boasting. A boasting which robs God must be of the devil. The
man who knows himself knows that there is no good thing in him. If he finds anything
good he immediately concludes that it did not spring from himself, and he looks about
for the originator and owner. It is only the very bad who think themselves very good.
If we are disposed to take the praise of our good actions to ourselves it is strong evidence
that these actions were not really good. " Grood " actions cannot be done by those who
are so utterly out of true relation to God.

n. Eight boastiko. This is boasting or glorying in the Lord (ver. 17). We may
boast of God, and the more boastful we are in this direction the better. There will be
no danger of running to excess ; after we have boasted to our utmost we shall have
fallen far short of the truth. Alas ! few things are more uncommon than this boasting
in God. Fallen human nature finds it easier and more reasonable to boast of the
mud-puddle than of the crystal ocean — of the dim rushlight than of the glorious sun.
1. We may well boast of the Divine perfections. Here we shall find an inexhaustible
subject. The glories of our God will exhaust our powers of glorying. Whilst carnal
men applaud their little gods, the saints may well extol Jehovah. " Who is a God like
unto our God ? " we may proudly cry. Pride becomes one of the chiefest virtues when it
is centred in God. Christians are not half boastful enough in the right direction, and twice
too boastful in the wrong. Shame upon us that we boast so little of our God 1 2. We
may well boost of the great redemptive work of Ood. So loud should be our boasting
as to make all men hear it. Here the perfection of God finds highest and most beautifiU
expression. Here each Person in the adorable Trinity works a matchless work of grace
and power. Upon ub especially, since we are the subjects of redemption, rests the
burden of boasting respecting it. This is our peculiar province of glorying. Of all
sreatuiM in the universe we are bound to this service. If we were silent, surely the



256 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOBLNTHIANS. [oh. x. 1—18



stones would cry out As God has wrought this great thing for us, we must never let
men or God hear the last of it 1 What a subject for boast ! Where is there at^ht that
can for a moment compare with it ? Boast, ye Christians, of redeeming love till all your
powers of boasting fail. 3. We may well boast of God's work in us and through us.
(1) In us. When we joyfully recognize that we are growing in grace we must exult
in the God of all grace. This thing is not of us, but of him. To him must all the
praise be accorded. 'Ilie " old man" within us is the child of our fall and our folly ;
the "new man " is God's special creation. Clearly should we realize this, and concen-
trate all our boasting in him from whom this "unspealtable Gilt" (which is " Christ in
us ") emanates. Humility and abasement in respect of ourselves ; boastfalness in
respect of him who has wrought the marvel in us. (2) Through us. To depreciate
what is accomplished through us is but lying humility. Paul was not guilty of it. It
is professedly abasing ourselves and really abasing God. \\'hen the work accomplished
is undoubted, the only right course is to glory to our utmost in the God who has
accomplished it. We must reserve no praise for ourselves, since we have deserved none ;
all the praise must he his. We need care, however, when glorying in God for what he
has accomplished through us, lest, whilst ostensibly praising him, we should be covertly
praising ourselves. There is a mouth of hell which lies near the gate of heaven. We
must guard against feeding conceit by supposing that we are of ourselves instruments
so fit that God could not have so well performed the work through others ; or that
through personal merit we are favourites uf God, and that therefore he has specially
wrought his will throu<;h us ; or that, having been so honoured, we may now hold our
heads high. Whilst extolling God we must abase ourselves ; whilst boasting in him
we must refiise to glory in the least in the unworthy instrument. That he has so
greatly distinguished what was so greatly unworthy should but deepen and intensify
our humility. — H.

Ver. 4. — Hcty weapons. One style of weapon for one kind of conflict, another for
another. For the common battle-field, cannon and rifle with their horrid din, the
bayonet, and the sword. For contests of opinion, weapons of argument and intellectual
precision — writings, lectures, and debates. For successes in the sphere of spiritual
thought and life, spiritual weapons mighty through God. St. Paul was much addicted
to the use of miliiavy metaphors. To him a zealous missionary was a good soldier of
Christ ; a well-equipped and disciplined Christian was a man armed in the panoply of
God. His own course of service in combatting errors and publishing the truth of the
gospel was as the march of a warrior, nay, of a victor, triumphing in every place. So
he regarded both the ordering of things within the Church and the aggression of the
Churdi on the world around as parts of his military duty, in which he wiis bound to
war, but not according to the flesh. There is still need to make war. On every side
are obstinate hindrances to the gospel of grace, and to the health and peace of the
Church. The most formidable of these are in the region of thought and feeling ; strong-
holds of prejudice and self-righteousness, and entrenchments of unbelief. And those
who propagate the gospel, and guard the purity and peace of the Church, must surmount
those obstacles, or pull down those strongholds, so as to lead away the convictions of the
delivered ones as happy captives to the obedience of Christ.

I. Not by carnal weapons or any form of physical coaotion. Though St. Peter
drew his sword to defend his heavenly Master, he was bidden at once restore it to its
sheath. When Pontius Pilate interrogated our Lord about his being King of the Jews,
he received for answer, " My kingdom is not of this world : if my kingdom were of this
world, then would my servants fight." Extremists have inferred from this language
that the followers of Christ may not, in any circumstances, wield a weapon of war; but
this is mere folly. The subjects of the kingdom of Christ are also for the time subjects of
an earthly kingdom also, or citizens in an earthly community, and have the same natural
and civil rights as other men, and the same warrant and obligation to defend them. They
may not delight in war ; but even to that dire extremity they may proceed if there be
no other way to keep order and secure justice and liberty. To do otherwise would be
tamely to surrender the earth to the most unscrupulous and aggressive of its inhaUtants.
But weapons of worldly warfare do not advance that spiritual power which is the
hig^test of all ; nor is it i lermitted to use them for direct furtherance of Christ's kingdom



OH,



X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 267



of the truth. This, of course, condennnB all forms of persecution ; and when we say, " all
forms," we mean, not merely impilsonment, pillage, and death, but the imposition of
civil disabilities, or social and educational penalties, or any abridgment of political
rights. On all such coercive measures the gospel frowns. Equally inadmissible is the
use of misrepresentation. Those " pious frauds " which fiave been practised and
propagated for the supposed glory of God have been very carnal weapons. So are
all the misleading phrases and cajoleries by which it is still attempted to draw men
into adherence to some form of religion without conviction of the understanding or
real allegiance of the heart.

II. But by weapons that abb after the mind of Christ. See the catalogue of
such weapons as they had been used by St. Paul at Corinth : " In pureness, in know-
ledge," etc. (ch. vi. 6, 7). Come honour or dishonour in this world, good report or
evil, with such weapons must all the soldiers of Christ be content in the warfare to
which they are called. The strongholds they assail may make a formidable resistance,
but nothing is gained by changing the spiritual weapons for the carnal. They are
mighty in God's sight and in God's strength. Paul knew them to be so. With
them, though he was but one man and a man reproached and afflicted, he had pulled
down many strongholds and won many victories. It is not a simple question of
conversion. The truth has many a struggle in the heart after conversion as well as
before. When Jericho fell, the holy war of Israel was well bfgun ; but there still
remained many holds and fenced cities to be taken. So, when the first opposition is
surmounted, and a sinner yields to the power of the saving truth as it is in Jesus, much
is gained, but not everything. The work of grace has to be pressed further ere every
thought is brought into captivity to the obeilience of Christ. Little worldly stir or
eclat attends the warfare of which we speak, but it awakens in hea\ en and through all
the heavenly kingdom the liveliest interest and the noblest joy. There are shouts and
Te Deums there, when evil is defeated and pulled down in the world, in the Church,
in the breast of the individual man ; when sinners repent ; when rebels submit to God ;
when thoughts that were lifted up in scorn are cast down at the feet of Jesus, and
affections that sin had beguiled and the pride of life enchanted, are fixed on truth, on
duty, and on the things which are above. — F.

Ver. 1. — " jThe meekness and gentleness of Christ." It is important to notice that this
chapter begins a new section of the Epistle. St. Paul has hitherto been addressing the
better, the more spiritual, portion of the Corinthian Church; but now he turns to
the section that impugned his authority, misrepresented his conduct, and spoke evil
things of himself. Olshausen says, " Until now Paul has addressed himself pre-
eminently to the better-intentioned in the Christian Church ; but henceforth he
addresses himself to those who had sought to lower his dignity and weaken his
authority by representing him as weak in personal influence," as well as in bodily
strength and consistency of purpose, "although courageous and fiill of self-com-
mendation in his letters." Dean Plumptre says, " The stinging words which Titus has
reported to him vex his soul. He speaks in the tone of the suppressed indignation
which shows itself in a keen incisive irony. The opening formula is one which he
reserves as emphasizing an exceptionally strong emotion (see Gal. v. 2 ; Bph. iii. 1 ;
Philem. 19)." Conybeare indicates that the party with which St. Paul now deals
was the Christian section of the Judaizing party — a section which, throwing off all
authority, even though it was apostolic, declared that they received Christ alone as
their Head, and that he alone should communicate truth directly to them. There
is some ground for the supposition that "they were headed by an emissary from
Palestine, who had brought letters of commendation from some members of the Church
at Jerusalem, and who boasted of his pure Hebrew descent, and his especial connection
with Christ himself. St. Paul calls him a false apostle, a minister of Satan disguised
as a ipinister of righteousness, and hints that he was actuated by corrupt motives.
He seems to have behaved at Corinth with extreme arrogance, and to have succeeded,
by his overbearing conduct, in impressing his partisans with a conviction of his
importance and of the truth of his pretensions. They contrasted his confident bearing
with the timidity and self-distrust which had been shown by St. Paul. And they even
extolled his personal advantages over those of their first teacher; comparing hia;

n. COBXNTHIANB. ■



258 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. x. 1—18

rhetoric with Paul's inartificial speech, his commanrling appearance with the insig-
nificance of Paul's 'bodily presence.'" Conylieare gives a trunslation of vers. 1 and 2,
vfhich effectively expresses the spirit in which the apostle began his pleading with this
malicious party. " Now I, Paul, myself exhort you by the meekness and gentleness
of Christ — (I, who am mean, forsooth, and lowly in outward presence, while I am
among you, yet treat you boldly when I am absint) — I beseech you (I say), that you
will not force me to show, when I am present, the bold confidence in my power,
wherewith I reckon to deal with some who reckon me by the standard of the flesh."
Archdeacon Farrar says, " There is (in these closing chapters) none of the tender
effusiveness and earnest praise which we have been hearing, but a tone of suppressed
indignation, in which tenderness, struggling with bitter irony, in some places renders
the language laboured and obscure, like the words of one who with difficulty restrains
himself from snying all that his emotion might suggest. Yet it is deeply interesting
to observe that the ' meekness and gentleness of Christ ' reigns throughout all this
irony, and he utters no word of malediction like those of the psalmists." By the term
"meekiiess" we are to understand the habit of putting self aside, which was so
characteristic of Moses, and the supreme grace of the Lord Jesus. By the term
"gentleness" is not meant "softness of manner," but "fairness," " considerateness
of the feelings of others." It indicates the habit of mind that is engendered by the
practice of regarding the rights of others as well as our own. Meekness and gentleness
belong to those passive graces which it was a great part of our Lord's mission to
exemplify, to set in prominent place, and to commend. Bushnell speaks of the
sublime efficacy of those virtues which belong to the receiving, suffering, patient side
of character. They are such as meekness, gentleness, forbearance, forgiveness, the
endurance of wrong without anger and resentment, contentment, quietness, peace, and
unambitious love. These all belong to the more passive side of chnraoter, and are
included, or may be, in the general and comprehensive term, "patience." '■ ± hese are never
barren virtues, as some are apt to imagine, but are often the most efficient and most
operative powers that a true Christian wields; inasmuch as they carry just that kind
of influence which other men are least apt and least able to resist." Considering
St. Paul's naturally sensitive and impulsive temperament, it must have cost him much
effort and prayer so to restrain himself that he could speak, even to such active
enemies, witii the " meekness and gentleness of Christ."

I. The kekknbss op Chbist in St. Paul. The word spems unsuitable for him
unless we give it the proper meaning, which is — not self-assertive, willing to bear
quietly, more anxious for others than for self. St. Paul was not even anxious, first
of all, for his own imperilled reputation. The honour of Christ was involved in his
self-vindication, and for Christ's sake he undertook it.

II. Thb oektleness of Chbist in St. Paul. Save to hardened scribes and
Pharisees, our Lord ever spoke sottly and persuasively, or, at most, reproachfully. He,
in his considerateness for others, would not break the bruised reed, or quench the
smoking flax. And nothing is more striking in the Apostle Paul than the gentlemanly
delicacy with which he considers the feelings of others. His hand trembles when it
holds the rod. And the words of reproof and reproach break forth from a grieved and
troubled heart. F. W. Robertson says, " He vindicated his authority because he had
been meek, as Christ was meek ; for not by menace, nor by force, did he conquer, but
by the might of gentleness and the power of love. On that foundation St. Paul built ;
it was the example of Christ which he imitated in his moments of trial, when he
was reproved and censured. Thus it happened that one of the apostle's 'mightiest
weapons' was the meekness and lowliness of heart which he drew from the life of
Christ. So it ever is ; humility, after all, is the best defence. It disarms and conquers
by the majesty of submission. To be humble and loving — that is true life." — B. T.

Ver. 3. — In the fiesh, but not of it. " For though we walk in the flesh, we do not
war after the flesh. This expression recalls the corresponding words of our Lord, with
which we may assume that St. Paul was familiar. Addressing his disciples during
those closing hours of communion with them in the " upper room," Jesus had said,
" If ye were of the world, the world would love his own : but because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." And,



CH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 259

In Us sablime high-priestly prayer, JesuB spoke thus : " They are not of the world,
even as I am not of the world. I pray not that thou shouldest take them out of the
world, but that thou shouldest keep them from the evil." The thought expressed
in the passage now before us seems to have been a cherished one with the apostle. He
enlarges upon it in writing to the Romans (viii. 4 — 9). He spealis of " us, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." He explains that "to be carnally
minded is death ; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace." And he firmly
declares, " So then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. But ye are not in the
flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you." By "living
in the flesh " we are to understand simply our possessing this fleshly, bodily nature,
with its frailties, limitations, and infirmities. By " living, or warring, after the flesh,"
we are to understand neglecting the higher dictates of the higher spiritual nature, and
living as though the desires of the body were the only ones that needed satislyiug.
But the precise thouo;ht of the apostle here may be that he will not be moved against
the evil party at Corinth by those natural feelings of indignation which their conduct
towards him had aroused, but will reprove and exhort only upon the great Chiistian
principles, and only in the Christly spirit. Self shall not rule even his warfare with
such unreasonable I'oes. Christ shall rule.

I. The Christian possibilities of cue fleshly condition. " We walk in the
flesh." God is pleased to set us in this human body, to give us this vehicle of com-
munication with other men and with the surrounding world ; and it is possible for us
to win this body for Christ, to possess and rule it so that all its powers shall be used,
and all its relations sustained, only in Christly service. In fact, the work of human
life may be spoken of as this — winning our bodies and our life-spheres for Christ.
Our bodies, our fleshly natures, include (1) natural faculties, such as eating and
drinking; (2) passions, affecting the relationship of the sexes; (3) mental emotions;
and (4) powers of acquiring knowledge. It is possible to dominate the whole
machinery of the body with the sanctified and Christly will.

II. The limitations of otm fleshly condition. It is not a merely dead machine
that we have to move by the force of the regenerate life. Nor is it a machine in full
efficiency and repair. If the figure may be used, the body is a machine of too liniited
capacity for the work which the renewed soul wants done ; and even taking it for what
it is, it is sadly out of repair, rusteil and worn, so that we have continually to complain
that "we cannot do the things that we would." Illustrate in St. Paul's case. The
body would have so affected him, if he had yielded to it, that he could not have been
noble towards his traduoers at Corinth. The body would have urged a passionate reply.
So we find the body such a drag upon the high and holy aims, ]iurposes, and endeavours
of the soul, that we are often saying, " wretched man that I am I who shall deliver
me from the body of this death ?"

III. The Christian mastery of fleshly conditions. This is precisely the
discipline of life. Christ wins our soul. Christ regenerates our will. Christ assures
us of his own spiritual presence as our inspiration and strength; and then seems to
say, " Go forth, win your flesh, your mind, your body, your associations, for me, bo
I hat henceforth no fieshly ends are sought, and no carnal, self-seeking tone rests ou
any of your doings and relations." It is inspiring to find how fully St. Paul could
enter into Christ's thought for him, but it is comforting to observe how very near
he was to failure in his endeavour to gain the mastery over self, again and a!>;ain.
Through much tribulation and conflict only can any one of us gain the mastery of the
spirit over the flesh. — R. T.

Ver. 6. — Captivity of thoughts for Christ. Probably the apostle makes special
reference to the confidence of Christians at Corinth in their learning and philosophizing ;
" to the efforts of human reason to deal with things beyond it, the best corrective of
which is, and always will be, the simple proclamation of God's message to men." But
our thoughts are the springs of action, as well as the means of acquiring knowledge ; su
they may be treated in a comprehensive way.

1. The importance of our thoughts. "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he."
Note: 1. The defiling! power of cherished evil thought. 2. The inspiring and ennobling
power of cherished good thought. 3. The relation of thought to (1) conduct, (2) culture,



26C THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [ch. x. 1—18,

(3) associations. Right thoughts make openness to God, give graciousness to our
conversation, enable us to be considerate of and helpf'jl to others. As we must keep
the fountain pure, if the siream is to run sweet and clear, we must recognize the supreme
jnportance of taking heed to our thoughts.

II. OuE EBSPONSIBILITT FOB OTJB THOUGHTS. On this poiut a Sentiment prevails
ffhich greatly needs correction. It is assumed that we cannot help thou<;lits coming
up before us, and that they may be the suggestions of our soul's spiritual en. uiy, and so
we cannot he held responsihle for them. This is one of those half-truths thsit ai'e often-
times more mischievous than downright error. We are not responsible for the mere
passing of thoughts, as in a panorama, before our mental vision ; but we are resp'insibie
for what we select of them for consideration ; we are responsible for what we cherish.
We are further responsible for the materials of our thought, and for the oircumstancia
in which we place ourselves, so far as they may suggest thought. Therefore we have
the counsel so earnestly given us, "Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are
the issues of liie."

III. The sboeet of controlling oue thooghts. That secret is made up of parts.
It includes: 1. The full surrender of our will to Christ, so that he may rule all our
choices and preferences, even the very choices of our thoughts. 2. The cherished
consciousness of Christ's living presence with us gives tone and harmony with him, to
all our preferences. 3. The culture of mind, disposition, and habits, which invc.lves the
resolute putting away from us of all associations and suggestions of evil. 4. The freeness
of access to God in prayer for strength whenever temptation seems to have an over-
coming power. 5. The occupying of heart, thought, and life so fully with the things
of Christ that there can be no room for evil. There is no more practical way of mastering
doubting, sensual, corrupt thought than by turning at once to good reading or engaging
at once in works of charity. While we pray to God to " cleanse the thoughts of our
hearts by the inspiration of his Holy Spirit," we must also remember that the apostle
teaches us to make personal efforts of watchfulness and good endeavour, and so "bring
into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ." In every age sincere hearts
have prayed the psalmist's prayer : "Search me, God, and know my heart: try me,
and know my thoujihts : and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the
way everlasting." — E. T.

Ver. 7. — Mistaken judgment hy appearances. " Do ye look on things after the outward
appearance?" In the mind of the apostle was, no doubt, the evident disposition of
the community at Corinth to " attach undue weight to the outward accidents of those
who claimed their allegiance rather than to that which was of the essence of all true
apostolic ministry." Bold and forward men, who make great boasting and pretension,
whose appearance and manners are taking, often do incomnarahle mischief in Christian
Churches. So easily are people carried away with the " outward appearance." The
Divine teaching on this subject is given in connection with Samuel's visit to the house
of Jesse, for the selection and anointing of Jehovah's new king. Samuel looked on the
stately figure of Bliab, Jesse's firstborn, and said to himself, " Surely the Lord's
anointed is before him. But the Lord said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance,
or on the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the Lord seeth not as
man seeth ; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the
heart." Plutarch says, " We ought to be candid enough to extol the merits of him who
speaks, but not suffer his address to lead into incaution; to regard his talents with
pleasure, but Investigate strictly the justness of his reasonings ; not to be influenced by
the authority of the speaker, but to scrutinize accurately the grounds of his argument ;
the orator's subject should be considered rather than his eloquence admired."

I. The outwabd appeabanob ought to express the inward fact. Outward and
inward should be in perfect harmony. They should be related as are thought and word.
A man's words should clearly, precisely, worthily, express to men his thought. And so
his outward appearance should exactly correspond with his inward condition. Only
then can a man be " sincere." We speak of a man as being " always the same." He
can onlj be so if he will let what he really is find due expression in his life. The
consciously sincere man makes no show. Without restraint he lets the life speak freely
what message it pleases. The life of the Lord Jesus Christ is so sublimely attractive,



CH. X. 1—18.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 261

because we feel that it was through and through true ; and whatever were its appearancea
they were but manifestations of his life.

II. The outwakd appbakanob la often untrub to the inwaed fact. Of this the
familiar illustration is taken from the usual description of the fruit grown near the
Dead Sea, and called " apples of Sodom." Beautiful to all appearance, but dry and
unpleasant to the taste. Hypocrisy is real " part-acting," representing ourselves to be
other than we are. It is a very subtle form of sin, especially in what are called
" civilized times," when so much depends on " keeping up appearances." Illustrate in
relation to house, dress, society ; and show that it may even concern personal religion.
The assumption and the show of piety are not always faithful transcripts of the heart's
love and devotion. But sometimes the outward appearance is untrue by being heloio
the reality. This seems to have been the case with St. Paul. His insignificant appear-
ance, and his modesty and considerateness of manner, gave little indication of the force
that was in him, or the bold and valiant defence of the truth which he could give upon
occasion. So the outward appearance may be unworthy of the inward, without being
wrongfully so ; unworthy by reason of infirmity, and not of hypocrisy.

III. Thbbbfoke we abb always bound to test the impressions made bt outwaed
APPEABANCBS. " Prove all things ; hold fast that which is good." The testings can
often be done (1) by patient waiting; (2) by observing the whole of a man's conduct ;
(3) by comparing our impressions with those made on others' minds ; (4) by the standards
given us in Holy Scripture ; (5) by cultivating our own sensitiveness to that which is
truly Christ-like. In order to find unworthy men out, and in order to esteem aright
good men, we must go beyond their form, feature, and outward show, and we must
know them. St. Paul will bear thoroughly knowing. — E. T.

Ver. 16. — 77ie gospel/or the regions beyond. " To preach the gospel in the regions
beyond you" (comp. Eom. xv. 19 — 24). The apostle, filled with the true missionary
spirit, was longing to be free from the care of Churches alieady founded, so that he
might be free to go again upon his journeyings, and preach the gospel in Western
Greece, in Borne, and even away in distant Spain. St. Paul was first and chiefiy a
missionary. The genius of the missionary is a Divine restlessness, a constant impulse
forward into new spheres, a passion for finding some one else to whom the gospel
message might he told. The men who settle down in Churches situated in heathen
districts are ministers and pastors and clergymen ; they cannot properly be called
missionaries, since these are men who are always hearing a call from " regions beyond,"
saying, " Come over and help us."

I. MiBsiONABY woBK AS HEKALDINO A MESSAGE. The word for " preaching " properly
means " heralding " — going forth to make a royal proclamation. Explain the work of
the Eastern herald. He would go through the land, and, wherever he could find
people, deliver the king's message. We need a fuller and worthier impression of the
gospel, as the royal proclamation of the King of kings, entrusted to us for delivery to
" all the world," to " every creature."

II. Hebaldinq woek A8 tempobabt. It is done when the message is declared and
delivered. The herald — as a herald — has no more to do there ; he must pass on his
way. There is abundant work left behind for others to do ; but his is over. And
we are told that the gospel heralds will not have gone all over the world when the
kingdom shall come. So we need fear no lack of work for missionaries and heralds.

III. Hbbald's duty to find eegions beyond, a glance at the map of our world
will show what vast masses of mankind have never heard of the true God, the redeem-
ing Son, and the eternal life. We rejoice that, especially in Africa and China, the
Christian Church is showing that it keeps the true missionary idea, and is eve^breaching
out to " regions beyond." — R, T.

Ver. 17. — Man's only true glorying, " But he that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord." The apostle used the simpler and stronger word, " boasteth." Dean Plumptre
complains of the besetting weakness for variation which characterized our English
translators. And oftentimes force of utterance is gained by dwelling on a word, even
at the peril of tautology. Reference is made, no doubt, to the boastings of this leader of
the party at Corinth that was antagonistic to St. Paul, and also to the accusation which



262



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xl 1— 3a



this man made against the apostle, that he was always boasting of his authority, his
superior knowledge, and the gieat things he had done. St. l?aul firmly urged the
distinction between glorying in what a man is or in what a man has done, and glorying
in what God has made a man to be and in what God has done by him. The first kind
of boasting is wrong and dangerous. " Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed
lest he fall." The other kind is right, is honouring to God, and may be our proper form
of testifying for him. There is then a sin of boasting, against which we require to be
duly warned. And there is a service of boasting which may, under certain circura-
eitances, be our most effective mode of resisting evil and witnessing for God. On the
whole, however, it may be fully urged that a man's life, rather than his lips, should do
all his boastings for him. These distinctions may be further elaborated and illustrated.
L Glohtino in what wb are is always a sign of Christian weakness. A
man had better not even think about himself, but put all his effort into higher attain-
ments in the Divine life. There is danger for us when we find that we have anything
in ourselves to talk about or to glory in. All the finest and most delicate Christian
graces are so fragile that they break with a touch, so sensitive that they fade if we only
look on them. Do not even think about what you are ; fill your thoughts with what
you may he, what you may become, in the grace and strength of Christ. Christian
progress stops as soon as we begin to boast. He that is satisfied with his attainments
falls from the Christian ideal, which is this, " Not that I have already obtained, or am
already made perfect ; but I press on, if so be that I may apprehend that for which also
I was apprehended by Christ Jesus " (Phil. iii. 12, Revised Version). Show the peril
that lies in habits of introspection and self-examination with a view to finding subjects
of self-satisfaction. And also of meetings in which Christians are encouraged to boast
of religious feelings and experiences. The text suggests an altogether "more excellent
way." " Let him that glorieth glory in the Lord."

II. Glortino in what we have done ptJTS Christian humility in feril.
Because it directs men's thoughts to us, sets them upon praising us, and so lifts up our
miads, gives us undue notions of our own suijeriority and excellence. When he gains
the applause of an unthinking multitude, Nebuchadnezzar can forget himself, and, in
uttermost pride, cast God wholly away, and say, " Is not this great Babylon, which 1
have builded? " Boastlulness of our doings is always perilous. God does not need it,
since he knows all about it. And man does not need it, for he can see the doings well
enough without our telling. " Let thine own works praise thee." Let thine enemies
praise thee. Let thy friends praise thee. But if you would keep fresh the great grace
of humility, never praise yourself.

III. Glorying in what God has done foe us and by us is always inspibino
AND HEALTHY. Such was the glorying of the apostle, and such are the narratives of
labour givea us by great missionaries. All true records of our life-work should lead
men to say, " What hath Ood wrought? "—R. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER XI
As Apostle driven against his Will ihto
A Bemblanoe op Boastjnq.

An apology for the " foolishness " of
boasting (vers. 1 — 4). He is not afraid of
comparisons (vers. 5, 6). He will not recede
from his despised practice of teaching gra-
tuitously (vers. 7 — 15). A second apology,
drawn from the outrageous conduct of his
opponents (vers. 16 — 20). His privileges,
life, and labours (vers. 21 — 33).

Ver. 1. — Wonld to God; rather, would
{hat I (oomp. 1 Cor. iv. 8). You could bear ;



rather, ye would hear. In my folly ; rather,
in a little foolishness. Namely, in this fool-
ishness of boasting. "Fool" and "folly"
are here haunting words (oh. i. 16, 17, 19,
21 ; xii. 6, 11). The article {the i.e. my
folly) is omitled in n, B, D, E. Bear with
me. It is better to take this as an indica-
tive. It would be meaningless to pass fiom
an entreaty to a command. On the other
hand, "Nay, ye do really bear with me"
was a loving and delicate admission of such
kindnes» as he had received from them.

Ver. 2. — For. This gives the reason
why they bore with him. It was due to •
reciprocity of affection, I am jealous oTer
you. The word implies both jealousy and



CH. XL 1—33.] THE SEOUJ^D EPISTLE TO THE CORIIITHIANS.



263



leal (oh. Tii. 7; is. 2). With a godly
jealousy ; literally, with a jealousy of God.
My jealousy is not the poor earthly vice
(Numb. V. 14 ; Eoolus. ix. 1), but a heavenly
zeal of love. For I have espoused you;
rather, for I ietrothed you ; at your coa-
version, I acted as the paranymph, or
"bridegroom's friend" (John iii. 2',)), in
bringing you to Clirist, the Bridegroom.
The metaphor is found alike in the Old and
New Testaments (Isa. liv. 5 ; Ezek. xxiii. ;
Hos. ii. 19; Eph. v. 25—27). To one
husband (Jer. iii. 1; Ezek. xvi. 15). Our
Lord used an analogous metaphor in the
parable of the king's wedding feast, the
virgins, etc. That I may present you. The
same word as in eh. iv. 14. The conversion
of the Church was its betrothal to Christ,
brought about by St. Paul as the para-
nymph ; and, in the same capacity, at the
final marriage feast, he would present their
Church as a pure bride to Christ at his
coming (Eev. xix. 7 — 9).

Ver. 3. — I fear.. Even now he would
only contemplate their defection as a future
dread, not as a present catastrophe. Lest
by any means ; lest haply (oh. ii. 7 ; ix. 4).
As the serpent beguiled Eve. St. Paul
merely touches on the central moral fact
of the temptation and the Fall (Gen. iii.
1 — 6). He enteis into no speculation about
the symbols, though, doubtless, like St. John
(Kev. xii. 9; xx. 2), he would have i lentifled
the serpent with Satan (comp. ch. ii. 11 and
Wisd. ii. 23). Through his subtlety. The
word means " crafty wickedness." It is used
in ch. xii. 16, and is found in cii. iv. 2;
Luke XX. 28. Your minds; literally, your
thoughts (ch. ii. 11). Should be corrupted
(comp. Col. ii. 4—8; 1 Tim. iv. 1). The
simpUoity. The apostles always insisted
on this virtue, but especially St. Paul, in
whose Epistles the word (oirAiiTrjs) occurs
seven times. That is in Christ ; rather, that
is towards (literally, into') Christ; as Cranmer
rendered it, "The perfect fidelity which
looks to him above."

Ver. 4. — He that cometh. Apparently
an allusion to some recent and rival teacher.
Another Jesus. The intruder preaches, not
a different Jesus (erepov) or a ditterent gospel
(comp. Gal. i. 6 — 8), but ostensibly the
same Jesus whom St. Paul had preached.
Another sfiiit . . . another gospel ; rather,
u, different spirit (firepov) . . . a different
gospel. The Jesus preached was the same ;
tho gospel accepted, the Spirit received, were
supposed to remain unaltered. Ye might
well bear with him. This is not without a
touch of irony. You are all set agaiust
me ; and yet the new-comer does not profess
to preach to you another Jesus, or impart
a different Spirit I Had he done so, you
might have had some excuse (/caXus) for



listening to him. Now there is none; for
it was I who first preached Jesus to you,
and from me you first received the Spirit.

Ver. 5. — For. It carmot be that you
received this rival teacher as being so much
superior to me ; for, etc. I suppose. Again,
like the Latin eenseo or opinor, with a touch
of irony. I was not a whit behind ; in no
respect have I come short of. The Tery
ohiefest apostles. The word used by St.
Paul for "very ohiefest" is one which, in
its strangeiieos, marks the vehemence of
his emotion. It involves an imlignant sense
that he had been most disparagingly com-
pared with other apostles, as though he
were hardly a genuine apostle at all. Yet
he reckons himself to have dune as much
as the " above-exceedingly "—or, as it might
be expressed, the "out-and-out," "extra-
super," or "super-apostolic," apostles. There
is here no reflection whatever on the twelve;
he merely means that, even if any with
whom he was unfavourably contrasted were
" apostles ten times over," he can claim
to be in the front rank witli them. This
is no more than he has said with the utmost
earnestness in 1 Cor. xv. 10; Gal. ii. 6.
There is no self-assertion here ; but, in con-
sequence of the evil done by his detractors,
St. Paul, with an utter sense of distaste, is
forced to say the simple truth.

Ver. 6. — Eude in speech ; literally, a laio
in discourse ; see ch. x. 10 and 1 Cor. ii. 13 ;
and, for the word idiutes, a private person,
and so "one who is untrained," as contrasted
with a professor, see the only other places
where it occurs in the New Testament
(Acts iv. 13; 1 Cor. xiv. 16, 23, 24). St.
Paul did not profess to have the trained
oratorical skill of ApoUos. His eloquence,
dependent on conviction and emotion, fol-
lowed none of the rules of art. Yet not in
knowledge. Spiritual knowledge was a
primary requisite of an apostle, and St.
Paul did claim to possess this (Eph. iii.
3, 4). We have been thoroughly made
manifest among you in all things. This
would be an appeal to the transparent open-
ness and sincerity of all his dealings, as
in oh. It. 20 and xii. 12 ; but the best reading
seems to be the active participle, phane-
rosantei (n, B, P, G), not the passive, phane-
rothentei. The rendering will then be, In
everything making it (my knowledge) mani-
fest among all men towards you.

Ver. 7. — Have 1 1 literally, or have Ii An
ironical exception to his manifestation of
knowledge; " unless you think that I com-
mitted a sin in refusing to accept mainten-
ance at your hands." It is clear that even
this noble generosity had been made the
ground for a charge against the apostle.
" If he had not been conscious," they said,
"that he has no real claims, he would not



264



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. m. 1—33.



have preached foi nothing, when he had a
perfect right to b« supported by his con-
verts " (1 Cor. ix. 1 — 15). Abasing myself.
The trade of tentmaker was despised, teJious,
and mechanical, and it did not suffice to
provide even for Paul's small needs (Acts
xviii. 3 ; xx. 34). That ye might he exalted ;
namely, by spiritual gifts (Epli. ii. 4 — 6).
The gospel . . . freely. Some of them would
feel the vast contrast between the words.
The gospel was the most precious gift of
God, and they had got it for nothing. Com-
pare the fine lines of Lowell —

" For a' cap and bells our lives we pay,
Bubbles we earn with our whole Boul'a
tasking;
'Tis only God who is given away,
'Tis only heaven may be had for the
asking."

To be a free and unpaid missionary was
St. Paul's pride (oh. xii. 14; 1 Thess. ii. 9;
2 Thess. iii. 8, 9 ; Acts xx. 33).

Ver. 8. — I robbed ; literally, 1 ravaged, or
'plundered. The intensity of St. Paul's
feelings, smarting under base calumny and
ingratitude, reveals itself by the passionate
expression which he here uses Other
Churches. The only Church of which we
know as contributing to St. Paul's needs
is that at Philippi (Phil. iv. 15, 16). Taking
wages The expression is again impas-
sioned It ia meant rather ironically than
literally Literally it means rations (1
Cor. ix. 7).

Ver. 9. — And wanted. The aorist shows
that this sad condition of extreme poverty
was a crisis rather than chronic. Yet even
at that supreme moment of trial, when from
illness or accident the scanty income of
his trade failed him, he would not tell
them that he was starving, but rather ac-
cepted help from the Philippians, who, as
he knew, felt for him an unfeigned affection.
It is needless to point out once more how
strong ia the argument in favour of the
genuineness of the Acts and the Epistles
from the numberless undesigned coin-
cidences between them in such passages
as those to which I have referred in the
foregoing notes. I was chargeable to no
man ; literally, I did not benumb you. The
word katenarlcesa, which occurs only here
and in ch. xii 13, 14, is ranked by St.
Jerome among St. Paul's cilicisms, i.e. the
provincial expressions which he picked up
during his long residence at Tarsus. Narke
(whence our nareiseus and narcotic) means
" paralysis," and is also the name given to
tbe gymnotus, or electric eel — in Latin,
torpedo, the cramp-fish — which benumbs with
the shock of its touch. "I did not," he
indignantly says, " cramp you with my
corpedo-touoh." Perhaps in a less vehement



mood he would have chosen a less picturesque
or technical and medical term. That wblcb
was lacking to me the brethren which came
from Macedonia supplied ; rather, for the
brethren, on their arrival from Macedonia,
filled up my deficiency. This must have
been the third present which St. Paul re-
ceived from Philippi (Phil. iv. 15, 16). These
brethren from Macedonia accompanied Silas
and Timotheus (Acts xviii. 5). And so will
I keep myself (oh. xii. 14).

Ver. 10. — As the truth of Christ is in me.
The strength of St. Paul's feelings on the
subject has already been expressed in 1 Cor.
ix. 15. We have a similar appeal in Rom.
ix. 1. The " as " ia not in the original, but
evidently the words are meant for a solemn
asseveration — " The truth of Christ ia in
me, that," eto. Ifo man shall stop me of
this boasting; literally, this shall not be
stopped as concerns me. The verb means
literally, " shall be fenced," and with that
tendency to over elaboration which is fre-
quent in commentators, some suppose that
St. Paul referred to the projected wall across
the isthmus of Corinth, etc. But the same
word is used for simply stopping the mouth
in Bom. iii. 19 ; Heb. xL 33. In the regions
of Achaia, He would not apply the rule to
Corinth only, but seems to have felt the
need for the utmost circumspection, and for
cutting off every handle for suspicion or
slander among these subtle, loquacious, in-
tellectual Greeks. He could act more freely
among the more firank and generous Mace-
donians.

Ver. 11. — ^Wherefore? He cannot tell
them the real ultimate reason, which is
their whole character and nature. Becaase
I love you not? He has already assured
them of his deep affection (ch. vii. 2 ; oomp.
siL 15).

Ver. 12.— Occasion ; rather, the occasion.
Wherein they glory, they may be found even
as we. " These new teachers boast to you
how disinterested they are. Well, them,
I have proved myself to be equally dis-
interested." But the words apparently
involve a most stinging sarcasm. For these
teachers were not in reality disinterested,
though they boasted of being so; on the
contrary, they were exacting, insolent, and
tyrannical (ver. 20), and did not preaob
gratuitously (1 Cor. ix. 12), though they
sneered at the apostle for doing so. Being
radically false (vers. 12, 13), " while they
were," as Theodoret says, " openly boasting,
they were secretly taking money," and
therefore were not " even as we."

Ver. 13. — For such are false apostles
This, with 1 Thess. ii. 14—16 and Phil. iii. 2.
is one of St. Paul's most pasalonate out'
bursts of plain speaking. " Now at length,''
says Bengel, "he calls a spade a spade.''



CH. XL 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CQBINTHIANS.



26a



They were "falae apostles" (Rev. iL 2),
because a true apostle delivers the message
of another, while these cared only for self
(Rom. xvi. 18). Deceitful workers. Work-
men who cheat their employers (oh. ii. 17 ;
iv. 2). Transforming themselves. The verb
is the same as in 1 Cor. iv. 6 and Phil,
iii. 21, and does not occur elsewhere in the
New Testament.

Yer. 11. — £ven Satan . . . angel of light.
This is one of Satan's devices (oh. ii. 11).
The allusion may be to the temptation
(Matt. iv. 8, 9) J or to the appearances
of Satan with the angels before God in
the Book of Job (ii. 1); or perhaps to the
Jewish hagadah, that the "angel" who
wrestled with Jacob was in reality Satan.

Ver. 15. — Whose end shall he according
to their works. Whatever their fashion
(schema), they shall be judged, not by what
they seem, but by what they ore, as shown
by their worlca.

Vers. 16 — 33. — Apology ly contrast.

Ver. 16. — I say again. St. Paul evidently
feels nn almost invincible repugnance to
begin to speak of his own works. He has
twice swerved away from the task (ch. x. 8 ;
xi. 1, 6) to speak of collateral topics. Now
at last he begins, but only (to our grievous
loss) to break off abruptly in ver. 33, before
tlie story of his past sufferings has been
much more than begun. A fool ■ . . boast.
Here, again, we have the two haunting
words of this section (see note on ver. 1 ;
1 Cor. XV. 36 J xili. 8). "Boast" occurs
sixteen times in these three chapters alone.
That I ; rather, that I also.

Ver. 17.— Kot after the Lord. » Boasting,"
or what might be stigmatized as such, may
become a sort of painful necessity, necessi-
tated by human baseness; but in itself it
cannot be "after the Lord." There is no-
thing Ohrist-like in it. It is human, not
Divine ; an earthly necessity, not a heavenly
example ; a sword of the giant Philistine,
which yet David may be forced to use.
Confidence ; hypostasis, as in ch. iz. i, where
exactly the same phrase occurs.

Ver. 18. — After the flesh (see note ch. x.
3 ; comp. Phil. iii. 4). I will glory also.
But, as Robertson admirably observes, he
« does not glory in what he has ione, but
in what he has borne."

Ver. 19. — Seeing you yourselves are wise;
ye gladly tolerate the senseless, being intellec-
tual (comp. 1 Oor. iv. 10). The irony would be
very scathing to those whose minds and con-
sciences were suificieutly humble and deli-
cate to feel it.

Ver. 20. — For ye suffer, if a man bring
you into bondage. The verse gives us an
unexpected and painful glimpse of the
enslaving (Gal. ii. 4), greed-loving (Matt.
xxiiL U; Bom. xvi 18), gain-hunting



(1 Pet. T. 2, 8), domineering (3 John 9),
and even personally violent and Insulting
character of these teachers; whom yet,
strange to say, the Corinthians seem to take
at their own estimate, and to tolerate any
extreme of insolence from them, while they
were jealously suspicious of the disinterested,
gentle, and humble apostle. If a man
devour you. As the Pharisees " devoured "
widows houses (Matt, xxiii. 14). Take of
you; rather, seize you; makes you his
captives. The verb is the same as " caught
you," in ch. xii. 16. Smite yon on the face.
They must have brought their insolence
with them from Jerusalem, where, as we see,
not only from the details of our Lord's
various mockeries, but from the accounfs of
the priests in Josephua and the Talmud, the
priests made free use of their fists and
staves I The fact that so many of the con-
verts were downtrodden slaves and artisans
would make them less likely to resent con-
duct to which they were daily accustomed
among the heathen. Neither Greeks nor
Orientals felt to anything like the same
extent as ourselves the disgrace of a blow.
That sense of disgrace rises from the frtedoin
which Christianity has gradually wrought
fur us, and the deep sense of thu dignity of
human nature, which it has inspired. Christ
had been so smitten, and so was Paul himself
long afterwards (Acts xxili. 2), and he had
to teach even Christian bishops that they
must be " no strikers " (1 Tim. iii. 3 ;
Titus i. 7). The "syllogism of violence"
has, alas 1 been in familiar use among re-
ligious teachers in all ages (1 Kings xxii.
24 ; Neh. xiii. 25 ; Isa. Iviii. 4 ; Matt. v. 39 ;
Luke xxii. 64 ; 1 Cor. iv. 11).

Ver. 21. — I speak as concerning reproach,
as though we had been weak. The sense
is uncertain, but if with the Revised Version
we render it, " I speak by way of disparage-
ment," the verse may be understood as an
ironical admission that, if absence from these
violent and self-assertive proceedings be a
sign of weakness, he has been weak. He
proceeds to correct the ironical admission la
the next clause. The meaning can hardly be,
" I admit the disgraces I have suffered"
(comp. ch. vi. 8), beciiuse he is speaking of
the Corinthians, not of himself I am bold
also. If they derive their right to thii
audacious and overweening line of conduct
from any privileges of theirs, there is not
one of these privileges which I too may not
claim.

Ver. 22. — Hebrews. In the strictest sense
those who still understood and spoke Ara-
maic, not Hellenists of the dispersion, who
no longer knew the sacred language. (For
the use of the word, see Acts vi. 1 ; Phil. iii.
4.) Israelites, Jews, not only by nation, but
in heart and feeling (see John i. 48 ; Acts ii.



266



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. ti. 1—33.



22, etc. ; Bom. ix. 4 ; xi. 1). The seed of
Abraham. Alike literally and spiritually
(see John viii. 33 — 53 ; Eom. ix. 7 ; xi. 1).
It may seem strange that St. Paul should
have found it necessary to make this state-
ment ; but his Tarsian birth and Eoman
franchise may have led to whispered in-
nuendoes which took form long afterwards
in the wild calumny that he was a Gentile
who had only got himself circumcised in
order that he might mnrry the high priest's
daughter (Epiphan., 'Hser.,' xxx. 16).

Ver. 23. — I speak as a fool. Not merely
as before aphron, but paraphronon, " I speak
as a madman." It is downright insanity
on my part to enter into this contest of
rival egotism. The verb does not occur
elsewhere in tlie New Testament ; the sub-
stantive is used of " downright infatuation "
in 2 Pet. ii. 16. I am more. I may claim
to be something beyond an ordinary servant
of Christ (comp. ch. xi. 5). This is the
" frantic " boast which he proceeds to
justify in a fragment of biograpljy which
must ever bo'accounted as the most remark-
able and unique in the world's history. And
when St. Paul lived the life was, as Dean
Stanley says, " hitherto without precedent
In the history of the world." No eubsequenl
life of saint or martyr has ever surpassed
St. Paul's, as here sketched, in self-devotion ;
and no previous life even remotely resembled
it. The figure of the Christian missionary
was, until then, unknown. In labours more
abundant ; literally, more abundantly. The
best comment is 1 Cor. xv. 10. In stripes
above measure. The expression is partly
explained in the next verse In prisons.
St. Clement of Bome says that St. Paul was
imprisoned seven times. The only imprison-
ment up to this date recorded in the Acts
is that at Philippi (Acts xvi. 23). The im-
prisonments in Jerusalem, Csesarea, and
Rome all took place later. Hesays later," The
Holy Ghost witnesseth in every city that
bonds and imprisonment await me" (Acts xx.
23). In deaths oft. He alludes to the
incessant opposition, peril, and anguish
which make him say in 1 Cor. xv. 31, " I
die daily" (comp. ch. iv. 11; Eom. viii.
36). With the whole passage we may com-
pare ch. vi. 4, 5.

Ver. 24. — Five tunes. Not one of these
Jewish soourgings — which yet were so severe
that the sufferer often died under thern — is
mentioned in the Acts. This paragiaph is
the most striking proof of the complete frag-
mentariness of that narrative, marvellous
as it is. On the circumstances which
probably led to these Jewish soourgings, see
'Life of St. Paul,' exo. xi. ; and comp.
Acts xxii. 19 ; xxvi. 11 ; Matt, xxiii. 34. The
question arises— "Was St. Luke entirely un-
aware of all these scenes of anguish and daily



martyrdom 7 Had St. Panl, in his hnmbia

reticence, never cared to speak of them ? or
were the Acts only intended for a sketch
which made no pretension to completeness,
and only related certain scenes and events by
way of specimen and example ? Forty stripes
save one (Deut. xxv. 3). On this instance
of Jewish scrupulosity, and for all that is
known of the rationale of Jewish soourgings,
see ' Life of St. Paul,' uhi supra.

Ver. 25. — Thrioe was I beaten with rods.
This alludes to soourgings inflicted by
Gentile magistrates with the vitis, or vine-
stick, of soldiers, or with the fasces of lictors.
Only one of these horrible soourgings, which
likewise often ended in death, is narrated
in the Acts (xvi. 22). We do not know when
the others were inflicted. In any case they
were egregious violations of St. Paul's right
of Eoman citizenship ; but this claim (as we
see in Cicero's various orations) was often set
at nought in the provinces. Onoe was I
stoned. At Lystra (Acts xiv. 19). Thrice
I suffered shipwreck. Not one of these
shipwrecks is narrated in the Acts. The
shipwreck of Acts xxvii. took place some
years later. A night and a day I have
been in the deep. An allusion, doubtless,
to his escape from one of the shipwrecks by
floating for twenty-four hours on a plank in
the stormy sea. We have no right to assume
that the deliverance was miraculous. The
perfect tense shows St. Paul's vivid remini-
scence of this special horror. " In the deep "
means " floating on the deep waves." Theo-
phylaot explains the words ^v $vB^ to mean
" in Bythos," and says that it was a place
near Lystra, apparently like the Athenian
Barathrum and lie Spartan Caeadas — a place
where the bodies of criminals were thrown.
The word does not occur elsewhere in the
New Testament.

Ver. 26.--In jonmeyings often. In those
days and in those countries journeys were
not only perilous and fatiguing, but also
accompanied with many severe hardships and
discomforts. In perils of waters ; rather, of
rivers. In all countries which, like parts of
Greece and Asia Minor, abound in unbridged
mountain torrents, journeys are constajtly
accompanied by deaths from drowning in the
sudden rush of swollen streams. In perils
of robbers. Then, as now, brigandage was
exceedingly common in the moTmtains of
Greece and Asia. In perils from mine own
countrymen ; literally, from my race. These
are abundantly recorded in the New Testa-
ment (Acts ix. 23, 29; xiii. 59; xiv. 5, 19;
XX. 3, etc. ; 1 Thess. ii. 15, 16; PhU. iii. 2).
From the heathen. They were generally
instigated by the Jews (Acts xvi. 19 — 39;
xvii. 5 ; xix. 23—34, etc.). In the city. As
at Damascus, Jerusalem, Philippi, Thessa-
lonica, Beroea, Ephesus, etc. — ^"in every



OH. XI. 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS.



267



city" (Acts XX. 23). In the wilderness.
As, for inslance, in ti'a\ellmg tlirougU the
wild waste tracts of land between Perga and
Antloch in Pisidia, or thence to Lystra and
Berbe; or over the mountain chains of
Taurus to the cities of Galatia. In the sea.
Storms, leaks, pirates, mutinies, etc. Among
false brethren. The word only occurs
elsewhere in Gal. ii. 4.

Ver. 27. — In weariness and painfulness ;
literally, in toil and travail (1 Thess. ii. 9;
2 Thess. lit. 8). In watchings ; literally,
in spells of sleeplessness (Acts xx. 84). £i
hanger and thirst (ver. 8; 1 Cor. iv. 11;
Phil. iy. 12). In fastings often. It is not
clear whether this refers to voluntary fast-
ings (oh. vi. 5; Acts xxvii. 9) or to general
destitution short of the actual pangs of
hunger. In cold and nakedness. St. Paul's
ideal, like that of his Master Christ, was
the very antithesis of that adopted by the
wealthy, honoured, and full-fed Shammais
and HiUels of Jewish rabbinism, who de-
lighted in banquets, fine garments, pompous
titles, domestic comforts, and stationary
ease.

Ver. 28. — Those things that are without.
The adverb thus rendered parektos only
occurs in Matt. v. 32; Acts xxvi. 29. It
may either mean " trials that come to me
from external and extraneous sources (quas
extrinseous accedunt) or things in addition
to these {prxterea), which I here leave un-
mentioned." The latter meaning is (as St.
Chrysostom saw) almost certainly the cor-
rect one. That which cometh npon me.
The word thus rendered is either episustasis
(J, K), which means " hostile attack " or
" tumult," as we talk of " a rush of trouble
or business ; " or epistasis (>*, B, D, E, F, G),
which may imply "halting, lingering
thoughts; "attention," and so "anxiety"
(comp. Acts xxiv. 12, where there is the
same various reading). Of all the Churches.
No doubt he is thinking of his own Churches,
the Churches of the Gentiles (Col. ii. 1).

Ver. 29. — Who is weak, and I am not
weak 1 See, by way of example, 1 Cor. viii.
13 ; ix. 22 ; Eom. xiv. 21. Instead of stiffly
maintaining my own prejudices, I am always
ready to make concessions to weak brethren.
Who is offended, and I bum not 1 That is,
" who is ever caused to stumble without
my burning with indignation ? " In other
woards, "Is not the intensity of my sympathy
whenever any scandal occurs an addition
to the trials of my Ufe ? "

Ver. 30. — If I must needs. If boasting is
forced on me as a moral necessity (Sei). The
things which concern mine infirmities. After
all, St. Paul cannot keep up even for a few
verses anything which can be regarded as
" boasting after the flesh" (ver. 18). Prac-
tically his boasting has bean only of those



afflictions which to oth^ rs might sound likf
a leooid of disgraues, but which left on him
the marks of the Lord Jesus. His hair-
breadth escapes were to him, as Bossuet said
of the wounds of the Prince of Oonde,
" marks of the protection of Heaven."

Ver. 31. — The Sod and Father of our lord
Jesus Christ. This solemn asseveration does
not seem to be retrospective. It is used to
preface what was perhaps intended to be
a definite sketch of the most perilous inci-
dents and trials of his life, which would
have been to us of inestimable value. This
awful attestation of his truthfulness was
necessary, (1) because even the very little
which we do know shows us that the tale
would have been " passing strange ; " and
(2) because his base and shameless calumni-
ators had evidently insinuated that he was
not straightforward (oh. xii. 16). (On the
phrases used, see ch. i. 23 ; 1 Cor. xv. 24 ;
Eph. i. 3.)

Ver. 32. — In Damascus. (For the inci-
dent referred to, see Acts ix. 22 — ^25.) The
governor ; literally, the ethnaroh. This is
obviously the title given to the commandant
of the city (whether an Arabian or a Jew),
left in charge by Aretas. The word does
not occur elsewhere in the New Testament,
but is found in 1 Maoo. xiv. 47 ; Josephus,
' Ant.,' xiv. 7, § 2. Under Aretas the king.
Hareth, the Emir of Petra, father-in law of
Herod the Great. He had either seized the
city during his war with Herod, to avenge
the insult offered to his daughter by Herod's
adultery with Herodias ; or it may have
been assigned to him by Caligula. His
relations with Damascus are confirmed by
coins (see 'Life of St. Paul,' exo. viii.).
Kept . . . with a garrison; literally, was
guarding. It is said in Acts ix. 24 that the
Jews did this ; but they could not in any case
have done it without leave from theethnarch,
and quifaaitper alium, faeit per se. Desirous
to apprehend me. Both words are a little
stronger in the Greek — " detennining to
seize me."

Ver. 33.— Through a window. A " little
door," or lattice in some house which abutted
on the Wall. In a basket (comp. Josh. ii.
15; I Sam. xix. 12). The word used by
St. Luke in Acts ix. 25 is spurts, which is
a general name for a largo basket. The
word here used is sargane, which is defined
by Hesychius to be a basket of wiokerwork,
but which may also mean a rope-basket. This
particular incident, no doubt, seems to be
less perilous and trying than many which
St. Paul has already mentioned. We must,
however, remember that escape from a
window in the lofty wall of a city guarded
by patrols was very perilous, and also thai
such a method of concealment was very
trying to the dignity of an Oiiento^'. -fitjhi



268



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xi. 1—33.



siioh aB St. Paul had been. Further, it ia
clear that St. Paul only muntious this as
the earliest incident in a long line of perils
wliich it had been liis original intention to
recount. But at this point he was inter-
rupted, and laid aside his task of dictation —
an incident which has not unfrequently had
its effect in literature. When next he re-
sumed the Epistle, he was no longer in the



mood to break through his rule of reticence
on these subjects. He had played "the
fool" and "the madman," as he says of
himself with indignant irony, enough ; and
he proceeds to speak of other personal claims
which he regards as more important and
more Divine. Of all " chapters of unwritten
histoiy," not one is more deeply to be re-
gretted than the one which we have thug lost.



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — 4. — Inviting men to Christ the supreme object of preaching. " Wo^ld to God
ye could bear with me a little," etc. Tlie purpose and spirit of this chapter are the
hame as the preceding one. The apostle proceeds against the charges which they had
brought against him, and the same breeze of irony breathes through all. These verses
seem to be his defence against the charge of his foolish boasting, " Would to God," or
rather would that ye could "bear with me a little in my folly," or better, in a little
foolishness. What I have said already you say is foolish boasting ; be it so, bear with
me whilst I proceed in the same strain of self-vindication ; tolerate me a little further.
It has been observed that no less than five times in this chapter does the expression
" bearing with," or " burden," occur, and the word " folly " eight times ; and the inference
is that the expressions refer to something which he had heard of some of their remarks
concerning him. Paul here seems to claim their continued attention on two grounds.

I. The gkeatnbss of the work he had accomplished amongst them. " For I
am jealous over you with godly jealousy : for I have espoused you to one husband, that
I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ." He bad " espoused," or united them, to
Christ, as the bride to the Bridegroom — a relationship the most sacred, close, tender, and
lasting. To unite men in supreme affection and supreme purpose is the grand work of
the Christian minister, and what work on earth is so sublimely beneficent and glorious
as to make men one with Christ ? It is impossible to make men one with a creed or a
Church, and were it possible it would be to the last degree undesirable. But to make
men one with Chiist is at once most practical and wgent — practical because Gk)d has
established an Infallible method, and urgent because souls disconnected from Christ are
in a guilty and ruined condition.

n. The dbbad which he had lest that woek should be UNiioins. "But I
fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety [craftiness], so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ." It would seem
from this that the union of souls to Christ is not absolutely indissoluble, that a separa-
tion is possible ; and, in truth, were it not so, man would with the union lose his
freedom of action, and would become a mere instrument. Angels fell from their
primitive holiness, our first parents Irom innocence, and Peter for a time from connection
with Christ. The holiest creature in the universe is conscious of a power by which he
could break away from his orbit of purity and obedience ; otherwise he would have no
sense of personal virtuousness. The apostle here seems to ascribe the possible dissolution
of the marriage of souls to Christ to Satan, whom he here represents as the "serpent,"
implying his belief at once in the personality, moral maliciousness, and mighty spiritual
influence of this superhuman intelligence. See how he does this. 1. By insidiously
corrupting the mind. " I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled Eve through
his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ."
There can be no union between a soul morally corrupt and impure, and Christ. The
moment those who are united to Christ become corrupted, the union is atan end; the
rotten branch falls from the trunk. So Satan's work is to " corrupt," and thvis undo the
grandest of all works. This he does insidiously, or craftily, just as he dealt with Eve
(Gen. iii.). How craftily this huge enemy of souls pursues his soul-corrupting work!
" Beware of his devices." 2. By the agency of false teachers. " For if he that cometh
preacheth another Jesus, whom we have not preached, or if ye receive another spirit,
which ye have not received, or another gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might
well bear with him." There is but one absolute Christ, but as many subjective ones aa



OH. XI. 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 269



call themselves ChriBtians, and not a few of the subjective ones are pernicious caricatures
of the true Jesus of Nazareth. These are preached, and the preaching of them corrupts
souls and fulfils the purpose of the devil. There is as much differeuce between the
Christ of the Qospels and the Christ of the creeds, as there is between the cedar giowini:;
in Lebanon and that cedar reduced to its primitive elements in the laboratory of the
chemist; in the one form beautifully attractive, in the other hideously repulsive. Such
Christs were preached in Corinth. Paul, perhaps, specially refers to some one who was
preaching " another Jesus," and ironically he intimates that such preachers they tolerated.
" Ye might well bear with him." As if he had said, " Such men who are doing the work
of the devil ye would tolerate."

Vers. 5 — 12. — The highest knowledge and the noblest generosity. " For I suppose 1
was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles. But though I be rude in speech, yet
not in knowledge; but we have been thoroughly made manifest among you in all
things. Have I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye mi^ht be exalted,
because I have preached to you the gospel of God freely ? I robbed other Churchc s,
taking wages of them, to do you service. And when I was present with you, anil
wanted, I was chargeable to no man : for that which was lacking to me the brethn n
which came from Macedonia supplied: and in all things I have kept myself from being
burdensome unto you, and so will I keep myself. As the truth oC Christ is in me, nu
man shall stop me of this boasting in the regions of Achaia. Wherefore ? because I love
you not ? God knoweth. But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion
from them which desire occasion ; that wherein they glory, tbey may be found even as
we." Few things in human life are more distasteful than egotism or vanity. There
are those in society whose chief delight is to parade their own imaginary merits and
distinctions. We are wrong, however, if we regard the man who sometimes speaks
about himself as an egotist. When a man is denied virtues which he knows he
possesses, and charged with faults of which his conscience tells him he is not guilty, he
is bound by the laws of his nature to stand up in self-defence. Every man is justified
in fighting for his moral reputation, which is to him more precious than gold, and dear
to him as life itself. This is just what Paul does here and in many other places in his
letters to the Corinthians. He had slanderers at Corinth. Here he says, " For I suppose
[reckon] I was not a whit behind the very chiefest apostles." Two facts are here
indicated which warranted his boasting.

I. He felt that, though he had not rhetorical accomplishments, kb had the highest
KNOWLEDGE. " Though I be rude in speech, yet not in knowledge." He was not
trained in all the rhetorical parts of Grecian oratory, his periods were not polished, his
sentences were not tuneful, and, perhaps, his utterances lacked flow ana his voice
music. This he seems to have felt ; but what of that? He had the highe t " know-
ledge." What is the grandest oratory without true knowledge ? Clouds of golden
splendour without water for the thirsty land. Paul's knowledge was of the highest
kind. He knew Christ ; he knew what Christ was to him ; what he had done r him,
as well as what he was in himself and in his relation to the Father and the uui 'erse.
This is the science of all sciences; the science of which all other sciences are to it the
mere leaf, or stem, or branch, of which this is the root. " This is life eter,nal, to kno-v
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." " I count all tilings
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord."

II. He felt that, though he consecrated himself to their highest interests, he received
FBOM THEM NO EEMTINBRATIGN. What trials he oudured for them! what perils he
braved for them ! what labours he prosecuted for them (see vers. 24—27) ! All this
was done and endured for what? Not for selfish ends, not for worldly gain. "Have
I committed an offence in abasing myself that ye might be exalted, because I have
preached to you the gospel of God freely ? " Why did he not receive remuneration
at their hands? Nay, why did he reject it? (1) Not because he did not need
such a recompense. " And when I was present with you, and wanted, I was chirgeable
to no man." He was dependent upon such contributions for his subsistence. He
had received them at Thessalonica before his first visit to Corinth. (2) Not because
he did not love them. "Wherefore? because I love you not? God knoweth." It
would have been a gratification to those whom he had spiritually saved, to have



270 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xl 1—33.

made some secular recompense for his labours, but he denied them this gratification,
not because he did not love them. Why,then,diii he reject their secular help? 1. To
furnish in his own life a proof of the benevolent terms of the gospel. " I preach to yon
the gospel of God freely." The gospel is a free gift of God, and I present it to you as
a free gift. The gospel should never be preached as a means of livelihood or for filthy
lucre. 2. To silence the tongue of his slanderers. No doubt his enemies at Corinth
sought in every way to degrade the apostle. The false apostles, no doubt, boasted that
they did their work there as benefactors disinterestedly and without pay. Had Paul
taken payment he would have given them some ground for boasting of their gene-
rosity. 3. To compel his enemies by his example to act from generous impulses. " That
they may be found as we are." " Notice,'' says Mr. Beet, " the bitter irony of these
words. Paul's opponents boasted their disinterestedness whilst making gain of the
Corinthians, and eagerly watched him to detect self-enrichment, that they might boast
of their own superiority. These have been the tactics of demagogues in all ages. But
Paul resolved to refuse just recompense for real and great benefits, that thus by his
example he may compel those who boasted their superiority to come up to his own level
of working without pay, so that when his conduct and theirs are investigated, they may
be found to be as disinterested as he was."

Conclusion. Truly that man might well exult who feels that, however deficient in
mere verbal learning, he possesses the highest knowledge — the knowledge of Christ ; and
who also feels that he is rendering to men the highest service from kindly generous
impulses without a desire for fee or reward, giving freely to men what God has given
freely to all — the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Vers. 13 — 15. — Self-misrepresentation. "For such are false apostles, deceitful
workers, translorming themselves into the apostles of Christ. And no marvel ; for
Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light. Therefore it is no great thing if
his ministers also be trsnaformed as the ministers of righteousness ; whose end. shall be
according to their works." Three thoughts are suggested by these words.

I. Man has the power of misrepbbsentinq his chaeacter to others. Naturalists
tell us of animals which have the power to appear what they really are not. Some
fei^n sleep and death. Be this as it may, man has this power in an eminent degree —
he can disguise himself and live in masqueiade. Hence our Saviour speaks of " wolves
in sheep's clothing." In fact, throughout all circles and populations those who appear
to be what they really are have ever been in a miserable minority. As a rule men are
not what they seem,

II. In the bxehoisb op this power man can inybst evil with THB mOHEST
FORMS OP good. The " false apostles," to whom reference is here made, seem to have
done BO. Paul speaks of them as " deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
apostles of Christ. And no marvel ; for Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light." 2%e worse a man is the stronger the temptation he has to assume the forms of
goodness. Were corrupt men to show the state of their hearts to their contemporaries,
they would recoil from them with horror and disgust, and they would be utterly unable
to enjoy social intercourse or to transact their worldly business. As a rule, the worse
a man is the more strenuous his efibrts to assume the habiliments of virtue. Selfishness
robes itself in the garbs of benevolence, error speaks in the language of truth. Hence
it does not follow that a man is a true apostle or minister of Christ because he appears
in the character. Some of the worst men on the earth have been deacons and priests,
I ccupied pulpits and preached sermons. " No marvel," says the apostle ; " for Satan
himself is transformed into an angel of light." Hence it behoves us all to look well into
the real moral character of those who set themselves up as the representatives of Christ
and the teachers of religion. " Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they are of God : because many false prophets are gone out into the world."

III. He who exercises this power in this wat benders himself liable to
TERRIBLE PUNISHMENT. " Whose end shall be according to their works." Of all
characters the hypocrite is the most guilty and abhorrent. More terrible and more
frequent were the denunciations Christ hurled against such than against the voluptuary,
ilio gross sensualist, or the sordid worldling. " Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees,
hy,. icritas 1 " etc. (see Matt, xxiii. 13 — 33) As such are the greatest sinners, such wil!



OH. XL 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. 27i



have the most terrible end ; the " end shall be according to their works." They will
reap the fruit of their own doings.

CoNomsioN. Learn : 1. The duty of self-truthfulness. Let us seek to be such true
men, so true to self, society, and God, that we may have no temptation whatever to
clay the hypocrite or to appear to others what we are not.

" To thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man."

2. The duty of social caution. Do not let us estimate men by their appearances, and
take them into the circle of our confidence and friendship merely on account of what
they appear to be. Often those whose outward garb is the most holy are inwardly the
most corrupt, who outwardly move as angels of light are inwardly the greatest devils.
Let us learn to take off the mask, to disrobe corruption of its external robes of purity,
and to give neither our trust nor our sympathy until we are convinced that they have
truth in the " inward parts."

Vers. 16 — 19. — Man talking about himself, and the limitation of apostolic inspiration.
" I say again. Let no man think me a fool ; if otherwise, yet as a fool receive me, that
I may boast myself a little. That which I speak, I speak it not after the Lord, but as
it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting. Seeing that many glory after the
flesh, I will glory also. For ye suffer fools gladly, seeing ye yourselves are wise."
Observe here —

L Man talkino about himself. Paul had said a good many things about himself.
Here again he takes up the subject, and his language suggests : 1. That the world is
disposed to regard such talk as foolish. " Let no man think me a fool [or, ' foolish ']."
In this he recognizes the tendency of men to regard such self-reference and self-talk as
weak and unwise. So in truth unsophisticated men do. When they hear a man
talking about himself he impresses them with a sense of his folly. Inwardly they say,
" What a fool that man is to be talking about himself! " It must be confessed that
generally it is a very foolish thing — few things are more foolish. 2. That such conduct
may become a duty. Paul felt it such an urgent obligation at this time that he begs
them to bear with him. " Yet as a fool receive me, that I may boast myself a little."
He was on his defence, and he felt that such self-references as he made he owed to
himself, to the Christians at Corinth, and to the cause of his Master. Hence he seems
to say, " Though you regard me as a fool whilst I thus talk about myself, yet do hear
me." 3. That to attention to such talk about himself the apostle had a special claim.
"Seeing that many glory after the flesh, I will glory also. For ye suffer fools gladly,
seeing ye yourselves are wise." As if he had said, " The false apostles amongst you
talk about themselves ; they boast of their merits and achievements, and you listen to
them. I have a special claim to your attention because of the proofs of my apostlesbip
amongst you."

n. The limitation op apostolic inspiration. " That which I speak, I speak it
not after the Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting." As if he
had ssud, " I do not talk of myself by ' commandment ; ' I have no special commission
fi:om Christ." How frequently does the apostle, in his communications to the Church at
Corinth, guard against the impression that everything he wrote was divinely inspired !
Indeed, in one case he indicates an imperfection of memory. " I baptized also the house-
hold of Stephanas: besides, I know not whether I baptized any other" (1 Cor. i. 16).
" I know not." What, an inspired apostle not knowing what he had doue, forgetting
the religious ordinances he had celebrated I In his letter to Timothy he himself says,
" Every Scripture inspired of God is also profitable for teaching," implying that all
Scripture is not inspiredj It is for us to find out which the inspired ones are, to
separate the human from the Divine. Whatever agrees with the character and the
teaching of the Spirit of Christ we may rest assured is inspired of God. Who but God
himself can tell the enormous amount of injury that has been done to sacred truth by
the dogma of verbal inspiration, regarding all the imprecations of David, all the reasonings
of Job's three friends, and even the utterances of Satan himself, as inspired by Heaven 1
The Scriptures contain the word of God, but they are not the word of God ; the casket



272 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. xi. 1—33

is not the jewel, the shell is not the kernel. This by a devout and earnest study we
must find out for ourselves.

Conclusion. The subject teaches : 1. That we must not slirinh from the discha/rge
of a duty, however painful. Paul, as a humble and modest man, felt it a very painful
thing to talk about himself. His native modesty shrank from it ; yet, though he would
be considered a "fool," he did it. 2. That we must study the Scriptures with u,
discriminating Judgment. We must penetrate through the " letter " that is human
and reach the " spirit " that is Divine. " Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law."

Ver. 20. — A picture of religious impostors. " For ye suffer, if a man bring you into
bondage, if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt himself, if a man
smite you on the face." This verse suggests five things concerning religious impostors.

L Thbt are ttbannio. " For ye suffer [bear] if a man bring you into bondage."
The reference is undoubtedly to those described in ver. 13, who were false teachers in
Corinth. They were enslaving the souls of men with their dogmas and rites. False
teaching always makes men spiritual serfs. Heathens are slaves to their priest, fanatics
are slaves to their leader, papists are slaves to their pope. True teaching makes men
free men. Spiritual bondage is infinitely worse than physical or political. A man's body
may be in chains, yet he may be free in spirit ; but if his spirit is enslaved, he himself
is in captivity. The work of a false teacher is always to subdue souls to himself; the
work of the true, to win souls to Christ. Even conventional Christianity is enslaving.

IL They abb rapacious. " If a man devour you." False teachers devour widows'
houses. They teach for money, turn temples and churches into shops. They shear
the sheep instead of feeding them. Greed is their inspiration.

III. Thbt are crafty. "If a man take of you [taketh you captive]." The
expression " of you " is not in the original. The idea to me seems to be — if a man
takes you in, deceives and entraps you. This is just what religious impostors do —
they " take men in," they cajole men, and make them their dupes.

IV. They arb arbooant. " If a man exalt himself." It is characteristic of false
teachers that they assume great superiority. With this they endeavour to impress
men by their costume, their bearing, and their pompous utterances. They arrogate a
lordship over human souls.

V. They are insolbnt. " If a man smite you on the face." This is the last form
of outrage ; no greater insult could be offered to a man. The religious impostor has no
respect for the rights and dignities of man as man. With his absurd dogmas and
arrogances he is everlastingly smiting men on "their face," on their reason, their
consciences, and their self-respect.

Vers. 21 — 33. — Pauls' avowal of his advantages and his history of his trials. " I
speak as concerning reproach," etc. The two subjects for thought that stand out
conspicuously in these verses are Paul's manly avowal of his distinguished advantages
and his historic sketch of his extraordinary trials.

I. His MANLY AVOWAL OF HIS DISTINGUISHED ADVANTAGES. There are three advan-
tages which he here touches upon. 1. His superior character. " I speak as concerning
reproach [by way of disparagement], as though we had been weak." Hitherto I have
spoken of myself as if all the disparaging things you have said of me were true. The
idea of Paul's language here seems to be this : " I have been speaking of reproach or
disgrace, as if I was weak, i.e. as if I was disposed to admit as true all that has been
said of me, as reproachful or disgraceful, all that has been said of my want of qualifi-
cations for the office, of my want of taleot, my dignity of character, my folly. In all
this I have been speaking ironically. I am superior to all ; I am not ignorant, but
learned ; I am not foolish, but wise ; not greedy, but generous ; not proud, but humble ;
not ignoble, but dignified." How far his character transcended that of his traducers,
history shows. 2. Mis superior ancestry. " Are they Hebrews ? so am I. Are they
Israelites ? so am I. Are they the seed of Abraham ? so am I." His traducers, the
false teachers, were, it would seem, Jews ; probably boasted of their descent, and cer-
taintly implied that Paul was a mere Hellenistic Jew, born at Tarsus. If they gloried
in their descent, go could he ; the blood of Abraham quivered in his veins, he was a



CH. xi. 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOBINTHIANS. 27 ;



lineal descendant of the man who wrestled with Jehovah and prevailed, an Israelite.
3. Eia superior a/postleship. "Are they ministers of Christ? (I speak as a fool)
I am more." They called themselves "ministers of Christ," and belonged, perhaps, to
the party in the Corinthian Church who said they were "of Christ" — Christites. But
he was more an apostle of Christ than they were. Of this he was conscious. In
touching this Paul says, "I speak as a fool," or as one beside myself. Here his great
soul seems to flash out in the fire of indignant irony. There is an egotism here, say
some. IVue, but it is a just, manly, necessary egotism.

II. His msTOEio sketch of ms bxtbaoedinart trials. He was scourged "five
times," in " prisons frequent " and in " deaths oft," thrice " beaten with rods," once
"stoned," "thrice suffered shipwrecks," in "perils in the sea" and on land, midst foes
and friends, in the "wilderness" and in cities, tried by " weariness and painfulniss, in
watohings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nak<:dness."
Besides all this, he refers to the trials that came "daily" upon him in "the care of all
the Churches." The Churches were dear to his heart, and all the dissensions, heresies,
unchastities, immoralities, that appeared from time to time in the Churches would carry
anguish into his heart. Why he should refer in the last verse to the event that
happened at Damascus, when he was let down " through a window in a basket," has
been a puzzle to commentators. But as it was amongst his first trials as an apostle, it,
perhaps, made the greatest impression on his mind. Tiie trials here sketched indicate
several things. 1. The mysteriousness of OocPs procedure with his servants. One
might have thought that the man inspired with supreme love to God, and receiving a
commission from him, involving the salvation of souls, would have had his way made
clear and safe and even pleasant for him ; that in his path no enemy should appear, no
peril should threaten, no pain should be endured, that all things would be propitious;
that he who embarked in such an enterprise as Paul's would sail in a bark absolutely
secure, under a sky without a cloud, with every billow and every breeze propitious.
But not so. The more important the Divine work entrusted to a man, and the more
fiiithful he is In its discharge, the more trials will embarrass and distract him. For an
explanation of this we must await the great explaining day. 2. The unconqueriiblrness
of Christly love in the soul. What stimulated Paul to eu;bark in such an enterprise
as this? What urged him on through innumerable difficulties and dangers? What
bore him up under distressing and ever-thickening trials ? Here is the answer :
"The love of Christ constraineth me." This is the love that is unconquerable and
all-conquering, the love that makes the true hero. 3. The indelihility of the impres-
sions which trials produce. The trials in this long catalogue, so varied and tremen-
dous, had long since transpired, but they were fresh in Paul's memory. Each one
stood before the eye of his memory in living reality. It is a law in our nature that
our trials make a deeper impression on us than our mercies. Why should this be so ?
Because they are the exceptions, not the rule. 4. The blensedness which the memory of
trials rightly endured produces. In Paul's case it did two things. (1) It generated
sympathy with the woes of others. " Who is weak, and I am not weak ? who is
offended, and I bum not?" No man can sympathize with the trials of others unless
he has passed through trials himself. The sufferings that Christ endured qualified him
to sympathize with the woes of the world. He who hungers for sympathy in his
sufferings will go in vain to the man who has never suffered. (2) It inspired the soul
with true rejoicing. " If I must needs glory. I will glory of the things which concern
mine infirmities." The reminiscence of the trials he had endured, the foes he had
encountered, the perils he had braved, in the cause of Christ were now for him subjects
for congratulation and glorifying. They had exerted such a beneficent influence on his
character, and were endured in such a noble cause, that he rejoiced in them. In
declaring all this Paul makes a solemn appeal for its truth. " The God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is blessed for evermore, knoweth that I lie not."

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUmOES.

Vers. 1 — 6. — Belations of the apostle to the Corinthiom* ; ground of anxiety. How
shall we read this chapter ? To read it aright it is certain that we must do more than

n. OOBINTHIANS. B



274 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. xi. 1—33.

exercise the understanding on its contents ; more than treat it as an argument intended
to set forth a definite conclusion ; and, especially, more than a defence, on any privata
grounds, of St. Paul's character and conduct. First of all, a general view of the situa-
tion is necessary. In this large, growing, and influential city, a bond of connection
between Asia and Europe, a median through which thf most prominent agencies of the
day operated over a very broad surface, — in this active and aspiring city a Ohristian
Church had been founded by St. Paul on his first visit. It was an era in his apostleship.
Of Greek intellect and habits, he had learned enough at least to give a special bias to his
style of preaching. Thrown among a population of Jews, Romans, Greeks, and adven-
turers from every quarter of the glube, he found a degree of skill and prudence necessary
in the management of his work that had not been required in any previous stage of his
career. Shrewd money-lovers were all around him; he would practise his trade and
support himself. Aquila and Priscilla had stood faithfully by liis side and cheered his
toil. He preached in the synagogue, trouble came, and he transferred his work to the
house of Justus. A vision from God assured him of help and protection, and one of
its fulfilments occurred when Gallic rlrove the apostle's persecutors, the turbulent Jews,
from " the judgment-seat," and, in the subsequent tumult, " cared for none of these
things." But it was more than an era in his Uiinistry. It was an epoch in the history
of the gospel. There had been something like a repetition of Pentecost. None of the
outward symbols, and yet a mighty descent of the Holy Ghost in the number and
variety of gifts. If the great Pentecost had been followed by sad lapses in the cases of
Ananias and Sapphira, even by lying unto the Holy Ghost whose dispensation had just
been inaugurated, could it be wondered at that disoider, misrule, heart-burnings, strife,
immoralities, had sprung up as tares among the wheat in this luxuriant harvest? It
was Corinth out and out. It was the excitable emporium in one of those ferments, good
and evil intermixed, which have happened at intervals in the history of the Church. To
check the unhealthy excitement, to purify the Church from corruption, to suppress
rivalries and animosities between parties, St. Paul had put forth all his wisdom, energy,
and fidelity, and, in large measure, had succeeded. At this point, a closer view of the
situation becomes necessary. Looking at St. Paul as the apostle to the Gentiles, we
see at once the significance of his relation to the Corinthian Church. Humanly
speaking, he had fought here his greatest battle and had won a grand victory. Where
was there a Church potentially of such promise ? Where such an array of brilliant
endowments ? Where such a manifoldness and plenitude of captivating gifts ? Here,
in the very city where the Jews had required a sign and the Greeks had sought after
wisdom ; here, in the very metropolis of Achaia, where learning and culture and Jewish
traditions were so strongly entrenched behind wealth and social influence, he had chosen
to lay a peculiar and profound stress on " the foolishness of preaching." And the
Christ crucified had suddenly revealed himself as the Christ glorified, had rcfulfiUed
his promise of the Holy Ghost, and a glorious Pentecostal season had been granted to
Corinth. It was the miracle of all the miracles in his career. How personal it was to
him as the apostle to the Gentiles is obvious. It was akin to the demonstration raado
before Jerusalem and her Sanhedrim in behalf of the twelve ; and if that event gave
St. Peter a commanding attitude at once, only second to that, if indeed second, was
this outpouring of the Holy Spirit as an attestation from Christ the Lord of the special
ministry of St. Paul Amid these signs and wonders dissension and bitter strife had
appeared at Corinth. Most alarming of all, Judaizers had come from Jerusalem to
assail St. Paul's authority and destroy his influence. They had been zealous, unscru-
pulous, persistent, malignant. At every point they had attacked him, and they had a
sufficient following to make the apostle apprehend serious damage. The persecution, he
had hoped, was checked if not ended. But it had broken out anew, and that, too,
while writing this Second Epistle. It was a severe blow. He was not prepared for it
Could it be possible that his work here was to be undone, or, if not that, to be arrestee
by these unprincipled adversaries? Corinth was the key to the vast citadel of the West
should he lose it from his hand ? It is in the light of these facts that we must read thir
eleventh chapter. And if we find him making a most vigorous and determined effort
to reinstate his authority over the disaffected portion of the Corinthian Church, let us
remember that it is not Paul as an individual, but St. Paul as an apostle — the apostle to
the Gentiles — who pleaded for a cause far dearer to him than reputation, honour, or life



CH. XL 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0RINTHIAN8. 275

itself. It was not a party, however strong, but the Church he needed in his future
work. The opening verse of the chapter indicates his sense of the embarrassing posi-
tion. " Would that ye could bear with me in a little foolishness, nay indeed bear w ith
me." To commend himself to them by this frequent recital of his labours and
sufferings must have heen exceedingly painful to one of his sensibility. Only as a
duty to his apostleship and to them could he do it, and hence he says, " I am jealous
over you with godly jealousy." The figure introduced is expressive of love and purity :
" For I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to
Christ." But what is the actual state of the Corinthian Church? Is it making ready
for presentation as a bride to the Bridegroom when he shall appear in his glory ?
There is ground for his jealousy : " I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent beguiled
Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that
is in Christ." Deception is plainly stated as the danger threatening them — no ordinary
danger, for it had an infernal origin, one that had been suncessful even with Eve in
Paradise ; and as these new teachers were using just such insidious arts, he warns them
lest they fall into the snare. The character to be maintained was virginal purity ; the
end to be kept in view was that Christ's betrothed Church might be worthy of her
Lord at the marriage supper ; the peril was the deceitfulness of agents who, under the
mask of instructors and authoritative guides, were acting in the interest of Satan ; and
the enforcement of the warning was the success of the serpent as Satan's instrument
in beguiling Eve. If Eve could be deceived in her purity, how great the danger to
this chaste virgin 1 The "subtlety" had lost none of its persuasive arts; thorough
the deception then, thorough would it he now, if they hearkened to these false
teachers. To supplant the gospel by the Law, to sink the Christian Church in the
Jewish Church, to rob him of his disciples and degrade them into the slaves of
Pharisaic superstitions already in their dotage, — this was the mercenary aim of these
emissaries of Satan. Such they were, as he would presently show. And what were the
evidences of imminent danger ? If this new preacher come to you preaching another
Christ, another Spirit, another gospel, how would you receive him ? Would you refuse
to hear him ? Nay ; you would " bear with him," dallying with temptation, blinded,
fascinated, opening your hearts to the " subtlety " of the " serpent." On this account
he was unhappy. The chaste virgin should listen to no hints of another love. Aside
from such conduct, as most evil in itself, what consistency had it with their relation to
him as their apostle ? He it was who had espoused them to Christ as the Bridegroom,
and therefore his jealousy lest they should be " corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ." The passage is very diiEcult to understand, and we are by no means sure
that we have caught the true meaning. But these seem to be the main points, viz. :
1. St. Paul claims that he has espoused them to Christ, and that he was anxious to
present the Church as a chaste virgin to him. 2. There was great danger of their losing
this virginal purity. 3. If this purity were lost, it would be through the subtlety of
Satan acting by means of human agency. 4. This agency threatened the Corinthians
even now, some of whom were inclined to reject his authority and become the disciples
of these arrogant and self-sufHcient teachers. 5. His authority was indisputable.
" Not a whit " was he " behind the very chiefest apostles," and this had been demon-
strated most signally by his apostolic labours in Corinth. " Eude in speech," according
to the Grecian standard of rhetoric, but " not in knowledge ; " so that if some of the
Corinthians went after another preacher with a different Christ and Spirit and gospel,
and would " bear with him " and " might well bear," it would be in contempt of him
who had been " made thoroughly manifest " among them as " not a whit behind the
very chiefest apostles," and that, too, " in all things." " Bear with him," the new
teacher, weaning yon away from your former love ? Then " bear with me a little in
my folly : and indeed bear with me." If you accede to his claims who comes to you
with such a novel, presumptuous, and overbearing manner, then surely you can tolerate
me in the little folly of lowering myself to a comparison with him. I condescend to
it for your sakes and for my own. The equal of any apostle, I let myself down to
this folly, and " would to God ye could bear with me " in it 1 — L.

Vera. 7—12. — Questions asked and amxivtred. His enemies had charged th«t, if ha
were an apostle, he would have claimed a support from the Corinthians. Instead of



276 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. to. 1—33



that, he had worked at his trade as a tentmaker, and done what he could to gain a
livelihood. It had been used against him. Was it, then, heneath the dignity of an
apostle to lahour with his own hands ? What his right was to a maintenance he
knew and they knew. But he had waived this right for reasons most satisfactory to
himself. Had he committed a sin in this voluntary abasement that ihey might be
exalted by his preaching gratuitously tlie gospel of God? Was this at varianc"^ with
his statement that he had been "thoroughly made manifest" among them "in ill
things," and was not " a whit behind the very chiefest apostles " ? In coming to
Corinth, and while labouring there, he hart " robbed other Churches," and what he
lacked in sustaininjj himself liad been supplied from Macedonia. This was done that
he might not be " burdensome " unto them. Would his opponents say that he would
claim remuneration for the future, or that he was running up a debt against them ?
Nay; the future shall be as tlie past. " So will I keep myself." Speaking in accord-
ance with Christ's truth in him, he would avow a fixed determination that this boasting
should never be denied him in Achaia. But would they misinterpret this lauguaae and
accuse him of wanting kind feelings towards them ? " God knoweth." To be suspected
of such a motive would do him wroivj;, since he meant it to be a proof of the sincerity and
earnestness of his ministry in their behalf. No one should charge him with seilishneas ;
he would be disinterested in all the services rendered to Corinth, that he might "cut
off occasion from them " who were always eager to find or make an " occasion " against
his apostleship. Had he, then, descended from the ordinary level of the apostolic office,
and abased himself, that the Corinthians might be exalted by a special proof of his
disinterested love? Further than this, he would protect the Church against these
money-loving partisans, who, while standing in a hostile attitude towards him and his
work, were looking after their own sordid interest, and intent on making a gain of
godliness. " Wherein they glory, they may be found even as we." It was the spiritual
intelligence of love. It was the prudence of sanctified worldly experience ; and the
wisdom of the serpent and the harmlessness of the dove were never more happily
blended. — ^L.

Vers. 13 — 15. — Character of these teachers. Indications of a marked change in the
apostle respecting these intruders at Corinth appear in the tenth chapter. Recent
circumstances had aroused his attention to their acrid and persistent hostility as directed
against him and the spiritual welfare of the Church. From the first he had not
misjudged them. Under all their specious arts he had detected a low and carnal spirit,
calculated to affect these volatile Corinthians and obstruct the progress of his ministry.
Meantime they had increased in boldness and audacity, and assailed him with more
impetuous virulence. Evidently, then, there was a growth in his convictions as to
their mischief-making power, and of late these convictions had become very strong.
The growth is apparent both in his thought and feeling, and in such a mind as tit.
Paul's it could not be long in reaching his will and shaping itself in a resolute purpose
to put down the evil. So long as it was mainly a personal vexation, he had borne it
patiently ; but the hour had come when, while true to " the meekness and gentleness of
Christ," he must show " the rod." Very clearly is the military attitude of his miurt
exhibited in the previous chapter. He speaks of " weapons," of their might to over-
throw " strongholds " and " cast down imaginations," and of his readiness at the proper
moment " to revenge all disobedience." 'ibis deepening intensity finds utterance in the
paragraph now under consideration. Unable to repress his feelings any longer, he gives
them expression in the most forcible form his language could assume as it regarded the
religious pretensions of these men. They are "false apostles, deceitful workers, trans-
forming themselves [by their own act] into the apostles of Christ." Looking at the
matter from St. Paul's point of view, nothing worse could be said of them. What his
description involved quickly appears. " No marvel ; " how could there be any room for
surprise ? It was characteristic of him, the great adversary, to send just such " apostles ; "
for " Satan himself transforms himself into an angel of light." Perfectly natural ; sender
and sent are one ; and the union is seen in the transforming power. No great thing if
" his ministers " should so fashion themselves as to seem " ministers of righteousness."
A nd having stated who and what they were, he announces their future doom : " whose
end shall be according to their works." We see now why he mentioned his fear in the



OH. XL 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIAN& ZT,

opening of the chapter, and referred to Eve as led into sin by the subtlety of the serpent,
and we see also why he spoke of their bearing with these hypocrites. Hitherto simie
of the Church had been deceived by the plausible devices of these persons. But he had
opened their eyes to the danger, and, if they continued to listen to these ministers of
Satan, tliey themselves would be willing dupes and participants in their guilt "whose
end shall be according to their works." The passage has a deep spiritual meaning. It
shows us the great power of Satan in adapting himself to circumstances and using
means suited to times and occasions. It shows him versatile, adroit, untiring in
inventiveness as well as in energy, and able to impart to others this transforming or
fashioning power which he pre-eminently possesses. Not only does the Pauline theology
recognize the inherency of sin in our nature, but in addition thereunto it recognizes h
mighty agent who employs the utmost skill and a prodigious strength of will and
passion to call out and direct this indwelling evil. And it shows this Satanic agency
working in the Church, and even counterfeiting the apostleship. The passage is full
and explicit. Its force cannot be evaporated in rhetoric; its truth is the sternest
reality in most earnest speech. A critical occasion had arisen, one of momentous
interest in the history of Christianity, one that presented a turning-point in St. Paul's
career, and he met this occasion by exposing the diabolical source of their conduct.
Prom his course of action we may learn a very useful lesson. His way of dealing with
sin looked to a personal agent beyond the sinner — one with the sinner and yet distinct
and separate, and this agent exerting his tremendous ability in exciting all the latency
of evil as unconscious to the sinner, and with it all his conscious susceptibility, so as to
accomplish his eternal ruin. Too often with us this Satanic power in men is not duly
estimated. In trying to save men, we should remember from whom we are delivering
them, and what an awful hold Satan's tyranny has upon their souls. As a practical
fact, this is a matter of vast importance. And, accordingly, we find the Lord Jesus
impressing on the apostles that the Holy Ghost was not only to convince the world of
" sin " and of " righteousness," but also of " judgment " — " because the prince of this
world is judged." How else, indeed, could the work of conviction be consummated ?
Precisely here the Spirit perfects his gracious office as the Divine Convincer; and
precisely here we must labour with all diligence and prayerfulness in order to convince
men that they are by nature the subjects of thii jaince, and that only Christ, who has
"judged " him, can deliver them from his bondage. No closeness of contact with man
as mere man will meet the requirements of the case. It is man, the servant of sin
because the slave of the devil, with whom the preacher of the gospel has to do, and
unless he realize as far as may be the fearful import of Christ's words, " Ye are of your
father the devil," it is not likely he will co-operate with the Holy Ghost in bringing
men to that depth and thoroughness of repentance which go far to determine the
stability and worth of future Christian character. Depend upon it, our danger at this
point is real and serious. What is the human nature with which we are struggling
in the daily endeavours of thought and in special sabbath efforts, praying, wrestling,
agonizing, that it maybe rescued from unbelief and restored to its Father? Inspi-
ration is never content to portray it as merely far gone from original righteousness,
dead in trespasses and sins, but the very phraseology takes its deepest import from
ideas and images originally associated with Satan. If detached from Satan, such
terms as " subtlety," " blindness," " deceitfulness," " bewitched," " craftiness," " be-
guiled," " wiles," " snares," " captivity," " bondage," would lose the peculiar force which
always accompanies them in the Scriptures. And with this use of language the spirit
of the New Testament accords when its writers are setting forth human depravity in
its siJecial relations to Christ's mediatorial work. Is Judas about to negotiate for the
betrayal of Jesus of Nazareth ? " Satan entered into him." Is St. Peter over-confident,
proud of his devotion to Jesus, full of daring ? " Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath
deeired to have you, that he may sift you as wheat." St. John : " He that committeth
sin is of the devil." St. Peter : " Your adversary, the deviL" St. James : " Resist the
deviL" St. Paul : " Recover themselves out of the snare of the deviL" Surely, then,
this uniform tenor of scriptural language, coupled with Christ's most emphatic declara-
tion as to man's incapacity to see Satanic agency in its true light except through the
convicting office of the Holy Ghost; surely, we say, this should impress us very deeply
as to the urgent need of mining prominent in oar preaching and teaching the fact of



278 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [cH. ii. 1—33

Satan's enormous power over the human soul. Time was when this truth was felt fai
more profounrlly than now, or at least when it filled a much larger space in pulpit
thought and Christian literature. And the fruits of it appeared everywhere, not only
ill a higher order of religious sentiment, but in the amenability of folly and vice to that
riKiral fear which no community can afford to lose. Wickedness abounded then, as now,
and yet wickedness was open to the probing of its conscience and to the disturbance of
iis sensibilities, nor did it commonly have the complacent hardness and the defiant
attitude towards the solemn hereafter which it now wears as its familiar aspect. Com-
munities had convictions then on moral and religious subjects, but only sections ol
communities (speaking generally) have such convictions now. Men of convictions
were sure of an audience. Savonarola could not but be heard. Luther had an intense
realization of an evil spirit ; less of it would have made him less of a reformer. Milton
and Bunyan, the two names that Englishmen would choose as the finest representatives
of English genius and manhood in the literary spheres they filled, wrote as men who
realized that Satan was something more in the affairs of the world than a subject for
artistic treatment. We have come to the closing quarter of the nineteenth century, and
within the century the land of Luther has given us 'Paust' with Mephistupheles, and
the England of Milton and Bunyan has gives us ' Festus ' with Lucifer. Insensibly
to itself, the pulpit has caught the effeminate spirit of the age, and it discusses sin
much more than it grapples with Satan in sin. " For this purpose the Son of God was
munifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil." If the most tender and
loving soul among inspired thinkers could lay such an emphasis on this truth, assuredly
there is a way for this doctrine to be strenuously preached, free fiom every taint of
extravagance and morbid imagination. Depend upon it, when we throw this doctrine
into the background of set purpose, or when we let it lapse from our grasp by casual
infirmity, we have nothing left but a fragmentary Christ and a depleted ethical
Christianity. — L.

Vers, 16 — 20. — Comparison of himself with his opponents. The weapons of his
warfare were not carnal, and yet he must use, under protest and with undissembled
humiliation, the weapons of his enemies. Boasting was their favourite art. Woiild
they think him a fool ? Let him not be so considered. If, however, they would regard
him in this light, nevertheless he must " boast a little." Only he would pray to bo
heard by the Corinthians, but, at the same time, he wished it understood that he was
speaking as a man, not as an apostle. " That which I speak, 1 speak it not after the
Lord, but as it were foolishly, in this confidence of boasting." St. Paul is careful to
state when he speaks from his own mind, and he is equally concerned to let his readers
know that, if others boasted from mean and selfish motives, he boasted in a very
different spirit from theirs. " Many glory after the flesh," referring to his adversaries,
and "I will glory also," but not as they do. "After the Lord" and "after the flesh"
are contrasted, and yet in doing this (boasting), if he imitated the manner of these
" false apostles, deceitful workers," there was nothing false or deceitful in his conduct.
What he boasted of was matter of fact ; and then he remarks, continuing the ironical
vein in which he had been arguing, that the Corinthians were well able to bear with
his foolishness, since they suffered fools gladly, seeing that they were wise. " Wise,"
verily. Then he cites what they had endured from these new teachers. Where was
their freedom? They had been brought into "bondage" — moral and ecclesiastical
submiMion to tyrannical rulers. Where was their self-protection against imposition
and craftiness, their discernment of men and motives? They had been taken in,
captured, devoured, by these designing men. Where was their self-respect? These
" fools," whom they suffered " gladly," had exalted themselves and humiliated a Church
abounding in special endowments. Where, finally, was their manliness? They had
borne insolence, personal ill treatment — had been smitten on the face. Such was his
arraignment of these " false apostles," such his indictment of those Corinthians who
had aUowed themselves to be dominated by these insulting pretenders. Such, too, wag
the background for a vivid picture now to be sketched. — L.

Vers. 21—33. — What St. Paid was and what he had suffered a> an apostle of Christ,
If, indeed, the standard of strength which the deceiving ministers of Satan had set uf



CH. XL 1—38,] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 279

among them were a correct one, tlien he must say that he had heen weaJc in his inter-
course with them on his visit to Corinth. He had not abused them as slaves, nor been
avaricious, nor offered them insults. Yes ; he must admit that they were strong and
he weak, they wise and he foolish, and he confesses the shame he felt. The sharp irony
is now dropped, and he proceeds to show what reasons he had for genuine boasting. If
he had to vindicate his claims against these men who had transformed themselves into
" ministers of righteousness," it was extremely abasing, but he would be hold (boastful),
•ince there was no escape from the painCul task. And, as we shall see, he would do it
with gieat deliberation, item by item, the points clearly made, apd only such points as
were capable of easy verification.

I. As TO NATIONALITY. These Judaizers, seeking to prop up a sinking theocracy by
means of a peiTerted Cliristianity, and ]iutting a most inordinate and carnal estimate on
their prerogatives as members of an elect race, had made on this score a very earnest
appeal to the Corinthians, and especially to the converted Jews. "Are they Hebrews?"
By this general race-title the chosen people had been early known, and it was still in
vogue. If they are Hebrews, St. Paul says, " so am I." Again, "Are they Israelites?"
That name was derived from Israel, the name given to Jacob after wrestling with the
angel at Peniel, and designated, originally, the union of the tribes as one community
under Jehovah's rule, and set apart to bear witness against all idolatry. "Israelite"
carried in its import a reference to the nation as representative of the Divine unity,
and was, therefore, distinctively religious. St. Paul responds again, "So am 1."
Finally, as to nationality. " Are they the seed of Abraham ? so am I." One by
one the honourable distinctions are mentioned, closing with the highest — a son of
Abraham, and in them he claims equality with these pretentious teachers. There
was an evident reason for this mode of procedure. No one suspected his devotion to
the Gentiles and his zeal in behalf of the apostleship of the unoircumcision. But
there were prejudices, strong and bitter, against him on his supposed want of fealty to
his nation, and hence his anxiety to show on all occasions that he prized his blood and
loved his people. We see from our standpoint that he was an ideal Jew, the truest and
most sagacious Jew of his age ; and yet it was a memorable part of his discipline, and
a main factor in his fortunes, to be subjected to all sorts of vexations and persecutions
on the ground of disloyalty to his nation. Other uses he subsequently made of these
and similar facts, giving them an enlarged application (Phil, iii.), and directing them
with exclusive intent to objects then engaging his thought ; but, at present, he only
individualizes far enough to prove that the " false apostles " had no advantage over
him as to national ties.

II. As TO THE MINISTRY OP THE LoED Jesub. Do these men claim to be Christ's
ministers? Whatever they might assume to be in this regard, he (speaking as one
beside himself) " was more." And what evidence shall he give of the fact that he was
more? Shall he point to his wonderful successes ? "He proceeds to mention, as the
reason for his pre-eminence, no illustrious achievements or wonderful results he had
accomplished, but difficulties, troubles, conflicts, perils" (Kling). Could more be
condensed in the same number of words than he compresses in one short verse ? . The
" more" means "in labours more abundant, in stripes above measure, in prisons more
frequent, in deaths oft." But he will furnish particular illustrations of the statement
just made. His own countrymen head the. list, for "of the Jews five times received I
forty stripes save one," thrice was he "beaten with rods," once stoned, thrice ship-
wrecked, " a night and a day in the deep." Yet this is only a partial account, and he
offers other instances of his superior devotion as a minister of Christ. There were his
frequent journeys, and what a history of perils 1 — perils of waters, perils of robbers,
perils by his own countrymen, perils by the heathen, perils in the city, perils in the
wilderness, perils in the sea ; did not this enumeration exhaust the sad experience ?
Nay ; one pictures him pausing at this point and falling into a mood of most touching
reflection. To one who loved the name of brother in Christ as he did, who recalled
how Ananias had come to him at Damascus and addressed him as " Brother Saul," and
who remembered how often it had cheered him to be recognized and honoured as a
brother in the ministry, what could be more oppressive to his spirit than to write at
the last, "perils among false brethren"? Thus closes the account of perib. Have his
sorrows all been catalogued ? The outward sufferings have been generalized in (;las!«a



280 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. h. 1—33.

of peril and in forms of physical torture. Enough has been said to make good his
claim to pre-eminence in affliction for the cause of Christ. Outside of the duties he
was discharging as the Lord's servant, not one of these evils had befallen him. It was
the cross of Christ, and only the cross, which had brought all these upon him. But he
had more to say. A man of feeble health, of acute nervous sensibility, struggling
with disease and infirmity ; who among us can enter into all he meant by " weariness
and painftilness, watchings often, hunger and thirst, fastings often, cold and naked-
ness"? It is only a rude outline ; imagine the details. But what were details to him ?
The rapid summation shows why he writes. Artistic efftct offers him no temptation.
Literary motives are impossible to his imagination and tastes. The eagerness of his
spirit, approaching a topic most dear to his soul, hurries him to " the care of all the
Churches." Ah ! that was something transcendent. Daily it came upon him amidst
weariness, painful-ness, and other ills, and daily it came as a crowd pressing upon him
with anxieties beyond utterance. Sympathy is incapable of complete expression. It
oannot make itself known. It can only make itself felt, and therefore contents itself
with hints. " Who is weak," sympathy asks, " and I am not weak ? " And who is
overcome by temptation (made to stumble), and I bum not ? The sympathetic man
is now deeply moved, and his heart breaks forth, " If I must needs glory, I wiU glory
of the things which concern mine infirmities [my weakness]."

III. The teub nature op his boastino. Examine this fragment of St. Paul's
biography, and what do you find as the shaping thought? It is the idea of suffering
as expressive of human infirmity. Suffering for a moral purpose is continually kept
before the mind, and, agreeably to that end, it is suffering that not only humbles its
subject in a spiritual point of view, but humiliates him in the eyes of the world.
Hence the conclusion to which he brings the mournful narration, " If I must needs
glory, I will glory of the things which concern my weakness." No doubt it seemed
very strange to many that he should boast of these things, but this was its justification.
Had it not appeared as " folly," it would not have vindicated him against the malicious
taunts of his adversaries; for it is exactly such a "folly" as identifies his life and
experience with the " foolishness " of the gospel, the preaching of Christ crucified, on
which, at the outset, he had laid a very distinctive stress. Boast he must to meet the
low state of intellect and spirituality in those of the Church who had fallen under
the influence of these self-aggrandiang "apostles." Boast he would in defence of
himself, of his motives and intentions. Yet, while stooping to such a worldly method,
he would do so in no carnal spirit, but as one who had a profound sense of his own
unworthiness. What did the Jewish world think of his apostleship? Let the five
times " forty stripes save one " answer. What did the Roman world think of it ? The
thrice " beaten with rods " was the reply. No allusion is made to his having been a
" blasphemer " and " persecutor," for this had no bearing on the question at issue. It
is a contrast throughout of himself with the " deceitful workers." And, finally, to
make the contrast as perfect as possible, he refers to " the care of all the Churches "
among the G-entiles. This point reached, he shows why he had made these concessions
to the folly of certain Carinthians, and his true heart exclaims, " If I must needs glory
I will glory of the things which concern my weakness." Here, then, we have the first
distinct appearance of one among those great thoughts that we find frequently in
various forms in his subsequent writings — the idea of glorying in his infirmities. Not
enough is it for him to accept it as a burden and tolerate it as a thing providentially
ordained to be borne. From this hour he enters on a higher experience, for he has
learned to cherish a sentiment as well as find a duty and a principle in his infirmities.
He wiU welcome them, he will press them to his heart as a treasure, he will "glory"
in them. And if, hereafter, we shall often listen to his exultation when he rejoices in
tribulation and glories in the cross, we can revert to the time and circumstances
that first made this experience an era in his career. No wonder that he appeals
with such solemnity to God for the truths asserted. It is a moment of impassiomd
thought which brings the past most vividly before his eye, and lo 1 the opening scene
in a long series of afflictions for the gospel. There it was — the far-off Syrian city of the
Damascenes, and the beginning of that persecution which the Jews had continued so
unrelentingly. And there, too, it had been announced to Ananias in a vision that the
Lord ha^i made Saul of Tarsus " a chosen vessel " unto himself, and would show him



OH. XI. 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE GOEINTHIANS. 281

" how great things he must suffer." Straightway the revelation of sorrow began, for
the stay at Damascus was interrupted by a conspiracy of the Jews, and he sought refiiga
in Arabia. All the intervening years had been years of suffering, the first link of the
unbroken chain forged by the hatred of the Jews at Damascus, the last up to this period
forged by the same hands at Corinth, and the issue of his experience was that he had
learned to glory in his weakness. — ^L.

Ver. 4. — A different gospel. That the apostle was pained, distressed, and mortified
by the partial success with which the false teachers, his opponents, had met at Corinth,
is very obvious from his bitter and sarcastic language. He reproached the Corinthians
that, indebted as they were to his labours, and grateful as they had shown themselves
for the benefits conferred upon them through him, they were nevertheless ready to
forget the lessons they had learned and the teacher they had revered, and to allow
themselves to be led away into false and delusive doctrines.

I. That is a different gospel which proclaims anothek Jesus. The Judaizing
teachers acknowledged that Jesus of Nazareth was the Messiah, but they seem to have
represented him as merely human, as merely a prophet, as destitute of Divine claims
upon the faith and reverence of men. The form of error changes, whilst the sub-
stance remains. In our own day there are public teachers who commend Jesus to the '
admiration and the imitation of men, but who ridicule or despise the notion that he is
the one Saviour, that he is the rightful Lord, of humanity.

II. That is a different gospel which breathes another spirit than that oj
THE New Testament. The Judaizers taught the doctrine of the letter, the doctrine
of bondage to the Law. In this their religion was contradictory to the religion of Jesus,
of Paul, of John, who upheld the religion of liberty, who taught that the heart inflamed
with Divine love will itself prompt to deeds of obedience, who discountenanced the
merely formal and mechanical compliance with the letter of the Law, as altogether
insuflficient. In our own day there are those who lay all stress upon the form, upon that
which is external and bodily ; these pibclaim a "different gospel."

III. That is a different gospel which neglects to offer the free saltation
OF God to sinful man. Whether this be the consequence of a defective view of man's
sinful condition, or of a failure to enter into the glorious counsels of Divine compassion,
or of an unworthy desire to retain a priestly power in their own hands, the result is
that, if there be anything that can be called a gospel, it is a different gospel. In truth,
there is but one gospel — that which is the power of God unto salvation to every one
that believeth, a gospel which is worthy of all love and of all acceptation. — T.

Ver. 7. — Oratuitotis ministry. It has been usual for all communities who possess
religions ordinances and organizations to set apart an order of men to officiate as the
representatives of the people generally, and to maintain them either by voluntary
offerings or by public provision. The Lord Jesus sanctioned the maintenance of the
Christian ministry by his general principle, " The labourer is worthy of his hire." And
no one has more vigorously vindicated the right of spiritual teachers and preachers to
live at the expense of those whom they benefit than has the Apostle PauL Yet for
himself, as the text and context prove, he was determined to waive this right, and
to preach the gospel of God for nought. Why was this ?

I. The principle or gratuitous ministbt is the benevolence and bagbifioe of
Christ. Of our Lord Jesus we know that, though he was rich, yet for our sake he
became poor, that he had not where to lay his head, that he had no possessions in this
world which was yet his own. The spirit of the Master has in a greater or less measure
penetrated the disciples. They have felt the force of the appeal, " Freely ye have
received, freely give." No other religion has a supernatural power mighty enough to
overcome the selfishness and self-seeking so characteristic of human nature,

II. The aim of gratuitous ministry is the salvation of men. It is not expected
that men should labour without fee or reward in order to supply the ordinary bodily
and social wants of their fellow-men. The apostle preached at Corinth amidst weak-
ness, weariness, discouragement, and ingratitude, because he sought the spiritnal welfare
of the population of that wealthy, intellectual, but profligate city. His heart was
moved by the spectacle of vice and idolatry which encumbered him on every side, MidL



282 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. Foh. xl 1—33

being in possession of the true and only remedy, he sought to bring it within the reacl
and urge it upon the acceptance of all.

III. The special purpose op gbatuitotts hinistbt is to eemovb the ministri
ABOVE THE SUSPICION OP INTERBSTBD MOTIVES. It is upon this that the Apostle Paul
in this passage lays such stress. There were professing Christians who were ready
enough to bring the charge of oovetousness against the apostle of the Gentiles, and so to
undermine his credit and authority. There was one way in which such designs might
be surely and conclusively defeated, and, although this was a way involving self-denial
to himself, Paul adopted it. He laboured with his hands, he accepted help from the
poor Christians of Macedonia, so that he might hold himself altogether free from any
suspicion of working at Corinth for the sake of anything he might receive from the
Corinthians. Herein he exemplified his own axiom, " All things are lawful, but all
things are not expedient."

Application. 1. Learn the wonderful and unique power of the Christian religion,
which alone is capable of vanquishing the sinful selfishness of human nature. 2.
Learn the importance of so acting as not to leave room even for suspicion or calumny
to injure Christian character and cripple Christian usefulness. — T.

Vers. 13 — 15. — Hypocrisy. Like his Divine Master, the Apostle Paul, although
compassionate to the penitent, was severe with the hypocritical. The vehement language
he here uses with reference to his opponents and detractors is not to be attributed to
personal resentment, but to a stern and righteous indignation against those Who sought
to undermine his just influence, and so to hinder the progress of his gospel.

I. The manifestations op htpookist. 1. What these hypocrites professed to be :
"ministers of righteousness," and "apostles of Christ." They posed as such, and with
many of the guileless and unwary they passed as such. As far as profession, pretension,
and language went, all was well. 2. What they really were: "false apostles," and
" deceitful workers." They had no real grasp of Christian truth ; they gave no real
evidence of Christian principle ; they consequently could do no real spiritual work for
the good of the people.

II. Tecb motive of htpoorist. Some characters seem to find a pleasure in dissimu-
lation and deception for their own sake; but usually the motive is (1) to gain influence
over others, and enjoy their respect and support ; and (2) in this way to exalt them-
selves and secure their own selfish ends.

III. The great prototype of htpoorist. This is to be found in Satan himself,
who " fashioneth himself into an angel of light." It is the wont of the tempter, the
adversary of souls, to proceed by fraud, to invent specious pretexts for sin, and to give
to vice the semblance of virtue. It is wise to bear in mind that, whilst we have seme-
times to resist the devil and his open assaults, we have at other times to be wise as
serpents, that we may " not be ignorant of his devices."

IV. The discomfitueb and exposure op htpoorist. Hypocritical teachers of
religion and pretenders to authority may for a time escape detection by their fellow -
men, and may for a time be sufiftred by an overruling Providence to lead astray, if
possible, the very elect. But the day is coming which shall test every man and shall
try every man's work. The earthly course of the hypocrites may be according to their
words, according to appearances. But their "end shall be according to their woiks."
By these they must be judged, and, since these are evil, by these they shall be
condemned. — T.

Ver. 23. — Ministers of Christ. It was not congenial to St. Paul's nature to boasf.
He would have preferred to keep himself in the background, that his Lord might be
prnminent and might attract the attention and the admiration of all men. But his
apostolic authority and consequently the value of his life-work, the credibility of his
doctrines, the soundness of the Churches he bad founded, were all at stake. As to
his national position, that was comparatively immaterial. But the great question was
this — Was he, or was he not, a true minister of Christ ? His adversaries made great
pretensions ; he had no choice but to ovei-whelm them with his own unrivalled cre-
dentials : " Are they ministers of Christ t . . . I more!"

I. Tbdb ministers are appointed bt Christ. Whatever \k the bumaa, ths



DH. xLl— 38J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 283

ecclesiastical agency by which men are summoned to, prepared for, employed in, the
ministry of the gospel, all true Christians are agreed that the real appointment is by
the Divine Head of the Church. It is he who, from the throne of his glory, places one
minister in this position, and another in that, holding the stars in his right hand.

II. True ministers are witnesses to Christ. It was Paul's justifiable boast
" We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord." His ministry had for its one
great theme the character, the life, the sacrifice, the redemption of the Divine Saviour.
A ministry which, professing to be Christian, is concerned with anything rather than
with Christ, disci edits and condemns itself. Inadequate as is all human witness to our
Lord, it is required to be sincere and outspoken.

III. TiiUE MINISTERS ARE FOLLOWERS OP Chbist. Upon this the apostlc lays great
stress. His own ministry was, in many of its circumstances, a copy of his Lord's. His
labours, privations, and sufferings were all akin to those of the Lord whose spirit he
shared, and in whose steps he trod. The outward circumstances of the ministerial life
may vary, but the temper and aim must ever be those of the Divine Master.

IV. True ministers look for their reward to Christ. Had the apostle expected
an earthly recompense for all he undertook and underwent, bitter inoeed would have
been his disappointment. But he and every faithful minister must have one supremo
desire and aim — to receive the approval and the acceptance of the Divine Lord him-
self.— T.

Ver. 23. — Labours and prisons. This is one of those passages which enable us to
institute a comparison between the Book of the Acts and the apostolic Epistles. It is
true that some of the circumstances alluded to in the context have nothing correspond-
ing with them in St. Luke's narrative. But this exception proves the independence
of the documents, whilst the coincidences, which are numerous and striking, confirm
our faith in the authority and validity of both.

I. The various enduranobs involved in the apostolio life. 1. Labours abounded,
both of body and of mind ; almost incessant toil was continued throughout long years.
Journeyings, preaching, writing, were a constant strain upon his whole nature. 2.
Hardships, sufferings, perils, and persecutions were even more painful to endure.
There are many, especially in the prime of lile, to whom toil and effort are congenial ;
but none can do other than shrink from pains and imprisonments. Paul's enumera-
tion of his privations and afflictions shows how deep an impression they had made
upon his nature.

II. The aim op the apostolio life in view op which these experiences were
CHEERFULLY ACCEPTED. His purposc was, not his own exaltation, but the spread of
the gospel and the salvation of his fellow-men. His benevolent heart found in the
extension of that kingdom, which is " righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Q-host,"
an object worrhy of all his devotion and all his endurance.

III. The motive op the apostolio life. If it be asked — How came St. Paul to
voluntarily engage in a service which involved experiences so bitter ? there is but one
solution of the problem, but that is a sufficient and satisfactory one : " The love of
Christ constrained " him. No inferior motive can be relied upon for the production
of such results.

IV. The practical advantages aocruino to mankind from this apostolio life.
1. It has an evidential value. Why should such a man as Saul of Tarsus have lived
a life of obloquy, poverty, and suffering ? Is any other explanation credible than this

that he knew and felt that he was witnessing to the truth ? 2. It has a moral value,

both in the beneficent results of the ministry and in the illustration afforded of the
power of the gospel and of the Spirit of Christ to raise a true Christian above the control-
of influences and interests merely earthly and human. — T,

Ver. 28. — Anxiety for the Churches. Bodily labour and even suffering are sometimes
felt to be less oppressive than mental anxiety and care. The Apostle Paul was familiar
with all alike ; and in his case a peculiarly sensitive and sympathetic nature caused him
to feel more keenly and constantly than others might have done the pressure of daily
anxiety for the welfare of the converts he had made and the Churches he had founded.

I, Thb bkasons fob anxiety wrra sEaABD to the Churches. 1. Their immaturity



284 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. m. 1—33

They had been in existence but a few years, and were subject to the natural disadvan-
tages of youth and inexperience. They needed diligent watching and tender, fostering
care. 2. Their exposure to the insidious efforts of false teachers. Some of these sought
to lead the Ohrisllaas of the first age back into Judaism, others strove to introduce
Ucence and lawlessness. 3. Their constantly recurring needs. Some needed the visits
of evangelists or the ap)iointment of pastors. Others needed the instructions or counsels
which circumstances might render appropriate.

II. The practical pkomptings of apostolio anxiety. We see the evidences of
Paul's sincere solicitude for the Churches in : 1. His frequent visits, by which he brought
his personal influence to bear upon those whose welfare he sought and who naturally
luoked to him for help. 2. His Epistles, full of clear statement, convincing reasoninLt,
earnest persuasion, and faithful warning. 3. His selection and appointment of devoted
fellow-labourers to assist him in the superintendence and edification of the youthful
communities. 4. His fervent prayers, which abounded on behalf of all in whose
s| iritual well-being he was interested.

HI. The profitable lessons of apostolio anxiety. 1. A general lesson of mutual
interest and sympathy. Who can read this language without feelinsc to what an exteiil
it enforces the scriptural precept ? — " Look not every man upon his own tilings, but
every man also upon the thinjis of others." 2. A special lesson of mutual helpfulness
as the duty and privilege of all who occupy positions of influence and authority in
Christ's Church. Some forms of Church government tend rather to isolate Christian
communities than to draw them together. This tendency may be happily counteracted
by compliance with the precept implicitly contained in this declaration of the apostle. — T.

Vers. 2, 3. — Pastoral anxiety. How little understood by most believers! What
strange notions many form of ministerial experience! To not a few the pastor appears
a nionnrch with a minimum of duties and cares, and whose lot has thus fallen in singu-
larly easy and pleasant places. But what a heavy burden is carried by the most pros-
perous minister 1 He who seems to be surrounded by all that can make his ministry
cheering and his life happy is agitated by a host of disquieting thoughts and pressed
upon by innumerable anxieties. So was it with that amazingly successful minister,
the Apostle Paul. Following his line of thought, we may gain some knowledge of a true
pastor's experience.

I. The pastor's babnkst dbsiej. 1. That his testimony mny not he ineffective.
Sorely burdened is that pastor's heart whose words seem to fall to i he ground. He has
a great object in his earnest appeals ; if these fail, his strength lias been spent for
nought, his life fails. To preach on and on, and yet to see no spiritual result, strains
his heartstrings till they threaten to snap. Hope deferred makes the hea'-l sick, and, if
the people of his charge are merely interested or amused by his preachmg,. he cries,
" Woe is me ! " 2. That those to whom he preaches may he truly converted. He desires
that they may be united to Christ as a bride to her husband (ver. 2). He is not satisfied
with their thinking or speaking well of Christianity, or with their outward observance
of religious duties; his longing is for their real ledemption and for their thorough con-
secration to Christ. If he be faithful, he aims to attach them, not to himself, but to
his Master. His joy is full only when they are married to Christ, and live as those who
are no longer their own. For this he longs, prays, labours, agonizes. 3. That at last
they may appear in holiness hefore Christ. " That I might present you as a pure
virgin to Christ " (ver. 2). The true pastor desires, not only that his people should
start in the Christian race, but that they should continue, and at last attain to the
" crown of righteou-ness." Flash-in-the-pan conversions please none but fools. Pastoral
anxiety is largely the anxiety of watching development. The man of God has the toil
and care of building up spiritual life. He counts that labour lost, so far as the objects
of it are concerned, which has no abiding effects. The merest flasli of thought will
reveal the multitude of disappointments certain to crowd upon his soul.

II. The pastor's constant dread. This dread is lest his converts should fall away.
Lest it should be made evident that the good seed has, after all, fallen upon the way-
side, or into stony places, or amongst destructive thorns. He remembers: 1, The
power of the tempter. Perhaps, like Paul, he calls to mind the fall of Eve, and
remembers how much the children are like their mother. He feels the power of tempta-



CH. XI. 1-^.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 285

tion in himself; he sees others fall; he wonders whether his own converts will yield.
They are his crown of rejoicing when they stand fast ; his crown of thorns when they falL
2. The weakness of the human heart. He remembers the old natuit! still within them
— their infirmities, their tendencies to trust to their own strength. Tliey seem to be
easy prey for the devil. 3. The subtlety of false human teachers. So many other
gospels besides the true will be preached to them — adroitly contiived, it may be, to
pander to the carnality still remaining within them. Called by seductive names — bearing
the name of Christ possibly, and yet inimical to his kingdom and person. Philosopliies
falsely so called, and philosophers as full of confidence and conceit as of emptiness,
and yet presenting to shallow judgments the appearance of the fulness of wisdom.

TIL The pastob's JEALOUSY. 1. A watchful Jealousy. He will have to give account
of the souls entrusted to his care, so dares not be careless. He loves his flock, and
therefore watches over it. He watches for the approach of peril, if peradventure he
may avert it. He jealously scrutinizes all influences affecting his charge. His Master
is the shepherd ; he is the watch-dog. 2. A warning jealousy. His keen feelings had
to solemn admonitions when needed. He barks, and, when occasion arises, even bites ;
faithful are the wounds of such a fiiend. A short shrift is the desert of a pastor who is
but a dumb dog. Pity it is if our feelings are so fine that we cannot rebuke men to save
them from perdition. Silver bells are all very well for seasons of festivity, but when
the fire blazes forth we must swing lustily the rough alarm-bell in the turret. He is a
poor surgeon who is too tender-hearted to use the knife. If we love people very much we
shall be willing to hurt them that we may heal them. An unwarning jealousy is not
worth a farthing a bushel. It is a poor sham. 3. A godly jealousy. (Ver. 2.) (1) Jealousy
which centres in the welfare of others rather than in gratification at their attachment to
the minister of Christ. (2) Jealousy which is concerned pre-eminently with the honour
of God. The falls of professed Cliristians bring dishonour upon the cause of Christ. (3)
Jealousy wrought in the heart by God himself. A right feelinsr, since God has given it
ploce in the pastor's heart. (4) Jealousy which allies with God. Leading to prayer,
communion with God, dependence upon him in every strait. — H.

Vers. 7 — 12. — Misinterpretation. I. Our best acts mat be misintbrpeetbd. Acts
of the greatest nobility and unselfishness have often been. The world's greatest bene-
factors have tasted the bitteinoss of being misunderstood. 1. We should not judge of
our acts by man's estimate of them. 2. We should not be surprised by any interpreta-
tion put on them. 3. We should not he dismayed by any interpretation. 4. We should
rejoice that we have a higher, wiser, and more impartial tribunal than the human. Our
Master said, " Woe unto you when all men shall speak well of you ! " (Lulie vi. 26) — a
pregnant warning to those who live upon the approval of men !

IL MiSINTBKPKETATION SHOULD NOT HINDER US FROM CONTINUING IN A EISHT COURSE.

1. We have not to give account to men, but to God. 2. To change our conduct might
not avoid misinterpretation, but rather give occasion for it (ver. 12).

III. Misinterpretation mat be met at suitable times by explanation ^nd
JUSTIFICATION OF CONDUCT. 1. It is Well to take away occasion for misinterpretation.
Misinterpretation, like martyrdom, should not be courted. Both should be borne heroic-
ally when they meet us in the path of duty. 2. It is often well to show that mis-
interpretation is misinterpretation. We should not forget that misinterpretation may (1)
injure our usefulness ; (2) injure those who misinterpret us ; (8) brin;^ dishonour upnn
Christ. In this matter we have need to be wise as serpents and harmless as doves. — H.

Ver. 14. — A very beautiful angel. I. A startling fact. We learn from Paul that
the most sable of Ethiopians can change his skin and the fiercest beast of prey throw
off his warning garb. The blackest devil can appear as the brightest angel. This is,
indeed, a transfiguration, the most marvellous of transformation scenes. As an angel
of wisdom Satan appeared to Eve ; as an angel versed in theology, to Christ, ghbly
crying, " It is written." Satan was an angel of light. He thus knows well how to play
the angel. Herein is he to be feared. It is not the ugly devil we need dread so much
as the pretty devil. The old Scotchman's comment on the horned and hoofed Satan of
a celebrated picture of " The Temptation" is full of point : " If that chiel cam' to me in
sic an ugly shape, I think he wud hae • teuch job wi' me too."



286 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. xi. 1—33.

II. An explanation of some mysteries. 1. The power of temptation. Men fre*
quently fall before vihite temptations rather than hlach ones. Satan is an adept at
"hitewashing the sepulchre. The voice that calls us to sin sounds often more like the
voice of an angel than the voice of a devil. The great adversary transforms his temp-
tations as well as himself. 2. That wrong often seems much like right. Satan is a
clever editor. 3. That folly often seems wisdom. A most dexterous counsel is the
devil ; as we listen to him, folly is evidently wisdom, and wisdom certainly folly. His
splendid intellect overmasters ours when we cope with him alone.

III. Ak iMPRESsrvE WAENINO. 1. To ever be on our guard. We need have our wits
about us whilst we have such an enemy about us. To be careless in such peril would be
suicidal. Our guard should be severe ; none should be admitted within the gates but
proved friends. 2. Not to judge by appearances. Our tendency is to do so, and there-
fore the devil transforms himself. " I'here is a way which seemeth right unto a man,
but the end thereof are the ways of death " (Prov. xiv. 12). We must get below the
surface of things. We must take pains to ascertain the right and the good. Every
trap is baited, and the fool who concludes that there can be no difference between a bait
and a meal, is soon caught. 3. To seek trite viisdom and discernment. Conceit in our
own unaided powers is just what delights the devil, and he often preaches to us an
angelic discourse upon the pleasing theme of our wonderful faculties, before demonstrat-
ing our unutterable folly and weakness. We need know that we are know-nothings.
Self-distrust baulks Satan. When a man is on the pinnacle of pride ho can easily deal
with him, but when he is in the valley of humility and self-abnegation the enemy
gets sorely perplexed. Let us empty ourselves of the wind of conceit and self-
sufficiency, that God may fill us with his own wisdom. 4. To ever abide with Christ.
Thus alone can we be truly safe. Here alone shall we secure the victory. Christ over-
came the devil when he spake least like a devil, and, if we are truly with Christ, no
disguise of Satan shall deceive us, and no might of his shall overthrow us. The
cross of Christ is Ithuriel's spear, which, touching the tempter, reveals him in his
true character. — H.

Vera. 23 — 33. — Apostolie experiences on earth. I. These ezpebiekoeb, as nabbated
HBBB, assume A GLOOMY OHABACTER. 1. Painful. (1) BodUy suffering. Excessive
toil, prison privations, scourgings, stoning, shipwrecks, a night and day in the deep,
sleeplessness, coldness, foodlessness, nakedness. (2) Mental suffering, (a) Persecution
from Jews as well as Grentiles. His "own countrymen" hated him more fiercely than
any. (J) Hostility of false brethren. Peculiarly painful to such a noble nature as
Paul's, (c) Anxieties respecting the numerous Churches, (d) Acute sympathy with
the weak and hindered ones (ver. 29). 2. Perilous. What a catalogue of perils in
ver. 26 1 how extreme the one instanced in vers. 32, 33 ! how pathetic and suggestive
the expression, " in deaths oft " (ver. 23) ! Paul lived on the margin of the next world
Of him was it peculiarly true that he knew not what a day would bring forth.

H. Much of the painful and pebilous experiescb of the apostle abose
FBOU his xabtellous ZEAL AND ENTERPBI8E. He might have avoided not a little
by : 1. Being only moderately active. That delightful " mean " coveted by so many —
it was too mean for Paul ! 2. Being more compliant. If he had been a man of
expediency, and not, as he was, a man oi principle. If he had bent to the storm; but
he intended that the storm should bend to him, or rather to those God-truths which
he proclaimed. 3. Placing Ood^s honour in the second place. The servant was
persecuted so vindictively because he would talk so much of his Master. It was not
Paid that Jew and Gentile hated so much, but Christ ; but where Paul was there men
could hear of nothing but the contemned Nazaiene. 4. Loving himself more than a
perishing world. It was a question which should suffer, Paul or the world ; Paul said,
" I will." In his sphere he thus imitated his Lord, who, though he was rich, for our
sakes became poor.

III. No SUFFEBINO OB FBBIL SUCCEEDED IN DAMPING THE APOSTOLIC ABDOUB. HoW

keen must have been his love for Christ and for his fellow-men 1 Ever before him he
had the future exaltation of Christ and the " saving some." We have here a marvellous
triumph of mind over matter, and a still more marvellous one of spirituality over
carnality. The life of the apostle was so vigorous that he could bear to die daily,



OH. XL 1—33.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COKINTHIANS. 287



What little aches and pains stop us I An avalanche of grief and trial failed to arrest
Paul!
IV. It was only when subjected to great pbessubb, and then only under

PROTEST, that THE APOSTLE ALLOWED HIMSELF TO DWELL UPON THIS PERPETUAL

MARTYRDOM. He rejoiced in it ; yet he did not like to speak about it. He almost calls
iiimself a fool for doing so. Tiie martyr has sometimes sullied his crown by pride ; but
the apostolic affliction seemed strangely sanctified to him. Some are not great enough
to suffer muob for Christ. God does not allow it. It would make them so intolerable
that prayer would ascend on all hands for their transference to a world where they
would have a humble opinion of themselves. Paul went through all the privation,
anDtuish, peril, catalogued here, and came out from it with the spirit of a little
child. — H.

Ver. 3. — The simplicity in Christ. " So your minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ." Some manuscripts read, " simplicity and chastity." By the
term " simplicity" is first meant "singleness of affection," "single-minded devotion to
Christ," and the word is used in connection with the marriage figure of vers. 1, 2. It
should be remembered that, in the East, the time of espousal is regarded as sacred, and
any infidelities during the time of espousal ere treated as adulteries are after marriage.
In St. Paul's conception the Church is the espoused bride of Christ, and he had been
the means of arranging the espousal in the case of the Church at Corinth. "What
the apostle now urges isthat it is as natural for him to be jealous for the purity of the
Church which owes its birth to him, as it is for a father to be jealous for the chastity of
the daughter whom he has betrothed as to a kingly bridegroom." The older theocratic
figure of idolatry as adultery, which so often appears in the books of the prophets, should
be compared with this. The term " simplicity " may, however, be more full and
suggestive to us, and mean sinaleness of devotion to Christ, entireness of service to him,
unmixed love for him. P. W. Robertson says that the expression, " the simplicity of
the gospel," is constantly mistaken. " People suppose simplicity means what a child
or a ploughman can understand. Now, if this be simplicity, evidently the simplicity of
the gospel was corrupted by St. Paul himself; for he is not simple. Who understands
his deep writings ? Does one in a thousand? St. Peter says there are things hard to
be understood in St. Paul's Epistles. We often hear it alleged as a charge against a book,
a lecture, or a sermon, that it is not simple. If we are told that what we are to preach
must be on a level with the most inferior intellect, so that without attention or thought
it may be plain to all, we are bound to disclaim any obligation to do this ; if it is
supposed that the mysteries of God, of which we are the stewards, can he made as easy
of comprehension as an article in a newspaper or a novel, we say that such simplicity
can only be attained by shallowness. There must be earnestness, candour, patience,
and a certain degree of intelligence, as well as a sort of sympathy between the minds of
the preacher and his hearers, and there must be a determination to believe that no man
who endeavours to preach the gospel will deliberately and expressly say what he knows
to be false or wrong. ' Simple ' means, according to St. Paul, unmixed or unadulterated."

I. The PLACE OF Christ in the Church. It is as unique aa that of the husband
in relation to the wife. A place that can know no rivalry. Christ is Head, Lord,
Husband. " One is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are brethren." The old
testimony is renewed for the Christian spheres, " Hear, Israel, the Lord your God is
one Lord," " One Lord, one faith, one baptism." No earthly teachers may push into
his place. No claim of Judaic ceremonies may spoil the trust in and devotion to him.
" Him first, him midst, him last, him all in all." The bride has but one Husband, even
Christ.

II. The spirit of the Chubch towards Christ. It is that full loyalty which
follows upon setting our whole affection on Christ, and which finds expression in all
loving submissions and obediences. It is precisely set before us by the great apostle
when he says, "To me to live in Christ." "I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth
in me."

III. The temptations to which the Church is exposed. Answering to the
disloyalty of a wife. And such t<imptations may take forms of subtlety, like those
presented by tiie serpent to Eve. ia every age there are things which tend to take the



288 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. [ch. ii. 1—33

mind and heart from Christ. Nowadays it is worldliness, self-indulgence, the beautiful
in art, and the fascination of scientific knowledge. We want now to love and snve so
many things much and Christ a little, and still the old message sounds forth, " If a
man forsake not all that he hath, he cannot he my disciple." St. Paul counted " all
things loss for Christ," and would have nothing — Mnsiiic rite, human philosophy, or
aught else — ccme between him and his one Lord. — E. T.

Ver. 4. — One Jesus, one Spirit, one gospel. Evidently St. Paul recognized a vital
distinction between the Christ whom he preached and the Christ preached by the
teachers of the Judaic party. The Christ whom he preached was the " Friend and
Brother of mankind, who had died for all men that he might reconcile them to Grod."
The Christ whom they preached was the " head of a Jewish kingdom, requiring
circumcision and all the ordinances of the Law as a condition of admission to it." St.
Paul could see no gospel, no good news, in such a Christ as that. By " another Jesus "
we may understand Jesus otherwise presented ; "another spirit "is something opposed
to the spirit of liberty in Christ from Mo.'aic ordinances ; and by " another gospel " the
apostle means something different fiom the good news of God reconciled to faith. " His
gospel was one of pardon throagb faith working by love ; theirs was based on the old
Pharisaic lines of works, ritual, ceremonial and moral precepts, standiog in their teaching
on the same footing." Here St. Paul makes distinct claim to be the authorized teacher
of the truth, and we consider this claim.

I. The sense in which apostolic teachino was final. In relation to this
modem opinion differs from the older opinion, and therefore the suhject needs to be
treated with extreme care and prudence. When the generally received doctrine of
inspiration was that known as the verbal theory, which affirmed the direct communi-
cation from God of every word of Scripture, the apostles were regarded as inspired lor
every detail of Gospels and Epistles, and appeal to their expressions was regai ded as
final. We now more clearly .see that they were inspired to guide men's thoughts, but
not to fetter them, or force them into precise moulds. The apostles do fix the lines
along which Christian thought may safely run, but they leave full room for the diversities
and idiosyncrasies of men to find free expression. They make a firm stand, and plainly
show the boundaries of Christian thinking, but within the lines they leave us free. We
properly use our own cultured Christian judgment — in the leadings of the Holy Ghost
— upon the value of their arguments, and the precise applications of their counsels.
And this appears to us quite consistent with a becoming reverence for these divinely
endowed men, and necessary to that personal leading of the Holy Ghost, which we are
permitted to realize as well as they. God's truth for the race can be set within no
permanent bonds, even though men may call them apostolic.

II. The limits within which diveesitt can be permitted. 1. Th'ere can be
no dispute with regard to the great Christian /ac<«. 2. There can be no attempt to iC.Ux
the supreme position of Christ in his Church and relation to his Church. Thert, is
nothing so essentially Christian as the truth of the direct relation of the soul to Christ,
a relation that is independent of doctrine, creed, ceremonial, or priesthood, though these
all have their place. 3. There are great foundation truths and principles which may
be stated in simple and comprehensive terms, but outside of which, or contrary to which.
Christian thought cannot safely run. None may take from us our " liberty in Christ,"
but we may wisely " hold fast the form of sound words."

III. The ways in which apostolic teaching might be imperilled. Unfold and
illustrate the following ways. 1. By overloading it with the old. 2. By overstraining
it to fit the new. 3. By applying it in a spirit that is out of harmony with its
principles. 4. By the pressure of the peculiarities of men who are strongly self-willed.
5. By translating the claims into the things we should lihe to do, rather than into the
things which we ought to do. 6. By permitting the common philosophy and sociology
of men to give tone to the Christian revelation, rather than to make Christianity tone
them.

IV. The tests bt whioh such peevebbions of apostolic teachings might be
DiscovEBBD. The all-sufficing tests of any teaching, under the influence of which we
may come — ^whether it be teachings of the pulpit or of the press — are these. 1. Is it
in harmony with the first truth of the Christian revelation — the fatherhood of God?



OH.XI. 1— 33.] THl! SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 28"

2. Does it uphold the honour, and the supreme administrative rights in souls, of the Lord
Jesus Christ? 3. And does it practically tend towards the things that are pure, and
tnie, and holy, and good? Everything godly is helpful to godliness. In conclusion,
argue this ]ioint — Can we still safely receive truth upon the authority of men ? and if so,
are there any limitations under which such reception is properly placed? And are we
still open and exposed to the persuasions of self-interested or self-deluded teachers?
We have to find out for these times in which we live what is the secret of " holding
&st the faith once delivered to the saints." — K. T.

Vers. 10, 21 — 30. — Apostolic boastings. This is a most reproachful passage, and the
i iitensity of St. Paul's feeling can only be accounted for by some knowledge of the bitter
and shameful treatment he was receiving from the antagonistic Jewish party at Corinth.
Archdeacon Farrar, in a very vivid and forcible manner, presents the kind of things
that were being freely said at Corinth about the apostle. "He had shown feebleness in
his change of plan ; his personal appearance, feeble and infirm, did not match the
authoritative tone of his letters ; his speern had nothing in it to command admiration ;
he threatened supernatural punishments, but he did not dare to put his threats to the
proof. What right had he to claim the autnority of an apostle, when he had never
seen the Christ in the flesh ? Was it certain that he was a Hebrew, a Jew of the pure
blood of Palestine, or even that he was of the seed of Abraham ? Who was this Paul,
who came without credentials, and expected to be received on the strength of his
everlasting self-assertions? Was there not a touch of madness in his visions and
revelations? Could he claim more than the tolerance which men were ready to extend
to the insane?" "Conceive all these barbed arrows of sarcasm falling on the ears, and
through them piercing the very soul, of a man of singularly sensitive nature, passionately
craving for affection, and proportionately feeling the bitterness of loving with no adequate
return ; and we may form some estimate of the whirl and storm of emotion in which
St. Paul began to dictate the Epistle." As a rule, boastings are only evil both for him
who boasts and for those who hear the boasting ; but no rule is witliout exception, and
there are times when a man is absolutely driven to boasting — it is the one thing that
he can do, and that he ought to do. It becomes the plain duty of the hour. A man
may never boast until he is thus driven to it, and then his boastings will have their foun-
dation in his humility. The apostle's boastings had direct reference to the accusations
made against him.

I. These were BOASTiuas of nis Jewish birth and eights. These had been
assailed. He was a foreign-born Jew, and the Palestine Jews rather looked down upon
all such. It was easy to raise prejudice against the apostle on this ground. He
therefore pleads the facts of his pure binh, his Pharisaic relationships, his Jerusalem
training, and his manifest Jewish sympathies. He was proud of the fact that no Jew
could plead superior Jewish birthrights to his. So far he did but boast of facts of his
life that were beyond his own control.

II. There were boastings op sufferings borne in ministering foe Christ.
See vers. 21—30, the most amazing catalogue of woes ever written. One wonders how
so frail a body could have endured them all. But even this record we feel is holy
boasting, for one can but feel that, under all the intensity of the utterance, there is a
great sadness of heart in being thus compelled to speak of such things. He never
yould have said one word about them had it not been that attacks upon his apostleship
meant dishonour to Christ, and mischievous hindrance to Christ's work. St. Paul
never would have boasted if he had not thus beea compelled to boast for Ghrisfs sake.
And this is the one law for us. Never put self in the front unless so putting self will
glorify our Master, We may even boast if it is clear that our boasting will serve
him.— E. T. (

Ver. 14. — Satanic subtletie$. " Satan himself is transformed into an angel of light."
This expression suggests that the Judaic party at Corinth laid claim to some angel
manifestations or revelations, and set these off against St. Paul's claim of apostolic
inspiration and authority. He really asserts here that they are deluded. It is not
Divine revelations which they have received. These things in which they boast are
Satanic subtleties and transformations, by which they arc deceived and ensnared.

II. CORINTHIANS. U



290



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. xii. 1—21



There may, howeyer, be a reference to what was so evidently in St. Paul's mind — the
serpent's deception of Eve (ver. 3). The mode in which referL'nce is made to ihe
incident in the garden of Eden su;jgests to us that St. Paul thought the serpent put
on some form ot beauty, or that lie, in a very subtle way, explained his superior
wisdom and intelligence by the fact that he fed on thu fruit of that forbidden tree.

I. The Satanio poweb of disguise. Illustrate the very various ways in which
evil is n)ade attractive. Apply to the temptitioDs of vice and self-indulgence, to mental
error, to religious wanderings and backs! idiiigs. He said a gnat thin^, who, knowing
much of the evils of Christian and Cliurch lile, exclaimed, " We are not ignorant of his
[S.itan's] devices."

II. Such power illustrated in religious leaders. Such as Joe Smith, the
Mormon leader. All who seek to delude men lor self-seeking ends are really Satanic ;
they are doing Satan's work. According to the standpoint of the preacher, it may be
shown that the methods by which men are deluded still are (1) mental, (2) ritual,
(3) moral. Therefore we have the very earnest advice, " Prove [test and try] all things ;
hold fast that which is good."— R. T.

Vers. 23 — 30. — The evidential value of sufferings home for Christ's sake. Recall
Paley's use of the labours and sufferings of the early Cliristians as an argument for
the truth of Christianity. Carefully observe under what limitations such an argument
must be set. There have been martyrs of all sorts of opinions. Men intense on
any subject are usually willing to bear much for its sake ; and the enthusiast or fanatic
does not shrink from giving his life for his faith, thouijh liis fiilh may be unreasonable
or absurd. We can only go so far as to say that willingness to bear sulfering proves —

I. Personal sincbritt. Men's hearts must be in that which they will maintain at
cost of toil, sorrow, disability, and |>ain. Christianity must be true to the man who
can die for it; but it is not therefore proved to be absolutely true.

II. A Divine call ob ooMiiiSbioN. It is one of the indications of such a call.
Not sufiBcient if it stands alone, but very helpful as a buttress to other arguments and
considerations.

III. That there ib a fine moral strength cultured by Chbistianiti. This,
perhaps, is its chief value. The noble endurance illustrates Christianity, and shows
what the almighty grace in it can do. That must be worthy, and it may be Divine,
which nerves men to such heroic labour, such patient submission, and such triumphs
over ills and death. So, when kept within due limits and carefully combined wich
other considerations, the sufferings and martyrdoms of the Christian saints become an
evidince of the Divine origin of Christianity. — E. T.



EXPOSITION.



CHAPTER Xn.



The revelatioDt Touclisafed to him (vers.
1 — 6). The counteracting " thorn in the
flesh " (vers. 7 — 10). One more apology for
glorying (vers. 11, 12). His disinterested-
ness (vers. 13 — 15). Indignant refutation
uf the charge that he had made gain of
them through the agency of subordinates
( vers. 16 — 18). Caution and warnings (vers.
19-21).

Ver. 1. — It is not expedient for me doubt-
less to glory. This rendering follows the
best-attested reading; but it is at least
doubtful whether, instead of Set or Se, the
ironic Sj) of K, M, and the Greek Fathers
is not the true reading. In mere vowel
variatiuiu, especially in passages where



the meaning does not lie on the surface, the
diplomatic (external) evidence is less im-
portant. If St. Paul wrote Sij, it means," of
course it is not expedient for me to boast."
I win come ; for I will come ; if the reading
of D is correct. In that case it is hardly
possible to define the counter-currents of
feeling which caused the use of the con-
junction. Visions and revelations. The
word used for " visions " means presentations
perceived in a state which is neither sleep-
ing nor waking, but whieh are regarded as
objective; "revelations" are the truths
apprehended as a result of the visions.
Optasia, for "visions," only occurs else-
where in Luke i. 22; xxiv. 23; Acts
xxvi. 19 (comp. Gal. ii. 2).

Ver. 2. — I knew ; rutlier, ITcnow. A man.
St. Paul speaks in this indirect way ol
himself (see vers. 6, 7). In Christ (1



CH. xiL 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS.



291



C3oT. 1. 30). To St. Paul every trne
GhriBtian was a man whose personal life
was lost in the life of Christ. Above four-
teen years ago. The note of time is very
vague. If we are at all able to identify the
vision alluded to, it must have been the
vision in the temple, referred to in Acta
xxii. 17, which was, roughly speaking,
" about fourteen years " before this time.
The vision on the road to Damascus liad
occurred about twenty years earlier than
the date of tliia E^iistle. Whether in the
body, etc. A powerful description of the
absorption of all conscious bodily modes
of apprehension. In their comments on
these verses, many commentators enter into
ppeoulationa which seem to me to be so
entirely arbitrary aod futile that I shall not
even allude to them. St. Paul's bodily and
mental state during this vision is familiar
to all who know the history of Oriental and
mediseval mysticism. Caught up (Ezek.
xi. 24 ; Acts viii. 39 ; Rev. iv. 1, 2). Into
the third heaven. It is most unlikely that
St. Paul is here in any way referring to the
Jewish hagadiith about seven heavens. The
expression is purely general, and even the
rabbis did not expect to be taken au pied
de la lettre. Plenee all speculations about
first, second, and third heavens are idle and
useless. Even as lote as the Clementine
writings in the middle of the second century,'
au attempt ia made, in reference to this
passage, to disparage St. Paul by sneering
at visions as a medium of revelation, on the
ground that they may spriiig from aelf-
deoeption ; and thia rapture of the " bald
hook-nosed Galilean " to the third heaven
is also sneered at in the ' Philopatris ' of
the pseudn-LuoIan. Yet how modest and
simple is St. Paul's awestruck reference to
this event, when compired, not. only with
the lying details of Mohammed's visit to
heaven, but even with the visions of St.
Theresa or Swedenborg I

Ver. 4. — Into Paradise. Here, again, we
encounter long speculations as to whether
Paradise is the same as the third heaven;
whether St. Paul is referring to two visions
or two parts of one vision. Such questions
are clearly insoluble, and I leave them
where I iiiid them. We shall never un-
derstand this passage otherwise than in the
dim and vajrue outline in which St. Paul
has purposely left it. All that we can
know from the New Testament about
Paradise must be learnt from this ver^e and
Luke xxiii. 63 and Eev. ii. 7, and it is
extremely little. Unspeakable words. A
figure of speech called an oxymoron. Utter-
ances (or " things ") incapable of utterance.
Not lawful for a man to utter. How futile,
then, must be the attempt to guesi what
they were, or on what subject I



Ver. 5. — Of such a one. These are legi-
timate subjects of " boast," because they are
heavenly privileges, not earthly grounds of
superiority. Except in my infirmities (oh.
xi. 30).

Ver. 6. — I forbear ; literally, I spare ; I.e.
I refrain from boasting. Should think of
me; literally, that no man should estimate
concerning me beyond what he sees me (to be),
or hears at all from my own lips. If he
were to tell them more of his revelations,
he miL'ht encourage them to think more
of him than he deserves or wishes.

Vers. 7 — 10. — The thorn in the flesh.

Ver. 7. — lest I should be exalted above
measure; literally, that I may not be over-
exalted. It was necessary to show St. Paul
that he only held the treasure in an earthen
vessel. There was given me. Even God'a
afflictiona are meant for gifts. A thorn
(sleolops). The more usual meaning is, as
Hesychius says, " a sharp stake " (' Sudea,'
Tert.). Hence the word sJcolopizo, I impale
or crucify. St. Paul's agony was an impale-
ment or crucidxlon of all sensual impulses
and earthly ambitions. In the flesh. There
have been endless conjectures as to the
exact nature of this painful and moat
humbling phyaioal affliction. It is only by
placing side by side a great many separate
passages that we are almost irresistibly
led to the conclusion which ia now most
generally adopted, namely, that it was acute
and disliguring ophthalmia, originating in
the blinding glare of the light which flashed
round him at Damascus, aud accompanied,
as that niobt humiliating disease usually
is, by occasional cerebral excitement. It
would be impossible here to euter into the
whole inquiry, for wh ich I refer to my ' Life
of St. Paul,' i. 214—226. The messenger of
Satan ; rather, an angel of Satan. By way
of comment, see Matt. xxv. 41 ; Luke xiii.
16 ; Job ii. 7 ; Eev. xii. 7, 9. To buffet me.
The verb is derived from hnlaphos, a slap on
the face, and would be suitable to such a
disfigurement as ophthalmia (ch. x. 10).

Ver. 8. — ^For this thing. In reference to
this or " to him," the angel of Satan. The
Lord. That is, Christ (I Cor. i. 3). Thrice
(oomp. Matt. xxvi. 44).

Ver. 9.— And he said unto me. The
original ia much more forcible : " And
he has said to me." Is sufficient for thee.
A similar phrase, though in a very dif-
ferent context, occurs in Deut. iii. 26. My
strength is made perfect in weakness
(comp. ch. iv. 7 ; Phil. iv. 13 ; I Cor. ii. 8—6).
The verse contains a paradox, which yet
describes the best history of the world.
The paradox becomes more suggestive if,
with N, A, B, D, F, G, we omit '^my." May
rest upon me ; literally, may tabernacle over
me. The compound verb occurs here alone.



292



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. hi. 1—21



but ilM rimple verb and the Bubstantive
occur in similar meanings in John 1. 14;
Rev. vii. 15 ; xxi. 3 (comp. eh. v. 1).

Ver. 10. — I take pleasure in; lam con-
tent to hear them cheerfully (oh. vii. 4 ; Rom.
V. 3). Strong ; rather, powerful, mighty.
The resemblance to Philo (' Vit. Mos.,' 0pp.,
i. 613, " Your weaknesB is might ") is
probably accidental (see 1 Cor. xv. 54;
Col. iii. 4).

Ver. 11. — A iool (see oh. xi. 16). For
I ought. The "/"is emphatic. You com-
pelled me to become senseless in boasting of
myself to you, whereas I ought to have
been commended by you. To have been
commended. The verb gives one more side
allusion, not without bitterness, to the com-
mendatory epistles of which liis adversaries
boasted (ch. iii. 1 ; v. 12 ; x. 12—18). The
very chiefest apostles. The same strange
compound, " out-and-out apostles," is used
as in ch. xi. 5 ; cump. Gal. ii. 6.

Ter. 12. — The signs of an apostle. St.
Paul always claimed to have attested his
mission by spiritual and miraculous gifts
(Rom. XV. 19 ; Acts xv. 12).

Ver. 13. — I was not burdensome. The
same word as in ch. xi. 9. Forgive me this
wrong. There is an exquisite dignity and
pathos mixed with the irony of this remark.

Ver. 14. — The third time I am ready to
come to you. He had been ready twice
before, though the second time his actual
visit had been prevented by the scandals
in their Church. That the visit which he
now contemplates is a third visit, and that
there was an unrecorded second visit, is a
needless and improbable inference from this
passage. Be burdensome (see ver. 13).
Hot yours, but you (1 Thess. ii. 8).

Ver. 15.— Spend and be spent; rather,
epend and he outspent, or Bpent to the utter-
most (Phil. ii. 17).

Ver. 16. — ^But be it so, I did not burden
yon. The " I " is emphatic. It is shocking
to think that, even after Paul has so trium-
phantly cleared himself from the disgraceful
Aarge of trying to make gain out of the
Ooriuthians, he should Btill be obliged to



meet the slanderous innuendo that, even il
he had not personally tried to get anything
out of them, still he had done so indirectly
through the agency of Titus. Being crafty,
I caught you with guile, He is here quoting
the sneer of his enemies (see what he has
already said in oh. i 12 ; vii. 2). The word
used for " being " means " being by my very
nature."

Ver. 17. — Did I make a gain of you, etc. ?
The same verb as in ch. ii. 11. It means " to
overreach," " to take unfair advantages."

Ver. IH. — Titus. This refers to the first
visit of Titus. He was now on the eve of
a second visit with two others (ch. viii. 6,
18, 22). A brother; rather, the hrother.
Who it was is entirely unknown. Perhaps
Tyohious (Titus iii. 12). In the same
Spirit ; namely, in the Spirit of God.

Ver. 19. — Again, think you that we excuse
ourselves unto you I The best reading is
not palin, again, but palai, long ago. This
wore! with the present is an elegant classical
idiom, and means, " You have, perhaps, been
imagining all this time that I am pleading
with you by way of self-defence. Do not
think it I You are no judges of mine. My
only object is to speak before God in Christ,
not to defend myself — since I need no de-
fence so far as you are concerned — but to
help in building you up, by removing the
falsehoods that alienate you from me."

Ver. 20. — Suoh as ye would not (see
ICor. iv. 21). Debates. " Discords," " quar-
rels." Strifes. " Party-intrigues," " factious
and emulous rivalries " (Rom. ii. 8). Back-
biting. Detnictions, talklngs against one
another. Swellings. Inflated conceit,
pompous egotism (1 Cor. iv. 6, 18, 19 ; Col.
ii. 18). Tumults. Disorderly excitement
(ch. vi. 5 ; 1 Cor. xiv. 33 ; oomp. 1 Cor. xiii.
2, 10).

Ver. 21. — Humble me among you; rather,
in my relation to you. Many which have
sinned already, and have not repented;
rather, who have sinned hefore and did not
repent. Many had sinned (1 Cor. vL 12 — ^20) ;
some only had repented.



HOMILETICSL

Veri. 1 — 5. — Apostolic piety and piychdlogy. "It ii not expedient," eta These
verses present two subjects of thought.

I. Apostolic psyoHOLOaT. The words reveal certain ideas which Paul had concern-
ing the human mind. He had the idea : 1. That whilst here it is capable of existing
separate from the body. " Whether in the body, I cannot tell ; or whether out of the
body, I cannot tell." If he had been certain that the soul could not exist whilst here
apart from the body, would he have spoken thus ? And who is not conscious of the mind
having experiences in which the body does not participate ? Paul speaks of himself
as entering regions far away. (I) The " third heaven." The Bible speaks of three
heavens, (a) The atmospheric. There the clouds travel and perform their functions.



OH. xa. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 293

(h) The starry. There the sun, moon, and stars appear, (c) The heavens that lie
beyond the heavenly orbs ; where God and his holy angels are supposed to have their
special residence. Up to this "third heaven "Paul was cauglit. (2) Paradise. "Caught
up into Paradise." The word here denotes some place iu the universe distinguished
in beauty and f'ruitfulness. Paul regarded it possible for the soul to go away into those
distant regions of supernal brightness and beauty. Who has not been conscious of
being borne far away from the body on the wing of thought ? 2. That whilst here
it i» capable of receiving extraordinary revelations apart from the body. " Heard
unspeakable words." Things of the soul may be unutterable either from necessity or
from impropriety. The deepest things of the heart are unutterable in any language.
Perhaps what Paul saw and heard in the spirit was neitlier possible nor proper to com-
municate. There are but few of us who have not received impressions of distant things.
We are often caught away to distant scenes, and see and hear extraordinary things.
3. That whilst here it may exist apart from the body and the man not know it.
" Whether in the body, I caimot tell." He was so charged with spiritual things that
he had lost all consciousness of matter and his relations to it. The man whose soul
is flooded with the higher elements of being does not Ijnow for the time whether he
is " in the body " or " out of the body." 4. ITiat wherever or however it exists it
constitutes the man. " I knew a man in Christ." Ttiat which had these wonderful
revelations he regarded as the man. To the apostlfe the body was the costume of the
man, which he put on at birth and took off at death. In fact, he regarded the body
as his not him, the soul as himself.

II. Apostolic piety. There are three things concerning piety here. 1. HwrnUity.
That the man of whom Paul here speaks is hiiuselt scarcely admits of a dnuht. Why
should he speak of himself in the third person ? It is because of that modesty of nature
which is ever the characteristic of a truly great soul. Humility is an essential attribute
of piety. 2. Ghristism. " A man in Christ." To be in Christ is to live in his ideas,
character, spirit, as the atmosphere of being. He who lives in the spirit of Christ
becomes a man. 3. Transport. His soul was borne away in ecstasy. The time when
the revelation occurred is specified — " fourteen years ago." Strange that he did not
speak of it before. Piety has its hours of ravishments, ecstasies, and transfigurations.

Vers. 6 — 10. — Soul-schooling. " For though," etc. These words teach us several
things concerning soul-discipline.

I. That the exercise of spiritual discipline is expedient for the best of men.
Paul required it. He says, "Lest I should be exalted above measure." 1. Pride is a
great spiritual evil. This is implied in the discipline with which the apostle was now
visited. " To be exalted above measure [or, ' overmuch '] " is, of course, to be proud,
and to be proud is to be in a position inimical to soul-progress. 2. Good men have
sometimes great temptations to pride. Paul's temptation seems to have arisen from the
" abundance of the revelation " of which he speaks.

II. That the mode op spiritual discipline is sometimes vert painfui. Paul
was visited with a " thorn in the flesh." What the thorn was is a question for specula-
tion ; our object is practical. Two things deserve notice here. 1. That suffering stands
connected with Satan. This painful dispensation was a "messenger from Satan." Tan
great original sinner is the father of suffering. 2. Both suffering and Satan are wider
the direction of God. He uses them as his instruments for gooil. Satan himself is the
servant of the Holy One.

III. That the means of spiritual discipline are sometimes misundebstood.
Paul prays to be delivered from that " thorn in the flesh " which was sent for his good,
and he does so frequently — " thrice." Notice : 1. The ignorance which sometimes
marks our prayers. We often pray against our own interests. There are some blessings
which are positively promised by God, such as pardon for sin, etc., for which we may
pray incessantly ; and there are others which we may esteem desirable, but which are not
promised. These we must seek in submission to his will. 2. The kindness of God
in not always answering ow prayers. He knows what is best. The great Father may
refuse the cry of his children for toys here, but he will give them estates in the great
hereafter.

IV That the supports under spiritual discipline are always abundant. ** Mj



294 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xn. 1—21



grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness." Observe : 1.
The nature of the support. " Strength." What matters the weight of the burden if
the strength is equal to bear it with ease ? 2. The principle of tha support. " Grace."
It comes, not from merit, but from grace free and unbounded. 3. The influence of the
support. " Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power
of Christ may rest upon me." " Best upon me." Spread over me like a tent to screen
me from the scorching sun. "I glory in my infirmities." The cup may be bitter,
but it has curative virtues. Tempests may toss, but those storms will purify the
atmosphere round the heart and bear us away from scenes on which our hearts are set.
All prayer is answered when the mind of the suppliant is brought into cordial sub-
mission to the Divine will.

Vers. 11 — 21. — Paul's state of mind concerning his past and prospective connection
with the Church at Corinth. " I am become a fool in glorying," etc. These_ verses
throw light upon Paul's state of mind, both in relation to his past and prospective con-
nection with the Corinthian Church.

I. His state op mind concerning his past connection with the Coeinthian
Church. 1. He remembers the ill treatment which forced him to speak with apparent
hoastfulness of himself. " I am become a fool [I am become foolish] in glorying ; ye
have compelled me: for I ought to. have been commended of you: for in nothing am
I behind the very chiefest apostles, though I be nothing." Dean Plumptre's remarks
tend to illustrate Paul's state of mind. " The verse opens with a somewhat thrilling
abruptness, ' I am become insane — it was you who compelled me.' The words are
partly ironical, partly speak of an impatient consciousness, that what he had been say-
ing would seem to give colour to the opprobrious epithets that had been flung at him.
The passage on which we now enter, and of which we may think as begun after a
pause, is rtmarkable for the production in a compressed form of most of the topics, each
with, its characteristic phrase, on which he had before dwelt. The violence of the
storm is over, but the sky is not yet clear, and we still hear the mutterings of the receding
thunder. He remembers once more that he has been called insane, that he has been
taunted with commending himself, that he has been treated as ' nothing ' in comparison
with those apostles extraordinary, who were setting themselves up as his rivals. ' I,'
he says, with an emphatic stress on the pronoun, ' ought to have had no need for this
painful self-assertion. You ought to have acknowledged my labour and my love for
you.'" 2. He remembers the work which he had done amongst them, and which raised
him above all the apostles. " Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought among you in
all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds." Paul possessed supernatural
power and wrought supernatural results in their midst. Of this they must have been
aware and could not deny. Referring to his ministry there he says elsewhere, " My
speech and my preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demon-
stration of the Spirit and of power " (1 Cor. ii. 4). In this respect he was, therefore,
not only not behind " the very chiefest apostles," such as Peter, James, and John, but
immeasurably superior to the false teachers, his traducers. Can a man who was con-
scious of such power as this be charged with egotism in proclaiming it in the presence
of his detractors ? Does he become " a fool in glorying " ? Nay, nay, a wise man.
3. He remembers that for his labours amongst them he had not sought any temporal
assistance. " For what is it wherein ye were inferior to other Churches, except it be
that I myself was not burdensome to you ? forgive me this wrong." Probably it had
been insinuated by his traducers that Paul cared less for the Churches at Corinth than
for those at Macedonia, because he had maintained his independence and sought no
gifts. He seems to intimate that this was some disadvantage to them, and he asks
their forgiveness. And, indeed, it seems to me it is a spiritual disadvantage to any
Church not to contribute to the support of its minister; for there is more good in
giving than in receiving.

II. His state op mind coNOERNiNa his prospective connection with ths
Corinthian CnnRCH. 1. Bere are loving resolves. " Behold, the third time I am
ready to come to you ; and I will not be burdensome to you : for I seek not yours, but
you." We have no record of a second visit, but this does not disprove its existence ;
for no doubt there is more omitted of Paul's history than recorded. He resolves that



OH. xn. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 295

in thia third visit he would not be bTirdensome to them, but pursue the same conduct
of independency towards them as he had done all alonjr, taking nothing from them, hut
giving to them. " 1 seek not yours, but you." Act as a father generally acts towards his
"children," "lay up" for them, not they for him, and srladly spend and be spent for
them. And all this, whether they love him or not. What noble generosity breathes
in all these resolves 1 2. Here are painful memories. " I did not burden you : never-
theless, being crafty, I causiht you with guile." This, again, is ironical. You say that,
although I made no demand on your purses for myself, I want a collection for the
" saints," and that out of that collection I will craftily take what I want. He seems
to fling back upon them their accusation of his being crafty and catching them " with
guile." " Did I make a gain of you by any of them whom I sent unto you ? 1 desired
Titus, and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain of you ? walked we not
in the same spirit? walked we not in the same steps?" Nay, neither they nor he had
ever sponged on them, but had maintained their hi^h indeiiendenoy. In saying this he
deprecates the idea that he was amenable to tliem for his conduct, but to Q-od only.
" Again, think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you ? we speak before God in Christ :
but we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edil'ying." Thus, in the prospect of
visiting Corinth once more, most painful memories ol his traducers arose. 3. Here are
anxious apprehensions. " For I fear, lest, when I come, I shall not find you such as
I would, and that I shall be found unto you such as ye would not." His tender nature
seemed to slirink at the supiiosition of the old evils still rampant there. " Lest there
be debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellmgs, tumults."
He was too brave a man to dread perils, or toils, or death. "None of these things
moved " him, but from such evils as " strifes," " envyings," " wraths," " backbitings,"
" whisperings," " swellings," " tumults," "uncleanness," "fornication," " lasciviousness,"
his pure and pious nature shrank with horror. The great thing to be dreaded is sin.
It is the " abominable thing," the soul-Jestroying devil of humnuity.

CoNCurgiON. 1. Do not judge any minister by the opinions of his brethren, Paul
was the best and the most useful of men, but the opinion of his brethren was that he was
the worst and the most pernicious. 2.- Do not cease in your endeavours to benefit men
because they calumniate you. The worst men require your services most, the " whole
need no ph3sician." 3. Do not sponge upon your congregation. Do not seek theirs,
but them. Do not study how to increase your pew-rents, .swell your collections and
offertories, but how to increase the si)iritual intelligence, freedom, and true Messedness
of the people. 4. Do not cower before anything but mm. Sin i» the ApoUyon of the
univerae.



HOMILIES BY VABIOUS AUTHOR&

Vera. 1 — 6. — Supernatural communications as evidences of ?U4 apostleship. The
old question as to his apostolic authority, which had ncently been revived in a most
exciting form, was not yet disposed of, and he must now discuss it in another aspect.
So far as external circumstances were concerned, had not the prophetic declaration to
Ananias been fulfilled ? — " I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Name's
sake." And, furthermore, he had proved that his own state of mind, the inward being
of his soul, had corresponded with his call to suffer. The flesh had been subdued.
Years of growth had brought him to a stage of experience that allowed him to spenk of
glorying in his infirmities. But he would now turn to another branch of experiences,
viz. " visions and revelations of the Lord." Glorious as these exaltations were, they
would see that, while they were exceptional in certain respects, yet they fell in with the
providential discipline of his life, and opened the way for a keener sense of Ms infirmiti«$
by" A thorn in the flesh." All along St. Paul has been painfully aware that his •nemies
were using these infirmities to his official disparagement. Painfully, we say, for it is
obvious that he was sensitive to the disadvantages under which he appeared before the
public. " Humble," " rude in speech," " bodily presence weak," " speech contemptible,"
were things that had some foundation in fact. Of course, his adversaries exaggerated
them, but the apostle could not escape instinctive feeling, and at times acute feeling,
touching thi» matter. This, however, was only one source of depression. A. fuller



-'96 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. in. 1—21.

account of his sufferings, physical and mental, ttan he had ever given had just new
been presented, and the conclusion of it was that his bodily disadvantages as a speaker,
his low repute as a public teacher, his constant endurance of pain and solicitude, had
resulted in his realizing the fact that this very weakness was Ms strength. Could
" risions and revelations " be entrusted to him — such visions and revelations — and he not
he humbled by Divine direction ? The more glorious the revelation, the greater the
necessity for him to be reminded, and most painfully reminded, that the treasure was
committed to an " earthen vessel." Witness the following : a man fourteen years ago —
the memory, of it still vividly present as a reality of to-day — such a man, whether
in the body or out of the body it was impossible to tell, elevated to the third
heaven, and hearing " unspeakable words not lawful for a man to utter." " Fourteen
years ago " the fact now first divulged, and yet the fact alone ; the secret disclosures
still a secret and personal to the man alone ; and the sanctity such that it would
be profanation to make the contents of the communication known. " Caught up to the
third heaven, caught up into Paradise," face to face with the Lord Jesus in his
mediatorial glory ; and there, the senses laid to rest and the body forgotten and the
spirit opened to receive instruction and inspiration, the man taught what he was to be
and what he was to do as the servant on earth of his Divine Master. Of this man, as a
man in Christ, he would boast ; of himself in the flesh and subject to its infirmities,
he would not boast save of his weakness. Under grace, what a debtor was he to these
humiliations I Intellectual pride and vanity, spiritual pride and vanity, pride and
vanity as a Jew to whom the God of the fathers had manifested himself — how could
these be kept down except by mortifications of the flesh ? If, nevertheless, he were
to boast of these revelations, he should do it truthfully. Suppose, then, that he should
make this boast ; who would be able to transfer himself into the proper altitude of a
listener? It would not be weakness, hutpowar, the observer would see. "I forbear,"
and I shrink from it, lest the contrast between this power and my visible tueakneu,
this glory_a,ni mys,present'A©Ki7miio»i, be too great for any man to bear. — L.

Vers. 7 — 0. — Need of humility and ihe means appointed to secure it. If the Lord
Jesus passed from the baptism in the Jordan, and the dovelike descent of the Holy
Ghost upon him, to the solitude of the wilderness and the assaults of the tempter ; if
he came down from the mount of transfiguration to witness the failure of the disciples
to heal the lunatic boy, and to give expression to his sorrow in the words, " faithless
and perverse generation ! " etc. — it is not surprising that an apostle should be sorely tried
after his exaltation. New endowments must have new tests. New and larger grace
must be immediately put on probation, since there are many probations in this one
probation that have eternal issues. " Lest I " — this man in Christ, who fourteen years
ago was prepared by special revelation for the toil and trial of his Gentile apostleship —
" lest I should be exalted above measure ; " and what was the danger ? " The abundance
of the revelations." Against that danger he must be fortified. If new endowments
and new graces are instantly put on trial, and the conditions of life's general probation
changed, then, indeed, a new check to guard against abuse of increased gifts must not
be lacking. The man is not precisely the same man as before, nor is he in the same
world that he previously occupied. Accessions of outward advantages, such as wealth
and social position, are full of risks, but accessions of inward power are far more perilous.
To preserve St. Paul from self-glorification, there was given him " a thorn in the flesh."
First of all, the revelations were as to the fact itself to be kept a secret, and this was a
means of humility, but the thorn in the flesh was added. What it was we know not,
but it was a bodily infirmity that caused him much suffering. "This is significant.
It is of the very nature of thorns to be felt rather than seen, and to appear
trifling evils to all but those directly stung by them " (Dc. Bellows). It was " a
messenger of Satan," though this does not imply that it was not under God's direction.
The idea is that this " angel of Satan " was an impaling stake that produced severe and
continued pain, and the reason therefore is twice stated, "lest I should be exalted
above measure." So, then, it was not, as an apostle, but as the apostle to the Gentiles,
that he was specially afflicted. Pain is instinctively resisted as an enemy to the acti-
vity, comfort, and pleasure of life. Naturally, therefore, St. Paul felt thit it would
interfere with his energy and happiness, and, of course, the Satanic side of the tortura



CH. xn. 1— 2L] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 297

would be uppermost in his thought. The evil in pain is what we see iirst. If this
were not realized, it could not be au affliction. Hence he prayed thrice to the Lord that
it might depart from him. But his prayer was denied. At the same time, the
promise was given — a promise worth far more than the removal of the pain — " My
grace is suEBcient for thee : for my strength is made perfect in weakness." The thorn
was to continue — a lifelong suffering in addifinn to his other infirmities was to
he fastened upon him, a special and grievous suffering. Yet, while it had to remain a
sad memorial, not of his exaltation, but of human frailty in connection with great
endowments, there was an assurance direct and specific of sustaining grace. Along
with that a most important truth was taught him, namely, that the perfection ol
strength is attained through the consciousness of our utter weakness. First, then, the
evil of pain; next, the good of pain under the agency of God's grace; — tliis is the
method of providence and grace, for the two are one in the Divine purpose. Alas '
had the prayer of those sensitive nerves of his been literally answered, what a loser
would he and we have been ! How much of his power wbuld have vanished with th(
pain 1 How many thoughts and emotions that have cheered the aiSicted and inspired
the weak to be heroic, would have been unknown ! Such Epistles as the apostle wrote
(to say nothing of his other services to the world) could never have been written under
the ordinary experience of the ills of life. All men have thorns in the flesh, for there
is no perfect health, no human body free from ailments. But in St. Paul's case the
thorn was a superaddition to existing infirmities. Nor is it difficult for us to see how
this particular infirmity, sanctified by the Spirit, was specially adapted to guard him
at a most exposed point. Inasmuch as he was the object of a peculiar and violent
opposition, he was singularly liable to the temptation of over-asserting himself and his
merits, the more so as his enemies took delight in taunting him vnth his personal
defects as to manner and appearance. The safeguard was provided where it was most
wanted. iSuch, in fact, was his own view of the matter: "Most gladly therefore will
I rather glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me." " My
infirmities," he argues, " instead of being the hindrance tliey would be if left to them-
selves, are helpers, since they are the <iccasions of grace, and this grace rests upon mn,
i.e. abides continually. The thought is precious ; it must be repeated. " Therefore I
take pleasure in infirmities," etc. ; for the power of Christ had been imparted to lum with
such fulness as to transform pain into pleasui'e so far as his spiritual nature was con-
cerned. The body continued to suff'er, the humiliations were increased, but his soul
was filled with Cliiist as the Christ of his pains and sorrows, and thus he had the
victory, not only over physical misery, but over all pride and vanity that might have
sprung up " through the abundance of the revelations." Glorious words are these :
" When I am weak, then am I strong." Notice the clear view St. Paul has of theDivine
hand in his thorn in the flesh. If he is perfectly assured of the abundance of the
revelations, if he can locate the scene in Paradise, if he realizes the sanctity of these dis-
closures in the " unspeakable woids," he is just as certain that the thorn " was given "
him. He knew it was a "thorn," and he knew whence it came. He acknowledged
God in it, and, in this feeling, prayed thrice for its removal. Christians often fail at
this point. They doubt at times whether their afflictions come from God. Some
Christians cannot be induced to believe that their sufl'erings are sent from above, and
they see in them nothing more than evil casualties. But if they fail to recognize God
in the sorrow, they will not find him in the joy of his blessed promise, " My grace
is sufficient for thee." It was not merely the " thorn " that St. Paul had to endure.
This was a source of pain, and it aggravated, doubtless, his other physical infirmities,
and, in turn, was augmented by them. But we must not forget the state of mind
such an affliction naturally produced — the surprise that it should follow such
wonderful signs of God's favour as had been vouchsafed in the " abundance of the
revelations," the temptation to a rebellious spirit and the occasion for unbelief it
would furnish. A literal answer to his prayer was refused; a spiritual answer was
granted. The " grace" bestowed was " sufficient," not only to bear the pain as a pecu-
liar addition to his " infirmities" already existing, but to enable him to "glory " in it ;
and the providence of it was specially manifested in the power it had given him to be
patient, forbearing, humble, in the late trouble with the Corintliians. Chrintians,
\vh« are called to a lifelong discipline in the school of sufiering, think of the measure



29b THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xn. 1—21-

implied in the sufficient grace ! Sufficient for what ? Sufficient, not only to glory la
pain and infirmity, but to glory " moat gladly." — L.

Vers. 11 — 15. — Becun-ence to the former argument. The intense feeling of St. PmI
indicates itself by not continuing on one unvarying level. From the climax just
reached he reverts to what had been previously discussed in ch. x. and xi. These rever-
berations are very characteristic of the man as a thinker, and they show how closely, in
him, temperament was allied with intellect. If aroused, he never became artificial or
unnatural, but was then most true to his organization. In the verses before us he
resumes his ironical vein : " I am become a fool in glorying ; " but not of his own
accord, for " ye have compelled me." The disaffected party at Corinth had not respected
his just claims, had not " commended " him, and they had failed in this matter when he
had demonstrated that he was " in nothing bt-hind the very chiefest of the apostles " —
the same idea expressed in ch. xi. 5, adding in this instance, " though I be nothing."
Was he thinking of the abundant revelations with which he could not have been
entrusted save on the condition of a thorn in the flesh ? Only a brief utterance, yet
very sincere — " though I be nothing." It was safe for such a man in his Impaled
situation to dramatiize the " fool," but he hastens to serious work and mentions that
" the signs of an apostle " had been wrought among them. His language is full and
earnest ; " truly," " in all patience," " signs and wonders and mighty deeds," no lack,
no irritating haste, no deception, number and variety and extraordinary power all
provided for. Despite of the accumulation, the magnitude, the unimpeachable quality
of these Divine evidences, God among you of a truth, Christ honouring his servant and
his servant's work, ye Corinthians, or some of you, have not " commended " me I In
what respect were ye inferior to other Churches ? Look at Macedonia, look at Asia ;
wherein were you less favoured than they ? They commended me ; what have you
done to exemplify your sense of my apostleship? I remember but one thing in which
ye were " interior " — and the irony is keen now — I remember that I preached the gospel
grattiitously, uo as not to be " burdensome to you ;" and this is your acknowledgment, this
your commendation of my course ! What a mistake my disinterestedness was! What
a "fool " in my goodness ! " Forgive me this wrong! " Despite of it all, I am not
weaned from Corinth. " The third time I am ready to come to you." Though my
self-denying conduct has been used to bring me into contempt, I shall repeat it without
imy abatement, for " I will not be burdensome to you." And now his heart swells as
he says, " I seek not yours, but you " — words that he bequeathed to the admiration of
ages ; for was he not their spiritual father ? If, at the bidding of natural instinct, children
were not to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children, then it became him
to provide for his spiritual children. But was this all that his love had to promise ?
Kay ; what means he had or might have should not only be freely used in their behalf, but
he would give his faculties, his heart, his whole self, to advance their well-being. " Signs
of an apostle " had been wrought at Corinth, " wonders and mighty deeds," but the signs
of a sublime moral manhood rise before us when he declares, " I wiU very gladly spend
and be spent for you." WiU this avail ? " If I love you more abundantly, am I loved
the less ?"—L.

Vers. 16 — 19. — Forestalling false criticism. What limit is there to the carping skill
of envy and hatred ! Some of this Judaizing party might say that, under cover of disin-
terestedness, he had acted cunni ugly in the matter of the collection for the poor saints
at Jerusalem. Was this so ? Did the deputies make a gain of you ? Did Titus abuse
bis position? One spirit, Christ's spirit, animated us, for we all " walked in the same
steps." Think you that this has been said for self-justification ? Do we excuse our-
selves? Fears were oppressing him^^ fears that he would mention presently. Can it all
be in vain ? Assurances of fatherly regard, assurances of a willingness, ay, of a gladness,
in giving all he had and all he was, even life itself, to their service and interest; would
they pass for nought? And were there both history and prophecy in the melancholy
words, " The more abtmdantly I love you, the less I be loved " ? The fervent appeal,
the protracted argument, the action and reaction, the irony and the profound sincerity,
the grieved tenderness, the sad ingratitude, the memory of noble self-sacrifice, gather
into the climax, " We speak before God in Ohrist." There, at that bar rf judgment,



OH. xn. i— 21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 299

he makes the solemn avowal, " We do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying."
Once more he would conciliate, nor should this long and impassioned outburst come to
a close without calling God in Christ to witness his deep-felt affection for these ungrateful
Corinthians. — L.

Vers. 20, 21. — Expression of his fears. Why had he just spoken with so much
earnestness ? Why had St. Paul brought facts to their notice which he had never used
in addressing his Churches ? Why had he referred to that exti-aordinary event in his
career, when he had been ushered into the secret chambers of Paradise and permitted to
hear things which were not to be told ? Why a revelation to be unrevealed ? It was
to teach the rebellious and evil-disposed among the Corinthiaus that he was Christ's
apostle to them, and, as such, charged with maintaining the order, peace, and purity
of the Churches entrusted to his oversight. Very tenderly had he appealed to the
Corinthians, and now, having called God, even God in Christ, to witness the depth and
sincerity of his love for them, he would entreat them not to drive him to extreme
measures. To exercise stern authority gave him no pleasure. The greatest thing in
an apostle was love, and he wished to restore harmony and prosperity to the Church by
means of forbearance and affectionate counsel. Therefore he had pleaded eo fervently;
therefore he had condescended to boasting ; therefore he had told them more of his
infirmities than his enemies knew ; therefore he had gloried in those things which these
very men used to alienate his own spiritual children by jmtting contempt on him and
his office. Fears he had, lest when he should come to Corinth, he should not find them
such as he wished, and fears too that he would have to act in an apostolic way not
agreeable to them, so that on their meeting together each party would be disappointed
in the other. Hope he had, and so he spenks doubtingly. But the fatherly heart is
overloaded with apprehensions and " lest " is thrice employed, for he would not conceal
these apprehensions. What a dark list of vices and sins is spread out in the last two
verses I If his should have to confront these evils, he will not find them such as he
would and they wUl find him such as they would not. First comes the catalogue of
moral evils such as origiiiated in the factious spirit so rife in Corinth, viz. strife,
jealousy, wraths, factions, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults. These things
would require discipline. But, moreover, he feared the sensual wickedness which had
such a hold on Corinth. For he might have to deal with gross offenders, men who had
committed sins of " uncleanness and fornication and lasoiviousness," and had not
repented. Such a state of things would grieve him. Disappointed and afilicted by a
blight like this falling on his labours in the ministry of the gospel, he tells them, " My
God will humble me among you." To avoid these distressing results, to restore peace
and spiritual prosperity to a Church rent by faction and disgraced by immorality, ho
had written and laboured and prayed. If all failed, " my God will humble me among
you."— L.

Ver. 2. — " A man in Christ." When we consider what man is, and who Christ is,
the conjunction seems wonderful indeed. Yet, when apprehended, this union appears
one fraught with richest blessings for him who is the inferior and dependent member.
The thought was one familiar to the apostle ; himself " a man in Christ," he spoke of
others who were "in Christ before" himself, and he designated Christian societies,
" Churches in Christ Jesus."

I. The natuke op the union thus dbsceibbd. 1. The Christian is grafted "in
Christ " as a graft in si. tree, joined to him as a branch to a vine. The union is thus a
vital union, and is to the Christian the means and the occasion of spiritual life. 2. The
Christian is accepted " in Christ," t.e. in the Beloved. For Christ's sake the Christian
is received into Divine favom-. The Saviour is in this capacity a Representative, a
Mediator, an Advocate. 3. The Christian is incorporated " in Christ " as the member in
the body, and has a new function to discharge in consequence of this relationship. 4.
The Christian is hidden " in Christ " as tlie traveller in the cleft of the rock, as the
voyager in the ark, when " the Lord shut him in." 5. The Christian dwells " in Christ "
as in a house, a home appointed for him by Divine wisdom and goodness.

II. The impobtanok and advantages op this union 1. As is apparent from
considering the positJoii of those who »rn out nf Christ, For such, where is safety.



800 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. xn. 1—21.

where is a law of life, where is a prospect for immortality? For to be out of Christ ii
to be without God, and so without hope. 2. From considering what in this life they
possess who have Christ and are in him. Whilst, so far as the bodily life is concerned,
they are in the world, they are in spirit in the Lord, and thus partake a higher nature
and existence than belong to earth and to time. 3. From considering the imperishable
character of this union. To be " in Christ " now is to be " with Christ " for ever. To
those who are in him there is no condemnation now, and from him there shall be no
separation hereafter. The visions which Paul beheld, and the declarations he heard
when he was caught up into the third heaven, were to him, and may be to us, an earnest
and promise of immortal union. Therefore " Abide in him." — T.

Ver. 5. — Glorying in wedknesaa. It is not to be wondered at that Paul boasted ; the
wonder is that, instead of boasting of the extraordinary visions he had expeiienced, the
extraordinary commission he had received, the extraordinary success which had followed
his labouis, he boasted of what other men would have concealed or have lamented — his
own infirmities, disadvantages, and troubles.

I. The weaknesses in which the apostle olobied. 1. His own bodily infirmity
was especially present to his thoughts, when using this language. Whatever this was,
whether fjeneral ill health or some special malady, as of the eyes, it was naturally
distressing to himself, as it prevented him from doing his work with the ease and pleasure
which he might have experienced had he possessed health and vigour of body. 2. The
contempt he met with from some amongst whom he laboured was to Paul no cause of
mortification, but cause of rejoicing. Let men despise him ; if he was able to serve and
please his IMaster, that was enough. 3. The hardships and privations and persecutions
he endured in the fulfilment of his ministry were matter of glorying. In these he took
pleasure, contrary as such a fact was to ordinary human experience.

II. The GRO0ND OF THE apiistle's gloeying ts his weaknesses. 1. There can be
no doubt that the deepest ground lay in Paul's sympathy with his Divine Lord. The
humiliation and obedience unto death of the Lord Jesus in order to secure man's
salvation became a new source of inspiration, in the direction both of human action and
of human suffering, and Paul was crucified with Christ unto the world. He bore about
with him in the body the marks of the Lord Jesus, and of this he justly boasted. 2.
Personal weakness was the occasion of the reception of new and spiritual strength. For
Christ made his own grace sufficient when his servant's strength was gone. And by a
sublime paradox the apostle learned that, when he was weak, then was he strong. And
thus the very infirmities which seemed to disqualify for service became the occasion of
the communication of such spiritual power and aid as rendered the apostle more efficient
and successful in the service of the Lord. — T.

Ver. 9. — Sufficient grace. Perhaps there is no verse in Scripture which has brought
more strength and comfort to the hearts of Christ's people than this. The explanation
of its [ireciousness and its power is to be sought first in the spiritual, the revealed truth
which it communicates, and secondly in the fact that it is the record of personal
experience. There is an instinctive persuasion in the human mind that the experience
which has been realized by one is possible to another. The grace which was actually
bestowed upon Paul does not seem inaccessible to the feeble, the tempted, the overbur-
dened Christian who cries to Heaven for help.

I. The need for this bdpfioienct. 1. The manifold duties, the severe temptations,
the varied sorrows and troubles, incidental to the Christian life. There are difficulties
and trials common to the Christian with all men, but there are others peculiar to him,
arising from the higher view he takes of life, both as a personal discipline and as aii
opportunity for serving and glorifying God. 2. The conscious insufficiency of human
resources. This, indeed, accounts for the universal practice of prayer, frequent or
occasional, deliberate or spontaneous. Men feel their utter helplessness in the presence
of the demands of life, and therefore they call upon Grod. Much more keenly does t^e
'(Jlower of the Lord Jesus realize his need of a higher than human aid. Conscious
.nat only Divine grace has reconciled him to God, he dally acknowledges his dependence
upon the same grace for the maintenance of his spiritual life and usefulness.

IL Thi aaoHNu of this bdfficiekct. 1. The divinity of the Siiyi.;ur. Can we



CH. XII. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 301

imagine any other tban Christ nring this language, " If^ grace is sufficient "? It is
becoming, it is possible, only 'to him who possesses Divine resources, who is spiritually
present with all his people. 2. Christ's mediatorial position. This involves the posses-
sion and the disposal of whatsoever is necessary for the spiritual welfare of those whom
the Lord Jesus saves. Accepted as our Representative, he has received gifts for men ;
and it is in the fulfilment of his mediatorial ofiBce that he imparts to each individual
disciple and friend the specially needed grace. 3. The spiritual dispensation over which
the Lord Jesus presides. He is Head over all things unto his Church. He distributes
to every man severally as he will. His Spirit is the Spirit of truth, of holiness, of power.
III. The evidence op this sufpioienot. 1. The personal experience of Paul as
recorded in this passage. He tells us here, not only what Christ promised, but what he
performed. He was perfectly satisfied with the course he had taken. He did not find
his own personal weakness and insufiBciency a barrier to his efRciency and usefulness.
What he lacked, his Lord supplied. 2. The recorded experience of all who have trusted
to the same Divine Source of all-sufficiency. There is no discordant note in the song of
grateful, affectionate adoration which fills the Church of the Redeemer. All his people
have known their own demerits, their own powerlessness, and all have known the
sufficiency of their Lord. And every Christian has reason to acknowledge —

" And when my all of strength shall &il,
I shall with the God-Man prevail."

T.

Ver. 12. — Sign) of apostteship. The evidences of deep feeling, which are manifest
throughout this Epistle, are very prominent in this passage. There were special reasons
why a sensitive man like Paul should lay to heart the treatment with which he met
from the Corinthians. Considering what he had done among them and for them, he
felt it hard that empty pretenders should be preferred to himself. And he was convinced
that, in disregarding his authority, these members of the Corinthian congregation whom
he had in view were doing injustice to his ministry among them. For all the proofs of
a Divine commission had been exhibited in his ministry in their city. He appeals to —

I. MiBAOULOus EVIDENCES OP APOSTiiBSHip. Upou due occasion the apostle did
not hesitate to bring forward and adduce as proofs of his commission the supernatural
gifts which had been bestowed upon him. How could he have publicly made such a
claim as this in an authentic letter, unless the Corinthians, friendly and inimical,
were ready to witness to the truth of his language? It would not be fanciful to
discriminate among the terms which Paul in this passage applies to these miraculous
evidences. Observe that they are designated : 1. Powers, as pointing to the heavenly
and Divine source to which they must needs be traced. Whether exercised in controlling
nature, in healing disease, or in inflicting punishment, they bore upon their very presence
the evidences that they were of superhuman origin. 2. Wonders, as fitted and indeed
intended to-awaken the interest, the inquiry, the amazement, of all beholders. Wonder
may be useful in leading to such reflection, such emotion, as may surpass itself in
value, 3. Signs, as indicating the authority of those at whose prayer or command
these marvels were wrought " among " the Corinthians.

IL The hobal evidence op apostleship. Nowhere in the New Testament is the
portent placed above the spiritual. Christ's mighty works answered their purpose when
they prompted the exclamation and inquiry, " What manner of man is this ! " And in
Paul's character there was seen an evi.ience of apostleship far more convincing and far
more instructive than the most marvellous deeds which he performed. He justly claims to
have exhibitei patience, both in his continuing to work for the Corinthians and to interest
himself in them notwithstanding their ingratitude, and in his tender and brotherly
treatment of them with a view to their restoration to entire sympathy with himself. — T.

Ver. 15.— Minisferidl devotion. Paul rejoices a'nd boasts that, however the Corin-
thians may misunderstand him, he cannot be accused of having acted towards them in
a mercenary spirit. Disinterestedness at all events he must claim, and they must
concede. They are the debtors, not he. He is the parent who lays up for the children.
This he does cheerfully, and is resolved that he will do in the future as in the past.
His determination is to spend and to be spent for their souls.



302 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xii. 1—21.

I. A BiNCBBE PKOFEBSiON. Had Paul been a stranger to his correspondents he could
not have used such languafce as this. But he was well kbown to them, having lived
and laboured in Corinth, working with his own hands for his maintenance, and putting
forth every effort for the spiritiial enlightenment and salvation of the citizeus. 1. The
minister of Christ spends for the enrichment of his people's souls. He has " treasure,''
though in earthen vessels. He has " the true riches " committed to his keeping. His
aim is to bestow the choicest and most precious blessings upon the spiritually necessitous.
All he has he longs to part with. 2. The minister of Christ is willing to he spent for his
people's souls. Labour often involves suffering. Bodily powers may be exhausted ;
even the mind itself may give way under the strain of a toilsome, emotional, prolonged
ministry. The missionary may sink beneath the burden of climate, of unrequited toil,
of persecution. Every faithlul minister must lay his account, not only with effort, but
with self-denial and self-sacrifice.

II. An ardent appeal. The Eeviserg adopt a rendering of the latter part of this
verse which harmonizes with what we may well believe to have been the sentiment of
the apostle. 1. Paul has proved the abundance of his love; and every true minister,
animated by the love of Christ and by pity for souls, has shown himself to be a true
lover and friend of his fellow-men. 2. Shall it, then, be the case that those whom the
Christian minister loves, and whose welfare he seeks, shall be indifferent and ungrateful ?
It is sometimes so; the very faithfulness and earnestness of the minister may occasion
the aversion of those who desire that he should "prophesv smooth things," and leave
them to their sinful pursuits and pleasures uninterrupted. Yet the affection and devotion
uf spiritual workers deserve a very different return. — T.

Ver. 19. — Edification. The strain in which this portion of the Epistle is written
may, ihe writer is conscious, mislead some readers. It displays a good deal of personal
feeling; it reproaches those who have not shown themselves amenable to ritihtful
influence and authority ; it reveals a wounded heart. Some readers may misinterpret
these signs and infer that the apostle regards himself as on his defence, as excusing and
vindicating himself, as asking thnt the best construction possible may be forbearingly
put upon his conduct. But all this is erroneous. Paul's one great aim is, not his
own vindication, but, on the contrary, the edification of those to whom his Epistle is
addressed.

I. In what DOiis EDIFICATION CONSIST ? 1. It has respect to those who are already
built upon the one Foundation — Christ. The minister of Christ, like other workmen,
must begin at the beginning. When men receive the gospel, then, and only then, are
they in a position to be "edified." 2. It consists in the building up of the Christian
character in the case of individuals. The resemblance to Christ is what is mainly to be
sought. 3. And in the formation of solid and serviceable Christian societies, all of
which are parts of the holy temple which is being reared to the glory of God.

II. By what MEANS IS EDIFICATION PKOMOTBD? 1. The mcaus divinely appointed
and approved are moral and spiritual. All employment of mechanical or political
agency to secure such an end is to be condemned, as both inappropriate and useless.
2. Personal agency is that which the New Testament exemplifies and which experience
approves. Living spirits, full of love and sympathy, are divinely qualified to engage
in such a work as this. 3. The presentation of truth, the addressing of language of
encouragement and promise, of admonition and rebuke, — these are emphatically the
scriptural methods of edification. Of all these abundant and very instructive examples
may be found in this very Epistle.

III. What pubposbs does edification subserve? 1. The welfare, the highest
spiritual development and happiness, of those who are edified. 2. The impression thus
made upon the world by the presence in the midst of it of a Divine temple reared with
human souls. 3. The honour and glory of the heavenly Architect himself. — T.

Vers. I — 4. — Apostolic experiences in heaven. I. The apostlb had a heavenly
EXPEEiENCB DURING HIS EARTHLY LIFE. His earthly experience was, very largely, dark
and sorrowful; but amidst the darkness appears this brilliant flash of heavenly light.
1. Re gives us this experience us ore actual fact, and as such we must receive it. It was
a reality to him. lie records it that it may come before ns as a reality, not as a mert



OH. xn. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 303

fancy or iUusion. 2. It furnished him with an opportunity of contrasting man's treat-
m,ent and God's. In the closing verses of the preceding chapter we have a catalogue of
Paul's tribulations, many of these occasioned by human perversity and enmity. Men
treated Paul evilly ; Ood gave hitn this special and marvellous heavenly experience!

IL The chaeacteb of this experience. 1. A real entrance into the heavenly
world. Paul has no doubt about this. His only doubt is whether he was in the body
at the time. He most distinctly conveys that there was a remnval of his spirit into
another sj)here ; he is not sure whether his body accompanit.d his spirit. There could
not have been a doubt as to whether he was " in the body" if his experience had been
a mere trance or any special influence brought to bear upon his mind. There was a
removal, but whether of body and spirit, or of spirit alone, the apostle cannot declare.
We may note the ajostolic ielief that conscious life is possible to us when we are "out
of the body." The apostle did not know whether liis exjierience was of this order, but
he evidently recognizes this order of experience us possible. "We may note further that
the apostle regarded heaven or paradise as a place as well as a state. " Third heaven "
and " paradise " seem to be used synonymously — " third heaven " indicating the realm
in which God's glory is pre-eminently manifested. The rabbins taught the existence
of seven heavens, but it is not probable that Paul refers to their notions. '2. An
entrance effected hy Ood. It was not by the apostle's merit or power ; it was by a
Divine act — he was " caught up." Admittance to the heavenly world is in the hands
of God ; if we enter, then God must effect the entrance for us. Christ, the Way, is
given to us by God. 3. Astonishing visions. Paul sow much (ver. 1). 4. Wonderful
revelations. He heard much. " Unspeakable words," understood by him, but not to
be repeated on earth. Possibly they would not have been intelligible to any who had
not participated in the heavenly experience. Our curiosity craves to know what Paul
saw and heard, but our needs do not demand it. We have the speakable words of the
gospel, which, rightly received, will prepare us to hear by-and-by the " unspeakable
words " of heaven and to behold the heavenly glories.

III. The object of this EXPBr.iBNCB. 1. To encourage the apostle in hit many
labours and sufferings. Christ took his disciples up into the mountain and was trans-
figured before them ; then he brought them down into the world of men to toil and to
endure. 2. To quicken his faith in the unseen. Great natures doing great works have
often great trials of faith. A big devil always comes against a big Christian. 3. To
speed him onward to the final rest of Qod's people. He was a much-loved child ; the
Father showed him special favour. 4. That others to whom, the experience should be
recounted might participate in the benefit. The experience was for us as well as for the
apostle. From us its special features are largely hidden ; but it is revealed to us, and
this knowledge may well encourage us in the earthly service, quicken our faith, and
hasten our footsteps towards the glories beyond the veil.

A general lesson maybe learnt from the event that those who have ipecial trials and
sorrows experience also special comforts and helps. — H.

Ver. 7. — I%e thorn in the flesh. I. What was it ? 1. In itself. There have been
almost infinite conjectures. As to the figwre : some prefer a " goad for the flesh," a
sharjiened stake; others, a rankling thorn; others, a stake on which offenders were
impaled or the cross to which they were fastened. As to the reality : evil suggestions ;
fiery darts of Satan ; some prominent adversary ; some painful bodily affection, weak
eyesight, defective speech, carnal cravings ; whilst a bold imaginationist has had the
temerity to suggest a termagant wife! Possibly the precise nature of the afiiiction is
concealed that no one may say, " Ah, that is not my trouble." It was very grievous
to the apostle whatever its precise nature. 2. As Satan was concerned in it. Paul
recognized Satan's hand (see Job ii. 7 ; Luke xiii. 16). It was u.sed of Satan to annoy,
pain, depress, and harass Paul, and with the hope that it would hinder his great work.
Satanic malice rejoiced in the anticipation that it might prove the last straw upon the
camel's back. Paul interfered much with the devil's kingdom ; it is no wonder that the
devil sought to interfere with him. Satan can afford to leave some people alone; but
if we faithfully attack his kingdom and his rule we may expect reprisals. Yet Satan
is bat a fool after all, and constantly overreaches himself. One has well said, " The
devil drives but a poor trade by the persecution of the saints — he tears the nest, but



304 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ch. xn. 1—21.



the bird escapes ; he cracks the shell, but loses the kernel." 3. As allowed 5y Ood.
God's hand was in it as well as Satan's. This is so with all our tribulations ; in one
aspect they are messengers of Satan, in the other messengers of God. All depondi
upon which message we listen to. Paul's thorn in the flesh was God's teacher of.
humility. There was danger that the extraordinary revelations made to the apostle
might foster pride. Human nature is intensely susceptible to this temptation. Those
who enjoy remarkable favours often experience remarkable affliction. The ship in the
high wind needs plenty of ballast. When we build high we must also build low — the
lofty building requires a deep foundation. It is well for us that God is not merely
indulgent. God will not allow us to become spoilt children.

II. The apostlk's rbstlbsssess under the affliction. Paul was very human.
He would not have been so could he have borne this additional trouble with indifference.
Remember his other troubles. If this special affliction seemed likely to hinder his life-
work, how keenly would he feel it ! 'Tis hard to dance in chains. Heavy labour tries
the healthy ; how exceedingly burdensome to the sick 1 Yet he did not grumblOj or
make himself a nuisance, or find fault with God, or sit down in despair. It was said
of him once, " Behold, he prayeth ; " it may be said of him again.

III. His PBATEB. 1. In his distress he betook himself to the mercy-seat. Like
Hezekiah, he spread the matter before the Lord. Affliction should drive us to, not
from, God. And we should come to pray, not to complain. The throne of grace is
sometimes turned into a bar of judgment, at which men arraign God. When some
strange experience comes upon us we should ask concerning it in the audience-chamber.

2. He prayed to the Lord Jesus. This seems evident from ver. 9, " that the strength
of Christ may rest upon me." The servant's difficulties may well be submitted to the
Master. Christ had directly appointed the apostle j to Christ, therefore, Paul brings
his seeming hindrance. Whilst usually we pray to the Father in the Name of Christ,
we may at other times pray to Christ himself. 3. Eeprayed with importunity. There
was no mistaking his Crirnestness. As Christ in Gethsemane prayed " the third time,"
so thrice did this Christ-like apostle knock at heaven's gate. He went on knocking until
he got a response. Many in prayer want nothing, ask nothing, get nothing. Some
are so polite that they dread lest they should disturb God, and knock so lightly and
daintily that it would require a microphone to make the sound audible. Others ring
and run away. The apostle stood at the gate till he was answered. Such holy boldness
delights God instead of affronting him. 4. He prayed definitely. (1) For " this thing."
Some pray for. everything in general, and therefore get nothing in particular. (2)
That it might depart. Here, perhaps, he went too far. If our troubles were sent away,
our best friends might be sent away. The counterpart of " a thorn in the flesh " may
be " grace in the spirit." It is a good thing that it does not rest with us to send away
or to retain ; we should often send away the good and draw to ourselves the injuiious
and evil.

IV. The ANSWER. \. A true answer, yel not what was looked for. (Ver. 9.) Such a
prayer, oHered in such a manner, was certain of a response, but not of the response
anticipated. God often answers our prayers by not answering them. We get what we
want, not what we wish. We dictate our prayer ; God dictates the answer. Generally
we do not ask enoitgh — ^the apostle did not ; to take away the thorn was small compared
with sanctifying its presence. To eject the devil's messenger was poor compared with
transforming it into a ministering spirit. 2. A lesson of faith. Paul's faith must
transcend his feeling. He must lay hold of Christ with more tenacious grasp ; he must
believe that Christ can use this trouble for high purposes. Perhaps as he looked to
Christ with stronger faith he could realize that, as great purposes were accomplished by
the many thorns in the flesh of Christ (he was crowned with thorns), so the one thorn
in his flesh should not prove unfruitful. Grapes might be gathered from this thorn.

3. A definite assurance. There was a basis for the faith demanded, as there always is.
" My grace is sufficient for thee " (ver. 9). Christ engages to bear him through ; can
he believe this? The Lord's resources are boundless; they are our resources when
strong faith binds us to their possessor. My "grace "may mean my " love," which
secures all things needful for my servants; or the aid of the Holy Spirit, which will
prove sufficient for every exigency. 4. An intimation of purpose. There was no
mistake in sending or allowing the " thorn in the flesh." Prayer becomes blasphemoua



OH. XII. 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 305

when it proceeds upon the assumption that God has made a blunder ! The thorn in
the flesh was the stem upon which the flower of the Divine glory was to blossom. The
" messenger of Satan " would be made a herald proclaiming the power of Christ. The
apostle's flesh was to be a battle-field on which Christ would triumph.

V. The issue. A new thought has been given to Paul — Christ's glory will be
enhanced. At once he begins to glory in this infirmity, " Most gladly " (ver. 9), or
most sweetly ; it became a delight of the highest kind. What he wanted to lose he now
wants to keep. With the thorn in the flesh he can become, as he could not without it,
the dwelling-place of the power of Christ. It is enough if through his humiliation
Christ may be exalted, if through his suffering Christ may be glorified. Many are
more than content with being resigned under suffering ; to submit they think is a mark
of highest grace. But the apostle is far beyond this. He can " take pleasure " (ver. 10)
in troubles, because through his troubles the power of Christ is more strikingly and
impressively exhibited. — ^H.

Ver. 11. — Much, yet nothing. I. The apostle's claim. A large claim, put strongly.
Paul claimed to be on a perfect equality with the leading apostles. Unwillingly he
referred to this matter, which might look like self-glorification ; but when the occasion
came, his utterance was full and unnaistakable. There is nothing derogatory in
magnifying our office, the evil lies in magnifying ourselves in it. It is not conceitedness
but righteousness to assert for ourselves what God has already asserted for us. Paul
felt that he must not lightly esteem, or allow others to lightly esteem, a high ofBce
conferred upon him by God, and an office in which God had signally witnessed to his
efforts. Paul speaks about " the signs " of an apostle ; the interesting question arises —
What were these signs ? We may note the following : — 1. Knowledge of the gospel
derived by immediate revelation from Christ (Gal. i. 12). 2. Being specially under the
influence and teaching of the Divine Spirit, so as to be able to announce truth with
authority (1 Cor. ii. 10 — 13; xii. 8, 29; xiv. 37). 3. External manifestations of
Divine favour sanctioning claim to the apostleship. 4. Continued faithfulness to
the gospel (Gal. i. 8, 9). 5. Success in preaching the gospel (1 Cor. ix. 2). 6. Power
of communicating the Holy Ghost by imposition of hands (Acts viii. 18). 7. Power
of working miracles (ver. 12 ; Bom. xv. 18, 19). 8. Holiness of life (ch. vi. 4).
Such of these as could be exhibited to the Corinthians, had been, and there was one
respect in which his readers would scarcely contest Paul's claim, and to this with his
accustomed dexterity the apostle refers. If founding great Churches was a mark of
great apostleship, what an apostle Paul must have been to found such a Church as the
Corinthian (ver. 13) ! This was a perfectly sound argument, but it was an argu-
mentum ad hominem of a singularly happy character. There was only one thing
lacking, and here the apostle blends irony with pathos — " I myself was not a burden to
you : forgive me this wrong " (ver. 13). For reasons given elsewhere in the Epistle, he
had resolved not to derive any part of his temporal support from them. They might
esteem this a slight. Had they lived in later days they would have counted it a
virtue !

IL The apostle's acknowledgment. Paul's humility is marvellous. Yet it was
not one whit greater than it ought to have been. The " thorn in the flesh " (ver. 7)
has accomplished a gracious work. Paul has at the same time the clearest view of
the Divine power and glory, and of his own insignificance and impotence. He does
not take to himself for a moment what was not of himself. Note in ver. 12 he says,
not " / wrought," but " were wrought " — he distinguishes between God and Paul I We
have a beautiful insight into the apostle's mind. He has risen too high to deck him-
self in plumes stolen from his Lord. Though divinely endowed, strikingly witnessed
to in his labours, beyond question the pre-eminent apostle, he says, " I am nothing."
We wonder not that God used such a man. We magnify God's grace in him. Truly
the promise had been amply fulfilled, " My grace is sufficient for thee " (ver. 9). Our
pride is our folly — it drives God out and lets the devil in. We cannot be great
because we will be so great. The bag is full of wind, so that it cannot be filled.

III. Leabn: 1. JBumility becomes u». It became Paul. If he had so lowly an
estimate of himself, how little should we think ol ourselves ! Even if we are " great men,"
we are very small men compared with him. 2. Humility it reasonable. It is not

n. C0BIKTHIAN& X



30« THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. xu. 1—21.

fiction, but fact, to say that we are nothing. Pride is based on a lie. 8. Ewnility i$
generally associated with large usefidness. — H.

Ver. 15. — Self-expenditivre. I. A splendid illustration op Christiah sebviois.
The apostle is carried beyond the thought of giving; some time, or strength, or property,
for his beloved Corinthians ; he expresses his perfect willingness to give himself. He
■will not count it a grief, but a gladness, to expend himself tor them. Whilst many find
great dlfiSculty in giving a little for others, the apostle seems to find none in giving all.
Here we have : 1. Whole-souled devotion. Nothing can transcend the apostle's oflfer.
And the voluntariness and the joy of the devotion place it in the first rank of excellence.
2. Earnest desire for welfare. The love of Paul for the Corinthians could not have
been more forcibly expressed. Men gauge oiir love for them by what we are willing to
give up for them ; when we are willing to give up ourselves for them, they cannot but
be convinced of our sincerity. 3. Indication of the importance of Christian work.
For nothing else in the world would Paul have willingly spent himself. But
Christian service more than justified the self-sacrifice. In his judgment nothing
could compare with it for a moment. We may remember that in all departments of
life we can render Christian service ; spheres of labour become insignificant and mean
only when Christian service is excluded from them. 4. A striking imitation of Christ.
Paul has caught his Master's spirit. His Lord laid down his life for him ; he will now
lay down his life for his Lord. Christ "gave himself." The Lord's servant is most
fitted to do his Lord's work when he is most like his Lord. 5. A secret of success.
When we labour for Christ in such a spirt as this we are certain to prosper. Failure is
the child of half-heartedness and selfishness. Christ honours an entire consecration
to his service.

II. Sblf-expbndino Christian service prompted bt a high motive. The apostle
was willing to spend himself for the souls of tlie Corinthians — " and be spent for your
souls " (New Version). In this labour he was seeking at the same time the highest glory
of God and Christ, and the truest welfare of men. These objects unite in Christian
service, which aims pre-eminently to do good to the souls of men. The saving and
perfecting of souls redounds supremely to the glory of the Divine Being, whilst it
secures the highest good for humanity. So dominated was the apostle by the desire to
do good to tlie souls of men, that what is usually a very strong motive for action, viz.
the love of others for us, was quite swept away. He declares that he will expend
himself for the Corinthians, though this strongest indication of his love to them should
produce a decreasing love for him on their part. The disinterested character of true
Christian service is here very strikingly displayed. It was by such self-expenditure as
that of Paul's that early Christianity won its triumphs ; it is for such self-expenditure
that later Christianity pathetically calls. God is always thoroughly in earnest, but men
are not. When men become so then " the arm of the Lord is revealed." — H.

Ver. 2. — "A man in Christ." St. Paul spoke of himself. Once he had been out of
Christ, though in a legal fashion very religious. But he gave up his legality when he
found Christ. He looked to him for help, fled to him for defence, and thenceforward
lived in him as a new creature. It is the best short description of every believer.

I. Chosen in Christ. (Eph. i. 4.) We put this first, because this must come first in
the Divine order and in the very nature of things. But man does not begin with any
knowledge of this as affecting himself. He grounds his faith, not on the secret purpose,
but on the revealed good will of God to all in the gospel. It is after he has believed
that he learns gratefully to trace his own calling and salvation, in common with that of
all his fellow-believers, to the gracious choice and purpose of God. Then, as the seven-
teenth Article of the Church of England expresses it, " The godly consideration of pre-
destination and our election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort
to godly persons and such as feel in themselves the worlsing of the Spirit of Christ."

II. Freely gbacbd in the Beloved. (Eph. i. 6.) The man in Christ is embraced in
the favour with which God regards his beloved Son. He has redemption and recon-
ciliation to God, unsearchable riches, spiritual blessings in heavenly places, and continual
freedom of access to the Father in heaven.

IIT. Created anew m Christ Jesus. (Eph. ii. 10.) God begins this work, as of old,



OH. xa. 1— 21.J THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 307

by causing light to shine out of darkness ; then he introduces a new order, peace and
fertile life, and this is wrought on and in every genuine Christian. " If any man be in
Christ, he is a new creation." And therefore he does what is right, not by a continual
strain and effort against nature, but spontaneously and naturally, because he has a clean
heart and a right spirit.

IV. EsTABLiSHBD IN Chbist. (Ch. 1. 21.) He who comes to Christ under the drawing
grace of the Spirit of God abides in him by the same Spirit, so as to imbibe his wisdom,
experience his support, and learn what consolation there is in him, and what comfort of
love. So God confirms and establishes his people in Christ, making good to them his
promises, anointing them, sealing them, and giving " the earnest of the Spirit " in their
hearts. This is much more than being settled in one's religious opinions and habits.
It is the staying of the mind on Christ. And usually it is reached through conflicts
and sufferings that compel the soul to grapple more firmly the reality of Christ and the
security of Divine promises in him, just as trees rocked by the winds strike their roots
the more widely and deeply into the ground (see 1 Pet. v. 10).

V. Appboved in Christ. (Rom. xvi. 10.) Establishment relates to faith, know-
ledge, and comfort; approval refers to service. Labour for the Lord ought to be
rendered in the Lord, t.e. in virtue of union with him, and by the power derived from
such union. But as there are gradations of faith and love among true Christians, so
also there are degrees of diligence and thoroughness in service ; and some servants are
more approved than others, and shall have a more full reward. Oh to serve so as to
have our Master's smile upon us now, and to be openly accepted of him at his coming
as good and faithful servants !

VI. Pbefect in Chbist Jesus : complete in him. (Col. i. 28 ; ii. 10.) There is all-
perfect resource in our Lord. But all have not attained. There are babes in Christ,
not perfect or mature; let them go on to fuller stature and strength. It is an
object to be desired and worked for, that every believing man may be presented
perfect in Christ Jesus, i.e. ripe and mature, not crude or ill-developed in the Christian
character.

VII. Asleep in Jesus. (1 Cor. xv. 18 ; 1 Thess. iv. 14, 18.) If we are Christ's, death
is ours. It cannot do us hurt or separate us from the love of God. For a man who is
in Christ, the whole state of death is brightened by the love and faithfulness of the
Lord. Blessed are the dead who die in him. Sweetly sleep the labourers who, when
their day's work for Jesus is ended, fall asleep in him.

" Oh, never doleful dream again
Shall break the happy slumber whea
• He giveth his beloved sleep.' "

F.

Ven. 7 — ^9. — An instructive experience. Like all true saints, Paul was modest about
his own experience. He did not write down his heavenly rapture and what followed it,
tiU fourteen years had passed, and then he wrote it only because he felt compelled to
prove to the Corinthians that even " in visions and revelations of the Lord " he surpassed
the false apostles as much as in labours and sufferings for Christ. Never did Christian
tell an experience more useful and strengthening to the Church.

I. Affliction the antidote to pbidb. We do not speak so much of the natural
pride of men over personal advantages of body or mind, over rank or riches, as of that
subtle pride which is apt to creep into the heart after a great influx of spiritual light
and joy. One may be exalted overmuch on account of the clearer vision of heavenly
things or the near access to the Lord which he has enjoyed. But there comes a timely
affliction or rebuke, not merely to correct pride if it is indulged, but to anticipate and
prevent its rising. "Lest I should be exalted." The wise man accepts this as a kind-
ness from God. " There was given to me a thorn in the flesh."

II. Praybb the antidote to despondency. " I besought the Lord thrice." When
one is cast down, worldly-wise friends can only bid him cheer up, cast off dull care, etc.
But the resource of the Christian is to pray to the God of his life. And prayer must
be repeated. The Saviour prayed thrice before the angel from heaven appeared to
strengthen him. Paul prayed thrice before the answer of grace and peace fell upon bis
fainting souL



808 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [ch. xn. 1—21.

in. Chkist's gbacb that sweetens all. He knows well the piercing of thorns,
the fiery darts, and the " blast of the terrible ones," and he can have compassion. He
did not, indeed, see fit to relieve his servant Paul at once of his distress, but assured him
of compensative grace and sustaining strength; and so the apparent evil was turned into
a blessing, the pain and sorrow into joy. Be of good comfort, O believers ! Against
your own felt weakness set Christ's strength ; and against all malice of Satan and his
messengers set Christ's sufficient grace. — F.

Ver. 1. — Visions and revelations. "1 will come to visions and revelations of the
Lord." The apostle had been dwelling on his personal experiences. He had been
compelled by the evil things that were said of him to refer to his own life, conduct, and
sufferinas for Christ's sake, in self-vindication. He would, however, not have spoken
one word about these things if the honour of Christ had not been bound up with his
claim to apostleship. He had now said everything that needed to be said about himself;
and it was every way pleasanter and healthier to turn away from his own doings and
sufferings, and to fix his heart and his thoughts upon what God had done for him.
Upon the Divine visions and revelations given to him he in great part rested his apostolic
claim. To him an apostle was, just what a prophet of the olden time had been, a man
who had direct and personal communications with the Lord Jesus, and received instruc-
tions immediately from him. For such instances in St. Paul's career, see Actsix. 4 — 6;
xvi. 9 ; xviii. 9 ; xxii. 18 ; xxiii. 11 ; ixvii. 23 ; Gal. ii. 2 ; and the scenes recorded in
the chapter now before us. This claim to direct revelation the enemies of St. Paul
denied, and laughed to scorn his pretensions as the indications of insanity. Dean
Plumptre tells us that " in the Clementine Homilies — a kind of controversial romance
representing the later views of the Ebionite or Judaizing party, in which most recent
critics have recognized a thinly veiled attempt to present the characteristic features of
St. Paul under the pretence of an attack on Simon Magus, just as the writer of a political
novel in modern times might draw the portraits of his rivals under fictitious names —
we find stress laid on the alleged claims of Simon to have had communications from the
Lord through visions and dreams and outward revelations ; and this claim is contrasted
with that of Peter, who had personally followed Christ during his ministry on earth.
What was said then, in the form of this elaborate attack, may well have been said
before by the more malignant advocates of the same party. The charge of insanity was
one easy to make, and of all charges, perhaps, the most difBoult to refute by one who
gloried in the facts which were alleged as its foundation — who did see visions and did
' speak with tongues ' in the ecstasy of adoring rapture." Compare the expression,
" whether we be beside ourselves," in ch. v. 13. When the particular visions came to
which reference is made in the passage before us cannot certainly be known. St. Paul
only aids us by referring to the time as " about fourteen years ago." The suggestion
we prefer is that they were granted during the time of his fainting after the stoning at
Lystra, and were the Divine comfortings of that hour of sorest peril and distress (Acts
xiv. 19).

I. Visions and eevblations abb agencies which God has always used. They
do not belong to any one age. We have no right to say that they are limited to
ancient times. There have always been the true and the counterfeit ; but the true
should not be missed or denied because the false have been found out. There are good
gold coins, or men would not trouble to make spurious sovereigns. Fanaticism deludes
its victims into imaginary visions, but souls that are kin with God, and open to him,
can receive communications from him. Illustrate from all ages, e.g. Noah, Abraham,
Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Samuel, David, Isaiah, Joseph (the husband of
Mary), aged Simeon, Zaoharias, etc. So in the Christian age we find visions granted
to Cornelius, Philip, Peter, and John, as well as Paul, and traces of prophets, such as
Agabus, and even of prophetesses. St. Paul's visions were probably of the nature of a
trance ; the mind being absorbed in contemplation may be prepared to receive Divine
levealings. It is right to subject all claims to visions to careful scrutiny, and the
things communicated to men at such times must be tested by their harmony with the
written revelation ; but we need not refuse to recognize the truth that God has dirjct
relations to souls now as certainly as in past ages. Both truth and duty may still b«
lUrectly revealed.



OH. xa. 1—21,] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE C0EINTHIAN8. 309

II. They comb to certain pbepakbd individuals. Not to masses, not to Churclies,
not to meetings. The vision is for individuals, who are thus made agents in the com-
munication to men of the Divine thought and will. P. W. Eobertson says, " To com-
prehend the visions we must comprehend the man. For God gives visions at his own
will, and according to certain and fixed laws. He does not inspire every one. He does
not reveal his mysteries to men of selfish, or hard, or phlegmatic temperaments. Ha
gives preternatural communications to those whom he prepares beforehand by a peculiar
spiritual sensitiveness. There are, physically, certain sensitivenesses to sound and colour
that qualify men to become gifted musicians and painters ; so, spiritually, there are
certain strong original susceptibilities (I say original, as derived from God, the origin oi
all), and on these God bestows strange gifts and sights, deep feelings not to be uttered
in human language, and immeasurable by the ordinary standard. Such a man was St.
Paul — a very wondrous nature, the Jewish nature in all its strength. We know that
the Jewish temperament fitted men to be the organs of a revelation. Its fervour, its
moral sense, its veneration, its indomitable will, all adapted the highest sons of the
nation for reoeivingr hidden truths and communioatin<j them to others."

III. They come on pabticulab occasions. By the law of Divine economy, only
when they are the precise thing demanded, the only agency that will efficiently meet
the case.

IV. Thbt come in gkaciouslt adapted fobms. Heard voices sometimes, at other
times dreams, ocular visions, symbols, trances, and mental panoramas. Close by
showing that, because the modern mode is direct to souls, immediate to the shaping of
men's thoughts, and not through symbols, or dreams, or visions, we need not lose the
conviction that, upon due occasions still, God gives to some amongst us insight and
revelation of his truth. — R. T.

Ver. 7. — Satan's messenger ; or, the thorn in the flesh. It would be a grave mistake
to make this description of St. Paul's affliction the basis of any argument for the
personality or agency of Satan. He does but use the familiar Jewish figure of speech,
which may or may not embody for him any doctrine concerning Satan. The figure
is most strikint];ly used in the introduction to the Book of Job; but the following
other passages illustrate how familiar it was to the Jewish mind : Luke xiii. 16; Acti
X. 38 ; 1 Cor. v. 5 ; 1 Thess. ii. 18 ; 1 Tim. i. 20. " These are enough to prove that,
while men referred special forms of suffering of mind and body, chiefly the former, to the
agency of demons, they were prepared to recognize the agency of Satan in almost every
form of bodily calamity." No single description of Satan can cover the entire Scripture
representation of him, but one aspect presented by it has not been duly considered. He
is sometimes regarded as the agent, or executor, of the Divine purpose in physical
calamity, and even in moral testings through temptation. We may think of an angel
of temptation as well as of an angel of death. We may not even think of Satan as in
any sense acting independently. He, too, comes fully within the Divine rulings and
ouemilings. What the nature of the apostle's affliction or temptation was cannot be
certainly known from his descriptions of it. Many explanations have been suggested.
Lightfoot summarizes them thus : (1) a bodily ailment of some kind : (2) some opposition
encountered from his enemies, or suffering endured ; (3) carnal longings ; (4) spiritual
trials, doublings, etc. Archdeacon Parrar thinks the " thorn " must have been some
physical malady, and suggests epilepsy, of which he says, " It is painful ; it is recurrent ;
it opposes an immense difficulty to all exertion ; it may at any time cause a temporary
suspension of work; it is intensely humiliating to the person who suffers from it; it
exercises a repellent effect on those who witness its distressing manifestations." But he
adds that there can be no doubt that St. Paul also suffered from ophthalmia, and that
this disease fulfils in every particular the conditions of the problem. Dean Plumptre
favours the idea of corporeal rather than mental suffering, and says, " Nor need we be
surprised that this infirmity — neuralgia of the head and face or inflammation of the
eyes, perhaps in some measure the after-consequences of the blindness at Damascus —
should be described as 'a messenger of Satan.'" Another suggestion has been made
which is fresh and interesting, and worthy of very patient consideration. Professor
Lias writes, "Our last alternative must be some defect of character, calculated t'l
interfere with St. Paul's success as • minister of Jesus Christ. And the defect which



310 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oe. xil 1—21



falls in best with what we know of St. Paul is an infirmity of temper. There seemi
little doubt that he gave way to an outbreak of this kind when before the Sanhedrim,
though he set himself right at once by a prompt apology (Acts xxiii. 2 — 5). A similar
idea is suggested by St. Paul's unwillingness to go to Corinth until the points in dispute
between him and a considerable portion of the Corinthian Church were in a fair way of
being settled. In fact, his conduct was precisely the reverse of that of a person who
felt himself endowed with great tact, persuasiveness, and command of temper. Such a
man would trust little to messages and letters, much to his own presence and personal
influence. St. Paul, on the contrary, feared to visit Corinth until there was a reasonable
prospect of avoiding all altercation. In fact, he could not trust himself there. He
' feared that God would humble him among them ' (ch. xii. 21). He desired above
all things to avoid the necessity of ' using sharpness,' very possibly because he feared
that, when once compelled to assume a tone of severity, his language might exceed the
bounds of Christian love. The supposition falls in with what we know of the apostle
before his conversion (Acts vii. 58 ; ix. 1). It is confirmed by his stern iaiiguage
to Elymas the sorcerer (Acts xiii. 10), with which we may compare the much milder
language used by St. Peter on a far more awful occasion (Acts v. 3, 9). The quarrel
between St. Paul and St. Barnabas makes the supposition infinitely more probable.
The passage, Gal. iv. 13, 14, may be interpreted of the deep personal affection which
the apostle felt he had inspired in spite of his occasional irritability of manner. The
expression (Gal. iv. 20), that he 'desired to be present with them, and to change his
voice,' would seem to point in the same direction. And if we add to these con-
siderations the fact, which the experience of God's saints in all ages has conclusively
established, of the difficulty of subduing an infirmity of temper, as well as the
pain, remorse, and humiliation such an infirmity is wont to cause to those who
groan under it, we may be inclined to believe that not the least probable hypothesis
concerning the ' thorn,' or ' stake,' in the flesh is, that the loving heart of the
apostle bewailed as his sorest trial the misfortune that by impatience in word he
had often wounded those for whom he would willingly have given his life." What^
ever the form of the trial may have been, we note —

I. St. Paul's thoughts about it. These may be unfolded and illustrated gene-
rally, in relation (1) to Christian culture ; (2) to Christian work, and especially (3) in
relation to peril of spiritual pride. St. Paul saw clearly that the humiliation came
" through the abundance of the revelations ; " and "lest he should be puffed up beyond
measure."

II. St. Paul's lesson learned from rr. It was mainly this — that the mission
of suffering may be continuous through life. It may be the point of God's dealing
with us that he does not sanctify us by sudden, occasional, and severe aflSictions,
but by calling us to bear a lifelong burden of disability or frailty. Troubles of
this kind cannot be removed in response to prayer, because to remove them would be
to check the sanctifying process. God, in sending a temporary affliction, may have a
temporary end in view, and so, when that end is duly reached, the affliction may be
removed. But if the work of our sanctification is, in the Divine wisdom, to be wrought
by a continuous life-pressure, then the response to our prayer can only be this :
" My grace is sufficient for thee." Dean Stanley points out that " St. Paul's sufferings
were to him what the mysterious agony that used at times to seize on Alfred, in the
midst of feast and revel, had been to the saintly and heroic king, a discipline working
for his perfection." — B. T.

Ver. Q.— Sufficient grace. The following incident from John Bunyan'a experience
may serve to introduce this subject. One evening, as Bunyan was in a meeting of
Christian people, full of sadness and terror, suddenly there " brake in " upon him with
great power, and three times together, the words, " My grace is sufficient for thee ; my
grace is sufficient for thee ; my grace is sufficient for thee." And " Oh, methought,"
says he, " that every word was a mighty word unto me ; as ' my,' and ' grace,' and
'sufficient,' and 'for thee,' they were then, and sometimes are still, far bigger than
others be." The great practical question for us, in our endeavour to live the godly life,
is not — What have we to bear? but — What strength have we for the bearing? God's
help never comes first to a man in his circumatanr.es, but always first in him, Th«



CH. XJL 1—21.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COfilNTHIANa 811



grace given is grace helping him in the circumstances. So the Christian often knows
that he is helped when those around him can see no signs of the helping. God's
promise from the olden time is this, " As thy day so shall thy strength be." In all our
relations with human trouble, our attention is directed to the removal of the trouble
itself or the change of the circumstances which occasioned the trouble. We move the
pain- wearied sufferer into a position of greater ease. We soften and smoothe the pillow
for the aching head. We offer temporary help to the man distressed in business. But Ood
does not promise any man that he will alter his circumstances or altogether relieve him
from his trouble. The economy of life is arranged, in the Divine wisdom, for the greatest
good of the greatest nmnber, and consequently some of those circumstances which bring
trouble to Christian hearts cannot be altered without involving injury to others.
God " strengthens with strength in the soul." To him body and circumstance are
secondary things ; souls are of the first importance, and bodies and circumstances gain
their importance by their influence on souls. Inward strength to bear is a far higher pro-
vision than any mere mastery of the ills and troubles of the life. A man is never lost
until he has lost heart. But if Ood supplies inward strength we never shall lose heart,
and so we never shall be lost. Outwardly a man may be tossed about, worn, wearied, lost,
wounded, almost broken, and yet inwardly he may be kept in perfect peace ; his mind
may be stayed on God ; he may be " strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might."
We may say of this " sufficient grace " that it is —

L Adapted. We are to conceive of the grace of God, not as a great mass, a
quantity of which is duly measured out to meet our need, but rather as a treasury
of various kinds and various colours, from which may be obtained just those threads
that will match our circumstances and repair the disasters into which we have fallen.

II. Timely. Here we require to distinguish between what we think to be timely
and what Qod thinks to be timely, remembering that God never delays, but is
never hurried. He waits for the moment of extremity. " When the tale of bricks is
doubled, then comes Moses." And it should also be shown that we may not look
for some particular grace and help to-day, which God knows will only be required
to-morrow. The very charm of " sufficient grace " is that it is precisely the thing for
the occasion." Those who are looking for kinds of grace for which they have no imme-
diate and pressing needs will be in danger of missing the gracious provisions which
their Lord is ever making for them. The way between earth and heaven is a ladder —
Jacob saw it — and the angels came up and down it. We cannot reach the top by
looking up ; only by putting our feet up one round after another. And God is williug to
be ever close beside us, holding us with his hand and strengthening us for each uplifted
step.

UL Abundant. That is assured in the fact that it is the grace of God, who
is able to do exceedingly abundantly for us above all that we ask or think. The man
with " sufficient grace " is efficient to all work, whether it be bearing or doiTig. He is
nowhere alone ; grace is with him. — B. T.

Ver. 9. — Glorying in infirmities. In introduction should be given some high and
noble instances of triumph over disease, pain, or disability, in doing philanthropic and
Christian work ; e.g. Baxter, Robert Hall, H. Martyn, 0. Pattison, P. W. Eobertson,
etc. Show that, while bodUy strength may be consecrated to God'.s service, it is also
true that physical weakness may serve him, and a man's very frailty glorify his Lord.
This may be further opened out by showing how —

L It beabb upon EnuiUTT. The grace which is the necessary completion and final
adornment of Christian character. The grace which puts on Christian fruitage all the
bloom. Humility is won by the pressure of God's hand upon us.

IL It NO0BI8HE8 DEPENDENCE ON GoD. "When I am weak, then am I strong."
This is the Christian paradox. Such dependence is not easy j it is one of the things
to which experience of failure and frailty alone can bring us. He is fitted for life and
for heaven who from his deep heart says, "I caimot, but God can."

III. It cultivates ohabaotbb. We know that physical weakness bears directly
and continuously upon temper, disposition, and virtue. Afflictions never test us, never
bear upon the whole culture of character, as does continuous pain or frailty. " As th«
outward man perishes, the inward man is renewed day by day."



312 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xn. 1—21.

IV. It keeps a man open to God. By its constant reminder of the need of God.
The frail man proves the preciousness of prayer. F. W. Eobertson most forcibly says
of prayer, " The true value of prayer is not this — to bend the eternal will to ours, but
this — to bend our wills to it." Frail, ever-suffering Paul laboured " more abundantly
than they all," and astonishing still is the soul-work that can be gotten out of feeble
men and women — with God's grace. — B. T.

Ver. 16. — Caught with guile. " Nevertheless, being crafty, I caught you with guile."
This expression occasions serious difBculty to the exegete. It may be that St. Paul is
referring to the accusation made against him that, being a crafty man, he had caught
the Corinthians with guile. He repudiates altogether such a charge, and pleads, as a
sufficient proof of his guilelessness, that no man could say he had ever used bis official
position to make personal gains. Archdeacon Farrar says, " Bein? confessedly one who
strove for peace and unity, who endeavoured to meet all men half-way, who was ready
to be all things to all men if by any means he might save some, he has more than once
to vindicate his character from those charges of insincerity, craftiness, dishonesty, guile,
man-pleasing, and flattery which are, perhaps, summed up in the general depreciation
which he so indignantly rebuts, that ' he walked according to the flesh,' or in other
words, that his motives were not spiritual, but low and selfish." He paraphrases the
sentence taken as our text thus : " But stop ! though I did not burden you, yet ' being
a cunning person, I caught you with guile.' Under the pretext of a collection I got
money out of you by my confederates! I ask you, is that a fact?" A possible
msinuation of the Corinthians is hereby anticipated and refuted ; and we need not
treat the statement of the text as any acknowledgment by St. Paul that he had adopted
any guileful schemes. No man could have been more thoroughly genuine, more
honourably straightforward. The subject for our consideration may be treated under
three divisions.

I. The idea op " caught with guile " that is inadmissible in Chkistian work.
1. Anything approaching to " doing evil that good may come " is inadmissible. 2. So
is any altering or qualifying the fundamental truths, claims, and duties of the
gospel. 3. vSo is any kind of action that is immoral, or of which the morality is even
doubtful. Illustrate by some of the guileful principles enunciated by the Jesuit fathers,
and so mercilessly exposed by Pascal in the ' Provincial Letters.' Sincerity and
simplicity are first virtues in Christian workers ; both the man and his labours must be
such as can be searched through and through. Guile, as the world understands the
term, must not be once known among us, as becometh saints.

n. The idea or " caught with guile " that is admissible in Chbistian work.
In the sense of adaptation to capacity it is an essential feature of Christian service. This
may sometimes appear to the onlooker as guile. In teaching children or uneducated
people, truth has to be simplified, to be set in figure and parable, and broken up into
parts and pieces, and such guilefulness St. Paul recognizes as valuable. He fed the
people with " milk " when he knew that they were unfit to receive " strong meat " of
truth. Our Lord himself was guileful in this good sense, for at the close of his inter-
course with his disciples he said, " I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now." It may also be shown that there is a " quick-wittedness " and skilful
seizing of opportunities, which are gifts finding honourable spheres in the Christian
Church.

III. The idea of " caught with guile " that noble-ionded men shrink from
EMPLOYING. Such are the various sensational devices of modern revivalism. The
masses are to be caught with the guile of trumpet, and drum, and dress, and excited
meetings. We need not say that such things are inadmissible, because they are not
morally wrong. But where there is a full sympathy with the Divine Lord, who " did
not strive, nor cry, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets," all such guilefulnesses
cannot but be paiiful. Anything approaching to an advertising of the gospel or the
preachers of the gospel grieves the sensitive feeling of all who know that the gospel
needs no such introductions, but is itself God's power unto salvation to every one that
believes. Our " yea " had better be simple " yea ; " with no blast of tmiiapet or roll of
drum let ns tell men of the life there is for all in Christ our living Saviour ; and let out
only guile be adaptation. — B. T.



OH. xm. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS.



313



Ver. 21. — The hwnibUng of God's ministers. " I fear . . . lest, when I come again,
my God will humble me among you." " There is something almost plaintive in the
tone in which the apostle speaks of the sin of his disciples as the only real ' humiliation '
which he has to fear." The following points will be readily worked out and illustrated
according to the experiences of the preacher : —

I. Such humblinqs comb from seeming pailubbs. Compare our Lord's distressful
•eproach of Capernaum and other towns on the shores of the lake of Galilee. See also
St. Paul's trouble over the failure of the Galatians from their primitive faith: "0
foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you ? " etc.

IL Such humblinqs comb pbom stbipb and divisions. As illustrated in the
Corinthian Church (see 1 Cor. ii.). Such strife may arise from (1) false teaching ; (2)
masterful individuals, who make parties ; (3) misunderstandings ; (4) exercise of
necessary Church discipline.

III. Such humblinqs comb feom individual baokslidings. There is no sadder
phase of experience for Christian ministers than the spiritual and moral failure of their
converts, and of those whom they have most fully trusted in Christian life and work.
So often men fall into temptation and are overcome in their middle life. When
ministers look for the ripest fruitage, then there is blight and death ; wealth, pleasure,
vice, smite and kill the soul, and the pastor weeps over the toil of life that seems to
have been all in vain. St. Paul spoke of the Corinthians as " his glory and joy ; " and
the things which he goes on to mention in this verse put shame on his work, for the
gospel call is " not unto uncleanness, but unto holiness." And ministers spe»il their
Btrength for nought if those who believe are not " careful to maintain good worki." — S. T.



EXPOSITION.



OHAPTBE Xin.



CoNOLCDiNO Appeals and Exhobtations.

Ver. 1. — ^This is the third time I am com-
ing to you. I have thrice formed the in-
tention, though the second time I had to
forego my.plan (eh. i. 15—17). In the mouth
of two or three witnesses. The quotation is
from Deut. xix. 15. It has been explained
as a reference to examinations which he in-
tended to hold on his arrival at Corinth. It
is much more probable that St. Paul la
representing his separate visits as separate
attestations to the truths which be preaches.

Ver. 2. — I told you before; rather, J Aa»a
told you before. As if I were present, the
second time. The meaning seems to be,
" You must understand this announcement
as distinctly as if I were with you, and
uttered it by word of mouth." And being
absent now I write; rather, so novo being
absent. The verb " I write " is almost cer-
tainly an explanatory gloss. And to all
other ; rather, and to the rest, all of them.
Namely, to those who, though they may not
have fallen into gross sin, still rejected St.
Paul's authority, and said that he was
afraid to come in person. I will not spare
(ch.i.23; iv. 19,21).

Yer. 3. — Of Christ speaking in me ; rather,
of the Christ who speaketli in me. Which;
rather, who. But is mighty in yon. The
spirit of Christ, in spite of all their short-
eomings, had not deserted them (see 1 Cor.
l6,7; ii.4).



Ver. 4.— For though. The "though"
should be omitted. Through weakness;
literally, out of wealcness ; i.e. as a result
of that human weakness of our nature whick
he took upon him, and which rendered him
liable to agony and death (ch. viii. 9 ; Phil,
ii. 7, 8; 1 Pet. iii. 18; Heb. ii. 10—18).
But we shaU live with him . . . toward you.
This thought of participation alike in
Christ's humiliation and his glory, alike
in his weakness and his might, was very
familiar to St. Paul (ch. iv. 10—12 ; Eph. i.
19, 20), Here, however, the following
words, " toward you," i.e. " with reference to
yon," show that the life of which he is
thinking is the vigorous re-establishment
of his spiritual authority in Christ over the
Church of Corinth.

Ver. 5. — Prove your own selves. In other
words, "test your own sincerity." Jesng
Christ is in you. To this truth — that the
body of every Christian is a temple of the
Holy Spirit of Christ— St. Paul returns
again and again (Gal. ii. 20 ; iv. 19 ; Eph.
ill. 17; Col. i. 27). We find the same truth
frequently in St. John (John xy. 4, 5 ; 1 John
iii. 24, etc.). Except ye be reprobates. The
Greek word adokimoi — from the same root
as the verb " to test " — means tried and found
to be worthless. " Beprobate silver shall
men call them, because the Lord hath re-
jected them" (Jer. vi. 30). The word is
found almost exclusively in St. Paul (ch. xiii.
5, 6, 7 ; Eom. i. 28 ; 1 Cor. ix. 27 ; 2 Tim. iii.
8 ; Titus i 16). The only other passage of



3U



THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. xm. 1— U



the New Testament where it oonura is Heb.
tL 8 ; and the reader most not read Calrin-
istic horrors into an expression which gives
no sanction to them.

Ver. 6. — ^Ihat we are not reprobates. My
power and faithfulness will be tested as weU
as yours, and I hope that it will stand the test.

Ver. 7. — Approved (dokimoi). The op-
posite of " reprobates." Though wa be as
reprobates ; rather, II pray] that ye may do
what is excellent, and that we may be as repro-
bates. This is one of the intense expressions
which, like Bom. ix, 3, spring from the
earnest and passionate nnselfishness of
St. Paul. His anxiety is for them, not at
all for himself. At reprobates; i.e. in the
judgment of men (comp. Kom. ix, 3).

Ver. 8. — We can do nothing against the
truth. I am powerless against anything
which is true, real, sincere ; I can exercise
no power except in the cause of the truth.
Be true to the gospel, and you will be mighty
and I sball be powerless, and (as he pro-
ceeds to say) I shall rejoice at the result.

Ver. 9. — When we are weak, and ye are
strong (oomp. 1 Cor. iv. 8 — 10). Strong;
" powerful " (ch. x. 4). We wish ; rather,
W8 pray. Your perfection j rather, your
perfect union ; " the readjustmcTU of your
disordered elements." A similar word occurs
in Eph. iv. 10, and the verb in ver. 11 ; 1
Cor. i. 10; 1 Thess. ill. 10, etc. It is also
used in the Gospels for "mending nets"
(Mark i. 19, etc.).

Ver. 10. — I shonid Tue sharpness. The
word rendered " sharpness " is an adverb,
like our "abruptly" or "precipitately."
The only other passage of the New Testa-
ment where it occurs is Titus i 13; but
the substantive apotomia occurs in Bom. xi.
22 for "severity."

Ver. 11. — ^Finally, brethren, farewell.
His concluding words are marked by great
gentleness, as though to heal the effects of
the sharp rebuke and irony to which he
has been compelled to have recourse. The
word may also mean " rejoice " (Phil, iii 1 ;
iv. 4). Be perfect (see note on " perfection "
in ver. 9). Be of one mind; literally, thinJt
the same thing (Phil. ii. 2; 1 Pet. iii. 8;
1 Cor. i. 10 ; Bom. xii 16, 18). Be at peace
(Eph. iv. 3).

Ver. 12.— ^reet one another. The Terb,
being in the aorist, refers to a single act.



When the letter had been read in theii
hearing, they were, in sign of perfect unity
and mutual forgiveness, to give one another
the kiss of peace. With a holy kisa (see
on 1 Cor. xvi. 20; comp. 1 Pet. v. 14).

Ver. 13. — All the saints; namely, in
Philippi or Macedonia.

Ver. 14. — The grace of our Lord, eie. This
is the only place where the full apostolic
benediction occurs, and is alone sufBcient to
prove the doctrine of the Trinity. St. Paul
seems to feel that the fullest benediction is
needed at the close of the severest letter.
With yon all. Tlie word " all " is here
introduced with special tenderness and
graciousnesB. Some have sinned before;
some have not repented; yet he has for
them all one prayer and one blessing and
one " seal of holy apostolic love."

The superscription, though of no an-
thority, may here correctly state that the
letter was written at Philippi, and conveyed
thence to Corinth by Titus and (possibly)
Luke (see ch. viii. 16 — 22).

These are the last recorded words ad-
dressed by St.Paul to theCorinthian Church.
The results produced by the letter and by
his visit of three months (Acts xx. 2, 3)
were probably satisfactory, for we hear no
more of any troubles at Corinth during his
lifetime, and the spirit in which he writes
the letter to the Bomans from Corinth seems
to have been unwontedly calm. He had
been kindly welcomed (Bom. xv. 23), and
the collection, about which he had been so
anxious, seems to have fully equalled his
expectations, for as we know (Bom. xvi. 18 ;
Acts XX. 4), he conveyed it to Jerusalem
in person with the delegates of the Churches.
We gain a subsequent glimpse of the Corin-
thian Church. Some thirty-five years later,
when a letter, which is still extant, was
addressed to them by St. Clement of Borne,
they were still somewhat inclined to be
turbulent, disunited, and sceptical (see
' Ep. ad Cor.,' iii., iv., xiii., xiv., xxxvii.,
etc.) ; but still there are some marked signs
of improvement. About A.D. 135 they were
visited by Hegesippus (Ensebius, 'Hist
Ecol.,' iv. 22), who spoke very favourably of
them, especially of their obedience and
liberality. Their bishop, Dionysius, was
at that time exercising a widespread in-
fluence (Eusebiui, ' Hist. EccL,' iv. 23>



HOMILETICS.

Vers. 1 — ^14. — FaiiTs epistolary farewell to the Gorinthiatu. "This is the third time
I am coming to you," etc. This chapter concludes Paul's letters to the Corinthians,
There is no evidence that he wrote a word to them after this. The letters had evidently
been a task to him. To a man of his tender nature no duty could be more painful
than that of censure and reproach. Nothing but a sense of loyalty to the holiness of
Christianity could hare urged him to it, No doubt he felt a burden rolled from his



CH. XIII. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANa 315

heart, and a freer breath, when he dictated thn last sentence. He wag now to visit
them for the third time, determined to execute the discipline that might he required,
earnestly hoping at the same time that, when he was once more amongst them, the
necessity for such discipline would not appear. In this concluding chapter we find
words of warning, exhortation, prayer, comfort, and henediction.

I. Words op wabnino. He warns them of a chastisement which he determined to
inflict upon all offenders, both in doctrine and conduct, against the gospel of Christ.
Four things are suggested here concerning the discipline he intended to prosecute. 1.
The discipline would he righteous. " In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every
word be established." Here is & rule quoted and endorsed by Christ (Matt, xviii.
16), an axiom of the Jewish Law and a natural dictate of judicial policy. What he
probably means to say, is, " I will not chastise any without proper evidence. I will not
trust to rumours or surmises ; I will test every case myself, so that justice shall be done.
Therefore the true need not fear, the false alone need apprehend." 2. The discipline
would be rigoroxu. " I told you before, and foretell you, as if I were present, the second
time ; and being absent now I write to them which heretofore have sinned, and to all
other, that, if I come again, I will not spare." He had threatened this in his former
letter (1 Cor. iv. 13 — 19), in which he had also indicated severity (1 Cor. v. 6), and
spoken of " delivering them to Satan" — an expression which probably means not only
excommunication, but the infliction of corporal suffering. The blindness of Blymas
and the death of Ananias and Sapphira are instances of the power of the apostles over
the body of men. This chastisement would be dealt, not only to the notorious inces-
tuous person often referred to, but to " all other ; " he would " spare " none. " I will
not spare." A more terrible chastisement know I not than entire excommunication from
the fellowship of the good. 3. The discipline would demonstrate the existence of Christ
in him. " Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me." " They had called in
question his apostolic authority, they had demanded the evidence of his Divine
commission. He says he would now furnish such evidence by inflicting just punisli-
ment on all offenders, and they should have abundant proof that Christ spoke by
him." He could have given this proof sooner, but he acted in this respect like
Christ, and was content to appear " weak " amongst them, in order that his power
might be more conspicuously displayed. " For though he was crucified through weak-
ness, yet he liveth by the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we shah
live with him by the power of God toward you." " The thought," says Dean Plumptre,
" that underlies the apparently hard saying is that the disciples of Christ share at
once in their Lord's weakness and in his strength. We, too, are weak, says the apostle,
we have- our share in infirmities and sufferings, which are ennobled by the thought
that they are ours because we are his, but we know that we shall live in the highest
sense in the activities of the spiritual life, which also we shall share with him, and
which comes to us by the power of God. This life will be manifested in the exercise
of our spiritual power towards you and for your good." In the case of the truly good,
in all weakness there is strength, and the weakness one day will disappear and the
strength be manifest.

II. WoBDS OP EXHORTATION. " Examine yourselves." Self-scrutiny la at once a
duty the most urgent and the most neglected. Hence the universal prevalence of
self-ignorance. Even men who know a very great deal of the world without are
ignorant of the world within, the world of worlds. 1, The momentous-point to he tested
in eelf-scrviimy. "Whether ye be in the faith." Not whether you have faith in
you, for all men are more or less credulous, and have some kind of faith in them ;
but whether you are " in the faith." The faith here is the gospel, or rather the Christ
of the gospel ; whether you are in Christ, in the character of Christ. Intellectually
and morally, all men are living in the characters of others. The grand thing is to be
in the character of Christ, in his principles, sympathies, aims, etc. 2. The momentous
conclusion to he reached hy self -scrutiny. " Know ye not [emphatic] your own selves,
how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates ? " If you are in the faith, you
are in his character, and he is in your life ; nay, your life itself. Should you find you
are not in the faith, ye are " reprobates," counterfeits, spurious, not genuine ; tares,
not wheat ; hypocrites. Here, then, is a work for every man to do — " examine " himseu,
introspect, scrutinize, decide, and thus know his real moral condition.



316 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xin. 1—14.

in. WoBDS OP PBATBB. " Now I pray to God," etc. Per what does h« pray ?
Not for his own reputation or himself. As if he had said, " I am not anxious about
my own standing amongst you." He prays for two things. 1. That they should he kept
from the wrong. " Now I pray to God that ye do no evil." " Do no evil," nothing
inconsistent with the character and teaching of Christ. " Cease to do evil, learn to do
well." 2. That they should possess the right. " Not that we should appear approved,
hut that ye should do that which is honest, though we he as reprobates." " We pray
not that we may gain a reputation as successful workers in your eyes or those of others,
but that you may do that which is nobly good (may advance from a negative to a
positive form of holiness), even though the result of that may be that we no longer put
our apostolic supernatural powers into play, and so seem to fail in the trial to which
you challenge us."

IV. Words op comfort. " We can do nothing against the truth." There mre two
comforting ideas here. 1. TJiat truth it uninjurable. " We can do nothing against the
truth." Let the " truth " here stand for Jesus, who is the " Truth," the great moral
Reality incarnated, all that is real in doctrine and duty embodied in him ; who can
injure such ? Man can do much against theories of truth, conventional manifestations
of truth, ecclesiastical representations of truth, verbid revelations of truth. The more
he does against these, perhaps, the better ; but he can do nothing against " the truth,"
its essence. Man may quench all the gas-lamps in the world, but he cannot dim one
star. The great ethical and doctrinal truths embodied in the life and teaching of
Christ are imperishable, they live in all religions. Men can destroy the forms of
nature, level the mountains, dry up the rivers, burn the forests, but can do nothing
against the imperishable elements of nature, and these elements will live, build up new
mountains, open fresh rivers, and create new forests. You can do nothing against the
truth. 2. That goodness is unpunishable. " For we are glad, when we are weak, and
ye are strong : and this also we wish, even your perfection." It is unpunishable : (1)
Because it is goodness. The best of men are too " weak " in authority to punish those
who are " strong " in goodness. And in truth there is no authority in the universe,
even God himself, to punish goodness. The stronger a man is in goodness, the weaker
the power to chastise him. Hence Paul wishes to find them "strong" in goodness
when he comes amongst them. He wishes this because goodness is their " perfection,"
or restoration. The way to paralyze all penal forces is to promote the growth of
goodness. (2) Because it is restorative. " Therefore I write these things being absent,
lest being present 1 should use sharpness, according to the power which the Lord hath
given me to edification, and not to destruction." Its destiny is " edification," not
" destruction ; " building up, not pulling down. Moral goodness is the restorative
power in the universe.

V. Words of benediction. "Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good
comfort, be of one mind, live in peace ; and the God of love and peace shall be with
you." His benedictory words imply : 1, Be happy. " Farewell," which means rejoice.
To be happy they must be " perfect," " of good comfort," etc. 2. Be blest of God.
" The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the
Holy Ghost, be with you all."



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS.

Vers. 1 — i. — Announcement of his purpose; Chrisfs power in him and in hit

apostleship. About to visit the Corinthians " the third time," he informs them very
distinctly what they had to expect. In the words of the Old Testament Law, he says,
" In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established." The strength
of Lis resolution to punish impenitent offenders is declared — " I will not spare." A
crisis was at hand, and he was fully prepared to meet the issue. He refers to the main
source of all the trouble, viz. the disparagement of his ofiBce as Christ's apostle.
Everything had been done by the Judaizers to put contempt on him and his official
position. The forbearance he had shown, the patience under repeated and aggravated
provocation, his deeds of self-denial, Christ's testimony to the greatness of the work
duue wnodji tiiom, b«d aJl heea misconstrued and turned to hia injury. Even his



OH. xin. 1—14.: THE SECOND EPISTLE lO THE CORINTHIANS. 317

infirmities, the defects of personal appearance, his conscientious avoidance of the least
worldly art in his ministry, had been used to his disadvantage. Craft, falsehood,
malignity, had followed him with persistent steps. Neither his private nor public life
had escaped prying eyes and slanderous tongues. A man in feeble health, his strength
constantly over-taxed, infirmities growing beyond his years as well as with his years,
labouring to support himself, and thus making heavy drafts on his bodily powers, he
had these ills daily augmented by annoyances and vexations from those who sought to
come between him and his Churches. To undo his work was their aim and ambition.
They hated him officially, they despised him personally, nor could they rest while he
had friends to cheer him on in his labours. What is most noticeable is the utter blind-
ness of these persecutors to the wonderful tokens of God's presence with him. It is to
this fact he alludes in the words, " Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me."
Remember, it was in this Corinth, where these turbulent spirits were most industrious
to overthrow him, that Christ had given the most numerous and remarkable evidences
of the favour bestowed on his apostle as the apostle of the Gentiles. " Seek a proof,"
to our ears sounds most strangely. " Signs and wonders and mighty deeds," and yet
" seek a proof of Christ speaking in me " ! It is well that there was an antecedent
history, a fourfold history but one biography, and that this biography of the Lord
Jesus opens to us a full view of man's capacity to disbelieve where Divine manifestations
are concerned. " If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you." So the
Lord Jesus had foretold ; so St. Paul had realized. And now, in the closing hour of
writing this Epistle, the apostle identifies his condition with that of Christ in the days
of the flesh. Years before, the great fact had occurred of which these recent facts were
no more than exemplifications. Taking upon himself the lowly form of a servant and
submitting to every kind of privation and sorrow, putting himself as to his circum-
stances in extreme contrast with his power and never exercising this power except
under the agency of the Holy Ghost, men treated him. Son of God, Son of man, as one
in their hands, over whom and his earthly destiny they had entire control. " He was
crucified through weakness." He could have been crucified in no other way. The sole
condition under which this event was possible is here stated, viz. weakness. The
weakness was assumed voluntarily by him because it was necessary to the work of
redemption. " Yet he liveth by the power of God." Even in the grave his body was
treated as though men had it under mastery. Roman procurator and Jewish Sanhedrim
held it as their own, and stationed a military guard at the sepulchre where his corpse,
still their prisoner, lay till the third day ended the mystery of his weakness. Then
came the triumph " of the power of God." Authority felt it and was abased. To its
degradation it added the infamy of a lie, and to the lie the infamy of a money bribe.
Guilt felt it and acknowledged its impending curse in the return of innocent blood as
vengeance on its head. Sad as this hour was to St. Paul, his faith was never firmer.
Had he not said just before, that if he should have to " bewail many which have sinned
already, and have not repented," he should accept the humiliation as a holy discipline ?
" My God will humble me among you." One had gone before him in weakness. But
his Leader in trial would be his Leader in triumph. " For we also are weak in him."
It is not our weakness. It wears a human look, speaks human words, trembles .with
human sensibility, sighs with human pathos, yearns for relief with human desires.
Nevertheless it is a fact, " we also are weak in him." The weakness we share is that
of the God- Man, the weakness of the Divine incarnation, so that we walk according to
our small measure in the footsteps of him who " himself took our infirmities and bare
our sicknesses." " But we shall live," not in the resurrection, but in the day when we
come to Corinth and vindicate our authority, " we shall live with him by the power of
God toward you." Then, indeed, you who have taunted us as " weak and contemp-
tible," shall see and know that this risen and exalted Christ is Christ in us, " the power
of God toward you," Do you then " seek a proof of Christ speaking in me" ? I shall
come with " the power of God " and the " proof" shall be given. — L.

Vers. 5 — 10. — Self-examination recommended ; supremacy of Divine truth. Proof
of his apostleship had been the demand of the disaffected portion of the Corinthians ;
" but prove your own selves " is St. Paul's exhortation. " Examine not me, but your-
selves, whether you are truly in the faith ; put yourselves to the proof concerning



818 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xm, 1—14.

Christ's presence with you which you seek in me " (Conyheare and Howson). Nc
one can help seeing how natural this advice was to the apostle, and how suitable to
these noisy and fault-finding Corinthians. On the one hand, St. Paul was a man
whom casual ohserverB could easily misunderstand. His temperament, his habit of
introversion, his intense self-consciousness, exposed him to constant misconception.
Again, he was a born leader of men. Such a leader as he could not escape a severe
probation while acquiring the ascendency to which he was predestined. Leaders who
adapt themselves unscrupulously to times and circumstances gain a quick mastery.
Leaders that shape contingencies to their high purposes and bring men into sympathy
with a lofty ideal in their own souls must have creative genius, and exert it under
sharp and continual opposition. To this class of leaders the apostle belonged. Further-
more, his position was unique by reason of the fact that his apostleship necessarily
placed him between the two great rival forces of the age, Judaism and Gentilism.
To show what the Law meant as a Divine institution; to show what Gentile
civilization and culture meant as a long-existing providence; to harmonize as far
as might be the truths in each ; in brief, to mediate between their claims as widely
organized economies, and put them on common ground as it respected GhriBtianity
and its supreme authoiity, and do away with the distinction of Jew and Gentile as
to the conditions of salvation ; — this was the most difficult task ever committed
to a man. Owing to its intrinsic character, it brought him at every turn in contact
with prejudices and passions which justified themselves in the one case by the
miracles of Jehovah, in the other by the prescripts of government, and in both by the
venerable sanction of ages. What wonder, then, that his career as a public man among
public men was specialised quite as much by systematic and vindictive misrepresentation
as by a success unequalled in the influence exerted over the thought and morals of the
world 1 On the other hand, look at these young Christian communities, situated often
wide apart and unable to strengthen each others' hands, planted in the midst of peoples
hostile to their creeds and still more to their virtues, and dependent in most instances
on the nurture of a single apostle ; look at them in a state hardly more than inchoate, —
and can we be surprised that they were in some cases the subjects of intestine distur-
" bance, nay, of violent commotion ? " Not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble," were " called ; " but the " weak things of the world," " base
things, and things despised," were " chosen," for the most part, as the original materials
of that edifice which was to show in its proportions, its symmetry, its permanence, the
workmanship of the Hand unseen. The " called " and the " chosen" were eventually
to vindicate the wisdom of the call and the choice. Let us not overlook, however, the
disadvantages inseparable at the time from the crude elements that constituted the
early Churches. Without dwelling on these at length, suffice it to say that they were
imperilled by a corrupt Judaism on the one side, and a most corrupt paganism on the
other, the agencies and influences of which sought them as a prey to their lust of
avarice and ambition. Now, the Church at Corinth was notably in this state of
exposure. Gallic, the Proconsul of Achaia, had protected St. Paul against the fury
of the Jews, and the Greeks had used the occasion to wreak their vengeance on the
Jews. Retaliation was the order of the times. BafSed by a Roman official, insulted
and beaten by a mob of Greeks, the Jews were not likely to forget the apostle, and we
can imagine with what cest they would enjoy the zeal of the Judaizing emissaries, and
how they would diligently foment the efforts made for his disgrace in Corinth. To
what extent this was carried by the Jews as a body we can only conjecture. Certain
it is, however, that for several years Corinth was the seat of a most active and uncom-
promising warfare on St. Paul. Once more, and finally, he comes before us in the
passage under notice in an attitude unmistakably stern and authoritative. Is Christ
in you, he asks the Corinthians, or are ye reprobates ? Prove yourselves, apply the
test, find out whether or not you are in Jesus Christ and share his spirit, and if you
cannot stand the test, know then that you are reprobates. He expresses the hope that
they will not find him a reprobate (unapproved or spiuious) if they put him to the
test of exercising his authority. Yet he trusts that the test of his power will be
avoided, and prays that they may " do no evil." If they should act as he prayed they
might, then there would be no necessity for him to demonstrate his authority, and, in
that happy event, he would appear " unapproved," {.«. not tested as to the display oi



OH. xm. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOBINTHIANa «19

his power. Welcome such unapproval I It would be in exact confonnity to the spirit
and end of his apostolic administration, which was in accordance with the truth of the
gospel and designed to show forth that truth. What is the test of a great and wise
ruler? The test is the uselessness of a punishing power (except in extreme cases and
as an ultimate resort), because his subjects govern themselves. Such was the apostle's
argument. Nothing against the truth, all for the truth, Christ the Truth ; this was
the beautiful summation in which he rested. If this should apparently exhibit his
weakness, what a glorious weakness it would be 1 Apostolic judgment made needless
by self-government ; what could be a grander testimony to the truth and excellence of
his work among them? Then, verily, they would be strong. "Perfection" in the
order and unity of the Church, " perfection" of individual character, was the object of
his prayer, and himce this Epistle. Whoever teaches Christianity as God's truth cannot
fail to teach much else besides. These verses are maxims of infinite wisdom. What
man in authority, what statesman in the affairs of a nation, what father at the head of
a family, what office-holder in the Church, if he would bear his faculties so meetly and
be thus " clear in his great office," would not be a providence of instruction and help-
fulness in the world I Decay of reverence for law begins in decay of reverence for men
who administer the law. Unhappily enough, this decline in reverence for law is one of
the growing perils of the age. It is peculiar to no form of government. It is spreading
everywhere as an atmospheric evil, and threatening like an epidemic to travel round
the globe. Power to build up, not to destroy; this is St. Paul's idea of power divinely
bestowed. And accordingly we see what a blessed discipline it was to him personally
and ofBcially ; and having accomplished this result in his own soul, it is not remarkable
that it achieved its ends in this distracted and corrupted Church at Corinth. — ^L.

Vers. 11 — 14. — Parting tenderness. If ever great principles of government were
subjected to the severest of ordeals, it was in the instance which has been under review.
If ever personal qualities and official prerogatives were inextricably mixed in pending
issues, and those issues diffused over a vast surface, it was in this affair at Corinth. If
ever the chief actor in the interest of tranquillity and social purity had to fight a battle
absolutely single-handed and alone, it was St. Paul's fortune in this struggle to save a "
community from degradation and destruction. We have seen what he endured when
endurance was probably harder than at any period of his life. What aids he summoned
in these critical hours, what recourse he had to the past, what account he gave of the
" thorn in the flesh " and its uses in his work, we have seen in the progress of this
interesting section of his career. Most of all, we have seen how the man and the apostle,
the tentmaker and the preacher, the liberal Jew and the sagacious Christian, were most
happily interblended in the rarest harmony and unity while doing the work of pacifica-
tion and reformation. And now that he comes before us in the last expression of
himself as to this weighty controversy, it is ennobling to see how finely poised he is,
and what anxiety he has " lest, being present," he should be compelled against all his
prayers and hopes " to use sharpness according to the power which the Lord had given
him." That miraculous gift was his as the apostle of Christ, but it was for " edification,
and not to destruction." At the cost of personal humiliation, he would be " glad " if
the Corinthians were "strong," and he "weak." How like his Master he was!
" Thinkest thou that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me
more than twelve legions of angels ? " Had he waved his hand, Jerusalem would have
been darkened by the wings of gathering angels for his rescue ; but he was to be crucified
in " weakness " that the " power of God " might be the more gloriously manifested in
his resurrection. Power denied in one of its uses, to be more signally displayed in
another and higher use, was the lesson St. Paul had learned of his dying Lord. " I am
crucified with Christ," said he on a subsequent occasion ; but he shares that crucifixion
word in one of its most painful forms by withholding the exertion of authority to punish
his enemies till all other means had been exhausted. He preached Christ " the Wisdom
of God," no less than Christ " the Power of God." Under circumstances of exltreme
hazard, reputation and influence and future success trembling in the balance, flesh and
blood supplying clamorous reasons for a self-asserting course and the swift riddance of
a most vexatious trouble, he abides with heroic fortitude by Christian principle in its
demands for self-crucifixion, and makes everything yield to magnanimity in his ardent



320 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. [oh. xni. 1—14.

desire for the "perfection" of the Church at Corinth. All this is admirable as a mere
matter of congruity in respect to the laws of art. But it leaves the domain of art and
rises to a realm infinitely more exalted when he comes before ui " apparelled in celestial
light," and completes the impression of one

" Whose high endeayours are an inward light,
That makes the path before him always bright."

Nothing in the apostle's life more became him than the tenderness in the parting words
of this Epistle. " 'Finally, brethren, farewell." There have been throes of spirit during
the birth of this Epistle, moments of vehemence, outbursts of indignation and menace;
but they are over now. The sun sets in a sky that the storm has purified, and the last
beams glide through an atmosphere of holy stillness. " Be perfect," or, be perfected,
making up what ye lack ; " be of good comfort," taking encouragement and hope from
your trials that God would overrule them for your happiness ; " be of one mind," by
suppressing all selfishness and partisanship and cultivating unity of interest ; " live in
peace," so that your outward life bears witness to the fact that ye have " one mind."
So shall the " God of love and peace he with you." Let not the sign of your union in
Christ as members of his Church be forgotten, and, accordingly, " greet one another
with a holy kiss." Macedonian brethren salute you. And now, acknowledging with
profoundest reverence the Holy Trinity, " in place of his own salutation, he gives us
finally that precious benediotiim which has acquired such a liturgical use in every age
and in every part of the Christian world" (Lange). Grace, love, commwnion, — these
three, and each blessing and all the blessedness for every one, friends and enemies, since
they are, in this touching moment, " brethren " to his heart. " The grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ" in the fulness of his mediatorial office, "the love of God" the Father
revealed through that grace, and the " communion of the Holy Ghost " as the effect of
the " grace" and the " love" in their fellowship with God and one another, "be with
you all. Amen."

It pleased God to make St. Paul his own historian during the memorable period
to which this Epistle belongs. No one was competent to this task, not even St.
Luke, with all his skill and insight as a writer, and his close relations to the apostle.
The inner life of the author was to be set forth with a force and vividness never
equalled in sacred literature ; and we were to have a section, and a most important
section, of the New Testament as a Scripture of a private soul. For, indeed, the Holy
Spirit would not limit the wonders of inspiration to the narration of outward events.
Great as those events were in the midst of changes going on in the Roman empire,
" the mingling and confusion of races, languages, and conditions," of which Dean
Milman gives so eloquent a description (' Latin Christianity '), and vast as was the
influence of the gospel in slowly transforming that " heterogeneous mass of a corrupted
social system " by " instilling feelings of humanity," and giving " dignity to minds
prostrated by years, almost centuries, of degrading despotism," it yet was vital to the
purpose of the written Word that we should have the record of a human soul in the
most typical period of its perplexity and conflict, and under just such circumstances as
identified it most nearly with the sharpest trials of manly intelligence and courage. It
is St. Luke who describes the one class of occurrences. Only a St. Paul was qualified
for the other ; and in the Second Epistle to the Corinthians he does this most interesting
work. At no point are we left in dimness or obscurity as to what he felt and purposed.
Every moment, as the eye follows his path, we see the end to which his steps are
tending. "Faint, yet pursuing," often thwarted, often thrown back, often sorely
embarrassed, without the lights of past experience, without the helps of brother apostles,
alone and unbefriended, he had to solve those problems of Church order and discipline
which involved all the future administrative policy of Christian communities. Through-
out the struggle we accompany him. We know what he thought, and why. We mark
his wisdom, earnestness, and fidelity. In the variety of his moods, in exaltation and
depression, in the alternate predominance of very unlike states of consciousness, we find
him the same man as to his ruling principle and aim, the same when he threatens and
beseeches, the same when he unmasks " false apostles," that he is in prayers for peace
and brotherhood. It was a most energetic and exciting portion of his career. But the
man's heart is the chief interest as illustrative of the cardinal doctrines of grace. True,



OH. xm. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBENTHIANa 821

we have invaluable contributions to theological truth, expositions of rare profundity and
insight, contrasts between the Law and the gospel never surpassed in this favourite
department of his intellectual work, references to the body that throw a new light on
its relations to mind, and directions as to practical benevolence which cover the wholf
range, in this particular, of Christian obligation. Tet these are enhanced in value by
the fact that the spirit of an intense living personality is ever present. We lose nothing
of the logic and philosophy, nothing of the force in the historical allusions, nothing of
the charm of metaphor and similitude. At the same time there runs through everything
the subtle influence of an individual soul, so that the strength which throbs in doctrinaf
arguments is from a heart all alive with sensibility. " Men," says Foster (' First Essay
on a Man's writing Memoirs of Himself), " carry their minds as for the most part they
carry their watches, content to be ignorant of the constitution and action within, and
attentive only to the little exterior circle of things to which the passions, like indexes,
are pointing." Not so St. Paul. Temperament, disease, special circumstances in his
position, made him in an unusual degree a self-observing man. In this Epistle we have
the richest fruits of his self-knowledge. Most of all, we see the meaning of that discipline
of affliction by means of which the life of Christ in the soul is perfected. And we see,
too, how our private history is far more than a personal concern, and widens out in
connections no one could have foreseen. " A thorn in the flesh " becomes a part of St.
Paul's public character ; incidents that historians and philosophers and poets would
have passed by as of little meaning, take on a most impressive significance, and endear
an Epistle, great on other grounds and great as a work of art, to the struggling and
sorrowing heart of every Christian. — L.

Ver. 4. — Weakness and power. It must have been very painful to the sensitive and
benevolent mind of the apostle to have written thus to any congregation of Christians,
especially to a congregation so intimately connected with him as was this at Corinth.
The whole society was to blame for suffering the Judaizers and the questioners of St.
Paul's authority ; when they should have taken the part of their spiritual benefactor,
and have indignantly resented the slights and misrepresentations which they tolerated.
In the prospect of visiting Corinth, the apostle requires that the people shall put
themselves to the test and shall give a proof of their reformation; otherwise, ha will
be compelled to give them a proof of his supernatural power and thus to silence
calumny and opposition.

I. The weakness of Chbist is shabbd even by his sincebbst and most paithfdl
FOLLOWEBB. 1. In the Lord Jesus were, both in his person and in his ministerial
career, many circumstances of humiliation. His helpless childhood; his subjection to
hunger, thirst, and weariness ; his liability to pain ; his endurance of death, are instances
of the former. His submission to calumny and insult, to betrayal and desertion, to
hatred and rejection, are proofs of the latter. 2. Now, our Lord himself forewarned his
lisciples that they should share their Master's lot. Paul certainly took up the cross.
The thorn or stake in the flesh, the feeble body, the scourgings and imprisonments which
he was called upon to endure, were not regarded by him as accidents and misfortunes,
but rather as proofs of true discipleship, as participations in the sufferings of the Lord.
And this is the light in which all followers of the Lord Jesus are justified in regarding
the endurances and calamities which befall them in treading in his steps and in
executing his commission. It is the moral glory of Christianity that it dignifies the
sufferings of those who partake their Leader's spirit in self-denying endeavours for the
salvation of their fellow-men. Such servants of the Divine Master may well " glory in
infirmity." Their wounds are the honourable scars telling of the severity of the coi^ct
in which they have been engaged.

II. The poweb of God which was tpoN Christ shall be disflaxbd in those
WHO, 8HABINO THE Mastbe'b bebviob, SHARE ALSO HIS vmEAKNESs. Paul Was content
that men should perceive the weakness manifest in the crucifixion of the Bedeemer ;
but he preached to them a risen, reigning, and glorified King. The resurrection and
ascension of Christ were both proofs of the acceptance of the Son by the Father, and
they were an inspiriting omen of the approaching victory of the cause for which Jesus
deigned to die. From the throne of might and dominion, possessed of all authority,
the victorious Lord governs his Church on earth, and secures its safety and well-being,

U. CORINTHIANS. T



322 THE -SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xm. 1—14,

St. Paul felt himself entrusted with abundant means of maintaining his spiritual
authority as the " ambassador of Christ." He might possess marks of the dying of the
Lord Jesus ; but he wielded a might which no foe could resist. Let all faithful servants
of Jesus and true soldiers of the cross be encouraged by the reflection that their
Commander is omnipotent, and that he must reign until every foe is beneath his
feet.— T.

Ver, 5.—" Prove ymi/rselves." The apostle, before closing his Epistle, turned round
upon his detractors. They had been questioning his authority and disparaging his
claims, and he had been defending himself and asserting his apostolic rights. But
was this as it should be? How was it with themselves? They were very anxious to
test him, to compel him to verify his claims. Why should not they be aslied whether
their own position was assured, whether their own professions were justifiable ? Let
them examine, test, and prove themselves ! The exhortation is one by which all
professing Christians may profit.

I. The impoetance of self-pboof. This apprars from the unquestionable fact that
men generally are disposed to talte too favourable a view of themselves, their own
character, their own services, their own importance to the Church or tlie world. Illusion
often becomes delusion. That which is nearest at hand, and which might be supposed,
because most accessible, to be best known, is often judged with the least fairness and
justice. Yet if we form a false estimate of ourselves, how disastrous the consequences
may be I

II. The method and spikit of self-pkoof. 1. There should be perfect candour.
2. The examination should be carried on as under the eye of the omniscient and all-
searching God. 3. The standard by which we judge ourselves should be the high and
infallible standard of God's own Word. 4. There should be no attempt to exalt self
by depreciating others.

III. The consequences of self-proof. 1. The process may reveal what is altogether
unsatisfactory and lamentable. He who tests himself thoroughly may come to the
conclusion that his life ia all wrong from the very foundation. If this is so, it is well
that it should be known, that a new basis for the moral life may be laid in the truth
and righteousness of God iamself. 2. The process may yield results partly gratifyin;^
and partly regrettable. If so, while there will be reason for gratitude and encourage-
ment, there will be a call to repentance, reformation, and improvement. For a man to
know his faults and errors is the first step towards what is better and nobler. — T.

Ver. 8. — Invincible truth. Paul boasted that he could do all things, i.e. through
Christ who strengthened him. Let his adversaries rage and threaten, he had no fear.
He would assert his authority, exercise his power, and reduce the proudest opponent
to helplessness. For the truth's sake, for the gospel, there was nothing which he was
not able to achieve. But if those whom he chided should submit, should return to
their fidelity, not to him only, but to the gospel, then he was powerless to harm them.
Nay, in such a case he was with them, on their side. Such appears to be the expla-
nation of this grand utterance occurring in this connection.

I. The powbblessness of man when in opposition to the truth of God. 1. The
avowed enemies of the truth have failed in their attacks upon it, whatever have been the
resources upon which they have drawn, the arms upon which they have relied. Persecu-
tion has raged first against Christianity itself, and then against its purer representation
in days of rdoimation. With what result ? The blood of the martyrs has ever been
the seed of thf Church. "Truth, like a torch, the more it's shook it shines." 2. The
false, hypocritical friends of the truth have never succeeded in exterminating it. Their
efforts have often been insidious, and have often* corrupted and ensnared individuals and
even societies. But the pure truth of God has survived, whilst these attempts have
again and again been foiled.

II. The strength of those who work with and fob the truth of God. 1. Their
natural feebleness does not hinder the victory of the cause which they embrace. The
ignorant, the poor, the young, the feeble, have done and are still doing great things for
the gosjiel. As at first, so now, God chooses " the weak things of the world to confound
the mishty." 2 The efficiency of the truth depends upon ita Divine origin luad •ource



CH. xin. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 323

" If God be for us, who caa be against us ? " Wherever God's truth is proclaimed,
there God's Spirit works and God's power is felt. 3. The efficiency of the truth lies
m its harmony with the nature and constitution of man. With the use of this divinely
tempered implement the divinely prepared soil of liumanity may be rendered fruitful
In great results. Magna est Veritas, et prevalebit, — T.

Ver. 11. — " Live in peace." The Christian religion ever represents all true peace
among men as taking its beginning in peace with God. This first creates peace of
conscience, and then issues in harmony and concord in civil and ecclesiastical society.
There can be no doubt that the apostle is here enjoining mutual good will, kindness,
and amity.

I. Christian feaoe is in contrast to the enmity which is natural to sinful
MEN. "Whence come," asks the inspired writer — "whence come wars and fightings
among you ? " And the answer is that they may be traced to the lusts which are
inherent in depraved human nature. In a more primitive state of society, mankind are
actually and almost normally at war. In more civilized society, hatred, malice, envy,
etc., prevail, and produce disastrous results, although the worst outward manilestations
may be restrained.

II. Christian peace is often violated in the societies which are named after
THE Prince of peace. How signally this was the case with the Church at Corinth
these Epistles make abundantly manifest. It was distracted by party spirit, by schism,
by factions. Christ was " divided " in his body and members. And in this respect
the example set at Corinth has, alas ! too often been followed. The abode intended for
peace has too often been converted into a scene of strife.

III. Fellowship with Christ is the only means for restoring ok preserving
Christian peace. Interest is not sufScieiit ; external authority and advice continually
fail. But if Christ be enthroned in each heart and in the society at large, then
conflicts will be hushed and the peace of God prevail. Hence the need for all those
exercises of prayer and meditation by which this truly Christian grace may be
promoted.

IV. Christian peace is a condition of Chdech prosperity. Work and warfare
are inimical. If there be strife, the vitality must needs be low, the witness must needs
be marred, the work must needs suffer in all finer quality. On the other hand, harmony
conduces to co-operation as well as to devotion. The world cannot fail to feel the
effects of the presence and the testimony of a united and harmonious Church. — T.

Vers. 12, 13. — Salutation. Among the various features which distinguish these
apostolic documents from ordinary treatises must be noticed the prominence they
attach to social greetings. The personal element mingles very beautifully with the
doctrinal and the practical. The apostle's theme may have been absorbing, but he
usually, in bringing an Epistle to its close, refers to the individuals by whom he is
himself surrounded — his companions and colleagues, and to such as were known to
him among the community he is addressing.

I. Upon what Christian greetings are based. They differ from common every-
day salutations in this, that they are not mere forms, and are not exchanged as a
matter of course. They presume a common relation to, a common interest in, the
Divine Saviour. The vital union of Christ's people to himself involves an inter-com-
munion of sympathy amongst themselves.

II. In what Christian salutation finds expression. 1. In words and in messages
of spiritual friendship, in the case of those who are absent from one another. It is thus
proved that distance does not sunder hearts, that the spiritual family, dispersed through
many places, is nevertheless but one. 2. In the primitive Churches the Christian
greeting took the form of the " holy kiss." In this a common social usage was sanctified
by a new and higher meaning. The custom was one which in some Churches was
retained for centuries. The kiss of peace, brotherhood, and love was felt to be the
appropriate symbol of the new and all-pervading sentiment of Christian kindness.

in. What purposes Christian greetings subserve. We may trace several very
useful practical ends secured by them. 1. They are evident tokens of the wide diffusion
of the Saviour's spiritual presence. It is because Christ is with and in bis Church that



824 THB SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COBINTHIANS. [oh. xra. 1—14

the living memlwn of this Church, pervaded hy one Spirit, 8how tme unity and love.
2. They remove the distressing feeling of isolation from which Christ's people may in
many circumstaoces grievously suffer. 3. They are an anticipation of the confidential
and affectionate fellowship which is (next to the presence of the Redeemer) to b«
expected as the highest joy of the heavenly state. — T.

Ver. 14. — Benediction. When we remember what just cause of complaint Paul had
against many members of the Corinthian Church, we cannot bat regard this concluding
benediction as an evidence of his large-hearted charity. There is no exception ; his
benevolent wishes and earnest intercessions are for all. And what fulness and richness
of blessing is this which the apostle here implores !

L TbUE blessing does not consist in EAKTHLT enjoyments OB EVEN IN HUMAN

FELLOWSHIP. Men's good wishes usually relate to these advantages, and as far as they
go they are good, and may be very good. But the apostle took a higher view of the
posubilities of human nature and life.

n. Tb0B BLESSING CONSISTS DJ THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF A DiVINB EBLATI0N8HIP. The

three Persons of the Trinity are all concerned in the best and happiest experiences of
the pious soul. It is a lofty view, it must be admitted, this which the apostle takes
of religion, but not therefore unreasonable. It is all the worthier as evincing the
interest of the Creator in the spiritual well-being of mankind.

IIL Tbue blessing assumes a DISTINCTIVELY Chbistian FORM. TMb is apparent
from the remarkable fact that in this solemn formal language the Lord Jesus occupies the
foremost place. Harmonious this with the Saviour's saying, " No man cometh unto
the Father but by me." The Mediator brings us into relation of sonship towards the
Father and of participation in and with the Divine Spirit.

IV. Tbue blessing besides m the revelation to Christians ofthebmphatioally
BENIGNANT ASPECTS OP THB DiviNB OHARACTEB. Observe that " favour," " love," and
" communion " are here put forward as those attributes and relations in which it is
chiefly desirable that the Eternal should manifest himself to his finite and dependent
creatures.

v. True blessing is the subject of mutual Christlan interoebsion. It is notice-
able that, not only is this incomparable boon tc be sought by each devout soul for
itself ; we have the example and the authority of the apostle for including it among
the objects sought in intercessory supplications. Hence the appropriateness of this
language for use at the close of devotional services. — T.

Ver. 4. — 2%e death and resurrection of Christ contrasted. I. Thk fobheb wa»
thbough weakness. 1. Christ assv/med a nature which was capable of crucifixion.
Who could crucify Ood t But the God-Man might walk in weariness and weakness to
Golgotha. What a pathetic consideration that Christ voluntarily chose a nature which
was subject to suffering and death 1 2. Christ repressed his innate power. (1) His
Divine power. Thus he laid down his life ; no man took it from him. But a flash of
that power, and the cross would never have been reared. But a word from his lips, and
his persecutors would have been dead men. But then the gospel would never have
been told to man ; so for man omnipotence bscame impotence. (2) His human power.
Man-power as well as God-power was discarded. There was no resistance. He became
" as a-sheep before her shearers." He voluntarily became the weakest of the weak that
he might be strong to redeem. Learn here that repression is often a triumph. Not
always does the putting forth of power mean success. It is sometimes our wisdom to
git still, to submit, to be silent.

II. The latteb was in power. 1. A marvellous event. What a contrast between
the first day and the third! How mighty men seem on the former 1 how unutterably
impotent on the latter ! How weak Christ seems on the one ! how omnipotent on the
other 1 2. Demanding Divine energy. This power was not of man. Man stands
completely helpless at the p;rave. Here his boastings are silenced. But the Author of
life can restore life. The Divine power manifested in our Lord's resurrection we find
sometimes ascribed to God the Father (Eph. i. 20), sometimes to the Son (Mark
xiv. 58); " I and my Father are one" (John x. 30). 3. Complete. (1) Christ arose in
perfect power. The cross and the grave left no marks of weakness upon him. Hi.-!



OH. xnL 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 325

omnipotence was untainted. (2) He has veigned since in power above. (3) He works
in power to-day on eartli through his Word and Spirit.

III. The death and eebubeeotion op Christ, though in contrast, abb in close
ASSOCIATION. They are in point of time. A few hours only separated the weakness of
the cross from the power of the restoration. But there is real dependence also. In a
certain sense the one was the natural result of the other. Without so perfect a
crucifixion there could not have been so triumphant a resurrection. Christ was perfect
alike when he was in weakness and when he was in power. Had there been any less
" weakness " in the death, there had been less " power " in the resurrection. The
humiliation was, in its order, as truly glorious as the exaltation. So with us — if we
are ab ised with Christ here we shall be glorified with him hereafter. We have the
cross — must have the cross — ^if we would have the crown. — H.

Ver. 5. — Self-testing. I. Many are fond op testing others when it is more
needpul for them to test themselves. " Beginning at Jerusalem " is beginning
at the right place. " Know thyself" was a very wise exhortation. To ascertain the
shortcomings of others is more pleasant, but not so profitable, as to ascertain our own.
The matter oi first importance to us is, not whether our neighbour's scales are true, but
whether ours are. Men are singularly unselfish in some directions — ^in the directions of
giving advice and passing condemnatory judgments.

II. ThK test WHICH WE APPLY TO OTHERS WE SRODIiD BB ABLE TO STAND

OURSELVES. Paul was not what the Corinthians thought he ought to be, because they
were not what they ought to have been. A blind man is a poor judge of colours. The
beam must be taken out of our eyes before we shall be able to see clearly. An unclean
man denouncing uncleanness is no very edifying spectacle. If we warn men against
getting into the mire, they will expect us to come out of it. If we would be leaders, we
must lead. " Come " is much more potent than " go."

III. There is one point upon Which we should be most desirous of testino
OURSELVES. This is — whether we are " in the faith." Men test themselves frequently,
but generally upon points of secondary importance. This is the question of questions.
1. Do we truly repent of sin f Do we grieve over evil as that which has been done
against Ood f Do we hate it, loathe it, desire to be freed from it ? 2. Have vie a
living faith in the Lord Jesus Christ f Do we gratefully receive him as our Redeemer,
and believe that his blood cleanses ms from all sin? Have we come to God by Christ
and obtained his forgiveness ? 3. Is the vitality of our faith demonstrated ly the fruits
of holy living f If our faith is not accompanied by works, it is no faith — we are
" reprobates " still, and hypocritical reprobates into the bargain. If we are " in the
faith," we shall be subject to God, striving daily to do his will, living and labouring to
please him and to extend his glory in the earth. We may still be very imperfect, but,
having been " born again," we shall walk in " newness of life."

IV. How WE MAT test OURSELVES UPON THIS VITAL POINT. 1. By prayerful sdf-
examination. Prayer must come into this examination of ourselves because God must
come. We need Divine help to aid us in knowing ourselves. 2. By comparing head,
heart, and life with God's Word. In the Scriptures we have declared what those " in
the faith" ielieve, feel, do. 3. By pressing home the question — Is Christ in mef "If
any man hath not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his " (Bom. viii. 9). We are in the
faith if the Lord of the faith is in us.

How earnestly should we examine ourselves I How restless should we be until we
enter into the rest which comes from knowing that we are truly in the faith I — H.

Vers. 11, 12. — A heautiful farewell. L Recognition of brotherhood In his
letter the writer had lieen compelled to insist much upon his apostleship, but he now
wisely and graciously stands upon common ground. He was compelled to magnify his
ofiBce, but he was too good and too great to magnify himself. Amongst men there is a
natural craving for equality ; we resent a fellow-creature attempting to lord it over us.
And in the realm of religion we have ever need to remember " all ye are brethren."
What a poor fool a great man seems when he swells and struts in his miserable

pomposity and conceit ! he is not great — ^no one can persuade us that he is great he

is extremely little. How much greater our great men would be if they would not bs



326 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xin. 1—14.

so great 1 One might imagine, sometimes, that our Lord had commanded those who
would be chief to imitate turkey-cocks; but he said they must become M little
children.

II. Good wishes. "Farewell," or "Rejoice." All joy to you, all prosperity, all
happy and profitable experience. Not a few of them had ill wishes for him; he had
nothing but good wishes for friends and foes. This was a very real fwre well. Upon
our lips it often means too little — in fact, it has become but the barest signal for
separation; but coming from Paul's heart it was full of earnest meaning. Possibly in
his thought it took the form of " Rejoice in the Lord," as in Phil. iii. 1. Everything of
value in the eyes of Paul was " in the Lord." And there is no real faring well unless
we are in Christ.

III. Lofty and qbacioxjb desires. 1. For spiritual growth. "Be perfected."
Correct the evils which I have pointed out. Reform yourselves. Seek to become more
like your Lord. Strive to get rid of the " old things," and to become new in Christ.
Rest not as long as any sin abides within you. This was desiring for them the very
highest good. This was a practical suggestion of the way in which they might " fare
w. 11." 2. For comfort, " Be comforted." Paul's heart was tender towards them.
'i'hey had caused him great discomfort ; he desires their consolation. He had, indeed,
wounded them himself in administering stern but necessary rebuke — ^but faithful were
the wounds of such a friend ; and now he desires that these wounds may be healed,
trusting that the lancet has done its work. Note : he does not say, " Be comforted, be
perfected," but " Be perfected, be comforted; " true comfort comes only as we strive for
true holiness. The quickest way to bring comfort to men is to seek to make them
better. To comfort men in sin is devil-like ; to comfort men by bringing them out oj
sin is God-like. 3. For unity. " Be of the ssime mind." Disunited, they would be
miserable and weak ; united, they would be happy and strong. When we are drawn
nearer to Christ we shall be drawn nearer to the brethren ; if we quarrel with the
members we shall soon quarrel with the Head. The Church has to fight united foes ;
union should not be the monopoly of the servants of the devil, 4. For peace. "Live
in peace." Let peace be continuous, uninterrupted. Disunion will lead to civil war,
and how can Christians fight the devil if they are fighting one another? If we have
peace with God we should live in peace with his children, and be at war only with
Satan and sin. 5. For love. Conveyed by the exhortation to " salute one another
with a holy kiss." Union is not enough ; peace is not enough ; there must be heartfelt
affection between the people of God. This is the only true basis of union and peace.
An armed truce is sometimes worse than open battle. We must not " tolerate " the
brethren — we must love them. A " Toleration Act" is a blasphemy against Christ.

IV. A STBBNGTHENING PEOMISB. " The God of lovc and peace shall be with you.''
What Wesley said in death is true for all life, "The best of all is — God is with us." "If
thy presence go not with me, carry me not up hence " (Exod. xxxiii. 15). If we have
God with us, what can we lack ? Perhaps we may regard this promise as conditional.
If you sincerely strive to be holy, united, loving, God will abide with you ; otherwise,
he will depart. Like Israel of old, you may become desolate through carnality and
hardness of heart. But if you desire to live in love and peace, the God of love and
peace will presence himself with you. You must be workers together with him ; from
him you get desires for love and peace ; but you must cultivate these, and be true and
earnest in your religious life. It has been well said, " God's presence produces love and
peace, and we must have love and peace in order to have his presence ; God gives what
he commands ; God gives, but we must cherish his gifts." — ^H.

Ver. 14. — The benediction. These words have become the universal sanctuary
utterance of the Christian Church. As Paul wrote them, how real and full of meaning
they were! Now, alas! they have too much degenerated into a, mere signal for
terminating public worship, anxiously anticipated by the weary — an empty appendage,
for which might adequately be substituted a bare announcement, " The meeting is
over." Yet how beautiful is this benediction! how suggestive! how fuU of teaching!
It is a summary of Christianity, a revelation of the Trinity and of the great threefold
Divine work for human redemption and exaltation.

I. The mattbb of the benbdiot[On. 1. " Tht grace of the Lord Jetus Christ'



CH. XIII. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS. 327

(1) Eemark the title. Lori — ^the Divine One and the Master. Jesus — ^the Saviour and
tlie Man. Christ — the Anointed of God, the long-]ironiised Messiah. A trinity oi
qiialifioation. (2) The grace. The favour, and all that the Tavour of such a Being
involves. The blessings of Christ's rule as Master, of his redemption as Saviour, of his
boundless resources as the Divine Messiah. If we are the objects of his favour, how
inestimnbly rich we are 1 2. " The love of Qod." The apostle has just spoken of God
as tlie God of love (ver. 11); now he desires for the Corinthians the love of this God
of love. The riches of Divine love are the Christian's portion. Here is specially
referred to the love of God as our Father. It was through the Father's love that the
Saviour was given, but it is through the Saviour's work, and our participation in it,
that we enter into the enjoyment of the love of God as the love of our Father. This is
the covenanted love of God ; his special fatherly affection for those who have become,
through Christ, his sons and daughters. Thus " the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ "
is made to precede " the love of God." 3. " The communion of the Euly Ohost." The
participation in the Holy Ghost. This we enjoy through Christ (Gal. iii. 13, 14).
Who can estimate the value of this? The great work of sanctiflcation, the constant
effective teaching of the truth, preservation in times of spiritual peiil, comfort in
sorrow, ability to carry on Christian work, — all these depend upon our participating in
the Holy Ghost. " Quench not the Spirit " (1 Thess. v. 19). If in aught we hinder
the Divine Spirit's working within us, in that measure we become spiritual suicides.

II. The extent of the benediction. It is for all Christians ; it is not for any
special order or class, but for every individual. Some privileges were associated with
the apostleship, some with certain of mark and power in the early Church, but the
privileges which are of supreme value have ever been the common heritage of God's
people. Some smaller favours may be for the few, the greatest are for the many.

III. How MAT WE COMB tJNDEK THIS BENEDICTION? A very important question.
To be beyond its reach must be to be in peril and misery. As it is for all the people
of the Lord, those must become the people of the Lord who would sliare in its blessings.
If we are willing to be blessed, Ood is willing to let this benediction rest upon us. By
the way of repentance and faith and sincere striving to do the Divine will we pass
from under the curse and abide under the benediction. — H.

Ver. 5. — Self-examination. I. Points on which self-examination is requieed.
They relate to your connection with Jesus Christ — whether he is in you and you are in
the faith. It is assumed that the word of faith has been preached ; then follows the
question — How does this Word affect or influence you ? It is easy to hear it and give it
a formal assent — but this is not enough. Are you really in the faith ? Does the truth
compass you about and impress itself on all your views, motives, and principles oi
action ? If so, Christ is certainly in you. He dwells in your heart by faith, and by
his Spirit vitalizes and purifies your spirit.

II. The kind of evidence needed. The thing is not to be assumed, but proved.
There is a mode of proof which onlookers may read and estimate. It is that which
appears in your temper, demeanour, and actions. If men see good fruit in you, they
inter that you are a good tree. But self-scrutiny must go into the matter mere deeply.
Onlookers see actions, but not the motives from which they spring. Some of your
words and deeds they know, but not all of them, and not your actuating dispositions.
Examine yourselves by the double test of the inward and the outward life. Review
your motives and secret desires, as well as the current of your tempers and the tenor of
your lives.

III. The difficuitt of oonductino this examination. 1. In the nature of the
case. Genuine self-knowledge is perhaps a rare attainment. The moment we go
beneath the surface and try to probe the hidden things of the heart, we find ourselves
among intricacies hard to unravel — a review of motives, the detection of half-motives,
and the analysis of transient thoughts and feelings as respects their moral complexion
and significance. We are in a labyrinth of plans, wishes, imaginations, passions,
caprices, and principles. One motive lurks behind another, one current of desire flows
beneath another. And feeling, when subjected to analysis, ceases to be feeling, and it
is only the recollection or the shadow of it which you can examine. 2. Through the
ddmiom of teif-etteem. Men shrink from a severe self-examination, lest the result



328 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [ot. xni. 1—14

should be mortifying, if not alarming. And even so far as they go, they are influenced
by a desire to think hopefully of their own state, and to apply to themselves easy and
partial tests. Like a teacher who is partial to a particular scholar and asks him
only those questions which he is sure to answer, or an unjust judge who gives ear only
to the side that he favours, every man is apt in sel f-examination to be biased in his own
favour and to dwell on his best points as though they formed the whole staple of his
character. 3. From exaggerated self-distrust. Some minds are morbidly sensitive, and
do not so much examine as torment themselves. They cannot own what Christ has
done for them, through fear of presumption. And their self-judgment is hindered
by over-caution and a dejection mistaken for humility.

IV. The way to reach the truth about yourselves. The Lord must be asked
to preside over and direct the examination. It is he who looks upon the heart, and so
it is he who can give you an insight into your real selves. Begin with the prayer in
Ps. cxxxix. 23, 24. The Spirit of the Lord then shows you what you are by means of
the lamp of the Word. And with such guidance you ought to know whether you are
the Lord's or no. But you must yourselves watch as well as read and pray. It is a
good rule to note the significance of little things, in which the mind is less on its guard
and so more freely reveals its bent. A physician watches slight symptoms in order to
detect and cure disease. A judge takes note of small incidents in a case, and shows
the jury how, on the combination of these, the verdict of guilt or innocence must turn.
So also should he act who would diagnose or judge himself; though, on the other hand,
one must not lay all the stress on minor points, but should rest the main conclusion
on broad and comprehensive grounds.

V. The condition op those who cannot beak the triai,. " Disapproved." Thero
is no verdict of " not proven." Those who name the Name of Christ are approved or
disapproved. Leave not your relation to Jesus Christ in doubt. Repair to him who
can solve your doubt and give you the good part that shall not be taken away. — F.

Ver. 11. — " The Ood of love and peace" Love is the nature, and peace the very
element, of God. Whatever the detached indications of severity under his sway,
whatever the calamities permitted or the penalties inflicted by God, there is love in,
over, and under all. Whatever the trouble or turmoil in parts of creation, at the centre
of the universe there is a perfect peace. It is the conviction of this which makes our
Christian faith so powerful both to calm and to satisfy the soul. We can endure much
if we have for our Friend and our eternal Portion the God of love and peace.

L The initiai. knowledge op God. You become in your heart acquainted with
God through the faith of the gospel. You hear and believe that he loves, and is so
far from desirous that any should perish, that he has made provision in Jesus Christ
for eternal life to all who confide in his Name. So you repent of your enmity to him
and turn to the God of love. Not only so. The gospel, while a revelation of love, is
also a message of peace. " God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself." Hearing
this, you perceive that God is not pursuing you with an angry countenance and a
terrible dart, but regards you with a face of sublime compassion and good-will, and bi
you flght against him no more, but become his friend. So you repent of your aliena-
tion and turn to the God of peace. And all is changed in you. You also love, f ou
also are in peace.

II. Progressive PRiENDsmp with God. In order to abide with God, you mnBi
grow in those moral qualities which in their perfection make up his character. Thus
you are to dwell in love, and to make peace. 1. Dwell in love. What notion ean a
hard-hearted, uncharitable man form of God? Faith needs love in order to the higher
attainments of holy knowledge and holy fellowship. Only he who dwells in love dwells
in God. The Divine Word is sweet to him. The Divine purposes are all good in his
eyes ; for love enters into the secret of love, and by a touch of sympathy recognizes its
presence and strength. 2. Cherish and make peace, A quarrelsome Christian, a former
of party, a fomentor of strife, — how can he know the God of peace ? St. Paul by no
means shrank fi:om controversy, and made no truce with error or evil ; but what a
peacemaker he was in the Church ! How impressive his appeals to the Corinthians t«
be of the same mind and at peace among themselves 1 It brings QoA into the heart to
arrange disputes, to forgive offences, to bury prejudices, and to exhibit and foBtoi



OH. im. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIAN& 829

brotherly kindness in the Church. It is the dove that was made a symbol of the Spirit
of God ; and that is a bird which flees away from noise and tempest. So ft is in the
quiet heart, and in those Churches where the brethren are at peace with one another,
that the Spirit of the God of peace, the Comforter, will dwell.

in. Defeat of the flesh and the devil. 1. Hatred is a work of the flesh.
Love is part of the fruit of the Spirit ; and he who is born of the Spirit ought to smile
at provocation and forgive injury and even love his enemies, because the God whom
he serves is love, the Father of whom he is begotten is merciful. 2. Discord is a work
of the devil. And in breathing a spirit of mutual consideration and concord over his
people, the God of peace bruises Satan under their feet (Bom. xvi. 20). He brings
order out of confusion, and crushes the hissing serpents of dissension and malignity
under the feet of his saints. — F.

V«r. 4, — " Crucified through vieakness." This is a very characteristic view of the
crucifixion of our Lord. St. Paul never dwelt upon it complacently, as we do. There
is no trace of his having ever elaborately described it, or endeavoured to move the
feelings of his hearers or readers by the persuasions of his Lord's dying distresses.
The Crucifixion was a painful subject to him. It was Christ's time of weakness. The
ipostle always seems to hasten away from that theme to what he can glory in, even
[/hrist, the risen One, the living One, who now can save. Dean Plumptre explains the
expression taken as our text thus : " For even he was crucified. St. Paul seems to see
in Christ the highest representative instance of the axiomatic law by which he himself
had been comforted, that strength is perfected in infirmities. For he too lived encom-
passed with the infirmities of man's nature, and the possibility of the Crucifixion flowed
from that fact as a natural sequel." Professor Lias says, " Our Lord assumed our human
nature with all its infirmities (Heb. ii. 10 — 18 ; iv. 15 ; v. 2, 3), and although they were
the result of sin. ^ He bore all those infirmities, death itself included. And then he
snook them all off for ever when he rose again ' by the power of God.'"

I. Christ was bodily weak. We may fairly assume that our Lord had a healthy
body ; but it was subject to ordinary human infirmities. He felt fatigue, hunger,
thirst, need of sleep ; and spiritual work exhausted his nervous system as it does ours.
We may even assume that his must have been a nervously sensitive body, since this is
found to be the characteristic of all highly intellectual and all highly spiritual men and
women. It will be easy to show how St. Paul would feel a special sympathy with the
Lord Jesus in all this, since his too was a frail, sensitively organized body. Those who
are easily depressed, readily affected by outward circumstances, and conscious of
physical frailty, seldom realize how near to them in sympathetic experience comes the
Lord Jesus Christ, and, after him, the great apostle of the Gentiles.

IL Chbibt was sodl-steono. And therefore he could go through all the lot which
God appointed for him, even though that included the bitter and terrible experiences of
the Crucifixion. The soul-strength St. Paul thought of as Chritt living in the very midst
of his weakness and suffering. His idea may be thus expressed ; " We too are weak ;
we have our share in infirmities and sufferings, which are ennobled by the thought that
they are ours because they are his ; but we know that we shall live in the highest sense,
in the activities of the spiritual life, which also we share with him, and which comes to
us by the power of God ; and this life will be manifested in the exercise of our spiritual
power towards you and for your good." Reference is to the present ministry and not
to the hereafter-time. If Christ's weakness was, like St. Paul's, frailty of body, he
might rejoice that Christ's strength was toul-strength, and, like his, the sixength of God
made perfect in weakness. — B. T.

Ver. 6. — Self-exa/minatum. " Examine yourselves, whether ye be in the faith ; prove
your own selves." This is without question a necessary and practically important
Christian duty. But the forms it takes and the estimates of its value differ according
to the tones and peculiarities of Christian life and feeling in each age. When promi-
nence is given to doctrine, and conflicts rage round precisions in the expression of
opinion, self-examination is neglected, and, as a rebound, is unduly cultivated by the
pietistic few. When feeling rather than truth is cultivated, and religion is conceived
as a mood of mind rather than as a body of doctrines, self-examination ia set forth



330 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE OOEINTHIANS. [oh. xin. 1—14

prominently as one of the essentials of Christian living. It must also be added that
self-examination has always been urged by the priesthood as an agent in preserving for
such priesthood the control of men's thoughts, opinions, conduct, and life. Recognizing
its importance, but carefully avoiding exaggerations in reference to it, -we notice —

I. What it mat peopbblt concbbn. 1. Conduct. This may include (1) our mode
of performing our ordinary life-duties ; (2) the character of our relationship with others ;
(3) the wise use of our opportunities of usefulness ; (4) the helpful occupation of our
leisure hours; (5) and the worthy meeting of our life-responsibilities. 2. Opinion. St.
Paul here enjoins a proving or testing of opinion, so that a man may tnow whether he
is " holding fast the profession of his faith without wavering ; " " holding fast the
form of sound words." 3. Feeling. So far as this is related to the motive of conduct,
and gives inspiration and character to the expressions of Christian life. Self-examina-
tion of feeling with a view to confidence of our state and satisfaction in our progress
and attainment is always perilous and often ruinous. Watching frames and feelings
is the most enervating thing a Christian can do. It never can culture humility ; it
often, in a very subtle way, nourishes spiritual pride and severs the soul from the
simplicity of its dependence on Christ. It brings a false satisfaction in feeling right,
or a needless distress in feeling wrong. It clouds the Christian life virith hindering and
weakening depressions, or it brings an extravagant joy whioh is really joy in self,
not joy in God.

II. When should it be undeetaken? Only occasionally, and under special
pressure, such as comes with times of conscious weakness and failure ; or times when
error is being freely taught; or times wlien the Christian morality is imperilled; or
limes when the changes of life are bringing to us fresh responsibilities. St. Paul com-
mends the duty in a special form in relation to the Communion of the Lord's Supper.
And many Christian people have found special times of self-examination useful — at the
New Year, at birthdays, etc. Where there is a natural tendency to morbid introspection
the seasons should be very infrequent. Where the active side of Christian life is over-
developed, the times for self-examination may safely be multiplied.

III. In what spirit should it bk conducted ? There should be (1) great serious-
ness ; (2) earnest prayer for a spirit of sincerity and faithfulness ; (3) careful avoidance
of any desire to test themselves by any human standards; (4) anxiously cherished
dependence on the leadings and teachings of God the Holy Ghost ; and (5) firm resolve
to turn the conclusions of our self-examination into principles and directions for the
guidance and the improvement of our practical life of godliness. Compare the psalmist,
who prays, " Search me, God," before attempting to search himself.

IV. How MAT THE POSSIBLE EVILS OF IT BE COUNTERACTED ? 1. By making Holy

Scripture the standard according to which we test ourselves. 2. By making conduct
rather than feeling the subject of our review. 3. By turning the results of the examina-
tion into prayer for more grace. 4. By persisting in seeing the things that we may
have to rejoice in, as well as those which we may have to groan over. 5. And by
regarding the Lord Jesus Christ — and none but he — as our Model of the interior, as
well as of the exterior. Christian life. — R. T.

Ver. 5.: — Who are the reprobates f Essentially such as have not Christ in them.
Those whose experience and conduct are not sufficient to prove the indwelling presence
and sanctifying power of the living Christ. The word " reprobate " signifies those who
have been tried and found wanting. Illustrations of the use of the term may be found
in Rom. i. 28 ; 1 Cor. ix. 27 ; 2 Tim. iii. 8 ; Tit. i. 16 ; Heb. vi. 8. The subject may
be effectively introducted by a description of the scene in Belshazzar's palace, with the
mystic handwriting on the wall. Then it may be shown how the term may gain its
application to —

I. Individual Chbistians. Some such St. Paul refers to by name, as Alexander,
Hermogenes, Demas, etc. Compare Peter's finding Simon the Sorcerer wanting. Indi-
viduals may be reprobate (1) intellectually, by accepting false and dishonouring doctrine ;
(2) morally, by yielding to temptations of self-indulgence, vice, or crime.

II. Churches. This may be illustrated by the searching addresses sent by tha
glorified Christ to some of the seven Churches of Asia. The principles of the search
may be effectively apjlied to modern Churches.



OH. xiu. 1—14.] THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE COEINTHIANS. 331

III. Pastoeb. These fail from the pastoral ideal generally after they have failed
from the private Christian ideal. Shepherds are reprobates when they neglect their
duty to their flock ; when they feed themselves and not the flock ; when they see the
wolf coming, and flee ; and when they fail duly to honour the chief Shepherd before
the flock. Illustration may be taken from the ex^jeriences of the City of Mansoui
as figured by John Bunyan, in his 'Holy War.' Reprobates, such as are here dealt
with, are recoverable by penitence, humiliation, and heart-return to Christ. — B. T.

Ver. 11. — Final counsels. What should the godly minister most desire for his
people? All his best wishes for them can be gathered up in the word " unity." And
the terms here used embody the ideal of unity. And this was the supreme want of the
Corinthian Church, which had been so broken up by (1) party feeling, (2) false teach-
ings, (3) immoral members. As this subject has been so often taken as a theme for
sermons preached at the close of ministries in particular places, we only give an outline
from the point of view which regards unity as the central idea of the passage.

L P*BFBCT. That is, exactly fitted together ; a whole.

IL Op good comfort. This would only come by the removal of the jealonsies and
envyings, which spoiled the unity and the brotherhood.

III. Of one mind. Giving up individual preferences and peculiarities, so that they
might agree together, think and plan the same things.

IV. Live in peace. Or show that thoughtfulness for others which is the great
secret of the peaceful life.

Upon such unity as tha apostle thus commends the Divine benediction is anre to
test.— B. T.

Ver. 14. — The Christian benediction. This is the closing sentence of a long letter.
Letters bear the stamp of the age in which they are written. Their modes of begin-
aing and ending, and their forms of salutation, are characteristic of nations and
periods. This closing benediction may be compared with those of other Epistles. The
most simple form is " Grace be with you," and this we find in Colossians, 1 and 2
Timothy, Titus, and also in the Epistle to "the Hebrews. A somewhat fuller but still
very simple form is this : " The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all." This
is found in Romans, Philippians, and 1 and 2 Thessalonians. The Epistle to the
Galatians closes thus : " Brethren, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your
spirit." Philemon ends in a similar way. In Bphesians there is a peculiar form :
" Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity." Comparing St.
Paul's mode with that of the other apostles, we find similarity with distinctive differences.
St. Peter closes his First Epistle thus : " Peace be with you all that are in Christ Jesus ; "
and his Second Epistle thus : " But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ." St. James has no greeting ; nor has John, except to his Third
Kpistle, and there it is simply, " Peace be to thee." Jude closes with a doxology.
From this comparison it appears that the Christian benediction, in its simplest form, is
the wish that "grace" may be with the Church. The point of it lies in the word
" grace," and in the ideas that St. Paul attached to the word " grace," and to its
" being " or " continuing " with the believers.

L The mbanino of the term " grace." It must be distinguished from the word
" graces," as meaning the special gifts and endowments granted to the early Church.
As used in the singular number, it sometimes means the free favour and love of God
as shown to us in our salvation by Christ. Then the fall expression is, " the grace of
God, and the gift by grace " (Rom. v. 15). A characteristic instance of this use of the
word may be found in Titus ii. 11, 12. St. Paul, however, uses the term in quite
another sense. He often means by it what we should call the state of grace, that
condition of privilege and relation, that favour and acceptance with God, into which we
are brought by Christ and in which we stand — a state of justification and acceptance ;
a state of rightness with God through faith. This state of favour he calls " grace."
Illastrative references may be made to Rom. v. 1, 2 ; Gal. i 6 ; Phi^. i. 7, and also to
a striking passage in 1 Pet. v. 12. It seems that the Lord Jesus Christ is regarded
as the model or representative of this state or standing of acceptance and favour with
God. The Fathor himself testiSed to it, saying, " This is my beloved Son, in whom I



832 THE SECOND EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS, [oh. xm. 1—14.

am well pleased." Chiist declares it to be his abiding state, " I do always the things
that please him." He was the perfect, obedient Son, in his trust, and love, and devotion,
and obedience, and freeness of communion with the Father, giving us the very model
and illustration of the state of rightness, of grace and favour, into which he brings us.
St. Paul's burden of benediction is " grace," and he sometimes means by it the state of
favour and acceptance with God into which we are brought by faith. Now, this state
of grace is so thoroughly that in which Christ himself stands, and it is so manifestly
the state into which we can only be brought by him, that it may pmperly be called the
" grace of the Lord Jesus," or the " state of grace of the Lord Jesus." Sometimes this
state is viewed on the side of the Spirit that brings us into it, and then it is called the
state oi faith ; at other times it is viewed on the side of the privilege that belongs to it,
and then it is called the state of grace. Beading St. Paul's benediction in the light of
these explanations, it may run thus : " May you enjoy and enter yet more fully into
that state of grace and favour with God which Christ has, by his sonship, and which
you have, in measure also by yours : that state of grace, I mean, which consists in these
things — an ever-deepening sense of the love of God, and feeling of the impulse of that
love ; and an abiding consciousness of the communion of the Holy Ghost, whereby ye
are sealed."

n. The Cheistian state of grace ob fellowship with God. Surely no fact
could be presented that is more calculated to fill our hearts with the "joy unspeakable "
than this. No principle of Christian steadfastness can be of more practical value than
this. If any one thing more than another is the burden of the Epistles, it is the right
of the believer in Christ. In multiplied ways the apostle seems to say — Realize your
sonship; enter into your privilege; use your right of access; live as restored and
accepted ones ; seek to know the spirit of your new state ; lift yourselves up to meet
the responsibilities resting on your privilege. Ye receive " now the end of your faith,
even the salvation of your souls." " Now are ye the sons of God." Yet surely this is
not the thought which, as Christians, we most readily cherish. Too often we encourage
uncertainty as to our spiritual status; we hope that all will be well at last; we walk
under clouds of doubt, and very feebly welcome even the salvation which God grants.
The higher Christian life takes in simple trust, not only Christ, but all the status, rights,
and privileges that come to us in Christ. It loses its fears, buries its questioning, and
rejoices in having " passed from death unto life." If any longing for a more earnest
religious life has been started in any of our hearts ; if for our own cold lifeless souls we
have been led to pray, " Lord, revive thy work in the midst of the years 1 " — then let
us be assured that the beginning of better things is this — Enter into, possess, and enjoy
your fuU rights in Christ ; not your own rights, but Christ's, which are made yours on
believing. Believe that you have been brought info, and do now stand in, a state of
grace and favour with Gfld, accepted by him in the Bt loved. For assurances of present
salvation and privilege, see Rom. viii. 1, 14 — 17 ; Eph. ii. 12, 13, 18—22 ; 1 Pet. ii. 5,
9, 10; 1 John iii. 1, 2, etc. But how is such a sense of our standing in Christ to be
won ? Faith — trust — ^is the answer. Trust is the attitude of our souls which God
demands. Trust in his Son Jesus Christ, who "of God is made unto us wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and complete redemption." Simple, entire, perfect trust.
Taking Christ as he is offered — as our " all in all," not for deliverance only, but also
for standing and sanctification. United with Christ, his rights become ours. We are
sons with God. We stand in the state of &Tour with God in which Jeaiu, the perfect
Son, who is our life, stands. — B. T.



HOMILETICAL INDEX



• THE SECOND EPISTLE OF

ST. PAUL TO THE CORINTHIANS.



CHAPTER 1

vsvm rAQB

The Will of God ^ 7

The God of Christianity ... „. 7

Personal Sufferings ... ... 8

Conscience and the Inner Life of Man 9

Possessions of a Genuine Christian ... 9

A Threefold Theme ... ... 10

Salutation ... ... ... 11

Thanksgiving in the Midst of Tribu-
lation; Uses of Sorrow; Comfort-
ing Others; Personal References ... II
Paul's Defence of himself; Character

of his Preaching ... „, 14

« An Apostle by the Will of God" ... 15

Comfort, Divine and Human ». 16

Intercessory Prayer ... ... 17

The Promises of God ... m. 17

The Spirit in the Heart ... „, 18

Helpers of J07 ... ... m. 18

"Saints" ... 19

True Comfort ... ... ... 20

In the Depths and out of them ... 21

The Testimony of our Conscience ... 22

Unchangeableness ... m. 23

Four Privileges of the Believer ... 23

Christian Suffering ... ... 24

" Tne Sentence of Death in ourselves " 26

Christ is "Yea" ... 87

The Certainty of Divine Promises ... 28

The Apostolic Ministry ... „. 29

"BythoWUl" ... SO

Comfoited, and therefore Oomforten ... 31



THBXB FAGa

Christ's Sufferings renewed In his
Disciples ... ... ... 32

The Sanctifying Influence of Keamess
to Death ... ... ... 82

The Gracions Influence of Prayerfnl-
ness and Sympathy on Suffering
Souls ... ... ... ... 33

The Conscience-Testimony ... 34

The Sealing and Earnest of Uie Spirit 35



CHAPTER n.

The Uniting Force of Christian Love 41

The Preaching of the Gospel ... 42
The Way in which the Gospel should

be preached ... ... ... 42

Further Explanations and Directions

luuohingMatters just discussed ... 43
Coming to Troas; Disquietude; De-
fence of his Apostleship ... ... 45

Sympathy in Grief and Joy ... 46
The Devices of Satan ... ... 46, 52

An Open Door ... ... ... 47

The Solemnity of the Ministry ... 47

The Triumph ... ... .,, 48

"Who is Sufficient?" .„ ^ 49

The Pains of Rebuking ... „. 49

Restoring the Backslider ... ... 60

The Constant Q[Mumpbof the Faithful

Minister ... „. «. M

The Sorrow of FaithfnlLoTe «. 61



INDEX.



The Church's Dealings with Un-
worthy Members ... ... 52

Pruvidential Doors ... ... 54

The Twofold Issues of a Preached

Gospel ... ... ... 54

Consoioni Simplicity and Integrity ... 55

CHAPTEB m.

Soul-Literature ... ... ... 62

The Ministry of the Letter and the

Ministry of the Spirit ... 62, 80, 85

Divine Revelation more Glorious in

Christ than in Moses ... ... S3

The Gospel as a Transendent Bene-
factor ... ... ... ... CI

No Letters of Commendation needed ;

his Converts were Epistles ... 65
Ministry of the Old Testament com-
pared with that of the New, and the
Superiority of the Latter shown ... 66
Boldness of Speech; the Two Minis-
tries ; from " Glory to Glory " ... 67
"Our Epistle" ... ... ... 71

"Epistlss of Christ" ... „. 71

The Old and the New .„ ... 72

The Veil 73

The Spirit of Liberty ... ... 74

The Glorious Transformation ... 74

The Christ-Letter ... ... 75

The New Covenant ... ... 76

The Veil on the Heart ... ... 77

The Great Change ... ... 78

A Living Letter ... ... ... 79

The Christian Transfiguration ... 81

The Best Commendation ... ... 83

The Power, and the Agency it uses ... 84

The Old Covenant and the New ... 86

The Liberty of the Spirit ... ... 86

The Vision of God in Christianiij ... 87

CHAPTBB IV.

The Character and Work of a Tme

Minister of Christ ... ... 91

The Condition of Unregenerated Men 92

Preaching ._ ... ... 92

True Soul-Light ... ... ... 93

The True Gospel Ministry ... ... 93

Trials in the Cause of Christ ... 94

The Speech of True Faith ... ... 94

Soul-Inspiring Facts ... „, 95

Soul-Growth ... ... ... 95

The Afflictions of Christly Men ... 95



THT'ME PAOB

Glory of the Apostolic Ministry ; how

its Duties were discharged ... 86
Ministers in their Weakness an4
Strength; Present Affliction and

Future Issues ... ... i.i 98

Truth and Conscience ... »• 300

The Gospel Veiled ... ^ 10)

The Theme of Preaching ... ... iOl

The Light of Spiritual Knowledge ... 102

Spiritual Treasure ... ... 102

Divine Discipline .^ m. 103

How Men should preach ... ... 104

" Earthen Vessels " ... ... 105

Heavy Affliction made Light ... 106

Not Self, but the Lord ... ... 107

Light of the Knowledge of Divine

Glory ... ... ... ... 108

The Lamp in the Pitcher ... ... 109

" Cast Down, but not Destroyed" ... 110

Inward Eenewal and Outward Decay 111

Seeing the Unseen ... ... 112

Full Confidence in the Power of the

Truth 113

Christ as the Image of God ... 114

Light from God and Light on God ... 114

Heavenly Treasure in Earthen Vessels 114

Suffering showing forth Character ... 115

The Outward and the Inward Man ... 116

The Christian Estimate of Affliction 118

CHAPTER V.

Christian Knowledge concerning the

Future Body of the Good ... 123

The Philosophy of Courage ... 124

Man in Christ a New Man... ... 124

God's Work in Christ ... ... 125

Christ made Sin ... ... ... 126

Assurance of Eternal Life ; Faith and

its Effects ... ... ... 127

Person and Ministry of the Apostle
further considered ; his Work as an

Ambassador ... ... ... 128

"Absent from the Lofd" ... ... 130

The Walk of Faith 130

The Love of Christ ... ... 13]

The Constraint of Christ's Love 131, 134

"TheMinistryof Reconciliatiou" ... 132

" Ambassadors for Christ " 133, 135

The Two Bodies of the Sainti ... 133

The Judgment 134

" A New Creature " ... ... 135

The Tent and the House ... „. 136

The Secret of Devoted 1 1 ess . . . ... 137



INDEX.



Iffizm PAGE

ReoofloiliMion ... m> ••• 138

rjr Permanent Building ... w. 139

' The Earnest of the Spirit " ... 140

Vaiking by Faith ... ... 140

" The Judgment-Seat of Christ " ... 141

The Power of the Christian Motive ... 142

God the Eeconoiler ... ... 143

The Sinless counted as a Sinner ... 144

CHAPTER VI.

The Grace of God received in Vain ... 148
The Highest OfSoe injured by its

Officer ... ... ... 148

" Things are not what they seem " ... 149

Genuine Christian Love ... ... ]50

Unequally Yoked ... ... 150,159

Appeal growing out of the Foregoing

Argument ... ... ... 151

His Warmth of Aifeotion ; Anxiety

of the Apostle lest the Grace of God

be received in Vain ... ... 152

" Workers together " ... ... 154

The Acceptable Time ... 155, 164

" Ministers of God " ... ... 155

" The Armour of Righteousness " ... 156

A Temple of God... 156

Father and Children .^ ... 157
"Now . . . now"... ^ 157, 160

Not hindering the Gospel ... ... 158

Sorrow and Joy ... .„ ». 161

"Be ye enlarged" .„ ... 162

Separation ... ... ... 163

The Holy Power of Chiiraoter ... 165

Where are Men straitened ? ... 166

Christian Friendships ... ... 166

Christian Relations with tlie World ... 167

Proving Sonship by Obedience ... 168

CHAPTER VII.

A Minister'B Address to his People ... 172

The Good tried and comforted ... 173

Godly Sorrow ... ... 174, 191

Church Discipline ... ... 175

An Exhortation to Perfection ... 175

Appeal for Affectionate Relations be-
tween himself and the Corinthians ;

Sorrow and Consolation ... ... 177

True Repentance and its Eifeots;

Ministry of Titus ... ... 179

Holiness... ... •« ... 181

•• In om- Hearts " ... ^ ... 182

Fighting and Fean ». ... 182



The Comforter of the Lowly m. 183

Sorrow and Repentance ... ... 183

Refreshment of Spirit ... ... 184

The Promises of God an Incentive to

Holy Living ... ... ... 184

Christian Affection ... ... 185

Ministerial Sorrows and their Allevia-
tion ... ... ... ... 186

Marks of True Penitence ... ... 187

Two Kinds of Sorrow ... ... 188

Tlie.Praotioal Power of the Promises 189

Our Great Life- Work ... ... 190

A Minister's Joy in Tribulation ... 191

Apostolic Cares ... ... ... 192

Apostolic Confidence ... ^ 193

CHAPTER VIU.
Genuine Beneficence ... 197, 198
Stimulating Men to Beneficent Actions 199
Christian Liberality in the Mace-
donian Churches ... ... 200

Appeal to the Corinthians ... ... 202

Prudential Management ; Care to avoid

Blame ... ... ... 203

Dedication ... ... ... 204

Sincere Love ... ... ... 204

The Condescension of Christ ... 205

The Rule of Acceptance ... ... 205

Things Honourable ... ... 206

The Appreciation of Fellow-Labourers 206

A Pattern of Charity ... ... 207

The Great Example of Benevolence ... 208

Things that belong to Charity ... 208

An Enviable Reputation ... ... 209

Ministerial Carefulness in Money

Matters ... ... ... 210

What True Christian Workers are ... 210

Praiseworthy Churches ... ... 211

Amazing Love ... ... ... 211

Readiness accepted ... ... 212

The Model Churches of Macedonia ... 214
The Religion of Association must be

made Personal ... ... ... 215

The Poverty that made others Rich ... 216

Willing Minds putting Value on Gifts 217

Honest before God and Man ... 218

CHAPTER IX.

Paul's Directions for Collecting the
Contributions of the Corinthian
Church ... ... ... 220

The Way and Worth of • Genuine
Beneficence ... ... ... 221



iy



IKDEX.



Keferenee to hu Fonner Argument;
its Completeness; why he resumes

the Subject ... ... ... 222

Ooirespondence between Christian

Sowing and Heaping ... ... 224

Unity in Nature and Grace; Mani-
fold Besults of Beneficence; Thanks-
giving... ... .„ ... 224

The Contagion of Zeal ... ... 225

Sowing and Beaping „. ... 226

"A Cheerful Giver" ... 226,229,234

Abounding Grace and Abounding

Service ... ... ... 227

True Enrichment m. ... 227

The Unspeakable Gift ... 228, 237

The Contagion of Charity ... ... 228

The Gift of Gifts ... ^ ... 230

"Always" 231

Forwardness in Good Works „. 232

Covetousness ... ... ... 233

God's Ability and Man's ... ... 234

God's Bewards for Liberal Souls ... 236



OHAPTEE X



M. 241
... 241



Self- Vindication ... „,

The True Soldiership ...

Paul's Special Power ... ... 242

God's Gift of Special Power to Man 242
The False and True Method of Esti-
mating Men ... ... ... 243

The True Sphere of Human Useful-
ness and the Source of Human Glory 244
Change in the Epistle ; Spirit of his
Defence ... ... ... 244

Continuation of his Defence ... 247

Limits and Labapra ... ... 247

Spiritual Weap4s ... 249, 256

The Captivity of the Thonghts 250, 259

Apostolic Authority ... ... 250

Letters, Weighty and Strong ... 251

Glorying in the Lord ... ... 251

Commendation, Human and Divine ... 252
"The Meekness and Gentleness of

Christ" 253,257

"Our Weapon*" ... ... 253

Judging from Appearance* 254, 260

Boasting, Wrong and Bight ... 255

Holy Weapons ... ... .~ 256

In the Flesh, but not of It ... ... 258

The Gospel for the Begions beyond... 261

Man's only True Glorying... ... 261



OHAPTBB XI.

THBMS F*»»

Inviting Men to Christ the Supreme

Object of Preaching ... ... 268

The Highest Knowledge and the

Noblest Generosity ... ... 269

Self-Misrepresentation ... ... 270

Man talking about himself, and the

Limitation of Apostolic Inspiration 271

A Picture of BeligiouB Impostors ... 272
Paul's Avowal of his Advantages and

his History of his Trials ... 272
Belations of the Apostle to the Corin-
thians ; Ground of Anxiety ... S73
Questions asked and answered ... 275
Character of these Teachers ... 276
Comparison of himself with hia Oppo-
nents ... ... ... ... i7S

What St. Paul was and what he had

suffered as an Apostle of Christ ... 27S

A Different Gospel ... ... 281

Gratuitous Ministry .„ m. 281

Hypocrisy ... „, ^. 282

Ministers of Christ m. m— 282

Labours and Prisons ... ». 283

Anxiety for the Churches ... ... 288

Pastoral Anxiety ^, „. 284

Misinterpretation ... ... 285

A Very Beautiful Angel ... ... 285

Apostolic Experiences on Earth ... 286

The Simplicity in Christ ... ... 287

One Jesus, One Spirit, One Gospel ... 288

Apostolic Boastings ... ... 289

Satanio Subtleties ... ... 289

The Evidential Value of Sufferings

borne for Christ's Sake ... ... 290

CHAPTEB XIL

Apostolic Piety and Psychology ,„ 292

Soul-Schooling ... ... ... 293

Paul's State of Mind concerning his
Past and Prospective Connection
with the Church at Corinth ... 294
Supernatural Communications as Evi-
dences of his Apostleship ... 295
Need of Humility and the Means
appointed to secure it ... ... 296

Eecurrenoe to the Former Argument 298

Forestalling False Criticism ». 298

Expression of his Feait m. ..• 299
"A Man in Christ " ^ 299, 306
Glorying in Weaknesses ... 300, 311
Sufficient Grace ... ». 300,310

Signs of Apostleship »• •«. 80]



INDEX.



Turnn PAGE

Ministerial Devotioii m. m. 30?

Edification ... ... ... 302

Apostolic Experiences in Heaven ... 302
The Thorn in the Flesh ... 303, 309

Much, yet Nothing ... ... 305

Self-Expenditure ... ^ ... 306

An Instructive Experience ... 307

Tigions and Revelations ... ... 308

Caught with Guile ... ... 312

The Humbling of God's Minister* ... 313

CHAPTER XIII.

Paul's Epistolary Farewell to the

Corinthians ... ... ... 314

Announcement of his Purpose; Christ's

Power in him and in his Apostleihip 316

Self-Examination recommended; 8o-

premapy of Divine Tmtb ... S17



PAOB

319

321
.S22
322
323
323
331



THEMIS

Parting TendemesB ^ m.

W'lalcnpss and Power ... ...

" Prove yourselves " ,,, ^. ...

Invincible Truth ., ...

" Live in Peace" ... ...

Salutation

Benediction ... ... 324, 326,

Tlie Death and Resurrection of Glirist
contrasted ... ... ... 324

Self-Testing 324

A Beautiful Farewell ... ... 325

Self-Examinatiou ... 327, 329

" The God of Love and Peace " ... 328
" Crucified through Weaknesg" ». 329
Who are the Bejiobate* ? ... ^ 33$

Final Counaela ... ^ _ SSI
